Plenary Lectures 5 PL1.1 A cohort (N=41) of unselected carriers, that were detected prenatally How next generation sequencing changes the practice of in the period 1970-2008, was identified in the Danish Cytogenetic medicine Central Register. Using information from national medical registries, H. Brunner; we compared morbidity in the cohort to that of a 5:1 matched control Deptartment of Human Genetics, Radbound University Medical Centre, group (N=205). Carriers were offered clinical re-examination, analysis Nijmegen, Netherlands. with Affymetrix SNP 6.0 Array, and breakpoint mapping with Next Now that massively parallel (or next generation; NGS) sequencing has Generation Sequencing (NGS) Mate-pair Analysis. become a reality, it is time to ask the question whether this technology We observed no serious congenital malformations in the cohort. will change the way we practice medicine in the clinic. While true costs However, the risk of neurodevelopmental and/or psychiatric disorders, that include personnel, bioinformatics support and equipment will be including mental retardation, learning disabilities, attention and/or considerably higher, we may expect that the costs for sequencing 50- behavioral disorders, autism spectrum disorders, and mood disorders, 150 genes should not exceed 1000 Euro. This will allow the creation of was significantly elevated (19.5% vs. 8.3% among the controls, diagnostic panels of for many clinical situations (muscular dystrophy; p=0.04). Analysis for copy number variants >100 kb did not provide neurodegenerative disorders; blindness, deafness, cardiomyopathy; prognostic information about late-onset disorders. So far Mate- long QT syndrome; Noonan and related conditions etc). This will pair sequencing indicate that many affected carriers have complex largely replace the testing of single genes, or of several genes in rearrangements and/or rearrangements that truncate brain expressed succession as is now customary. The projected cost of consumables genes, including genes known to be involved in neurodevelopmental for sequencing all 21000 human genes (the exome) using the SOLID disorders. platform is 2000 Euros. This could be used to test for instance to detect Our study demonstrated that prenatally detected de novo de novo changes in mental retardation patients. We may predict the balanced chromosomal rearrangements have high risk of late- following: onset neurodevelopmental and/or psychiatric disorders but are not • Diagnostic testing of genes will move to the front end of the diagnostic associated with congenital malformations. The breakpoint mapping, process in many clinical situations. When a patient is seen in the which will be completed in March 2011, will reveal whether NGS can outpatient clinic, an exome may already be done. improve the counseling dilemma associated with prenatally detected • Clinical geneticists should themselves aim to be involved in the apparently balanced de novo chromosomal rearrangements. diagnostic process from the start. This argues for multidisciplinary diagnostic clinics PL2.2 • Clinical diagnostic skills (in dysmorphology, or other) will become less Development and validation of non-invasive prenatal diagnostic important and understanding genes and their functions in terms of the test for trisomy 21 human organism becomes a critical skill. E. A. Papageorgiou1, A. Karagrigoriou2, E. Tsaliki1, V. Velissariou3, N. P. Carter4, • Numerous patients will be diagnosed with unique (new) genetic P. C. Patsalis1; conditions. This calls for geneticists to participate and perhaps 1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2University of organize specialist clinics for (very) rare diseases. Geneticists should Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Mitera Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4The Wellcome develop skills that allow them to feel comfortable in their role as the Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. ultimate expert on a subset of these very rare conditions. The development of a Non-Invasive Prenatal Diagnostic (NIPD) • Clinical geneticists should consider setting up services for the public test for Down syndrome (Trisomy 21) has become one of the most that deal with incidental and minor findings on exome analysis. This interesting fields in the prenatal world of the last decade. Extensive may well be in the shape of e-consults rather than of formal outpatient investigation of epigenetic differences between the mother and the clinics. fetus has led to the identification of Differentially Methylated Regions • The counseling element of clinical genetics (what am I to do with my (DMRs) which have the potential to be used in the development of life given my genetic profile and risks) remains essentially unchanged. NIPD test for Trisomy 21 (Papageorgiou et al., AJP, 2009).In this study, we have been using a subset of our previously identified DMRs to PL1.2 develop a non-invasive prenatal diagnostic test for Trisomy 21 using Unraveling the Dutch genome in health and disease the Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) methodology in C. Wijmenga; combination with Real-time qPCR. The statistical significance of the Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, University 12 selected DMRs was evaluated using the Mann-Witney U test and Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. selection of the best DMRs was followed. No abstract received as per date of production. Please see We hereby present a strategy to achieve non-invasive fetal www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. chromosome dosage assessment through the analysis of fetal specific DMRs. We achieved non-invasive prenatal detection of Trisomy 21 by PL1.3 determining the methylation ratio of normal and Trisomy 21 cases for LGR5 stem cells in health and disease each tested fetal specific DMR present in maternal peripheral blood, H. Clevers; followed by further statistical analysis. The application of the above Molecular Genetics, Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands. fetal specific methylation ratio approach provided with 100% accuracy No abstract received as per date of production. Please see the correct diagnosis of 66 normal and 34 Trisomy 21 pregnancies. www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. We present in this study the successful development and validation of a low cost, fast, sensitive and universal, non-invasive prenatal PL2.1* diagnostic test for Trisomy 21 which can be potentially implemented in De novo balanced chromosomal rearrangements have high risk diagnostic laboratories. of neurodevelopmental and psychiatric disorders. C. Halgren1, I. Bache1, N. M. Nielsen2, S. Kjaergaard3, K. Brøndum-Nielsen4, P. PL2.3* K. A. Jensen5, C. Fagerberg6, L. N. Krogh7, M. Frisch2, J. Hansen5, T. Bryndorf8, mRNA-seq analysis of monozygotic twins discordant for N. Tommerup1; trisomy 21 reveals large chromosomal domains of gene 1University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Statens Serum Institut, expression dysregulation Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, A. Letourneau1, S. B. Montgomery1, D. Gonzalez2, C. Borel1, D. Robyr1, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, 5Aarhus E. Migliavacca1,3, Y. Hibaoui4, L. Farinelli5, M. Gagnebin1, E. Falconnet1, University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, S. Deutsch1, S. Dahoun-Hadorn4, J. L. Blouin1,4, A. Feki4, R. Guigo2, E. T. 7Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 8Hvidovre University Hospital, Dermitzakis1, S. E. Antonarakis1,4; Hvidovre, Denmark. 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Carriers of prenatally detected de novo balanced reciprocal Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Center for Genomic Regulation, translocations or inversions are believed to have 6-9% risk of congenital University Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinfomatics, malformations and/or developmental delay. However, systematic data Lausanne, Switzerland, 4University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, regarding late-onset disorders are lacking.Plenary Lectures 66 5FASTERIS SA, Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland. Giessen, Berlin, Germany, 29Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Trisomy 21 (T21) is the most widely studied model of aneuploidy. It Poland, 30Kinderzentrum München, München, Germany, 31Department of is likely that the majority of the phenotypes are related to alterations Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, of gene expression. In this study, we investigated the perturbations 32Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Münster, Germany, of gene expression in fibroblasts derived from a pair of monozygotic 33Institut für Humangenetik, Abt. Medizinische Genetik, Tübingen, Germany, twins discordant for T21. The use of these samples eliminates the bias 34Instituto Hispalense de Pediatria, Sevilla, Spain, 35Dept of Genetics and of genome variability and most of transcriptome differences observed Pathology Rudbeck laboratory, Berlin, Germany. are likely to be related to the supernumerary chromosome 21. X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is a clinically and genetically The transcriptome was studied by mRNA-Seq; more than 200 heterogeneous condition. It accounts for 10% of all forms of intellectual million 100bp paired-end reads were generated and mapped using disability. To date, mutations in >90 genes have been implicated in this MAQ and GEM (Ribeca et al, unpublished). The expression level of disorder, yet in the majority of families, the underlying molecular cause 15’000 protein-coding genes was compared between the discordant is still unknown. We performed Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) twins. On average, we found that 4% of the genes are differentially for mutation detection in >240 XLID families that had been recruited expressed. Surprisingly, for most of the chromosomes, we identified by the European MRX Consortium and associated groups. In total, we large chromosomal regions that are either up- or downregulated in the detected potentially XLID causing mutations in up to 45% of our cohort. trisomic twin. This raised the hypothesis that differential expression Only 28% of the families carried mutations in the >90 established may be organized in domains throughout the genome. The same XLID genes, which may be due to the fact that prior to NGS, many domains of gene expression dysregulation have also been found when of the families had undergone pre-screening for mutations in known we compared the transcriptomes of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells XLID genes. Unique truncating and/or novel perfectly co-segregating, derived from the same twins fibroblasts, indicating that iPS cells retain functionally plausible missense mutations with high pathogenicity a specific memory of their origin. Control comparisons of fibroblasts scores were detected in 20 genes that had not been implicated in XLID between normal monozygotic twins showed some transcriptional before. Numerous of these novel genes play a role in the regulation of differences likely due to the contribution of stochastic, technical and transcription, while others are involved in ubiquitin-mediated protein environmental factors. degradation or in synaptic function, and many interact with ID genes Our study reveals a unique finding in genome regulation of T21 nuclei that are already known. To our knowledge, this is the largest study ever and may be important for the molecular pathogenesis of whole and into the molecular causes of XLID and the first one employing NGS to partial chromosome aneuploidies. elucidate monogenic disorders in a systematic manner. It illustrates that in spite of a previous, Sanger-sequencing-based ‘drain the pond’ PL2.4 screening effort (Tarpey et al, Nature Genetics, 2009), the pond of Next-generation sequencing in >240 families with X-linked unknown XLID genes is not empty yet. intellectual disability Supported by BMBF, Max-Planck-Society, EU. V. M. Kalscheuer1, H. Hu1, S. Haas2, J. Chelly3, H. Van Esch4, M. Raynaud5,6,7, S. G. M. Frints8,9, A. de Brouwer10, J. Gecz11,12, S. Weinert13,14, T. Zemojtel2, PL2.5* M. Love2, G. Froyen15, F. Laumonnier5,6,16, H. Richard2, A. Emde2, M. Bienek1, Identification of the gene underlying Congenital Short Bowel C. Jensen1, M. Hambrock1, N. Lebrun3,17, M. Corbett18, C. Tan11, C. E. P. van syndrome, pointing to its major role in intestinal development Rozendaal9, M. Pocquet19, N. Ronce20, R. Sun2, A. Hackett21, M. Field22, E. C. S. van der Werf1, T. D. Wabbersen2, N. Hsiao3, J. Paredes4, H. C. Haan23,24, J. Nelson25, G. Turner21, G. Baynam26, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach27, U. Etchevers5, P. M. Kroisel6, C. Babarit5, D. Tibboel7, R. A. Schreiber8, E. J. Mueller28, B. Budny29, M. Badura-Stronka29, A. Latos-Bieleńska29, M. Cohen30, Hoffenberg9, M. Vekemans5, S. L. Zeder10, I. Ceccherini11, S. Lyonnet5, A. T. Kleefstra31, R. Ullmann1, P. Wieacker32, A. Dufke33, G. R. Criado34, M. S. Ribeiro4, R. Seruca4, G. J. te Meerman1, S. C. D. van IJzendoorn12, I. T. Bondeson35, H. van Bokhoven36, A. Tzschach1, K. Wrogemann1, T. Jentsch13,14, Shepherd2, J. B. G. M. Verheij1, R. M. W. Hofstra1; W. Chen1, H. Ropers1; 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, 1Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Human Molecular Netherlands, 2Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, States, 33The Membrane Cell Biology section, Department of Cell Biology, Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Berlin, Germany, 3Institut University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4The Cancer Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France, 4Center Genetics Group, the Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Inserm University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5Département de Génétique, INSERM, U930 “Imaging and Brain”, Tours, France, 6University François-Rabelais, U781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, Tours, France, 7CNRS ERL3106, Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, France, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, Service de Génétique, Tours, France, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, 7Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children’s Hospital, Maastricht University Medical Center+, azM, Maastricht, Netherlands, 9School Rotterdam, Netherlands, 89The Division of Gastroenterology, BC Children’s for Oncology and Developmental Biology, GROW, Maastricht University, Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 9Department of Pediatrics, Section of Maastricht, Netherlands, 10Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition, University of Colorado., for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Denver, CO, United States, 10Department of Pediatric Surgery, Medical Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11SA Pathology, Women’s and Children’s Hospital, University of Graz., Graz, Austria, 111Laboratorio di Genetica Molecolare, Adelaide, Australia, 12School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University Istituto Giannina Gaslini., Genoa, Italy, 12The Membrane Cell Biology section, of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 13Max-Delbrueck-Centrum fuer Molekulare Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Medizin, Berlin, Germany, 14Leibniz-Institut fuer Molekulare Pharmakologie, Netherlands. Berlin, Germany, 15Human Genome Laboratory, Department for Molecular and Congenital Short Bowel Syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder Developmental Genetics, VIB, Leuven, Belgium, 16CNRS ERL3106, Tours, characterized by substantial shortening of the small intestine and by France, 17Inserm, U1016, Paris, France, 18SA Pathology at the Women’s intestinal malrotation. Until recently, nothing was known about the and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 19Centre Hospitalier Régional genetic cause. Homozygosity mapping was performed using 610K Universitaire, Service de Génétique, Tours, France, 20Centre Hospitalier SNP arrays of Illumina on five patients of four different families, Régional Universitaire, Service de Génétique, Tours, France, Tours, France, including one consanguineous family with two affected siblings and 21GOLD Service, Hunter Genetics, Newcastle, Australia, 22Northern Clinical one unaffected child. We found an overlapping homozygous region School, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Sydney, New South Wales, in four of the five patients. In this region a homozygous deletion Australia, 23South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, SA Pathology at concerning one exon of a gene encoding a tight-junction protein, Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Adelaide, Australia, 24Department of was detected in one of the patients. Furthermore, a homozygous Paediatrics, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 25Genetic Services deletion in the first intron was detected in the affected siblings of of Western Australia, King Edward Memorial Hospital for Women, Perth, the consanguineous family, this deletion co-segregates with the Australia, 26Genetic Services of Western Australia, Princess Margaret Hospital disease phenotype in this family. Sequencing of the gene in three for Children and King Edward Memorial Hospital for Women, Perth, Australia, other patients resulted in the identification of additional mutations: 27Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, one patient proved to have a heterozygous frameshift mutation and Lübeck, Germany, 28Institut für Humangenetik Justus-Liebig-Universität a heterozygous splice site mutation, whereas two other patients were Plenary Lectures 7 homozygous for a nonsense mutation and a missense mutation, PL3.1 respectively. The gene is expressed in the intestine of human embryos the personal genomes of individuals with extreme phenotypes: throughout development. The missense mutation abrogated the normal cardiac repolarization & sudden cardiac death localization of the encoded protein at the cell membrane. Knock-down A. Chakravarti; experiments in zebrafish resulted in general developmental defects, McKusick - Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University including shortening of the intestine and absence of goblet cells, which School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. are characteristic for the mid-intestine. Therefore, loss-of-function of Although the genome (actually, two genomes) of specific individuals the identified gene leads to Congenital Short Bowel Syndrome, likely are now being sequenced there is great uncertainty regarding what by interfering with tight-junction formation, with intestinal development phenotypic predictions we can make from the sequence itself. and with gut length determination. Accurate phenotypic predictions may be impossible unless we are more educated about the genetic architecture of human disease PL2.6* and the contributions of epigenetic and environmental effects. One HLA-A*3101 and carbamazepine-induced Hypersensitivity exception to this expectation is perhaps phenotypic prediction in Reactions in Europeans individuals with a rare susceptibility allele or an excess of common M. McCormack1, A. Alfirevic2, S. Bourgeois3, J. F. Farrell4, D. Kasperavičiūtė5, susceptibility variants. M. Carrington6,7, G. J. Sills2, T. Marson2,8, X. Jia9, P. I. W. deBakker10,11,12, K. Sudden cardiac death, arising from dysregulated cardiac repolarization, Chinthapalli5,13, E. Udragene Collaborators14, M. Molokhia15, M. R. Johnson16, G. is a hallmark of the long QT syndrome and extreme elevations of the D. O’Connor1, E. Chaila1, S. Al Husaini1, K. V. Shianna17, R. A. Radtke18, E. L. QT interval. A variety of human genetic studies by many investigators, Heinzen17, N. Walley17, M. Pandolfo19, W. Pichler20, B. K. Park21, C. Depondt19, including us, have identified over 30 genes contributing to inter- S. M. Sisodiya5, D. B. Goldstein17, P. Deloukas3, N. Delanty1, G. L. Cavalleri1, M. individual variation in the QT interval. We will summarize the current Pirmohamed2; genetic and genomic knowledge in this area, and the study of families 1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2The University of and population cohorts, to evaluate whether phenotypic prediction of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, sudden cardiac death is possible at least for a defined segment of the Hinxton, United Kingdom, 4Boston University, Boston, MA, United States, population. 5UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 6SAIC Frederick, Inc., Frederick, MD, United States, 7Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, PL3.2 Boston, MA, United States, 8Walton Centre for Neurology, Liverpool, United Focus on genomic personalised medicine Kingdom, 9Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Boston, C. Bustamante; MA, United States, 10Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Bio-X , Stanford School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. Boston, MA, United States, 11Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, No abstract received as per date of production. Please see MA, United States, 12University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 13National www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. Society for Epilepsy, Buckinghamshire, United Kingdom, 14London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United Kingdom, 15King’s College, PL3.3 London, United Kingdom, 16Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, the genetics of type 2 diabetes: crossing the translational 17Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 18Duke University Medical bridge. School, Durham, NC, United States, 19Hôpital Erasme, Universite´ Libre de M. McCarthy1,2; Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 20University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 21B. Kevin 1Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism (OCDEM), Park, Liverpool, United Kingdom. Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Carbamazepine (CBZ) is the most commonly prescribed anti-epileptic Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. drug. However its use can cause various forms of subcutaneous Until recently, progress in identification of the genetic variants adverse reactions ranging from maculopapular exanthema (MPE) to influencing predisposition to common forms of diabetes and obesity Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), a life-threatening skin reaction. has been slow. However, advances have transformed the situation, A strong correlation has been demonstrated between CBZ-induced with researchers now able to undertake well-powered surveys of SJS and HLA-B*1502 in Asian populations however as HLA-B*1502 genetic variation across the genome. is largely absent in European populations, the test is not applicable in For T2D, genome-wide association studies have extended the Europeans. number of loci harbouring common variants implicated in diabetes- We investigated whether genetic variants, particularly within the HLA susceptibility beyond 40. Most of these seem to impact on beta-cell locus, play a role in susceptibility to CBZ-induced adverse reactions. function and there is evidence that cell cycle regulation pathways We performed a genome-wide association study of 22 participants are overrepresented. However, even in combination, these variants with CBZ-induced hypersensitivity syndrome (HSS), 43 participants account for only around 10% of the genetic predisposition to T2D. with CBZ-induced MPE and 3958 population controls, all of European Genetic diagnostics plays an increasingly important role in the descent. We replicated the study with an independent set of participants diagnosis of relatively rare monogenic forms of diabetes and obesity (n=145) with CBZ-induced MPE and SJS. and provides a molecular basis for accurate prognostication and HLA-A*3101 strongly associated with both HSS (3.5x10-8) and therapeutic optimisation. In contrast, the modest effect of the common MPE (1.1x10-6) in two independent association studies. Follow-up variants thus far implicated in common forms of diabetes and obesity genotyping of HLA-A*3101 in additional cases and controls confirmed has precluded similar clinical applications. Indeed, the principal HLA-A*3101 as a risk factor for HSS (OR 12.4; 95% CI 1.3 to 120.4), translational justification for genetic discovery efforts lies in explaining MPE (OR 8.3; 95% CI 3.6 to 19.4), and SJS (OR 25.9; 95% CI 4.9 to the mysteries of disease pathogenesis: there have been numerous 116.2). advances in this respect, though much more remains to be done. We report for the first time in participants of European ancestry, a strong The large proportion of heritability and familiality not explained by association between HLA-A*3101 and CBZ-induced hypersensitivity. the GWA approach (which has surveyed only common SNP-based This finding has immediate clinical relevance in the care of epilepsy variation) raises questions about the basis of the “missing” genetic patients. The presence of HLA-A*3101 increases the probability of variance. The contribution to disease risk of low-frequency and rare developing hypersensitivity from 5% to 26%, while its absence reduces variants is being enumerated through large-scale next-generation the risk to 3.8%. This work provides the foundation for genetic testing sequencing studies. Discovery of low frequency penetrant alleles of HLA-A*3101 for all prospective CBZ users. influencing T2D risk (and/or risk of obesity and other metabolic and cardiovascular traits) will not only provide important insights into disease pathogenesis, but also powerful reagents to support functional and physiological studies.Plenary Lectures 88 PL4.1 PL5.1 mendel Lecture EsHG Award Lecture: Genetics in health care: about to make a E. H. Blackburn; (big) difference Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, The University of California, San G. J. B. van Ommen; Francisco, CA, United States. Dep.of Human Genetics, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, University No abstract received as per date of production. Please see Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. No abstract received as per date of production. Please see www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates.Concurrent Symposia 9 s01.1 s02.2 controlling gene expression by the regulation of chromatin modeling rare blood diseases with induced pluripotent stem compaction in the nucleus cells W. Bickmore; S. Agarwal1,2; MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, 1Children’s Hospital Boston, Boston, MA, United States, 2Harvard Medical Edinburgh, United Kingdom. School, Boston, MA, United States. It is widely appreciated that histone modifications correlate to gene Genetic mutations associated with blood diseases are being expression states and can, in some cases, directly impact on gene discovered at an unprecedented rate. To develop new treatments, we expression and repression. But, our understanding of chromatin states must determine how these mutations cause defects in hematopoietic beyond the level of the nucleosome itself is rudimentary and so there development and cell function. The advent of “direct reprogramming” has been little exploration of how these levels of chromatin structure technology allows us to revert a patient’s skin or blood cells to an might contribute to the regulation of gene expression. embryonic state, yielding “induced pluripotent stem” (iPS) cells. Important and well studied regulators of gene expression during iPS cells carrying patient mutations can in turn be differentiated development are the polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs). These into numerous specific tissue types to examine pathogenesis in a complexes have also been implicated in human cancers and their developmental context. iPS technology is well suited for modeling histone modifying activities have been studied extensively. However, human genetic blood disorders (e.g. dyskeratosis congenita, Pearson we show that polycomb repressive complexes act at the level of marrow pancreas syndrome, Shwachman Diamond syndrome) that chromatin compaction in the nucleus and we go on to demonstrate that have been a challenge to study using engineered mice or primary the ability of the PRC1 complex to compact chromatin, and to repress patient cells. Work-to-date creating iPS cells from patients with gene expression is not dependent on its histone ubiquitination activity. bone marrow failure syndromes is providing insights into disease mechanisms and stem cell biology, and prospects for therapy. s01.2 transcription and the three-dimensional genome s02.3 V. Corces; induction of Pluripotency ECAS: Biology, MS 1940-001-1AC, Emory College, Atlanta, GA, United States. H. Schöler1,2; No abstract received as per date of production. Please see 1Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute of www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. Molecular Biomedicine, Muenster, Germany, 2Medical Faculty, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. s01.3 The mammalian germline comprises two principal parts: the inner topography of nuclear functions studied by high-resolution cell mass and epiblast, containing pluripotent cells, and the germ microscopy cell lineage, hosting unipotent cells. Several pluripotent stem cell T. Cremer1, M. Cremer1, Y. Markaki1, B. Hübner1, K. Austen1, D. Smets1, J. types have been derived from the first part. Embryonic stem (ES) Rouquette1, M. Gunkel2, S. Beichmanis2, R. Kaufmann2, H. Leonhardt1, L. cells, derived from preimplantation embryos, comprise at least two Schermelleh1, S. Fakan1, C. Cremer2; populations of cells with divergent states of pluripotency. In addition, 1LMU Biocenter, Department of Biology II, Ludwig Maximilian University of epiblast stem cells (EpiSCs), derived from postimplantantion embryos, Munich (LMU), Martinsried, Germany, 2Kirchhoff-Institute for Physics and also do not comprise a uniform cellular population, as we’ve shown the BioQuant Center, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. presence of at least two EpiSC types: one resembling epiblast tissue Recent developments of light optical nanoscopy with resolution beyond of early and the other of late pregastrulation embryos. the classical Abbe limit (1) have supplemented electron microscopic A current aim in cell and developmental biology is to program cells at approaches (2,3) to study the structure of individual CTs in space will. The first step in converting a given cell into another cell is through and time and their spatial relationships to non-chromatin domains achievement of a pluripotent stem cell state that resembles that of (4). The results of these studies support the chromosome territory- ES cells. To date, somatic cells need to be pushed to a pluripotent interchromatin compartment (CT-IC) model of nuclear architecture (5): state by the introduction of exogenous factors, mostly transcription CTs are built up from a network of interconnected chromatin domains factors. Reprogramming of mouse and human somatic cells into with a DNA-content in the order of 1 Mb (~1Mb CDs) . Their structure pluripotent stem cells, designated as induced pluripotent stem (iPS) has not yet been resolved, but we argue that these domains are built cells, was first described in 2006 using fibroblasts as the somatic up from a series of more or less compacted chromatin loop domains cell source and initially requiring introduction of the virally-expressed with a DNA content in the order of 100 kb (~100 kb CDs). Moreover, transcription factor quartet of Oct4, Sox2, c-Myc, and Klf4. As we several ~1Mb CDs may form larger chromatin clusters. The IC forms a have recently shown, induced EpiSCs (iEpiSCs) can be obtained by 3D network of channels and larger, DNA free IC-lacunas (width > 400 directly reprogramming somatic cells with the quartet under EpiSC nm). It starts at the nuclear pores and pervades the nuclear interior culture conditions. We previously reported that Oct4 alone is sufficient expanding both between CTs and within CTs. Accordingly, CTs may to directly reprogram adult mouse and human fetal neural stem cells be compared with sponges built up from 3D interconnected chromatin (NSCs) into iPS cells, thus highlighting the crucial role played by Oct4 domains and the pervading IC channels. A layer of decondensed in the process of reprogramming. chromatin, termed the perichromatin region (PR), covers the In contrast to the recent reprogramming of somatic cells, induction of more compact interior of ~1 Mb-CDs and constitutes the nuclear pluripotency in primordial germ cells (PGCs) was accomplished 20 compartment for transcription and DNA-replication (1, 3). years ago by the mere modulation of the culture conditions. Recently, (1) Markaki, Y., et al. Cold Spring Harb Sym Quant. Biol. 75 (2011) we converted adult germline stem cells (GSCs) into germline-derived [Epub ahead of print]. pluripotent stem (gPS) cells. GSCs are unipotent cells of the testis that (2) Rouquette, J et al. Chromosome Res 17 (2009) 801-810. are capable of not only self-renewing, but also giving rise to sperm. (3) Niedojadlo, J. et al. Exp. Cell Res 317 (2011) 433-444. Like ES cells, GSCs exhibit significant levels of Oct4 and Klf4, but (4) Rouquette, J., et al. , Int. Rev Cell Mol Biol 282 (2010) 1-90. low endogenous expression Sox2 and c-Myc. To better understand (5) Cremer, T. and Cremer, M. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2 (2010) the reprogramming process, we sought to identify factors that mediate a003889. reprogramming at higher efficiency. We established an assay based on Oct4 reactivation to screen nuclear fractions from extracts of s02.1 pluripotent cells. BAF chromatin remodeling complexes containing Generation of organs from pluripotent stem cells the Brg1 protein have been shown to be not only essential for early H. Nakauchi; embryonic development, but also, as we have previously shown, Inst. of Medical Science, Center for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative paramount in enhancing the efficiency of reprogramming somatic Medicine, Univ. of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. cells to pluripotency mediated by the quartett. As knockdown of Brg1 No abstract received as per date of production. Please see leads to differentiation of ES cells, we investigated the early effect www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. of Brg1 knockdown by assessing the impact of RNA interference on the expression levels of key pluripotency factors. We show that Brg1 Concurrent Symposia 1100 knockdown leads to an immediate alteration in Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog and statistical methods and should further refine our understanding expression. More specifically, Sox2 expression is downregulated, of complex disease genetics. I illustrate the possibilities both with while Nanog expression is upregulated. Oct4 expression is simulation and with results from ongoing studies. immediately upregulated, perhaps triggering ES cell differentiation. Our data suggest that Brg1 plays an important role in regulating Oct4 s04.1 expression, which is instrumental in maintaining cells in a pluripotent Joubert syndrome: impaired cilia and shh dependent cerebellar state. development N. Spassky; s03.1 Inst. Nat. de la Santé et de la Recherche Méd. U1024, Inst. de Biol. de l’Ecole Dissecting regulatory variation in human genomes using RNA Norm. Sup. (IBENS), Paris, France. sequencing Joubert Syndrome (JS) is a multisystemic disorder characterized by a S. Montgomery; complex cerebellum/brainstem malformation where the most striking Development and Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, feature is a severe cerebellar vermis defect ranging from hypoplasia Switzerland. to complete aplasia. JS belong to a group of rare genetically Our ability to understand and predict complex human traits is being heterogeneous diseases recently reclassified as ciliopathies, where enhanced by our ability to uncover the effects of genetic variation on causative genes encode ciliary or basal body proteins and the function cellular state. Specifically, by identifying the genetic variants which and/or the structure of cilia, sensory organelles, are abnormal. One of influence the expression of particular genes it is likely we are also the most intriguing JS genes is CEP290 as it has the widest phenotypic uncovering those variants which inform various human conditions. spectrum ranging from isolated blindness to in utero lethal Meckel- Now, with advances in RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq), we can better Grüber syndrome and mutations of this gene are responsible for 50% interrogate transcriptome complexity; this provides us with the ability of JS with renal and ocular involvement (CORS). It is totally unknown to better understand the repertoire and abundance of transcripts how CEP290 and ciliary loss of function impair human cerebellar in multiple cell types. Furthermore, with the increasing availability growth giving rise to the drastic vermis malformation characteristic of of individual genomes we have the resolution to integrate rare and JS. Here we show that Shh dependent growth of human cerebellum, common as well as small and large variants into a more complete supported by the granule cells progenitors (CGP) proliferation, starts model of association with the aim of pinpointing specific causal around 15 gw, that GCP possess a primary cilium and that CEP290 variants. I will discuss what we are learning and how genetic studies of is localized at its base. We find that GCP proliferation and response gene expression are evolving using RNA-Seq and population genome to SHH is severely impaired in JS cases bearing mutations in genes sequencing. including CEP290 or MKS3, as well as in a Jeune syndrome ciliopathy case and a Thanatophoric dysplasia case, a putative ciliopathy. Finally, s03.2 we show that in JS cases, GCP proliferation and response to SHH are Exploring the invisible world using metagenomics: systemic impaired not only in the vermis but also, and to the same extent, in the analysis of the ecosystem ‚human gut‘ hemispheres. These results add a feature to the already described JS P. Bork; defects and rule out impaired GCP expansion as the origin of vermis Structural and Computational Biology, European Molecular Biology Laboratory hypo/aplasia. Our results show that Shh dependent GCP proliferation (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany. and consecutive cerebellar growth starts around 15 gw in the human Environmental sequencing (metagenomics) is uncovering genomic cerebellum and is impaired in JS whole cerebellum. They also suggest parts lists of various microbial communities, but our understanding that this could be a common feature to several ciliopathies. of their functioning remains limited. I will briefly discuss the status of this young field (Raes and Bork, 2008), in which due to utilization of s04.2 NGS data and ambitions increase exponentially. I will illustrate the ciliary control of feeding behavior and body weight developments using the example of the human gut, where recently N. F. Berbari, R. C. Pasek, E. B. Malarkey, R. A. Kesterson, T. R. Nagy, B. K. NGS has been demonstrated to provide an entry a new dimension Yoder; in analysis (Qin et al., Nature 2010). New biological discoveries, like University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States. the identification of a stratification of microbial communities in the Primary cilia have essential functions in regulating signaling pathways human population dubbed enterotypes (Arumugam et al., 2011) come during mammalian development. In adults, cilia are also important as along with big hopes for microbial markers in various diseases with evidenced by the spectrum of phenotypes observed in mouse models considerable diagnostic potential. and human patients with ciliary defects (ciliopathies); however, their Raes J and Bork B, Nat Rev Microbiol. 2008 Sep;6(9):693-9. roles in tissue physiology are poorly understood and the mechanisms Qin J et al., Nature. 2010 Mar 4;464(7285):59-65. underlying most ciliopathies remain enigmatic. We are addressing this Arumugam et al., Nature 2011, in press issue using conditional tissue-specific cilia mouse mutants and show that disruption of cilia in the hypothalamus results in hyperphagia and s03.3 obesity. A similar obesity phenotype was reported in mouse models of sequencing thousands of Human Genomes Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS). BBS mutants have defects in receptor G. Abecasis; transport into the cilium and are thought to be unable to sense the Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, University of anorexigenic peptide leptin. Here we assess the leptin signaling axis Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. in cilia mutants and demonstrate they are sensitive to leptin prior to Identifying and characterizing the genetic variants that affect human becoming obese, are leptin insensitive when obese, and then regain traits is one of the central objectives of human genetics. Ultimately, leptin sensitivity after caloric restriction to bring mutants back to wild this aim will be achieved by examining the relationship between type body weight. Thus leptin resistance is a secondary consequence interesting traits and the whole genome sequences of many of the obesity and not causal indicating that pathways other than the individuals. Whole genome re-sequencing of thousands of individuals leptin-melanocortin axis are involved. Data indicate that one of these is not yet feasible, but advances in laboratory methods (for example, pathways could be the melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) axis. to enable the genotyping of thousands of individuals at hundreds of Previous data indicate that MCH receptor localizes in the cilium of thousands of SNP sites) and in statistical methodology (for example, control but not of BBS mutants. Further, we show that MCH binds to enable accurate correction for population stratification and genotype MCHR1 in the cilium and that in the absence of the cilium, the MCH imputation) have resulted in substantial progress in our understanding signaling pathway is altered. Pharmacological and genetic studies of complex disease biology. are being conducted to assess whether defects in MCH signaling are Here, we discuss practical study designs for the first generation of directly associated with the obesity phenotype in cilia mutants. This whole genome sequencing studies. These will enable the examination work will provide novel insights into how dysfunction of the cilium of 1,000s of individuals at >15 million of polymorphic sites. These contributes to the onset of obesity and more generally the importance studies will be enabled by continuing advances in laboratory technology of the cilium in regulating normal neuronal activity and energy balance.Concurrent Symposia 11 s04.3 s05.2 Joubert syndrome Functional genomics in individuals: Understanding biology J. Gleeson; using intra-species comparisons. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of California, San Diego, CA, E. Birney; United States. European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, EMBL Joubert syndrome is characterized by congenital ataxia, oculomotor Outstation - Hinxton,, Cambridge, United Kingdom. apraxia and metal retardation and the pathognomonic Molar Tooth No abstract received as per date of production. Please see Sign on brain MRI (MTI). Joubert syndrome and related disorders www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. (JSRD) refers to a multiorgan class of conditions displaying the MTI as well as frequent retinal blindness, nephronophthisis, hepatic fibrosis s05.3 and polydactytly. JS and more broadly JSRD are caused by mutations Title to be announced in at least 10 different genes that are unified by the finding that the M. Snyder; encoded proteins localize at or near the cellular primary cilium. Up Stanford Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine , Stanford, CA, until recently, neurons were not generally regarded to have primary United States. cilia, but with better cilia visualization tools we now know that the most No abstract received as per date of production. Please see or all neurons in the developing and adult brain display primary cilia. www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. Furthermore, mutations in these genes frequently result in altered structure of the primary cilium. Two competing models have emerged s06.1 to explain the genotype-phenotype correlations: 1] These genes RNAi-based therapeutic strategies for inflammation and determine the structure of the primary cilium, alterations of which result metabolic disease in disease. 2] These genes modulate the efficiency of signaling of the M. Czech1, M. Aouadi1, G. J. Tesz1, S. M. Nicoloro2, M. Prot1, S. Amano1, G. R. many pathways linked to the primary cilium including Platelet derived Ostroff1; growth factor, Sonic hedgehog and Wnt signaling. 1Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, The genes mutated in Joubert syndrome suggest that altered structure Worcester, MA, United States, 2University of Massachusetts Worcester and/or function of the primary cilium underlie this complex phenotype, Campus, Worcester, MA, United States. but many important questions remain: 1] What can the genes identified Infiltration of macrophages into adipose tissue in animal models of to date tell us about the basis of this class of disease? 2] What type obesity increases expression and secretion of many factors which of genetic modifiers can explain the widely variable expressivity in could potentially regulate lipogenesis and sequestration of fat in this disease? 3] What types of treatment options will emerge from the adipocytes. Recently our laboratory reported that human omental molecular characterization of this disease? adipose tissue was more highly infiltrated with macrophages in obese, insulin resistant subjects, even when matched to equally obese human s05.1 subjects that were insulin sensitive. We have initiated strategies to mechanisms and evolution in mammalian transcriptional target macrophages with siRNA to suppress expression of genes regulation that promote adipose dysfunction and metabolic disease. We have D. T. Odom1,2; silenced TNF-α as well as other genes that promote inflammation using 1Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Inst., Li Ka Shing Centre, siRNA encapsulated within hollow shells of β, 1-3 D-glucan prepared Regulatory Systems Biology Lab., Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2University of from yeast cell walls (denoted GeRPs, for Glucan-encapsulated RNAi Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. particles). Both oral and intraperitoneal administration routes have My laboratory investigates the complex relationships among tissue- been tested in mice with GeRPs loaded with siRNA anchored between specific transcription, genetic sequence, and evolution using high- cationic (polyethyleneimine) and anionic (tRNA and siRNA) layers that throughput methodologies. We have demonstrated the remarkable also contain an amphipathic peptide. We have now developed simplified divergence in tissue-specific transcriptional regulation that has versions of these formulations with fewer components in order to occurred among mammals. We found that a set of liver-specific enhance reproducibility of manufacture, promote siRNA release from transcription factors whose function, amino acid sequence, and GeRPs after phagocytosis and increase gene silencing potency. The targeted binding motif are highly conserved throughout mammals newly developed GeRPs have achieved significant gene silencing in changes both their potentially targeted genes and also their precise mice targeting Map4k4, a protein kinase that controls inflammation in binding locations globally. An outstanding mechanistic question arose marcrophages, as well as the cell surface proteins F4/80 CD40, CD80 from the discovery of the rapid divergence of transcription factor and CD86 analyzed by FACS. The simplified GeRP system consists binding: what directs these transcription factor binding changes? Is it of glucan shells loaded in a step-wise procedure under various pH genetic sequence, epigenetic state, organismal development, or some conditions with only an amphipathic peptide, Endo-porter, and siRNA. combination of these? Current experiments are devoted to testing whether gene silencing We showed that an aneuploid mouse line carrying a human chromosome in macrophages in vivo by these simplified GeRP formulations can could isolate genetic sequence as an independent variable in directing alleviate insulin resistance in obese mouse models and in other animal transcriptional regulation. Remarkably, mouse-encoded transcription models of inflammation. factors bound the human chromosome in mouse liver almost precisely as do human-genome-encoded transcription factors in human liver. s06.2 We found that the mouse nucleus could also accurately re-create Gene therapy for inherited retinal dystrophies - from mouse to the epigenetic landscape and even mRNA regulation across the man entirely of this human chromosome. Thus, it is almost entirely genetic R. Ali; sequence variation that is responsible for interspecies differences in Institute of Ophthalmology, University College London, London, United transcriptional regulation. Kingdom. I will be discussing other current projects, including the evolution and No abstract received as per date of production. Please see conservation of CTCF binding events across multiple mammalian www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. orders, and the manner that RNA polymerase III maintains its conserved transcriptome in the face of rapid remodeling of its transcribed tRNAs. s06.3 Gene therapy for genetic leukodystrophies N. Cartier-Lacave; Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Neurology, INSERM UMR745, University Paris-Descartes, Paris, France. No abstract received as per date of production. Please see www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates.Concurrent Symposia 1122 s07.1 s08.1 causes and consequences of microRNA dysregulation in cancer mitochondrial quality control and neurodegeneration C. M. Croce; T. Langer1,2; Comprehensive Cancer Center, Wiseman Hall, Ohio State University, 1Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Max-Planck- Columbus, OH, United States. Institute for Biology of Aging, Cologne, Germany. During the past several years it has become clear that alterations in the Dysfunction of mitochondria has severe cellular consequences and is expression of microRNA genes contribute to the pathogenesis of most, linked to aging and neurodegeneration in human. Several surveillance perhaps all, human malignancies. These alterations can be caused by a mechanisms have evolved which prevent the accumulation of non- variety of mechanisms, including deletions, amplifications or mutations functional mitochondria and ensure cellular integrity. Whereas involving microRNA loci, by epigenetic silencing or by dysregulation irreversibly damaged mitochondria can be selectively removed by of transcription factors targeting specific microRNAs. Since malignant autophagy, various intraorganellar proteases degrade non-native cells show dependence on the dysregulated expression of microRNA mitochondrial proteins and limit mitochondrial damage. These include genes, which in turn control or are controlled by dysregulation of hexameric m-AAA proteases, ATP-dependent proteases in the inner multiple protein coding oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes, these membrane of mitochondria, mutations of which are associated with small RNAs provide important opportunities for development of future hereditary spastic paraplegia and spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA28). microRNA based therapies. m-AAA proteases are part of large supercomplexes with prohibitin scaffolds in the inner membrane. Recent experiments link the function s07.2 of this protein complex to mitochondrial fusion and the processing Evolution of the cancer Genome of the dynamin-like GTPase OPA1, which is emerging as a central M. R. Stratton; mechanism to monitor mitochondrial integrity. A dysfunction of Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cancer Genome Project, Hinxton, Cambridge, mitochondria as well as the loss of prohibitins or m-AAA proteases United Kingdom. induces the proteolytic breakdown of OPA1 isoforms by the OMA1 All cancers carry somatically acquired changes in their genomes. peptidase triggering mitochondrial fragmentation. Recent experiments Some, termed “driver” mutations, are causally implicated in cancer on the role of this mitochondrial quality control mechanism for neuronal development. The remainder are “passengers”, and bear the imprints survival will be discussed. of mutational processes operative during cancer development. Following the advent of second generation sequencing technologies s08.2 the provision of whole cancer genome sequences has become a insights into human neurodegenerative disease from Drosophila reality. These sequences generate comprehensive catalogues of genetics somatic mutations, including point mutations, rearrangements and N. Bonini; copy number changes and provide insights into the evolutionary 306 Leidy Laboratories, Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, processes underlying the development of individual human cancers Philadelphia, PA, United States. including the factors generating variation and the forces of selection. The causes of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are poorly These insights will form the foundation of our understanding of cancer understood, although TDP-43 has been suggested to play a critical causation, prevention and treatment in the future. role. We found that ataxin 2, a polyglutamine (polyQ) protein mutated in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), is a potent modifier of TDP- s07.3 43 toxicity in yeast and Drosophila (Elden et al., 2010). Moreover, Roles of chromatin ubiquitylation in DNA Double strand Break the proteins physically associate in an RNA-dependent manner, and Repair and tumor suppression ataxin 2 is abnormally localized in spinal cord neurons of ALS patients. R. A. Greenberg; Given these findings, we assessed the role of mutations in the gene School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United encoding ataxin 2 (ATXN2) in ALS. Ataxin 2 bears a polyQ repeat which States. is normally 22 or 23 Qs, but becomes expanded to ≥34Qs in SCA2. We Germline mutations to the Breast Cancer Early Onset 1 gene (BRCA1) therefore considered that polyQ expansions greater than normal, but confer a strong predisposition to breast and ovarian epithelial below the threshold for SCA2, may be associated with ALS. Analysis of cancers. BRCA1 maintains genomic integrity by activating cell cycle 915 ALS patients revealed that intermediate-length polyQ expansions checkpoints and error-free mechanisms of DNA double strand break (27-33 Qs) in the ATXN2 gene are significantly associated with ALS (DSB) repair. Cancer causing mutations disrupt these activities (4.7% of ALS cases vs 1.4% in controls). primarily by impairing BRCA1 recognition and retention at DSBs. We The ATXN2 gene presents additional interesting features because have discovered that BRCA1 is targeted to DSBs via an interaction the polyQ expansions associated with SCA2 are typically pure CAG with the ubiquitin interacting protein, RAP80 (Sobhian et al. Science repeats. However, similar expansions that are interrupted with other 2007). RAP80 provides a DNA damage recognition element by codons in analysis to date present atypically with parkinsonism. Given specifically binding lysine63-linked ubiquitinated (K63-Ub) structures on the association of ATXN2 with ALS, we determined the sequence of chromatin adjacent to DSBs for a complex consisting of BRCA1 and the ATXN2 expansions in our ALS patients (Yu et al., 2011). These several other proteins (Shao et al. Genes & Development 2009; Shao data indicate that expanded alleles associated with increased risk for et al. PNAS 2009). These results imply that ubiquitin recognition is ALS all bear at least one CAA interruption. These data suggest that required for genome integrity and suppression of malignancy. Related the nature of the repeat sequence, as well as the length of the polyQ to this hypothesis, new insights into the roles of this complex in DNA expansion, may play a role in neurological effects conferred by polyQ repair and tumor suppression will be presented. Recent findings repeat expansions in the ATXN2 gene. from my laboratory have revealed that DSB associated ubiquitin Elden et al., 2010, Nature 466: 1069-1075. also enables communication between DNA damage responses and Yu et al., 2011, PLoS One 6:e17951. transcriptional processes that occur on chromatin in cis to the site of damage (Shanbhag et al. Cell 2010). Using a novel assay that we s08.3 have developed for single cell analysis, we have observed an ATM When does neurodegeneration start in Huntington‘s disease: dependent process that silences transcription for multiple kilobases in study of pre-symptomatic phase cis to DSBs. New mechanistic insights into this ATM dependent DSB S. Tabrizi; silencing pathway will be presented along with its implications to DSB Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, MRC Prion Unit, repair, epigenetic inheritence, carcinogenesis, and viral latency. London, United Kingdom. Huntington’s disease is a neurodegenerative condition characterised by deterioration of motor and cognitive function as well as neuropsychiatric disturbance. The mean age of onset is 40 years, and progression is slow and inexorable, with death occurring typically 15-20 years later. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Currently there are no treatments available that modify disease progression. However, novel Concurrent Symposia 13 therapeutic agents specifically targeting HD pathology are now on the s09.3 horizon. DNA damage and its implications for the aging epigenome As Huntington’s disease has a 100% sensitive and specific genetic P. Oberdoerffer; test, it allows us to study at-risk subjects who carry the HD gene many Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, Epigenetics of DNA Repair and Aging years before symptom onset. The optimal point at which to introduce Section, NCI-Frederick, Frederick, MD, United States. neuroprotective agents in the hope of delaying symptom onset and Changes in chromatin structure are a conserved hallmark of aging slowing the rate of disease progression is likely to be in the premanifest and age-related diseases. The mechanisms driving these changes as stage before the onset of rapid neuronal degeneration and emergence well as their functional significance are heavily investigated. Over the of clinical symptoms. Data from a conditional Huntington’s disease past few years, it has become evident that DNA damage is a major mouse model suggests the potential reversibility of this neuronal contributor to a wide range of direct (genomic) and indirect (epigenomic) dysfunction leading to full recovery when expression of the mutant changes observed in aged nuclei, placing it at the crossroads of age- gene is halted. associated nuclear defects and functional decline. Recently, we were Studies such as TRACK-HD and PREDICT-HD have advanced able to show that DNA damage associated epigenomic changes our understanding of the clinical manifestations and underlying can be caused by the redistribution of the chromatin modifier SIRT1 pathobiology of HD in the earliest phase of the neurodegenerative from promoters and repetitive DNA to sites of DNA breaks, resulting disease process, such that we are now better equipped to enter in gene expression changes at ostensibly undamaged genomic loci. disease- modifying clinical trials and offer hope to the families affected This SIRT1-associated gene deregulation correlated with a significant, by this devastating disease. In TRACK- HD, which is a large multi- albeit small fraction of age-related epigenetic changes. Preliminary national observational study, we are investigating a range of potential data from our lab now implicate numerous other chromatin modifiers measures and biomarkers in premanifest HD gene carriers and early in DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair, suggesting a more general HD subjects which will have utility in clinical trials, and also help us role for DNA damage-induced epigenomic reorganization in the aging understand the neurobiology of the premanifest and early phase of process. Specifically, our data indicate that a repressive chromatin Huntington’s disease. structure may be a critical and novel aspect of DSB repair, involving In this talk I will summarise the state of the art in understanding the a significant nuclear reorganization of factors associated with age- presymptomatic phase of neurodegeneration in Huntington’s disease. related heterochromatin formation. Unlike DNA damage itself, damage- associated epigenetic changes are, at least theoretically, reversible s09.1 and may, thus, provide a unique means to interfere with age-related Old men and selfish spermatogonia: how much do they nuclear reorganization and concomitant tissue dysfunction. contribute to the mutation burden? A. O. M. Wilkie1, J. Lim1, G. McVean2, G. Turner3, G. K. Jacobsen4, E. Rajpert- s10.1 DeMeyts5, A. Goriely1; Using custom arrays to improve the understanding of metabolic 1Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, United disorder Kingdom, 2Dept of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, B. F. Voight; 3Dept of Pathology, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust,, Oxford, United Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States. Kingdom, 4Dept of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Dept of Establishing the statistical significance of novel associations from Growth & Reproduction, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. genome-wide studies through replication as well as the fine-mapping Gain-of-function mutations in 5 genes (RET, FGFR2, FGFR3, PTPN11 of established loci to identify causal alleles are both crucial activities and HRAS) that cause congenital malformations exhibit the collective for understanding the genetics of complex traits in humans. As our properties of very high apparent rates of germline base substitution, understanding of human traits has increased over the past several near-exclusive paternal origin, and increased average age of the years, new technologies are required to continue the accelerated father from whom the mutation has arisen (paternal age effect, PAE). pace of genetic discovery in performing both replication and fine Somatic mutations in these same genes have been described in mapping experiments. Each of these experiments requires hundreds various human cancers. of thousands of SNPs to be genotyped in thousands of samples and, We have developed methods to quantify several of these mutations in until very recently, comprehensive application of these experiments human sperm and have also identified FGFR3 and HRAS mutations in has been cost prohibitive. To overcome this challenge, I describe spermatocytic seminoma, a rare type of testicular tumour. The combined the approach to the design, as well as the features, of a custom evidence suggests that these mutations, although occurring rarely, genotyping assay, the Metabochip, tailored to interrogate high priority provide a selective growth advantage to the mutant spermatogonial genetic loci implicated in metabolic disorder and clinically important cell, resulting in clonal expansion over time, accounting for the PAE. anthropometric measurements. After a brief characterization of the To date, all examples of these “selfish” spermatogonial mutations properties of the array, I will focus on insights gained from extensive locate within a single signalling pathway, the growth factor receptor- replication studies for type-2 diabetes: namely, (1) how the array RAS pathway, which is a key determinant of spermatogonial stem cell provides clues to the extent of polygenicity of this trait, and (2) how proliferation and renewal. Our recent immunohistochemical analysis the depth of replication results can be used to extract new biological of normal testes shows features consistent with the occurrence of insight, using text-based mining approaches or protein-protein mutational microclones; a variety of patterns of antigen positivity are interaction networks. The Metabochip, and other similarly designed observed, consistent with different underlying driver mutations. custom genotyping technologies like it, offer a practical and powerful Regulation of cell turnover is important in many disease contexts, experiment to advance the understanding of complex traits in humans. for example neurogenesis and neoplasia, so the consequences of mutations that hijack this process within the testis are potentially far s10.2 reaching. Depending on the spectrum of average PAE mutations Ankylosing spondylitis levels, they may contribute significantly to the ‘dark matter’ in human M. A. Brown, Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium 2, Australo-Anglo- heritability, currently speculated to be explained by uncommon alleles American Spondyloarthritis Consortium (TASC), The Spondyloarthritis of moderate effect. Hence this mechanism is likely to be important in Research Consortium of Canada (SPARCC); the origins of common complex diseases such certain cancers and MBBS, MD, FRACP, Autoimmunity Division, University of Queensland, psychiatric disorders, as well as in congenital malformations. Brisbane, Australia. Ankylosing spondylitis (AS) is an inflammatory arthropathy affecting s09.2 primarily the spine and pelvis, with a disease prevalence of 0.4% in telomeres, aging and stem cells white Europeans. Susceptibility to AS is known to be highly heritable K. L. Rudolph; (h2>90%), and the major gene for the condition, HLA-B27, has been Institut für Molekulare Medizin, Max-Planck-Forschungsgruppe für known since 1972. However, only 1-5% of HLA-B27-carriers develop Stammzellalterung, Universität Ulm, Ulm, Germany. AS, and 10-20% of cases do not carry the gene, suggesting that other No abstract received as per date of production. Please see genes must be involved. Genetic studies of AS have made rapid www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. progress over the past 5 years, with associations with novel genes Concurrent Symposia 1144 and genetic loci providing insights into the disease pathogenesis, s11.2 stimulating much follow-up functional research and therapeutic Drosophila: Parkinson‘s disease development. A. J. Whitworth; In order to identify further genetic variants predisposing to AS, a gwas MRC Centre for Developmental and Biomedical Genetics, Dept of Biomedical was performed involving 1782 British and Australian cases fulfilling Science, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. modified New York Criteria, and 5167 historical controls from the Neurodegenerative diseases present an increasing challenge to Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2 (WTCCC2). The study was biomedical science. Our understanding of the cause and nature combined with existing results from the Australo-Anglo-American AS of diseases is greatly informed by study of models organisms Consortium (TASC) consortium, and replication of the most significant that recapitulate features of the disease. One model system that findings performed in 2109 cases and 4410 controls from Australia, has proven surprisingly tractable for these diseases is the fruit fly, Britain, and the Canadian SPARCC consortium. As well as confirming Drosophila melanogaster. In my lab we are principally focussing on known associations at HLA, IL23R, ERAP1, KIF21B, 2p15 and 21q22, understanding the function of genes linked to Parkinson’s disease we identified and subsequently replicated risk predisposing variants (PD). PD is the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disorder in RUNX3, IL12B, and LTBR, and found suggestive association at principally affecting the dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra. ANTXR2, PTGER4, CARD9, TRADD and TBKBP1-TBX21. The pathogenic mechanisms are unknown and there is currently no Additionally, we identified a single SNP within the MHC, rs4349859, cure or disease-modifying therapies. Genetic studies have begun to which lies near the gene MICA and tags HLA-B27 with near perfect identify single-gene mutations responsible for rare heritable forms of sensitivity (98%) and specificity (99%). Studies in cases and controls PD and define genetic risk factors contributing to disease prevalence carrying different HLA-B27-subtypes, some AS-associated and some in sporadic cases. These findings provide an opportunity to gain insight not, indicate that rs4349859 is not itself AS causative, and further into the molecular mechanisms of this disorder through the creation reduce the likelihood that an HLA-B*27-linked gene is responsible for and analysis of appropriate genetic models. Analysis of a number of the association of B27 with AS. This SNP is far cheaper and easier to Drosophila models of PD has revealed some profound and sometimes genotype than HLA-B*27-itself, and can be used as an alternative to surprising insights into PD pathogenesis. Moreover, these models can HLA-B*27-typing, at least in European populations. be used to investigate potential therapeutic strategies that may be In most common diseases the proposed genetic model involves effective in vivo, and tests have highlighted the efficacy of a number interaction between loci, but to date no convincing examples of such of neuroprotective compounds. I will discuss the methodologies interaction have been demonstrated. We identified an interaction employed in developing the various Drosophila models, and the recent between HLA-B*27 and variants within ERAP1 in the WTCCC2 advances that these models in particular have contributed to our (p=0.02), TASC (p=0.014) and replication datasets (p=0.0019). understanding of the mechanisms that underlie PD pathogenesis and Specifically, risk variants in ERAP1 increased odds of disease in possible treatment strategies. HLA-B*27-positive, but not HLA-B*27-negative, cases (combined P=7.3x10-6). In contrast, SNPs at other AS-loci, including IL23R, s11.3 KIF21B, IL12B and the intergenic regions 2p15 and 21q22, were AS Modeling Parkinson‘s disease in zebrafish associated in both HLA-B*27+ve and HLA-B*27-ve disease. This O. Bandmann; result indicates that HLA-B*27+ve and HLA-B*27-ve forms of disease Sheffield Institute of Translational Neuroscience, Dept. of Neuroscience, have substantially different but overlapping aetiologies. Interestingly, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. in a separate WTCCC2 study, we have demonstrated that ERAP1is Parkinson’s Disease (PD) is the second most common associated with psoriasis, and that the association is restricted to neurodegenerative disease after Alzheimer’s Disease. The pathological cases carrying the HLA Class I protein HLA-Cw6. The findings support hallmark of PD is loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia mechanisms of association of HLA-B*27 and ERAP1 with AS that nigra (SN). Currently, only symptomatic treatment is available. The involve peptide presentation, and that ERAP1 contributes to disease identification of monogenically inherited subtypes of PD has provided risk through its action in trimming peptides prior to loading into nascent us with crucial new insight into the pathogenesis of this disorder, but HLA class I molecules, rather than by cleaving pro-inflammatory not led to better therapy as such. Mitochondrial dysfunction is of crucial cytokine receptors on the cell membrane. importance in the pathogenesis of both sporadic and familial PD. Many further genes are likely to be identified over the coming years. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) are emerging as a new animal model for The International Genetics of Ankylosing Spondylitis Consortium will human disease. They are vertebrates and therefore more closely perform what will likely be the definitive SNP genotyping study of AS, related to humans than other model systems such as c. elegans or involving over 12,000 cases and 20,000 healthy controls genotyped for drosophila. There is very high sequence homology of many PD genes 200,000 markers targeting immunogenetically relevant genes using the between humans and zebrafish. The embryos develop externally and ‘Immunochip’. This study will bring new findings including new genes, are transparent. The dopaminergic nervous system in zebrafish is well fine-mapping of known genes, data about the value of genetic risk characterized. prediction in different world populations, and even pharmacogenetic We will use PD as an example how zebrafish can be used to study data regarding TNF-antagonist response and intolerance. human disease. Knockdown of parkin (an autosomal recessively These findings provide substantial material for the functional biology inherited PD gene, leading to the disease due to loss of function) leads community to research, with the promise of early translation in both to loss of dopaminergic neurons and mitochondrial dysfunction with therapeutics and improved diagnostic tests. specific lowering of complex I activity, mirroring both the biochemical and pathological abnormalities observed in human PD patients with parkin s10.3 mutations. A STOP mutation in PINK1, a further autosomal recessively Genetic Analysis of Autoimmune Disease in the Wellcome trust inherited, loss of function PD gene also results in mitochondrial case-control consortium 2 dysfunction and loss of dopaminergic neurons. In addition, PINK1 C. Spencer, on behalf of the WTCCC2; mutant zebrafish larvae display a behavioural phenotype compatible WTCHG, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. with the abnormalities observed in human patients. I will discuss genome-wide association studies of Psoriasis, Ankylosing Spondylitis and Multiple Sclerosis performed as part of the Wellcome s12.1 Trust Case-Control Consortium 2 (WTCCC2) PGD - 21 years on J. Harper; s11.1 UCL Centre for PG & D, EGA Institute for Womens Health, University College Dog: how comparative genetics inform human diseases London, London, United Kingdom. K. Lindblad-Toh; Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) was developed in 1989 as an Scientific Director of Vertebrate Genome Biology, Broad Institute, Cambridge, alternative to prenatal diagnosis to help couples at risk of transmitting MA, United States. a genetic disease to have a healthy family. To achieve this patients No abstract received as per date of production. Please see go through in vitro fertilisation (IVF) procedures. Cells are removed www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. from the embryo at one of three stages; polar bodies from the oocyte/Concurrent Symposia 15 zygote, blastomeres from cleavage stages or trophectoderm from s12.3 blastocysts. During the last 21 years, the majority of cycles have Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis using circulating fetal DNA: been performed using cleavage stage biopsy. The diagnosis has state of the art mainly been performed using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Y. M. D. Lo; monogenic disorders and fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) for Li Ka Shing Institute of Health Sciences and Department of Chemical chromosome analysis. Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong This technology has also been used as an adjunct to IVF to help choose Kong. the ‘best’ embryo for transfer by testing for as many chromosomes as The discovery of the presence of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma possible; preimplantation genetic screening (PGS). PGS has been a in 1997 has opened up new possibilities for non-invasive prenatal controversial procedure as thousands of cycles have been performed, diagnosis. Early work had focused on the detection of paternally- but eleven randomised controlled trials (RCT) have shown that it does inherited targets in maternal plasma, e.g. Y chromosomal markers. not increase IVF delivery rates for certain indications. Recently, the development of technologies for analyzing single DNA The European Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology molecules, e.g. digital PCR and next-generation sequencing, has (ESHRE) set up an international PGD consortium in 1997 to monitor greatly enhanced our ability to exploit the diagnostic capabilities of PGD and collect data on PGD cycles worldwide. We have collected circulating nucleic acids. Hence, using next-generation sequencing, data on over 33,000 cycles of PGD/PGS, produced four guidelines on fetal trisomy 21 can be detected with high sensitivity and specificity PGD/PGS and have five working groups. from maternal plasma (Chiu et al. BMJ 2011; 342: c7401). Furthermore, Recent advances in the field of PGD/PGS have been the exploration it has been demonstrated in a proof-of-concept study that the entire of polar body biopsy (for those countries where embryo biopsy is not fetal genome can be scanned non-invasively by maternal plasma DNA allowed) and blastocyst biopsy. Improvements in embryo freezing by sequencing (Lo et al. Sci Transl Med 2010; 2: 61ra91). It is envisioned using vitrification have resulted in an increase in pregnancies from that plasma DNA analysis will play an increasingly important in prenatal biopsied embryos. The use of array-comparative genomic hybridisation diagnosis and monitoring. (a-CGH) or single nucleotide polymorphism arrays (SNP-arrays) is rapidly entering the PGD/PGS arena. Many groups are performing s13.1 blastocyst biopsy, vitrifying the embryos, and using array technology Genomic imprinting: an epigenetic gene regulatory model to perform the diagnosis. The embryos are replaced in a future cycle. D. P. Barlow; For PGS, the new technology needs to be shown to improve delivery Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Science, rates by performing RCTs. Vienna, Austria. Controversially, PGD has been used for social sexing, the diagnosis of Genomic imprinting is an epigenetic process leading to parental- late onset disorders and HLA matching. Treatment of these indications specific expression of 1-2% of mammalian genes that offers one of the has caused many ethical discussions and the use of whole genome best model systems for a molecular analysis of epigenetic regulation in scanning will bring more debate. development and disease. In the twenty years since the first imprinted gene was identified, this model has had a significant impact on s12.2 decoding epigenetic information in mammals. So far it has led to the Use of acGH in Prenatal Diagnosis discovery of long-range cis-acting control elements whose epigenetic A. L. Beaudet; state regulates small clusters of genes, of unusual macro ncRNAs Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Houston, TX, United States. that directly repress genes in cis and critically, it has demonstrated Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is currently being that one biological role of DNA methylation is to allow expression of offered as a rapid and reliable method of prenatal testing for the genes normally repressed by default. Here we describe our progress detection of structural and numerical chromosome abnormalities. in understanding how imprinted protein-coding genes are silenced, in aCGH can survey the entire genome for submicroscopic deletions particular, focussing on the role of macro (or long) ncRNAs that have and duplications, aneuploidy and other unbalanced chromosomal broad relevance as a potential new layer of regulatory information abnormalities and is being increasingly applied to prenatal diagnosis, in the mammalian genome. The Airn macro ncRNA silences the where it is already making significant impact. Inclusive of our reported Igf2r protein-coding gene on the paternally inherited copy of mouse experience with 300 prenatal cases (PMID 19012303), we now have chromosome 17. We have previously established an in vitro model aCGH data on 841 clinical prenatal samples, 545 (65%) of which were in differentiating ES cells that emulates the developmental onset of direct amniotic fluid or direct CVS specimens, allowing for a turnaround imprinted expression of Igf2r and Airn (Latos et al., 2009). The ES cell time far superior to that of cultured cells. Copy number changes were model was used to determine the functional length of Airn. Several detected in 166 (20%) of the total 841 cases. Of these, 94 (11%) ES lines carrying different Airn truncations were generated and tested were CNVs that were interpreted as likely benign either because for their ability to direct imprinted Igf2r expression and to change the they were inherited from a phenotypically normal parent (90) or they physical characteristics of the Airn ncRNA itself. The data show the Airn were de novo (4) but had been previously observed in our aCGH ncRNA sequence and structure do not play a role in Igf2r repression. database of over 26,000 clinical cases and phenotypically normal Since the Airn transcript overlaps the Igf2r promoter, we next tested individuals. Of the 63/841 (7.5%) cases in which clinically significant if transcriptional overlap was sufficient to repress Igf2r by moving genomic imbalances were detected, 23/841 total cases (2.7%) or the Airn promoter directly in front of the Igf2r promoter. Together, the 23/63 abnormal cases (36.5%) would not have been detected by results do not support a functional role for the Airn ncRNA but, instead, conventional G-banded prenatal chromosome studies alone. These indicate that transcriptional overlap by the Airn ncRNA is sufficient to data demonstrate the superior diagnostic power of aCGH compared repress Igf2r in cis. to conventional karyotype analysis, with a relatively small number of findings of uncertain significance (1% or less), most of which can be s13.2 resolved by analyzing parents or by using data from ever-growing How epigenetics disconnects the ability to learn with increasing experience with diagnostic aCGH. It is noteworthy that we have age now analyzed more than 400 prenatal samples on high-resolution R. M. Stilling, A. Fischer; oligo arrays and the frequency of findings of uncertain significance European Neuroscience Institute Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. has remained at approximately 1%. Furthermore, the increasing Aging is a major issue in modern societies since it is the main risk availability and decreasing cost of prenatal aCGH will likely lead to factor for dementia, especially Alzheimer’s disease. It has been its universal acceptance as a first-line prenatal diagnostic test for shown across various species including humans, monkeys and fetal chromosomal abnormalities in the near future. Furthermore, we rodents that age-associated memory impairment (AAMI) correlates have successfully optimized aCGH technology to achieve detection with deregulated gene expression in certain brain regions such as the of copy-number imbalances of 1 Mb from single cells; with improving hippocampus. During the last years it became increasingly evident technology for fetal cell or fetal DNA enrichment, this may open up new that genome-environment interactions have a significant impact on avenues for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. cognitive functions and that these GxE interactions are mediated by epigenetic mechanisms like DNA methylation and post-translational Concurrent Symposia 1166 (cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:17) S15.1 (cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3) Jewish population structure on Lysine 12 of Histone 4 (H4K12ac) is an important regulator in M. Metspalu; dynamic transcription of learning associated genes. H4K12ac was the Inst. of Molecular and Cell Biology, Dept. of Evolutionary Biol., Univ. of Tartu – only of several investigated acetylation sites on H4 and H3 that did Eston. Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. not respond to a learning stimulus in the fear-conditioning paradigm I shall give a brief overview of the genetic studies that have addressed (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:20)(cid:25)(cid:16)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:16)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3) Jewish origins including studies focusing on uniparentally and that H4K12ac seems to be especially important for transcriptional biparentally inherited markers but will focus on genome-wide patterns (cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:78)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3) of variation across the vast geographic span of Jewish Diaspora transcriptome plasticity in 16-month-old mice. H4K12 acetylation as communities and their respective neighbours. well as memory performance could be reinstated by intrahippocampal We have used Illumina 6X0 bead arrays to genotype individuals from injection of an HDAC inhibitor in old individuals. 20 Jewish Diaspora communities, including in addition to the European Furthermore, we employed 24-month-old mice that represent a communities those from Northern Africa, India and Central Asia, and (cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3) compare these patterns of genome-wide diversity within the context impairment in the novel object recognition (NOR) learning paradigm. of the genetic landscape of the Old World. We have also improved By employing a combination of ChIP-seq and DNA microarray we were the sampling of the host populations and those from the historically (cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:43)(cid:23)(cid:46)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3) suggested region of Jewish origins in the Middle East. hippocampal transcriptome of these mice. We observed elevated Principal component and structure-like analyses show that most genome-wide levels of H4K12ac, which corresponded to a high Jewish samples shear genetic ancestry signals and form a sub-cluster degree of differential gene expression in the aged hippocampus. In that overlies with some Levantine populations but not the paired summary, histone acetylation-mediated GxE interactions seem to be Diaspora host populations. Nevertheless, in line with the history of an essential regulator of stimulus-driven transcription and a hallmark the different Jewish communities, different levels of admixture with (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:17) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:86)(cid:3) (Beta Israel) and Indian Jews (Bene Israel and Cochini) cluster with S13.3 neighbouring autochthonous populations in Ethiopia and western Towards epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS) India, respectively, despite a clear paternal link between the Bene S. Beck; Israel and the Levant. UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, London, United Kingdom. Overall these results point to the genetic origins of most Jewish What determines a phenotype is one of the fundamental questions in Diaspora communities in the Levant and exemplify how genetic biology and medicine. In addition to genetic factors, epigenetic factors information may be utilized to address questions of demographic such as DNA methylation have been shown to play important roles. To history where historical evidence is weaker or inexistent. understand the rules governing DNA methylation and their functional consequences requires genome-wide analysis of methylome S15.2 dynamics. I will present our efforts using array- and sequencing-based A fine-scale map of recombination rates and hotpots in the chim- platforms for high-throughput methylome analysis, discuss some of panzee reveals conservation and turnover in factors localising the lessons learnt and give an outlook on how this approach may be cross-overs. used for epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS) to analyse and O. Venn1, A. Fledel-Alon2, A. Auton1, L. Segurel2, S. Pfeifer3, E. Leffer2, R. better understand phenotypic plasticity in health and disease. Hernandez4, C. Melton2, R. Bowden1,3, Z. Iqbal1, I. Turner3, J. Maller3, G. Lunter1, For further details, please see: J. Broxholme1, P. Humburg1, S. Myers1,3, P. Donnelly*1,3, M. Przeworski*2,5, G. McVean*1,3; http://www.ucl.ac.uk/cancer/research-groups/medical-genomics 1University of Oxford , Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2University of Chicago, Dept. of Human Genetics, Chicago, IL, United S14.1 States, 3University of Oxford, Dept. of Statistics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4De- Genomic advances in early-onset myocardial infarction partment of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of California, S. Kathiresan; San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. Cardiovascular Disease Prevention Center, CPZN 5.252, Massachusetts No abstract received as per date of production. Please see General Hospital Heart Center, Boston, MA, United States. www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. No abstract received as per date of production. Please see www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. S14.2 CCM protein interactions, double KO mouse models E. Tournier-Lasserve; U.F.R. de Médecine Paris Diderot, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France. No abstract received as per date of production. Please see www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. S14.3 Genomics of blood pressure and hypertension A. F. Dominiczak; School of Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3) genome wide association studies of blood pressure and hypertension as well as strategic developments including large meta-analyses and sampling from the extremes of blood pressure distribution. Published and in press successes, which include more than 20 SNPs/loci associated with blood pressure and hypertension, will be described together with the future directions such as exome sequencing as well as clever functional studies leading to clinically useful applications.Concurrent Symposia 1177 s16.2 Feedback of individual genetic results to research participants: in favor of a qualified disclosure policy A. L. Bredenoord; University Medical Center Utrecht, Julius Center, dept Medical Ethics, Utrecht, Netherlands. In recent years, a debate evolved regarding the question whether s15.3 researchers have a duty to return individual genetic research results Genome diversity in Asia to research participants. This unsettled debate has rapidly gained in M. Seielstad1,2, The Pan-Asian SNP Initiative; urgency in view of the emergence of biobanks and the advances in 1Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2University of California next-generation sequencing technology, which has the potential to San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States. generate unequalled amounts of genetic data. This implies that the Asia harbors substantial cultural and linguistic diversity, but the generation of many known and unknown genetic variants in individual geographic structure of genetic variation across the continent remains participants of genetics/genomics research as intentionally or enigmatic. Here we report a large-scale survey of autosomal variation collaterally obtained by-products is unavoidable. from a broad geographic sample of Asian human populations. Our In both the scientific debate and in international guidelines, the results show that genetic ancestry is strongly correlated with linguistic extreme positions of full disclosure and no disclosure whatsoever are affiliations as well as geography. Most populations show relatedness seldom defended. A duty to warn when this may save the life of a within ethnic/linguistic groups, despite prevalent gene flow among research participant is apparently recognized widely. As no disclosure populations. More than 90% of East Asian (EA) haplotypes could is unethical because it fails to adhere to the so-called rule of rescue be found in either Southeast Asian (SEA) or Central-South Asian and full disclosure nonsensical (at best) as it could imply disclosure of (CSA) populations and show clinal structure with haplotype diversity all raw sequencing data, any disclosure policy in between means we decreasing from south to north. Furthermore, 50% of EA haplotypes have to consider how and by whom a selection should be made about were found in SEA only and 5% were found in CSA only, indicating that which results are eligible for disclosure. SEA was a major geographic source of EA populations. In this presentation, a qualified disclosure policy is proposed. This policy contains a standard default package, possibly supplemented s16.1 with three additional packages. Whereas the default package, Research Governance - so…Last century? containing life-saving information of immediate clinical utility, should J. Kaye; be offered routinely and mandatory to all research participants, offering Department of Public Health, Centre for Law, Health and Emerging (one of) the three additional packages is context-specific. Such a Technologies, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. qualified disclosure policy in our opinion best balances the potential Since the advent of the Human Genome Project, we have seen benefits of disclosure with the potential risks for research participants significant changes in the way that research is carried out. Samples and the harms of unduly hindering biomedical research. and data are now shared widely on a global level by researchers in international consortia and biobanking networks. The problem is that s16.3 our research governance systems are nationally based, following Ethics, genetics and the family national legal requirements and guidelines, and relying on the A. Lucassen; expertise of research ethics committees for oversight. In this paper Faculty of Medicine and Health and Life Sciences, School of Medicine, I will argue that our current national research governance systems University of Southhampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. are inadequate for the task of international data sharing and that No abstract received as per date of production. Please see radical new approaches are needed to bring our research governance www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. systems into the 21st century.Educational Sessions 1188 Es1.1 USA the panel comprises more than 54 disorders whilst at the other mitochondrial diseases extreme Great Britain is screening for four. P. F. Chinnery; Mitochondrial Research Group & Institute for Genetic Medicine, Newcastle Es2.1 University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Lynch syndrome (HNPcc) The first pathogenic mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) were E. Mangold; identified over 20 years ago, paving the way for two decades of clinical Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. and molecular research, and opening up the new field of mitochondrial Hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC), also called Lynch medicine. Pathogenic mutations of mtDNA have been found in > 1 syndrome, is an autosomal-dominant predisposition to colon cancer in 200 of the general population, and cause mitochondrial disease and other malignancies (e.g., endometrium, urinary tract, small bowel, in > 1 in 5000. The spectrum of mitochondrial disorders continues biliary tract, ovary, stomach cancer). Lynch syndrome patients and to increase, both at the molecular and clinical level, presenting new their first degree relatives are recommended lifelong surveillance for challenges for diagnosis and treatment. colorectal cancer and other Lynch syndrome malignancies starting This presentation will provide the basic biochemical and molecular in their 20s and 30s. The diagnosis can be made based on clinical knowledge required to understand mitochondrial disorders in a data and family history (Amsterdam criteria) and/or when a causative clinical context, describe novel phenotypes that present in adult life, germ line mutation has been detected. To date, private mutations discuss the complex interplay between the nuclear genome and the in mismatch-repair genes MSH2, MLH1, MSH6, PMS2 or deletions mitochondrial genome in human disease, and describe new treatments of EPCAM leading to epigenetic silencing of MSH2, are known as under development for these disorders. molecular causes of Lynch syndrome. The identification of a causative 1. Cree LM, Samuels DC, de Sousa Lopes SC, Rajasimha HK, mutation is important, as it allows predictive testing in healthy family Wonnapinij P, Mann JR, Dahl HH, Chinnery PF (2008) A reduction members. of mitochondrial DNA molecules during embryogenesis explains the Not all Lynch syndrome patients meet the Amsterdam criteria for Lynch rapid segregation of genotypes. Nat Genet 40:249-254 syndrome. The diagnosis of HNPCC should also be considered when 2. Yu-Wai-Man P, Griffiths PG, Gorman GS, Lourenco CM, Wright AF, the patient’s individual history and family history meet one or more Auer-Grumbach M, Toscano A,¼.Chinnery PF. (2010) Multi-system of the less stringent criteria (revised Bethesda guidelines). Among neurological disease is common in patients with OPA1 mutations. these patients an examination of tumor tissue for Lynch syndrome Brain 133:771-786 characteristics is able to detect those, who have a high probability 3. Yu-Wai-Man P, Sitarz KS, Samuels DC, Griffiths PG, Reeve AK, for Lynch syndrome and therefore should undergo surveillance and Bindoff LA, Horvath R, Chinnery PF (2010) OPA1 mutations cause mutation screening. A high microsatellite instability and loss of DNA cytochrome c oxidase deficiency due to loss of wild-type mtDNA mismatch repair protein expression are characteristic for Lynch molecules. Hum Mol Genet 19:3043-3052 syndrome tumors. However, a loss of MLH1 and PMS2 expression is 4. Samuels DC, Wonnapinij P, Cree LM, Chinnery PF (2010) also observed in a considerable portion of sporadic cancers. Reassessing evidence for a postnatal mitochondrial genetic bottleneck. This educational will focus on diagnostic approaches in patients Nat Genet 42:471-472 diagnosed with or suspected of Lynch syndrome and point out possible 5. Craven L, Tuppen HA, Greggains GD, Harbottle SJ, Murphy JL, Cree pitfalls. LM, Murdoch AP, Chinnery PF, Taylor RW, Lightowlers RN, Herbert M, Turnbull DM (2010) Pronuclear transfer in human embryos to prevent Es2.2 transmission of mitochondrial DNA disease. Nature 465:82-85 BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes cancer susceptibility: from bench to bedside Es1.2 D. Stoppa-Lyonnet1,2; Neonatal screening for inherited diseases 1Genetics Department, Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2University Paris U. von Döbeln1,2; Descartes, Paris, France. 1Centre for Inherited Metabol. Dis. (CMMS), Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset, The chromosomal mapping of the BRCA1 gene by Mary-Claire King Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of laboaroty medicine, Karolinska Institute, twenty years ago has opened the field of breast cancer genetics, and Stockholm, Sweden. paved the way to the personalized management of women at-risk Mass screening of newborn infants by analysis of blood samples dried because of their breast cancer family history. on filter paper (DBS) is performed all over the world. The aim is to find The first application of the identification of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 infants with treatable inborn diseases in order to improve the long term genes was indeed genetic testing. Yet, 20 years latter, BRCA1/2 outcome by early institution of treatment. genetic testing remains complex because of the large size of the coding Neonatal screening started with the autosomal recessive disorder sequences, of the broad allelic heterogeneity - disease-predisposing phenylketonuria (PKU) in the early sixties by the pioneering work of mutations being different from a family to another in most cases -, and Robert Guthrie. He developed a bacterial assay on DBS that could of the vast number of rare variants with unknown significance (VUS). detect infants with this serious disorder before it had given symptoms. The international ENIGMA consortium (Evidence based Network Patients with PKU born before the start of screening are mentally for the Interpretation of Germline Mutant Alleles) has been recently retarded while those treated since the neonatal period become created to classify these VUS by using multiple approaches including completely normal. family cosegregation data. New disorders (eg galactosemia, congenital hypothyroidism, Tumour risk estimate is also a major concern. Numerous factors, both congenital adrenal hyperplasia, cystic fibrosis) have been added genetic and non-genetic, are influencing risks. Their identification, still one by one when analytical methods for the screening of them have ongoing, is of the utmost importance for the individualised management been developed. Screening for congenital hypothyroidism is the most of at-risk women, and for opening new ways of prevention and widely spread over the world. This disorder has a fairly high incidence treatment. Two international consortia, now associated, play a major (1:3000) and is easy to treat at a low cost with one pill of thyroxin a day. role on their identification namely the IBCCS (International BRCA1/2 In the early nineties a new era for neonatal screening started with the Carrier Cohort Study) and CIMBA (Consortium of Investigators of introduction of LC-MS-MS. With this equipment the concentration of Modifiers of BRCA1 and BRCA2) consortia, for non-genetic and more than a hundred metabolites can be quantified simultaneously in a genetic factors respectively. 3 mm diameter punch of dried blood on filter paper at an analysis time The discovery of the involvement of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 proteins of 2 min per sample. New technologies for DNA analyses will certainly in the Double-Strand Break DNA repair pathway has lead to specific also contribute to the development of neonatal mass screening. clinical trials testing molecules increasing the tumour genomic LC-MS-MS has meant a technological break through but has also led instability such as alkylating agents and Base Excision Repair to ethical and economical dilemmas with respect to choice of disorders inhibitors (PARPi). Their first results are promising and, importantly, to include in the screening panel. could also have an impact on non-BRCA1/2 related breast tumours, This is well illustrated by the differences between countries. In the some of them showing DSB repair defects as well.Educational Sessions 19 Thus, in this particular field, may be more than in any other genetic analysis in six different skin disorders including NF1, Hailey-Hailey medicine areas, it is fascinating to see how much, in so few years, the disease, Darier disease and rhodoid nevus syndrome (“capillary distance between bench and bedside has shortened, at-risk women malformation-arteriovenous malformation”). - Conversely, in autosomal and researchers now walking next to each other. recessive epidermolysis bullosa, postzygotic loss of homozygosity may cause revertant mosaicism in the form of mosaic patches of Es3.1 healthy skin. Similarly, ichthyosis variegata (ichthyosis in confetti) eQtL reflects thousands of revertant clones involving the KRT10 locus. - L. Franke; The concept of didymosis (twin spotting) explains the coexistence of Groningen, Netherlands. two different mosaic patches such as capillary didymosis, cutis tricolor, No abstract received as per date of production. Please see or phacomatosis spilorosea. - Superimposed segmental manifestation www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. of polygenic skin disorders: Clinical examples now include psoriasis, atopic eczema, lichen planus, systemic lupus erythematosus, Es3.2 dermatomyositis, pemphigus vulgaris, vitiligo, graft-versus-host Design, analysis and interpretation of genome-wide association disease, granuloma annulare, drug eruption, and multiple melanocytic studies nevi. This new genetic concept offers an explanation why in polygenic C. A. Anderson; skin disorders “mixed” cases of both segmental and nonsegmental Statistical Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United involvement may occur; why the segmental manifestation is rather Kingdom. severe, tends to occur early in life and is rather difficult to treat; and Genome-wide associations studies (GWAS) have revolutionised the why family members may show the same disorder in a nonsegmental field of human genetics and have directly led to the identification of form. over a thousand loci associated with complex traits and disease. In this presentation I will begin by outlining the rationale behind genome- Es6.1 wide association studies and the technological advances that were marfan syndrome: evolving nosology, evolving pathophysiology necessary to make them a reality. I will go on to discuss how to design and evolving treatment with improved survival a successful GWAS and outline some of the steps that should be C. Boileau1,2,3; undertaken to reduce false-positive and false-negative findings. I will 1Inserm U698, Paris, France, 2University Versailles SQY, Versailles, France, then review GWAS replication studies and meta-analysis. Throughout 3Ambroise Paré University Hospital, Boulogne, France. the presentation I will draw on examples from the GWAS literature. I Marfan syndrome (MFS), the prototypical heritable connective tissue will finish by summarising the major lessons learnt from GWAS and disorder, has been known for its pleiotropy since Victor McKusick’s discussing the ‘next-generation’ of genome-wide association studies. founding monograph in 1955. Through the years, clinical pleiotropy has led to an evolving nosology (Berlin, 1986: Gent I, 1996; and Es4.1 Ghent II, 2010) that illustrates the difficulty of the diagnosis of MFS. Genetics of fear, anxiety and affective disorders Twenty years ago the syndrome was found to be due essentially to M. Schalling; mutations within the FBN1 gene that encodes fibrillin 1, the major Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery , Karolinska Hospital, component of 10 nm diameter microfibrils, matrix structures found Stockholm, Sweden. as isolated aggregates or closely associated with elastin. Careful No abstract received as per date of production. Please see clinical investigations and the identification of molecular defects www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. located in new genes (TGFBR2 and TGFBR1) have lead to the recognition of overlapping syndromic entities: Marfan syndrome type Es4.2 2 and the Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Conversely, FBN1 gene mutations Autism have been identified in familial diseases affecting mainly one organ T. Bourgeron; system (isolated ectopia lentis, familial thoracic aortic aneurysm and Human Genetics and Cognitive Functions , Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. dissection, Marfanoid habitus), thus showing that they are allelic to No abstract received as per date of production. Please see MFS. This molecular complexity of human diseases has benefited www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. the understanding of pathogenic mechanisms underlying MFS since it opened avenues of research not only in the field of connective tissue Es5.1 remodelling, but also in alteration of TGF β signalling. Historically, Targeted rapid aneuploidy detection in prenatal diagnosis MFS was thought to result from structural weakness of connective T. Bui; tissue. This was confirmed with the indentification of mutations Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. (either missense or nonsense) in the FBN1 gene associated with a No abstract received as per date of production. Please see dominant negative or haploinsuffisiency effect, respectively. Mutations www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. could reasonably well explain the altered mechanical properties of the zonules (ocular ligaments containing high levels of isolated Es5.2 microfibrillar aggregates) and the aortic media (containing elastin cutaneous mosaicism 2011: understanding the patterns and lamellae closely bordered with microfibrils) in MFS. However, no clear mechanisms genotype/phenotype correlation could be established between FBN1 R. Happle; mutations and various forms of MFS but for the identification of an Department of Dermatology, University of Freiburg, Germany, Freiburg, association between mutations in exons 24-32 and the neonatal MFS Germany. as well as the tendency to a more severe phenotype in adults. Further All nevi reflect mosaicism. Such skin lesions show a remarkable insight into pathophysiology has been gained through the study first divergency of archetypical patterns. Some unusual types are the of the transgenic Fbn1 mgΔ and subsequently the KI Fbn1 C1039G mice “Ruggieri pattern”of pigmentary disturbances, and the hypopigmented strains, the latter providing a model more analogous to the situation macules of Pallister-Killian syndrome. - Epigenetic cutaneous in affected humans. The mice strains have led to the identification of mosaicism can today explain the hereditary patterns of lyonization as increased TGF β signalling within disease tissues. This finding is in well as hereditary autosomal pigmentary disturbances arranged along agreement with an additional role for fibrillin 1: matrix sequestration Blaschko’s lines. - Genomic mosaicism: Such mosaics can usually not of inactive TGF β and regulation of TGF β activation by targeting and be transmitted to the next generation. A new possible example of a lethal concentrating TGF β at specific locations through its interaction with mutation surviving by mosaicism is papular nevus spilus syndrome latent TGF-β-binding proteins (LTBPs). The identification of altered that is characterized by ipsilateral neurologic defects, especially in the TGF β signalling has led to several clinical trials worldwide to test the form of segmental hyperhidrosis. Phylloid hypomelanosis is a novel efficacy of Losartan on blunting the overstimulation of the signalling neurocutaneous phenotype that reflects mosaic trisomy 13q. - The and thus on the aortic disease. The scientific challenge is now the concept of type 2 segmental manifestation of autosomal dominant identification of genetic modifiers that could lead to the identification of skin disorders, reflecting early LOH, has been confirmed by molecular prognostic factors and new therapeutic targets.Educational Sessions 20 Es6.2 Legius syndrome patients show the same multiple café-au-lait spots the Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: a disorder with many faces as patients with NF1 but without Lisch nodules, neurofibromas, optic A. de Paepe; pathway gliomas and NF1 related bone abnormalities. Melanocytes Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. from café-au-lait spots in Legius syndrome patients show a “second The Ehlers-Danlos Syndromes (EDS) comprise a heterogeneous group hit” in the SPRED1 gene. Legius syndrome is associated with mild of diseases which are characterized by fragility of the soft connective learning problems and the Spred1 knockout mouse model shows tissues and widespread manifestations in skin, ligaments and joints, similar learning and memory deficits as the Nf1 mouse model. blood vessels and internal organs. The clinical spectrum varies from These findings point to important roles for the evolutionary conserved mild skin and joint hyperlaxity to severe physical disability and life- RAS-MAPK pathway not only in oncogenesis but also in cognition, threatening vascular complications. Current classification (Villefranche growth and development. Nosology) recognizes 6 genetic subtypes, most of which are linked to In recent years germline mutations in genes coding for other mutations in one of the genes encoding fibrillar collagen proteins or components of the RAS signalling cascade have been recognized in a enzymes involved in post-translational modification of these proteins. group of phenotypically overlapping disorders, referred to as the neuro- Mutations in type V and type III collagen cause classic or vascular EDS cardio-facial-cutaneous syndromes or Ras-o-pathies. These disorders respectively while mutations involving the synthesis or processing of are characterized by variable degrees of cognitive impairment, cardiac type I collagen are involved in the kyphoscoliosis, arthrochalasis and abnormalities, facial dysmorphism, short stature, skin abnormalities dermatosparaxis type of EDS. Establishing the correct EDS subtype and a variable cancer risk. has important implications for genetic counselling and management and is supported by specific biochemical and molecular investigations. Es9.1 Over the last years, several new EDS variants have been characterized Arrays in daily practice which call for a refinement of the Villefranche classification. Moreover, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts; the study of these diseases has brought new insights into the molecular University Medical Centre Groningen, Department of Genetics, University of pathogenesis of EDS by implicating genetic defects in the biosynthesis Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. of other extracellular matrix molecules, such as proteoglycans and This presentation will focus on the interpretation of array results in a tenascin, or genetic defects in molecules involved in intracellular routine diagnostics setting from a cytogenetic and clinical point of view. trafficking, secretion and assembly of extracellular matrix proteins. The main take-home messages will be: No causal therapy is available for EDS, but a series of “preventive” 1. Know your diagnostic limits. Within these limits, data should be of guidelines are applicable to all forms of EDS. Key-aspects of high quality, accurate and reproducible. management include cardiovascular work-up, physiotherapy, pain 2. Define thresholds that are realistic for the array platform used and management and psychological support. Recently, a clinical trial has are manageable without losing too much information. shown promising results for a betablocker, Celiprolol, in the prevention 3. Be aware of the relationship of the array result with the underlying of vascular catastrophies in patients with vascular EDS. cytogenetic abnormality and with the possible mechanism of formation. This is important for the follow-up studies that should be recommended Es7.1 (e.g. karyotyping, FISH or array) and for counselling (e.g. recurrence Noonan syndrome risk). M. Zenker; 4. Recognise the importance of clinical information and the use of Humangenetisches Institut, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. databases. No abstract received as per date of production. Please see 5. Know when not to use arrays, and ensure you answer the physician’s www.eshg.org/eshg2011 for possible updates. question. 6. Be aware of the increasing number of CNVs that are “risk factors” Es7.2 for MR/MCA, but which, on their own, may not be sufficient to cause Neurofibromatosis a phenotype. This also implies that inheriting a CNV from a non- E. Legius; affected parent may mean it can still make a contribution to the child’s Center for Human Genetics, Laboratory for Neurofibromatosis Research, K.U. phenotype. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. 7. Be aware that for CNVs, “de novo” does not automatically mean RAS proteins play key roles in normal cell growth, malignant “pathogenic”. transformation, learning and memory. Somatic mutations in RAS 8. Be aware of unexpected findings. Pre-test counselling on the genes and several of their upstream and downstream molecules play possibility of unexpected findings is important. If no national guidelines an important role in different human malignancies. are available, local guidelines should be set up. Neurofibromatosis type 1 is caused by heterozygous mutations in the I will give illustrative examples for all these take-home messages. NF1 tumor suppressor gene coding for neurofibromin. Neurofibromin functions as a GTP-ase activating protein towards RAS and Es9.2 neurofibromatosis type 1 was the first human inherited disorder to Deciphering Developmental Disorders be associated with an increased signalling through the RAS-Mitogen N. P. Carter; Activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway. Molecular Cytogenetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Most features of NF1 are the result of tissue specific inactivation of the Kingdom. normal NF1 allele. “Second hits” in the NF1 gene have been observed Improved diagnosis for children with developmental disorders requires in NF1 related tumors such as neurofibromas, gastrointestinal stromal the integration of several important elements. These include accurate tumors, pheochromocytomas, brain tumors, and glomus tumors of the and detailed phenotyping, reproducible and consistent application of digits. “Second hits” were also seen in melanocytes from café-au-lait new genomic methodologies, a comprehensive database to inform spots, and pseudarthrosis tissue. In addition patients with NF1 have an diagnosis and genetic counselling, open data sharing for additional increased risk of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors. research opportunities and a comprehensive collection of patient and These “second hits” in NF1 result in a deficiency of RAS signalling parental DNAs to facilitate further disease-gene discovery. We are down regulation with subsequent overactivity of the RAS pathway. bringing all these elements together by direct collaboration between Cognitive difficulties in NF1 patients and Nf1 heterozygous mice have the 23 UK Regional Genetics Services and the Wellcome Trust been attributed to haploinsufficiency for NF1(Nf1). Pharmacological Sanger Institute in the Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) down regulation of RAS activity is capable of correcting learning and project (http://www.ddduk.org). The main aim of the DDD project is memory deficits in adult mice. Clinical trials in humans with NF1 trying to improve diagnosis for children with developmental disorders within to pharmacologically correct the learning disabilities are running at this a 5-year period. This will be achieved by the systematic application moment. of the latest microarray and sequencing methods to 12,000 children Legius syndrome is a more recently described entity resembling with developmental disorders and their parents from the UK recruited neurofibromatosis type 1. It is caused by heterozygous mutations through the Regional Genetics Services. The new technologies will in SPRED1, a negative regulator of RAF activation by RAS-GTP. raise ethical challenges that we will address by a programme of Educational Sessions 21 ethics and sociological research, working with patients and the UK database (https://decipher@sanger.ac.uk) can be used to inform genetics community. The high-resolution genomic and phenotypic data diagnosis of developmental disorders and how the database has collected on this unparalleled scale will deliver accurate diagnosis for been adapted to provide informatics support for patient recruitment 1000s of families; a knowledge base for clinical interpretation of results and clinical reporting of significant findings for the DDD project. from new technologies; the design of cost effective, efficient diagnostic Furthermore, I will describe the pragmatic approach we are taking to assays; standards of good practice addressing ethical issues raised by filtering the research findings to maximise the feedback of pertinent new genomic technologies; and the opportunity for major UK research findings to the clinical teams while minimising the risk of feeding back into diagnostic applications based on next generation sequencing.In incidental findings that might cause psychological harm to the patient his educational session, I will describe how the current DECIPHER or family.Concurrent Sessions 22 c01.1 c01.3* Landscape of somatic structural alterations in chronic The role of germline allele-specific expression of TGFBR1 in lymphocytic leukemia (cLL) detected by whole-genome colorectal cancer predisposition sequencing N. Segui1, K. N. Stevens2, E. Guino3, L. S. Rozek4, V. R. Moreno3, G. Rennert5, L. Bassaganyas*1, J. M. C. Tubio*1, G. Escaramis1, C. Tornador1, S. Bea2, X. S. G. Capellà1, S. B. Gruber2, L. Valle1; Puente3, D. Gonzalez-Knowles1, R. Guigo1, I. Gut4, C. Lopez-Otin3, E. Campo2, 1Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology - IDIBELL, X. Estivill1,5; Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Epidemiology, Department of Internal 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, Medicine, and Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann 2Hematopathology Unit, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, Arbor, MI, United States, 3Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Unit, Catalan Institute 3Departamento de Bioquimica y Biologia Molecular, Universidad de Oviedo, of Oncology - IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 4Environmental Health Science, Oviedo, Spain, 4Centro Nacional de Analisis Genomicos, Barcelona, Catalonia, School of Public Health, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Spain, 5Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain. MI, United States, 5CHS National Israeli Cancer Control Center and Carmel Cancer is driven by somatically genetic mutations that can be Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. acquired gradually overtime or by single catastrophic events. Chronic A previous report suggested that allele-specific expression (ASE) lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is one of the most frequent cancers in of TGFBR1 confers an increased risk of colorectal cancer (CRC)[1]. western countries, representing 35% of all cases of leukemia. Different Subsequent studies showed contradictory results[2-5]. Considering its genetic alterations have been identified in CLL, including chromosomal potential use in the clinical evaluation of CRC susceptibility we herein aberrations detected by cytogenetic analysis, FISH and aCGH. The perform a validation study. limitations of these techniques do not allow the identification of the full While in the original study ASE was measured using SNaPshot, set of somatic structural variation at molecular level. Our understanding here we use pyrosequencing. We show that this technology is a of oncogenesis has benefited greatly from next-generation sequencing more powerful and robust method for allelic imbalance assessment, technology. Massively sequencing, in combination with computational showing reproducible and consistent results when using different approaches, offers the potential to carry out genome-wide screening of allelic markers, even when high-quality RNA is not available. Blood all sort of chromosomal rearrangements. Using a toolkit (PeSVFisher) lymphocytes and normal colon mucosae were used as source of non- that includes several algorithms to identify structural variations in tumoral biological material. genomic sequencing, we have analyzed whole-genome sequencing, Two different populations were analyzed: 433 healthy controls and whole-exome sequencing and SNP/CGH arrays data, to annotate the 426 CRC patients of Ashkenazi Jewish descent, and 178 CRC cases entire complement of genomic rearrangements in ten patients with from a Caucasian-dominated population. In the Ashkenazi cohort, CLL. By identifying read pairs that did not align correctly with respect 26% controls and 27% patients were informative. ASE values ranged to each other on the reference genome, we have catalogued hundreds from 0.67 to 1.39 (median: 1.00) for controls and from 0.76 to 1.67 of somatic rearrangements. Moreover, depth of coverage of whole- (median: 1.00) for cases (median difference -0.003; 95%CI -0.032 genome sequencing and whole-exome sequencing data provides a to 0.025; p=0.81). 50% of the Caucasian cases resulted informative. comprehensive catalogue of copy number variations. The analysis of Their ASE values ranged from 0.68 to 1.40 (median: 1.01), and no these first ten CLL cases represents the first step in a comprehensive significant differences were identified neither when compared with the characterization of the genomic alterations at the structural level, Ashkenazi controls or with the cases. Only 25-50% of all individuals coupled with functional analysis, of CLL in the framework of the CLL are informative for analysis, so novel approaches may be required to genome project to decode the genetic changes that are responsible for comprehensively determine the role of allele-specific expression of the development and progression of CLL. TGFBR1 in colorectal cancer. *Equal contribution Our results suggest that ASE of TGFBR1 does not confer an increased risk of CRC. c01.2 Exome sequencing in the identification of breast cancer c01.4* predisposition genes chromosomal, epigenetic and microRna-mediated inactivation K. M. Snape1, E. Ruark1, S. Hanks1, P. Tarpey2, S. Seal1, A. Renwick1, G. of LRP1B, a modulator of the extracellular environment of Bowden1, D. Hughes1, C. Turnbull1, J. Douglas1, M. R. Stratton2, N. Rahman1; thyroid cancer cells 1Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom, 2The Wellcome Trust H. Prazeres1, J. Torres1, F. Rodrigues2, M. Teixeira-Pinto1, M. Sobrinho- Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Simões1, P. Soares1; High, intermediate and low penetrance genetic variants predisposing to 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2IPO Coimbra, FG, EPE, Coimbra, Portugal. breast cancer have been identified but account for <30% of estimated The Low density lipoprotein receptor Related Protein (LRP1B), disease heritability. Our systematic resequencing of candidate genes encoding an endocytic LDLfamily receptor, is amongst the 10 most previously identified the predisposition genes, CHEK2, ATM, BRIP1 significantly deleted genes across 3,312 human cancer specimens. and PALB2. These genes are characterized by rare, inactivating, We undertook the present study to elucidate the mechanisms of primarily truncating mutations that confer a relative risk of breast LRP1B inactivation in cancer cells and to investigate the key roles cancer of 2-4. It is highly plausible that there exist additional genes of this lipoprotein receptor in the carcinogenesis. Here we show that acting in a similar fashion and whole exome sequencing should allow LRP1B inactivation (by chromosomal, epigenetic and microRNA- their identification. However, there are significant scientific and cost mediated mechanisms) modulates the tumor microenvironment to constraints on such experiments. confer cancer cells an increased invasive capacity. LRP1B displays To explore the utility of exome sequencing in gene identification in frequent DNA copy number loss and CpG-island methylation resulting breast cancer susceptibility we have sequenced 50 familial breast in mRNA under-expression. By using CpG-island reporters methylated cancer exomes using the Agilent whole-exome pulldown, Illumina in vitro, we found that DNA methylation disrupts a functional binding Genome IIx sequencing and NextGENe software for data analysis. We site for the histone-acetyltransferase p300 located at intron 1. We first identified rare (<5% frequency) mutations resulting in premature identified and validated a microRNA targeting LRP1B (miR-548a-5p) protein truncation, as these have the highest likelihood of being which is overexpressed in cancer cell lines as a result of 8q22 DNA associated with disease. Each sample contained ≥ 15 such mutations. gains. Restoration of LRP1B impaired in vitro and in vivo tumor growth, Five were in known genes (CHEK2 (n=3) ATM (n=1) and BRCA2 (n=1)) inhibited cell invasion and led to a reduction of soluble growth factors, and therefore likely to be causative. However, without prior knowledge cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases in the extracellular medium. of their role in breast cancer predisposition, recognition of these as These findings link DNA copy-number changes, an epigenetic pathogenic mutations would have been challenging. Amongst the transcription factor and a specific microRNA with the modulation of the remaining 45 samples were some interesting genes, including some extracellular medium, through LRP1B (de)regulation. with two truncating mutations which we are following up. Our data demonstrates that exome sequencing in familial breast cancer can identify predisposition genes but that there are significant challenges in using this approach in an agnostic fashion to discover new genes.Concurrent Sessions 23 c01.5 c02.1 chromosomal instability in cancer: How does p53 guard the Clinical and molecular findings in 91 patients with the clinical genome? diagnosis of cornelia de Lange syndrome P. H. G. Duijf, J. M. Schvartzman, R. Sotillo, C. Coker, R. Benezra; I. Stefanova1, A. Dalski1, S. Vogt2, D. Braunholz1, F. J. Kaiser1, G. Gillessen- Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, United States. Kaesbach1; Chromosomal instability, a high rate of chromosome missegregation 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, Bonn, during mitosis, is a hallmark of many human cancers and a major Germany. driving force for solid tumor progression. The mitotic checkpoint, Cornelia de Lange Syndrome(CdLS) is characterized by dysmorphic a key surveillance mechanism to safeguard against chromosomal features, growth and cognitive impairment, limb malformations and instability, is frequently hyperactivated in tumor cells. While we know other features. Mutations in the genes NIPBL,SMC1A and SMC3 are that p53 protects against varies forms of genomic instability, how known to cause CdLS. aberrant p53 signaling leads to chromosomal instability through mitotic 91 patients were referred to us for molecular analysis of NIPBL and checkpoint hyperactivation has thus far remained elusive. We find SMC1A. that, via induction of p21 expression and inhibition of cyclin-dependent In 64 patients we found no mutations.In 30 of them we support the kinase activity, crosstalk to the Retinoblastoma (Rb) pathway is clinical diagnosis CdLS, in 13 we suggest a different condition. For 21 critically important to prevent overexpression of the E2F target gene patients insufficient clinical information was supplied. Mad2. Mad2 is a mitotic checkpoint protein whose overexpression is In 27/91patients we found probably pathogenic mutations, 25 in sufficient to hyperactivate the checkpoint and initiate aneuploid tumor NIPBL and 2 in SMC1A. 21 are novel mutations. 13/27patients have a formation in vivo. We show here that its overexpression is required mild, three an intermediate whereas six patients have a severe CdLS to mediate the chromosomal instability phenotypes of impaired p53 phenotype. In 5/27patients the clinical data was insufficient. and Rb pathways. In the context of aberrant Rb pathway signaling, 95% of the patients with NIPBL or SMC1A mutation show typical Mad2 overexpression is required for the acquisition of chromosomal facial features for CdLS.All patients have mental retardation(59% instability and anaplastic mammary tumor formation. Additionally, in a mild,18% moderate,23% severe). 18% have severe malformations of p53 mutant knock-in mouse model that develops tumors with stable, the upper limbs and other 36% show typical X-ray findings. For 72% diploid genomes, the Mad2 upregulation and chromosomal instability intrauterine growth retardation was reported and 67% have short that is caused by p21 loss can be rescued by genetic reduction of stature at present. 75%of the patients are dystrophic and 94% have Mad2 levels. These results demonstrate that Mad2 overexpression microcephaly. Further features are feeding difficulties(76%), cleft is an essential mediator of the chromosomal instability and tumor palate(24%), congenital heart defects(40%), kidney anomalies(12%), phenotypes observed upon inactivation of the two tumor suppressor gastrooesophageal reflux and hearing loss. pathways that are most frequently impaired in human cancer. It is of note that one SMC1A mutation is familial. The patient´s mother also shows features of CdLS. c01.6 In addition we report a case of gonadal mosaicism with two affected Germline gain-of-function mutations of ALK disrupt central sibs and parents not carrying the pathogenic NIPBL mutation. nervous system development We discuss the clinical and molecular findings of 91patients with C. Gordon1, L. de Pontual1,2, D. Kettaneh1, M. Oufadem1, N. Boddaert3, M. suspected clinical diagnosis CdLS and compare them with the Lees4, J. Mollet5, A. Munnich6,1, L. Brugière7, O. Delattre5, M. Vekemans6,1, S. literature. Lyonnet6,1, I. Janoueix-Lerosey5, J. Amiel6,1; 1Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U-781, Paris, France, 2Service de c02.2* Pédiatrie, Hôpital Jean Verdier, AP-HP, Bondy, France, 3Service de Radiologie Advances in phenotype-genotype correlations in Pédiatrique, INSERM U-1000, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, Holoprosencephaly: about a European series of 645 probands. France, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Great-Ormond Street Hospital for S. Mercier1,2,3, C. Dubourg2,3, M. Belleguic1, I. Gicquel3, L. Rochard3, L. Ratié3, Children, London, United Kingdom, 5INSERM U-830, Institut Curie, Paris, L. Pasquier1, C. Bendavid2,3, P. Loget4, N. Garcelon5, B. Campillo-Gimenez5, S. France, 6Département de Génétique, Faculté de Médecine ; AP-HP, Hôpital Jaillard3, C. Quélin1, V. Dupé3, V. David2,3, S. Odent1,3; Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 7Service d’Oncologie Pédiatrique, 1Service de Génétique clinique, CHU, Rennes, France, 2Laboratoire de Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Hôpital Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 3Institut de Neuroblastoma (NB) is a frequent embryonal tumour of sympathetic Génétique et Développement, UMR 6061 CNRS, Université Rennes1, Rennes, ganglia and adrenals with extremely variable outcome. Recently, France, 4Service d’Anatomie Pathologique, CHU Hôpital Pontchaillou, Rennes, somatic amplification and gain-of-function mutations of the anaplastic France, 5Département d’Informatique Médicale, CHU Hôpital Pontchaillou, lymphoma receptor tyrosine kinase (ALK, MIM 105590) gene, either Rennes, France. somatic or germline, were identified in a significant proportion of NB Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common malformation of the cases. human forebrain resulting from incomplete midline division of the Here we report a novel syndromic presentation associating congenital prosencephalon. Three ranges of increasing severity are described: NB with severe encephalopathy and abnormal shape of the brainstem lobar, semi-lobar and alobar HPE. Other milder subtypes are part of on brain MRI in two unrelated sporadic cases harbouring de novo, the HPE phenotypic spectrum: Middle Interhemispheric Variant (MIH germline, heterozygous ALK gene mutations. Both mutations are or syntelencephaly), septo-optic dysplasia and microforms that consist gain-of-function mutations that have been reported in NB and NB cell in facial midline defects without any HPE typical brain malformation. lines only. Electroporation of the neural tube of embryonic day 1.5 Since 1996, a European network was organized from Rennes, France: chicken embryos with a mutant ALK construction results in spreading data of 645 HPE probands and 699 relatives were analyzed and DNA of neural progenitors beyond the ventricular zone at two days post- prospectively collected. electroporation; this phenotype is not observed when wild-type Here we report the clinical and molecular data of the largest European ALK is over-expressed. This supports the hypothesis that activating series in HPE. Our cohort encompasses 51% of foetuses and 49% mutations in ALK disrupt neurogenesis in the central nervous system. of children with a sex ratio (female/male) of 1,2. Facial defects, brain These observations further illustrate the role of oncogenes in both associated malformations, neural tube defects, extra-brain associated tumour predisposition and normal development, and shed light on malformations are detailed. Mutations in the four main genes implicated the pleiotropic and activity-dependent role of ALK in humans. More in HPE (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF) were identified in 26% of cases. generally, missing germline mutations relative to the spectrum of They are inherited in more than 70% of cases in SHH, SIX3, and TGIF. somatic mutations reported for a given oncogene may be a reflection Instead of the other genes, they arise de novo in 70% of cases for of severe effects during embryonic development, and may have to be ZIC2. Moreover rearrangements were detected in further 4% of cases looked for in patients with extreme phenotypes. by subtelomeric MLPA analysis and in further 22% in 260 HPE patients screened by array-CGH. Interestingly some probands have both a microrearrangement and a mutation in another HPE gene which adds additional support to «multiple-hit process» in HPE. Based on statistical analyses we report new phenotype-genotype Concurrent Sessions 24 correlations that may help define molecular analysis strategy and specific morbidity. The knowledge of the PWS specific age related genetic counseling. health risk factors will be used to adjust guidelines for preventive management. c02.3* Microcephaly with simplified gyration, West syndrome and c02.5 infantile diabetes linked to inappropriate apoptosis of neural Craniofacial characteristics of Fragile X syndrome identified by progenitors dense surface and signature graph analyses C. J. Poulton1, R. Schot1, S. Kheradmand Kia1, M. Y. de Wit1, M. Jones2, H. P. Hammond1, M. J. Suttie1, I. Heulens2, F. Faravelli3, F. Forzano3, C. S. Venselaar1, G. Vriend3, E. de Graaf1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1, G. M. S. Mancini1; Perrotta4, T. Mattina4, R. F. Kooy2; 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2La Plata, La Plata, Argentina, 3CMBI, 1UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Department of Neijmegen, Netherlands. Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3E.O. Ospedali We describe the causative gene defect in a new syndrome with primary Galliera, Genova, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Catania, microcephaly, infantile spasms epilepsy, diabetes and early death. Catania, Italy. Microcephaly with simplified gyration (MSG) is a rare malformation For a disorder as common as fragile X syndrome, a hereditary form of of cortical development, not always associated with severe epilepsy. cognitive impairment, the facial features are relatively ill defined. An Infantile onset permanent diabetes is caused by inappropriate elongated face and prominent ears are the most commonly accepted apoptosis of pancreatic beta cells, e.g. Wolcott-Rallison syndrome dysmorphic hallmarks. We analysed 3D photographs of 50 males with (WRS).We have previously described a WRS patient with MSG full FMR1 mutations using dense surface modelling (DSM) techniques suggesting abnormal apoptosis as a common mechanism. Additional and a new method that forms a directed graph with normalised faces families exhibiting this combination have been collected. as nodes and edges linking faces showing closest dysmorphism. We Genomic linkage revealed a region on chromosome 18 with a LOD identified as yet unrecorded facial characteristics such as infra-orbital score of 4.3.This corresponded to an area of overlapping homozygosity proptosis, hyperplasticity of the nasal bone-cartilage interface, mid- on SNP array. facial hyperplasia and increased supra-orbital height. Subsequently, Two homozygous non-conservative missense mutations in a novel we began analysis of micro-CT images of the fragile X mouse model. gene were found in patients from two unrelated consanguineous Results indicated reduced inter-parietal bone length and reduced families, but not in 300 matched controls, and were predicted as length and width of the inner skull. We also found reduced lateral pathogenic by Poliphen-2, SIFT programs and the HOPE project. The separation of condylar surfaces and increased mandibular height due gene involved is highly expressed in ventricular and subventricular to altered orientation of condyle, coronal and angle tip, and increased zone of the fetal brain cortex and pancreas and is presumably depth at anterior molars. implicated in regulation of apoptosis. Patient fibroblasts and cells Thus, we have refined the facial characteristics of fragile X syndrome treated with specific siRNA showed an increased susceptibility to and have obtained a 95% discrimination rate between affected apoptosis under stress conditions. Autopsy specimen from one patient and control males. Some of the abnormalities, e.g., nasal cartilage showed increased apoptosis in the cerebral cortex. qRT-PCR revealed deficiencies in patients and mid-facial effects in the mouse model, dysregulation of other genes in the apoptotic control system.in patient correspond in both species and suggest a common mechanism. cells. This supports reports that FMR1, the gene silenced in the disorder, We have identified a new syndrome with MSG, epilepsy and infantile influences eye and cranial cartilage development through effects on diabetes caused by novel mutation pointing to apoptosis of neural neural crest cells and is consistent with a previous study of Bardet- progenitors in the developing cortex as the causal mechanism. This Biedl syndrome where similar nasal bone and mid-facial abnormalities work sheds light on the mechanisms of brain development and West were linked to adverse neural crest cell behaviour. syndrome. c02.6 c02.4* Epigenetic modification of the FMR1 gene in fragile X syndrome Ageing in Prader-Willi syndrome: twelve persons over the age is associated with differential response to the mGluR5 of 50 years antagonist AFQ056. M. Sinnema1,2, C. T. R. M. Schrander-Stumpel1, M. A. Maaskant2,3,4, L. M. G. S. Jacquemont1, A. Curie2, V. des Portes3, M. Torrioli4, E. Berry-Kravis5, R. Curfs1,2; J. Hagerman6, F. J. Ramos7, K. Cornish8, Y. He9, C. Paulding10, G. Neri11, F. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Governor Chen1, N. Hadjikhani12, D. Martinet1, J. Meyer10, J. S. Beckmann1, K. Delange3, Kremers Centre, MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Health Care A. Brun3, G. Bussy3, F. Gasparini13, T. Hilse14, A. Floesser14, J. Branson13, G. and Nursing Science, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Stichting Bilbe13, D. Johns15, B. Gomez-Mancilla15; Pergamijn, Echt, Netherlands. 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Hospices introduction: The life expectancy of persons with Prader-Willi Civils de Lyon, Université de Lyon and CNRS UMR 5230 (L2C2), Lyon, syndrome (PWS) has increased in recent years. Because of the paucity France, 3Hospices Civils de Lyon, Université de Lyon and CNRS UMR 5230 of reports on older persons with PWS, the natural history, the onset (L2C2), Lyon, France, 4Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Cattedra di and type of age related problems are not well known. We will present Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Roma, Italy, 5Departments of Pediatrics, Neurological data on physical, behavioural, psychiatric and ageing characteristics in Sciences, and Biochemistry, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, the first cohort of individuals with PWS aged over 50 years. IL, United States, 6Department of Pediatrics and Medical Investigation of method: Twelve persons with a genetically confirmed diagnosis of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (M.I.N.D.) Institute, University of California, PWS aged over 50 years are described (4 deletion; 8 mUPD). Data Davis, School of Medicine, Sacramento, CA, United States, 7Department of were collected through semi-structured interviews with the individuals Pediatrics, University of Zaragoza Medical School, Zaragoza, Spain, 8Centre with PWS and their main carers. for Developmental Psychiatry and Psychology, School of Psychology and Results: Cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, dermatological and Psychiatry, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 9Biomarker orthopedic problems were common physical complaints in elderly with Development, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research,, Cambridge, MA, PWS. Function in ADL, psychological functioning, physical functions United States, 10Biomarker Development, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical and care dependence were substantially worse in elderly (50+) Research, Cambridge, MA, United States, 11Università Cattolica del Sacro compared to the control group (18-49 yrs). 7/8 persons with mUPD Cuore, Istituto di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, 12Brain Mind Institute, Ecole had a history of psychiatric illness. Behavioural and food related Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 13Neuroscience problems were not less prevalent in the older individuals compared to Discovery, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland, 14Neuroscience Clinical the control group. Sciences and Innovation, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Basel, Discussion: Given the combination of age related physical morbidity, Switzerland, 15Neuroscience Translational Medicine, Novartis Institutes for physical appearance, behavioural and psychiatric problems and Biomedical Research, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. functional decline in our cohort, we hypothesize premature ageing in Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by expansion of a CGG repeat elderly with PWS. Healthy ageing in PWS requires a lifespan approach in the 5’ untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation 1 that recognizes the presence, progression and consequences of (FMR1) gene. This mutation is associated with hypermethylation Concurrent Sessions 25 at the FMR1 promoter and subsequent transcriptional silencing. mutations in ORC1, and through further sequencing multiple mutations The absence of FMRP (FMR1 protein) at the synapse has many in other preRC complex components, ORC4, ORC6, CDT1 and CDC6. consequences, including up-regulation of metabotropic glutamate We therefore implicate the pre-replication complex as a whole in the receptor 5 (mGluR5)-mediated signaling. It has been postulated developmental regulation of human growth, and surprisingly show that this increased mGluR5 signal may be responsible for many of that disruption of its function is associated with a distinct and broad the clinical manifestations observed in fragile X syndrome. mGluR5 spectrum of developmental abnormalities. receptor antagonists have shown promise in preclinical FXS models Bicknell, Walker et al. Nat.Genet, in press; and in one small open-label study of FXS. We examined whether a Bicknell, Bongers et al. Nat.Genet, in press. receptor subtype-selective inhibitor of mGluR5, AFQ056, improves the behavioral symptoms of FXS in a randomized, double-blind, c03.2 two-treatment, two-period, crossover study of 30 male FXS patients Exome sequencing identifies truncating mutations in NOTCH2 aged 18 to 35 years. We detected no significant effects of treatment as a cause of Hajdu-cheney syndrome on the primary outcome measure, the Aberrant Behavior Checklist- B. Isidor1, P. Lindenbaum2, O. Pichon1, S. Bezieau1, C. Dina2, S. Jacquemont3, Community Edition (ABC-C) score, at day 19 or 20 of treatment. In an D. Martin-Coignard4, C. Thauvin-Robinet5, M. Le Merrer6, J. L. Mandel7, A. exploratory analysis, however the patients with full FMR1 promoter David1, L. Faivre5, V. Cormier-Daire6, R. Redon2, C. Le Caignec1; methylation and no detectable FMR1 messenger RNA improved, as 1CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 2INSERM UMR915, Nantes, France, 3CHU, measured with the ABC-C, significantly more after AFQ056 treatment Lausanne, Switzerland, 4CH, Le Mans, France, 5CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, than with placebo (P < 0.001). If confirmed in larger and longer-term 6INSERM U781, Paris, France, 7IGBMC, Illkirch, France. studies, these results suggest that blockade of the mGluR5 receptor Hajdu-Cheney syndrome is a rare skeletal disorder characterized in patients with full methylation at the FMR1 promoter may show by the association of facial anomalies, radiological findings (acro- improvement in the behavioral attributes of FXS. osteolysis, general osteoporosis, insufficient ossification of the skull) and periodontal disease (premature loss of permanent teeth). c03.1* Although most cases are sporadic, transmission in a few families mutations in multiple components of the pre-replication complex suggests autosomal dominant inheritance. We sequenced the exomes cause microcephalic primordial dwarfism and Meier-Gorlin of six unrelated patients and identified nonsense and frameshift syndrome heterozygous mutations in NOTCH2 for five of them. The five mutations L. S. Bicknell1, E. M. H. F. Bongers2, S. Walker3, J. Schoots2, A. Klingseisen1, are invariably located within the last 3’ coding exon of NOTCH2, distal T. Stiff3, A. Leitch1, S. Brown1, C. Kerzendorfer3, C. Martin1, P. Yeyati1, M. to the ankyrin repeats and NLS necessary for the transcriptional E. Harley1, S. Aftimos4, J. Y. Al-Aama5, N. Al Sanna6, M. Bober7, H. van activity of Notch2 intracellular domain, while deleting the PEST Bokhoven8, P. A. J. Brown9, J. Dean10, A. Y. Edrees5, M. Feingold11, A. Fryer12, domain. These results suggest that mutant mRNA products escape L. H. Hoefsloot2, D. Johnson13, N. Kau14, N. V. A. M. Knoers15, J. MacKenzie10, nonsense-mediated decay and that truncated NOTCH2 proteins act in J. M. Opitz16, P. Sarda17, A. Ross10, I. K. Temple18, A. Toutain19, C. A. Wise20, M. a gain-of-function manner. This mutational mechanism also suggests Wright21, M. O’Driscoll3, P. Jeggo3, A. P. Jackson1; that decreasing Notch2 signaling using selective gamma-secretase 1MRC Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2Institute for inhibitors may have therapeutic interest in this severe and progressive Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Genome Damage disease. Finally, our findings establish an important role for Notch2 and Stability Centre, Brighton, United Kingdom, 4Northern Regional Genetics signaling in bone homeostasis that may notably be relevant to better Service, Auckland, New Zealand, 5Princess Al Jawhara Center of Excellence in understanding of mechanisms leading to osteoporosis. the Research of Hereditary Disorders, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 6Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 7A.I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, c03.3 DE, United States, 8Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences and Institute Exome sequencing identifies truncating mutations in human for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Aberdeen Royal sERPiNF1 in autosomal-recessive Osteogenesis imperfecta Infirmary, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 10Department of Clinical Genetics, J. Becker1, O. Semler2, C. Gilissen3, Y. Li1, H. J. Bolz4,1, C. Giunta5, C. Ashgrove House, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 11National Birth Defects Center, Bergmann4,6, M. Rohrbach5, F. Koerber7, K. Zimmermann1, P. de Vries3, B. Waltham, MA, United States, 12Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, Wirth1,8, E. Schoenau9, B. Wollnik1,10, J. A. Veltman3, A. Hoischen3, C. Netzer1; United Kingdom, 13Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 14Aberdeen Maternity Hospital, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 15University Medical 2Children´s Hospital, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Cologne, Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 16University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular United States, 17Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement CHRU de Life Sciences and Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disorders, Radboud Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 18University of Southampton, Southampton, University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Center for United Kingdom, 19Service de Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 5Division of Metabolism, 20Sarah M. and Charles E. Seay Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Dallas, Connective Tissue Unit, University Children’s Hospital and Pediatric Research TX, United States, 21Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Center, Zurich, Switzerland, 6Department of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen Kingdom. University, Aachen, Germany, 7Department of Radiology, University of Cologne, Microcephalic primordial dwarfism is an autosomal recessive group of Cologne, Germany, 8Institute of Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, conditions with extreme growth failure, characterised by intrauterine Germany, 9Children´s Hospital, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, growth retardation, short stature and microcephaly. Several genes 10Center of Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, involved in fundamental cellular processes have been identified Germany. for these disorders: PCNT in MOPD II ; ATR , CEP152 in Seckel Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous genetic disorder syndrome; but none previously for Meier-Gorlin syndrome. characterized by bone fragility and susceptibility to fractures after Here, we report the identification of five further genes encoding minimal trauma. After mutations in all known OI genes had been components of the pre-replication complex. Homozygosity mapping in excluded by Sanger sequencing, we applied next-generation a Saudi Arabian family with an uncategorised form of microcephalic sequencing to analyze the exome of a single individual with a severe primordial dwarfism established a novel locus at 1p32.3. Subsequent form of the disease whose parents are second cousins. A total of 26,922 sequencing identified biallelic missense ORC1 mutations in 4 families variations from the human reference genome sequence were subjected with microcephalic dwarfism from a cohort of 170 cases. We found that to several filtering steps. In addition, we extracted the genotypes of replication licensing was impaired in Orc1 patient cell lines and cell cycle all dbSNP130-annotated SNPs from the exome sequencing data progression slowed, in keeping with ORC1’s role, (along with ORC2-6, and used these 299,494 genotypes as markers for the genome-wide CDC6 and CDT1), as a component of the Pre-Replication Complex identification of homozygous regions. A single homozygous truncating that licenses replication initiation. Furthermore, developmentally, Orc1 mutation, affecting SERPINF1 on chromosome 17p13.3, remained depletion substantially impaired zebrafish embryo growth. that was embedded into a homozygous stretch of 2.99 Mb. The Extending our studies to patients with Meier-Gorlin syndrome, in mutation was also homozygous in the affected brother of the index which primordial dwarfism is accompanied by absent or hypoplastic patient. Subsequently, we identified homozygosity for two different patellae and microtia, we then identified biallelic missense/truncating truncating SERPINF1 mutations in two unrelated patients with OI and Concurrent Sessions 26 parental consanguinity. All four individuals with SERPINF1 mutations of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Children’s Hospital and Dana-Farber have severe OI. Fractures of long bones and severe vertebral Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, United States, 12Department of Medical Genetics, compression fractures with resulting deformities were observed University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. as early as in their first year of life. Collagen analyses with cultured Vertebral and metaphyseal chondrodysplasia, spasticity with cerebral dermal fibroblasts displayed no evidence for impaired collagen folding, calcifications, and strong predisposition to autoimmune diseases such posttranslational modification, or secretion. SERPINF1 encodes as systemic lupus erythematosus and autoimmune cytopenias are pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF), a secreted glycoprotein of the hallmarks of the genetic disorder Spondyloenchondrodysplasia the serpin superfamily. PEDF is a multifunctional protein and one of (SPENCD; MIM 271550). We mapped a locus to chromosome 19p13 the strongest inhibitors of angiogenesis currently known in humans. and identified ten different mutations in the ACP5 gene in 14 patients Our data provide genetic evidence for an involvement of PEDF in aged from 3 to 63 years. human bone homeostasis. ACP5 encodes tartrate-resistant phosphatase (TRAP), a lysosomal enzyme that is expressed predominantly in macrophages, osteoclasts c03.4* and dendritic cells. The mutations abolish enzyme function in the serum mutations in lectin complement pathway genes cOLEc11 and and cells of affected individuals. Phosphorylated osteopontin (p-OPN), mAsP1 cause 3mc syndrome a protein involved in bone reabsorption and in immune regulation, C. Rooryck1, A. Diaz-Font1, D. Osborn1, E. Chabchoub2, V. Hernandez- accumulates in serum, urine and cells cultured from TRAP-deficient Hernandez1, H. Shamseldin3, J. Kenny4, A. Waters1, D. Jenkins1, A. Al Kaissi5, individuals. Patient-derived dendritic cells exhibit an altered cytokine G. Leal6, B. Dallapiccola7, F. Carnevale8, M. Bitner-Glindzicz4, M. Lees4, R. profile and are more potent than matched control cells in stimulating Hennekam9, P. Stanier10, A. Burns10, H. Peeters11, F. Alkuraya3, P. Beales1; allogeneic T cell proliferation in mixed lymphocyte reactions. Thus, 1Molecular Medecine Unit, University College London Institute of Child Health, TRAP deficiency leads to (1) a defect in bone remodeling, particularly London, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals at growth plates, and (2) accumulation of phosphorylated osteopontin, of Leuven., Leuven, Belgium, 3Developmental Genetics Unit, Department of a potent pro-inflammatory cytokine, leading to interferon release and Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi autoimmunity. Arabia, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital, The discovery of TRAP deficiency as the basis of SPENCD London, United Kingdom, 5Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology, Hanusch discloses new therapeutic options such as hematopoietic stem cell Hospital of WGKK and AUVA Trauma Centre, Meidlin 4th Medical Department, transplantation, enzyme replacement therapy, or pharmacologic Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 6Instituto de Medicina Integral Professor modulation of the OPN-IFN axis. The findings also shed new light Fernando Figueira, Recife, Brazil, 7Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Istituto Di on the role of osteopontin and its regulation by tartrate-resistant acid Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Rome, Italy, 8Department of phosphatase in the pathogenesis of common autoimmune disorders. Pediatrics, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 9Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Neural c03.6* Development Unit, University College London Institute of Child Health, London, De novo nonsense mutations of AsXL1 cause Bohring-Opitz United Kingdom, 11Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals of Leuven, (Oberklaid-Danks) syndrome Leuven, Belgium. A. Hoischen1, B. W. M. van Bon1, B. Rodríguez-Santiago1,2, C. Gilissen1, L. 3MC syndrome has been proposed as a unifying term encompassing E. L. M. Vissers1, P. de Vries1, I. Janssen1, R. Hastings3, S. F. Smithson3, R. the overlapping Carnevale, Mingarelli, Malpuech and Michels Newbury-Ecob3, S. Kjaergaard4, J. Goodship5, R. McGowan6, D. Bartholdi7, A. syndromes. These rare autosomal recessive disorders exhibit a Rauch7, M. Peippo8, J. M. Cobben9, D. Wieczorek10, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach11, spectrum of developmental features, including characteristic facial J. A. Veltman1, H. G. Brunner1, B. B. B. A. de Vries1; dysmorphism, cleft lip and/or palate, craniosynostosis, learning 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, disability and genital, limb and vesicorenal anomalies. Here we 2Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Centro de Investigación studied eleven families with 3MC syndrome and identified two mutated Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, genes, COLEC11 and MASP1, both of which encode proteins in the Spain, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, lectin complement pathway (collectin kidney 1 (CL-K1) and MASP-1 United Kingdom, 4Deptartment of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of and MASP-3, respectively). CL-K1 is highly expressed in embryonic Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Institute of Human murine craniofacial cartilage, heart, bronchi, kidney and vertebral Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, bodies. Zebrafish morphants for either gene develop pigmentary 6Department of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospitals, Yorkhill, Glasgow, United defects and severe craniofacial abnormalities. Finally, we show Kingdom, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, that CL-K1 serves as a guidance cue for neural crest cell migration. Switzerland, 8Department of Medical Genetics, The Family Federation Together, these findings demonstrate a role for complement pathway of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 9Department of Pediatric Genetics, Emma factors in fundamental developmental processes and in the etiology of Kinderziekenhuis AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 10Institut für Humangenetik, 3MC syndrome. Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 11Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. c03.5 Bohring syndrome is characterized by severe intellectual disability, Genetic deficiency of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP) distinctive facial features and multiple congenital malformations. Whole associated with skeletal dysplasia, cerebral calcifications exome sequencing and follow-up by Sanger sequencing revealed and autoimmunity: delineation of a new defect in a lysosomal heterozygous de novo nonsense mutations in the additional sex combs enzyme like 1 gene (ASXL1) in seven patients with Bohring syndrome. ASXL1 E. Lausch1, A. Janecke2, M. Bros3, S. Trojandt3, Y. Alanay4, C. De Laet5, C. A. belongs to the Polycomb group (PcG) and trithorax complexes family. Huebner6, A. Kiss7, P. Meinecke8, G. Nishimura9, R. Renella10,11, L. Bonafé10, S. This family of genes is required for maintenance of both activation Unger12, B. Zabel1, A. Superti-Furga10; and silencing of Hox genes, which determine segmental identity in 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, the developing embryo. Somatic mutations in ASXL1 have previously 2Department of Pediatrics II and Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck been reported with leukemia and myelodysplactic syndrome. Thus, our Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Department of Dermatology, University findings suggest a new link between severe developmental disorders Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany, and cancer. 4Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, 5Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, Queen c04.1 Fabiola Children’s University Hospital, Bruxelles, Belgium, 6Institute of Human A Unifying Genetic model for Facioscapulohumeral muscular Genetics, Friedrich-Schiller-University, Jena, Germany, 7Clinical Genetics Dystrophy Division and the Graduate Program in Pathology, Universidade Federal de R. J. L. F. Lemmers1, P. J. van der Vliet1, L. N. Geng2, L. Snider2, R. R. Frants1, Ciências da Saúde, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 8Clinical Genetics Unit, Children’s R. Tawil3, D. G. Miller4, S. J. Tapscott2, S. M. van der Maarel1; Hospital Altona, Hamburg, Germany, 9Department of Pediatric Imaging, Tokyo 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Fred Hutchinson Metropolitan Children’s Medical Center, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan, 10Department Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States, 3University of Rochester of Pediatrics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 11Department Medical Center, Rochester, NY, United States, 4University of Washington, Concurrent Sessions 27 Seattle, WA, United States. China, 4Imperial College, London, United Kingdom, 5GOLD Service, Newcastle, Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is characterized Australia. by progressive and often asymmetric weakness and wasting of facial, Recent systematic X chromosome exon re-sequencing and high shoulder girdle and upper arm muscles. FSHD is most often caused by resolution copy number profiling on a set of 208 families resolved only contraction of the D4Z4 macrosatellite repeat array, but only when the ~50% of these. In one unresolved family, known as MRX3 (J Med repeat array is localized on a specific permissive genetic background Genet, 28, 372-7; 1991), we excluded the presence of a mutation in of chromosome 4q. Repeat contractions non-permissive 4q or 99.5% of the coding sequence in the linkage interval by massively 10q chromosomes do not cause FSHD. D4Z4 repeat contractions parallel (MPS) and Sanger sequencing. We postulated a non-coding are associated with local chromatin relaxation and transcriptional mutation might be disease causing and from 15 such (unique) variants upregulation of the retrotransposed gene DUX4 in FSHD myotubes we investigated one, chrX(hg18) 152890455 A>G, in further detail. We only. show, that this intergenic nucleotide change unidirectionally affects We performed detailed D4Z4 sequencing in permissive and non- the expression of the HCFC1 gene. This variant occurs in one of six permissive haplotypes and identified specific single nucleotide consensus binding sites of the YY1 transcription factor. We examine polymorphisms (SNPs) in the polyadenylation signal of DUX4. While its effect by EMSA and luciferase reporter assays and show that permissive chromosomes carry a typical polyadenylation signal for YY1 binding is abolished. HCFC1 forms a complex (among others) DUX4, non-permissive chromosomes have sequence variants that with the MLL family of H3K4 methyltransferases that is important would predict the DUX4 polyA signal to be non-functional. Indeed, in cell cycle regulation. We also show further downstream effect of transfection studies revealed that DUX4 transcripts are efficiently HCFC1 de-regulation on the E2F1 transcription factor and as such polyadenylated and more stable when expressed from permissive putatively linking HCFC1 de-regulation to p53 regulated neurogenesis. chromosomes. These findings suggest that FSHD arises through a Interestingly, YY1 itself has recently been found mutated in a sporadic toxic gain of function attributable to the stabilized DUX4 transcript. In case with ID (Nat Genet, 42(12):1109-12, 2010). Our data show that addition to the SNPs affecting the polyadenlyation signal other SNPs patients with MECP2 (and also HCFC1) duplications do not have their are currently being investigated for their role in DUX4 mRNA processing HCFC1 mRNA up regulated. Currently ~86% of all disease causing and stability. In controls DUX4 is highly expressed in the germ line mutations are in protein coding regions, however, this may represent and then is epigenetically silenced in somatic tissues. In FSHD, the ascertainment bias, which can now be addressed at least partly by the combination of inefficient D4Z4 chromatin silencing and stabilization application of MPS technology. of DUX4 mRNAs results in inappropriate DUX4 protein expression in muscle cells. Therefore, FSHD represents the first human disease c04.4 caused by the inefficient repression of a retrogene array. Distinct effects of allelic NFi-X mutations on nonsense-mediated mRNA decay engender either a sotos-like or a marshall-smith c04.2* syndrome High-resolution breakpoint mapping of 10 regulatory and V. Malan1, D. Rajan2, S. Thomas1, A. C. Shaw3, H. Louis-dit-Picard1, V. Layet4, 32 FOXL2 encompassing deletions in BPEs using targeted M. Till5, A. van Haeringen6, G. Mortier7, S. Nampoothiri8, S. Pušeljić9, L. Legeai- microarrays Mallet1, N. P. Carter2, M. Vekemans1, A. Munnich1, R. C. Hennekam10, L. H. Verdin1, B. D’haene1, Y. Novikova1, J. Nevado2, P. Lapunzina2, B. Menten1, Colleaux1, V. Cormier-Daire1; E. De Baere1; 1INSERM U781 and Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, 1Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Instituto de Genética Médica Y Paris, France, 2The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Molecular (INGEMM), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Clinical and Molecular Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is a rare autosomal dominant Genetics Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Service developmental disorder characterized by a complex eyelid de Génétique Clinique, CH Le Havre, Le Havre, France, 5Service de Génétique malformation associated or not with ovarian dysfunction. Deletions Clinique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France, 6Department of Clinical encompassing the FOXL2 gene and regulatory deletions located Genetics, LUMC Leiden University Medical Center, Postbus 9600, Leiden outside its transcription unit represent 12% and 5% of molecular 2300RC, Netherlands, 7Center for Medical Genetics, Antwerp University defects respectively. In total we identified 32 FOXL2 encompassing Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 8Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute and 10 regulatory deletions. The deletion size and breakpoint locations of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin 682026 Kerala, India, are highly variable, suggesting absence of a recombination hotspot. 9Pediatrics Clinic, Clinical Hospital Centre Osijek (KBC), Osijek, Croatia, To unravel the mechanisms underlying these rearrangements, we 10Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, aimed to determine the precise locations of the breakpoints. A second Netherlands. purpose was to identify genotype-phenotype correlations for extra- Using a combination of array comparative genomic hybridization and ocular features. We used high-resolution tiling arrays to fine-map the a candidate gene approach, we identified nuclear factor I/X (NFI-X) breakpoints. For 27 deletions, both breakpoints could be fine-mapped, deletions or nonsense mutations in three sporadic cases of a Sotos- allowing junction PCRs. Of these, six deletions could be delineated at like overgrowth syndrome with advanced bone age, macrocephaly, the nucleotide level so far. At least two out of six deletions are caused developmental delay, scoliosis and unusual facies. Unlike the by a recombination-based mechanism using LINE and Alu elements aforementioned human syndrome, Nfi-x-deficient mice are unable to as recombination substrates. With regard to genotype-phenotype gain weight and die in the first three postnatal weeks, while they also correlations, an ATR encompassing deletion was found in five of present with a spinal deformation and decreased bone mineralisation. eight BPES patients with reported microcephaly. Interestingly, in two These features prompted us to consider NFI-X as a candidate gene patients with joint abnormalities the SOX14 gene was located within for Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS), a severe malformation syndrome the deletion, potentially implicating this gene in the pathogenesis of this characterized by failure to thrive, respiratory insufficiency, accelerated extra-ocular feature. In the largest series of FOXL2 encompassing and osseous maturation, kyphoscoliosis, osteopenia and unusual facies. regulatory deletions in reported, high-resolution breakpoint mapping Distinct frameshift and splice NFI-X mutations creating premature was used to gain more insights into the mechanisms underlying the translation termination codons that escaped nonsense-mediated mRNA deletions, and to correlate deletion size and breakpoint location to decay (NMD) were identified in nine MSS subjects. NFI-X belongs extra-ocular features. to the Nuclear factor one (NFI) family of transcription factors, but its specific function is presently unknown. We demonstrate that NFI-X c04.3 is normally expressed prenatally during human brain development Non-coding, regulatory mutation implicates the HcFc1 gene in and skeletogenesis. These findings demonstrate that allelic NFI-X non-syndromic intellectual disability. mutations trigger distinct phenotypes, depending specifically on their J. Gecz1,2, L. Huang1,3, S. Willis-Owen1,4, M. Field5, A. Hackett5, M. Shaw1, A. impact on NMD. Gardner1, C. Shoubridge1, M. Corbett1; 1SA Pathology at the Womens and Childrens Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia, 2The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 3Institute of Reproductive & Stem Cell Engineering, Central South University, Changsha, Concurrent Sessions 28 c04.5* c05.1 Revertant somatic mosaicism in Dyskeratosis congenita by Novel method to Estimate the Phenotypic Variation Explained by mitotic recombination. Genome Wide Association studies Reveals Large Fraction of the M. C. J. Jongmans1, R. Kuiper1, Y. Heijdra1, T. Vulliamy2, E. Kamping1, E. missing Heritability Bongers1, F. van Leeuwen1, K. van Gassen1, H. van Krieken1, A. Geurts van Z. Kutalik1,2, J. Whittaker3, D. Waterworth4, J. S. Beckmann1, S. Bergmann1; Kessel1, I. Dokal2, M. Ligtenberg1, N. Hoogerbrugge1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Queen Switzerland, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom. Lausanne, Switzerland, 3GlaxoSmithKline, Medicines Research Centre, Somatic mosaicism due to reversion of a pathogenic allele to wild type Stevenage, United Kingdom, 4Medical Genetics, GlaxoSmithKline, Philadelphia, is an intriguing phenomenon. We have observed reversion by mitotic PA, United States. recombination of a mutation in TERC (telomerase RNA component) Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are conducted with the in a family affected by Dyskeratosis Congenita (DC). DC is a promise to discover novel genetic variants associated with diverse disorder of telomere biology and is characterized by mucocutaneous traits. For most traits, associated markers individually explain just abnormalities and dystrophic nails. Persons affected by DC are at risk a modest fraction of the phenotypic variation, but their number can for bone marrow failure, cancer and lung fibrosis. well be in the hundreds. We developed a maximum likelihood method We identified a deletion in TERC in the proband of a family with that allows us to infer the distribution of associated variants even autosomal dominant DC. Segregation of the mutation was confirmed when many of them were missed by chance. Compared to previous in all affected relatives by sequence analysis on peripheral blood DNA. approaches, the novelty of our method is that it (a) does not require In two affected brothers, discrepancies in the peak heights suggested having an independent (unbiased) estimate of the effect sizes; (b) overrepresentation of the wild-type allele, whereas the mutation had makes use of the complete distribution of P values while allowing for remained heterozygous in tissues other than blood. Therefore, this the false discovery rate; (c) takes into account allelic heterogeneity mosaicism in peripheral blood must result from somatic reversion of and the SNP pruning strategy. We then applied our method to the the mutated allele to normal. Neither one of these patients developed latest GWAS meta-analysis results of the GIANT consortium. It bone marrow failure. SNP array analysis on blood DNA from the revealed that while the explained variance of genome-wide (GW) brothers showed acquired uniparental disomy of chromosome 3q, significant SNPs is around 1% for waist-hip ratio (WHR), the observed including TERC. In one of these two patients, two independent events P values provide evidence for the existence of variants explaining of mitotic recombination on chromosome 3 were observed, which were 10% (CI=[8.5%-11.5%]) of the phenotypic variance in total. Similarly, both present in different blood cell lineages of this person. Therefore, the total explained variance likely to exists for height is estimated to the reversion events must have occurred in non-lineage specific be 29% (CI=[28%-30%]), three times higher than what the observed haematopoietic precursor cells. GW significant SNPs give rise to. This methodology also enables us In conclusion, we have found recurrent revertant mosaicism in a family to predict the benefit of future GWA studies that aim to reveal more with DC. This finding is important for improving diagnostic testing and associated genetic markers via increased sample size. understanding the variable phenotype of DC. c05.2 c04.6 Accurate prediction of a minimal region around a genetic mutations in RAD21 as a cause of a new cohesinopathy association signal that contains the causal variant F. J. Kaiser1, D. Braunholz1, J. Wilde2, C. Gil-Rodriguez3,1, M. Albrecht1, D. Z. Bochdanovits1, J. Simón-Sánchez1, M. Jonker2, W. Hoogendijk1, A. van der Clark2, A. Rampuria2, W. Xu1, I. D. Krantz2,4, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, J. A. Vaart2, P. Heutink1; Horsfield5, M. A. Deardorff2,4; 1VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam, 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2The Children’s Hospital Division Netherlands. of Genetics, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Unit of Clinical Genetics and In recent years, genome wide association studies have been very Functional Genomics, Departments of Pharmacology-Physiology, Medical successful in identifying loci for complex traits. However, typically School, Zaragoza, Spain, 4The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine these findings involve noncoding and/or intergenic SNPs without Department of Pediatrics, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5University of Otago a clear functional effect that do not directly point to a specific gene. Department of Pathology, Dunedin, New Zealand. Hence, the next challenge is to identify the causal variant responsible Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a dominantly inherited for the association signal. Typically the first step is to identify all multisystem developmental disorder that includes distinctive facial genetic variation in the locus region by, for example, resequencing a features, growth retardation, limb defects and variable cognitive delay. large number of case chromosomes. Once all variants are identified, Mutations in NIPBL have been identified in approximately 75% of the causal one needs to be ascertained in further functional studies. patients with severe classical CdLS but have been found in a far lower Because the experimental follow up can be laborious, restricting the percentage of patients with mild or atypical features. NIPBL is required number of variants to be scrutinized would yield a great advantage. for the establishment of sister chromatid cohesion through the loading Therefore, an objective method for choosing the size of the region to of Cohesin, a multimer consisting of SMC1 and SMC3 and the clasp be followed up would be highly valuable. Here we propose a simple proteins, RAD21 and STAG. Following the identification of NIPBL, method to call the minimal region around a significant association mutations in SMC1A and SMC3 were detected in a small percent peak that is very likely to contain the causal variant. We model Linkage of patients. These patients have a milder phenotype without major Disequilibrium (LD) in cases from the observed single SNP association structural anomalies, although all have significant mental retardation. By signals and predict the location of the causal variant by quantifying mutation-screening of several genes encoding cohesins or associated how well this relationship fits the data. Simulations showed that our proteins in a cohort of 180 mutation-negative individuals, two de-novo approach identifies genomic regions of on average ~50 kb with up to RAD21-mutations in patients with features that diverge from classical 90% probability to contain the causal variant. We apply our method to CdLS were identified. We have measured the expression and activity two genome-wide association datasets and localize both the functional of these missense-mutations in protein-interaction, DNA-damage variant REP1 in the α-synuclein gene that conveys susceptibility to and zebrafish developmental-assays. In short, one of these RAD21- Parkinson’s Disease and the APOE gene involved in susceptibility to mutations which increases binding to STAG2, appears to function in Alzheimer’s Disease. a dominant-negative manner and results in a more severe phenotype than the other loss-of-function mutation, which alters binding to SMC1. c05.3* Cohesinopathies comprise a broadening spectrum of pediatric Anaylsis of 150 exomes using an automated analysis pipeline developmental disorders. We will discuss the current understanding S. H. Eck1, T. Wieland2, E. Graf2, A. Benet-Pagès1, T. Meitinger2, T. M. Strom2; of mechanisms by which Cohesin mutations may alter transcriptional 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum profiles to result in multiple variant developmental phenotypes and München, Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. speculate on clinical features that appear to be unique and common Enrichment techniques for targeted sequencing of coding regions are between different “disorders of Cohesin”. currently applied to identify rare variants. We developed a pipeline to analyze exome sequencing data. The pipeline is a combination of Concurrent Sessions 29 Perl scripts and public available software packages (BWA, SAMtools). from a total of >7000 subjects. Genetic homogeneity of the samples It calculates quality metrics and performs read alignment to the was assessed and genotypes were imputed using the HapMap III reference sequence, variant calling, variant annotation and selection of reference panel, and associations were tested via dosage of each candidate variants according to the genetic model. Variants are stored imputed SNP (accounting for kinship in family-based samples). After in a database, which allows user queries through a web interface and quality control, results files and summary statistics were pooled for enables pedigree or gene based searches. Exomes deposited in the meta-analysis. By February 2011, 16 groups had uploaded GWAS database can be used as controls. results in >7000 subjects. Association conducted at ~1.3 million We applied the analysis pipeline to ~150 exomes. From an average autosomal SNPs showed that none of the individual sites contained of ~7-10 GB of aligned sequence, the pipeline calls ~16,000-20,000 genome-wide significant GWAS results (p<10^-8). Conversely, coding variants. Approximately 7,500-8,500 of these are non- meta-analysis of the data from the 16 studies yielded genome-wide synonymous variants of which ~700-800 not present in dbSNP (version significant p-values for total brain volume. To date, neuroimaging 132). Depending on the number of affected individuals investigated genetics has largely employed candidate gene, GWAS, or image-wide and the underlying inheritance model, we are able to confine this list to GWAS analyses in samples < 1000 subjects. This leads to a lack of 1-10 putatively disease causing variants. power to detect significant effects while controlling the false positive We compared our results with known disease causing recessive rate. Our collaborative ENIGMA pilot project on total brain volume mutations in 438 genes obtained from the Human Gene Mutation shows the utility of data sharing and meta-analysis, and the value of Database (HGMD). We quantified the amount of new, putatively large sample sizes for genetic analysis of brain measures. deleterious variants and assessed the frequency of literature- annotated disease mutations. We identified 16 new heterozygous c05.6* nonsense variants. 174 of HGMD annotated mutations (~0.85%) had The influence of genetic variations on regulatory modules in the a frequency of >5% in our samples. After subtracting these mutations liver. with an unlikely high frequency, the carrier burden of recessive A. Kreimer1, I. Pe’er2; mutations from HGMD in these genes is between 0 and 9 per individual 1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY, (average 3.12). United States, 2Department of Computer Science, Columbia University., New York, NY, United States. c05.4* Deciphering the influence of genetic variants on regulatory modules, identity-By-Descent Filtering of Exome sequence data for and the correlation between such regulatory variants and phenotype Disease-Gene Identification in Autosomal Recessive and (e.g. disease) has been the subject of extensive research in recent X-Linked Disorders years. Here, we present a novel approach to this problem, which P. M. Krawitz1, C. Rödelsperger1, S. Bauer1, J. Hecht1, M. R. Schweiger2, P. N. entails analyzing modules of genes, rather than studying SNP-gene Robinson1; connections independently. First, we search pair-wise connections 1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for between transcripts whose levels are co-associated to the same SNP. Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Second, we combine these pairs into modules that share a regulating Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) and exome-capture technologies SNP. Third, we assign a confidence score to each module. Finally, we are currently revolutionizing the way geneticists screen for disease- split the samples in each module according to the genotype of the main causing mutations in rare Mendelian disorders. Current analysis SNP and find the best allele specific SNPs that explain the expression strategies involve intersection filtering, restriction of candidates to of the largest group of genes in each subset of samples. We applied sequence variants predicted to be deleterious, searching for de novo our method to data on genetic and gene expression in the liver across mutations in trios, and using linkage analysis to filter out exome 371 samples by Merck. We detect 129,109 pairs of transcripts that are sequences from chromosomal regions that do not demonstrate jointly associated to the same SNP as their most significant regulator. linkage. None of the above mentioned analysis strategies are well These make up 10,354 modules, 518 including 10 transcripts or more. suited for identification of disease genes in small families segregating These are significantly more and larger modules than in permuted data autosomal recessive (AR) or X-linked (XL) diseases. (2,322+-208, 220+-42 of size 10 or more). We quantified the confidence Here, we present an algorithm that can be used to narrow down in a module as a likelihood score, and prune a subset of 114 modules the candidate regions in exome sequences of affected siblings of with FDR<0.02. We observe similar annotations of modules from two consanguineous or non-consanguineous parents in AR disorders. Our sources of information: the enrichment of a module in gene subsets algorithm uses a non-homogeneous hidden Markov model (HMM) that and locus annotation of the genetic variants. This provides a validation employs local recombination rates to identify chromosomal regions of our methodology. that are identical by descent (IBD=2) in children of consanguineous or non-consanguineous parents solely based on genotype data of siblings c06.1 derived from high-throughput sequencing platforms. Using simulated Identification of recent admixture in an Indian population of and real exome sequence data, we show that our algorithm is able to African ancestry: prospects for complex disease mapping reduce the search space for the causative disease gene to a fifth or a A. Basu1, A. Narang2, P. Kumar2, A. Mukhopadhyay2, D. Dash2, M. Mukherjee2; tenth of the entire exome. We have used our algorithm successively 1National Institute of BioMedical Genomics, Kalyani, India, 2IGIB, New Delhi, on real data to identify disease genes including the PIGV gene as the India. cause of Mabry syndrome (Krawitz et al., Nat Genet. 2010,42:827-9). Identification and study of genetic variation in recently admixed Here, we will present the algorithm as well as a recent modification of populations not only provides insight into historical population events the algorithm for XL diseases. but is also a powerful approach for mapping disease genes. We studied a population of African-Indian(AI) origin which is believed to c05.5 be the descendants from the Bantu speaking parts of Africa and have Genome-Wide Association meta-Analysis of total Brain Volume: been residing in the western part of India for nearly >500years. We Results from the ENiGmA consortium have carried out this study using a common set of 18534 autosomal A. Arias-Vásquez1, .. The ENIGMA Consortium2; markers; common between 26 Indian populations (50 K Affymetrix 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2http:// array), populations in the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) enigma.loni.ucla.edu/publications/ohbm2011/, Los Angeles, CA, United States. and HapMap populations. Principal component analysis clearly There is evidence that differences of brain volume, either global or revealed that the African-Indian population derives its ancestry from regional, are related to their specific functioning and to more global West-African as well as Indo-European speaking Northern and North- cognitive processes. Our overall aim is to identify common genetic West Indian population(s). STRUCTURE and ADMIXTURE analysis variants that modify the risk for psychiatric disorders based on the revealed that, overall the AI population derive 58.7% of their genomic identification of genetic variants involved in the variance of the volume ancestry from their African past with very little inter-individual ancestry of brain structures in healthy individuals. Mean total brain volume was variation (8.4%). The extent of linkage-disequilibrium also reveals automatically segmented in T1-weighted MRI scan using FreeSurfer. that the admixture event has been recent. Functional annotation of 16 groups worldwide have now pooled their imaging genomics data genes encompassing the ancestry informative markers revealed Concurrent Sessions 30 significant enrichment of biological processes related to ion channel genes found within CNVs in chimpanzee, for which data are available. activity from the Indian ancestry. We briefly examine the implications of Collectively these results suggest that miRNAs may have acted as determining the genetic diversity of this population which could provide equilibrators of gene expression during evolution, in an attempt to opportunities for possible studies using admixture mapping. regulate aberrant gene expression and to increase the tolerance to genome plasticity. c06.2 Identification of loci governing phenotypic traits in dog breeds c06.4 highlights disease genes of relevance to human health Loss and gain of function in human SERPINB11: an example of a C. HITTE1, A. Ratnakumar2, A. Vaysse1, T. Derrien1, E. Axelsson2, G. gene under selection on standing variation, with implications for Rosengren Pielberg2, S. Sigurdsson3, T. Fall4, E. Seppälä5, M. S. T. Hansen6, host-pathogen interactions C. Taylor Lawley6, E. K. Karlsson3,7, -. The LUPA consortium8, D. Bannasch9, S. Seixas1, N. Ivanova1, Z. Ferreira1,2, J. Rocha1,2, B. L. Victor3; C. Vilà10, H. Lohi5, F. Galibert1, M. Fredholm11, Å. Hedhammar12, C. André1, K. 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Faculty of Sciences University of Porto, Porto, Lindblad-Toh2,3, M. T. Webster2; Portugal, 3ITQB, Oeiras, Portugal. 1Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, CNRS-UMR6061, Serine protease inhibitors (SERPINs) are crucial in the regulation Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 2Science for Life Laboratory, of diverse biological processes including inflammation and immune Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, response. SERPINB11, located in the 18q21 gene cluster, is a Uppsala, Sweden, 3Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute polymorphic gene/pseudogene coding for a non-inhibitory SERPIN. of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Department of Medical This study sought a better understanding of the evolutionary history of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, SERPINB11, with special focus on evaluating the adaptive signature 5Department of Veterinary Biosciences, Department of Medical Genetics, identified in Africans in a genome-wide scan for selection. Our study Research Programs Unit, Molecular Medicine, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, comprised the resequencing of SERPINB11 in 20 Yorubans and Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Illumina Inc., the analysis of primate orthologous sequences. We identified a full- San Diego, CA, United States, 7FAS Center for Systems Biology, Harvard length SERPINB11 variant encoding a non-inhibitory SERPIN as the University, Cambridge, MA, United States, 8EU Large-scale integrating project, putative candidate of selection, probably driven to higher frequencies FP7-Health-no201370, Brussels, Belgium, 9. Department of Population by an adaptive response using preexisting variation. In addition, we Health and Reproduction, University of California, Davis, School of Veterinary detected contrasting evolutionary features for SERPINB11 in primates: Medicine, Davis, CA, United States, 10Department of Integrative Ecology, While primate phylogeny as a whole is under purifying selection, the Doñana Biological Station (CSIC), Seville, Spain, 11Faculty of Life Sciences, human lineage shows evidence for positive selection in a few codons, Division of Genetics and Bioinformatics, Department of Basic Animal and all associated with the active SERPINB11. According to comparative Veterinary Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, modeling studies, positively selected codons are suggested to reduce Denmark, 12Department of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural SERPINB11’s ability to undergo the typical conformational changes Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. of inhibitory SERPINs - suggesting that it is evolving towards a new The dog population is composed of more than 400 breeds; each function in humans. The recognition of significant correlations between one is a genetic isolate with unique phenotypic characteristics. Dogs SERPINB11 variants and pathogen richness has led us to propose a tend to suffer from the same range of diseases as humans, but the selective advantage through host-pathogen interactions, which may be genetic complexity of these diseases within a breed is reduced as a linked to an adaptive response combating the emergence of infectious consequence of intense selection and inbreeding. diseases during the Neolithic. This work represents the first description In this study, we performed a comprehensive analysis using multiple of a resurrected gene in humans, and is likely to represent an example test statistics to identify regions under strong selection in 518 dogs from of selection on standing variation triggered by drastic ecological shifts. 46 diverse breeds using a newly developed high-density genotyping canine array consisting of >170,000 evenly spaced SNPs. We first c06.5 identified 44 genomic regions exhibiting extreme differentiation across Remarkably little homozygosity in first generation mixed race multiple breeds. Genetic variation in these regions correlates with individuals variation in several phenotypic traits that vary between breeds, and we J. F. Wilson1,2, C. O’Dushlaine3,4, R. Fraser1, R. McQuillan1; identify novel associations with both morphological and behavioural 1University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 2EthnoAncestry Ltd, traits. We next scanned the genome for signatures of selective sweeps Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, in single breeds. These scans identify hundreds of regions strongly United States, 4The Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, MA, United enriched for developmental genes and genes implicated in diseases. States. We characterised one highly differentiated region associated with body Long runs of homozygosity (ROH) are ubiquitous features of human size and ear morphology, using high-throughput sequencing to provide genomes. There is, however, wide variation in the number and length a list of variants that may directly affect these traits. of ROH across individuals and populations due to their diverse In this study, we provide a detailed description of genomic regions demographic histories: sub-Saharan African populations are the least under strong selection in the canine genome, including many linked homozygous and Native South Americans the most. Using genomic to extreme phenotypic variation. We hypothesize that some of these analysis we here demonstrate the remarkable lack of homozygosity in regions will also contain canine disease genes of comparative mixed race individuals: first generation (F1) West African x European relevance to human health. individuals are the least homozygous of all, with an order of magnitude fewer ROH than commonly observed in other populations. Their parents c06.3 may not share ancestors after the Out of Africa movement, ~70,000 years increased number of microRNA target sites in genes encoded in ago. Populations may be ranked by increasing mean number of ROH: CNV regions. Εvidence for an evolutionary genomic interaction? (1) F1 West African x European; (2) F1 Afro-Caribbean x European; (3) K. N. Felekkis1, K. Voskarides2, H. Dweep3, C. Sticht3, N. Gretz3, C. Deltas3; Afro-Caribbean; (4) sub-Saharan African (excluding hunter-gatherers), 1University of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, F1 European x East African, F1 European x East Asian, Mauritian and 3University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. Seychellois; (5) F1 European x South Asian; (6) F2 Eurasian mixed MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and Copy Number Variations (CNVs) are two race individuals; (7) other Eurasians; and (8) Native North Americans. newly discovered genetic elements that have revolutionised the field of Afro-Caribbeans have on average ~20% European ancestry, and these molecular biology and genetics. By performing in silico whole genome haplotypes generate ROH in offspring with Europeans. F1 European analysis we demonstrate that both the number of miRNAs that target x East Asian individuals carry a similar complement of ROH to sub- genes found in CNV regions as well as the number of miRNA binding Saharan Africans, emphasising the great genetic diversity in Africa. The sites are significantly higher than those of genes found in non-CNV variance in the number of ROH was highest for Native North Americans: regions. Analysis of human and chimpanzee genome demonstrates NROH was strongly inversely correlated with the large and variable that the number of microRNAs targeting a gene, increase after the genomic estimates of European admixture. The reduction in genome- formation of CNVs since genes in CNVs formed in human lineage wide homozygosity in mixed race individuals will reduce their risk for are targeted by a significantly higher number of microRNAs than the diseases with a recessive genetic component.Concurrent Sessions 31 c06.6* c07.2 microsatellite choice and Y chromosome variation: attempting to Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis offers a fair chance of having select the best stRs to date human Y chromosome lineages unaffected offspring for mitochondrial DNA disorders G. B. J. Busby, C. Capelli; D. Hellebrekers1, R. Wolfe2, A. Hendrickx1, R. de Coo3, C. de Die1, J. University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Geraedts1, P. Chinnery4, H. Smeets1; Recently the debate on the origins of the major European Y chromosome 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2School haplogroup R-M269 has reignited, and opinion has moved away of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, from Paleolithic origins to the notion of a younger Neolithic spread of Australia, 3Department of Pediatric Neurology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children’s these chromosomes from the Near East. We investigate the young, Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle STR-based Time to the Most Recent Common Ancestor estimates University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. proposed so far for R-M269 related lineages and find evidence for Oxidative phosphorylation disorders due to maternally inherited an appreciable effect of microsatellite choice on age estimates. We homoplasmic or heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations affect approximately further expand our analysis to include a worldwide dataset of over 60 1/5,000 individuals. The mutation level of transmitted heteroplasmic STRs which differ in their molecular attributes. This analysis shows mtDNA point mutations varies significantly between embryos due to a that by taking into account the intrinsic molecular characteristics of segregational bottleneck. Prenatal (PND) or pre-implantation genetic Y chromosome STRs, one can arrive at a more reliable estimate for diagnosis (PGD) of mtDNA disorders is complicated by the inability the age of Y chromosome lineages. Subsequently, we suggest that to accurately predict the threshold of clinical expression for most most STR-based Y chromosome dates are likely to be underestimates heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations. Here we tried to define a minimal due to the molecular characteristics of the markers commonly used, mutant level below which the chance for an embryo of being affected such as their mutation rate and the range of potential alleles that is acceptably low, irrespective of the exact mtDNA point mutation. A STR can take, which potentially leads to a loss of time-linearity. As a systematic review was performed on muscle mutant levels of 159 consequence, we update the STR-based age of important nodes in different heteroplasmic mtDNA point mutations derived from 327 the Y chromosome tree, showing that credible estimates for the age of unrelated patients or pedigrees, excluding three overrepresented lineages can be made once these STR characteristics are taken into mtDNA mutations. We generated a distribution of mutation levels of consideration. Finally we show that the STRs that are most commonly all affected individuals (n=195) and their unaffected maternal relatives used to explore deep ancestry are not able to uncover ancient (n=19) from 137 pedigrees with a familial mtDNA mutation, and relationships, and we propose a set of STRs that should be used in predicted the risk of being affected given a varying mutant level. This these cases. prediction required an assumption of overall prevalence of affected status in familial pedigrees. For familial mutations, little difference c07.1 in mean muscle mutant level was observed between probands and impact of mtDNA mutations on mtDNA segregation throughout affected maternal relatives and between affected individuals with human oogenesis a tRNA-versus protein-coding mutation. The overall prevalence of S. Monnot1, N. Gigarel1, D. C. Samuels2, P. Burlet1, L. Hesters3, N. Frydman3, affected status in familial pedigrees was estimated as 0.477. A 95% R. Frydman3, V. Kerbrat3, B. Funalot1, A. Benachi4, J. Feingold1, A. Munnich1, J. or higher chance of being unaffected was associated with a muscle Bonnefont1, J. Steffann1; mutant level of 18% or less. PGD provides carriers of heteroplasmic 1INSERM unit U781, Necker Hospital, and Paris-Descartes University, paris, mtDNA point mutations the opportunity to substantially increase the France, 2Center for Human Genetics Research, Department of Molecular chance of having healthy offspring. Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States, 3Reproductive Medicine Department, A Beclere Hospital, c07.3 Clamart, France, 4Gynaecology-Obstetrics Department, Necker Hospital, paris, multiplex massively parallel sequencing for noninvasive prenatal France. diagnosis Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations cause a wide range of serious B. H. W. Faas, L. E. L. M. Vissers, I. M. Janssen, J. de Ligt, A. Eggink, J. A. diseases with high transmission risk and maternal inheritance. Owing Veltman, A. Geurts van Kessel; to the absence of therapy, couples at risk to transmit such disorders Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. commonly ask for prenatal (PND) and preimplantation diagnosis Blood plasma of pregnant women contains circulating fetal DNA, (PGD). The lack of data regarding heteroplasmy distribution throughout with great potential for non-invasive detection of fetal chromosomal oogenesis, however hampers these procedures. aneuploidies. We have explored the possibility for multiplex massively We tracked the segregation of 5 mtDNA mutations, namely m.3243A>G, parallel sequencing to detect such fetal chromosomal aneuploidies. m.8344T>G m.8993T>G, m.9185T>C and m.10197G>A responsible From three women, carrying euploid fetuses (46,XY [N=1], 46,XX for MELAS, MERRF, NARP or Leigh syndrome during oogenesis, [N=2]) blood samples were drawn prior to invasive procedures and by quantifying the corresponding mutant loads in 6 carriers, their 14 from five women, carrying aneuploid fetuses (47,XX,+21; 47,XY,+21; oocytes, 53 first polar bodies (PB1), and 65 early embryos thought to 47,XXX; 47,XX,+13; 47,XY,+18) blood samples were drawn after estimate of the mature oocyte mutant load. invasive procedures. Samples were taken at various gestational ages, Our data indicate that ranging from 12+4 to 19+6. DNA was isolated from 3.5-8 mL of plasma 1/ mtDNA segregation is governed by random genetic drift for using either a QIAamp DSP Mini Blood Kit or a QIAamp Circulating m.3243A>G throughout the whole oogenesis. Nucleic Acid Kit. Sequencing libraries were prepared individually and 2/ the size of the bottleneck operating during oogenesis i) is likely DNA was multiplexed after ligation of an unique sequencing barcode. to depend on the mutation type, and ii) is individual-dependent for Sequencing was performed on a SOLiDTM 4 system. Next, the m.3243A>G. sequence reads were mapped to the human reference genome (hg19) 3/ while the absence of mutation constantly correlates between and quantified according to their genomic location. Subsequently, PB1 and the corresponding oocyte/embryo, mutant load may vary ζ-scores per chromosome were calculated as described elsewhere. significantly (+30%) between these 2 clonally-derived daughter cells, Thresholds for aneuploidy were set at ζ>+3.0 and ζ<-3.0 for over- or irrespective of the mutation type, contrary to the data drawn from under-representation, respectively, of a chromosome. mouse models. All aneuploidies yielded ζ-scores >3.0 for the aberrant chromosomes 4/ a selection event against high mutant load oocytes might occur (range +3.38 to +9.43), whereas all other chromosomes were detected during meiosis. as normal (range -2.27 to +2.31). Our data thus indicate that full- 5/ there is no correlation between the PB mutant load and the rate blown fetal aneuploidies can be reliably detected in maternal plasma of cleavage, suggesting that oocyte fertilization and early embryonic using a multiplex massively parallel sequencing approach. Further development are not markedly affected by mtDNA mutations. improvements in the rate of multiplexing samples to reduce costs and These data have obvious consequences on genetic counseling and increase efficiency are currently under investigation. PND/PGD procedures in mtDNA inherited disorders.Concurrent Sessions 32 c07.4* Pediatrics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. the Use Of Array cGH for Prenatal Diagnosis Of Fetuses With Noonan syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous, autosomal congenital malformations Detected By Ultrasound dominant disorder characterized by short stature, congenital heart P. D. Brady1, E. Mattheeuws2, J. A. Deprest3, J. P. Fryns2, K. Devriendt1, J. R. defects, distinctive facial features, and a variable degree of intellectual Vermeesch1; deficits. The PTPN11 gene is involved in 50% of Noonan syndrome 1Centre for Human Genetics, K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Centre for cases, but is also found to be mutated in 9% of fetuses with cystic Human Genetics, U.Z. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Fetal Medicine Unit, U.Z. hygroma and increased nuchal translucency (NT) (Lee et al. (Clin Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Genet 2009;75:190)). In our laboratory parallel testing of PTPN11and Karyotyping has remained the gold standard for the detection of KRAS in fetuses with a normal karyotype and an increased NT showed numerical and structural chromosome rearrangements for prenatal a mutation frequency of 16% [Houweling et al. (2010) Prenat Diagn genetic diagnosis. Molecular karyotyping by array CGH is now a widely 30:284]. Until now, we have investigated the DNA of 76 fetuses for used technique for postnatal genetic analysis providing genome- mutations in PTPN11, KRAS, SOS1, and RAF1. In 12 fetuses (15,8%) wide detection of genomic imbalances at a resolution far superior a de novo mutation has been identified in either PTPN11 (n=8), RAF1 to conventional karyotyping. The use of array CGH is an attractive (n=3), or KRAS (n=1). alternative in the prenatal diagnostic setting, given the ability to In an anonymous study the DNA of 62 other fetuses with increased NT overcome the resolution & time limitations of conventional karyotyping (>3.5 mm), cystic hygroma, hydrops fetalis or congenital heart disease or the locus-specific limitations of targeted analyses such as FISH & - with or without ventricular megaly and/or renal abnormalities- and a MLPA. normal karyotype, has been investigated for mutations in 10 genes We have undertaken a prospective study into the use of a high of the RAS-MAPK pathway. Besides potentially causative mutations resolution array for the prenatal diagnosis of pregnancies where in PTPN11 (n=1), RAF1 (n-1), and SOS1 (n=1), also unclassified fetal abnormalities were detected on ultrasound scan. Over 100 fetal variants in BRAF (n=1) and MAP2K1 (n=1) have been identified. We samples have been analysed from amniotic fluid and chorionic villi, conclude that prenatal testing for fetuses with an increased NT (>3.5 using both direct and cultured material. Since UZ Leuven is a specialist mm) should at least include PTPN11, RAF1 and KRAS sequencing. If referral centre for fetuses with isolated congenital diaphragmatic enough time and DNA is left, mutation analysis of SOS1, BRAF and hernia (CDH), a subset of our referrals are from this cohort. MAP2K1 should be considered. We show that array CGH detects a number of causal submicroscopic imbalances in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies. Of particular interest, c08.1* our results allow us to refine the minimal critical region associated with A de novo paradigm for mental retardation CDH on chromosome 15q26 to a single gene, NR2F2 (COUP-TFII). L. Vissers, J. de Ligt, B. van Bon, C. Gilissen, M. Willemsen, I. Janssen, J. We demonstrate an average reporting time of 8 days for uncultured Schuurs-Hoeijmakers, M. Steehouwer, W. Nillesen, P. de Vries, K. van der material. We shall present our results, and also discuss our approach Donk, B. van Lier, P. Arts, H. Scheffer, N. Wieskamp, M. del Rosario, A. de to the interpretation and reporting of CNVs detected prenatally. Brouwer, A. Hoischen, T. Kleefstra, B. de Vries, H. Brunner, J. Veltman; Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. c07.5 Recent studies have indicated that humans have an exceptionally Diagnostic utility of array-based comparative genomicv high per-generation mutation rate of 7.6 x 10-9 to 2.2 x 10-8. These hybridization (acGH) in a prenatal setting spontaneous germ line mutations can have serious phenotypic I. Maya1, B. Davidov1, Y. Zalzstein1, E. Taub1, M. Shohat1,2; consequences when affecting functionally relevant bases in the 1Raphael Recanati Genetic Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Hospital, genome. In fact, their occurrence may explain why diseases with a Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, severely reduced fecundity remain frequent in the human population, Israel. especially when the mutational target is large and comprised of many Objective: Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is genes. This would explain a major paradox in the evolutionary genetic a technique for detecting submicroscopic deletions and duplications. theory of cognitive disorders. There is limited information regarding its use in the prenatal setting. In this presentation, we will first describe our recent work on using a Here, we present our experience of 431 prenatal aCGHs between family-based exome sequencing approach to test this de novo mutation 2006 and 2011. hypothesis in 10 patients with unexplained mental retardation1. materials and methods: We reviewed the medical files of 431 prenatal Unique non-synonymous mutations were identified and validated in cases seen in the Recanati Genetic Institute between 2006 and 2011 nine genes. Six of these, identified in different patients, were likely on whom prenatal aCGH was carried out. pathogenic based on gene function, evolutionary conservation and Results: The indications for testing were fetal anomalies on ultrasound mutation impact. These findings provided a strong experimental (U/S) (43%), advanced maternal age (AMA)(20%), family history of a support for a de novo paradigm for mental retardation. disorder of unknown etiology (15%), parental concern (13%), Abnormal The clinical relevance and ultimate proof for disease-causality of these routine karyotype (8%) and abnormal serum biochemical screening for novel genes lies in the identification of de novo mutations in additional common fetal aneuploidies (1%). patients of similar phenotype. As such, we are currently screening Of 34 cases with a known abnormal karyotype, 26 (75%) had a normal ~1,200 patients with unexplained mental retardation for mutations aCGH. This enabled us to reassure the families and the pregnancies in YY1, representing one of these newly identified genes. Moreover, were continued. The remaining 8 (25%) showed an abnormal we are extending our family-based exome sequencing approach to aCGH, confirming the chromosomes were unbalanced, and were 100 patients to establish the diagnostic yield for de novo mutations in terminated. Of 397 cases with a normal karyotype, 7 had an abnormal patients with unexplained mental retardation. aCGH and after genetic counseling they were terminated. Overall, 1Vissers et al. A de novo paradigm for mental retardation. Nature new clinically relevant results were detected by aCGH in 41 cases, Genetics 42: 1109-1112 (2010). providing additional information for prenatal genetic counseling and risk assessment.conclusion: Our results suggest that prenatal aCGH c08.2 should be offered particularly in cases with abnormal U/S (detection Homozygosity mapping, exon enrichment and next generation rate was 1:46). We found the rate of detecting an abnormality by aCGH sequencing reveals single plausible gene defects in 72 in low-risk pregnancies (normal fetal U/S) was 1:70, but larger studies consanguineous families with autosomal recessive intellectual will be needed to expand our knowledge and validate our conclusions. disability H. Najmabadi1, H. Hu2, M. Garshasbi2, T. Zemojtel3, S. S. Abedini1, W. Chen2,4, c07.6 M. Hosseini1, F. Behjati1, S. Haas3, P. Jamali5, A. Zecha2, M. Mohseni1, L. Prenatal diagnostic testing of the Noonan syndrome genes in Püttmann2, L. Nouri1, L. Moheb2, F. Larti1, R. Weissmann2, H. Darvish1, K. fetuses with abnormal ultrasound findings Wrogemann2, V. Hadavi6, D. Wieczorek7, S. G. Firouzabadi1, M. Cohen8, Z. H. G. Yntema1, E. Croonen2, W. Nillesen1, L. Martens1, M. Schepens1, M. Fattahi1, I. Rost9, F. Mojahedi10, C. Hertzberg11, A. Dehghan12, A. Rajab13, M. J. Ruiterkamp-Versteeg1, H. Scheffer1, B. Faas1, I. van der Burgt1; S. Banavandi14, J. Hoffer2, M. Falah1, L. Musante2, V. Kalscheuer2, R. Ullmann2, 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of A. Kuss2, A. Tzschach2, K. Kahrizi1, H. H. Ropers2; Concurrent Sessions 33 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation assembly and stability. Riboflavin treatment of all five mutant cell lines Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular resulted in a significant increase of complex I activity. This supports Genetics, Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, previous accounts of beneficial effects of a high dosage riboflavin 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Computational regimen in ACAD9 patients. Molecular Biology, Berlin, Germany, 4Max-Delbrueck-Centrum fuer Molekulare Medizin, Berlin, Germany, 5Shahroud Welfare Organization, Semnan, c08.4 Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology and Next Generation diagnosis of Glycogen storage Diseases Genetics Centre, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Institut für Humangenetik, F. Smith1, T. Cullup1, C. Deshpande2, M. Champion2, H. Mundy2, K. Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 8Kinderzentrum München, Bhattacharya3, S. Abbs1, S. C. Yau1; München, Germany, 9Zentrum für Humangenetik und Laboratoriumsmedizin 1GSTS Pathology, London, United Kingdom, 2Guy’s and St Thomas NHS Dr. Klein und Dr. Rost, Martinsried, Germany, 10Mashhad Welfare Organization, Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 11Kinderneurologie und Sozialpädiatrie Sydney, Australia. Vivantes.-Klinikum Neukölln, Berlin, Germany, 12Yazd Welfare Organization, Glycogen storage diseases (GSD) are heterogeneous disorders Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 13Genetics Unit, Ministry of Health, Directorate caused by mutations in one of 18 genes encoding proteins of the General of Health Affairs, Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman, 14Islamic Azad glycogen metabolism pathway. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity University of Kerman, Kerman, Islamic Republic of Iran. between GSD subtypes makes diagnosis lengthy and costly, requiring Functional considerations and empirical data from animal models numerous clinical assessments including muscle or liver biopsy, suggest that most gene defects are inherited as recessive traits. followed by sequencing for mutations in a sequential ‘gene-by-gene’ However, research into recessive disorders has lagged behind manner in some cases. We have developed a rapid and cost effective because in Western societies with their small-size families, most Next Generation diagnostic test to screen all 18 genes simultaneously. affected patients are isolated cases. Intellectual disability (ID) is a A bespoke Agilent SureSelect in-solution DNA array is used to capture particularly important problem of health care world-wide, and most ~1Mb genomic sequence from all 284 exons of the GSD genes. The severe forms have a genetic etiology. Autosomal recessive forms of ID captured material is sequenced on the Illumina GAIIx platform with (ARID) are thought to be more frequent than X-linked ones, particularly up to 12 samples per lane, using index tagging to reduce costs. The in developing countries where parental consanguinity is common and massive capacity of such instruments ensures adequate sequencing the incidence of ID is significantly elevated. coverage (>30x) of target exons +/- 50bp, to accurately detect Here we report on the first systematic attempt to shed more light on the heterozygous variants. Validation experiments have correctly detected molecular causes of ARID. By performing homozygosity mapping, exon homozygous and heterozygous single nucleotide sequence variants, enrichment and next generation sequencing (NGS), we have identified deletions ranging from 1bp to 38bp, a complex indel of 27bp, and apparently causative gene defects in 72 out of 130 consanguineous large CNVs. We have tested 16 patients diagnosed clinically with GSD families from Iran and elsewhere. In 26 families, causative changes and have detected pathogenic mutations in 14, in the AGL, PHKA2, were found in previously described disease genes. In three of these PHKB, PHKG2, PYGL, PYGM and SLC37A4 genes. Compared with genes, i.e. AHI1, SRD5A3 and PRKCG, allelic mutations were found the current costly and lengthy investigation of these patients, including in more than one family. In 46 families, single apparently causative sequential gene sequencing in some cases, this comprehensive mutations were detected in genes not hitherto implicated in ID or mutation screen for GSD provides cheaper and faster diagnosis related disorders such as autism, epilepsy or schizophrenia. Many within a number of weeks rather than months or even years. This Next of these genes are involved in (the regulation of) transcription and Generation diagnosis changes the patient’s investigative pathway, translation or other regulatory pathways known to be important for reducing the need for alternative invasive diagnostic procedures. brain function, while others interact directly with known ID genes. Thus, the systematic identification of novel ID genes is also a potent strategy c08.5 to unravel the pathways and pathogenetic mechanisms underlying High throughput Genetic Analysis in Patients with Hereditary cognitive disorders. Retinal and Optic Nerve Diseases S. Biskup1, B. Wissinger2, T. Scheurenbrand3, S. Kohl2, D. Boehm3; c08.3 1Herte Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, 2Molecular Exome sequencing and AcAD9 mutation screening of patients Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research Centre for with complex I deficiency Ophthalmology University Clinics Tuebingen, Tübingen, Germany, 3CeGaT T. Haack1,2, K. Danhauser1, B. Haberberger1, P. Freisinger3, S. Eck2, M. GmbH, Tübingen, Germany. Zeviani4, T. Strom1,2, T. Meitinger1,2, H. Prokisch1,2; Hereditary retinal dystrophies (RDs) and optic nerve degenerations 1TU Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Helmholtz (ONDs) are amongst the genetically most complex and heterogenous Zentrum München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3Klinikum conditions. Up to now more than 180 genes have been described to am Steinenberg, Reutlingen, Germany, 4The Foundation ‘Carlo Besta’ Institute be implicated in RDs and ONDs. However it has been estimated that of Neurology, Milan, Italy. mutations in the known genes account for only ~ 50% of all affected Faulty energy supply due to defective oxidative phosphorylation is subjects. Current genetic diagnostics based on mutation scanning the biochemical signature of mitochondrial disorders, a genetically techniques (e.g. HRM, dHPLC, SSCP) and Sanger sequencing on heterogenous group of rare, severe and highly invalidating human capillary sequencing machines frequently takes several month or conditions. For a majority of patients, the molecular basis of the years and is laborious and cost-intensive. Such considerations, as disorder remains unknown and there is an urgent need for new well as the demand to clarify the remaining 50% of unsolved cases, diagnostic strategies. We have recently used an exome sequencing have resulted in an initiative to transfer hereditary ophthalmic disease strategy based on a single patient with a complex I deficiency to diagnostics to the high-throughput sequencing (HTS) arena. identify a pathogenic mutation in ADAD9, which codes for a member Methods: DNA is enriched for the coding and flanking intronic/UTR of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (ACAD) protein family. We had also sequences of a panel of 190 genes known to be associated with RD shown that treatment of patient fibroblasts with riboflavin rescues the and OND diseases using a custom designed Agilent SureSelect kit. phenotype. Sequencing is performed using barcoded libraries on a single Oct Here we demonstrate the efficacy of exome sequencing in combination on the SOLiD 4 platform. The basic data analysis is performed with with cellular assays in 12 additional unrelated complex I patients and Bioscope v1.2. All variants and putative deletions are re-sequenced by the results of ACAD9 mutation screening in a group of 100 complex I the gold standard Sanger sequencing or quantitative PCR, respectively. patients. We found pathogenic variants in three known disease genes Results: Here, we present the results of the high throughput coding for mitochondrial proteins in four patients. In two instances, the analysis in 50 patients. We will demonstrate how so far genetically pathogenic role of novel variants was established by the correction undiagnosed cases could be solved by our newly developed method. of the biochemical defect on expression of the wild-type protein in Most interestingly, we are able to detect different types of mutations patient’s fibroblasts. Fibroblasts of five patients with ACAD9 mutations including SNVs, as well as copy number variations ranging from small, were treated with riboflavin, the vitamin precursor of the FAD moiety, large up to whole exon deletion. which is the catalytic cofactor of ACADs, is known to foster their Concurrent Sessions 34 c08.6 mutations in the distal part of the DMD gene. XCI study does not multiplex targeted High-throughput sequencing for mendelian fully explain the mechanisms as well as the wide spectrum of clinical cardiac disorders identified oligogenic inheritance phenotype, though a clear correlation between the severity of the S. Fokstuen1, S. Nikolaev2, D. Robyr2, A. Munoz2, L. Farinelli3, C. Iseli4, S. E. phenotype and inactivation bias was observed. Antonarakis2,1, J. Blouin1; 1Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, c09.2 2Genetic Medicine, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, Development of systemic antisense treatment in dystrophic 3Fasteris S.A., Plan-les-Ouates, Switzerland, 4Ludwig Institute of Cancer mouse models for Duchenne muscular Dystrophy Research and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. A. Aartsma-Rus1, C. Tanganyika-de Winter1, T. Karnaoek2, J. C. T. van Cardiomyopathies and arrhythmias are common, seemingly Deutekom2, G. B. van Ommen1; mendelian autosomal dominant cardiac disorders known as primary 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Prosensa cause of sudden cardiac death in young adults. These diseases are Therapeutics, Leiden, Netherlands. characterized by a remarkable genetic heterogeneity, which makes it Antisense-mediated reading frame restoration is a promising difficult to unravel the causative mutation in a diagnostic laboratory. therapeutic approache for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD). It To circumvent these limitations, we explored targeted high-throughput uses antisense oligonucleotides (AONs) to induce exon skipping to sequencing of multiplexed indexed samples. Five patients suffering reframe mutated dystrophin transcripts, allowing synthesis of internally from different mendelian cardiac disorders were analysed. We deleted, partly functional dystrophins. Proof of concept has been designed a capture microarray with the total genomic length of 1 obtained in cultured cells and the mdx mouse model and this approach Mbp that includes all exons/splicing sites of 132 genes involved in is currently tested in clinical trials by Prosensa/GSK (GSK2402968 cardiovascular mendelian disorders. In Patient 1 with arrythmogenic and PRO044) and AVI Biopharma (AVI-4658). right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) and a known PKP2 frameshift The 2’-O-methyl phosphorothioate (2OMePS) chemistry used in deletion, an additional novel nonsense variant was found in Sodium the Prosensa/GSK trials has favorable pharmacokinetic properties, Channel V (SCN5A) gene (p.Lys991X). In Patient 2 with hypertrophic as it binds serum proteins, preventing clearance by the kidney and cardiomyopathy (HCM), a novel missense variant in Acid Alpha- increasing serum half life. Uptake by healthy muscle is low, but is up to Glucosidase (GAA) gene and a second novel missense variant in the 10-fold higher in dystrophic muscle in animal models. desmoglein-2 (DSG2) gene were identified. In Patient 4 with long- Here, we tested the safety and efficacy of high dose (200 mg/kg/week) QT syndrome (LQTS) two missense variants in two different channel AON treatment for up to 6 months in mouse models with varying levels genes (SCN5A and KCNQ) were found. Finally, in Patient 5 with of severity: mdx mice (mild phenotype) and mdx mice with one utrophin LQTS, a novel missense variant in the Fibrillin (FBN1) gene (Marfan allele (mdx +/-; intermediate phenotype). This was well tolerated. syndrome) was detected. We did not identify any pathogenic mutation Notably, in the more severely affected mdx +/- mice the therapeutic in Patient 3 with HCM. To our knowledge, this is the first report of effect was larger: exon skipping and dystrophin levels were higher, the such common oligogenic inheritance in mendelian cardiac disorders. creatine kinase levels were more decreased and rotarod running time Multiplex targeted high-throughput resequencing holds considerable was more increased. Preliminary results suggest that AON levels in promises for molecular diagnosis of highly heterogeneous disorders in the muscles of the more severely dystrophic mdx +/- are higher than in clinical practice and allows a better understanding of the complexity of those in mdx mice, confirming the hypothesis that AON uptake is aided mendelian disorders. by the disease pathology. These results are encouraging for long term trials in patients, recently c09.1 initiated by Prosensa Therapeutics/GSK. Dystrophinopathies and X-inactivation pattern: about 26 symptomatic carriers at pediatric age c09.3* S. Mercier1, A. Toussaint2, C. Beugnet2, C. De Baracé3, A. Toutain4, M. A guideline for CHD7 analysis Raynaud4, P. Marcorelles5, L. Pasquier1, C. Espil6, J. Chauvel-Breton1, R. Ben N. Janssen1, J. E. H. Bergman1, R. M. W. Hofstra1, L. H. Hoefsloot2, C. M. A. Yaou2, F. Leturcq2, J. Chelly7,8, I. Desguerre7,9,8; van Ravenswaaij-Arts1; 1Service de Génétique clinique, CHU, Rennes, France, 2Laboratoire de 1Department of genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Génétique Moléculaire, Cochin, APHP, Paris, France, 3Service de Pédiatrie, Netherlands, 2Department of Human genetics, Radboud University Medical CH, Saint-Brieuc, France, 4Service de Génétique médicale, CHU, Tours, Centre Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. France, 5Service d’Anatomopathologie, CHU, Brest, France, 6Service de CHARGE syndrome is a multiple congenital malformation syndrome. Neuropédiatrie, CHU, Bordeaux, France, 7Génétique et Physiopathologie des The causative gene, CHD7, was identified in 2004 and is a large gene maladies neurodéveloppementales et neuromusculaires, INSERM U1012, comprising 37 coding exons. Not surprisingly, patients with a CHD7- CNRS UMR 8104, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 8Université René Descartes, mutation have a more variable phenotype than patients diagnosed Paris V, France, 9Service de Neuropédiatrie, NEM, APHP, Paris, France. with CHARGE syndrome based on the currently used clinical criteria. Aim: to define molecular basis underlying different clinical phenotypes This raises the question whether CHARGE syndrome is a clinical or of symptomatic DMD carriers at pediatric age. molecular diagnosis and in which patients CHD7-analysis should be Methods: 26 cases of early symptomatic DMD carriers followed in the done. french neuromuscular network were investigated. We report findings We explored the phenotypic spectrum of our cohort of 280 patients with concerning clinical presentation, muscular histological analysis and a CHD7-mutation. The phenotype was highly variable, but external ear type of gene mutation, as well as X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) anomalies, cranial nerve dysfunction, semicircular canal hypoplasia patterns using DNA extracted from peripheral blood or muscle. and psychomotor delay were almost always present. In comparison Results: The initial symptoms were significant weakness (88%) or with clinically diagnosed CHARGE patients cleft lip and/or palate and exercise intolerance (27%). Clinical severity varied from a Duchenne-like genital hypoplasia occurred more frequently and congenital heart progression to a very mild Becker-like phenotype. Cardiac dysfunction defects less frequently in patients with a CHD7-mutation. In 5-10% was present in 19% of the cases. Cognitive impairment was worthy of of patients with typical CHARGE syndrome no CHD7-mutation could notice as 27% of the carriers are concerned. The muscular analysis be identified. In these patients CHARGE syndrome remains a clinical was always contributive revealing muscular dystrophy (83%), mosaic diagnosis. In contrast, 14-17% of the patients with a CHD7-mutation in immunostaining (81%) and dystrophin abnormalities in Western Blot do not fulfil the clinical criteria for CHARGE syndrome and in these analysis (84%). 73% had exonic deletions or duplications and 27% had patients CHD7-analysis can be helpful to establish the diagnosis. point mutations. XCI pattern was biased in 62% of the cases. Confirming the diagnosis is important for the clinical surveillance of the Interpretation: We report the largest series of manifesting DMD patients. Moreover, finding a CHD7-mutation enables counselling of carriers and show that exercise intolerance and cognitive impairment recurrence risk and reproductive options. may reveal symptomatic DMD carriers. The complete histological and We propose a guideline for CHD7-analysis and indicate in which immunohistological study of the muscle is the key of the diagnosis patients imaging of the semicircular canals is helpful. This guideline leading to the dystrophin gene analysis. Our study shows also that can help clinicians in their diagnostic work-up of patients suspected of cognitive impairment in symptomatic DMD carriers is associated with CHARGE syndrome.Concurrent Sessions 35 C09.4 We delineated a new syndrome presenting with aneurysms, The new Ghent criteria: What do they change? dissections and tortuosity throughout the arterial tree in association L. Faivre1, G. Collod-Beroud2, L. Ades3, E. Arbustini4, E. Arbustini5, B. Loeys6, with mild craniofacial features and skeletal and cutaneous anomalies. C. Binquet7, E. Gautier7, K. Mayer8, M. Arslan-Kirchner9, M. Grasso4, C. In contrast with other aneurysm syndromes, most of these affected Beroud2, D. Hamroun2, C. Bonithon-Kopp7, H. Plauchu10, P. N. Robinson11, J. individuals presented with early-onset osteoarthritis. We therefore De Backer12, P. Coucke13, U. Francke14, C. Stheneur15, N. Hanna16, D. Detaint15, propose to refer to this disorder as aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome A. De Paepe13, C. Boileau16, G. Jondeau15; (AOS). We recently mapped the genetic locus to chromosome 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2INSERM U827, Montpellier, (cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:84)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)SMAD3. This France,3Marfan research group, Sidney, Australia, 4IRCCS, Pavia, Italy, 5St (cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:533)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3) George’s hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, (cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:533)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:3)SMAD3 mutations lead to increased aortic Belgium,7CIC-EC, Dijon, France, 8Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory (cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:533)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3) Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 9Institut für Humangenetik, Hannover, (cid:54)(cid:48)(cid:36)(cid:39)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3) Germany, 10Service de Genetique, Lyon, France, 11Universitätsmedizin Charité, with AO syndrome. We present extensive clinical and molecular data Berlin, Germany, 12Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 13Center for from these patients among which a large family with 29 affected medical genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 14Departments of Genetics and Pediatrics, individuals. Stanford, CA, United States, 15Centre de Référence Syndrome de Marfan, (cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3) Paris, France, 16Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Paris, France. cases and relatives at risk for major cardiovascular complications. The diagnosis of Marfan syndrome (MFS) is challenging, and (cid:50)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3) international criteria have been proposed. New diagnostic criteria for (cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:82)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:533)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3) Marfan syndrome were released in 2010, giving more weight to aortic pathway as the primary pharmacological target for the development root aneurysm and ectopia lentis. We aimed to compare the diagnosis of new treatment strategies for aortic aneurysms and osteoarthritis. reached by applying this new nosology vs. the 1996 Ghent nosology in (cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:16)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:28)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3) C09.6 FBN1(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:27)(cid:22)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:41)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3) Novel Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome caused by mutations in the to the new nosology as compared to 89% according to the 1996 Ghent CHST14gene - Expanding the Phenotype (cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:41)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:26)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:73)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:3) R. Mendoza-Londono1, D. Chitayat1,2, W. Kahr1, A. Hinek1, L. Dupuis1, E. Goh1, been reported to make a diagnosis of MFS, and the patients would S. Blaser1, A. Howard1, L. Mittaz3, A. Superti-Furga3, S. Unger3, G. Nishimura4, (cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:40)(cid:47)(cid:54)(cid:12)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:92)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:3) L. Bonafe3; (cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:3) 1The Hospital for Sick Children and University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, (MASS), Mitral Valve Prolapse Syndrome (MVPS); or potential MFS in 2The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Department of patients aged less than 20 years. The possibility has to be considered Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount Sinai Hospital and University of Toronto, that these patients would go on to develop classic MFS with time. Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Division of Molecular Pediatrics, CHUV, Lausanne, Although the number of patients for a given diagnosis differed only Switzerland,4Department of Radiology, Tokya Metropolitan Kiyose Children’s slightly, the new nosology led to a different diagnosis in 15% of cases: Hospital, Kiyose, Japan. (cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:41)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3) Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS) is a heterogenous group of disorders ELS or MASS in the absence of aortic dilatation; conversely, 5% of characterized by varying degrees of connective tissue hyperextensibility. (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:41)(cid:54)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:92)(cid:3) In 2010 a new type of EDS was described in patients of Japanese in the presence of aortic dilatation in his personal or familial history. and of Turkish descent presenting with craniofacial characteristics, Whatever is the diagnosis, aortic follow-up is mandatory in all patients. contractures and joint and skin laxity. All patients had mutations in the CHST14gene coding for the enzyme dermatan 4-O-sulfotransferase. C09.5* (cid:58)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:36)(cid:73)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:3) Mutations in SMAD3(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:42)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:533)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:90)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:3) descent born to consanguineous parents. The patients presented syndromic form of aortic aneurysms and dissections with early- with multiple contractures, progressive joint and skin laxity and onset osteoarthritis hemorrhagic diathesis following minor trauma. Prenatal evaluation of I. M. B. H. van de Laar1, R. A. Oldenburg1, G. Pals2, J. W. Roos-Hesselink3, (cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:16)(cid:58)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:16) B. M. de Graaf1, J. M. A. Verhagen1, Y. M. Hoedemaekers1, R. Willemsen1, chorionic separation, bilateral club feet and clenched hands. Platelet L. Severijnen1, H. Venselaar4,5, G. Vriend4,5, P. M. Pattynama6, M. Collée1, J. aggregometry and electron microscopy revealed normal function Cobben7, L. van Laer8, J. De Backer9, D. Majoor-Krakauer1, D. Poldermans10, (cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3) I. M. E. Frohn-Mulder11, D. Micha2, J. Timmermans12, Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee13, S. (cid:191)(cid:69)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:44)(cid:44)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3) M. Bierma-Zeinstra14, P. J. Willems15, J. M. Kros16, E. H. G. Oei6, B. Loeys8, P. (cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3) Coucke9, B. A. Oostra1, A. de Paepe9, M. W. Wessels1, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1; intracellular retention of Collagen I. Both patients were found to be 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, homozygous for a novel missense mutation in the CHST14gene. Netherlands,2Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, (cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3) Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Cardiology, Erasmus Medical Center, awareness of the pan-ethnicity of the condition and expands our Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Nijmegen Center for Molecular Life Sciences, knowledge regarding its clinical manifestations. Our studies show that Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Center for Molecular the condition has to be considered in cases presenting prenatally with and Biomolecular Informatics (CMBI), Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Department (cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:16)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3) of Radiology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Department are characteristic regardless of ethnicity and the bleeding diathesis in of Pediatrics/ Pediatric Genetics, Emma Kinderziekenhuis AMC, Amsterdam, these patients are not the result of thrombocytopathy. We also expand Netherlands,8Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital Antwerp, the knowledge regarding the collagen abnormalities in this condition. Antwerp, Belgium, 9Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, C10.1 Ghent, Belgium, 10Department of Vascular Surgery, Erasmus Medical Center, C10.1* Exome sequencing reveals mutations in the retromer protein Rotterdam, Netherlands, 11Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Erasmus (cid:42)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:3) VPS35 as cause for Parkinson´s disease Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 12Department of Cardiology, Radboud susceptibility loci for Dupuytren‘s disease, and suggests a E. Graf1*, A.Zimprich2*, A. Benet-Pagès1*, W. Struhal3*, S.H. Eck1, M.N. Offman4, University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, major role for WNT signalling D. Haubenberger2, S. Spielberger5, E. C Schulte1,6, P. Lichtner1, S.C Rossle4, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 14Department of ND.. KFluorpnpi7s, sE1,.2 ,W Go.l fH5,. KC.. SGe.p Dpoi5l,m Wa.n Ps3ir,4k, ePr.2 ,W Se. rPkreers3,s Hla.u Here8n, nBi.e Ms5o, lHle.n Ghiaeulee1r,29,, R. General Practice, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 15GENDIA RO.p Khaotfzf6e,7n, sCc.h Wlaigjmere10n, gTa. 4F;oki2, C. Hotzy2, E. Reinthaler2, A. Harutyunyan11, (GENetic DIAgnostic Network), Antwerp, Belgium, 16Department of Pathology, R1(cid:49). (cid:88)K(cid:73)r(cid:191)a(cid:72)lo(cid:79)(cid:71)v(cid:3)i(cid:39)cs(cid:72)1(cid:83)1,(cid:68) A(cid:85)(cid:87).(cid:80) P(cid:72)e(cid:81)t(cid:87)e(cid:3)(cid:82)rs(cid:73)(cid:3)7(cid:54), (cid:88)F.(cid:85) (cid:74)Z(cid:76)(cid:70)im(cid:68)(cid:79)p(cid:3)(cid:54)ric(cid:70)h(cid:76)(cid:72)2(cid:81), (cid:70)T(cid:72). (cid:86)B(cid:15)r(cid:3)(cid:50)üc(cid:91)k(cid:73)(cid:82)e(cid:85)8(cid:71), (cid:15)W(cid:3)(cid:56). (cid:81)P(cid:76)(cid:87)o(cid:72)e(cid:71)w(cid:3)(cid:46)e(cid:76)5(cid:81), (cid:74)E(cid:71).(cid:82) A(cid:80)u(cid:15)f(cid:3)f2, C. Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. T2Dreenpkawrtamldeenrt9 ,1o2f, PBl.a Rstoics ta4,n Gd .R Reacnosnmstaruycr3t,i vJe. WSuinrgkeerlmy, aOnxnf2o,6r,d13,, UT.n Miteedit iKnignegrd1,o13m, T, .M Aortic aneurysms represent an important cause of cardiovascular S3Dtreopmar1t,1m3;e nt of Plastic Surgery, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, morbidity and mortality. Thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections are GGeernmeatincsy,, 2GDreopnainrgtmene,n Nt oeft hNeerularnodlosg, y5,U Mneivdeirzsinitiys cohf eC Uolnoigvneers, iCtäot lWogienne,, VGieernmnaan, y, a main feature of some connective tissue disorders, such as Marfan A6Duestpraiar,t m3Deenpt aorft mMeendti coafl NGeeunreotliocgsy, Uantrde cPhst,y cNheiathtreyr,l aAnlldgse,m 7Ueinnieves rKsirtayn okfe nhaus, syndrome and Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Linz, Austria, 4Institute of Bioinformatics, Technische Universität München, Concurrent Sessions 36 Munich, Germany, 5Department of Neurology, Medizinische Universität CInanlsifborrunciak,, LInonss Abnrugcekle, As,u CstAri,a U, 6nDiteepda Srttmateenst. of Neurology, Technische (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:23)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:3) BUnaicvkegrsriotäut nMdünchen, Munich, Germany, 7Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz DCM-associated SNPs, rs10927875 and rs2234962 with respective (cid:39)Ze(cid:88)n(cid:83)tr(cid:88)u(cid:92)m(cid:87)(cid:85) M(cid:72)(cid:81)ü(cid:182)n(cid:86)c(cid:3)h(cid:71)e(cid:76)(cid:86)n(cid:72), G(cid:68)(cid:86)e(cid:72)rm(cid:3)(cid:11)a(cid:39)n (cid:39)R(cid:3)e(cid:16)s(cid:3)e(cid:50)ar(cid:48)ch(cid:44)(cid:48) C(cid:3)e(cid:20)n(cid:21)te(cid:25)r(cid:28) fo(cid:19)r(cid:19) E(cid:12)(cid:3)n(cid:76)v(cid:86)i(cid:3)ro(cid:68)n(cid:3)m(cid:191)(cid:69)en(cid:85)(cid:82)ta(cid:80)l H(cid:68)e(cid:87)(cid:82)a(cid:86)lt(cid:76)h(cid:86),(cid:3) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3) P-values of 9.5 x 10-10 and 4.0 x 10-12 in the combined data set. The (cid:75)N(cid:68)e(cid:81)uh(cid:71)e(cid:3)(cid:68)rb(cid:81)e(cid:71)rg(cid:3)(cid:191), (cid:81)G(cid:74)e(cid:72)rm(cid:85)(cid:86)a(cid:15)n(cid:3)(cid:82)y,(cid:73) (cid:87)8(cid:72)D(cid:81)e(cid:3)p(cid:79)(cid:72)a(cid:68)rt(cid:71)m(cid:76)e(cid:81)n(cid:74)t(cid:3) o(cid:87)(cid:82)f (cid:3)N(cid:192)e(cid:72)u(cid:91)r(cid:76)o(cid:82)l(cid:81)og(cid:3)(cid:70)y(cid:82), W(cid:81)(cid:87)i(cid:85)lh(cid:68)e(cid:70)l(cid:87)m(cid:88)(cid:85)in(cid:72)e(cid:86)n(cid:3)s(cid:82)p(cid:73)(cid:3)it(cid:87)a(cid:75)l,(cid:72) V(cid:3)(cid:68)ie(cid:73)(cid:73)n(cid:72)n(cid:70)a(cid:87),(cid:72) (cid:71)(cid:3) (cid:191)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:83)(cid:22)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:18)(cid:92)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3) Austria, 9Paracelsus-Elena Klinik, Kassel, Germany, 10Department of Neurology, (cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:58)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:93)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:39)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:192)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:92)(cid:3) haplotype structure encompassing several genes including HSPB7. Sozialmedizinisches Zentrum Ost-Donauspital, Vienna, Austria, 11Center for mMoulleticpullea rg Meendeictiicn ea onfd t heen Avuirsotrniamne Anctaadl efmacyt oofr sS.c Wienec epse, rVfoiernmnead, A au sgtreian,o me- The second SNP on 10q26.11 is located within BAG3 and is non- w12Dideep aarstmseoncti aotfi oCnlin sictauld Nye tuor oipdheynstiiofylo gDyD, G seuosrgc-eAputgibuislitt-yU ngiveenresistä at Gndö ttfiunrgtehne,r synonymous. Sequencing of BAG3 exons in patients with familial DCM uGnödttienrgsetna,n Gdeinrmg aonfy i,t s13 Ipnasttihtuoteg eonf Hesuims.an Genetics, Technische Universität (cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:92)(cid:3) MMüenthchoedns, Munich, Germany individuals, suggesting that they are causal for familial DCM. HSPB7 TPahrek ignseonno’sm dei-sweaidsee aiss sthoec isaetcioonnd s tmudosyt incocmlumdeond 9ne6u0r oDduetgcehn eDrDat icvea sdeisso ardnedr and BAG3 encode for non-structural proteins important for autophagy, 3af,f1e1c7tin cgo n1%tro–l2s%. T ohfe tthoep -p3o5p ualsastioonc iaatbeodv es inthgel ea ngeu colef o6t0id. eIt pios lycmhaorarpctheirsizmesd which implicates perturbed protein processing as a new mechanism (bSy NdPesge) nweerarteio rne polfi cdaotpeadm inin ethrgriec en ienudreonpse nind ethnet cnaigsreo sstreiariteasl ,p caothmwpayri sainngd underlying DCM-associated heart failure. 1ot,h3e6r5 m DoDno acmasineesr gaicn dc e8ll ,4g4ro5u pcso nintr othlse frboramin sthteem UleKa,d Ginge rmto abnrya,d aykninde tshiae, Nreesttihneg rtlarenmdosr., muscular rigidity, and postural instability as well as non-motor C10.4* Rsyemsputlotsms. To identify rare causal variants in late-onset Parkinson’s disease (cid:36)(cid:70)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:192)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3) (cid:44)((cid:81)P(cid:76)D(cid:87)(cid:76))(cid:68), (cid:79)(cid:79)w(cid:92)(cid:3)e(cid:90) (cid:72)in(cid:3)v(cid:82)e(cid:69)s(cid:86)ti(cid:72)g(cid:85)a(cid:89)te(cid:72)d(cid:71) (cid:3)(cid:74)a(cid:72) f(cid:81)a(cid:82)m(cid:80)ily(cid:72) (cid:16)f(cid:90)ro(cid:76)m(cid:71)(cid:72) A(cid:3)(cid:86)u(cid:76)(cid:74)st(cid:81)ri(cid:76)a(cid:191) (cid:70)w(cid:68)i(cid:81)th(cid:70) (cid:72)1(cid:3)6(cid:73)(cid:82) (cid:85)a(cid:3)f(cid:72)fe(cid:76)(cid:74)c(cid:75)te(cid:87)d(cid:3)(cid:54) i(cid:49)nd(cid:51)iv(cid:86)i(cid:3)d(cid:68)u(cid:87)(cid:3)a(cid:87)l(cid:75)s(cid:85) (cid:72)b(cid:72)y(cid:3) atherosclerosis, and incident cardiovascular disease leoxcoim. Ae ftseerq rueepnlcicinagt.i oWne a nfodu njodi nat manisasleynssise omf u2ta,3ti2on5, DDD62 c0aNs, eins athned r e1t1ro,5m6e2r S. M. Willems, A. Dehghan, A. Hofman, B. A. Oostra, J. Witteman, C. M. van protein VPS35 in all seven affected family members that are alive. By screening (cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3) Duijn, A. Isaacs; additional PD cases, we saw the same variant co-segregating with the disease (cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:54)(cid:76)(cid:91)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:39)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:78)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:3) Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. in an autosomal dominant mode with high penetrance in two further families with involved in the WNT signaling pathway: WNT4 (rs7524102, P =2.81 (cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:16)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:33)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3) five and ten affected members, respectively. Genotyping showed that the shared x 10-9, OR 1.28), SFRP4 (rs16879765, P = 5.63 x 10-39, OR 1.98), multiple loci associated with LDL-C, HDL-C and TG. Risk scores haplotype extends across 65 kilobases around VPS35. Screening the entire WNT2(rs4730775, P =3.02 x 10-8, OR 0.83), SULF1 (rs2912522, P = computed from the top SNPs in those loci successfully discriminated VPS35 coding sequence in additional 860 cases and 1014 controls revealed six 2.01 x 10-13, OR 0.72),RSPO2 (rs611744, P = 7.87 x 10-15, OR 0.75), low-lipid controls from individuals with extreme lipid values. These same further non-synonymous missense variants. Three were only present in cases, and WNT7B (rs6519955, P = 3.24 x 10-33, OR 1.54). scores were used to test the hypothesis that the cumulative effects two only present in controls, and one present in cases and controls. D620N and Conclusions of common SNPs are associated with sub-clinical atherosclerosis a further variant detected in a PD case, R524W, were predicted to be damaging This study implicates nine different loci involved in the genetic and incident coronary heart disease (CHD) in the Rotterdam Study by sequence-based and molecular dynamics analysis. VPS35 is a component of sthues rceetrpotmibeilri tcyo mtop lDexD w. hTichhe m perdeisaetensc ree troofg rWadNeT tr asnigsnpoarlti nbge twpaeethnw eanyd ogseomneess (n=8131) and a Dutch family-based cohort, the Erasmus Rucphen iann ds ixth oe f ttrhaens n-Ginoelg lio ncei tswuogrkg easntds twhhaitc hit ihsa sli kreelcye tnotl yb eb eae nk edye psclariybeedr into thbee Family Study (n=2081). Both included measurements of carotid intima (cid:191)in(cid:69)v(cid:85)o(cid:82)lv(cid:80)ed(cid:68) (cid:87)i(cid:82)n (cid:86)A(cid:76)(cid:86)lz(cid:3)h(cid:83)e(cid:85)i(cid:82)m(cid:70)e(cid:72)r(cid:86)’s(cid:86) d(cid:3)(cid:82)is(cid:69)e(cid:86)a(cid:72)s(cid:85)e(cid:89). (cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:39)(cid:17) media thickness (IMT) and plaques. The Rotterdam Study additionally (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:38)(cid:43)(cid:39)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:90)(cid:16)(cid:88)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:167)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:3)(cid:92)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:3) C10.2* Controlled for age and sex, the LDL-C risk score was associated with Fine mapping of the celiac disease locus on 3q27-q28 harboring IMT (P=0.021) and strongly associated with plaque (P=1.7x10-8). the LPP gene Cox proportional hazards models were used to assess MI and CHD R. C. Almeida1,2, G. Trynka2, J. Romanos2, J. Gutierrez-Achury2, C. Wijmenga2; incidence. For each standard deviation increase in the LDL-C score, 1University of Brasilia, School of Health Sciences, Brasilia, Brazil, 2Department the hazard ratio (HR[95%C.I.]) for MI was 1.14[1.04,1.25] (P=0.006) of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen and University of Groningen, compared to the mean score. For CHD, the per SD increase in risk Groningen, Netherlands. was HR[95%C.I.]=1.10[1.04,1.50] (P=0.003). Exclusion of prevalent Results from meta-analysis in genome-wide association studies cases and control for additional covariates minimally affected the point (GWAS) revealed 26 loci to be associated with celiac disease, a estimates. The HDL-C risk score was nominally associated with plaque common immune-mediated disease. The majority of the celiac loci (P=0.049). We found no associations with the TG risk score and clinical also overlapped with results form GWAS conducted in other immune- outcomes. In conclusion, an accumulation of common genetic variants mediated diseases, suggesting a shared genetic origin. One of the most (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:39)(cid:47)(cid:16)(cid:38)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3) strongly associated loci was found on 3q27-28 and this regions also impact sub-clinical and clinical outcomes. As our knowledge of genetic seemed rather unique for celiac disease (rs1464510, p= 2.98 x 10-40, variation increases, pre-clinical genetic screening tools might enhance (cid:50)(cid:53)(cid:32)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:28)(cid:12)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:28)(cid:25)(cid:19)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:12)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3) the prediction and prevention of clinical events. (cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3) and to identify the haplotypes driving the association, we set out to C10.5 (cid:191)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:83)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:47)(cid:51)(cid:51)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:70)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:11)(cid:27)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:3) (cid:47)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:191)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:40)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:51)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3) cases and 846 controls), Finnish (647 cases and 1829 controls) and Progression in Mexican Americans Italians (497 cases and 543 controls). We used genotype data from J. E. Curran1, J. M. Weir2, C. Bellis1, M. A. Carless1, J. B. Jowett2, M. C. the celiac disease GWAS to look for others SNPs associated in this Mahaney1, T. D. Dyer1, H. H. H. Goring1, A. G. Comuzzie1, L. Almasy1, P. J. region in each population and also checked their linkage disequilibrium Meikle2, J. Blangero1; (LD) with rs1464510. We found different SNPs in each population with 1Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, United States, 2Baker suggestive association and LD in Dutch (rs1559810, p=1.2 x 10-2, IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia. r2=0.8, D’= 0.9), Italian (rs6790359, p=7.8 x 10-4, r2 = 0.2, D’=0.9) and Lipids are a highly diverse class of molecule with essential roles in Finnish (rs9851967 p=2.1x10-4, r2=0.6, D’=0.8). Future analysis will cellular structure, signaling, and energy storage. Dysregulation of lipid focus on an imputated dataset, using IMPUTE 2 with HapMap III and metabolism can lead to the development of various diseases including 1000 Genomes Project as reference panels. To help to identify rare Alzheimer’s, atherosclerosis, and diabetes. These lipid molecules may variants we plan to use additional European cohorts with high-density represent endophenotypes that are closer to gene action than classical genotyping across the LPP region, including Spanish, UK, Pollish, and lipid markers, and extremely valuable for genetic analysis. In a large- two non- European cohorts (Saharawi and Indian). (cid:86)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:88)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:191)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:3) Americans from the San Antonio Family Heart Study, identifying and C10.3 quantifying 356 different lipid species. We then performed quantitative (cid:36)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3) genetic and genome-wide association analyses, using ~1,000,000 with heart failure due to dilated cardiomyopathy (cid:54)(cid:49)(cid:51)(cid:86)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:192)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:74)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:191)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:3) E. VILLARD1, C. Perret2, F. Gary1, C. Proust2, G. Dilanian1, C. Hengstenberg3, (cid:48)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3) (cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3) (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3) (cid:22)(cid:24)(cid:25)(cid:3) (cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3) (cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3) (cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3) (cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3) (cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:3) (cid:76)(cid:81)(cid:3) (cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:3) S. Cook4, D. Tregouet2, L. Tiret2, R. Isnard1, M. Komajda1, P. Charron1, f. (cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:53)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:27)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3) Cambien2; to diabetes in non-diabetics followed for ~10 years. The single best 1INSERM UMR956, Paris, France, 2INSERM UMR937, Paris, France, 3Klinik predictor of progression to diabetes is dhCer (dihydroceramide) 18:0, und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin II, Regensburg, Germany, 4Medical Research (cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:92)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:29)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:75)(cid:38)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:81)(cid:76)(cid:191)(cid:70)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:79)(cid:92)(cid:3) Council, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. heritable (h2=0.247; p=1.6×10-9) and is markedly increased in diabetics (cid:44)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:191)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:16)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:88)(cid:71)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:68)(cid:76)(cid:79)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:88)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3) (p=2.5×10-7). In non-diabetics, those that progress to diabetes dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) with discovery and replication cohorts show higher dhCer 18:0 levels at baseline than non-progressors Concurrent Sessions 37 (p=2.2×10-8). This predictive relationship is maintained (p = 1.2×10- ties, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 11Department 4) after accounting for baseline fasting glucose and insulin levels, of Clinical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, indicating this lipid component may be an independent predictor of Trabzon, Turkey, 12Department of Oral Diagnosis and Radiology, Faculty of risk. A genome-wide association analysis reveals two rare SNPs Dentistry, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 13Department of Ra- on chromosome 3p22 (between SNORA62 and MOBP) exhibiting diology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, significant association with dhCer 18:0 levels (p=9×10-8). Our results 14Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical suggest that lipidomic profiles may represent endophenotypes that University, Trabzon, Turkey, 15Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust may help us identify genes involved in diabetes development. Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 16Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service and The University of Witwaters- c10.6* rand, Johannesburg, South Africa, 17Centre de Référence pour les Affections Genetic association study of sNPs discovered from low Rares Génétique Ophtalmologique, Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux coverage exome sequencing of 1000 phenotypically Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 18Institut für Humangenetik, characterized Danish individuals Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 19Department of Human Genet- T. Sparso1, A. Albrechtsen2, L. Skotte2, N. Grarup1, T. Jorgensen3, Y. Li4, J. ics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Wang4, R. Nielsen5, T. Hansen6, O. Pedersen1; 20Institute of Medical Genetics, Zürich University, Zürich, Switzerland. 1Marie Krogh Center for Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Seckel syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, by intrauterine growth retardation, short stature, severe microcephaly Copenhagen, Denmark, 3Research Centre for Prevention and Health, Glostrup associated with mental retardation, and a typical “bird-headed” faci- University Hospital, Glostrup, Denmark, 4Beijing Genomics Institute, Shenzhen, al appearance. Using a genome-wide SNP homozygosity mapping China, 5Departments of Integrative Biology and Statistics, UC Berkeley, strategy we identified a homozygous donor splice-site mutation in Berkeley, CA, United States, 6Hagedorn Research Institute, Copenhagen, CEP152 cosegregation with the disease in six Turkish families. Inde- Denmark. pendently, we identified CEP152 as causative gene in an additional Background and hypothesis: Genome-wide association studies Seckel patient born to consanguineous parents using an exome se- (GWAS) have driven the identification of multiple new loci contributing quencing strategy. Furthermore, additional screening identified two significantly to modulation of the fasting plasma glucose levels in other patients carrying compound heterozygous mutations in CEP152. humans. However, the explained heritability is still very modest. CEP152 encodes a 1654 amino acid protein that was originally iden- We hypothesize that novel exome variation not captured by GWAS tified in a proteomic screen of human centrosomes. We could show may contribute to the missing heritability of fasting plasma glucose that CEP152 deficient fibroblasts show severe defects in mitosis and levels. spindle organization resulting in cells with multiple centrosoms and Methods: Exome capturing of 1000 Danish individuals were performed abnormal nuclei pattern. In addition, Seckel cells showed an overall on the Nimblegen 2.1M followed by next generation resequencing increased sensitivity to oxidative stress and responded with increa- with a mean depth of x8. Within a 34Mb targeted region we identified sed apoptosis. Furthermore, DNA-damage response was impaired 70,182 SNPs with a MAF>1%. in cells with mutated CEP152 confirming a functional link between Any association between the identified SNPs and fasting plasma centrosomal function and DNA repair responses. We could show that glucose level was evaluated directly from the sequencing data, by impaired CEP152 function leads to genomic instability via increased accounting for the uncertainty of the genotype rather than on the called H2AX phosphorylation due to enhanced activation of ATM signaling genotypes. The tests are based on score statistics which require less pathways. These findings provide evidence for an important role numerical optimization than conventional likelihood ratio test. of CEP152 in DNA damage response and genome maintenance. Results: We find many novel and known variants with allelefrequency In summary, we identified the centrosomal protein CEP152 as a novel down to 1% that associate with fasting plasma glucose levels at the protein involved in the maintenance of genomic integrity and in the abi- significance level of<10-3. However, we were not able to replicate lity to respond to DNA damage, and show that that recessive loss-of- any of the top 20 variants by direct genotyping in independent study function mutations in CEP152 can cause Seckel syndrome in humans. populations of 9,893 individuals. Conclusion: Low-coverage exome sequencing driven association c11.2 studies yield many novel low frequency-and common variants; NEK1 mutations cause short rib-polydactyly syndrome type however; it seems that there are no single low-frequency variants in majewski the examined exome with a large effect on the fasting plasma glucose C. T. Thiel1, K. Kessler1, A. Giessl2, A. Dimmler3, S. Shalev4,5, S. von der levels on its own, suggesting the need for testing various burden tests Haar6, D. Zahnleiter1, H. Stoess7, E. Beinder8, R. Abou Jamra1, A. B. Ekici1, to evaluate the cumulative impact of multiple variants within the same N. Schroeder-Kress2, T. Aigner9, T. Kirchner10, A. Reis1, J. Brandstaetter2, A. locus. Rauch11; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Animal Physiology, c11.1 Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Pathology, St. Vincentius Hospital, Karlsruhe, mutations of CEP152 encoding a centrosomal protein cause Germany, 4Genetic Institute, Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, 5Rappaport seckel syndrome with defective DNA damage response Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, E. Kalay1, G. Yigit2, Y. Aslan3, K. Brown4, E. Pohl2, L. Bicknell5, H. Kayserili6, Y. 6Private Clinic Kossakiewicz, Nuremberg, Germany, 7Institute of Pathology, Li2, B. Tüysüz7, G. Nürnberg8, W. Kiess9, M. Koegl10, I. Baessmann8, K. Buruk11, St. Johannisstift, Paderborn, Germany, 8Department of Obstetrics, University B. Toraman1, S. Kayipmaz12, S. Kul13, M. Ikbal14, D. Turner15, M. Taylor5, J. Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 9Institute of Pathology, Leipzig, Germany, Aerts15, C. Scott15, K. Milstein16, H. Dollfus17, D. Wieczorek18, H. Brunner19, M. 10(Institute of Pathology, Munich, Germany, 11Institute of Medical Genetics, Hurles15, A. Jackson5, A. Rauch20, P. Nürnberg8, A. Karagüzel1, B. Wollnik2; Zurich, Switzerland. 1Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz Technical Uni- Defects of ciliogenesis have been implicated in a wide range of human versity, Trabzon, Turkey, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, phenotypes and play a crucial role in different signal transduction Cologne, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Karadeniz pathways and cell cycle coordination. We thoroughly delineated the Technical University, Trabzon, Turkey, 4Chromosome Biology Group, Medical clinical, radiographic, and histological phenotype of the autosomal- Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College School of Medici- recessive short-rib polydactyly syndrome Majewski type. Parametric ne, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5Medical Research Coun- multipoint linkage and haplotype structure analysis confirmed a linked cil (MRC) Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, interval with a maximum LOD score of 2.95 (17.36 Mb / 18.65 cM) on Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6Department of Medical chromosome 4 encompassing 38 genes. Assuming an overlap of the Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, İstanbul, Turkey, 7De- phenotypic spectrum of our patients with other ciliopathies, we used partment of Pediatric Genetics, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Istanbul Universi- known genes of the cilia proteome database and compared them with ty, İstanbul, Turkey, 8Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University the genes in our candidate interval. The NIMA-related kinase 1 (NEK1) of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 9Department of Women and Child Health, gene was highlighted as homozygous mutant mice show polycystic Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, kidney disease, craniofacial anomalies, and growth reduction. 10Preclinical Target Development and Genomics and Proteomics Core Facili- Sequencing of NEK1 identified a homozygous nonsense and a Concurrent Sessions 38 homozygous splice-site mutation in the affected persons of two 20University Collegge London, London, United Kingdom. consanguineous families as the underlying cause. NEK1 encodes a KIF7, the human ortholog of Costal 2, represents a key component serine/threonine kinase with proposed function in DNA double-strand of the Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway. Here we report mutations repair, neuronal development, and coordination of cell cycle-associated in KIF7 in patients with Hydrolethalus and Acrocallosal syndromes ciliogenesis. With immunofluorescence analyses we confirmed that (HLS and ACLS), two multiple malformation disorders with overlapping the absence of functional NEK1 significantly decreases the number of features such as polydactyly, mid-line brain abnormalities, and cleft ciliated fibroblasts and alters the structural morphology of the primary palate. Consistent with a role of KIF7 in Hh signaling, we show a cilium in vivo as well. Transmission electron microscopy indicated deregulation of most of the Gli transcription factor targets and impaired a defect in progression from stage I after vesicular accumulation of GLI3 processing in KIF7 mutated patient tissue, as well as defects in ciliogenesis to stage II and subsequent failure of axoneme growth. primary cilia length in fibroblast cells. KIF7 is also a likely contributor We further substantiate a proposed digenic diallelic inheritance of of alleles across the ciliopathy phenotypic spectrum; sequencing ciliopathies by identification of heterozygous mutations in NEK1 and of a diverse patient cohort revealed several missense mutations DYNC2H1 in a further non-consanguineous family. which, upon in vivo testing were shown to be detrimental to protein function. Consistent with an epistatic role for such alleles, in vivo c11.3* genetic interaction studies indicated that KIF7 could exacerbate the Whole Exome Sequencing Identifies The Genetic Cause Of A phenotype induced by the loss of other ciliopathy transcripts. Our data New ciliopathy syndrome demonstrate the role of KIF7 in the Sonic Hedgehog signaling pathway A. M. Waters1, F. Lescai2, S. Christou1, A. Brooks1, E. Chanudet1, D. Charu3, R. in humans through the regulation of Gli targets, its role in primary cilia Kleta4, M. Hubank2, E. Stupka2, M. Winey5, P. L. Beales1; function and expand the clinical spectrum of ciliopathies. 1Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 2UCL Genomics, London, United Kingdom, 3Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4RFH, UCL, c11.5* London, United Kingdom, 5University of Colorado, Denver, CO, United States. sensenbrenner syndrome is caused by dysfunctional iFt-A Gene identification in rare single-gene disorders significantly lends to mediated retrograde transport in the cilium the understanding of key developmental and physiological processes. H. H. Arts1, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, D. A. Mans1, S. E. van Beersum1, M. M. Oud1, As 85% of all disease-causing mutations are within coding exons, the E. Bolat1, L. Spruijt1, E. A. M. Cornelissen1, J. H. M. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers1, recent application of massive parallel sequencing with exon capture N. de Leeuw1, V. Cormier-Daire2, H. G. Brunner1, N. V. A. M. Knoers3, R. has shown the efficacy of this technique in the rapid identification of Roepman1; mutations in Mendelian disorders. Herein, the genetic basis of a novel 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, syndrome was sought in a non-consanguineous kindred consisting 2Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, of 6 offspring where 4 exhibited mid-gestation intrauterine death. Utrecht, Netherlands. Dysmorphic features included cleft palate, high nasal bridge, short Sensenbrenner syndrome (a ciliopathy) is mainly characterized by columella, micrognathia, wide mouth and low set ears. Systemic skeletal and ectodermal anomalies, and can be accompanied by other features included renal hypoplasia, duodenal atresia and cerebellar features (e.g. chronic renal disease). We performed SNP array analysis vermis hypoplasia with hydrocephalus, pre and post-axial polydactyly and positional candidate gene sequence analysis in two siblings with consistent with a predicted ciliopathy. Linked regions were identified Sensenbrenner syndrome of a consanguineous Moroccan family. Both on 1p31.1, 4q,19p13.3 and 20q13.13 using high density SNP arrays patients suffered from nephronophthisis, and the youngest sibling (Affymetrix 250k/sty and Illumina 550K). As the identified regions were had end-stage renal disease since the age of 3 years. We identified large, whole exome capture (Nimblegen EZ Exome SR, v1) followed a homozygous mutation in the initiation codon of C14ORF179 in both by massively parallel sequencing (Illumina GAIIx) was employed. A siblings. C14ORF179 encodes IFT43, a subunit of the intraflagellar novel compound heterozygous loss of function mutation involving transport complex A (IFT-A) machinery of primary cilia. We show that an essential splice site and a truncating change were found in an the mutation disrupts translation; due to the mutation translation starts annotated gene which segregated with affected family members. at an ATG in exon 2 instead of at the canonical initiation translation Subcellular localization revealed a nuclear, centrosomal and basal codon in exon 1. This results in a shortened N-terminally truncated body localization for this protein. Gene knockdown in zebrafish IFT43 protein. The IFT-A protein complex (together with the dynein results in a ciliopathic phenotype consisting of curved body axis, motor) drives retrograde axonemal transport in the cilium. We show U-shaped somites, microcrania, microphthalmia, cardiac oedema that in fibroblasts of one of the affected siblings, disruption of IFT43 and renal cysts. Whole exome sequencing has identified compound affects this transport from the tip of the cilium to its base. In fibroblasts heterozygous mutations in a new ciliopathy gene and supports its role of the patient with mutated C14ORF179, we found that IFT-B complex in gene identification in rare and novel syndromes. proteins aberrantly accumulate in the ciliary tips. Interestingly, we observed the same defect in fibroblasts from a Sensenbrenner c11.4 syndrome patient with mutations in WDR35/IFT121, encoding another costal2 (KiF7) mutations cause fetal Hydrolethalus and IFT-A subunit. Our results suggest that Sensenbrenner syndrome is Acrocallosal syndromes and expand the ciliopathy spectrum caused by dysfunctional IFT-A mediated retrograde transport in the S. Thomas1,2, A. Putoux1,2, K. Coene3, E. E. Davis4, Y. Alanay5, G. Ogur6, E. cilium. Uz5, D. Buzas7, C. Gomes1, S. Patrier8, C. L. Bennett6, N. Elkhartoufi1, M. Saint- Frisson9, L. Rigonnot10, N. Joyé11, S. Pruvost12, G. E. Utine5, K. Boduroglu5, c11.6* P. Nitschke13, L. Fertitta1, C. Thauvin14, A. Munnich1,2, V. Cormier-Daire1,2, R. ccDc39 is required for assembly of inner dynein arms and the Hennekam15, E. Colin16, N. A. Akarsu5, C. Bole-Feysot12, N. Cagnard13, A. dynein regulatory complex and for normal ciliary motility in Schmitt17, N. Goudin18, S. Lyonnet1,2, F. Encha-Razavi1,2, J. Siffroi11, M. Winey19, humans and dogs N. Katsanis4, M. Gonzales11, M. Vekemans1,2, P. L. Beales20, T. Attié-Bitach1,2; A. C. Merveille1, E. Davis2, A. Becker-Heck3, M. Legendre4, M. Georges1, A. 1INSERM U781-Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Université Lequarré1, N. Katsanis2, H. Omran3, S. Amselem4; Paris-Descartes, Paris, France, 3Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 1Unit of Animal Genomics, GIGA-R, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University 4Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, 5Hacettepe University Medical of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2Center for human disease modeling, Department Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, 6Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey, 7CH of cell biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, Sud Francilien, Evry, France, 8Hôpital Armand Trousseau, PARIS, France, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital 9CH Victor Dupouy, Argenteuil, France, 10CH Sud Francilien, PARIS, France, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 4INSERM U933, Université Pierre et Marie 11Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 12Imagine Fondation-Hopital Curie-Paris 6 and AP-HP, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Services d’explorations Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 13Service Bio-informatique Université fonctionnelles respiratoires, Paris, France. Paris-Descartes, Paris, France, 14CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 15University Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is an inherited disorder characterized of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 16Hôpital d’Angers, Angers, France, by recurrent infections of the upper and lower respiratory tract, 17Institut Cochin, Paris, France, 18IFR94-Université Paris Descartes, Paris, reduced fertility in males and situs inversus in about 50% of affected France, 19University of Colorado at Boulder, Boulder, CO, United States, individuals (Kartagener syndrome). It is caused by motility defects in the respiratory cilia that are responsible for airway clearance, the Concurrent Sessions 39 flagella that propel sperm cells and the nodal monocilia that determine subunit of voltage-gated Ca1.3 L-type calcium (Ca2+) channels, v left-right asymmetry. Recessive mutations that cause PCD have been in two consanguineous deafness families. The mutation results in identified in genes encoding components of the outer dynein arms, an insertion of a glycine residue in a highly conserved region near radial spokes and cytoplasmic pre-assembly factors of axonemal the channel pore. Ca1.3 channels tightly control Ca2+-dependent v dyneins, but these mutations account for only about 50% of cases glutamate release at cochlear inner hair cell (IHC) ribbon synapses of PCD. We exploited the unique properties of dog populations to in response to sound and the diastolic depolarization in sinoatrial positionally clone a new PCD gene, CCDC39. We found that loss- node (SAN) pacemaker cells. Targeted deletion of Ca1.3 channels v of-function mutations in the human ortholog underlie a substantial in mice causes deafness and pronounced, non-fatal SAN arrhythmia fraction of PCD cases with axonemal disorganization and abnormal and bradycardia. Strikingly, all patients also had pronounced SAN ciliary beating. Functional analyses indicated that CCDC39 localizes dysfunction with SAN arrhythmia, bradycardia and junctional escape to ciliary axonemes and is essential for assembly of inner dynein arms rhythms. We termed the condition SANDD syndrome (sinoatrial node and the dynein regulatory complex. dysfunction and deafness). We analyzed the biophysical properties of wildtype and mutant Ca1.3 channel complexes using whole-cell v c12.1 patch-clamp recordings. Homozygous individuals lack significant A genome wide study reveals rare cNVs exclusive to Alzheimer L-type Ca2+ currents from exon 8B-containing Ca1.3 channels. The v Disease extreme phenotypes SANDD phenotype and mouse mRNA expression studies suggest A. Rovelet-Lecrux1,2, S. Legallic1,2, D. Wallon1,3, J. Flaman2, T. Frebourg2, D. that the exon 8B splice variant is predominant in human IHC and SAN Hannequin1,2, D. Campion1,2,4; pacemaker cells. The CACNA1D mutation underlying SANDD results 1CNR-MAJ, CMRR, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France, 2Inserm U614, in non-conducting calcium channels and altered voltage-dependent Faculty of Medicine, Rouen University, Institute for Biomedical Research gating. Our results constitute the first evidence that Ca1.3 channels v and Innovation, Rouen, France, 3Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen are involved in human cardiac pacemaking, implying them as a University, Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France, 4Research potential drug target for controlling heart rate in disease conditions. Department, CH du Rouvray, Sotteville les Rouen, France. Regular cardiological follow-up of SANDD patients seems appropriate Autosomal dominant early onset Alzheimer disease (ADEOAD) to avoid cardiovascular complications. is a rare condition with a prevalence rate estimated to 5.3 per 100 000 persons at risk. Mutation screening of more than 150 ADEOAD c12.3 families, ascertained in France by the National Centre for early-onset Validating massive parallel sequencing as a diagnostic tool for AD (CNR-MAJ) has shown that mutations of APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 seizure disorders genes account for 85 % of ADEOAD families. We hypothesised that J. Lemke1, D. Boehm2, E. Riesch2, T. Scheurenbrand2, C. Courage1, S. Gallati1, rare copy number variants (CNVs) could be involved in ADEOAD T. Dorn3, M. Wolff4, Y. Weber5, H. Lerche5, S. Biskup2; families without mutations in known genes. Using high resolution 1Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland, array CGH, we assessed the presence of rare copy number variants 2CeGaT GmbH, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Swiss Epilepsy Center, Zurich, (CNVs) in two highly selected disease groups, 21 unrelated ADEOAD Switzerland, 4Department of Paediatrics, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, cases without alteration on APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 genes and 12 Germany, 5Department of Neurology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, isolated Alzheimer disease (AD) cases with age of onset before 55 Germany. years. This analysis revealed the presence of 7 singleton CNVs (4 in Introduction: The epilepsies are common neurological disorders with a ADEOAD and 3 in isolated cases) not present in 1078 controls, thus strong genetic impact. Consequently, understanding the genetic basis yielding a nominal significance for association of every CNV with AD of seizure disorders will provide novel insights into the underlying of p=0.019 in the ADEOAD group and p=0.011 in the isolated cases pathophysiology and result in novel diagnostic and therapeutic group, respectively. Strikingly, 4/7 rearrangements target genes avenues. With our approach we aim to reveal the genetic basis of encoded proteins that are tightly related to Amyloid β (Aβ) peptide epileptic disorders in so far unresolved cases. metabolism or signalling. Although these variants are individually rare Methods: Genomic DNA is enriched for a panel of 485 genes using and restricted to particular subgroups of patients, their characteristics a custom designed Agilent SureSelect in solution kit. 265 of the 485 strongly support the causal role in human pathology of a set of genes are known causative genes for seizure disorders comprising genes coding for molecules suspected for a long time to modify Aβ all relevant epilepsy phenotypes. The remaining genes on the panel metabolism or signalling and for which animal or cellular models had represent putative candidate genes for epileptic disorders. Sequencing already been developed. is performed on the SOLiD 4 platform. We developed a diagnostic pipeline to (i) identify regions that are underrepresented with reads, (ii) c12.2 identify potentially pathogenic SNVs, (iii) identify small insertions and Loss of cav1.3 (cAcNA1D) function in sANDD syndrome, a deletions and (iv) identify larger indels including whole exon deletions novel human channelopathy with bradycardia and congenital and duplications. All variants and putative deletions are then validated deafness using conventional methods. S. M. Baig1, A. Koschak2, A. Lieb2, M. Gebhart2, C. Dafinger3, G. Nürnberg4, Results: We sequenced 20 so far genetically undiagnosed cases with A. Ali1, I. Ahmad1, M. J. Sinnegger-Brauns2, N. Brandt5,6, J. Engel5,6, M. E. a broad spectrum of epilepsy phenotypes. We present an overview of Mangoni7, M. Farooq1, H. U. Khan8, P. Nürnberg4,9, J. Striessnig2, H. J. Bolz10,3; the number of detected sequence alterations comprising mutations, 1Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Division, possibly damaging variants as well as benign SNPs in both well-known National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, epilepsy genes and putative candidates. Pakistan, 2Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacy, Center for Conclusion: We have successfully established a fast and cost efficient Molecular Biosciences, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute genetic screening method for patients with seizure disorders. By of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, applying this approach we hope to uncover both known and unknown 4Cologne Center for Genomics and Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, sequence variants and give new insights in genetic factors involved in 5Institute of Physiology II and Tübingen Hearing Research Centre, University of epileptogenesis. Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 6Department of Biophysics, Saarland University, Homburg/Saar, Germany, 7CNRS, UMR 5203, INSERM U661, Université c12.4 de Montpellier 1 et 2, Institut de Génomique Fonctionnelle, Département de the XLiD protein PQBP1 is a novel regulator of RNA metabolism Physiologie, Montpellier, France, 8Department of Pathology, Khyber Teaching L. Musante, U. Fischer, A. Grimme, V. M. Kalscheuer; Hospital, Peshawar, Pakistan, 9Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases, University of Cologne, Cologne, The polyglutamine binding protein 1 (PQBP1) gene plays an important Germany, 10Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany. role in X-linked intellectual disability (XLID). To date, about 25 families Hearing impairment occurs in approximately 1 out of 500 newborns. with a mutation in this gene have been identified. Common clinical Most cases with congenital deafness are of genetic origin. We features include intellectual disability, microcephaly, and short stature. identified a homozygous founder mutation in the alternatively spliced Most of the mutations cause frameshifts, which result in premature exon 8B of CACNA1D, the gene encoding the pore-forming αλπηα1- stop codons. Interestingly the mutant mRNA is only partially degraded Concurrent Sessions 40 via nonsense mediated mRNA decay and truncated protein exists Methods. Homozygosity mapping was performed using Affymetrix (Musante et al., 2010). Human Mapping 250k NspI arrays. Sequencing of all coding exons To unravel the pathomechanism of the disease, we have searched of the candidate genes was performed with primer sets designed for novel PQBP1 interactors. We have found several splicing factors, using the Primer3 program. Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting was belonging to the SR protein family, which are important regulators of performed using conjugated antibody to CD59. Staining, acquisition alternative splicing. One of the newly found PQBP1 interactors, SRp20, and analysis was performed on a FACSCalibur flow cytometer. is highly expressed in brain. In RNA-protein immunoprecipitations, Results. We mapped the disease locus to 18q21.32-18q22.1 and we could show that, in addition to SRp20 protein, the PQBP1 protein identified the disease-causing mutation, c.2126G>A (p.Arg709Gln), in complex contains SRp20 mRNA. As other SR proteins, SRp20 is able PIGN, which encodes glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) ethanolamine to modulate its own protein level, by regulating alternative splicing phosphate transferase 1, a protein involved in GPI-anchor biosynthesis. of its RNA. To test whether PQBP1 is involved in this feedback Arginine at the position 709 is a highly evolutionarily conserved residue mechanism, we have knocked-down PQBP1 and overexpressed located in the PigN domain. The expression of GPI-linked protein a minigene containing the alternatively spliced exon of SRp20. RT- CD59 on fibroblasts from patients as compared to that in a control PCR experiments indicated that knock-down of PQBP1 significantly individual showed a ten-fold reduction in expression, confirming the increased skipping of the alternatively spliced exon. Real time RT-PCR pathogenic consequences of the mutation on GPI-dependent protein on endogenous SRp20 mRNA confirmed these results. Interestingly, expression. Conclusions. The abundant expression of PIGN in various rescue experiments performed with mutant PQBP1 constructs tissues is compatible with the diverse phenotypic features observed in revealed deficient splicing activity. Confirmation of several PQBP1 the patients and with the involvement of multiple body systems. The regulated target RNAs are in progress. Taken together, we provide the presence of developmental delay, hypotonia and epilepsy combined first evidence that the XLID PQBP1 protein plays a key role in nuclear with multiple congenital anomalies, especially ano-rectal anomalies, RNA metabolism. should lead a clinician to suspect a GPI deficiency-related disorder. c12.5* c13.1* Genetic cause for infantile mitochondrial cardiomyopathy copy Number Variants in a Large Pedigree of inbred mice identified by exome sequencing C. N. Henrichsen, E. Chaignat, A. Valsesia, J. Chrast, N. Walters, A. H. Tyynismaa1, A. Götz1, L. Euro1, P. Ellonen1, T. Hyötyläinen2, R. H. Reymond; Hämäläinen1, J. Tommiska1, T. Raivio1, M. Oresic2, R. Karikoski1, K. O. J. University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. Simola3, A. Paetau1, T. Tyni1, A. Suomalainen1; Copy number variation (CNV) is an important source of genomic 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2VTT, Espoo, Finland, 3Tampere diversity that plays a role in disease, adaptation and evolution. University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. Recent reports suggested the existence of hotspots favouring the Mitochondrial dysfunction is an important cause of infantile appearance of CNVs in germline and somatic tissues, however the cardiomyopathies, but most patients with the devastating, fatal disorder mutation rate of these variants remains largely unspecified. Rates of still remain without a molecular diagnosis. Here we investigated the 3.6x10-3 to 1.1x10-2 have been estimated from 10 CNVs of 14 sub- molecular background of the disease in a patient who died at the populations of the C57BL/6J strain. Similarly, human parent-offspring age of 10 months of hypertrophic mitochondrial cardiomyopathy. The trios allowed estimating a rate of 3x10-2 for a broader CNV size range. mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes were severely disturbed in To assess how CNV alleles are transmitted from one generation to the patient’s heart and to a lesser extent in the skeletal muscle and the next and estimate their mutation rate, we setup a large brother- brain. Since pathogenic mitochondrial DNA mutations were excluded sister mating of C57BL/6J mice over nine generations, for a total of as the cause of disease, we sequenced the whole-exome of the patient 692 mice. We used high-resolution CGH arrays (2.1M features, mean to reveal the underlying nuclear disease gene. Over 65,000 SNPs were probe spacing 1.2kb) to detect CNVs in 45 representative individuals identified and filtered using our on-site-pipeline. The data analysis from this cohort. We combined three independent detection methods, led to a single gene encoding a novel mitochondrial protein, which a Bayesian HMM, GADA and Nexus5.1, to identify 485 CNV regions was found to contain a homozygous missense mutation. Compound (CNVRs) covering 24Mb (1%) of the mouse genome. We selected 185 heterozygous mutations in the same gene were identified in a second high-confidence CNVRs and determined their absolute copy number family, with two affected children, who died of antenatal/neonatal with nanoString nCounter in the complete pedigree. To infer CNV hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Protein modeling predicted different alleles from absolute copy number for each individual, we devised a functional consequences of the two mutations for the enzyme activity, semi-automated strategy relying on trio information. We followed the offering an explanation for the neonatal vs infantile disease onset in inheritance of existing CNVs and identified de novo CNVs, some of the patients. Our example shows that disease mutations of single which appeared multiple times independently in different branches of patients can be identified by whole-exome sequencing. Consequently, the pedigree. This allowed calculating a genome-wide mutation rate the genetic background of pediatric mitochondrial cardiomyopathies and ascertain general or gender-specific segregation bias of a large is now starting to unravel. In conclusion, we have identified a new number of CNVs in a large pedigree. genetic cause of infantile cardiomyopathy, which may also underlie unexplained antenatal death. c13.2 Balanced translocation and copy number detection in c12.6 hematologic disorders by array cGH A novel GPI-deficiency related disorder: multiple congenital L. G. Shaffer1, R. Schultz1, V. Cawich1, C. Valentin1, S. Minier1, L. McDaniel1,2, anomalies-hypotonia-seizures syndrome is caused by a N. Neill1, S. Byerly1, A. Morton1, B. C. Ballif1; mutation in PIGN 1Signature Genomics, Spokane, WA, United States, 2Sacred Heart Medical G. Maydan1, I. Noyman2, A. Har-Zahav3, Z. Ben Neriah4, M. Pasmanik-Chor3, A. Center, Spokane, WA, United States. Yeheskel3, A. Albin-Kaplanski1, I. Maya1, N. Magal1, A. J. Simon5, G. Rechavi5,3, Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) can M. Shohat1,3, R. Straussberg2,3, L. Basel-Vanagaite6,3; detect submicroscopic copy-number alterations (CNAs) throughout 1Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Schneider Children’s Medical the genome, but the technique cannot detect balanced translocations, Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, 3Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, which are important markers for hematologic disease. We report 4Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 5The Chaim Sheba the development of a microarray-based technology coupled with Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 6Schneider Children’s Medical Center of linear DNA amplification, termed translocation-CGH (tCGH), that Israel and Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel. can identify and characterize balanced translocations in addition Background. There are currently three human diseases known to to CNAs. With this technology, we have developed tCGH assays be caused by mutations in proteins involved in GPI synthesis. We for eight different hematologic disorders that simultaneously test for report on a hitherto undescribed GPI-deficiency related disorder. the presence of multiple, clinically relevant balanced translocations This autosomal recessive syndrome is characterised by dysmorphic associated with each disease. Our data demonstrate the utility of the features and multiple congenital anomalies together with severe assay with the detection of >20 different balanced translocations in a neurological impairment, chorea and seizures leading to early death. variety of disease specimens. The ability of this technology to detect Concurrent Sessions 41 clinically relevant balanced translocations, to identify specific partner c13.5* chromosomes precisely, to delineate the molecular breakpoints within the power of high resolution non-targeted array-cGH in the single genes involved and to reveal submicroscopic CNAs at these identifying intragenic rearrangements responsible for cohen breakpoints provides distinct advantages over the current standard of syndrome chromosome and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. In S. EL Chehadeh-Djebbar1, L. Faivre1, A. Moncla2, B. Aral3, C. Missirian2, addition, this technology is of value when cytogenetics or FISH fails, C. Popovici2, P. Rump4, A. van Essen4, A. Frances5, N. Gigot3, V. Cusin1, A. is ambiguous, or is discordant. The novel findings revealed by tCGH Masurel-Paulet1, M. Payet6, C. Ragon6, N. Marle6, A. Mosca-Boidron6, F. Huet1, will have a profound impact on future algorithms used in the diagnosis, I. Balikova7, J. Teyssier3, F. Mugneret6, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, P. Callier6; prognosis and treatment of individuals with hematologic and other 1Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, malignancies. 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, marseille, France, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Plateau Technique c13.3 de Biologie, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 4Department of Genetics, University A standardized statistical decision procedure for mosaic Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Service de Génétique, Hôpital Font- detection by array cGH. Pré, Toulon, France, 6Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau Technique de B. Sikkema-Raddatz, L. F. Johansson, T. Dijkhuizen, C. M. A. van Biologie, CHU de Dijon,, Dijon, France, 7Centre for Human Genetics, University Ravenswaaij-Arts, R. J. Sinke, G. J. te Meerman; Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium. Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. Cohen syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive inherited Somatic chromosomal mosaicism is a well established cause for disorder that results from mutations of the VPS13B gene. It has mental retardation and multiple congenital abnormalities (MR/MCA). been recently showed that copy number variation (CNVs) at VPS13B In 0.4 - 1% of patients with MR/MCA a mosaic pattern is detected locus could result in CS when present in a compound heterozygous (Hoang et al, 2010). It has been reported that array-CGH is able to state associated to a point mutation or in a homozygous state. We detect up to 5% mosaicism (Conlin et al, 2010). However, until now, screened for the VPS13B gene 54 patients from 46 families with CS detection of mosaicism is predominantly based on visual inspection of and identified at least one mutation in 12 families, 6 of which had the graphical representation of the array results. mutations in compound heterozygous state, 1 in a homozygous state We developed a statistical decision procedure to detect mosaic and 5 had only one mutation. 244K array-CGH was performed in 2 genotypes. Input parameters are the assumed a priori probability, groups, group 1 including the 5 families with one mutation and group e.g. the chance of 0.0001% that at a certain chromosomal region 2 including families with no mutation but fulfilling the Chandler and mosaicism is present, the variability of probe intensities, the desired Kolehmainen’s criteria, to seek to identify a large intragenic event. We area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic identified a CNV in 3/5 families from group 1 and in 1/9 families from (ROC) curve and the mean deviation of a specific interval. The output group 2. A targeted 8x15K array-CGH was used in the 2 groups to look is the minimal number of adjacent probes needed for a significant for a smaller intragenic rearrangement not detected by the 244K array- deviation of the interval from the mean array intensity. For practical use CGH but did not reveal any additional rearrangement. When pooling we constructed tables. If an observed number of probes in an interval the different series, we found that a CNV could be detected in 33% with a known average ratio surpass the threshold number of probes of families with CS and showed that all of them could be detected by needed for the specific interval ratio given in the table, mosaicism is a 244K array-CGH. These results confirm that CNVs are a major cause reasonable explanation and confirmation studies should be performed. of CS and allowed us to suggest that non-targeted 244K array-CGH We aim to evaluate this decision procedure in a retrospective could be easily used as an initial screening method for the molecular approach using 2000 patients with MR/MCA including 14 confirmed diagnosis of CS. mosaics detected by visual inspection of the graph. The results of this retrospective study will be presented as well as a practical guideline for c13.6* the use of the table in daily practice. Nasal speech and hypothyroidism are common hallmarks of 12q15 microdeletions. c13.4 S. Vergult1, D. Krgovic2, B. Loeys1,3, S. Lyonet4, A. Liedén5, B. Anderlid5, F. A significant proportion of private inherited CNVs has Sharkey6, S. Joss7, G. Mortier3, B. Menten1; pathogenic relevance in intellectual disability: clinical-genetic 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, survey in 40 families. 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Maribor, M. Zollino, D. Orteschi, G. Marangi, S. Lattante, M. Murdolo, S. Ricciardi, G. Neri; Maribor, Slovenia, 3Departement for Medical Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, Institute of Medical Genetics, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. 4INSERM, Paris, France, 5Department of Clinical Genetics and Institution of During routinary array-CGH analysis applied to the diagnosis of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Centre of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska intellectual disability, private CNVs inherited from an apparently Universitetssjukhuset, Stockholm, Sweden, 6South East Scotland Cytogenetics healthy parent represent an emerging category of chromosome Laboratory,Western General Hospital, Scotland, United Kingdom, 7West of imbalances with no clear-cut significance. It was recently suggested Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill that rare inherited CNVs have to be considered benign variants. Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom. We analyzed by a-CGH a total of 756 patients with intellectual Array CGH has led to the identification of several microdeletion disability usually associated with multiple phenotypical anomalies. syndromes by screening individuals with shared phenotypical Chromosomes imbalances were detected in 230 of them (30%). We characteristics. By combining array CGH data from large cohorts classified the observed CNVs in the following categories: 1) clearly of patients, the screening of overlapping microdeletions is made pathogenic, 132/756 (17.5 %); 2) likely benign: 58/756 (7.7 %); 3) with possible, which in turn can lead to the identification of shared uncertain significance: 40/756 (5.3 %). This last category included phenotypic characteristics. Here we present the clinical and molecular private CNVs inherited from an apparently healthy parent, but not data of three previously unreported patients with submicroscopic reported in Database of Genomic Variants. Each private inherited CNV overlapping deletions distal to the 12q14 microdeletion syndrome at was evaluated for gene content, size and nature of the rearrangement chromosome bands 12q15q21.1. The deletions presented in this study (deletion vs duplication), parental origin and the associated clinical vary from 2.5 Mb to 2.59 Mb in size with a 1.34 Mb common deleted phenotype. New and more detailed information about clinical history region containing six RefSeq genes. To our knowledge, only seven of the family were collected in each case. To speculate whether the patients have been reported with deletions in this region (Meinecke observed CNV could act as pathogenic factor in intellectual disability, et al., 1987; Watson et al., 1989; Perez Sanchez et al., 2004; James we looked at the following mechanisms: 1) mosaic status in unaffected et al., 2005; Tocyap et al., 2006;.Yamanishi et al., 2008; Schluth et parents (FISH on metaphase chromosomes or interphase nuclei) al., 2008). The deletion breakpoints in the literature vary from 12q13 2) reduced expressivity; 3) imprinting effects; 4) uncoverage of a to 12q23 and are associated with growth retardation, developmental recessive allele. delay and dysmorphic features. The previously reported cases were A total of 18 of 40 private inherited CNVs (44%), resulted to have detected with standard cytogenetic techniques, except for the patient pathogenic relevance. Specificity of both the genetic and clinical of Tocyap et al. (2006) where localization of microsatellite markers profile, and mechanisms, are discussed. was investigated and the patient from Schluth et al. (2008) which Concurrent Sessions 42 was fine mapped using a 1 Mb resolution array. Although a variable c14.3 clinical phenotype is present in all patients, the three patients reported survey of European clinical geneticists on awareness, here all present with developmental delay or learning disability, nasal experiences and attitudes towards direct-to-consumer genetic speech and hypothyroidism. In this study we further elaborate on the testing genotype-phenotype correlation associated with this deletion. P. Borry, H. C. Howard; Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, 3000, Belgium. c14.1* An increasing number of private companies are now offering direct- cutting edge technology and old-fashioned relationships: to-consumer (DTC) genetic testing services. The tests offered range ethical reflections on incidental findings arising from whole from tests for single gene, highly penetrant disorders to susceptibility genome and exome sequencing tests for genetic variants associated with common complex diseases G. M. Christenhusz, K. Devriendt, K. Dierickx; or with particular non-health-related traits. The aim of this study was Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. to collect information regarding the awareness, experiences and Incidental findings, a common issue in neurology and oncology, are attitudes of European clinical geneticists about genetic tests and test a pressing ethical issue in next generation sequencing because of interpretations sold directly to consumers. European clinical institutes that technology’s potential to deliver an enormous amount of often where genetic counselling is offered to patients were contacted. One- unsought for information of widely varying significance. This paper hundred and thirty-one of the three-hundred eligible respondents (44%) is based on a systematic literature review of ethical reflections on answered a questionnaire. Eighty-six percent (110/128) of the clinical the issue of incidental findings, specifically those arising from whole geneticists said they were aware that companies are advertising and genome and whole exome sequencing in clinical and research selling genetic tests directly-to-consumers. Of the 44% (54/121) of the genetics. A number of electronic databases were searched using respondents who had been contacted by patients who underwent DTC the term “incidental findings” and variations of (bio)ethics, (bio-) testing, almost all respondents (98%, 47/48) did discuss test results medical and research, and 25 articles were ultimately included for with the patients. The following respondents somewhat or strongly systematic review as being detailed ethical reflections on incidental agreed that DTC genetic tests should be legally banned for following findings in general or incidental findings in clinical and research tests: prenatal gender tests (69%, 77/112); genome scans (63%, genetics in particular. The ethical issues raised can be divided into 70/112), 54%, athletic performance (54%, 61/113), preconceptional two main clusters. One cluster revolves around the incidental findings carrier tests (53%, 59/112) and ancestry testing (27%, 30/113). themselves. This cluster includes ongoing debate on how to classify The results indicate that most European clinical geneticists have incidental findings, a classification that determines whether and only limited experience with patients who have accessed direct-to- how disclosure to the patient or research participant will proceed. A consumer genetic testing, however, these physicians are entering into second cluster revolves around the relationships between the various patient-physician interactions with patients when requested to do so. parties involved: professionals, patients or research participants, their families, the wider society, and overseeing bodies such as Institutional c14.4 Review Boards. Where the emphasis is placed in each relationship Familial Breast cancer: is it time to move from a reactive to a has a bearing on the disclosure process, and there is a notable tension proactive role? between research and clinical practice. We conclude that, cutting edge I. Nippert1, H. Harris2, C. Julian-Reynier3, J. Schmidtke4, C. J. van Asperen5, A. technologies notwithstanding, personal relationships between medical Tibben6, D. G. Evans7; professionals and patients or research participants are key in realising 1Women’s Health Research, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster the full promise of whole genome and exome sequencing. Medical School, Münster, Germany, 2GenEd Coordinating Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3U912, INSERM, IRD, Aix-Marseille c14.2 Université, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Institute of Human Public attitudes towards genetic testing revisited. comparing Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5Centre for Human opinions between 2002 and 2010 and Clinical Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University E. Vermeulen, L. Henneman, C. G. Van El, M. C. Cornel; Medical Centre (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 6Centre for Human and Clinical VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Genetic Counselling, Leiden Background: Ten years after the Human Genome Project, medicine University Medical Centre (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 7Genetic Medicine has yet to see any large part of the promised benefits, and experts MAHSC, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, St have tempered their high expectations. Aim of this study is to compare Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. public attitudes and expectations concerning genetic testing over the introduction: Until recently there was little evidence base that years (2002 vs. 2010). interventions would affect life expectancy in familial breast cancer other methods: Cross-sectional questionnaire survey of a consumer panel than from theoretically based decision analysis in BRCA1 or BRCA2 representative for the Dutch population. The questionnaire was sent to mutation carriers. In 2004 the UK NICE guidelines for familial breast 1,385 members (>20 years). A similar panel was used in 2002. cancer on women unaffected with the disease determined that ‘Health Results: In 2010 and 2002, the response was 70% (978) and 63% Care Professionals should not actively seek to identify women with a (817), respectively. More respondents (64%) now believe that family history of breast cancer’. Since 2004 a wealth of evidence on knowledge about the genetic background of disease will help people the efficacy of MRI screening and risk reducing surgery has emerged to live longer as compared to 2002 (43%). Respondents want genetic including the first real impact on survival. tests to be available (64% vs. 61% in 2010 and 2002, respectively). methods: A total of 1197 GPs and 1223 surgeons completed a Respondents also think that genetic testing will become more normal questionnaire on risk communication and management of familial in different situations (57% vs. 45%). breast cancer in four EU countries (UK, France, the Netherlands Expectations on negative aspects of testing changed over time. On the and Germany). One question addressed whether or not health care one hand, respondents think more often that a dichotomy will emerge professionals should actively seek to identify women with a family between people with ‘good’ and ‘bad’ genes as a consequence of history of breast cancer. testing (38% vs. 22%). On the other hand, respondents seemed less Outcome: Responses were overwhelmingly against current NICE concerned that genetic tests would become necessary for establishing guidance on identification of women at risk of familial breast cancer. the height of health insurance premiums (34% vs. 42%). Amongst GPs 74.8% in Germany up to 97% in France either disagreed conclusions: The results suggest that over the past ten years, or strongly disagreed with the non proactive approach. Amongst expectations of benefits, potential use and impact on society of surgeons the disagreement ranged from 73.1 in Germany to 90.8% genetic testing have increased among the public, as have worries on in France. inequity, while worries about genetic testing for health insurance have conclusion: We have shown there are strong views against the decreased. current reactive approach to familial breast cancer amongst GPs and surgeons. We believe the time is right to become more proactive in identifying women at increased risk of breast cancer so that advice on Concurrent Sessions 43 surveillance and possible genetics referral can be reviewed. In addition, we performed collagen analysis in 60 probands with isolated carotid dissection, all with normal results, which suggests another c14.5* underlying cause for this disorder Based on these observations, we Risk predictions from direct-to-consumer personal genome designed new, age-specific clinical criteria for vascular EDS which are testing: What do consumers really learn about common disease more specific than the Geneclinics criteria and more stringent than risk? the Villefranche criteria. Re-evaluation of the 211 probands showed R. R. J. Kalf1, R. Mihaescu1, P. de Knijff2, R. C. Green3, A. C. J. W. Janssens1; that 97% of the COL3A1-mutation-positive probands (versus 57% with 1Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden Geneclinics criteria) fulfilled these adapted criteria. Additionally, these University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Harvard Medical School, results confirm the biochemical collagen analysis as highly sensitive Boston, MA, United States. for the diagnosis of vascular EDS. Objective: Direct-to-consumer (DTC) companies predict risks of common complex diseases on the basis of genetic markers. Given c15.1 the low number of markers involved and their small effect sizes, it is Epigenetic regulation of learning & memory in a Drosophila unclear whether high-risk groups can be identified. We investigated model for Kleefstra syndrome the risk distributions generated by two DTC companies for 8 diseases. J. M. Kramer1, K. Kochinke1, M. A. W. Oortveld1, H. Marks1, D. Kramer1, methods: We simulated genotype data for 100,000 individuals based E. K. de Jong1, Z. Asztalos2, J. T. Westwood3, H. G. Stunnenberg1, M. B. on published genotype frequencies. Predicted risks were obtained Sokolowski3, K. Keleman4, H. Zhou1, H. van Bokhoven1, A. Schenck1; using the formulas and risk data provided by the companies. 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Results: The table presents observed and trimmed ranges of predicted 2Biological Research Center of Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Szeged, risks. The two companies used different formulas to calculate risks. Hungary, 3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Institute of Molecular One company predicted risks higher than 100% for 5 out of 8 diseases, Pathology, Vienna, Austria. which for AMD concerned 1 in 200 individuals. Observed ranges were The epigenetic modification of chromatin structure and its effect on smaller for the second company, except for Type 1 Diabetes. Predicted complex neuronal processes like learning and memory is an emerging risks higher than 50% were frequently observed for company 1, but field in neuroscience. However, little is known about the “writers” of were exceptions for company 2. When predicted risks of company 1 the neuronal epigenome and how they lay down the basis for proper were calculated using the formulas of company 2, observed ranges cognition. Here, we have dissected the neuronal function of the were substantially smaller. Drosophila euchromatin histone methyltransferase (EHMT), a member conclusion: Whether companies can currently predict high risks of a conserved protein family that methylates histone 3 at lysine of disease predominantly depends on the method used for their 9 (H3K9). We identify EHMT as a regulator of peripheral dendrite calculation. development, larval locomotor behavior, non-associative learning and courtship memory. The requirement for EHMT in memory was mapped Condition Company 1 Company 2 to a subset of neurons in the adult brain and memory was restored by EHMT re-expression during adulthood, indicating that cognitive defects Average Trimmed Average Trimmed Range Range are reversible in EHMT mutants. To uncover the underlying molecular risk range risk range mechanisms, we generated genome-wide H3K9 dimethylation profiles AMD 8 0.1-100 0.3-100 7 0.4-46.9 0.9-46.9 using ChIP-seq technology. Loss of H3K9 dimethylation in EHMT Atrial fibrillation 25 13.8-100 15.0-67.2 27.2 23.2-63.3 23.2-55.4 mutants occurs at 5% of the euchromatic genome and is enriched at Celiac disease 1 0.0-56 0.1-21.7 0.1 0.0-5.1 0.0-2.9 the 5’ and 3’ ends of distinct classes of genes that control neuronal Crohn’’s disease 0.5 0.0-8.6 0.0-3.0 0.5 0.0-8.4 0.1-2.1 and behavioural processes that are corrupted in EHMT mutants. This Heart attack 42 9.0-100 14.3-100 21.2 17.5-25.5 17.5-25.5 study identifies Drosophila EHMT as a key regulator of cognition that orchestrates an epigenetic program featuring classic learning and Prostate cancer 16 1.9-100 3.4-68.4 17.8 1.2-59.4 3.5-40.8 memory genes. Our findings are relevant to the pathophysiological Type 1 Diabetes 0.4 0.0-10 0.0-2.7 1 0.1-41.4 0.1-13.7 mechanisms underlying Kleefstra Syndrome, a severe form of Type 2 Diabetes 25 4.1-100 8.2-69.5 23.7 9.1-48.6 12.2-41.4 intellectual disability caused by mutations in human EHMT1, and have potential therapeutic implications. Our work thus provides novel Values are percentages. AMD=Age-related Macular Degeneration; insights into the epigenetic control of cognition in health and disease. Trimmed range=0.5% outliers removed (two-sided) c15.2* c14.6* mutations in the NSUN2 and ZNF526 genes cause autosomal clinical, biochemical and molecular overview of the Ehlers- recessive intellectual disability in middle Eastern populations Danlos syndrome, vascular type: the Ghent experience with elevated frequency S. Symoens, F. Malfait, P. Vlummens, J. De Backer, A. De Paepe; L. Abbasi Moheb1, S. Mertel2, L. R. Jensen1, L. Nouri Vahid3, S. Ghadami3, K. Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium. Wrogemann1,4, H. Hu1, R. Weissmann1, M. Mohseni3, K. Kahrizi3, A. Tzschach1, Mutations in COL3A1, encoding type III (pro)collagen, cause vascular D. Wieczorek5, M. Garshasbi1, S. Cirak6, S. Abedini3, H. Najmabadi3, H. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS), a life-threatening heritable connective Ropers1, S. Sigrist2, A. Kuss1,7; tissue disorder characterized by thin translucent skin, arterial/intestinal/ 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics, uterine rupture, easy bruising and characteristic facies. Institute for Biology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Genetics We reviewed clinical/biochemical/molecular data of 211 probands Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, fulfilling the Villefranche criteria for vascular EDS. All probands were Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, subjected to biochemical and molecular collagen analysis. In 100/211 Canada, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany, (47%) probands a causal COL3A1 mutation was identified. Evaluation 6The Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, University College London Institute of of this COL3A1-mutation-positive group revealed that 57% of the Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 7*Current address: Institute for Human probands fulfilled the Geneclinics criteria. This result shows that while Genetics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Ernst the Villefranche criteria lack sensitivity, the Geneclinics criteria are too Moritz Arndt University, Greifswald, Germany. strict. Importantly, biochemical analysis revealed an abnormal type III So far no more than six hotspot loci for unspecific or non-syndromic (pro)collagen pattern in all but 6 COL3A1-mutation-positive patients, autosomal recessive intellectual disability (NS-ARID) have been three of whom harboured a COL3A1-null-allele. In the COL3A1- identified (Kuss et al. 2011, Human Genetics Vol.129, 141-148). In mutation-negative group, only five probands revealed an abnormal this study we now resolved the underlying gene defect of MRT 5 and pattern for type III (pro)collagen and only four probands showed an report three deleterious mutations in NSUN2. This gene encodes a abnormal pattern for type I (pro)collagen, with an underlying COL1A1 methyltransferase, which catalyzes the intron-dependent formation mutation. In one COL3A1-mutation-negative proband a TGFBR2 of 5-methylcytosine at C34 of tRNA-leu(CAA). Two of the observed mutation was identified. changes were nonsense mutations (p.Q227X and p.Q372X), which Concurrent Sessions 44 cause a complete loss of NSUN2 transcripts in the patients. In the third clinically recognizable AP-4 deficiency syndrome. family we found an intronic exchange of an adenosine for a guanine 11 nucleotides upstream of exon 6. This change causes exon 6 to be c15.4* skipped during splicing and results in the loss of the main transcript. A novel dynamic mutation in AFF3 associated with Hence all mutations lead to a loss of NSUN2 protein function in developmental delay homozygous mutation carriers and thus in all likelihood cause the S. Metsu1, L. Rooms1, J. Gecz2, D. R. FitzPatrick3, R. F. Kooy1; patient phenotype. In order to gain further evidence for an involvement 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, of NSUN2 in cognitive functions, we studied fruit fly mutants that lack 2Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Neurogenetics, Genetics and Molecular the NSUN2 ortholog. These experiments revealed a marked learning Pathology, Adelaide, Australia, 3Medical Genetics Section, MRC Human impairment in mutant flies, which clearly underscores the relevance of Genetics Unit, Edinburg, United Kingdom. NSUN2 in higher brain functions. Many types of dynamic mutations are cytogenetically expressed as Moreover we present mutation screening results for another hot fragile sites. Although it is known that fragile sites of the rare, folate spot locus (MRT11) in three Iranian families with several NS-ARID sensitive type occur more frequently in cohorts of patients with patients overlapping on Chr19q13.2-q13.31. Mutation screening by cognitive disorders, few have been characterized at the molecular hybridization based enrichment of the exonic regions of all genes from level. We studied three families with FRA2A expression. The probands the respective intervals and subsequent next-generation sequencing were characterized by slow early motor and language development revealed two different single nucleotide changes in ZNF526. Mutations and learning disability. As the molecular basis of this fragile site we in other genes were not observed.ZNF526 encodes a brain expressed identified an elongated polymorphic CGG repeat in the 5’ region of C2H2 zinc finger protein with DNA binding properties that is thought AFF3. This gene is a member of the family of nuclear transcription to be involved in gene regulation. Each mutation affects a functional factors including AF4, AF5q31 and FMR2, involved in regulation of domain of ZNF526 and both alter the protein conformation, causing gene expression, cell expansion, embryonic development and fulfill a a putative functional impairment as suggested by in silico protein role in the central nervous system. Interestingly, AFF3 is a paralog of modelling. A decrease in DNA affinity was confirmed by CHIP-seq FMR2, causative of FRAXE non-syndromic mental retardation. Loss and array-based gene expression studies showed specific changes of expression of FMR2 occurs through dynamic repeat expansion of a in the expression patterns of patient lymphoblastoid cells, which could CGG repeat in the 5’ untranslated region of the gene and subsequent be recapitulated in ZNF526-deficient neuroblastoma cells. Functional hypermethylation of the promoter. This mechanism was first described annotation showed significant enrichment of the deregulated genes in the fragile X syndrome. Expansion of the AFF3 associated repeat in pathways that play a role in protein synthesis, mitochondrial was shown in the probands of the 3 families and in five family dysfunction, energy metabolism and gene regulation. Several zinc members using Southern blot analysis. By cSNP-analysis we could finger proteins were found to be involved in the pathogenesis of confirm that methylation of the promoter region silences transcription X-linked ID, but ZNF526 is the first to be implicated in NS-ARID. of the AFF3gene. All patients but not all parents were methylated. Our results show that both NSUN2 and ZNF526 belong to the still In conclusion we collected compelling evidence that transcriptional few genes known to carry NS-ID-causing mutations in independent silencing of the AFF3 gene could play a role in the cognitive impairment families, which suggests that defects in either gene belong to the more present in all patients. common causes of NS-ARMR, at least in the Iranian population. c15.5 c15.3* mutation in ARiD1B as a frequent cause of intellectual disability mutations in genes encoding adaptor protein complex 4 (AP-4) A. B. Ekici1, J. Hoyer1, C. Petsch1, I. Goehring1, C. Zweier1, A. Wiesener1, M. subunits cause a clinically recognizable autosomal recessive Zweier1, A. Rauch1,2, A. Reis1; syndrome. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Medical O. Philippe1, R. Abou Jamra2, A. RAAS-ROTHSCHILD3, G. Borck1, R. Genetics, Zurich, Switzerland. Buchert2, T. Strom4, S. Eck4, A. Munnich1, L. Colleaux1, A. Reis2; Interstitial deletions of chr.6q are rare findings ranging from 0.3 to 1INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, several megabases. Some associated features are common, including PARIS, France, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, intellectual disability (ID), hypotonia and facial dysmorphism. Germany, 3Department of Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Hadassah We detected a 2.3Mb de novo deletion in chr.6q25 with molecular University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz karyotyping in an infant with ID, facial dysmorphism, strabismus and Center Munich, Neuhergerg, Germany. hyperopy. Autosomal recessive inheritance accounts for nearly 25% of This deletion lies within previously reported regions and encompasses intellectual disability (ID) but the extreme heterogeneity of these only 5 known genes. We hypothesized that haploinsufficiency for one conditions markedly hampers gene identification. Using a combination of these may impair normal development. To identify the phenocritical of autozygosity mapping combined to Sanger sequencing of candidate gene we screened these five positional candidates for point mutations gene or identity-by-descent filtering of exome sequence data, we in 331 patients with moderate to severe ID. identified three mutations in the genes encoding adaptor protein In one of these genes, ARID1B, highly expressed in brain and complex 4 subunits : a nonsense mutation within the AP4S1 gene encoding a subunit of the mammalian SWI/SNF complexes important (c.124C>T;p.R42X), a frameshift mutation within the AP4B1 gene for different neuronal developmental programs, we found four de novo (c.487-488insTAT;p.E163X) and a splice mutation within the AP4E1 sequence alterations. One 11bp deletion resulting in a premature stop gene (g.542+1_542+4delGTAA). All affected patients presented with codon, which shortens the protein by 58AA, a stop mutation in exon 16 severe ID, normal head circumference or mild microcephaly, hypotonia and an in-frame 3bp deletion. We thus identified a sequence alteration that progressed to spastic paraplegia with hyperreflexia and hypertonia, in ARID1B in nearly 1% of patients with unexplained intellectual deformities of feet, and little muscle mass of the lower extremities. disability. Additionally, CNV screening in 1,986 patients with intellectual Finally, patients show an extreme shy and amicable character with disability revealed a validated de novo duplication of three exons stereotypic laughter. resulting in a frame shift. All five patients display a pronounced clinical Adaptor complexes (AP1-4) are evolutionarily conserved overlap like ID, especially regarding expressive speech and similar heterotetrameric complexes that mediate different types of vesicle facial phenotype. formation and the selection of cargo molecules for inclusion into these Moreover, recently the disruption of ARID1B was also reported in a vesicles. Interestingly, two mutations affecting the AP4M1 and AP4E1 translocation patient with ID, supporting our hypothesis of ARID1B genes (a splice donor site mutation in the AP4M1 gene and a 192kb- mutation as a frequent cause of ID. long deletion encompassing the 5’ end of the AP4E1 gene) have been This study is part of the German Mental Retardation Network (www. recently found to cause cerebral palsy associated with microcephaly german-mrnet.de). and severe intellectual disability. Combined to previous observations, these results support the hypothesis of a crucial role of AP4-mediated trafficking in brain development and functioning and demonstrate the existence of a Concurrent Sessions 45 c15.6* associate with nucleoli in a reproducible and heritable fashion. The Haploinsufficiency of microRNA-137 is associated with nucleolar-associated loci have in common a high density of AT-rich intellectual disability in patients with overlapping deletions in sequence elements, low gene density and a striking and significant 1p21.3. enrichment in transcriptionally repressed genes. Unexpectedly, both M. H. Willemsen1, L. Kirkels2, M. Mastebroek3, A. Vallès4, N. OldeLoohuis1, the direct DNA sequencing and fluorescence photoactivation data A. Kos1, W. Wissink-Lindhout1, A. de Brouwer1, M. Coppens-Hofman1, H. show that certain chromatin loci can specifically associate with either Rensen1,3, B. Hamel1, H. van Bokhoven1, A. Aschrafi1, T. Kleefstra1; the nucleolus or the nuclear envelope. 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, We are currently comparing nucleolar-associated loci in a model for 2Radboud University Nijmegen,The Netherlands, Nijmegen, Netherlands, cancer versus non-cancer cells. This will allow us to identify genomic 3Pluryn, Service provider for people with intellectual disability, Oosterbeek, regions that are mis-localized and of which gene expression maybe Netherlands, 4Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre and Maastricht deregulated in cancer cells, and therefore can possibly be used as a University, Nijmegen, Netherlands. probe to diagnose specific cancers or cancer stages. Introduction: Genome-wide array technologies have led to the identification of several microdeletion and microduplication syndromes c16.2* and genes involved in intellectual disability (ID). Microdeletions and/ interrogation of high purity primary cell subsets demonstrates or duplications restricted to chromosomal region 1p21.3 have rarely the majority of eQtLs operate in a cellular discrete manner been reported before. Several ID syndromes have been linked to B. P. Fairfax, S. Makino, K. Plant, J. Radhakrishnan, J. C. Knight; the microRNA (miRNA) pathway, but there are no previous reports Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. of genome wide array studies that have led to the identification of A functional consequence of genetic variation is the regulation of miRNAs associated with ID. transcript abundance - the formation of expression quantitative traits Methods: We characterized the clinical and molecular features of three (eQTLs). In cultured umbilical-cord derived cells it is clear that many sibs and 2 non-related patients with overlapping 1p21.3 deletions, SNPs form eQTLs dependent upon the cell type. The degree to which detected by genome-wide array analysis. The deletions in the two these loci are reproducibly associated with gene expression in primary unrelated patients were de novo. We determined the shortest region of tissues and whether they act in a cell-specific manner is unclear. overlap (SRO) to identify candidates for the phenotype. We have sought to identify polymorphisms acting in a cell specific Results: Clinical features comprised mild ID and autism spectrum manner from physiologically relevant tissue - freshly purified positively disorder. The SRO was 1.22 Mb and included one annotated gene, selected lymphoid derived CD19+ B-cells and myeloid derived CD14+ DPYD (dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency), which was monocytes. unlikely to cause the phenotype, since no associated metabolic defect Cells were purified from a cohort of 288 healthy adult Caucasians. was detected. Interestingly, the SRO also comprised microRNA-137 Subjects were genotyped at 731,442 markers (Illumina (miR-137), which was shown to be under epigenetic regulation of HumanOmniExpress) and expression analysed using whole genome MeCP2 and involved in adult neurogenesis in previous studies in microarrays (Illumina HumanHT-12, n=566). At a p-value <1x10-11 mice. Our patients had a significantly altered expression of miR-137 we identify 1960 SNPs with eQTLs unique to B-cells and 3700 SNPs and downstream targets. Furthermore, in mouse synaptosomes we with eQTLs unique to monocytes. Whilst the most significant eQTLs found significant enrichment of miR-137 at the synapse as assessed tend to be shared between cell type, over 90% of SNPs with eQTLs by qRT-PCR, suggesting a role for miR-137 as a modulator of local at a p-value <0.01 are cell specific. Furthermore, we identify a subset translation at the synapse. of ~20 genes with SNPs that lead to opposing directional effects on Conclusion: We propose that these patients represent a novel expression in a cell dependent manner. We confirm the microarray microdeletion syndrome that is caused by haploinsufficiency of miR- results for multiple genes using quantitative PCR and analyse several 137. monocyte and B-cell specific eQTLs in a third cell type - Natural-Killer cells. Interrogation of this dataset suggests that several GWAS loci c16.1 are associated with regulation of expression of genes in cis with the High-resolution whole genome sequencing reveals specific putative functional gene, indicating alternative candidate genes for chromatin domains from most human chromosomes associate several disease associations. with nucleoli S. van Koningsbruggen1, M. Gierlinski2, P. Schofield2, D. M. Martin3, G. J. c16.3 Barton3, Y. Ariyurek4, J. T. den Dunnen5, A. I. Lamond1; Whole-exome sequencing of DNA from peripheral blood 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Gene Regulation and Expression, College of Life mononuclear cells (PBmc) and EBV-transformed lymphocytes Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2Data Analysis from the same donor Group, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United E. R. Londin1, M. A. Keller1, K. Delgrosso2, A. Ertel2, S. Surry2, M. R. Kingdom, 3Division of Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery, College of Life D’Andrea1, K. Gwinn3, P. Fortina2; Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 4Leiden Genome 1Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, United States, 2Thomas Technology Center, Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden Medical Center, Jefferson University Hospital, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3National Leiden, Netherlands, 5Leiden Genome Technology Center, Human and Clinical Institute for Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD, United States. Genetics,Leiden Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. The creation of lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCLs) through Epstein-Barr TThe nuclear space is mostly occupied by chromosome territories and virus transformation of B lymphocytes can result in a valuable and nuclear bodies. While the nuclear organisation of chromosomes affects renewable biomaterial. Many biobanks, including the NINDS Human gene function, relatively little is known about the role of nuclear bodies Genetics DNA and Cell Line Repository, establish and distribute LCLs in the organization of chromosomal regions. The nucleolus is the best- and LCL-derived DNA samples. While LCLs have been extensively studied subnuclear structure and forms around the ribosomal RNA used in cellular and genetic studies, the process of cell immortalization repeat-gene clusters on the acrocentric chromosomes. In addition to and expansion during culturing may introduce genomic changes rDNA, other chromatin sequences also surround the nucleolar surface that could impact interpretation of genetic findings. We tested this and may even loop into the nucleolus. These additional nucleolar- hypothesis by performing whole exome-sequencing using both PBMC- associated regions have not been characterized. and LCL-derived genomic DNA from a family of 4 individuals. Using We present here a whole-genome, high-resolution analysis of the Agilent SureSelect Human All Exon Kit and SOLiD 4 Sequencer chromatin endogenously associated with a subnuclear body. We the DNA samples were sequenced to over 100X read depth with both have used a combination of three complementary approaches, DNA sources yielding similar sequencing efficiencies. An average namely fluorescence-comparative-genome in situ hybridisation, high- of 17,730 SNPs were identified with 2% novel SNPs, as defined throughput deep-DNA-sequencing and photoactivation combined with by no representation in dbSNP and/or the 1000 Genomes dataset. time-lapse fluorescence microscopy to study nucleolar-associated A comparison of sequence data from peripheral blood- and LCL- chromatin. derived DNA from the same individual will be presented, including The data show that specific sequences from most human chromosomes concordance rates, categorization of variant types and a breakdown Concurrent Sessions 46 of novel variants by their potential impact. These findings will aid the for Molecular and Vascular Biology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. research community in identifying the optimal starting material for A recent meta-analysis of the genome-wide association study (GWAS) deep sequencing studies. in 68,000 individuals of European ancestry has identified 68 genomic loci (53 new) associated with platelet count and volume. Our functional c16.4 study in Danio rerio by the means of gene silencing, has demonstrated Unmasking of pathogenic rare variants by inherited deletions a role for five genes from the associated loci (ak3, arhgef3, jmjd1c, detected with multiplexed capture array-based re-sequencing. rnf145 and tpma) in regulation of thrombopoiesis. Additionally, lineage R. Hochstenbach1, I. Nijman2, M. Poot1, W. Kloosterman1, I. Renkens1, K. relatedness of megakaryocytes and erythrocytes prompted us to Duran1, E. van Binsbergen1, B. van der Zwaag1, V. Guryev1, S. Koval2, H. Ploos explore the putative role of these genes in erythropoiesis. Morpholino van Amstel1, E. Cuppen1; (MO) knockdown of all five genes but tpma resulted in a variable 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, P.O. decrease in the number of erythrocytes. Arhgef3-depletion had the most Box 85090, 3508 AB Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute and University profound effect on erythropoiesis, leading to further detailed studies. Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, Netherlands. Examination of peripheral blood from arhgef3 MO-injected embryos We investigated the hypothesis that a familial deletion, transmitted revealed microcytic, hypochromic erythrocytes, a classic feature of by a healthy parent to a child with mental retardation and congenital iron deficiency. Anaemia was rescued by intracellular supplementation anomalies unmasks a recessive mutation transmitted by the other of iron to arhgef3 MO-injected embryos, demonstrating that arhgef3- healthy parent. To detect such mutations, we designed two capture depleted erythroid cells, once provided with intracellular iron are arrays with 60-mer probes tiled with an off-set of 10 nt covering the fully capable of haemoglobinisation. Disruption of the arhgef3 target, entire coding sequence (1.53 Mb capture footprint) of all genes within RhoA, also produced severe anaemia, which was again rescued by 20 transmitted deletion regions (covering in total 57.9 Mb genomic iron injection. Moreover, silencing of ARHGEF3 expression in the DNA). Deletions varied in size from 0.15 to 11.0 Mb and contained up erythromyeloblastoid cell line K562 revealed that the uptake of iron to 36 protein coding genes. The patient DNA samples were sheared, transporter, transferrin, was severely impaired. This is the first study ligated with short adaptors and SOLiD library barcodes, hybridized to provide evidence for ARHGEF3 being a regulator of transferrin and simultaneously (as pools of 9 and 11 samples, respectively) onto iron uptake in erythroid cells, through activation of RhoA. capture arrays, recovered and sequenced on a SOLiDv3.5 sequencer. In conclusion, our findings demonstrate the value of pursuing GWAS Sequencing reads were mapped against the human reference signals as a new and exciting forward genetics approach in identifying genome and all Single Nucleotide Variations (SNVs) were compiled novel regulatory molecules and signalling pathways in haematopoiesis. using in-house developed SNP-calling algorithms. Except for SNVs coinciding with indels and segmental duplications, all SNVs were close c17.1 to 0 or 100% non-reference calls, confirming the mono-allelic nature Hypofunctional cHD1L variants in patients with congenital of the regions studied. In all three cases tested, SNVs showed high anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract (cAKUt) concordance with SNP calls by Illumina HumanHap 300v3 BeadChips. A. Brockschmidt1, B. Chung1, S. Weber2, D. Fischer3, M. Kolatsi-Joannou4, L. Most of the 668 SNVs detected occurred in multiple samples. Only Christ1, G. Klaus5, G. D. Simonetti6, M. Konrad7, P. Winyard4, D. Haffner3, F. 9 SNVs located exclusively to the cognate deletion regions of the Schaefer2, R. G. Weber1; patients and were confirmed by capillary sequencing. Two patients 1University of Bonn, Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2University carried a second, smaller loss within their inherited deletion region. Children’s Hospital Heidelberg, Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Heidelberg, All SNVs were evaluated for potential pathogenicity using inheritance Germany, 3University Children’s Hospital Rostock, Department of Pediatrics, patterns, Grantham matrix scores and evolutionary conservation. Rostock, Germany, 4University College London, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 5KfH-Pediatric Kidney Center, Marburg, Germany, c16.5 6University Children’s Hospital Berne, Division of Pediatric Nephrology, Berne, De novo copy number variations causing mental retardation Switzerland, 7University Children’s Hospital Münster, Department of General show a significant paternal origin bias and are associated with Pediatrics, Münster, Germany. increased paternal age Background. Recently, we identified a microduplication in J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, B. Rodríguez-Santiago1,2, L. E. Vissers1, N. de Leeuw1, R. chromosomal band 1q21.1 encompassing the CHD1L/ALC1 gene Pfundt1, L. A. Pérez-Jurado2, J. A. Veltman1; encoding a chromatin remodeling enzyme in a CAKUT-patient. 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, methods. To explore the role of CHD1L in CAKUT, we screened 85 2Unitat de Genètica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, and Centro de Investigación CAKUT-patients for mutations in the CHD1L gene and performed Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. functional analyses of the three heterozygous missense variants De novo mutations and structural rearrangements are a common detected. In addition, we quantitatively determined CHD1L expression cause of mental retardation (MR) and other disorders with reduced or in multiple human fetal and adult tissues and analyzed expression of null reproductive fitness. Insight into the genomic and environmental CHD1L protein in human embryonal, adult and hydronephrotic kidney factors predisposing to the generation of these de novo events therefore sections. is of significant clinical importance. In this study we used information Results. Two of three novel heterozygous missense variants from SNP microarrays to determine the parent-of-origin of rare de identified in three patients were not found in more than 200 control novo CNVs from a large mental retardation cohort (3,443 patients, 227 chromosomes. All variants lead to amino acid substitutions in or near de novo CNVs). The large majority of these CNVS originated on the the CHD1L macro-domain, a poly-ADP-ribose(PAR) binding module paternal allele (78%, p=3.4x10-9). This paternal bias was independent interacting with PAR polymerase 1 (PARP1), and showed decreased of CNV length and CNV type. Interestingly, the paternal bias was less interaction with PARP1 by pull-down assay of transfected cell lysates. pronounced for CNVs flanked by low-copy repeat (LCRs), suggesting Quantitative mRNA analysis demonstrated high CHD1L expression that molecular mechanisms involved in the formation of rare de in human fetal kidneys, and levels were four-times higher than in novo CNVs may be dependent on the parent-of-origin. In addition, a adult kidney. In the human embryo at 7-11 weeks gestation, CHD1L significantly increased paternal age was only observed for those CNVs immunolocalized in the early ureteric bud and the S- and comma- which were not flanked by LCRs (p=0.009). This indicates that de novo shaped bodies, critical stages of kidney development. In normal CNVs are increasingly being generated with advanced paternal age by postnatal sections, CHD1L was expressed in the cytoplasm of tubular replication-based mechanisms during spermatogenesis. cells in all tubule segments. CHD1L expression appeared higher in the hydronephrotic kidney of one patient with a hypofunctional CHD1L c16.6* variant than in normal kidneys, recapitulating high fetal levels. Functional validation of GWAs loci for platelet traits in Danio conclusions. Our data suggest that CHD1L plays a role in kidney rerio reveals new regulators of haematopoiesis development and that hypofunctional CHD1L variants may induce J. Serbanovic-Canic1, A. Cvejic1, N. Soranzo2, D. L. Stemple2, K. Freson3, W. deficits in nephron differentiation leading to CAKUT. H. Ouwehand1; 1Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3Center Concurrent Sessions 47 c17.2* genome give evidence against haploinsufficiency as the pathogenetic First implication of stRA6 mutations in isolated anophthalmia, mechanism for ANKRD26-mediated thrombocytopenia. The luciferase microphthalmia and coloboma reporter assay suggests that these 5’ UTR mutations might enhance J. P. Casey1, R. Kawaguchi2, M. Morrissey1, H. San2, P. McGettigan1, J. ANKRD26 expression. ANKRD26 is the ancestor of a family of primate- Nielsen1, J. Conroy1, R. Regan1, P. Tormey3, M. Ní Chróinín4, B. Kennedy1, S. specific genes termed POTE, which have been recently identified as Lynch5,1, A. Green5,1, S. Ennis1,5; a family of proapoptotic proteins. Dysregulation of apoptosis might 1University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2David Geffen School of Medicine therefore be the pathogenetic mechanism, as demonstrated for at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Waterford Regional Hospital, another thrombocytopenia, THC4. Further investigation is needed to Waterford, Ireland, 4Cork University Hospital, Cork, Ireland, 5National Centre for provide evidence supporting this hypothesis. (Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland. Jan 7;88(1):115-20) Microphthalmia, anophthalmia and coloboma are structural congenital eye malformations that cause a significant percentage of childhood c17.4 visual impairments. Several disease genes and risk loci have been Genomic instability represents the unifying molecular pathology identified but do not account for all MAC cases, suggesting that of progressive muscular dystrophies and muscle-derived additional disease loci exist. Using SNP homozygosity mapping sarcomas and targeted sequencing of the candidate homozygous segments, W. M. Schmidt1, M. H. Uddin1, S. Dysek1, K. Moser-Thier1, S. Kummer1, we identified a novel disease gene, STRA6, for isolated autosomal A. Lauermann1, D. Maddaluno1, C. Pirker2, H. Höger3, I. M. Ambros4, P. F. recessive colobomatous micro-anophthalmia (arCMIC). The STRA6 Ambros4, W. Berger2, R. E. Bittner1; missense mutation was subsequently detected in additional families 1Neuromuscular Research Department, Center of Anatomy & Cell Biology, that presented at the genetics clinic, including one patient with Matthew- Vienna, Austria, 2Institute of Cancer Research, Department of Medicine Wood syndrome (MWS). We have shown that the mutant STRA6 I, Vienna, Austria, 3Division for Laboratory Animal Science and Genetics, protein is not expressed on the cell surface and has severely reduced Vienna, Austria, 4CCRI, Children’s Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna vitamin A uptake activity. Furthermore, inhibition of retinoid synthesis Kinderkrebsforschung, Vienna, Austria. in zebrafish embryos recapitulated the arCMIC phenotype, suggesting Muscular dystrophies (MDs) represent genetically heterogeneous that diminished retinoid levels due to decreased vitamin A uptake by disorders, characterized by progressive loss of functional muscle fibres STRA6, account for the eye malformations in the arCMIC patients. and its replacement by adipose and fibrous tissue. Despite earlier We demonstrate that STRA6 mutations can cause isolated arCMIC promises based on the discovery of molecular defects underlying in addition to MWS, which opens the debate as to the genetic and several MDs there is still no causative therapy, which underscores the environmental factors which determine whether patients with STRA6 need for a comprehensive understanding of the molecular mechanisms mutations develop isolated eye malformations or multisystem congenital underlying the common MD pathology. anomalies. Currently, STRA6 screening for diagnostic purposes is only Investigating age-related phenotypes of MD mouse models, we offered to patients with MWS. Our findings suggest that patients with observed the frequent occurrence of spontaneous skeletal muscle- isolated eye defects of unknown etiology should also be considered derived tumors in mice lacking dystrophin, dysferlin, calpain-3, or for STRA6 screening. The study also illustrates that the combination of Large, respectively. The primary gene defect and genetic background homozygosity mapping together with targeted array-based sequencing influenced tumor incidence, latency, localization, and gender is a powerful tool for identifying disease genes for recessive disorders. prevalence. Combined loss of dystrophin and dysferlin or calpain-3 showed a strong synergistic effect. We found that these musculature- c17.3* derived tumors are mixed sarcomas with rhabdomyo-, fibro-, and mutations in the 5’ UtR of ANKRD26, the Ankirin Repeat Domain liposarcoma elements. Molecularly, these sarcomas shared non- 26 Gene, cause an Autosomal-Dominant form of inherited random genomic alterations including frequent losses at the Cdkn2a thrombocytopenia, tHc2 and Nf1 loci, amplification of oncogenes (Met, Jun), and recurrent T. Pippucci1, A. Savoia2,3, S. Perrotta4, N. Pujol-Moix5, P. Noris6, G. duplications of whole chromosomes 8 and 15. Skeletal muscles of Castegnaro1, A. Pecci6, C. Gnan2, F. Punzo4,7, C. Marconi1, S. Gherardi8, G. aged MD-mice without overt sarcomas regularly harbor sarcoma- Loffredo9, D. De Rocco3, S. Scianguetta4, S. Barozzi6, P. Magini1, V. Bozzi6, L. specific genetic lesions. Consequently, we discovered that also Dezzani6, M. Di Stazio2, M. Ferraro4, G. Perini8, M. Seri1, C. L. Balduini6; dystrophic muscles and cultured cells from human MD patients are 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Gynaecological, Obstetric, and very similarly affected by DNA damage and chromosome copy number Paediatric Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of aberrations. Reproductive and Developmental Sciences and Public Medicine Sciences, Thus, we present a novel, unifying concept for the molecular University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Laboratory of Genetics, Institute for pathogenesis of MDs. Our identification of tumor-related DNA- Maternal and Child Health, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico pathologies in muscular dystrophies builds a bridge between a whole ‘‘Burlo Garofolo,’’, Trieste, Italy, 4Department of Paediatrics, Second University group of different rare diseases and the common entity of cancer of Naples, Naples, Italy, 5Autonomous University of Barcelona & Platelet diseases. This will foreseeably make the arsenal of anti-cancer Pathology Unit, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, therapies available for combating muscular dystrophies. 6Department of Internal Medicine, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, University of Pavia, Pavia, c17.5 Italy, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, A new human ichthyosis gene revealed by the canine genetic Netherlands, 8Department of Biology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, model 9Department of Oncology, Azienda ‘‘Santobono-Pausilipon,’’ Pausilipon A. Grall1, E. Guaguère2, S. Planchais1, E. Bourrat3, C. Hitte1, I. Hausser4, M. Hospital, Naples, Italy. Le Gallo1, C. Derbois5, L. Lagoutte1, F. Degorce-Rubiales6, E. Bensignor7, A. Thrombocytopenia 2 (THC2 [MIM 188000]) is one of the rarest forms Thomas8, J. Fontaine9, M. Lathrop5, F. Galibert1, J. Fischer5,10, C. André1; of autosomal-dominant thrombocytopenia. Until recently, it has been 1CNRS Université Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 2Clinique vétérinaire Saint reported in only two families. THC-2 affected individuals have a Bernard, Lomme, France, 3Département de dermatologie, Hôpital St Louis, degree of thrombocytopenia ranging and platelets showing no relevant Paris, France, 4Department of dermatology, University of Heidelberg, morphological abnormality. It had been mapped to chromosome Heidelberg, Germany, 5CEA, Institut de Génomique, centre national de 10p11.1-p12 and ascribed to mutations in MASTL or ACBD5. We génotypage, Evry, France, 6Laboratoire d’anatomie pathologique vétérinaire showed that ANKRD26, another gene within the THC2 locus, and du Sud-Ouest, Toulouse, France, 7Clinique vétérinaire de la Boulais, Cesson- neither MASTL nor ACBD5, was mutated in eight unrelated families. Sévigné, France, 8Antagene, laboratoire de génétique animale, Limonest, ANKRD26 was also found to be mutated in the family previously France, 9Clinique vétérinaire, Bruxelles, Belgium, 10Institute of human genetics, reported to have an ACBD5 mutation. We identified 6 different University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. ANKRD26 mutations, which were clustered in a highly conserved 19 Due to the unique history of dog breeds, the proximity between dog bp sequence located in the 5’ untranslated region. Mutations were and human lifestyle, physiology and genetic diseases, dog constitutes not detected in 500 controls and are absent from the 1000 Genomes a unique model to unravel the phenotype/genotype relationships and database. Available data from an animal model and Dr. Watson’s to provide new insights into human genetic diseases. In the golden Concurrent Sessions 48 retriever breed, a high incidence of an autosomal recessive form region (UTR) of the proteasome maturation protein (POMP) gene. of ichthyosis, resembling human autosomal recessive congenital The deletion causes a relative switch in transcription start sites for ichthyoses (ARCI), has been diagnosed. Ichthyoses consist of a POMP, predicted to decrease levels of POMP protein and mature heterogeneous group of genodermatoses characterized by abnormal proteasomes in terminally differentiated keratinocytes. In order to desquamation over the whole body, for which the genetic causes of understand the pathophysiology behind KLICK we created an in vitro several human forms remain unknown. We carried out a genome-wide model of the disease using siRNA silencing of POMP in epidermal association study on 40 unrelated golden retriever dogs (20 cases and air-liquid cultures. Immunohistochemical analysis of tissue constructs 20 controls), using the canine 49,000 SNPs array (Affymetrix v2). The transfected with siRNA against POMP revealed aberrant staining statistical analysis demonstrated a significant associated locus of 7 Mb of POMP, proteasome subunits and the skin differentiation marker on canine chromosome 12. Sequencing metabolic candidate genes filaggrin when compared to control tissue constructs. The staining revealed a recessive exonic indel mutation leading to a premature stop patterns of POMP siRNA tissue constructs were strikingly similar to codon in one annotated gene. We then searched for alterations in the those observed in skin biopsies from KLICK patients. Furthermore, orthologous human gene in ARCI families, for which no genetic cause knock-down of POMP expression in regular cell cultures resulted in has been identified so far. We identified two recessive mutations in decreased amounts of proteasome subunits and an increase in subunit the catalytic domain of the orthologous human gene in two families. transcripts. Prolonged silencing of POMP in cultured cells induced In addition to identify a seventh gene for human ARCI, electronic an increase in C/EBP homologous protein expression consistent microscopy investigations highlighted the implication of this new gene with an activation of the unfolded protein response and increased product in the lipid metabolism of the skin barrier. Other breeds are endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. The combined results indicate that affected by different ichthyoses, therefore using the canine model KLICK is caused by reduced levels of POMP, leading to proteasome might facilitate the identification of rare gene variants responsible of insufficiency in differentiating keratinocytes. This disturbs terminal human ichthyoses. epidermal differentiation, presumably by increased ER stress and incomplete filaggrin processing. Our findings underline a critical role c17.6* for the proteasome in human epidermal differentiation and suggest siRNA silencing of proteasome maturation protein (POmP) that tissue constructs with siRNA induced POMP insufficiency can expression activates the unfolded protein response and serve as a model for KLICK genodermatosis in vitro. constitutes a model for KLicK syndrome J. Dahlqvist, H. Törmä, J. Badhai, N. Dahl; Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. KLICK genodermatosis is an autosomal recessive skin disorder associated with a single-nucleotide deletion in the 5’untranslated Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 49 POstERs Autism Spectral Disorder. In India, metropolitan cities like Chennai, Hyderabad etc. are showing an increased incidence of stress related disorders like Thyroid malfunction, Polycystic Ovarian Disease, infertility etc., and P01.01 hence assisted reproduction is on the rise among the young urban the factors associated with the structure of the public attitude population. Though similar indications are available in other countries, toward the genome research by the latent class analysis in the suspected association between increased rate of Assisted Japan Reproduction and Autism Spectral Disorder in India needs to be Z. Yamagata1, T. Maeda2, K. Muto3, A. Nagai1, A. Tamakoshi4, I. Ishiyama5; established. 1University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan, 2The Institute of Statistical To explore this link, a questionnaire based case-control cohort study Mathematics, Tokyo, Japan, 3The Institute of Medical Science, The University was conducted in Indian Autistic population and preliminary results of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 4Aichi Medical University, Aichi, Japan, 5Teikyo-Gakuen indicate that ART cases represented 8-10% of the autistic subjects Junior College, Yamanashi, Japan. analysed. This is the first report from Indian population indicating the The purpose of this study was to clarify the factors associated with link between Assisted Reproduction and Autism Spectral Disorder. the structure of the public attitude toward the genome research by the latent class analysis. The participants of the national wide surveys on P01.04 the attitude toward the genome research were comprised of 4,000 mutation analysis of familial NF1 pedigrees with multiple people (age, 20-69) in 2005 and in 2009, selected from the Japanese affected individuals general population by using the two-step stratified random sampling Y. Tunca1, S. Celik2, F. Tangi2, C. Oktenli3, M. Upadhyaya4; method. Five clusters (“Group of aggressive promotion”, “Group 1GATA, Gulhane Military Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, 2GATA, Gulhane of passive support”, “Group not making judgment”, “Group making Military Medical Faculty, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Internal Medicine, prudent judgment”, “Group not interested in genome”.)were assumed Anadolu Medical Center,, Kocaeli, Turkey, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff as an explanation model of six variables related to the knowledge University, Heath Park Campus,, Cardiff, United Kingdom. of genome and attitudes toward genomic research promotion about Neurofibromatosis is the one of the most common autosomal three themes; basic genome research, genome research related to dominant inherited disorders that occurs 1 in 3500 live births. The agriculture and medicine at the survey in 2005. These clusters are penetrance of NF1 is virtually 100 %. NF1 is characterized by multiple associated with academic background, socioeconomic status, to cafe-au-lait spots, cutaneous or subcutaneous neurofibromas, donate to their blood for genome research, interest of science, to plexiform neuromas, axillary or inguinal freckling, optic gliomas, want to genome lectures. These factors become the basis of genome and iris Lisch nodules. Here we present two families with multiple research outreach programs. affected individuals. One of the case was diagnosed as bicytopenia (leukopenia and thrombocytopenia) and splenomegaly. Cases had P01.02 multiple café-au-lait spots and immobile tumors. Histopathological Genetic causes of pervasive developmental disorders analysis of tumors diagnosed as neurofibroma. Also ophthalmological G. C. Cozaru, A. C. Papari; examination showed Lisch nodules. Cases are clinically diagnosed as Andrei Şaguna University, Constanta, Romania. NF1. We performed DNA analysis for family and c2041 C>G p.R681X The pervasive developmental disorders (PDDs), or autism spectrum mutation which is located at exon 13. Second family has six affected disorders (ASD), range from a severe form, called autistic disorder, to individuals, which are diagnosed as NF1 with clinical findings. Also at a milder form, Asperger syndrome. family history there was two suspicious deaths because of brain tumor This paper will focus on classic autism and Asperger syndrome, without certain diagnosis. DNA analysis of six individuals revealed intending to review the current understanding of the etiologies and the c.4084 C>T p.R1362X mutation which is located at exon 23.2. These multiple pathogenetic pathways that are likely to lead to the autistic two mutations are defined before at literature. Molecular diagnosis phenotype. Like mental retardation, autism is likely to be caused by of NF1 is challenging and expensive, but DNA analysis are required many different genetic mechanisms and genes rather than a single, for these kind of families which have multiple affected individuals for or few, major genes or environmental effects. Applying routine genetic genetic counseling and further prenatal diagnosis. testing in clinical (CLIA-certified) diagnostic laboratories it’s possible to identify the specific etiology and recurrence risk in 10% to 15% of P01.05 autism cases and is clinically indicated for any child with autism. The participation of minors in biobank research: reflections and In this study we report 5 cases with different genetic syndromes in recommendations which ASD has been described as one of the possible manifestations: K. Hens, K. Dierickx, G. Christenhusz; Down syndrome, 22q13 deletion, ,,cri du chat” syndrome - 5p15 Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Leuven, Belgium. deletion, Cornelia de Lange syndrome, Sotos syndrome. The participation of minors in biobank research poses specific ethical conclusions: The etiologies of ASD are complex and presence of a questions that are not analogous to those raised by the participation wide variety cytogenetic abnormalities are providing us with extremely of adults. Specifically, issues regarding parental consent, assent, valuable information about the role played by genetics in autism and the question of minimal risk and benefit and the return of individual collaboration with psychiatrists. Such recognition and understanding research results to parents and minors need in depth reflection. will help clinicians implement syndrome-specific treatments of patients For example, should parents be given the opportunity to consent to identified with a genetic cause of autism spectrum disorder. Early each possible genetic research on the samples of their children, or identification of this genetic disorder is critical not only to the individual should they only be allowed to give specific consent? At which age patient but for the entire family. is a child able to understand genetic research on his or her sample and/or assent to such research? What, if any, risks do children face P01.03 when they participate in biobank research? Should such research Assessment of Assisted Reproductive technology and its specifically benefit children? Do parents have the right to access all associated risk with Autism spectral Disorder in indian genetic data that are generated by the research? Do researchers have population a duty to return individual results that may be of potential health benefit M. P. Mamidala, C. Rahul, N. Rajesh, V. Rajesh; to the child? We have finished a three year project investigating these Birla Institute of Science and Technology, Pilani-Hyderabad Campus, issues. This project involved reviews, empirical research to query the Hyderabad, India. opinion of lay people and professionals, theoretical reflections and Autism Spectral Disorders are hypothesized to be on a rise across recommendations. In this paper we shall present our findings and the globe and developing countries like India are no exceptions. especially focus on the recommendations that were the conclusion of According to unconfirmed estimates there are about 1.7 million the investigation. affected individuals in India. Increased globalisation and changing socio- economical development seen in last two decades have led to changing lifestyles and increased exposure to various risk factors of Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 50 P01.06 P01.08 BRiF: Bio-resource Research impact Factor. towards a working BRcA1 mutation carriers self-reported levels of anxiety, tool to promote and recognise sharing of biological samples and depression, quality of life> 1 year after genetic testing. associated data. I. Rønning1, H. Vetti1, K. Nordin2, C. Bjorvatn1,2; L. Mabile1, A. Cambon-Thomsen1, o. the BRIF Working Group2; 1Western Norway Familial Center, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, 1INSERM, Toulouse, France, 2Gen2Phen Knowledge Centre, University of Norway, 2Department of Public Health and Primary Health care, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. Bergen, Bergen, Norway. A bio-resource can be a database, a biobank, a set of bioinformatics Background: Genetic testing for hereditary cancer is expected to software tools etc. As part of the work on incentivisation to construct, involve an increasing number of individuals in the years to come due to share and to use bio-resources, the concept of a Bio-resource to the rapid development in molecular genetics. The main aim of this Research Impact Factor (BRIF) has been introduced. The concept cross-sectional study was to investigate the long-term psychological relies on a quantitative parameter for bio-resource use, similar to the effect of being a BRCA1 mutation carrier and compare this to a Impact Factor for publications. Such a BRIF would make it possible to matched normal population. Secondly, we wanted to explore if losing document: 1. the quantitative use of a bio-resource, 2. the quality and a close relative in childhood due to cancer or being affected by cancer the importance of research results involving it, and 3. the scientific and were associated with symptoms of anxiety and depression or the level management efforts of those who set up and made available a valid of health related quality of life. bio-resource. A working group has been set up towards the creation Method: Of the 100 eligible participants, 78 consented to participate of this BRIF, starting with an online forum http://www.gen2phen. and were included in the study. Questionnaires were sent to them at org/groups/brif-bio-resource-impact-factor in EU projects. The work least one year after a positive BRCA1 test result had been revealed addresses several steps: 1. Creating a bio-resource unique identifier, to them. or digital ID; 2. Standardising bio-resource acknowledgement in Result: Compared to the Norwegian general population, participants papers; 3. Cataloguing bio-resource data access and sharing policies; reported higher level of anxiety and low level of depression. Mutation 4. Identifying the other factors to take into account when calculating carriers who experienced losing a close relative in childhood due to the Impact Factor; 5. Prototype testing, involving volunteer bio- cancer reported higher levels of anxiety and depression and lower resources and the help of journal editors. Such a system could be psychological health (WHOQOL-BREF) compared to those without used to rationally evaluate bio-resource activities over time. Such a this experience. There was no significant difference between mutation system could be used to rationally evaluate bio-resource activities over carriers affected by cancer and those not affected. time. Specificities in data sharing versus biological samples have to Conclusion: The results from the present study show that living with be considered. Also, if taken into account in assessing researchers/ knowledge of being a mutation carrier may affect anxiety and physical contributors professional activity, the use of BRIF would probably health. Those who had lost a close relative due too cancer during promote both quality and sharing of Bio-resources and contribute to childhood seemed to be a more vulnerable group, and may need extra harmonising sharing policies. intervention from genetic counsellors. P01.07 P01.09 cafe for Routine Genetic Data Exchange Does time frame matter? communicating age-related or lifetime O. Lancaster1, D. Atlan2, R. Dalgleish1, R. K. Hastings1, G. A. Thorisson1, A. J. risks in breast cancer risk communication Brookes1; D. R. M. Timmermans1, C. J. Van Asperen2, J. C. Oosterwijk3, F. H. Menko1, C. 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Phenosystems SA, Lillois, F. Ockhuysen-Vermey1, L. Claassen1, L. Henneman1; Belgium. 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Diagnostics laboratories assess DNA samples from many patients Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Groningen, with various inherited disorders, producing a wealth of data on the Groningen, Netherlands. genetic basis of disease. Unfortunately, those data are not usually Introduction: Many women overestimate their breast cancer risk. shared with others. To address this deficiency, a novel system has Evidence suggests that people fail to adjust their risk perception to been constructed that facilitates the discovery and controlled transfer account for longer time frames. It has been argued that using narrower of diagnostic laboratory data to the wider community, via an internet- time frames (e.g. 10 years) are more appropriate than life time frames. based ‘Café for Routine Genetic data Exchange’ (Café RouGE http:// The aim of this study was to compare the effects of presenting risk www.caferouge.org/). information on breast cancer in age-related 10 years frames in addition Actually, diagnostic laboratories are not reluctant to release their data, to life time risks on the counselees’ understanding and perception of but merely face practical obstacles: First, their personnel do not have risks, psychological well-being, and intentions regarding breast cancer time nor funding to manually submit data to internet depositories such surveillance. as Locus Specific databases (LSDBs). Second, they would receive no Methods: In a randomized controlled multicenter intervention trial, recognition or reward for releasing their data, giving them no incentive. unaffected women with a breast cancer family history were recruited. Café RouGE takes account of these real-world obstacles and the Women received one of two breast cancer risk presentation formats: needs of diverse LSDBs and aims to minimize the effort required to lifetime risk in frequencies (i.e. X out of 100) (n=63) or life time publish variant data by: risks and age-related 10 years risk in frequencies (n=69). Baseline, a) Endowing data analysis tools used by diagnostic laboratories with 2-week and 6-month follow-up measurements were assessed using a ‘data submission’ function that automatically pushes processed data questionnaires. onto the internet Results The added age-related risk led to a more accurate b) Producing a single internet depot (café) to receive and display understanding of 10 years breast cancer risk but not of life time risks, the existence of these data, with options for controlled download by and gave women more clarity. The added age-related risk also lowered diverse third parties. women’s perceived relative risk of getting breast cancer. However, A modified version of the Gensearch sequence analysis package participants evaluated their own risk as less imaginable when (PhenoSystems SA) now offers this submission functionality, and expressed as age-related risk compared to life time risk. The addition other tool providers are encouraged to do likewise. Several hundred of age-related risk had no effect on well-being or preventive intentions. mutations per month are now released by users of the Gensearch tool Conclusion: Our results suggest that the addition of age-related risk to alone. life time risk of breast cancer may have an additional value in breast GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Community’s Seventh cancer risk counseling. Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement 200754.Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 51 P01.10*** P01.12 comparison of three different formats of breast cancer risk Cancer Genetic Counselling in Cyprus: Review of the first six communication: percentages, frequencies and graphical years displays V. C. Anastasiadou1, E. S. Aristidou1, M. Kotti2, A. Hadjisavvas3, M. Loizou3, Y. L. Henneman1, J. C. Oosterwijk2, C. J. Van Asperen3, F. H. Menko1, C. F. Marcou4, E. Kakouri4, D. Papamichael4, T. Delikurt-Tuncalp1, K. Kyriacou3; Ockhuysen-Vermey1, L. Claassen1, D. R. M. Timmermans1; 1Clinical Genetics Clinic, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical Cyprus, 2Makarios Medical Center, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Electron Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Microscopy and Molecular Pathology, Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Leiden, Netherlands. Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Bank of Cyprus Oncology Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus. Introduction: Inaccurate risk perception is a common finding in genetic Cancer Genetic Counselling in Cyprus was established in 2004. counseling of women with a breast cancer family history. It is however Patients are referred based on type of cancer, family history and age unclear how risks should best be communicated. It has been suggested of diagnosis. Referred patients are offered counselling appointments that some risk communication formats (e.g. frequencies, graphs) are to be appropriately informed of the risks, benefits, and limitations prior better than others (e.g. percentages). We compared the effects of to decision making for testing. Results are communicated in person three risk presentation formats on the counselees’ understanding and and also in a written report while further appointments are scheduled perception of risks, psychological well-being, and intentions regarding according to the needs of the patients and their families. breast cancer surveillance. During the six years of CCGC’s running, more than 450 families with Methods: In a randomized controlled intervention trial, unaffected cancer history were seen. The patients were mainly referred by their women with a breast cancer family history referred to three clinical oncologists. Among these 400 were breast/ovarian cancer families genetic centers in the Netherlands were recruited. Women received and 49 were colorectal cancer families. one of three breast cancer risk communication formats: lifetime risk in Genetic counselling for cancer predisposition genes was in general percentages (i.e. breast cancer risk is X%) (n=38), in frequencies (i.e. well appreciated. Uptake of genetic testing by patients and their family X out of 100 women will get breast cancer) (n=63) or in frequencies members were diverse and the response to results varied. The aim of plus graphical display (100x100 human figure icons) (n=91). Baseline, this study is to analyze demographic information, the variability within 2-week and 6-month follow-up measurements were assessed using this patient group in terms of diagnosis, and also the reported reasons questionnaires. for uptake or denial of testing as well as other data. Results: No differences were found between women who received the percentages and those who received frequencies in terms of cognitive P01.13 outcomes, psychological well-being and preventive intentions. Neither the storyBank: A web-based resource of digital stories to meet was there an effect of an added graphical display. In all three groups the information and support needs of cancer genetics patients women were highly satisfied with the risk information provided. J. Hilgart, R. Iredale, L. Mundy; Conclusion: No evidence was found for different effects of percentages Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. or frequencies with or without a graphical display when communicating The Cancer Genetics Service for Wales (CGSW) offers a range of breast cancer risks in genetic counseling. Methodological and services such as risk assessment, genetic counselling and genetic psychological explanations will be discussed. testing for people with a family history of hereditary cancer. As a result of the life-long nature of genetic conditions, a fundamental P01.11 challenge is to meet the ongoing information and support needs of Gender differences in forming intent-to-obtain cancer these patients. The internet is increasingly being used as a source of susceptibility genetic testing - a group-based structural equation health information and is one mechanism through which this challenge modeling approach. can be met. Patients often want to hear from others that have been A. Botoseneanu, V. T. Motoc; through a similar experience and digital stories are particularly useful School of Public Health, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. for transmitting this information. Objective: Cancer-susceptibility genetic testing (GT) can advance The CGSW Research Team have created an online collection of cancer prevention only if it leads to improvements in current screening digital stories from 23 patients living with, or at risk of familial cancer, behaviors. The gender distribution of breast and prostate cancer about their experience of cancer, genetics and their journey through genetic risk profiles argues for elucidating gender differences in forming CGSW. Staff from CGSW have also contributed to the StoryBank with intent-to-obtain GT. We use a theory of reasoned action derived model stories answering questions about the service such as ‘What is genetic to test for such differences. counselling?’ The stories can be freely accessed on the StoryBank methods: Cross-sectional analysis of 1,824 US adults. Structural website www.cancergeneticsstorybank.co.uk equation modeling tested for gender differences in total/direct/indirect The StoryBank is a web-based resource designed to meet the effects of attitudes towards GT, knowledge about genetic diseases and information and support needs of cancer genetics patients, new testing, prior experience with GT, and religious involvement on intent- referrals, and anyone concerned about a family history of cancer. It to-obtain GT. provides reliable and engaging information and allows patients the Results: 765 men and 1,059 women were surveyed. Despite similar opportunity to hear the experiences of other patients. It is hoped that willingness-to-test for curable disorders (77%), men showed higher hearing real stories about people’s experiences can help those with, or willingness-to-test for incurable disorders (54% vs. 46% in women). at risk of, cancer and will raise awareness of cancer genetics amongst Men were significantly more likely to have had prior experience with the public and health professionals. GT (7.5% vs. 5.1%). Prior experience with GT had a direct positive effect on intent-to-test among men (b=0.68; p<0.01), but no effect P01.14 among women (p>0.05). For both genders, attitudes towards GT had A french regional pilot experiment for multidisciplinary a significant direct positive effect on intent-to-test (b=0.536 for men; management of patients at risk of inherited cancers b=0.391 for women; p<0.001) and individuals with high religious C. Cordier1,2,3, D. Lejri1,2,3, C. Kastner1,2, M. Voltzenlogel1,2,3, A. L. Wetzel1,3, L. involvement held more negative attitudes towards GT and were less Haar1,2,3, L. Gilleron1,2, H. Nehme-Schuster2, J. M. Limacher3, J. P. Fricker2, C. willing to obtain GT (b=-0.020 for men; b=-0.017 for women; p<0.05). M. Maugard1,3; The model explained 24% of the variance in intent-to-test among men, 1University Hospital Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2CRLCC Paul Strauss, but only 12.1% among women. Strasbourg, France, 3Hopital Pasteur, General Hospital, Colmar, France. conclusion: Significant differences exist between men and women in Recently, the French national cancer institute (INCA) launched an the pathways to formation of intent-to-obtain GT and underscore the extramural program, the main goal of which was to integrate, facilitate need to refine genetic counseling and outreach to account for gender and improve global risk management for patients at very high risk of influences on GT behaviors. cancer, based on their familial history and/or genetic testing result. Six pilot experiments were supported in six different geographic area of France and received the following mandates : (1) to offer an individualized cancer screening and preventive recommendations Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 52 program to at risk patients, using the latest knowledge and individual or be required to return results. Model consent language has been patient medical history, (2) to coordinate the introduction of the new created by the ICGC to assist projects as well as other researchers. screening and preventive option procedures in each unit, (3) to insure Sample language from existing ICGC projects shows how the model access to multidisciplinary services, since patients shoud be offered consent has been adapted to suit local needs as well as those of the adequate screening strategies and all necessary information and ICGC. As more international consortia are created, others may learn psychological support when prophylactic surgery is discussed and from the ICGC experience. finally, (4) to offer necessary expertise when difficult cases have to be discussed. P01.17 Our pilot experiment takes place in the eastern part of France, in teaching counseling to students Alsace province. We began with the recruitment of a core team A. Gugu1, L. Bohiltea2, R. Dragotoiu2; dedicated to these new missions comprising : a genetic counselor, an 1German Goethe College, Bucharest, Romania, 2Medical and Pharmacy assistant-coordinator, two research assistants and two psychologists. University “Carol Davila”, Bucharest, Romania. We will present the first steps and will introduce the new tools we The intent of the present study is to continue researching whether have developed to inform patients and specialists of the more ethical issues need to be learned for genetic counseling or whether recent national recommendation to be applied for follow-up of at risk they are already one of the human mind’s perspectives for making patients. We will describe how we will assess the compliance to these moral decisions. Embedded in human behavioural patterns, ethical or recommendations of patients and the medical community. Finally, we moral principles look as if they were inborn, but it appears that that will discuss issues encountered in the development and maintenance usually people only get alerted or react when their socially acquired of this program. ethical or moral rules and values are somehow out of balance compared to those of the surrounding world. If counseling is nothing P01.15 more than exercising one’s own moral concepts, are medical students Do nurses have the requisite competences related to genetics? gaining new ethical principles during their genetic training or are they A systematic review of the evidence. just consolidating their previous opinions? H. Skirton1, A. O’Connor2, A. Humphreys2; The target group in this study consisted of first year medical students 1Faculty of Health, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2Faculty of Health, Plymouth, who originate from other countries beside Romania. Their social, United Kingdom. educational and moral backgrounds differ within the investigated The expansion of genetic testing in monogenic and complex disorders group. To eliminate biases identified in a similar previous study, already has increased the need for all healthcare practitioners to develop during the first practical an article from the specialized literature was genetic competences. Nurses are the largest single group of healthcare read by students and then they wrote down their opinions. The same professionals and core competences for nurses have been described questions were also answered at the end of their training in medical by the European Society of Human Genetics. The aim of this systematic genetics, the changes of their views being discussed, if any. These review was to determine the extent to which nurses are achieving the new data are compared to those analyzed and presented last year, core competences in genetics. We conducted a systematic search of when only Romanian first year medical students read the same article the published scientific literature held in four relevant databases, using and answered the same questionnaire. a set of key words including nurs*, competen* and genet*. A total of Increased understanding of the students’ views on moral issues can 269 papers were retrieved, of these 11 (reporting 9 studies) fitted the help organizing the teaching process of genetic counseling. inclusion criteria and were included in the review. The main themes extracted from the data were knowledge, skills, nurses’ perception P01.18 of the relevance of genetics to their roles, confidence and ethical clinical experiences of genetic counselors ordering cYP 2D6 issues. The evidence indicates that while nurses across a range of genetic testing for tamoxifen therapy in breast cancer countries and practice areas perceive genetics to be important to their L. A. Johnson; roles, generally their knowledge of genetics is low, as is their ability to Charite Universitatmedizin, Berlin, Germany. perform basic clinical skills, such as taking a family history or referring Personalized medicine is a field growing in both interest and practice. to genetic services. This is reflected in nurses’ low confidence in In terms of breast cancer therapy, genotyping of CYP2D6 exists their ability to deal with genetics issues concerning their patients. In to determine a patient’s tamoxifen metabolism. Despite the high addition, some nurses have ethical concerns that genetic testing could incidence of breast cancer in the United States, the frequency with cause discrimination against patients. It is clear that, despite calls for which tamoxifen is prescribed for treatment, and the shift towards enhanced genetics education for nurses for over a decade, nurses are personalized medicine, no data exists of the frequency of ordering not equipped to deal with the genomics era. CYP 2D6 genotyping in a genetic counseling setting, or the barriers that are faced when ordering the test. The purpose of this study was P01.16 to identify both the frequency of genetic counselors ordering CYP 2D6 consent for the feedback of individual research results in genotyping and the barriers that they faced - both experienced and international consortia: Examples from the international cancer perceived. An online survey was distributed over the NSGC Cancer Genome consortium SIG Listserv. Thirteen percent (n = 6) of respondents had ordered CYP S. E. Wallace; 2D6 genotyping for a patient. Sixty-five percent (n = 30) of respondents Leicester University, Leicester, United Kingdom. provided information regarding barriers they faced when ordering the Returning individual research results to participants is an increasingly test, including uncertainty of clinical utility (77%), not my role/role of the debated subject. It is suggested that, in order to be returned, findings oncologist (60%), unfamiliarity with the test (40%), recommendations should be scientifically valid and confirmed, have significant health of professional societies (40%), and lack of impact on patient’s medical implications and there should be therapeutic or preventative options management (20%). Literature suggests that personalized medicine available. However, the process by which these findings will be is the future of oncology; however this study found that genetic communicated will necessarily be different depending on the context of counselors have little experience with CYP 2D6 testing. the research. Individual research projects are able to rely on available institutional guidance. Consortia whose members are all located in P01.19** one country may need to deal with different institutional procedures, cystic Fibrosis carrier screening: customer satisfaction study but will also have national law and regulations to guide their actions. L. Ditta, S. Egiziano, C. Salbe, M. Mattiuzzo, L. Tognetto, A. Brugnoli, G. International consortia face the additional problem of having projects Romagnosi, M. Gion, L. Bartoloni; that represent different legal, regulatory and cultural requirements for ULSS12 Veneziana, Dpt Clinical Pathology, Venezia, Italy. different aspects of the research process, including returning individual We have been performing preconceptional identification of Cystic research results. Therefore, how should an international consortium Fibrosis (CF) heterozygotes since 2001. 13168 subjects were analysed deal with this pressing issue? The International Cancer Genome and 400 carriers found. Consortium has created a policy where the consortium itself will not We refined the distribution of the different CFTR mutations in our return results, but recognises that local member projects may choose population, defining a more sensitive and less expensive mutation Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 53 panel. To assess the impact of this test on the carriers, we performed 100 P01.22 phone interviews. Even if the couples were followed by gynecologists Looking Forward: involving young people with cystic Fibrosis and family doctors and received an informative leaflet and a written (cF) in developing an educational arts package exploring cF and report, the majority of the carriers didn’t know what CF was and what gene therapy a carrier status meant. The majority of the women were prescribed the L. Winters1,2, M. E. Palm1,2, L. E. Holmes3, K. W. Southern4, B. Chapman5, L. test during the pregnancy and not before, and there isn’t an agreed Morton6, H. Kitchen5, A. Smith7, K. Dack1,2, I. Starling1,2; protocol for testing (both members at the same time or one member 1Nowgen (A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare), NIHR Manchester Biomedical first). Only 39% of the carriers decided to have a second level test for Research Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Central Manchester their partner, and the 12% of them got a positive response too. This University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, The University of Manchester, five couples were not influenced in their reproductive choices by the Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust, London, United Kingdom, positive test, and asked for a CF pre-natal test for all their pregnancies, 4School of Reproductive and Developmental Medicine, The University of with no double heterozygote babies to date. The 61% of carriers that Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5LimeArt, Central Manchester University did not screen the partner, did not report the birth of CF babies. Even Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Cystic Fibrosis if the interviewed carriers were happy with the test and suggest to Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 7Science Learning Centre North West, their friends and family to be tested, the results of the questionnaire Manchester, United Kingdom. forced us to change the way we deliver the report and to improve the Cystic Fibrosis (CF) is one of the most common genetic conditions dissemination of informations among the physicians and the public. in the UK, affecting approximately one in 2500 people. Patients with CF cannot meet up in person due to the risk of infection; therefore P01.20 their opportunities to discuss the latest scientific research related Genetic counseling in phenylketonuria (PKU) and cystic fibrosis to their condition can be limited. Gene therapy is often heralded as (cF) patient’s parents a potential future treatment for CF and first phase clinical trials are V. L. Izhevskaya1, E. A. Borzov1, L. Y. Ivanova2, I. V. Zhuravleva2, E. K. Ginter1; underway in the UK. Despite the frequent news headlines reporting 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute continuing progress, the consistent and effective future use of gene of Sociology of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. therapy remains only a possibility. Mandatory newborn screening for PKU is spent in Russia since 90th The Looking Forward project brings young CF patients, clinicians, years of XX century, and for CF since 2006. To estimate patient’s artists, scientists and educationalists together to develop an online parents opinion concerning different aspects of genetic services we educational arts package exploring CF and gene therapy. Young CF have spent questioning of 187 PKU and 93 CF patient’s parents. PKU patients are brought together via web-based technologies such as patient’s parents more often have learnt about the hereditary nature social networking websites and videoconferencing, and will also work of their child disease from geneticist than CF patient’s parents (75% in one-to-one sessions with members of the project team. Creative and 51% respectively, p<0.05). CF patient’s parents more often than and novel approaches will be used to explore the science behind gene PKU patient’s parents have noted that they have not understood the therapy and the personal, social and ethical issues associated with information on repeated genetic risk (6.4% vs 1.2%, p<0.05) and this field of research. The resulting resource will be disseminated to a incorrectly specified its value (32.0% vs 15.0%, p<0.05). However wide audience, including CF patients and their families, school pupils, they more often regarded genetic risk as high whereas PKU patient’s teachers and health professionals. Importantly this project will explore parents more often - as average (p<0.05). Prenatal diagnostics was methods of participatory engagement with individuals who cannot more acceptable for CF patient’s parents (64.9% vs 43.3%,p<0.05). meet face-to-face (the CF patients). Only 1.1 % of respondents have answered that they didn’t want to This project is a unique collaboration that puts young people with CF at terminate the CF foetus pregnancy, and 23.5% PKU patient’s parents the centre of planning an educational arts package to ensure that the have selected the same answer (p<0.05). resource created is valuable and meaningful. P01.21 P01.23 cystic Fibrosis and sickle cell Diseases: Young adults‘ the views of cF patient’s parents on prenatal diagnostics understanding of newborn screening E. K. Ginter1, V. L. Izhevskaya1, E. A. Borzov1, L. Y. Ivanova2, I. V. Zhuravleva2; M. Noke, F. Ulph; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. of Sociology of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. Recently implemented Newborn Screening (NBS) for Cystic Fibrosis To estimated views on prenatal diagnostics (PD) we have spent (CF) and Sickle Cell Diseases (SCD) across the UK raises questions questioning of and 93 CF patient’s parents. Majority of respondents about the public’s level of awareness of NBS. Pregnancy is believed to (83%) knew about the PD of CF, and 52 % have received this be a difficult time to communicate about NBS, as information is poorly information from geneticist; 42 % from them answered, that the absorbed and negative consequences may arise for parents during possibility of PD has changed their reproductive plans. The majority pregnancy and after birth. Although awareness of NBS is suggested of parents (81 %) believed, that PD of CF is necessary procedure, 78 to reduce the distress associated with screening, research fails to % believed, that it could solve family problems and for 65 % of them stipulate what information is required or when it should be provided. PD is acceptable. More than 50 % of respondents would terminate Furthermore, the extent of lay disease knowledge prior to screening is pregnancy with CF foetus. To reveal factors which can influence the not established. This study explored i) young adults’ existing knowledge relation to PD Spearmen rank correlations were calculated. Correlation of CF, SCD and NBS, ii) how awareness of NBS can be improved for of reproductive plans changing with burden of treatment of CF child, future generations and iii) the feasibility of providing NBS information and storing the value of repeated genetic risk was shown. Acceptance to a young adult population. Thirty four young adults took part in one of PD was correlated with the age and educational level of woman, of seven focus groups. Thematic analysis was conducted to generate whether or not she was referred for genetic counselling, and whether codes and themes at a manifest level. Coupled with numerous or not she has received an explanation about repeated risk. Correlation misperceptions, students displayed limited knowledge of CF and SCD. of reproductive plans changing and acceptance of PD was shown too. Predominantly informed by Biological education, awareness of the severity of SCD was typically underestimated. Participants dismissed P01.24** wanting further NBS information during young adulthood despite Dravet syndrome caused by scN1A mutations, and other showing preoccupation with personal carrier risk. Lack of knowledge genetic causes of epilepsy, with onset after vaccination in and perceived irrelevance of screening information causes concern infancy about how to prepare the future generation of NBS programme users. N. E. Verbeek1, M. J. A. van Kempen1, F. E. Jansen1, D. Lindhout1, N. van der The inclusion of carrier statistics, autosomal recessive inheritance and Maas2, E. H. Brilstra1; information about the severity of SCD are proposed to improve young 1University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2RIVM, Bilthoven, adults’ interest and understanding of NBS. Netherlands. Background: Vaccinations are one of the most cost-effective health interventions of the 20th century. Alleged adverse effects, like (a)febrile Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 54 seizures, may have great impact on public acceptance of vaccination clinical care for patients seeking information or testing for a wide range programs. In this study we investigated the etiology of epilepsy of genetic conditions and the European Society of Human Genetics following vaccination, in a national cohort. is making efforts to set up a system of accreditation for genetic Methods: Medical data of 1301 children, reported with convulsion(s) counsellors, to ensure safe practice. We undertook a descriptive, after vaccination in the first two years of life between 1997-2006 to the cross-sectional survey to obtain baseline data on the role, education National Institute for Public Health and Environment in the Netherlands, and practice of genetic counsellors and nurses in European countries. were re-evaluated. Parents of children with onset of epilepsy within To collect the data, we approached a number of key informants (leaders 24 hours after a DTP-IPV-+Hib vaccination, or 5-12 days after MMR- in national genetics organisations or experienced practitioners) to vaccination were re-contacted for follow-up. complete an online Results: Twenty-seven children (2,1%) had epilepsy with onset survey, reporting on the situation in their own country. Twenty-eight after vaccination. Follow-up was available for 24. Ten children had practitioners responded, providing data from 17 European countries. a genetic cause: Dravet syndrome due to a SCN1A-mutation (8), The findings indicate huge variation in genetic counsellor numbers, epilepsy in females with mental retardation (EFMR) due to a PCDH19- roles and education across Europe. In United Kingdom and the mutation (1) and a submicroscopic 1q deletion (1). A genetic cause Netherlands there are more than 4 counsellors per million population, was presumed in four others: neuronal migration disorder (2) and in five countries there is less than one counsellor per million, while in autosomal dominantly inherited form of epilepsy (2). Of the remaining Turkey, Czech Republic and Germany there are no counsellors. There 10 children, three had a first or second degree relative with seizures. are specific educational programmes for genetic counsellors in seven In one child the cause of the epilepsy was probably viral. countries but only France has a specific governing legal framework Conclusions: In the majority of cases with epilepsy onset following for genetic counsellors. We will present these and other data to vaccination in the first two years of life, a genetic cause is detected demonstrate the disparity in approaches to the education and use of or suspected (14/24). Early diagnosis of Dravet syndrome and genetic counsellors across Europe. This study underpins the need for other genetic causes is not only important for treatment and genetic a coherent European approach to accreditation of counsellors. counselling, but also for safety surveillance of vaccination programs. P01.27 P01.25 Deficiency of genetics standards for secondary education in the Views of relatives of children with Duchenne muscular United states dystrophy on their experience of diagnosis and population M. Dougherty1, C. Pleasants1, L. Solow2, A. Wong1, H. Zhang1; screening 1American Society of Human Genetics, Bethesda, MD, United States, S. A. Metcalfe1, S. H. Wong2, A. D. Archibald3, B. J. McClaren3, A. J. 2Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT, United States. Kornberg1,4; Recent changes in federal oversight of science education in the U.S. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, The University have imposed testing and accountability requirements at the national of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Research Institute level through the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB). Implementation and The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens of NCLB relies heavily on learning outcomes, or “standards.” Those Research Institute, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 4Dept of Neurology, Royal standards, in turn, drive curriculum and instruction. However, unlike Children’s Hospital (RCH), Parkville, Vic, Australia. many European countries where the science curricula are also Newborn screening (NBS) for Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is national, in the U.S. curriculum is established at the state and local controversial as there is no treatment that can be implemented at birth, levels. Given the centrality of standards to teaching and learning, we and the pros and cons are subject to debate. investigated the quality of life science/biology standards with respect We conducted a qualitative study exploring relatives’ views on to genetics for all 50 states and the District of Columbia using core population screening for DMD in Australia. Participants were concepts developed by The American Society of Human Genetics as recruited through the Muscular Dystrophy Association and RCH normative benchmarks. Our results indicate that the states’ genetics Neuromuscular Clinic. A total of 13 families were interviewed: 15 standards, in general, are poor, with more than 85 percent of states parents, 1 grandmother and 2 adult sisters. Parents reported a 1-2 receiving overall scores of ‘inadequate’. In particular, the standards year gap between their first noticing signs of developmental delay in virtually every state have failed to keep pace with changes in the and of receiving the DMD diagnosis; all found this delay in diagnosis discipline as it has become genomic in scope, omitting concepts related to be very difficult. Most participants perceived population screening to genetic complexity, the importance of environment to phenotypic for DMD to be acceptable, preferring infant screening (6 months to 2 variation, differential gene expression, and the differences between years) but generally opposing NBS. Two parents only felt resources inherited and somatic genetic disease. If the genetics standards (and, would be better used for improving treatment. The main reason against by inference, the curriculum) are not improved, the deficiencies we NBS was potential for a negative impact on parental-child relationship. identified may adversely affect genetics instruction and learning, the Participants supporting infant screening felt that a diagnosis in infancy preparation of future genetics researchers, and the genetic literacy of would allow: implementation of early interventions; guidance with the U.S. citizenry as medicine becomes more informed by genomics. financial, practical and reproductive decision-making; and greater understanding of the child’s struggle with developmental milestones. P01.28 Some parents supported a more ‘targeted’ approach to population Enhancing knowledge about modern genetic medicine amongst screening of infants at ≥ 1 year of age, the time at which most started to secondary school students and their teachers in the UK be concerned with their child’s development. Based on these and our K. Dack1, P. Finegold2, L. E. Holmes1, I. Starling1, L. Winters1, M. E. Palm1, preliminary audit data (showing a median age of 5 years at testing for A. Hall3, J. Worthington1, J. Harris1, A. P. Read1, D. Donnai1, H. R. Middleton- 70 boys [<18yr] in the 2005-2009 period), we are currently developing Price1; various models of offering population screening. 1Nowgen (A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare), NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Isinglass Consultancy Ltd, P01.26*** London, United Kingdom, 3The Nuffield Foundation, London, United Kingdom. Genetic counsellor education and professional standing in 17 The Nowgen Schools Genomics Programme aims to change the European countries way that genetics is taught in UK secondary schools. This three-year C. Cordier1, U. Hösterey Ugander2, D. Lambert3, M. Voelckel4, H. Skirton5; programme started in July 2009, funded by the Wellcome Trust, and 1University Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2Klinisk genetik, has made significant progress to date. The multidisciplinary team use Göteborg, Sweden, 3Children’s University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 4Timone’s a range of approaches to help equip young people to assess the real Hospital, Marseille, France, 5Faculty of health, University of Plymouth, Tauton, potential of genomics, and to make informed decisions about future United Kingdom. healthcare. This paper highlights three successful elements of the Quality genetic healthcare services should be available throughout programme. Europe. However, due to enhanced diagnostic and genetic testing A series of broadcast educational films have been produced to options, the pressure on genetic counselling services has increased. enhance school science lessons and promote awareness of genetic Appropriately trained genetic counsellors and genetic nurses can offer medicine amongst teachers. They feature researchers explaining their Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 55 investigations on the role of genes in complex diseases. The films comparison of measured endogamy rates gave the same degree of reflect many areas of uncertainty and the great challenges involved. genetic isolation for both studied generations (p>0.05). Personal accounts are also given by some patients, who describe the In comparison to other results obtained in other regions of morocco, real impact of the conditions. See films at: www.teachers.tv/series/ the region of Souss-Massa-Draa is considered to be closed. genetics-and-medicine. Two events were run with 25 researchers working with small groups P01.31 of school students (aged 16 and 17) to give them a unique insight Break oder continuity? Human genetics in Germany after 1945. into the world of research. The students met researchers in their H. I. Petermann; laboratories and found out about latest technologies and methods Institute for Ethics, History and Theory of Medicine, Muenster, Germany. used in genetics and genomics research. Students also spent part of In 1945 Human Genetics was not established at German universities the day considering the wider implications of genetics research and and efforts were made to change this. After 1933 founded institutes bioethics. for ‘racial hygiene’ or ‘human heredity’ did no longer exist. Therefore One of the most important achievements of this work programme well-known people in the field of Human Genetics could carry on their has been its influence on genetics taught in schools in England research: 1946 Fritz Lenz in Goettingen, 1948 Wolfgang Lehmann in and Scotland. The project team has worked closely with curriculum Kiel und 1951 Otmar von Verschuer in Muenster, in neurologic and developers and made a significance impact on the new school psychiatric research supported by Gerhard Koch. The number of curricula. institutes increased up to the year 1980 to 24. Those named Human Genetics can be called the Pre-War-Generation. P01.29 They have in common their relationship to the Kaiser-Wilhelm- Nowgen’s professional training courses in bioinformatics Institute for Anthropology, Human Heredity and Eugenics, as director T. E. Hancocks1,2,3, A. C. Davies1,4, A. Devereau3, A. Brass4, D. Donnai1,2, H. R. (Verschuer), members (Lenz, Becker, Lehmann) or guest (Koch). Middleton-Price1,4; • Because of lack of scientists after 1945 the Pre-war-generation got 1Nowgen A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare, Manchester, United Kingdom, a second chance. They continued with their research on ‘old ideas’. 2Central Manchester and Manchester University Hospitals NHS Trust, In 1960 the Wissenschaftsrat (German Science Council) stated Manchester, United Kingdom, 3The National Genetics Reference Laboratory, that new professorial chairs at universities should only be for fields Manchester, United Kingdom, 4The University of Manchester, Manchester, that were still in evolution. In medicine a chair for Genetics at every United Kingdom. Medical faculty was regarded necessary, replenished by a chair for Nowgen - A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare develops and delivers anthropology. an exciting portfolio of training courses for academics, health and Right afterwards Helmut Baitsch was appointed professor in Freiburg industry professionals. Nowgen’s portfolio of training courses covers (1961), Widukind Lenz in Hamburg (1961) und Friedrich Vogel in a wide range of topics including: ethical and social aspects of Heidelberg (1962). Those belong to the Post-War-Generation of genetic research, pharmacogenetics, cancer, molecular biology next German Human Genetists. They set the stimulus for the development generation sequencing and bioinformatics. and professionalization of Human Genetics in Germany. The Modernising Scientific Careers (MSC), led by the Chief Scientific institutionalisation was supported by public policy. Officer at the Department of Health, is a key programme designed • The break came around 1960. The Post-war-Generation established to re-model career pathways for healthcare scientists. Nowgen with Human Genetics at German universities. colleagues at NW e-health in The University of Manchester, the National Genetics Reference Laboratory (NGRL), Manchester, alongside the P01.32 professional bodies’ bioinformatics working group, are developing the New Bioethics Law in France regarding human genetics: MSC bioinformatics curriculum, in particular for genetics trainees and evolution, revolution or stagnation? the wider life sciences MSC programme. E. Rial-Sebbag1,2, S. Julia3,4,5, A. M. Duguet3,4,6, A. Cambon-Thomsen3,4,1; In addition, together with the NGRL and NW e-health, we are delivering 1Plateforme «Génétique et société» Genotoul, Toulouse, France, 2Université a programme of bioinformatics training for healthcare practitioners de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 3Inserm, U1027, Toulouse, France, 4Université and scientists in genetics, including: short bioinformatics courses for de Toulouse, Paul Sabatier Toulouse 3, Toulouse, France, 5Medical genetics cytogeneticists, molecular geneticists and clinical geneticists, and the department, University hospital, Toulouse, France, 6University hospital, development of a distance learning module to complement the current Toulouse, France. short bioinformatics course for scientists. France is in the process of revising its bioethics law 5 years after its We are also delivering next generation sequencing bioinformatics last revision (2004). This law addresses genetic testing among other training for researchers, and clinical and industry based scientists: aspects (e.g. embryo stem cell research, transplantation, medical Next generation sequencing bioinformatics will be held on 14 June, aided procreation). In various French legal instruments genetic 2011. This course is being delivered in collaboration with Genomatix, information is treated apart from other biologic information given its Life Technologies, Roche and Illumina. potential misuses and its familial dimension. The proposal for revising For further information on Nowgen’s bioinformatics courses contact: the law is focusing on two major points of genetics: communication of Tom.hancocks@cmft.nhs.uk the genetic Information and optimisation of laboratory’s quality. Based on professional secrecy medical doctors could not inform, on their P01.30 own decision, family members about genetic characteristics, even if Geographical origin and genetic isolation in southern morocco relevant for them. New procedures to allow medical doctors to disclose L. SBII, M. LATIFI, H. HAMI, D. BENALI, A. MOKHTARI, A. SOULAYMANI; such information to family members are proposed; liability incurred in university Ibn Tofail fac Scienes Kenitra Maroc, Kenitra, Morocco. case of non transmission of the information and the role of patients The study of the endogamy provides information about the repartition, associations to deliver relevant information are underlined. Although the structure and the heterogeneity of the genetic heritage of provisions on quality aspects in a bioethics law can be discussed, populations. they aim to protect people through a high quality of laboratory tests The main aim of this study is the evaluation of the level of geographical and analyses performed, with regards to direct to consumer genetic endogamy in the population of Souss-Massa-Draa in south of Morocco. tests on internet. A key role will be devoted to the “Agence de la This work consists in a prospective survey of 277 families sampled at Biomédecine” for assessing quality of laboratories and delivering random from October 2005 until April 2007. From survey’s data, the information regarding such tests. Many other aspects have been choice of the spouse is studied according to the origin and the place of discussed in the preparatory debates to the revision, such as consent birth of the husband and the wife in the generation of the couples and issues (for deceased people) or biobanks and are absent from the in their parents’ generation. proposal. However these issues are among the most problematic in The results clearly showed tendency of couples to the geographical research and practice. We will discuss the consequences of this lack endogamy. In deed, in 83% of studied couples, the spouses chose each of regulation. other from the same origin whereas in parents’ generation, the choice of common origin represented 95%. Moreover, the intergenerational Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 56 P01.33 describe ethical dilemmas in a series of four cases involving predictive the Not so „incidental“ Research Results testing for hereditary ataxias in Cuba and Portugal. Ethical challenges B. Knoppers; demand a multidisciplinary approach, where genetic counselors, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. psychologists, social assistants, medical doctors and other health Research itself has always been understood as the search for professionals integrate the psychological, socio-familial and medical generalizable knowledge and not concerned with the individual per se. issues of complex decisions surrounding predictive testing. The clinical Today, the ability to perform whole-genome sequencing (WGS) at a scenarios presented and the general discussion could be useful for fraction of what it used to cost is about to change the “no returns” policy health professionals involved in predictive programs for hereditary of both longitudinal, population studies and some disease-specific ataxias and other neurodegenerative disorders. cohorts. Moreover, as researchers begin to access such population biobanks for disease-specific studies using (WGS) or, when begin P01.36 using WGS in their own clinical research, the concept of “incidental” Ethics of personal genetic profiling findings (ie. unforeseen and unrelated to the disease under study) may A. Lucassen1,2; also be challenged, (if not become obsolete), as the whole genome of 1University of Southampton Cancer Sciences Division, Southampton, United a person is exposed. The classic duo of returning only those results Kingdom, 2Nuffield Council on Bioethics, London, United Kingdom. with scientific validity and clinical utility is no longer a bulwark to refusal Following a two-year inquiry, the Nuffield Council on Bioethics, a UK to communicate when ethics guidance requires that any results with independent advisory body, has published a report which explores “significant welfare implications for the participant, whether health- the ethical issues raised by new developments in ‘personalised related, psychological or social” be returned. This raises the issue healthcare’, including commercial personal genetic profiling. The of which results exactly should be returned, when, by whom, and, to Council found that these services have a number of potential benefits, whom (if at all). such as providing reassurance or enabling people to take preventative Unless the delineation of responsibilities is clarified, it will be health action. But potential harms were also identified. For example, the professionals and researchers who may be the most “at-risk” test results can be unreliable and difficult to interpret; ‘good’ results from incidental findings. Indeed, the no-returns policy for research may lead to complacency in lifestyle; learning about risk of disease results that includes the not so “incidental” result may no longer be could be upsetting, particularly if no treatments are available; there is acceptable. How to delimit this seemingly, open-ended avenue of potential for misuse of personal genetic information; and people may potential professional responsibility and possibly, liability? What are seek unnecessary further tests or advice from their doctor. However, the mechanisms available? the number of people using genetic profiling services and whether this is currently leading to any actual harm is not known. P01.34 Several ethical values come into play, such as individuals’ ability to Assessing the Assessment tool: is the ELsi component of pursue their own interests and efforts by the state to reduce harm, and AccE adequate? the report explores the extent to which genetic profiling tests really C. Chen1,2,3, H. Howard1; do lead to healthcare becoming more ‘personalised’. On the basis 1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, of this, the Council makes a number of recommendations for policy. Belgium, 2Section Ethics, Philosophy and History of Medicine, IQ Healthcare, For example, regulators are urged to request evidence for any claims Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, being made by companies about the clinical value of their tests, and 3Dipartimento di Filosofia, Università degli Studi di Filosofia, Università degli governments are encouraged to provide information on their websites Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy. about the risks and benefits of personal genetic profiling, including the Genetic tests for susceptibility to common, complex disorders are relevance for insurance. proliferating, both in clinical and direct-to-consumer (DTC) settings. However, many of these tests, focusing on genes involved in P01.37 multifactorial disorders, have limited clinical validity and utility. Due to Are published genomic data free for further uses? Legal and the nature of the genetic information that these tests provide, coupled ethical issues in a context of data sharing with the relative lack of end-user genetic information literacy, it is A. Pigeon1,2,3, G. Chassang1,2, A. Cambon-Thomsen1,2; especially important that the quality of these tests (in both a clinical 1Inserm, U1027, Toulouse, France, 2Université de Toulouse, Paul Sabatier and DTC setting) be independently evaluated. A handful of tools and Toulouse 3, Toulouse, France, 3Université de Toulouse, Faculté de droit, Centre initiatives have been proposed to aid in the evaluation task. One de droit des affaires, Toulouse, France. such tool is the ACCE model; consisting of 44 questions, designed to The use of published information and data for generating electronic assess the quality of a genetic test’s Analytical validity, clinical validity, databases, such as LSDBs (locus specific databases), for meta- clinical utility and also, to address Ethical, legal and social issues analyses and for new association studies is frequent. Current policies (ELSI) of the test. Of the 44 questions, three have been allocated towards data sharing encourage access to and circulation of data. to examine the ELSI. Although literature exists that discusses the Nevertheless ethical issues are raised regarding informed consent adequacy of the ACC components in ACCE, little has been elaborated of the person from whom the data were collected. Published, hence for the ELSI questions. As such, we used a literature review and a publicly available data are not necessarily data free to be used. psychiatric genetic test case study to critically analyse the adequacy of Limitations given through the consent procedure may exist and the the ELSI component of ACCE. Our analysis identified some potential fact that data are published does not erase them. The problem is gaps in the ELSI component of ACCE and we discuss how these may growing with the rapid technological advancement and more control be reduced. The ELSI of genetic tests are particularly challenging and by the citizens about the use of their data. Those issues are new important, given among others, the possibility for the information to be challenges in the frame of the revision of the EU directive 95/47 on the simultaneously individual, familial and communal, and the short- and protection of personal data. We analysed various possible solutions long-term impact it can have on all these three levels. and studied the associated responsibilities of researchers, institutions, editors, ethics committees and data mining scientists. This reflexion P01.35 led to propose to systematically indicate in the publication itself or Ethical dilemmas in predictive testing: challenges for genetic as supplementary information possible other uses of data/samples counselors included in the informed consent and other limitations and to ask the T. Cruz1, L. Velázquez1, J. Sequeiros2, M. Paneque2; editors to consider introducing this in instructions to authors. It would 1Center for Research and Rehabilitation of Hereditary Ataxias CIRAH, Holguín, provide useful information to potential users in order for them to decide Cuba, 2IBMC-University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. whether to use the published data or not. It would be respectful of Predictive testing protocols are intended to help patients affected with privacy rights and autonomy. Nevertheless it remains limited in cases hereditary diseases understand their condition and make informed where the consent is not indicating the possible further uses of data. reproductive choices. However, predictive diagnosis process may Other solutions can be proposed in such cases. expose clinicians, consultands and families to ethical dilemmas that interfere with genetic counseling and the decision making process. We Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 57 P01.38 personal genome tests raise the same ELSI. We offer a systematic secondary use of research data: ENGAGE and BiosHaRE as approach towards questions regarding what ELSI to expect from proof of concept specific applications, and why. A. Tassé, B. Knoppers; Methods: Review of the bioethical literature, expert interviews and McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. conceptual analysis. Biobanking activity is increasingly at the heart of research practice. Results: ELSI may vary with the characteristics of the test, the Access to such resources is of major interest for research since it disease and the context in which testing is offered. For example, tests avoids the limitations of research conducted among smaller number of of limited clinical validity are less likely to be utilized as a basis for subjects. Alongside these benefits, however, remain the ethical issues discrimination than do those of higher levels of clinical validity. Further, of respect for the autonomy and privacy of research participants, most testing for a multitude of diseases simultaneously brings along an notably in the context of secondary use of data, i.e. where data is used unequalled quantity of information, thereby threatening the feasibility for purposes falling outside the scope of the consent given by research of informed consent. Also, testing for psychiatric diseases such as participants. clinical depression, is surrounded by various psychological and ethical The last decade has witnessed the attempt to establish the ethical sensitivities, which are much less pressing in testing for (most) somatic acceptability of the secondary use of data. It has remained unclear diseases. A major context characteristic is direct-to-consumer access however as when should research accessing biobanks be considered to personal genome testing, which is associated with ELSI of its own, as “primary” vs. “secondary” use, and as to how to apply these criteria such as lack of professional medical guidance. We have composed a in the context of international research consortia such as ENGAGE comprehensive list of characteristics that are of relevance to the ELSI- and BioSHaRE. debate. The European Network for Genetic and Genomic Epidemiology Conclusion: In an informed and meaningful ELSI-debate on (ENGAGE) is a research project performing meta-analyses in order personal genome testing for multifactorial diseases, consideration of to translate the wealth of data emerging from large-scale research in characteristics of the test, disease and the context is indispensable, genetic and genomic epidemiology from 23 population cohorts into for these characteristics determine the applicability of ELSI to specific information relevant to future clinical applications. personal genome tests. The goal of BioSHaRE is to allow researchers to use data pooled from different cohorts and biobank studies, thereby creating sample P01.41 sizes large enough to investigate questions relating to multifactorial Patients’ experiences and views of DNA testing and familial diseases. cascade screening for Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH): a In order to determine whether the use of already collected samples qualitative study and data in international research consortia should be considered as N. Hallowell1, N. Jenkins2, M. Douglas3, J. Lawton2; either “primary” or “secondary” use, both the ENGAGE and BioSHaRE 1Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Edinburgh consortia will serve as models for our study. University, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3NHS Lothian, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. P01.39 Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), an autosomal dominant disease, medical ethics and counseling genetic in smA manifests as a disorder of cholesterol metabolism. Early detection A. C. Papari, G. C. Cozaru; and treatment with statins can be effective in reducing morbidity and Andrei Şaguna University, Constanta, Romania. mortality from CVD. Familial cascade DNA screening for FH mutations Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is one of the most common autosomal is a clinical reality throughout Europe. Questions have been raised recessive diseases, affecting approximately 1 in 10,000 live births, and about the most efficient and cost-effective way of implementing with a carrier frequency of approximately 1 in 50. The SMA phenotype cascading. The argument for direct (clinician-mediated) versus indirect is widely variable, with the severity of symptoms influenced by several (patient-mediated) cascading is that the former overcomes patients’ genetic factors. Genetic risk assessment is an essential and integral reticence about disclosure and thus, maximises the number of component of SMA genetic testing and impacts genetic counseling relatives approached and captured in the cascade. However, research both before and after genetic testing is performed. suggests that family communication about genetic testing takes place To better understand the ethical difficulties associated with a condition without a need for this intervention. Moreover, direct cascading is like SMA, we report a couple where the man was diagnosed with reliant upon the index patient revealing family contact details, and this SMA type IV. He has a family history of SMA. Couple was provided may raise issues about confidentiality for some. To date no research information on SMA, including range of severity and test limitations. has been undertaken on the views of patients involved in indirect Parents was requested prenatal diagnosis because they did not cascading. This paper looks at patients’ experiences of DNA screening accept residual risk. and mediating familial cascade screening. The data were gathered More, it is almost certain that other father’s family members are also in in-depth interviews with 38 patients who had DNA testing in lipid carriers of genes mutation. Should the counselor be expected to break clinics SE Scotland. 15(39%) were referred for cascade appointments confidentiality to inform the at-risk family members of their genetic risk? in clinical genetics. Patients appreciate DNA testing being undertaken Comprehensive SMA genetic testing, comprising PCR-RFLP assay, by known and trusted lipid clinic staff. DNA testing was seen as part of SMN gene dosage analysis and genetic counseling, offers the most the normal lipid clinic routine. Having a genetics consultation to identify complete evaluation of SMA patients and their families at this time. relatives for cascading was perceived as facilitating, and potentially These cases illustrate that SMA testing, like other genetic testing, can increasing, family communication about FH. Patients expressed a lead to complicated scenarios and highlight the importance of genetic preference for indirect cascading, commenting that it may be less counseling for identified SMA carriers. A genetic counselor could help threatening for relatives than unsolicited clinical contact. this couple to understand the risk for own children and to develop strategies to accurately inform their family members of their possible P01.42 risk of SMA without being alarming. Conflicts regarding genetic counseling for Fragile X syndrome screening: A survey of clinical geneticists and genetic P01.40 counselors in israel Personal genome testing: characteristics of the test, the disease S. Lieberman, S. Zukerman, E. Levy-Lahad, G. Altarescu; and the context to clarify the discourse on ethical, legal and Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. societal issues Although Fragile X screening has been offered in Israel since 1994, E. M. Bunnik, M. H. N. Schermer, A. C. J. W. Janssens; issues related to potential neurological and gynecological symptoms Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. in carriers make counseling for Fragile X different from recessive Background: Personal genome tests are currently marketed directly- disorders. We evaluated the attitudes of geneticists regarding to-consumer to estimate genetic risks for a range of multifactorial genetic counseling given to the women undergoing screening. We diseases and other traits. These tests have spurred critical discussions performed a self-administered questionnaire including 13 study of their ethical, legal and societal implications (ELSI), but not all questions was mailed to all geneticists in Israel. The questions were Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 58 related to counseling for women pre and post screening regarding appropriate where a medical intervention was available and would themselves and the affected fetuses (including the risk for Premature usually be offered during childhood, but that such testing should Ovarian Insufficiency; FXPOI and Fragile X-Associated Tremor Ataxia not generally be undertaken for adult-onset disorders unless there Syndrome; FXTAS). Out of a total of 80 geneticists 34 responded were clear cut and unusual arguments in favour in a particular case. with no additional responses on e-mail re-call. There was no clear The report concluded that it was important to preserve or maximise consensus for 11/13 (85%) presented questions. The most striking children’s future choices where no clear benefits would accrue during differences in opinion were observed for issues regarding FXTAS risk childhood. The guidance has recently been reviewed by a working in prescreening counseling sessions (p<0.05).This study demonstrates group on behalf of the British Society for Human Genetics, and a new that , there is no consensus on critical variables implying risk for fetus report was published in 2010. This was informed by research, and took and mother and that counseling practices are dissimilar even in this into account developments including other guidelines published over small cohort of experts. We demonstrated a conflict between the the last 15 years. The report includes recommendations about genetic detailed amount of information which should be given prior to the test testing of children, an explanation of the legal (in the UK) and clinical in order to allow informed decisions and the overload of information rationale for these and case studies to assist professionals in their use which may cause confusion. of the recommendations. P01.43 P01.45 the use of genealogy databases in genetic health care Fourteen year’s experience of genetic counseling for hereditary V. Stefansdottir1, H. Skirton2, O. T. Johansson3, J. J. Jonsson1,4; hearing loss patients in iran 1Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The National University Hospital S. Arzhangi1, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, Z. Fattahi1, M. Moheni1, P. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Jamali2, K. Jalalvand1, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1; Kingdom, 3Dept. of Medical Oncology, The National University Hospital of 1Genetics Research Center, USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ. counseling centre, Shahrood, Islamic Republic of Iran. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. Diagnosis and estimation of recurrence risk are components of a Background: The use of electronic genealogical databases could complete genetic evaluation of a child with hereditary hearing loss facilitate the construction of accurate and extensive pedigrees in (HHL). The disease can be classified into syndromic or nonsyndromic genetic health care. Genealogical databases could be linked to specific forms. The most common pattern of inheritance in HHL is autosomal disorder databases in order to increase the accuracy of pedigrees and recessive (AR) with a 25% risk of transmission to the next generation. inform the genetic risk assessment. The aim of this study was to provide more accurate genetic information Aim: Systematic review of the published literature on the use of using in genetic counseling for Iranian HHL families. genealogy databases to construct pedigrees for risk assessments in Since 1996, genetic counseling has been provided for over 2650 genetic health care. deaf families. Majority of them had 2 and more affected child. Over Design: A systematic literature search was undertaken using the sixty percent of the families who referred to us had consanguinities following 12 combined search terms: “Genealogy database* AND marriages. Out of 2650 families, 80% had AR pattern of HHL, 1% genetic risk AND family history”, “Genealogy database* AND clinical AD and X-linked, and the remaining cases were sporadic cases. genetics” , “Genealogy Database* AND medical AND family history”, Nonsyndromic and syndromic forms of HHL account for 79% (n=2094) “Cancer registry AND genetic service”, “Cancer registration AND and 9% (n=238) of families, respectively. Most of the deaf patients had clinical genetics AND genealogy”, “Database* AND family history congenital HL (n=2065). The mutation in GJB2 accounted for overall AND genetic risk assessment”, “Genealogy database* AND cancer 16% of the referred families; however, the prevalence of the mutation registry”, “Database* AND genealogy AND genetics”, “Genealogy OR in this gene significantly varies among different ethnic groups in Iran. heraldry AND database”, “Genetic counsel* and clinical genetics AND In Northwest of Iran the frequency was about 30% while in the East genealogy” and “Cancer genetic counsel* and genealogy”. and South was as low as 4%. Data sources: EbscoHost, PubMed, Web of Science, Ovid, the Grey We have been able to provide result for 30 to 50% of the referral literature and reference lists of identified studies. families depending to ethnic population. Results: Of 683 titles identified, one study described experience of So far, we have provided genetic diagnosis, carrier detection, and using a genealogy database in a cancer registry in support of genetic recurrence risk estimation for 1500 families to help them in decision health care. Two more papers discussed the potential use of genealogy making for future pregnancies. databases. conclusions: Limited published information exists on the use of genealogy databases in genetic health care although numerous P01.46 such databases exist. This may reflect legal or regulative restrictions the use of iPad in genetic counseling based on autonomy or information risk. Studies are needed to address V. Stefansdottir1, H. Skirton2, O. T. Johansson3, J. J. Jonsson1,4; the benefits and drawbacks of using genealogy databases in genetic 1Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, The National University Hospital health care. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 3Dept. of Medical Oncology, The National University Hospital of P01.44 Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ. Genetic testing of children: report of a working party of the of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland., Reykjavik, Iceland. British society for Human Genetics Accurate information about genetic aspects of disorders is needed in T. Clancy1, A. Lucassen2, J. Montgomery3, A. Clarke4, A. Hall5, A. Fryer6, A. genetic counseling. To address this need and enable clear and easily Fenwick3, M. Parker7; understood explanations, professionals in genetic health services 1St Mary’s Hospital and University of Manchester, Manchester, United have developed a number of educational aids. These aids can be used Kingdom, 2University of Southampton and Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, to inform the counselee of the inheritance pattern, risk to relatives, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3University of Southampton, Southampton, genetic testing options, symptoms and surveillance. They can also be United Kingdom, 4University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 5PHG used as decision aids regarding genetic testing and prevention. Most Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Royal Liverpool Children’s Hospital, often these aids are visual; images, booklets, interactive computer- Liverpool, United Kingdom, 7Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom. based programs, checklists and CD/DVD´s, Genetic tests can offer immediate clinical benefits and should be It has been shown that counselees using educational aids before or utilised in the same way as any other investigation used to determine during genetic counseling session are more likely to remember their the best clinical management of a child. But, genetic tests can also risk status, show significant knowledge improvement and are more generate information about children’s health in the medium to long satisfied with their decisions. However, the use of educational aids term future, rather than about current health problems. Decisions has not been shown to benefit the psychosocial aspects of genetic about the optimum time to carry out a genetic test can therefore raise counseling and counselees prefer personal communication. difficult issues for health professionals, for parents and for children Recently, touch screen computers such as iPad, have made their way and young people themselves. In 1994 a report from the UK’s Clinical into the medical world. We have introduced the use of iPad in genetic Genetics Society recommended that predictive genetic testing was counseling at The National University Hospital of Iceland. With an Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics educa- tion, Genetic services, and Public policy 59 iPad the genetic counselor can show the counselee defined packages conclusion: The result reveals that the counselees have high of information, including small videos, and use the touch screen to expectation prior to the counselling and these expectations are usually draw further images for explanation. The flow of information can be met. In this study,subjects whose expectations were not meet seem to controlled and it is possible to zoom in on images. The use of iPad be morevulnerable after the counselling. combines the benefit of personal communication and an educational aid in genetic counseling to improve the overall experience. P01.49 Recontacting patients: needed, expected or desired? A literature P01.47 review the medium and the message: Genetic counselling in the direct- S. Jansen, H. Meijers-Heijboer, L. Henneman, P. J. G. Zwijnenburg; to-consumer genetic testing industry VU university medical center, dept. Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands. S. E. Kelly1, A. Harris2, S. Wyatt2,3; Aim: As our insights and knowledge in medical genetics is continuously 1ESRC Centre for Genomics in Society (Egenis), University of Exeter, Exeter, expanding, recontacting patients as new information becomes United Kingdom, 2Maastricht Virtual Knowledge Studio, University of Maastricht, available could be desirable. The purpose of this literature review was Maastricht, Netherlands, 3e-Humanities Group, Royal Netherlands Academy of to establish the extent to which recontacting patients after previous Arts & Sciences (KNAW), Amsterdam, Netherlands. genetic counseling is needed for, expected or desired by patients and As part of a larger study of direct-to-consumer genetic testing (DTCGT) recognised by counselors. for psychiatric disorders, we investigated the role genetic counselling methods: The starting point for the literature review was a Pubmed is coming to play in the DTCGT industry, and its implications for search using “Duty to Recontact”[MeSH] and using “recontacting”[All how genetic counselling is understood and provided, addressing a Fields] AND (“patients”[MeSH Terms] OR “patients”[All Fields]) common critique of the DTCGT industry (Hudson et al. 2007; Nuffield and a search in Web of Science® on topic “RECONTACT OR Council on Bioethics 2010). We performed qualitative analyses of RECONTACTING”. The results were sifted by reading the title and (if two web-based resources (a sample of DTCGT websites and genetic available) abstract. The referencelists of relevant papers were also counselling blogs and forums), to answer the following research included. questions: with what types of genetic testing products is genetic Results: A total number of 22 publications, addressing this issue to counselling offered; what forms of genetic counselling are offered; some extent, were retrieved. There were few attempts to define the how is genetic counselling represented in terms of function, trust, and legal, ethical and social context of this issue, mostly based on expert expertise; how do genetic counselors discuss genetic counselling in opinion. We found two studies describing surveys among clinical the DTCGT industry? Findings: We identified 21 companies selling geneticists and genetic counselors and three studies investigating genetic tests for psychiatric disorders online. Of these, 15 do not patient’s or relative’s attitudes. The number of participants was 13-61 provide genetic counselling (although several provide links to genetic patients or relatives/study and 58-252 health care professionals/study. counselling services or recommend genetic counselling). We identified The results of most studies show significant variation in outcomes. A the following types of genetic counselling provision: integrated genetic comparison between outcomes of the different studies is hampered by testing and counselling product; discretionary genetic counselling; the differences in study population and methods. genetic counselling for product advice; result interpretation counselling; conclusion: We provide an overview on the literature on recontacting future health and information strategy counselling. We further consider patients in medical genetics, indicating that this is a relatively under- forms of interaction and information provision (e.g., email, phone); researched area. Considering our rapidly growing insights and representations of genetic counselling as a profession; and ethical possibilities in medical genetics, future studies are needed. aspects of genetic counselling practice (e.g., privacy, confidentiality). We conclude that both the ‘medium’ of DTCGT and the ‘message’ P01.50 of common genetic polymorphism-based risk assessment have congenital and genetic disorders in the Eastern mediterranean implications for the field of genetic counselling. Region: challenges to public health and priorities to address H. Hamamy1, I. Fadhil2, H. Madi2; P01.48 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, Geneva, Switzerland, informational needs and expectation prior to genetic counselling 2World Health Organization Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office, Cairo, for hereditary cancer and fulfilment of these needs and Egypt. expectations The Eastern Mediterranean Region (EMR) of the World Health C. Herland1, H. Vetti1, K. Nordin2, C. Bjorvatn11,2; Organization (WHO) includes 22 countries in the Middle East and 1Western Norway Familial Centre, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, North Africa that are currently facing major challenges in providing Norway, Bergen, Norway, 2Department of Public Health and Primary Health comprehensive and up-to-date community genetic services. Care, University og Bergen, Norway, Bergen, Norway. This study directed by WHO Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office Background: The fulfilment of counselees’ expectations in cancer (EMRO) reviews available data from EMR countries on the current genetic counselling and how this affects the outcome of counselling situation of congenital and genetic disorders. Data on the epidemiologic have received little attention so far. The aims of the present study profile and available services was collected from published literature, was to investigate the informational needs and expectations among from questionnaire sheets sent to Ministries of Health, and from counselees prior to their first genetic counselling for hereditary cancer. personal experience. We investigated also whether these needs and expectations were Consanguineous marriage is customary in most EMR communities fulfilled. Furthermore, we explored cancer specific worry, levels of and intra-familial unions currently account for 20-50% of all marriages, anxiety and levels of depression among the counselees. Lastly, we with first cousin unions amounting to 20-30% of all marriages. investigated if there were any relations between fulfilled expectations Haemoglobinopathies in EMR countries show high population carrier and levels of anxiety or depression after the counselling. rates of 2-7% for ß-thalassaemia , 2-50% for α-thalassaemia, and 0.3- methods: One hundred and twenty-eight counselees (response rate 30% for sickle cell, while G6PD deficiency ranges from 2.5 to 27%. 65%) participated in this study. Data were collected both before and In countries including Oman and UAE, birth rate of Down syndrome after the counselling session. Levels of anxiety and depression were amounted to 2/1000 births. assessed by the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, the level Currently, community genetic services such as newborn screening, of worry by the Cancer Worry Scale and informational needs and premarital carrier screening for thalassemias, prenatal screening, expectations by the Quote-gene ca. . genetic counselling, education and birth defects registries are Result: The majority of counselees were highly satisfied with the extent available in some EMR countries. Such genetic services, however, to which their informational needs and expectations were fulfilled, remain patchy and selective. although some counselees were not satisfied regarding «emotional The basic strategies needed for implementing community genetic matters». The mean level of anxiety among the participants decreased services that depend on a combination of basic public health measures, after the counselling session. The result also indicates that if needs and the education and involvement of the primary health care network and expectations were not fulfilled, the counselees reported higher will be discussed. levels of anxiety and depression. WHO has a crucial role in helping EMR countries planning and Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 60 implementing community genetic services and in encouraging regional P01.53 and international genetic collaborations. test translation: from a research test to diagnostic test P. Pohjola1, M. Peippo2, M. Penttinen3, K. Elenius1, H. Kääriäinen4; P01.51 1University of Turku, Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Medical A critical appraisal of the private genetic and pharmacogenomic biochemistry and Genetics, Turku, Finland, 2The Department of Medical testing environment in Greece Genetics, The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3The Clinical A. Sagia1, D. N. Cooper2, K. Mitropoulos3, K. Poulas1, V. Stathakopoulos4, G. P. Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Central Hospital, Patrinos1; Turku, Finland, 4National Institute of Health and Welfare, Public Health 1University of Patras,, Patras, Greece, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, School Genomics Unit, Helsinki, Finland. of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Golden Helix New molecular genetic methods provide a vast spectrum of tools Institute of Biomedical Research, Athens, Greece, 4Department of Marketing for detecting various mutations. Every routine diagnostic laboratory and Communication, Athens University of Economics and Business, Athens, has to evaluate which methods can be adopted from the research Greece. setting for routine diagnostics and which are the factors that dictate In the post-genomic era, we are witnessing rapid progress in the the applicability of a given method in a diagnostic laboratory. In most identification of the molecular basis of human inherited disorders laboratories, instrumentation is not a limiting factor, but the challenge and the elucidation of genotype-phenotype relationships. The rate of is to determine the most cost-effective test, taking into consideration progress has been driven not only by the determination and ongoing the utility of the test for patients. decipherment of the human genome sequence but also by the advent We have used Sotos syndrome as a model for test translation. The of new technological developments that have dramatically reduced key issue in successful translation was a close collaboration between the costs of genetic analysis. Consequently, a considerable number academic research and diagnostic laboratory, adding to that a close of genetic testing centers have emerged, both in Europe and the collaboration with a clinical genetics unit, ensuring the up-to-date United States, which offer a plethora of different genetic tests. We knowledge in each phase of translation. We have tested altogether have performed a nationwide survey of 18 private genetic testing 150 Sotos syndrome samples, and detected a mutation in 30% of the laboratories in Greece to acquire a better understanding of the genetic samples. Many clinicians meet Sotos patients rarely and, consequently, testing services that these centers provide, specifically the types of the test has been mostly used in cases of suspected Sotos syndrome genetic test offered, the target groups, marketing channels, costs of rather than in confirming the clinical diagnosis. Finding the mutation is analysis and accreditation. Molecular genetic and cytogenetic testing valuable for the patient/family, while the value of negative result is less were found to be the predominant types of genetic testing services clear and other differential diagnostic diagnoses should be considered. offered although there is an increasing demand for pharmacogenomic The Sotos syndrome test has been a suitable model for test translation, testing. The main target group for private genetic testing laboratories because the genetic background and genotype-phenotype correlation are physicians who are approached via the Internet, through personal are well characterised. However, in syndromes where mutational contacts from sales representatives, and at scientific conferences. background or genotype-phenotype correlation are less clear, the test Genetic testing costs are fairly low in Greece. Although the majority of for the patients and diagnostic laboratory may remain of low utility, and private genetic laboratories either employ or collaborate with a genetic test translation should be carefully considered. counselor, few of them are accredited for the provision of genetic testing services. This study provides the basis for a critical appraisal P01.54 of the private genetic testing environment in Greece and provides a Direct-to-consumer genetic testing for non-health purposes in model for replication in other European countries. East Asia K. Muto, Y. Inoue, H. Hong; P01.52 The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. the impact of genetic testing in reproductive medicine: anxiety Background: In 2010, DTC (direct-to-consumer) genetic testing for and distress three and twelve months after disclosure - an health purposes have been featured in Europe for its regulation or index-control study alert to the public by the ESHG and the HGC in the UK. In contrast, F. Vansenne, M. Goddijn, S. Snijder, B. Redeker, N. J. Leschot, F. van der several Shanghai-based companies stated to advertise in Japan to sell Veen, P. M. M. Bossuyt, C. A. J. M. de Borgie; DTC genetic tests for non-health purposes, such as tests advertised Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. to identify genes related to an individual’s talent, character traits and As more and more genetic risk factors for disease are discovered, more aptitude. Regulation of DTC genetic tests for non-health purposes genetic tests are offered to patients. None of these tests are properly have rarely discussed before. evaluated for clinical utility, efficacy and psychosocial consequences. Purpose and methods: To address broad ethical, legal and social In reproductive medicine, couples with recurrent miscarriage (RM) and implications arising from such tests, we’ve conducted 1) systematic couples with a man with poor semen quality are karyotyped as part literature review and policy analysis towards genetic testing in Asian of the diagnostic work-up. We evaluated the psychological impact of countries including Japan, South Korea, Taiwan and China, 2) receiving a genetic test result in both partners of couples with a genetic questionnaire survey to the Japanese general public to know their abnormality compared to controls. recognition and interests towards DTC tests. methods: Longitudinal prospective index-control study. Participants Results: Advertisement is commonly observed in East Asia though received 3 questionnaires; just before disclosure of genetic test result, some of the tests have been banned in South Korea. Our survey 3 and 12 months after disclosure. Outcome measures were scores on shows that 1.3% (47) of respondents has purchased DTC genetic the Becks Depression Inventory (BDI), State-Trait Anxiety Index (STAI) tests, and 72.9% (2,627) of them hasn’t recognized such tests. They and Impact of Event Scale (IES). show higher interests towards tests for health purposes (25.3-53.4%) Results: Between 2006-2009, 439 subjects were included. 172 than non-health purposes (8.2%-21.9%). Younger generation shows patients from couples with RM (36 indexes, 35 partners, 101 controls), higher interests toward DTC genetic tests for their children. 267 patients from couples with poor semen quality (48 indexes, 42 Discussions: The trend of our survey shows the same trend from the partners, 177 controls). No differences were found between scores on survey conducted in 2007. Many parents are deeply concerned about BDI and STAI between the groups before disclosure or during follow- providing education for their children and it’s difficult to intervention up. On the IES both indexes and partners had significant higher scores parental decision to purchase such tests. We should more actively than controls (p<0.001). These effects were still present after 1 year consider issues particularly arisen from such tests. follow-up. conclusion: Receiving an abnormal genetic test result seems to have negative psychological consequences for both partners of couples with RM or poor semen quality in short and in long term. In the light of ongoing discussions on the efficacy of karyotyping these couples, we need to realise that genetic tests can do harm.Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics educa- tion, Genetic services, and Public policy 61 P01.55 States, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, EuroGentest clinical Utility Gene cards - guidelines for the Estonia, 4Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. clinically validated use of genetic testing Since 2000, Estonian Genome Center of University of Tartu (EGCUT), A. Dierking, J. Schmidtke; in partnership with primary care providers (PCPs) nationwide, has Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. recruited over 50,000 gene donors for the Estonian Biobank. This The Additional Protocol to the Convention of Human Rights and collaboration has ensured a collection of high quality health data, Biomedicine, Concerning Genetic Testing for Health Purpose (Article 6) as pre-existing medical information has been included. Additionally, declares that clinical utility is an essential criterion for deciding to offer it represents a starting point in the working relationship between a genetic test to a person. Clinical utility refers to the ability of a genetic EGCUT and PCPs, who are expected to facilitate the use of genomic test to significantly affect the clinical setting and patient outcome. In information in the clinical setting once genomic information has order to assess this information and make it available to clinicians, sufficient clinical validity and utility. This study investigated the geneticists, referrers, service providers and payers, EuroGentest, an knowledge base and expectations of PCPs. Of 130 PCPs surveyed, EU-funded Network of Excellence, designed the Clinical Utility Gene 64 responded, representing 8% of the 804 PCPs in Estonia. Overall, Cards (CUGCs). PCPs demonstrated eagerness to apply genomic information in CUGCs are disease-specific guidelines written by international practice, as well as a willingness to improve their knowledge base authorships. Based on the ACCE framework (Analytical validity, in genetics and genomics. Results also indicated that substantial Clinical validity, Clinical utility, Ethical, legal and social issues) the improvements in genetics education are needed to achieve EGCUT’s CUGC backbone consists of three parts: disease characteristics, plans for personalized medicine in Estonia. It is a goal of EGCUT test characteristics and clinical utility. CUGCs represent concise to implement a database that can be accessed by all physicians in and comprehensive documents for the clinically validated use of Estonia that would contain genomic data, along with all other medically genetic testing. All guidelines are freely available on the websites of relevant information on the patient, and could be used in medical EuroGentest, the European Journal of Human Genetics (EJHG) and counseling for and effective application of genomic information in Orphanet. clinical care. Several additional factors in Estonia may help to realize As of January 2011, the clinical utility gene cards project receives that goal: the national health care system, availability of electronic support by EuroGentest 2 and the European Society of Human health care records, and the fact that University of Tartu is responsible Genetics. Initial steps taken for each gene card include the selection for the education of health care workers as the only medical school in of principal authors, the provision of document templates, as well as the country. support during document publication. Subsequently, each CUGC is peer-reviewed and published by the EJHG. From 2011 to 2013, 300 P01.58 new CUGCs are planned to be established. The regular revisions and One more proof that practice makes perfect inclusion of new developments and findings ensure that all published R. Dragotoiu; documents reflect the state-of-the-art. Medical and Pharmacy University Carol Davila, Bucuresti, Romania. The aim of this study is finding a way to determine better achievements P01.56 in learning genetics. Motivation for a more thorough learning at the end Genetic testing and common disorders in a public health of the first semester is a final examination, although many students framework - Recommendations of the European society of bear in mind the wish to practice in another field beside medical Human Genetics genetics. Because “practice makes perfect” in every field under the C. G. van El, M. C. Cornel; proper guidance, I have tried to discover if repeating the information Department of Clinical Genetics/EMGO+ Institute, VU University Medical could change the marks students obtained. Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. The study group consisted of 128 first year medical students, who Currently, the genetics research community is sceptical about the were tested twice. During the middle of the term they received possibilities of genetic susceptibility testing and screening. The Public marks for answering two questions: one from the practicals’ and one and Professional Policy Committee of the European Society of Human from the lectures’ content. Then all the questions from the lectures Genetics, EuroGentest and the Institute for Prospective Technological were discussed, so students could learn what was expected as an Studies convened to discuss relevance and possibilities of genetic answer. Despite lack of time, these answers were briefly repeated at testing for common disorders in a public health perspective. It is the beginning of the next practical. To view the impact of repetition, suggested to take the spectrum ranging from monogenic disorders I compared these marks in each of the two questions with those to common complex disorders into account. Associations between obtained at the end of the term. At this final test 88 students had to genetic variants and disease risk have been established, for instance answer exactly the same two questions as the first time, while 30 for hereditary breast and ovarian cancer, colon cancer, diabetes control students received different ones, randomly distributed, but from mellitus (MODY subtypes), thrombosis, cardiovascular disorders, the same question pool. celiac disease and Alzheimer disease. Although these examples relate In both groups about 70% of students had better results at the second to monogenic sub-forms of common disease, they can nevertheless be testing, supporting consequently the idea that when teaching medical used to reflect on possibilities and relevant obstacles in using the new genetics one can mould his activity, repetition providing a better and genetics in public health. Recommendations have been formulated therefore more satisfying outcome for both trainer and trainee. stressing: avoiding too high expectations of genomics applications; the need to establish clinical utility of genetic testing before introducing P01.59 large-scale applications; in case clinical utility is not proven, but likely, Hearing impairment data analysis in clients of the genetic research should accompany pilot projects; monogenic conditions can counseling network of iran welfare organization (1999 - 2009) serve as examples for common complex diseases, when identifying S. Akbaroghli1,2, H. Masoudi Farid1, S. A. Aledavood1, F. Kavezadeh1, P. etiological pathways and developing healthcare in a responsible way; Jamali3, N. Sorkhkooh Azari4, B. Azadeh5, N. Jianabed6, G. Mohammadian7, sufficiently qualified health-care professionals should be involved in M. Taghdiri8, M. Borujerdi9, F. Habibi10, M. Mohammadi Sarband11, S. S. case of direct-to-consumer genetic testing; regulation is necessary Mahdavi11, J. Malbin12, Z. T. Zand13, J. Rezazadeh Varaghchi14, F. Sabbagh to guarantee truth-in labelling and truthful promotion of genetic tests; Kermani15, P. Nikui16, H. Khodai17, H. Yazdan18, M. Salamatmanesh11, G. stratified medicine will only be successful if health-care insurance is Fatemi19, A. Moshtaghi20, H. A. Saberi11, G. Karbasi21, H. Adibi11, K. Alimadadi18, based on solidarity; especially in developing countries governments A. Sahebazamani15, A. Kamangari22, S. H. Mussavi23, S. M. Rajabi24, H. should avoid an access gap to genetic testing of proven clinical utility. Dehghan25, R. Torabi26, F. Mohammadi18, F. Ebadi27, R. Farajollahi28, S. F. Hejazi29, M. Kasiri30, N. Janmohammadi31, M. Sohrab Jaidari32, M. Rassuli33, F. P01.57 Fardanesh11; Genomics education for primary care providers in Estonia 1Preventing Disabilities Office of Iran Welfare Org., Tehran, Islamic Republic L. Leitsalu1, L. Hercher2, A. Metspalu1,3,4; of Iran, 2Dr. Akbaroghli Genetic Counseling Ctr., Tehran, Islamic Republic 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Sarah Lawrence of Iran, 3Semnan Province Welfare Org., Semnan, Islamic Republic of Iran, College Joan H. Marks Human Genetics Program, Bronxville, NY, United 4Azarbayejan Sharghi Province Welfare Org., Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 62 5Esfahan Province Welfare Org., Esfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Khorasan the essence of traditional clinical values and how to maximize the Razavi Province Welfare Org., Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Khuzestan translational relevance of genetic research for patients and for society? Province Welfare Org., Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 8Fars Province A main concern is that the rapid penetration of systematic technologies Welfare Org., Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 9Ghom Province Welfare Org., into genetic medical departments blurs established frontiers between Ghom, Islamic Republic of Iran, 10Gilan Province Welfare Org., Gilan, Islamic research and clinics. A huge amount of personal medical data will Republic of Iran, 11Tehran Province Welfare Org., Tehran, Islamic Republic indeed be produced, including results irrelevant to any particular of Iran, 12Azarbayejan Gharbi Province Welfare Org., Orumiyeh, Islamic clinical problem but which may be of importance to the patient in other Republic of Iran, 13Bushehr Province Welfare Org., Bushehr, Islamic Republic ways or in the future. Our present inability to interpret most of the data of Iran, 14Khorasan Jonubi Province Welfare Org., Birjand, Islamic Republic requires ethical consideration. Questions of personal data storage, of Iran, 15Kerman Province Welfare Org., Kerman, Islamic Republic of Iran, possible updating and conditions to re-contact patients and families 16Hormozgan Province Welfare Org., Bandar abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, require the development of appropriate rules or guidelines prior to 17Yazd Province Welfare Org., Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 18Kermanshah clinical implementation. Clinicians, public health practitioners and Province Welfare Org., Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 19Zanjan relevant decision-makers should also determine their strategies and Province Welfare Org., Zanjan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 20Ghazvin Province approaches in an era of such rapid advances. Main general challenges Welfare Org., Ghazvin, Islamic Republic of Iran, 21Kordestan Province Welfare raised by High Throughput Technologies will be discussed and some Org., Sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22Mazandaran Province Welfare positions proposed. Org., Amol, Islamic Republic of Iran, 23Lorestan Province Welfare Org., Khorramabad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 24Mazandaran Province Welfare Org., P01.61 Sari, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 25Golestan Province Welfare Org., Gorgan, Genetic testing for Lynch syndrome: Psychological impact and Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 26Markazi Province Welfare Org., AraK, Iran, opinion about reproductive decision-making among mutation Islamic Republic of Iran, 27Kohgiluyeh and Boyerahmad Province Welfare carriers Org., Yasuj, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 28Ardabil Province Welfare Org., A. Combes, L. Roca, M. Ychou, C. Fiess, F. CASTAN, J. Duffour; Ardabil, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 29Khorasan Shomali Province Welfare CRLC Val d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France. Org., Bojnord, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 30Chaharmahal and Bakhtiari Background: New assisted-reproduction techniques as prenatal Province Welfare Org., Shahrekord, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 31Sistan and diagnosis (PND) and preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) are Baluchestan Province Welfare Org., Zahedan, Iran, Islamic Republic of Iran, sometimes proposed in inherited cancer predispositions. These The importance of genetic and congenital factors which causes many techniques are debated in some European countries regarding diseases and disabilities is obvious over the world.In Iran,Prevention Hereditary NonPolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC). This interview of Genetic Disabilities program has been planned with the aim of study aimed to assess the psychological impact and the opinion about implementation of a genetic counseling network.For implementing this reproductive decision-making in HNPCC mutated individuals, after program The network has gradually expanded since the year 1997,now genetic test results disclosure. we have 169 genetic counseling centers throughout the country. methods: A self-report questionnaire including socio-demographic One of the chief complaints of clients of these centers has been the data, psychological status and reproductive options was retrospectively history of hearing impairment.In this study we have gathered the sent to 101 HNPCC mutation carriers (patients and their relatives) data from 1999 until 2009 about hearing impairment in our provincial from a complete oncogenetic colorectal data-base between 1997 and referral centers in genetic counseling network.The total number of 2010. The prevalence of posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) was files having deafness history in pedigrees among 118786 files are assessed at the time of result disclosure and at least one year later, 6521(5.5%).The total number of files having deafness history in each using IES-R(Impact of Event Scale-Revised) of spouses is 960(14.7%),in both spouses is 625(9.6%), in offsprings Results: Complete data were available for 34 individuals (25 relatives, is 1460(22.4%),in one Offspring is 957(14.7%)&in two or more 9 patients): 17 males, 17 females, median age of 33.5(22-59), with offsprings is 503(7.7%).The total number of files which are positive mutations in hMLH1 (15) hMSH2 (15) and hMSH6 (4) genes. for Connexin 26 is 168(2.58%),Connexin 26 & 30 is 8(0.12%),other Only 13.8% of participants reported significant immediate PTSD. They nonsyndromic AR genes is 7(0.11%),other syndromic AR genes is mainly explained their distress by fear of premature death (43.3%) 26(0.4%),nonsyndromic AD genes is 1(0.015%) and syndromic AD and passing on mutated genes (41.9%). For 90.3% of respondents, genes is 5(0.08).The total number of deaf people is 9817: 5313(54%) reproductive decision-making remained unchanged after results. males and 4512(46%) females.The numbers of different types of Among reproductive options, PND/PGD or spontaneous natural consanguinity among the clients (the total number of files with deafness conception were equally reported (50%). None of socio-demographic history) are double cousins: 87(1.33%), first cousins:2803(42.98%),first or psycho-medical variables were significantly associated with both cousins once removed:310(4.75%),second cousins:720(11.04)&nonc choices. onsanguineous: 2839(43.54%).The total number of files with deafness conclusion: A minority of mutation carriers reported significant history due to different modes of inheritance in pedigrees are: levels of distress after result genetic disclosure. Half of respondents environmental factors:87(1.33%), nonsyndromic AR:2961(45.41%), were in favour of PND/PGD (as much as those interested by natural syndromic AR:269(4.13%), nonsyndromicAD:400(6.13%), syndromic conception) but we are taking about an opinion and not their intention. AD:70(1.07%), nonsyndromic X-Linked:32(0.49%), syndromic X-Linked:9(0.14%), mitochondrial:3(0.05%) & unknown causes:1171 P01.62 (17.96%). Oncogenetics as a tool of cancer personalized medicine: a two- year experience in a public hospital in Brazil P01.60 A. A. P. Santa Rosa1,2, B. P. Costa3, B. A. L. França3, B. A. Fernandes4, F. A. S. Are genetic testing technologies driving clinical practice? Ribeiro4, R. J. Muharre4, M. Valadão4, R. A. C. Leal4, D. César4, P. R. Cotrim5, T. S. Julia1,2,3, A. Soulier1,3, A. Cambon-Thomsen1,3; Jeunon5, A. Caldas5, L. Zamagna6, H. V. Moysés7, J. C. C. Rocha2, R. Facadio1, 1Inserm, U1027, Toulouse, France, 2Clinical genetics department, University S. S. Azevedo8; hospital, Toulouse, France, 3Université de Toulouse, Paul Sabatier Toulouse 3, 1Ministério da Saúde / Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso / Departamento de Toulouse, France. Pesquisa, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 2COI - Clínicas Oncológicas Integradas, Rio As the demand for genetic analysis is increasing in the health care de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Ministério da Saúde / Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso / system, the extension of diagnostic tests for genetic disorders is Serviço de Oncologia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 4Ministério da Saúde / Hospital needed. The majority of genetic diseases are molecularly and clinically Federal de Bonsucesso / Serviço de Cirurgia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5Ministério highly heterogeneous and until recently, the available techniques lacked da Saúde / Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso / Serviço de Dermatologia, Rio the required capacity to test many genes in parallel. Next generation de Janeiro, Brazil, 6Ministério da Saúde / Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso sequencing technologies already available in research provide a / Serviço de Ginecologia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 7Ministério da Saúde / unique opportunity to develop new diagnostic tools for heterogeneous Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso / Serviço de Urologia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, genetic diseases. But their clinical use raises major and previously 8Ministério da Saúde / Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso / Direção Geral, Rio de unaddressed issues. In a context of innovation, implementing new technologies is aiming to optimize clinical care. How to preserve Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics educa- tion, Genetic services, and Public policy 63 Janeiro, Brazil. Index (PWBGI); 3) the Short Form 36 Health Survey Questionnaire The purpose of Oncogenetics is twofold: to identify a portion of (SF-36). population with increased risk for cancer by identifying those with Results: Eighteen patients (M:5, F: 13; mean age: 48,52, range significant family history and to successfully intervene in these age:28-75) were assessed. individuals reducing their incidence of and mortality from cancer by The means and standard deviations of the PWBGI scales are: Anxiety enhanced and directed genetic screening, early detection, prophylactic 16,38 (4,90), Depression 11,55 (2,57), Well-being 10,66 (3,56), Self surgery, and so forth. control 10,56 (3,53), Global health 10,44 (4,55), Vitality 11,78 (4,18). This individualized approach has been carried out for the last two The means and standard deviations of the SF-36 scales are: Physical years in Hospital Federal de Bonsucesso, the biggest and most functioning 78,61 (30,83), Role-Physical 62,5 (50,62), Bodily pain important general hospital in Rio de Janeiro, performing almost 500 82,28 (30,13), General health 51,83 (31,66), Vitality 54,72 (25,34), oncology consultations monthly and about 600 cancer surgeries yearly Social functioning 72,92 (28,75), Role-emotional 70,39 (51,64), Mental . As about 10% of these cases are familial and non-related, there are health 60,67 (18,98). Sample mean scores were found lower than the 60 new cancer-prone families undergoing our attention yearly. With normative scores. regards to colorectal cancer, 20 HNPCC families and 3 FAP patients Conclusions: The current preliminary findings show a critical impact have been identified based on family history and pathology data, being of DNA testing on psychological well being and the quality of life of referred to genetic counseling and specific cancer control strategies. the presympotamic HD gene carriers: they were characterized by As to less frequent conditions, patients with VHL Disease, Muir-Torre lower physical functioning, less vitality and social support, higher level Syndrome and Nevoid Basal Cell Carcinoma Syndrome have been of anxiety and depression. The data also suggest the importance of identified being under close follow-up and individualized genetic a specific psychological intervention. Further research with a larger counseling. sample is needed. In conclusion, the experience of our hospital shows that clinical geneticists working in close contact with oncologists and surgeons P01.65 are of utmost importance for directing clinical investigation, especially Hypermobility syndrome (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in places where more specific examinations may be unavailable. Hypermobility type) in Japan Oncogenetics represents a true bridge closing the gap between basic A. Watanabe1, M. Hatakeyama1,2, T. Kosho3, Y. Kawame2, T. Shimada1; sciences and clinical medicine, and can surely play a pivotal role in any 1Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan, 2Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan, interdisciplinary team devoted to cancer care and willing to provide a 3Sinshu University, Matsumoto, Japan. comprehensive approach to their families. Background: Hypermobility Syndrome (HMS, ICD-10 M357) is a connective tissue disorder characterized by generalized joint P01.63 hypermobility and chronic pain (major criteria in Brighton criteria Action research of genetic education on human diversity (2000)). Both the pathogenesis and the causative gene are not targeting mothers of pre-school children in Japan known. Even healthcare professionals are not normally familiar with H. Moriya1, K. Wada1, H. Isibasi2, i. Takahasi2, i. Inoue1, M. Mozoguchi1; HMS patients. We have developed a draft diagnostic criteria for HMS 1Tokai University, Isehara,Kanagawa, Japan, 2Honda Memorial Kindergarten in Japan based on our past survey for clinical manifestations in our Attached to Tokai University, Isehara,Kanagawa, Japan. twenty patients and worldwide previous studies. <Background> Japan is basically a homogeneous society in culture method: With our draft diagnostic criteria and a summary of the condition and population, therefore people are less aware of human diversity. We from GeneReviews, we have sent 455 departments in university are intending to perform the action research of the genetic education hospitals and orthopedic hospitals a survey form investigating whether to mothers of pre-school children. At first, it was necessary to know they have any experience with patients with possible diagnosis of the participants’ basic knowledge of genetics where understanding of HMS. The departments included orthopedics, anesthesias, rheumatics human diversity is most preferable subject to discuss. and genetics. Our draft diagnostic criteria is as follows: Essential <methods> We recruited 8 mothers participating in the University items 1. Generalized joint laxity (a Beighton Score of 4 or more), 2. affiliated kindergarten who accepted the study and were willing Recurrent dislocations/subluxations in multiple joints without known/ to discuss a theme: “everybody is different therefore everybody obvious trauma, 3. Chronic pain which persist more than 3 months. is valuable”. Throughout the Class and Discussion at eight times, Notices 1. Skin hyperextensibility/loose skin is not necessarily seen the discussion was qualitatively analyzed. The study protocol was in HMS patients, 2. Those who are already diagnosed with EDS will approved by the ethical committee of the Tokai University. be included, 3. Joint laxities may recur after operation to stabilize the <Result> Three concerns were raised from discussion on the theme: joint had done, 4. Other symptomatic diseases such as chromosomal “troublesome with surroundings”, “inherent lack of individual ability”, abnormality should be excluded. and “discrimination to disease/disablity”. After the discussions, the Result: 207 forms were collected (45%), 27 departments answered participants felt the self-contradiction and genetic knowledge is needed they have experienced HMS patients in the past, the total number of for better understanding of human diversity. patients reported was 77 (47 if limited within past one year). Secondary <Discussion>The participants had conflicted thought to the human survey is currently in progress. diversity, and were willing to know more about human diversity on the course of the discussion. In conclusion, importance of genetic P01.66 education to general population for the society is confirmed. Attitudes toward termination of pregnancy based on prenatally detected genetic disease or malformations in selected groups of P01.64 doctors-in-training Psychological impact of presymptomatic DNA testing on M. D. Ingerslev1, B. R. Diness2, M. S. Norup3; Huntington‘s Disease gene carriers 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Roskilde Hospital, Roskilde, S. Serpentini1,2, L. Dal Sasso1, E. Pasquin1, M. Balestrieri3, G. Damante1,2, I. R. Denmark, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Lonigro4,2; Denmark, 3Department of Public Health, University of Copenhagen, 1Istituto di Genetica, A.O.U., Udine, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Copenhagen, Denmark. Biomediche, Università, Udine, Italy, 3Clinica Psichiatrica, A.O.U., Udine, Italy, Background: This study explores attitudes towards termination of 4Dipartimento di Medicina di Laboratorio, Università, Udine, Italy. pregnancy (TOP) in different scenarios between different groups of Aim: The present study is finalized to explore the psychological doctors-in-training working with TOP. and “quality of life” impact of genetic testing on presymptomatic Danish law permits TOP on request of the woman until gestational age Huntington’s disease (HD) gene carriers. This is a part of a larger (GA) 11+6 and TOP by permission after application to a local abortion research and has only a descriptive and preliminary purpose. council until approximately GA 22+0. Methods: From May 2009 to October 2010 we evaluated 18 methods: Doctors-in-training aiming for specialisation in obstetrics presymthomatic subjects resulted carriers of HD gene, 6-12 months and gynaecology (OG-i-T) or clinical genetics (CG-i-T) completed a after the genetic testing. The instruments used are the following: 1) questionnaire regarding their views on TOP in different scenarios. a semi-structured interview; 2) the Psychological General Well-being A pro-abortion-index was derived from their responses.Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 64 Results: 96 doctors-in-training completed the questionnaire. Of these São Paulo, Brazil. It concerns a descriptive study, undertaken between 77% aimed for specialisation in obstetrics and gynaecology, 20% 2007 and 2010, when 11,818 children were born, of which 10,589 aimed for clinical genetics and 3% were undecided. Mean number (93.55%) were subjected to the BUNHS’s screening. The screening’s of years since graduation was 7.0; mean number of months in the results showed 360 abnormalities (3.39%), with an incidence of specialty of choice was 25. The pro-abortion-index was normally 1.85% falciform trace, 0.009% sickle-cell disease, 0.45% C trace, distributed (mean 10.1, SD 3.2). CG-i-T were more pro-abortion as a 0.37% alpha-thalassemia, 0.03% suspected beta-thalassemia, 0.07% group than OG-i-T (p = 0,02). low fetal hemoglobin and 0.14% undetermined hemoglobin, mean, Results are summarised in table 1. a hemoglobin variant not identified by test. There was 1 (0.009%) Discussion: Doctors-in-training were more acceptant of TOP based falciform trace associated with Bart’s hemoglobin and 2 (0.018%) on genetic disease and foetal abnormalities than TOP for psychosocial C trace associated with Bart’s hemoglobin. In 48 cases (0.45%) the reasons. A similar tendency has been reported for nurses and medical results were inconclusive. Although the PNTN’s reasonable cover, the students. The responses for upper GA-limit varied with the specific numbers of inconclusive results and undetermined hemoglobins are diagnosis. Both groups favoured abortion on request longer than considered high yet, as well as the newborn’s percentage with low fetal Danish law currently permits. Both groups agreed with current practice hemoglobin, giving an indirect idea of the percentage of children who for late terminations. took the screening after 21 days of life, when the fetal hemoglobin is Table 1 replaced by the adult hemoglobin. The results points to the need for a GA in weeks (95% CI) until which consolidation of a line of comprehensive health care for patients with participants thought that TOP hemoglobinopathies and their family in the City of São Carlos. should be possible P01.68 Scenario P-value Clinical Providing genetic risk information to parents of newborns OBGYN-in- OG-i-T geneticists- with sickle cell trait: role of the general practitioner in neonatal training vs CG- in-training screening i-T F. Vansenne1, C. A. J. M. de Borgie1, M. Legdeur1, M. Oey-Spauwen2, M. Psychosocial 13.1 (12.5- 15.3 (13.6- On request 0.003 Peters1; problems 13.7) 16.9) 1Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2National Institute for With permission 19.9 (19.2- 19.8 (18.2- Public Health and the Environment, Maarssen, Netherlands. from abortion 20.5) 21.5) 0.84 Purpose: In 2007 the neonatal screening program in the Netherlands council was expanded, now including sickle cell disease (SCD). SCD carriers Foetus are also identified. The benefit of reporting SCD carrier ship includes 16.5 (15.2- 17.9 (16.2- with Down On request 0.28 detection of high risk couples (both parents are carriers) who can 17.8) 19.5) syndrome be informed about future reproductive choices, a responsibility of With permission their general practitioner (GP). We evaluated knowledge, ideas and 22.0 (21.2- 22.4 (21.7- from abortion 0.62 reported actions of GP’s about SCD carrier ship and explored reported 22.8) 23.1) council potential barriers. Foetus with 15.8 (14.8- 16.9 (15.1- methods: A questionnaire study. On request 0.31 cystic fibrosis 16.9) 18.8) Results: 139 GP’s responded to our questionnaire (49%). 90 GP’s (90%) stated they informed parents of the test result. In only 23 cases With permission 21.3 (20.7- 21.2 (19.8- (23%) both parents had themselves tested for hemoglobinopathies. 81 from abortion 0.88 21.9) 22.0) GP’s (64%) stated they did not have enough clinical experience with council SCD. Almost half of the GP’s indicated they did not experience any Foetus with 14.1 (13.2- 15.7 (14.0- barriers in counseling patients (n=60, 48%). polycystic On request 0.12 15.1) 17.3) conclusion: At the moment the goal of the neonatal screening for kidney disease SCD carrier ship has not been achieved as the majority of parents With permission 20.0 (19.2- 19.2 (17.2- were not tested for hemoglobinopathies after disclosure of carrier ship from abortion 0.35 21.0) 21.1) in their newborn. With GP’s reporting few barriers in counseling parents council and only indicating a lack of knowledge and clinical experience, more Minor effort is required to provide better information to GP’s to help facilitate malformation their work. (limb defect) 13.8 (12.9- 15.4 (13.7- On request 0.09 detected 14.7) 17.1) P01.69 with routine Parents’ opinions on storage of heel-prick cards for research ultrasound purposes With permission S. R. F. van Teeffelen1,2, C. M. W. Douglas1,2, C. G. van El1,2, M. Radstake2, R. 17.5 (16.3- 18.9 (16.7- from abortion 0.27 J. G. van den Born3, M. C. Cornel1,2; 18.7) 21.1) council 1Section Community Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics and EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Centre for Pro-abortion- 9.7 ( 8.9- 11.7 (10.4- Society and Genomics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Philosophy 0.02 index 10.5) 12.9) and Science Studies, Institute for Science, Innovation and Society, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands. P01.67 This paper reports on a recent quantitative survey of over 1600 Dutch Neonatal screening for hemoglobinopathies in the city of são parents’ views about the storage, management, and secondary use of carlos, são Paulo, Brazil: an analysis heel-prick cards. Given the scale of neonatal screening, these blood R. M. M. Moreira1, I. F. Estevão2, D. G. Melo1; samples present a wealth of biological data for medical research. While 1Department of Medicine, Federal University of São Carlos, São Carlos, Brazil, not a conventional biobank, the card collection could be treated as 2Hematologyst of the Municipal Health Secretary of São Carlos, São Carlos, such if there would be societal support and a (new) management body Brazil. and use policies could be developed. There is currently a discussion in The neonatal screening is the major Brazilian Unified National the Netherlands about prolonged storage, independent management Health System (BUNHS)’s initiative in medical genetic’s area and it and extended secondary uses. Our survey was aimed at parents of embraces four diseases: inborn hypothyroidism, phenylketonuria, children aged 0-5 whose heel-prick cards are presently in storage, hemoglobinopathies and cystic fibrosis. This project intends to verify as well as parents-to-be. The survey quantifies for the first time the the National Neonatal Screening Program (NNSP)’s effectivity and to views of this group about current and future options related to neonatal estimate the hemoglobinopathies’ incidence in the City of São Carlos, screening, permission for use in medical research, and issues related Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics educa- tion, Genetic services, and Public policy 65 to (length of) storage, management and secondary uses of the cards, and well-baby clinic doctors. They were asked about their first reaction including medical research, diagnostics, and identification. The survey to neonatal screening for Pompe disease, after which benefits and contains questions on knowledge of current storage, management and harms and requirements for screening were explored in more detail. use policies (6 items), personal experience with heel-prick testing (4 This study shows that many professionals expect benefits from items), demographic information (9 items), and opinions on specific neonatal screening for Pompe disease, especially for early-onset storage, management, and use issues (41 items). Respondents were cases, since it has been shown that prompt treatment improves able to indicate their level of support for 10 categories of secondary survival and health status in many affected infants. A distinctive feature use, including “to determine how often certain medical conditions of this type of screening is the detection of late-onset cases that would occur in the Netherlands” (prevalence studies) and “to find out how otherwise present anytime between infancy and later in adulthood. certain diseases develop” (etiology studies). Respondents were also Whereas some interviewees considered early detection a benefit in asked how long the collection of heel-prick cards should be kept for these cases as well, allowing for monitoring and timely treatment, medical research. others considered this a drawback or a reason not to screen, given the psychological burden. P01.70 Patient and public involvement in genetic and developmental P01.72** medicine research Governance and future of genetic preconception carrier M. E. Palm1,2, G. Hall3, G. Black2,4, J. Clayton-Smith3,4, H. C. Kitchener2,3,4, R. screening Albrow2, S. Laura2, K. Dack1,2, D. Donnai1,3, H. R. Middleton-Price1,2; P. Lakeman1, L. Henneman1,2, E. Sistermans1, P. Borry2,3, L. P. ten Kate1, H. 1Nowgen (A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare), NIHR Manchester Biomedical Meijers-Heijboer1, M. C. Cornel1,2; Research Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2The University of Manchester, 1VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Netherlands, 2EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, University Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4NIHR Manchester Biomedical Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Research Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom. Law, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. The Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (MBRC) specialises in Recessive disorders cause serious morbidity and mortality in 25/10,000 genetics and developmental medicine, aiming to transform healthcare children. Most of them are born unexpectedly without family history of through translational research. Patients and the public are at the the condition. In about 1/100 couples, both partners are carriers of the centre of the MBRC effort to move developments from the laboratory same disorder, facing 25% risk of affected offspring in each pregnancy. into clinics. Carriers are usually unaware of their carrier status. Patient and public involvement (PPI) in healthcare research has been Preconceptional carrier screening enables carrier couples to make shown to increase its relevance and effectiveness. A recent mapping informed reproductive decisions before pregnancy. Our offers of exercise carried out at the MBRC showed a range of PPI activity taking preconceptional carrier screening for cystic fibrosis (CF) and/or place. This paper highlights three examples of good practice. hemoglobinopathies (2002 and 2005) were favoured by the target (1) A patient advisory group (PAG) was formed to help design, translate population and stakeholders. Despite positive results in pilot studies, and disseminate the outcomes from a programme of research looking meeting genetic screening criteria and constructive debates about at improving services for patients with inherited retinal disease. The ethical, technical and financial aspects, in most European countries PAG is made up of patients, representatives from a range of charities a systematic healthcare offer of preconceptional carrier screening for for visual impairment and Genetic Alliance and is attended by the wider the general population is lacking. Meanwhile, uncontrolled commercial study team, including the primary investigator, health care researchers, private testing is available online. Is this development desirable in genetic counsellor and health economist. terms of informed consent, counselling, and medical supervision? In (2) A parent of an affected child is a partner on the Dyscerne guidelines the absence of a healthcare offer, the Clinical Genetics Department group, whose aim is to develop and disseminate clinical management of VU University Medical Center in Amsterdam recently started to guidelines for rare dysmorphic conditions. This has resulted in the offer preconceptional CF screening tests on the hospital website, inclusion of important information aimed at professionals dealing with accompanied by sufficient medical information, without commercial children who have rare syndromes. goals and with availability of counselling. The experiences of (potential) (3) A public consultation was carried out with women at the surgery of users will be monitored and integrated when further developing the their general practitioner. Women were asked to feedback their views service. Is this the ideal answer in diversifying contexts of screening? of both cervical screening and proposed interventions to increase Will screening for more recessive disorders become available in regular uptake via a questionnaire. The consultation increased confidence in healthcare in the future? And how to enable beneficial application of the proposal and provided support for the study trial design. whole genome sequencing, which allows parallel screening for all known recessive disorders, in this preconception setting? P01.71 Newborn screening for Pompe disease? Exploring professional P01.73 views Effects of predictive genetic testing for cardiovascular risk in C. G. van El1,2, T. Rigter1,2, S. Weinreich1,2, A. Reuser3, A. van der Ploeg2,4, M. healthy overweight subjects. C. Cornel1; V. V. Markova1, O. A. Makeeva1,2, V. P. Puzyrev1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics/EMGO+ Institute, VU University Medical 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic 2Research Institute of Complex Problems of Cardiovascular Diseases, Diseases, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department Kemerovo, Russian Federation. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Aims: To compare effectiveness of common medical recommendations 4Department of Paediatrics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. to reduce the weight as it is a confirmed risk factor for future New developments in enzyme replacement therapy have kindled cardiovascular pathology in a group of overweight healthy young discussions on adding Pompe disease to neonatal screening subjects with the counseling supplemented by genetic test for programmes. Traditionally, expanding screening is being discussed cardiovascular disease predisposition. Materials & methods: two among a restricted number of medical experts. In this research we aim groups were collected in a similar way: group 1 (control) (n=95, average to explore the views of a wide range of relevant professionals to gain age 31 years, body mass 84.9 kg) got recommendations that they are more insight into the process of weighing pros and cons of neonatal overweight and have to reduce their body mass in order to lower the screening for Pompe disease. risk of future CV pathology; group 2 (experimental) (n=103, average We conducted semi-structured interviews with over 25 professionals in age 30.8 years, body mass 89.0 kg) got similar recommendations and the Netherlands. Some had experience with Pompe disease patients, additionally got results of a genetic test assessing individual risk of such as paediatricians, neurologists, physiatrists, family doctors and CVD. Both groups were examined after a year and body mass was patient organisation representatives. Others were involved in the measured repeatedly. Results: Both groups reduced their weight organisation of screening or health care, such as representatives from significantly. Control group lost 1.51 kg (p<0.0001), while experimental the Centre for Population Screening, the Health Care Insurance Board, - 2.29 kg (p<0.0001). The weight lost did not differ statistically between Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Public policy 66 two groups. Analyzing separately subgroups of men and women Children’s Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Sophiahemmet showed that men lost their weigh independently from the fact of University College, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Learning, Informatics, getting personal genetic cardiovascular risk estimates (1.5 kg and 1.8 Management and Ethics, Stockholm Centre for Healthcare Ethics, Karolinska kg in groups 1 and 2 accordingly), while women reduced their weight Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, mainly in the group with genetic testing - 4.2 kg compared to control Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. group who lost 0.8 kg. Conclusions: Our data reports that there can be Among current teenagers we find a large proportion of future parents, gender-specific reaction to genetic testing. It was shown in previous some of whom will be seeking prenatal genetic counseling. Getting studies that women in our population have more positive attitudes and raised in the genomic era may not only increase the knowledge of beliefs to predictive genetic testing. available genetic testing but may also have an impact on how genetic information is perceived. However, little is known about how this P01.74 teenage group reacts to the language commonly used by health Ethical issues in pre-implantation genetic diagnosis in Portugal: care professionals providing prenatal counseling. In addition, as risk a comparative analysis of professional’s opinions in years 2000 communication is related to numbers and figures, having different and 2010 using questionnaires educational backgrounds may be associated with separate risk N. M. P. O. Teles1,2; perceptions. In order to investigate these issues, a previously developed 1INSA, I.P., Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto, Porto, Portugal, 2Faculty questionnaire (Abramsky & Fletcher, 2002) was administered to Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. high-school students in Sweden. A total of 344 questionnaires were Medical genetics has made significant progress in the last decades, completed by students belonging to a natural science or a social especially in the field of prenatal testing. After the dramatic expansion science program. Our data show that teenage participants were of prenatal diagnosis that started in the seventies, pre-implantation particularly worried by the use of technical jargon and words like rare genetic diagnosis (PGD) became a reality in 1990, following and abnormal. Negative framing effects and perception differences advances in the techniques of medically assisted reproduction related to numeric risk formats were also present. There were some (MAR). Ethical problems related to this technique start well before cases of gender and educational program effects on risk assessment the analysis: it is necessary to offer appropriate genetic counselling, but this outcome was not generalizable. Besides the questionnaire to obtain informed consent for the necessary procedures and to results, we discuss the ethical implications of the data based on the maintain strict confidentiality of the whole process. The main ethical norm of non-directiveness and try to provide some basic guidelines. In problems concern the status of the embryo, the investigation and the general, genetic counselors should be aware that the language used manipulation of embryos, eugenic or sex selection and the provision of within clinical services can be influential on this group of upcoming resources. In 2000 a questionnaire addressing several of the principal counselees. ethical concerns, namely the attitude towards PGD, embryos and genetic testing, was distributed to the Directors of the five largest MAR P01.77 centres in Portugal; in 2010 the same questionnaire was sent to 27 From rationing to rationality: an n-of-one trial service for off- MAR centres and answered by 11. In all cases it was required that label medicines for rare (neuromuscular) diseases the answers should be based on the general policy of each centre. C. Vrinten1, S. S. Weinreich1,2, J. J. G. M. Verschuuren3,4, C. A. Uyl-de Groot5, This work presents the comparative analysis of all the obtained data, M. R. Kuijpers6, E. Sterrenburg4,7, J. P. M. Scholten8, C. F. R. M. van Bezooijen9, particularly focusing on the main ethical problems related to this M. F. T. Timmen2, M. C. Cornel1; diagnosis, i.e., the status of the human embryo and the attitude of 1Institute for Research in Extramural Medicine (EMGO), Amsterdam, the genetic professionals working in this still relatively new, and very Netherlands, 2Dutch Association for Neuromuscular Disorders, Baarn, specific, field of genetic diagnosis. Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Dutch Neuromuscular Research Centre, The Hague, Netherlands, 5Erasmus Medical P01.75 Center, Institute for Medical Technology Assessment, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Prenatal diagnosis based on informed choice 6Health Care Insurance Board, Diemen, Netherlands, 7Princes Beatrix Fonds, S. Izumi, K. Takahashi, h. Moriya, S. Sato, Y. Goto, Y. Onuki, H. Yokoyama, A. The Hague, Netherlands, 8Dutch Cochrane Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Kondo; 9Stichting Eerlijke Geneesmiddelenvoorziening (Foundation for Equitable Tokai University, Isehara, Japan. Provision of Medicines), Rotterdam, Netherlands. In general, prenatal test is recognized as population screening in many Background: In the Netherlands, expensive medicines are not countries. For example, more than 80% women have maternal serum reimbursed for off-label use without sufficient evidence of efficacy. test as screening in the UK. In Japan, we do not offer maternal serum Patients with rare diseases are disadvantaged because the burden test as screening in most obstetrics services. We might provide the of proof is difficult to meet. There are obstacles both for industry and information of screening test and further chromosomal test such as academia to performing large-scale randomized, controlled trials. CVS and amniocentesis with the information of genetic counselling. Moreover, reimbursement rules discourage doctors from prescribing There is no regulation for prenatal diagnosis in ultrasound diagnosis, expensive medicines off-label, even to small groups of patients. so some clinic would offer screening at some point and some do not. Examples of reimbursement problems with off-label medicines are We do not scan the fetus as screening without patient’s request at our known from many rare disease areas, including genetic disease. hospital. Controlled n-of-one (single-patient) trials with internal randomisation Historically, we have been concerned with prenatal diagnosis over 30 (e.g. AB-BA-BA) could generate new evidence for rare, chronic years at our hospital. At first, we had been doing only the test and conditions where the aim of treatment is symptom control. given the result for referred patients; however we now offer genetic Objective: This project aims to initiate development of an n-of- counselling for referred patients to avoid automatic screening and to one trial service, embedded in the Dutch health care system. Pilot have informed choice for prenatal diagnosis. implementation will be designed, focusing on neuromuscular diseases Prenatal diagnosis contains ethical issues all the time, but most as a model. pregnant women do not notice this problem until they consider methods: Reimbursement problems with off-label medicines for rare termination at some point. Genetic counselling in prenatal diagnosis neuromuscular diseases are being inventoried among neuromuscular could be good support for the patient who has to face difficult ethical specialists and patients with neuromuscular disease in the Netherlands. A issues during pregnancy. It sometimes reduces unnecessary risk for consensus meeting will be organized to define legal, ethical and scientific worries and/or invasive test. preconditions for formalizing and sustaining an n-of-one trial service. An electronic data registry system for n-of-one trials will be designed, and P01.76 several protocols will be written for specific trials to be performed in a pilot information related to prenatal genetic counseling: interpretation implementation of the n-of-one trial service. by teenage students and ethical implications implications: If an n-of-one trial service is successfully designed, a P. A. Melas1, S. Georgsson Öhman2,3, N. Juth4, T. H. Bui5; subsequent project can pilot trials for off-label neuromuscular indications 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Neurogenetics Unit, and eventually others. Societal acceptance of n-of-one evidence may also Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department of Women’s and stimulate development of genomic therapies tailored to rare genotypes.Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics educa- tion, Genetic services, and Public policy 67 P01.78 Madrid, Spain. Volunteers involved in working with NGOs for rare diseases Our purpose was to design an online Registry in order to manage M. Gafencu1, G. Doros1, D. Dan2, I. Jurca Simina1, M. Puiu1; patients who suffer a Rare Disease (RD) in Primary Care (PC). This 1University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Romanian National Registry might be a quick and useful tool for General Practitioners. It Alliance for rare diseases, Zalau, Romania. could help to follow-up the RD patients and their families in PC. Also to In the absence of a national strategy for rare diseases (RD), in the improve its National Spanish Registry. last 20 years - the most neglected group of diseases in Romania - The Workgroup of “Clinical Genetics and Rare Diseases” of SEMFYC the information and social inclusion of these children remains to the in collaboration with the Institute of Research of Rare Diseases of initiative of NGO’s. The start was in 2006 and working with volunteers the Institute of Health Carlos III, the Spanish Federation of Patients was for the first moment, the solution. Aim of our work was to focus with RD (FEDER), and its families (CREER), has designed the online on the changes in life quality of children with these diseases, after Registry “DICE-APER”: http://dice-aper.semfyc.es teamwork and a multidisciplinary approach. Material and methods. The The PC is the “gateway” to access to the National Health System and volunteering activity intend to contribute, both by involving as many most of the PC units have connection to Internet. Both resources have volunteers as possible and by providing information, coming directly been used to design an online tool to manage “forgotten” or unknown into contact with patients and their families, change their perception aspects in the daily practice. As result we have an online tool that: 1) and in future the civil society perception towards the rare diseases’ allows to identify every RD, 2) invites each patient to participate in issue. Main activity was based on specialized volunteer-patient- family the Biobank at the Spanish National Registry of RD, 3) coordinates direct relationship, making use of playing games, art and group therapy genetic counselling, 4) offers health care and social resources 5) and in weekly meetings. Results. Every year since 2008, volunteers Save encourages working with other Medical Specialities. the children and ANBRARo have organized “Rare Diseases Day” by This online tool will help on growing the Spanish National Record of handing out leaflets to the people, for a week, in a crowded square RD and, therefore, we might hope an increasement of the resources from Timisoara and other Romanian cities. These informing campaigns that are focused to these diseases in order to obtain the satisfaction of were very well received by the passer- byes, media and people with patients. It’s important to create and to use new online tools to improve (RD). Being medical students and in the company of children with RD, several aspects of the RD. volunteers were able to participate at conferences and other meetings with scientific papers. They also provide active help to the children P01.81 so that, the parents could stay and learn more about their children’s Pre-marriage screening Program for Beta-thalassemia in disease in meetings dedicated to support groups. isfahan (center of iran) (2005-2010) M. Zeinalian Dastjerdi1, R. Fadaei1, A. Moafi2; P01.79 1Health Deputy of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Islamic Orphanet UK 2011: More information, more specific and easier Republic of Iran, 2Medicine School of Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, to retrieve Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. I. Gomez Paramio1,2, G. Sainz1,2, D. Ward1,2, S. Ayme3, H. Middleton-Price1,2, Thalassemia is the most widespread single gene disease in Iran. This D. Donnai1,2,4; report presents the results of pre-marriage screening program applied 1Nowgen (A Centre for Genetics in Healthcare), NIHR Manchester, Manchester, in Isfahan province (center of Iran) within 5 last years (2005 -2010). United Kingdom, 2The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, The information related to 22 screening and genetic counseling centers 3ORPHANET- INSERM SC11, Paris, France, 4Central Manchester and was collected throughout the province within this period. Data analysis Manchester University Hospitals NHS Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. was performed by excel soft ware. Orphanet is the largest international online portal for rare diseases and Overall 233400 couples were screened from March 2005 till March orphan drugs. Orphanet lists services for around 6,000 rare diseases 2010. Totally 86352 of couples (3.7%) were anemic. In 4.6% of anemic in 36 countries. Among these services there are over 21,000 medical couples Hb A2 was more than 3.5% and they were confirmed for beta- laboratory tests, 1,200 clinical trials, 1,000 registries and 4,900 expert thalassemia trait in the first stage. Overall 61% of anemic couples centres. were undergone iron-therapy that it was in range of 30% in early years Information regarding the UK has grown strongly over the last two to more than 70% in the last one which genetic counseling centers years. Today there are over 70% more clinical trials, 45% more had been developed. Also CBC indices were modified in 69.1% of registries and biobanks, over 50% more medical diagnostic tests and these couples after treatment for 3 months. Finally genetic testing 30 % more clinics. was performed in 94% of the couples who had not been treated and Relevant information is highlighted and retrievable; from over 170 beta-thalassemia trait was ruled out in 76% of them. We concluded clinical trials available, 80% are ongoing and over 50% are recruiting that genetic counseling and iron-therapy has a significant role to participants. There are also over 80 registries and biobanks from which reduce under-care suspected couples (false suspected), so that if it 25% are recruiting. Laboratories with accreditations are highlighted. is invigorated the surveillance system will be concentrated to care of Designated centres of expertise display the Reference Centre label. real carriers. All these services can be searched by disease or by gene. Moreover, research activities can also be retrieved by type, by institution/ P01.82 laboratory, by professionals, by sponsor/funding body and by Pharmacogenetic Distribution of Warfarin and its clinical substance/tradename (clinical trials). Diagnostic test can be filtered Significance in Korean Patients during Initial Anticoagulation by city or type of accreditation and clinics by type of service (medical therapy management/genetic counselling and paediatric/adult clinic). Y. Lee1, A. Kwon1, S. Jo2, H. Im3, Y. Jo1, J. Park1, H. Cho1; The webpage has also improved its user friendliness with the addition 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Hallym University College of Medicine, of two new features: the “google translational tool” that allows the user Anyang, Korea, Republic of, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Hallym to translate any page in different languages and the “autocompletion University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea, Republic of, 3Department of tool” that facilitates research by providing suggestions as terms are Occupational Medicine, Hallym University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea, entered. Moreover, a new website for the UK has been created to offer Republic of. national relevant information for patient and professionals. During warfarin treatment, determining the optimal dose and maintaining the target PT-INR are challenging. Increasing evidence supports the P01.80 theory that genotypic polymorphisms influence an individual’s warfarin the “DicE-APER Registry”: a new online tool to attend the dose requirement. In this study, we evaluated allele frequencies and patients with Rare Diseases in Primary care. effects of CYP2C9 and VKORC1 on warfarin response during initial M. Garcia Ribes1, I. Ejarque Domenech1, M. Blanco Marenco1, J. V. Sorli anticoagulation therapy in Korean patients. We enrolled patients Guerola1, R. De Celada1, I. Garrell Lluís1, I. Abaiuta Borda2, G. Esteban Bueno1, who had initiated warfarin therapy and undergone PT-INR testing at M. Posada de la Paz2; least three times within the first month of anticoagulation therapy. All 1Workgroup SEMFYC “Clinical Genetics and Rare Diseases”., Barcelona, the participating patients were tested for the detection of CYP2C9*3 Spain, 2Institute of Research in Rare Diseases. Institute of Health Carlos III., (c.1075A>C) and VKORC1-1639G>A. A melting-curve analysis after Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 68 real-time PCR was performed using CYP2C9*3 and VK1639 genotyping their perception of negative peer opinion. If screening would become kits (Idaho Technology, USA). A total of 37 patients were enrolled in national policy most midwives and FPs would carry out ethnicity based this study. CYP2C9*1/*1 (86.5%) and VKORC1-1639AA genotypes haemoglobinopathy carrier screening. Both practitioners favoured (89.2%) were predominant in Korea. The CYP2C9*3 and VKORC1- ethnicity registration for health purposes. 1639G alleles were found in five (13.5%) and four patients (10.8%), Conclusion: Whether ethnicity based haemoglobinopathy screening is respectively. Patients with the VKORC1-1639G allele received a higher offered, is partially influenced by FPs and midwives perception of their warfarin dose (P=0.002), with a significant dose change between days colleagues’ opinion about carrier testing based on ethnicity. However 1 and 30 (P=0.003). Patients with the CYP2C9*3 allele tended to show most are willing to offer screening should this become national policy. a more rapid PT-INR increase and receive a lower warfarin dose, In developing new policy, debate amongst midwives and FPs should with a greater dose change between days 1 and 30. The CYP2C9*3 be encouraged articulating the voices of colleagues who already and VKORC1-1639G alleles influenced warfarin response during actively offer haemoglobinopathy screening. the first month of anticoagulation therapy. Considering CYP2C9 and VKORC1 genotypes when estimating warfarin dose and frequency P02 clinical genetics and Dysmorphology of PT-INR monitoring can improve therapeutic outcomes with fewer complications. P02.001 Genomic and clinical characteristics of six patients with partially P01.83 overlapping interstitial deletions at 10p12p11 DNA degradation analysis in post-mortem soft muscle tissues in C. Wentzel1, E. Rajcan-Separovic2, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp3, S. Sandra Chantot- relation to accumulated degree-days (ADD) Bastaraud4, C. Metay5, J. Andrieux6, G. Annerén1, A. C. J. Gijsbers3, L. Druart4, M. S. Nazir; C. Hyon7, M. Portnoi4, E. Stattin8, C. Vincent-Delorme6, S. G. Kant3, M. School of Forensic and Investigative Sciences, University of Central Steinraths9, S. Marlin4, I. Giurgea5, A. Thuresson1; Lancashire, Preston, United Kingdom. 1Department of Immumology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, After the death of an organism DNA starts to degrade: as the organism’s Uppsala, Sweden, 2The Child and Family Research Institute and University of cell structure breaks down, nucleases are released and directly cause British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, DNA degradation. Subsequent colonisation, action of insects and Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center microorganisms also contributes to the DNA degradation. As the post- (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 4Service de Génétique, Hôpital Armand mortem interval (PMI) increases, DNA continues to degrade until no Trousseau, Paris, France, 5Service de Biochimie-Génétique, Plateforme high molecular weight DNA (HMW-DNA) remains. de Génomique Constitutionnelle, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, In order to assess DNA degradation in the model organisms chosen 6Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de (pig and rabbit), two nuclear genes, Connexin 43 and RAG-1, were Lille, France, 7Universite Paris decarte, Service de génétique hôpital necker aligned to identify conserved regions. Primers were designed to Paris, Paris, France, 8Department of Medical Biosciences, Medical and Clinical amplify 70 bp, 194 bp, 305 bp and 384 bp amplicons. The primers Genetics, Umeå, Sweden, 9Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology and were also designed to amplify human DNA, which allowed the use Medical Genetics, Victoria General Hospital, Victoria, BC, Canada. of commercially purchased DNA standards to be used as controls. With the clinical implementation of genomic microarrays, the detection Following DNA extraction PCR analysis was performed using the four of cryptic unbalanced rearrangements in patients with syndromic primers sets in a multiplex (4-plex): the PCR was optimised so that it developmental delay has considerably improved. Here we report the worked over a wide range of template amounts (0.1 ng to 75.83 ng). molecular karyotyping and phenotypic description of six new unrelated The multiplex (4-plex) PCR was found to work efficiently in triplicate patients with partially overlapping microdeletions at 10p12.31p11.21 samples of all three species down to 0.3 ng of DNA template. ranging from 1.0 Mb to 10.6 Mb. The smallest region of overlap is 306 This multiplex has been used to assess whether DNA degradation can kb, which includes WAC gene, known to be associated with microtubule be predicted by accumulated degree-days (ADD), which provides a function and to play a role in cell division. Another patient has measure of both time and temperature. previously been described with a 10 Mb deletion, partially overlapping Full 4-plex profiles were generated until day 7 (ADD 111.93) from with our six patients1. All seven patients have developmental delay and whole carcasses and body fragments and up to day 11 (ADD 172.48) a majority of the patients have abnormal behaviour and dysmorphic from insect-activity-free muscle samples. features including bulbous nasal tip, deep set eyes, synophrys/thick Future work will include; development of real-time PCR quantification eyebrows, and full cheeks, while other features varied. All patients assays, DNA Fragment analysis and DNA preservation. also displayed various visual impairments and 6 out of 7 patients had cardiac malformations. Together with the previously reported patient, P01.84 our study suggests that the detected deletions may represent a new Attitudes of midwives and family physicians towards ethnicity contiguous gene syndrome caused by dosage sensitive genes that based haemoglobinopathy carrier screening: exploring current predispose to developmental delay. behaviour and future intentions. 1)Shahdadpuri R, de Vries B, Pfundt R, de Leeuw N, Reardon W: S. M. P. J. Jans1, A. de Jonge1, M. C. Cornel1, A. M. Lagro-Janssen2; Pseudoarthrosis of the clavicle and copper beaten skull associated 1EMGO Institute for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, with chromosome 10p11.21p12.1 microdeletion. Am J Med Genet A 2Institute for gender studies, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 2008; 146A: 233-237. Netherlands. Purpose: Globally approximately 5% of the world population is a P02.002 carrier of a serious haemoglobin disorder. No formal recommendations Vermis hypoplasia as part of a contiguous gene syndrome in a concerning preconception or antenatal testing of carrier status exist in girl with microdeletion 10q26 The Netherlands at present. Earlier research identified registration of K. M. Roetzer1, A. Schwerin-Nagel2, P. Kroisel1, M. Mach1, E. Vallant1, K. ethnicity as an issue in deciding not to introduce a screening program Wagner1, M. Speicher1, B. Plecko-Startinig2; in the past and found that health practitioners did not perceive ethnicity 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, as an increased risk factor. 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescence Medicine, Medical University of This study investigates attitudes, behaviour and intentions of midwives Graz, Graz, Austria. and FPs towards haemoglobinopathy carrier screening on the basis Microdeletions of 10q26 cause a contiguous gene syndrome of ethnicity. described in about 60 patients until now. There is significant variation Methodology: A structured questionnaire based on the Theory of in deletion size and phenotype. Clinical symptoms include mental Planned Behaviour sent to 1800 midwives and 2100 FPs retardation, motor and speech delay, strabismus, characteristic facies, Results: 1346 questionnaires were collected (35% response). Midwives microcephaly, short stature, as well as in some cases feeding difficulties, and FPs were positive about offering ethnicity based screening but do behavioural problems, muscular hypotonia, ataxia, hearing loss, not currently carry this out. Factors explaining intention were social genitourinary anomalies and heart defects. We report on a 10-year-old norm, control over the ability to carry out the test and social norm girl who presented with moderate global developmental delay, severe (R2 0.522). The main factor explaining intention was social norm: speech delay, strabismus, intention tremor, ataxia, hydronephrosis Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 69 and mild dysmorphic features. Pregnancy was complicated by vaginal Results: Mean Z score BMI and mean height were normal (0.07 ± 1.49 bleeding in gestational week 32. Furthermore, the mother recognized SD, -0.87±1.36 SDS, respectively). 16.1 % of patients were overweight reduced fetal movements. Sectio was performed in gestational week (including obese), 57% of them were born SGA for length versus 25% 41 (APGAR score 3/8/9 at minutes 1/5/10, birth measurements within of non overweight patients. During infancy, boy’s BMI dramatically normal range). Developmental milestones were delayed with sitting increased (+ 1.07 SD Z score) until normalization whereas girl’s BMI at 8 months, walking at 22 months, first words at about 28 months. increased from 2 to 4 years. Childhood: 14.7% were overweight, a At the age of 30 months a brain MRI showed marked hypoplasia prevalence similar to that in French children population. Adulhood: of the inferior part of the vermis cerebelli. Investigations regarding from 26 available measures, 19.2% were overweight. Male gender inborn errors of metabolism, congenital disorders of glycosylation was significantly associated with a lower post pubertal BMI than as well as classical karyotyping were unremarkable. However, array female (β=-1,987). After 15 years of age, BMI and Z score of BMI were CGH analysis revealed an interstitial 6.92 Mb microdeletion in 10q26. inversely correlated with neonatal length (β=-1.140) but positively Further investigations showed that the deletion had occurred de novo. associated with neonatal weight (β=+2.294) and female sex (p<0.01). This is the first case of a 10q26 microdeletion with an abnormal MRI of From analysis of neonatal data, 22q11DS newborns were significantly the cerebellum. We hypothesize that the vermis hypoplasia might be shorter (-1.46± 1.2 SDS) with regard to their weight (-0.83 ±0.98 SDS) causative for the ataxia and intention tremor in our patient. (p<0.01), even though mean neonatal measures were above -2SDS. conclusions: Our study did not find a higher prevalence of overweight P02.003** in 22q11.2DS to that in French population. Post pubertal BMI was Reciprocal extreme Bmi phenotypes associated with gene inversely correlated with neonatal length but positively associated with dosage at the 16p11.2 locus neonatal weight and female gender. F. Zufferey1, L. Harewood2, R. G. Walters3, Z. Kutalik4,5, A. Valsesia4,5,6, D. Martinet1, A. I. Blakemore3, P. Froguel3,7, S. Jacquemont1, t. 16p11.2 P02.005 consortium1, A. Reymond2, J. S. Beckmann1,4; 3.7 mb tandem microduplication in chromosome 5p13.1-p13.2 1Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, associated with developmental delay, macrocephaly, obesity, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, University of and lymphedema. Further characterization of the dup(5p13) Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genomics of Common syndrome. Disease. Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Department K. Oexle1, M. Hempel1, A. Jauch2, T. Meitinger1, S. Stengel-Rutkowski3, T. of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Strom4; Institute of Bioinformatics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 1MRI, München, Germany, 2University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 3LMU, 6Ludwig Insitute for Cancer Research. University of Lausanne, Lausanne, München, Germany, 4Helmholtz Center, München, Germany. Switzerland, 7CNRS 8090-Institute of Biology. Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. In a male patient with developmental delay, autistic behaviour, obesity, Both underweight and obesity have been associated with increased lymphedema, hypertension, macrocephaly, and facial features morbidity and mortality. Weight faltering in childhood (or failure to thrive) (dolichocephaly, short neck, low set posterior hairline, dysplastic ears, have long-lasting deleterious effects on development, including adverse broad nasal root, short nose, microretrognathia) of chromosome 5p intellectual outcomes. In contrast to obesity, molecular abnormalities duplication (trisomy 5p) a 3.7 Mb de novo tandem microduplication underlying low-weight remain elusive. While hemizygosity of a 600 kb of 5p13.1-13.2 (rs4703415-rs261752, i.e., chr5:35.62-39.36Mb) region on the short arm of chromosome 16 (chr16:29.5-30.1Mb) causes was identified. This observation contributes to the characterization a highly-penetrant form of obesity often associated with hyperphagia and dissection of the 5p13 duplication syndrome. A comparison and intellectual disabilities, the corresponding reciprocal duplication is with previous case reports is provided. Similar to the patients with associated with underweight. We identified 108 carriers of this 16p11.2 duplication of the entire NIPBL gene reported by Yan et al (2009) but duplication among 95,000 individuals. These carriers show significantly different from several case reports on 5p13 duplication, there was, for reduced weight (mean Z-score -0.6; p<10-3) and adults have an 8.7- instance, no heart defect in our patient. The possible role of genes fold (p<10-10) increased risk of being clinically underweight (defined by within the duplicated region, especially of NIPBL, is discussed. a BMI<18.5kg/m2). An early onset gender-specific effect was found in cases ascertained through developmental and intellectual disabilities, P02.006 with half of the boys younger than 5 years exhibiting failure to thrive. Application of array cGH method in two 18q21.31-q23 deletion These features are only detectable postnatally and are associated patients with an unusually high frequency of selective and restrictive feeding e. gumuslu1, n. cine1, b. kara2, d. sunnetci1, n. uzulmez1, b. enguzel1, s. eren1, behaviours. Duplication carriers also have a significant reduced head r. akkoyunlu1, z. ilkay1, d. yavuz1, h. savli1; circumference (p<10-5) which positively correlates with BMI. Weight, 1kocaeli university medical genetics department, kocaeli, Turkey, 2kocaeli BMI and head circumference phenotypes as well as food intake university department of pediatrics, kocaeli, Turkey. behaviours are the converse of those reported in carriers of deletions iNtRODUctiON: at this locus, correlating with changes in transcript levels for genes Partial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 18 lead to different mapping within the CNV, but not within flanking regions. The reciprocal clinical presentations. Patients whose deletions localized within the impact of these 16p11.2 copy number variants evidences that severe same region may exhibit distinct phenotypes. Conversely they can obesity and being underweight can have mirror etiologies, possibly exhibit common clinical features. New molecular techniques such as through contrasting effects on eating behaviour. array CGH allow for a more precise determination of deletion points leading to better-defined genotype-phenotype correlations. This P02.004 method proved to be effective in determining molecular profiles with a Auxological evaluation in patients with a 22q11.2 microdeletion resolution 5-10 times higher than conventional karyotyping methods. syndrome: normal prevalence of obesity but neonatal length and mAtERiAL- mEtHOD: gender influence on body mass index evolution We had two patients admitted to our clinic; one of them, 13 years R. Reynaud1, D. Braunstein2, J. Gaudart3, F. Giuliano4,5, A. Moncla1, N. Philip1,6; old boy with dysmorphic features and autism; the other 15 years old 1Hopital d’Enfants de la Timone, Marseille, France, 2University of the girl with inability to speak. We used array CGH method for diagnosis Mediterranean, Marseille, France, 3University of the Medriterranean, Marseille, of these two patient. DNA samples which labelled according to the France, 4Hopital Archet 2, Nice, France, 5Reference center for developmental protocol, were hybridized with CytoSure Syndrome Plus(v2)4x44K anomalies, Nice, France, 6Reference center for developmental anomalies, microchips and scanned with Agilent Microarray Scanner. Obtained Marseille, France. data were analyzed using Cytosure Analysis Software,v.2.0.8. Aims: to evaluate auxological parameters in children and adults with a REsULts: 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome (22q11.2DS); to compare prevalence According to array CGH analysis, 8.21 Mb deletion was detected in of obesity to that in the general French population. 18q21.31-q23 region. Important genes for this region are MALT1, RAX, methods: 102 patients with 22q11.2DS (49 males, 53 females) were LMAN1, MC4R, TNFRSF11A, BCL2, CTDP1 and FVT1. The conventional recruited from birth to adulthood through a reference center from karyotype analysis was performed to these patients and 46XYdel(18) Southern France. (q21.3-q23) was found. These results supported array CGH results.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 70 cONcLUsiON: P02.009 Although these patients possesed same deletions at the same region, Phenotypic variations in Wolf-Hirshorn syndrome their clinical manifestations was different and they had few common E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, V. Sabolich-Avramovska; phenotypic features. Effects of the genes to the phenotype at this Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. region is unknown but can be possible to investigate. These genes Wolf-Hirshorn syndrome is rare chromosomal disorder caused will provide new clues for pathogenesis and treatment of the disease. by terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4. The haploinsuficiency of the deleted region is expressed as severe P02.007 phenotype which includes growth retardation, severe mental 45,X/46,XY mosaicism: a cause of short stature in males retardation, characteristic face, seizures and midline defects in A. Efthymiadou; the brain, heart, palate, hypospadias, etc. The severity of clinical Department of Pediatrics, University of Patras, Patras, Greece. presentation is due to the size of the deleted region, as well as genes 45,X/46,XY mosaicism is associated with a broad spectrum of involved in the deleted region. phenotypes ranging from apparently normal male development, We present five children with Wolf-Hirshorn syndrome with variable individuals with incomplete sexual differentiation and males and clinical presentation. Present dysmorphic stigmata as Greek helmet- females with clinical signs of Turner syndrome. The most common like forehead, hyperthelorism, broad nose, short philtrum, low-set presentation for individuals with a 45,X/46,XY karyotype is sexual dysplastic ears, and sacral dimple were classified as minor, mild and ambiguity, accounting for ~60%, and the least common category of severe. Aditional congenital anomalies of the heart, kidneys, genitalia 45,X/46,XY patients consists of those with bilaterally descended and intestine were taken into the consideration. Seizures were present testes, found in 11-12%. in 4 children, and were of variable type. Two of the children have We report on two patients with an apparently normal male phenotype visible cytogenetic deletion, two had microdeletion detected with FISH and 45,X/46,XY mosaicism who were diagnosed postnatally because probe, and one child with less characteristic clinical picture had mosaic of short stature. type of the deletion. Both of these boys presented at the age of 15 years with short The phenotype of the deletion of the short arm of cheomosome 4 is stature, minor Turner-like stigmata, normal male external genitalia and variable -from minor to full blown clinical presentation with characteristic spontaneous pubertal development. One of them had coarctaction facial dysmorphism and adjacent malformations. Characteristic of aorta with bicuspid aortic valve, an uncommon clinical feature appearance resembling “Greek helmet” facies is the basis for in boys with 45,X/46,XY karyotype. The same patient had a trial of establishing the diagnosis of Wolf-Hirschhorn (WH) syndrome. Since GH replacement therapy with poor response and his sperm analysis it is a contiguous gene syndrome, different regions of chromosome 4p revealed azoospermia. could be deleted. Recently used molecular techniques increase the Like our patients, most mosaic 45,X/46,XY children with bilateral number of diagnosed cases due to the detection of smaller deletions. scrotal testes go unrecognised at birth and throughout childhood unless they have somatic features of Turner syndrome or significant growth P02.010 retardation. We recommend that boys with otherwise unexplained 4p15 deletion in a patient with apparently isolated metopic short stature being short for their families should be karyotyped craniosynostosis. routinely as is recommended in short-stature girls. In addition, boys V. Alesi1, G. Barrano1, S. Morara1, D. Darelli1, K. Petrilli1, A. Capalbo2, M. with 45,X/46,XY karyotype must be routinely followed-up for their Pacella3, C. Haass3, M. Finocchi3, A. Novelli2, M. Bertoli1; potential to respond favourably to GH treatment and for late onset 1S. Pietro Fatebenefratelli Hospital Rome, Italy, UOSD Genetica Medica, rome, abnormalities, such as infertility and gonadal tumors. Italy, 2IRCCS «Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza» and Mendel Institute,, rome, Italy, 3S. Pietro Fatebenefratelli Hospital Rome, Italy, Neonatal Intensive Care P02.008 Unit, rome, Italy. cephalometric evaluation in a patient with 48,XXXX syndrome Craniosynostosis, premature fusion of one ore more cranial sutures, D. Belengeanu1, A. Podariu2, R. Rotaru3, N. Andreescu4; affects approximately one in 3000 live births. Syndromic trigonocephaly 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, College of Dental Technique, Timisoara, has been associated with chromosomal imbalances or point mutations Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Dental in single genes. Recently, it has been suggested that rare copy number Prevention and Oral Health, Timisoara, Romania, 3Individual Dental Office, variants (CNVs) in patients with isolated single-suture synostosis could Timisoara, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of contain genes important for cranial development. In fact, some of the Medical Genetics, Timisoara, Romania. involved genes play a role in osteoblasts proliferation, apoptosis and The aim of this study is to investigate the cephalo-facio-dental differentiation, whose deregulation can evolve in precocious suture relationships in the craniofacial complex and the use them for closure. We report the case of a 12 months old boy with an apparently diagnostic and orthodontics treatment. We studied the changes of the isolated craniosynostosis and harboring a de novo microdeletion cephalo-facio-dental relationships, using serial lateral cephalometric in the cytoband 4p15. The imbalance, about 4 Mb in size is, up to roentgenograms in a 29 years old female with 48,XXXX karyotype. By date, the smallest deletion described in this region, encompassing using cephalometric methods we evaluated 32 linear and 12 angular 12 genes. SLIT2, originally characterized in the nervous system as measurements of the craniofacial complex. We found smaller linear a guidance factor for axons, looks interesting because it was recently and larger angular measurements. Even if all face heights were described to have a role in in vitro osteoblast growth regulation. diminished, we recorded a significantly shortening of the length of the Further cases of CNVs including SLIT2 would be extremely useful in anterior and posterior cranial bases, posterior face height, the length determining whether its deregulation could be implicated in premature of the calvarium and mandibular ramus length, while the mandibular suture closure. Among others, DCAF16 and NCAPG should also be corpus demonstrated only a slight reduction. This can explain the considered for genetype phenotype correlation. In fact, these genes significantly increased SNB angle as a compensatory mechanism are involved in fundamental cell biological processes, and could between the accentuated shortening of the anterior and the slight be eventually associated with poor brain development. Up to now, reduction of mandibular corpus, ramus height reduction of was developmental steps of our patient looked adequate for his age, compensated by a smaller gonial angle. The angles between the palatal but further follow up is needed in order to assess his psychomotor and occlusal planes and between the palatal and mandibular planes development. Genotype-phenotype comparison with other previously were increased due to the fact that the palatal plane that was canted described cases with 4p15 deletion will be discussed in detail. upwards. The patient was included in skeletal Class III growth pattern and associated a modified dentoalveolar complex with upper incisors P02.011 having a reduction of the proclination and lower incisors in retrocline Early-onset polycystic kidney disease (PKD) - a crucial position. We concluded that even if the underlying mechanisms are additional finding of 4q deletion syndrome not known, the presence of supernumerary X chromosome influence y. oto, t. nagai, n. murakami, k. obata, y. tanaka, s. sakazume, y. kido; the development of craniofacial complex conducting to smaller linear dokkyo university school of medicine, saitama, Japan. parameters and enlarged angular measurements. Several reports describing chromosome 4q deletion have been published since 1980’s . In 2010, 9 cases with 4q deletion were Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 71 reported by Bonnet et al and the name of 4q deletion syndrome was conclusions. ACGH makes it easier to assess different clinical established. This is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome showing aspects such as developmental delay, autism and deformities with several characteristic features including severe growth retardation, regard to the chromosomal findings. teeth defect and neurosensorial deafness. PKD2 gene which was mapped at 4q21-q23 by Mochizuki in 1996 is related to autosomal P02.014*** dominant type PKD. PKD2 gene is deleted in 4q deletion syndrome. Evidence for AXiN2/iRF6 interaction in oral facial clefting However, few reports have described renal cysts in this syndrome. R. Menezes1,2, B. Bjork3, M. Cooper1,2, A. Letra1,2, H. Szabo-Rogers4, A. We assumed that deleted PKD2 should result in autosomal dominant Cramer1, D. Knight1, R. Rylands1, C. Brandon1,2, J. Resick1,2, K. Bardi1,2, F. W. B. PKD. Deleyiannis5, L. L. Field6, A. E. Czeizel7, L. MA8, G. P. Garlet9, F. A. Poletta10,11, Here we report on 2 cases of 4q deletion syndrome; one is a 15-year- J. C. Mereb12, J. S. Lopez-Camelo10,13, E. C. Castilla10,14, I. M. Orioli15, S. K. old female patient who was previously reported by Harada in 2002 and Wendell1,2, K. J. Liu4, M. L. Marazita1,2, A. R. Vieira1,2,16; the other is a 9-year-old female patient showing deletion 4q21-21.3 1Department of Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine, University of and 4q21.1-22.2, respectively. Both of them showed several typical Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 2Center for Craniofacial and characteristic findings of 4q deletion syndrome including severe Dental Genetics, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 3Division of Genetics, growth and mental retardation, and teeth defect. In addition to these Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Craniofacial features, both of them showed severe PKD by echogram and MRI Development, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Departments without renal dysfunction. Usually PKD2 mutation develops PKD of Surgery and Otolaryngology, University of Colorado School of Medicine, frequently in adulthood and rarely in childhood. Our cases with this Denver, CO, United States, 6Department of Medical Genetics, University of deletion developed PKD in childhood, suggesting that early onset may British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 7Foundation for the Community be related to the deletion, not a mutation, of PKD2. Control of Hereditary Diseases, Budapest, Hungary, 8School of Stomatology, PKD should be added to the essential features of 4q deletion Beijing University, Beijing, China, 9Department of Biological Sciences, syndrome. Clinicians should perform renal imaging study in patients University of São Paulo, Bauru, Brazil, 10ECLAMC (Latin American with this syndrome even without abnormal findings in routine blood Collaborative Study of Congenital Malformations) at CEMIC (Center for Medical tests and urinalysis. Education and Clinical Research), Buenos Aires, Argentina, 11ECLAMC at INAGEMP-CNPq (National Institute of Population Medical Genetics) at CEMIC, P02.012 Buenos Aires, Argentina, 12ECLAMC at Hospital de Area El Bolson, Rio Dysmorphic features, short stature and deafness explained by a Negro, Argentina, 13ECLAMC at Imbice (Multidisciplinary Institute of Cellular homozygous deletion of 15p15.33 involving the sLc12A7 (Kcc4) Biology), La Plata, Argentina, 14ECLAMC at INAGEMP-CNPq (National Institute gene and the NKD2 gene. of Population Medical Genetics) in Department of Genetics, Osvaldo Cruz M. Elting, A. van Hagen, A. Nieuwint, H. Meijers-Heijboer, E. Sistermans, M. Foundation, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 15ECLAMC (Latin American Collaborative Weiss; Study of Congenital Malformations) at INAGEMP (National Institute of VU University medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Population Medical Genetics) at Department of Genetics, Institute of Biology, A fourth child of consanguineous parents was born with a Pierre Center of Health Sciences, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Robin sequence and dysmorphic features concerning round eyes, Janeiro, Brazil, 16Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Dental Medicine, low set- and cup shaped ears, flat midface, bowed tip of the nose, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States. underdeveloped nostrils and flat philtrum. Growth on - 2 SD, no heart Oral-facial clefts (OFC) have a multigenic etiology that involves or kidney anomalies. Normal karyotype, no 22q11 deletion. many different signaling pathways. We recently reported that families The girl developed short stature and perceptive deafness. DFNB1, segregating OFCs present an increased history of cancer when SHOX and CHARGE were excluded. A skeletal survey was normal. compared to control families, and that AXIN2 is associated with OFCs Array CGH (Agilent 180k) showed a homozygous deletion of 50 kb of in a US population. Since Axin2 is an important negative regulator 5p15.33 involving the 3’ end of both the NKD2 and SCL12A7 (Kcc4) of the Wnt pathway, and the Wnt pathway is integral to craniofacial gene. The healthy parents and three sibs are heterozygous carriers of development, we expanded our initial study to explore the association the deletion. of AXIN2 markers with OFCs in 724 cleft families from North America, Kcc4 is a K+- Cl- cotransporter playing a role in the K+ transport in the Europe, Asia, and Latin America. Thirteen AXIN2 SNPs were genotyped inner ear and in the Cl- transport in the proximal tubules of the kidney. using TaqMan chemistry and tested for association with OFC using Mice lacking Kcc4 are deaf, have a low bodyweight and develop renal the Family-Based Association Test (FBAT). An association between tubular acidosis. SNP rs7224837 and OFC was identified in the pooled populations Nkd 1 and nkd2 inhibit wnt-signaling and are involved in morphogenic (P=0.001), while SNP rs3923086 showed association with Chinese signaling. In mice ndk2 is expressed in the snout and ears. In the ndk1- families from Beijing and Shanghai presenting cleft lip and palate ndk2 knockout mouse the nose is short. individuals only (P=0.004). We found statistical evidence of interaction In conclusion, this patient has a homozygous deletion syndrome in between these AXIN2 SNPs and IRF6 SNPs rs2235371 and rs642961 which the loss of Kcc4, likely explains her deafness and short stature, (P<0.05). We assessed mouse Axin2 expression during mouse and the loss of nkd2 causes specific dysmorphic facial features. palatogenesis, and also detected co-localization of Axin2 and IRF6 proteins in the palate, oral and molar tooth epithelia. Taken together, P02.013 our results support an important role for AXIN2 during craniofacial De novo 9p duplication in a syndromic child and palatal development. Further, these results provide insights into A. Bakken1, K. O. Clausen1, A. K. Eek1, H. Høyer1, S. Skei2, G. J. Braathen1,3; potentially etiologic AXIN2-IRF6 interactions that may contribute to the 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark etiology of OFcs in humans. Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Department of Pediatrics, Section of Habilitation, Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 3Head and Neck Research Group, Research P02.015** Centre, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway. COL4A2 mutation associated with familial porencephaly, Background. 9p duplication syndrome is a rare chromosomal disorder aneurysm and secondary developmental anomalies often with well characterized clinical features. Array Comparative H. A. Verbeek1, F. W. Verheijen1, M. E. C. Meuwissen1, P. Govaert2, D. Licht3, Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) have revealed that duplicated areas D. S. Kuo4, C. Poulton1, R. Schot1, M. H. Lequin5, J. Dudink2, D. J. Halley1, I. R. on 9p may have different clinical impact, i.e. 9p24.3 to 9p23 as a F. de Coo6, J. den Hollander7, R. Oegema1, D. B. Gould8, G. M. S. Mancini1; potential autism spectrum disorder locus, 9p22.3 to 9p22.2 as the 1Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, critical region for the 9p duplication syndrome, 9p22.1 to 9p13.1 as Netherlands, 2Dept. of Neonatology, Erasmus University Medical a probable normal variant and 9p11.2 to 13.1 definitely as a normal Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Children’s Hospital and University of variant Pennsylvania Medical School, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Department methods. We describe a child with de novo 9p duplication and the of Ophthalmology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, United genetic analyses performed in the family. States, 5Dept. of Radiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Results. Both chromosomal analysis and array Comparative Genomic Netherlands, 6Dept. of Child Neurology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Hybridization (aCGH) identified the duplication. Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Dept. of Pathology, Erasmus University Medical Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 72 Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Dept. of Ophthalmology and Anatomy, heterogeneous, but split-hand and split-foot malformation and Institute for Human Genetics University of California, San Francisco, CA, congenital heart defect (CHD) are the most important diagnostic United States. features. Other malformations and clinical signs reported are: cleft lip/ Background. Familial porencephaly results from cerebral stroke during palate, genital anomalies, facial dysmorphisms and mental retardation. pregnancy or around birth and has been described with dominant Genetic cause is unknown and autosomal recessive inheritance is mutations in the gene encoding for type IV collagen alpha 1 (COL4A1). supposed. We observed three porencephaly families that lack COL4A1 We describe a male born to non-consanguineous parents, with hand mutations. Mice harbouring mutations in either Col4a1 or Col4a2 malformations, CHD and peculiar morphologic facial features. Fetal suffer from cerebral and ocular bleeding and developmental defects. ultrasound at 20 week gestation showed a complex CHD. At birth, he We hypothesized that COL4A2 mutations could cause porencephaly presented with cleft left hand and lack of flexion at the interphalangeal in families without COL4A1 mutations. joints of the fifth right hand finger. On echocardiography the CHD Methods. We sequenced COL4A2 in three families with porencephaly, detected consisted of truncus arteriosus type 1, ventricular septal and characterized clinical, neuroradiological and cellular phenotypes defect and pulmonary atresia. Morphologic features of the face were: by biochemistry and EM of skin. high forehead, broad nasal bridge, long philtrum, microretrognatia and Results. Sequencing of COL4A2 identified the heterozygous pathogenic large and dysmorphic low-set ears. TC scan showed the presence of mutation Gly1389Arg and two probable pathogenic c.3206delC schisis of the posterior arch of the lumbar vertebrae. Karyotype was and Met813Leu in three families with cerebrovascular disease. In 46,XY, and array-CGH is ongoing. patients with mutations, phenotypes varied including porencephaly, We underline the clinical variability of this condition and the wide range microcephaly, white matter tract abnormalities, secondary cerebellar of malformations reported requiring a multidisciplinary approach. and optic nerve hypoplasia, stroke at adult age and carotid aneurysm. Clinical genetic assessment is important in order to define the However, in two families, patients without the mutation were described. diagnosis and genetic counselling is recommended for parents for high In support of pathogenicity, fragmentation and duplication of epidermal recurrence risk. basement membranes was observed by electron microscopy in c.3206delC and Met813Leu patient skin biopsies, consistent with P02.018 abnormal collagen IV network. Cultured fibroblasts of one c.3206delC Apert syndrome With Fused thalami patient showed significantly increased rates of apoptosis under stress K. Ludwig1, R. Salmaso1, M. Cassina2, R. Manara3, V. Citton3, M. Baldi4, M. conditions, but, interestingly, no associated signs of ER stress. Rugge1; Conclusions. Dominant COL4A2 mutations are a novel risk factor for 1Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & Special Therapies, Pathology porencephaly, stroke and brain developmental defects. Basement Unit, Padova, Italy, 2Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics Unit, Padova, membrane defects appear to underly pathology, but abnormal Italy, 3Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & Special Therapies, regulation of apoptosis may be a contributing factor. Neuroradiology Unit, Padova, Italy, 4Human Genetics Laboratory, E. O. Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy. P02.016 An increased nuchal translucency had been detected at 12 weeks of G1138A mutation in FGFR3 gene in patients with achondroplasia gestation and second level ultrasounds (2-D, 3-D and 4-D) at 20+1 S. BUCERZAN1, C. Al-Khzouz1, R. Popp2, A. Trifa2, C. Denes1, M. Crisan1, P. weeks of gestation revealed multiple cranio-facial dysmorphisms Grigorescu-Sido1; including turricephaly, frontal bossing, midface hypoplasia and ocular 1FIRST PEDIATRIC CLINIC, CLUJ-NAPOCA, Romania, 2Department of hyperthelorism. The pregnancy was terminated at 20+3 weeks of Medical Genetics, CLUJ-NAPOCA, Romania. gestation. Introduction. Achondroplasia is a common form of chondrodyplasia External examination of the female fetus revealed a clinical phenotype with a frequency of 1/15.000 - 40.000 new borns. It is transmitted by indicative of Acrocephalosyndactyly type I (Apert Syndrome), autosomal dominant trait with full penetrance but approximately 75- confirmed by molecular analysis of the FGFR2 gene. 80% of the cases are caused by de novo mutations. The disease is In addition, due to a transvaginal ultrasound detection of probable determined by mutations in receptor-3 gene of the fibroblast growth holoprosencephaly, a post mortem MRI scan was preformed revealing factor (FGFR3), mapped to band 4p16.3, resulting in decreased a minimal form of holoprosencephaly with fusion of the thalami. endochondral ossficication, inhibited proliferation of chondrocytes Apert syndrome and holoprosencephaly occur with prevalences of in growth plate cartilage and decreased cartilage matrix. The most approximately 1:55000 and 1:8000, respectively. Various central frequent mutations (up to 99%) are G1138A and G1183C. The aim of nervous system anomalies, such as ventriculomegaly, corpus this study is to establish the prevalence of G1138A mutation in FGFR3 callosum anomalies, hydrocephaly, defective septum pellucidum and gene in patients with achondroplasia in our care. mesial temporal abnormalities have been reported in patients with Patients and method. The study group consisted of 27 patients (17 Apert syndrome. girls and 10 boys), aged between 1 year 8 months - 22 years, who While there are numerous patients affected simultaneously by HPE were registered in the Centre of Genetic Diseases of First Pediatric and craniosynostosis (one of the cardinal signs of Apert syndrome), Clinic Cluj in the period 2007-2010. The method consisted in: clinical cases of holoprosencephaly in Apert syndrome have never been assessment and radiological examinations (radiograms of the skull, reported so far. upper and lower limbs, spinal column and pelvis). The DNA analasys was performed by PCR-RFLP technique. P02.019 Results. Between 2007 - 2010, 80 patients were diagnosed with subtle risk of dissection in thoracic aneurysms associated with bone dysplasia; 27 of them (33,75%) were diagnosed (on clinical and mutations of smooth muscle alpha-actin 2 (ActA2) radiological basis) with achondroplasia. Out of this group, 13 patients E. Disabella, M. Grasso, F. Gambarin, N. Narula, R. Dore, V. Favalli, A. Serio, (48,14%) were identified as heterozygotes for G1138A mutation in L. Gesa, E. Antoniazzi, M. Mosconi, A. Odero, M. Pasotti, E. Arbustini; FGFR3 gene; this prevalence is very low comparatively with other IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. studies (Hung CC, Alderborn A). To evaluate the prevalence and phenotype of smooth muscle alpha- Conclusions. It is the first study that reports the prevelance of this actin (ACTA2) mutations in nonsyndromic thoracic aortic aneurysms mutation in Romania. and dissections (TAAD).Observational study of ACTA2 mutations in TAAD.Setting : Centre for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases. P02.017 Patients A consecutive series of 100 patients with TAAD. Exclusion Acro-cardio-Facial syndrome: description of a new case. criteria included genetically confirmed Marfan syndrome, LoeyseDietz B. Toschi1, C. Congregati1, A. Michelucci1, V. Bertini1, A. Valetto1, P. Simi1, B. type 2, familial bicuspid aortic valve and EhlerseDanlos type IV Murzi2, M. Cantinotti2, N. Assanta2; syndromes. 1U.O. Citogenetica e Genetica Molecolare, PISA, Italy, 2Fondazione Monasterio, Multidisciplinary clinical and imaging evaluation, genetic counselling Pasquinucci Hospital, National Research Council, Massa, Italy. and testing of ACTA2, and family screening. Acro-Cardio-Facial syndrome (ACFS) is a very rare genetic condition Main outcome measures Prevalence of ACTA2 mutations and with nine patients been published until now. ACFS is clinically corresponding phenotypes. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 73 Results TAAD was familial in 43 cases and sporadic in 57 cases. Five major 3’→5’ DNA exonuclease in mammals; RNASEH2A, RNASEH2B, mutations in the familial TAAD group (12%) were identified that were and RNASEH2C, encoding the components of the RNASEH2 absent in controls. The known p.Arg149Cys and the novel p.Asp82Glu, RNA:DNA endoribonuclease complex; and SAMHD1. At least another, p.Glu243Lys and p.Val45Leu mutations affected evolutionarily but minor, AGS-related gene is likely to await identification. The conserved residues. The IVS4+1G>A mutation was novel. Of 14 AGS system is of both biological and medical interest. For clinical affected relatives, 13 were carriers of the mutation identified in the use, we have developed and launched a comprehensive testing corresponding proband while one deceased relative had no genetic package consisting of high-throughput conventional sequencing of test. Type A dissection was the first manifestation of aortic aneurysm in the coding regions of the above five genes. Our GeneTests-listed four probands and occurred unexpectedly in five relatives. The aortic AGS service is estimated to have a clinical sensitivity around 80% aneurysm was age dependent and absent in mutated children. Of and is available with a target turnaround time of 8 weeks for routine nine patients who had acute dissection, five died following surgery. diagnostic requests; responding to urgent diagnostic queries is also At dissection, the size of the aortic aneurysm ranged from 40 mm possible. Overall, this cost-effective strategy reduces testing bias to 95 mm. Extravascular, ocular, skeletal, nervous and pulmonary and enables more conclusive reporting while fully complementing, traits were variably associated with TAAD, with iris flocculi being most or even superseding, radiological, immunological, and biochemical common. investigations. Additionally, carrier and prenatal testing, in families with Conclusions Timely diagnosis of TAAD in the probands, genetic previously characterised mutations, is streamlined. counselling and family screening identify predisposed relatives and prevent catastrophic aortic dissections. P02.022 A case of right-sided cardiac developmental abnormality due to P02.020 a novel mutation in JAG1 Four new cases of Acute Necrotizing Encephalopathy caused by B. Brasseur1,2, N. Revencu1; mutation in RANBP2 gene 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, Bruxelles, Belgium, 2Clinique Saint-Pierre, M. Rio1, A. Lebre1, R. Armando1, D. Grévent2, M. Willems1, N. Brahimi1, A. Ottignies, Belgium. Kuster3, M. Holder4, a. Munnich1, A. Rotig1, P. de Lonlay5, I. Desguerre5, N. Introduction Boddaert2; The JAG1 gene encodes jagged-1 protein, a highly conserved ligand 1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, paris, France, 2Department of for the Notch1 receptor. Jagged/Notch interactions are critical for pediatric radiology, Necker Hospital, paris, France, 3Department of Pediatrics, determination of cell fates in early development. JAG1 mutations nantes, France, 4Department of genetics, lille, France, 5Department of cause the well-known Alagille syndrome (ALGS, MIM: #118450), but Pediatrics, Necker Hospital, paris, France. growing evidence implicates this gene in various non-syndromic right- Acute necrotizing encephalopathy (ANE), first described in East sided cardiac defects (1). Asia, affects mainly young and healthy children who develop acute Clinical case encephalopathy, seizures and rapid progression to coma 2 or 3 days We report on a case of a 4-year-old boy referred for evaluation of after the onset of a viral illness. An autosomal dominant form, ANE1, peripheral pulmonary stenosis. His weight and height were 20kg (0 has been recognized and linked to mutations in the gene encoding SD) and 111cm (-1SD) respectively. Developmental milestones were the nuclear pore protein Ran Binding Protein 2 (RANBP2). We report normal. He showed some dysmorphic features: broad and prominent the clinical, MRI, and molecular genetic findings of ANE1 in 4 non- nasal bridge with bulbous nasal tip, long upslanting palpebral fissures related French patients. In all patients, the disease was manifested and broad chin. There were no other clinical or radiological features of as a rapidly progressing acute febrile encephalopathy. The patients ALGS. Bidirectionnal sequencing of JAG1 (NM_000214.2) revealed a were previously neurologically normal, with the exception of one child c.820G>T transversion in the exon 6, responsible for a p.Gly274Cys who had residual neurologic problems following a previous febrile change in the second EGF-like repeat. encephalopathy. Interestingly two of them were initially referred Discussion with the diagnosis of mitochondrial disease because of oxidative The interest of this case is the link with a previously described large phosphorylation deficiency demonstrated in muscle biopsy. The kindred with a JAG1 mutation in the same codon p.Gly274Asp (2). disorder was fatal in two patients. The two other patients recovered Interestingly, the affected family members presented striking similar from the coma but experienced significant neurologic disability. facial features and right-sided cardiac defects, mainly Tetralogy of Cerebrospinal fluid protein was consistently elevated among patients Fallot and peripheral pulmonary stenosis, but no other signs of ALGS. during the acute illness. Imaging findings showed multiple symmetrical These findings suggest a genotype-phenotype correlation. Patients lesions affecting primarily the brainstem, the thalami and the external with right-sided cardiac defects should be carefully screened for capsule. The four patients were heterozygous for the same missense dysmorphic features and family history of cardiac defects and even in mutation (c.1880C/T, p.Thr585Met) in the gene (RANBP2). The the absence of other signs of ALGS, JAG1 should be screened. mutation occurred de novo in two patients and was inherited from References: healthy parents in two. These observations emphasize the distinctive 1. Hum Mutat. 2010 May;31(5):594-601 brain MRI, the possible role in energy maintenance and the not fully 2. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Jan 15;10(2):163-9 penetrant phenotype associated with RANBP2 mutations. P02.023 P02.021 A case of misdiagnosis of Angelman syndrome, the role of mLPA consolidated clinical genetic testing for Aicardi-Goutières genetic analysis in diagnosis syndrome and related conditions: a service package covering N. Khazamipour1, S. Rezaee1, N. Mirfatahi1, M. Noruzinia2; TREX1, RNASEH2B, RNASEH2C, RNASEH2A, and SAMHD1. 1Sarem Cell Research Center and Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic L. A. Mavrogiannis1, N. Kumar1, Y. J. Crow2, T. Lamb1, R. S. Charlton1; Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetic and Hematology, faculty of 1Regional Genetics Service, St James’s University Hospital, Leeds, United medical sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Kingdom, 2Genetic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder Kingdom. characterized by severe developmental delay or mental retardation, Clinical and molecular research in Aicardi-Goutières syndrome ataxia and dysmorphic facial features. The unique clinical features of (AGS), a severe genetic encephalopathy resembling congenital AS manifest after 1 year of age, and it can take several years before infection, uncovered a range of immune-mediated brain and lupus-like the correct clinical diagnosis becomes obvious. conditions associated with dysregulation of nucleic acid metabolism Microdeletions on chromosome 15q11.2q13 of maternal origin are the and/or innate immunity mechanisms. Apart from classical AGS, the commonest genetic mechanism, occurring in approximately 70-75% of AGS spectrum comprises atypical AGS, retinal vasculopathy with AS. Other mechanisms include paternal uniparental disomy, imprinting cerebral leukodystrophy, chilblain lupus, and certain types of systemic defects and point mutations or small deletions within the UBE3A gene. lupus erythematosous, linked by a common genetic etiology. All can be We report an interesting case of an 8-year-old male with MR, partial caused by mutations in one, typically, of five known genes involved in seizure, nystagmus and albinism. The EEG and MRI were abnormal. nucleic acid clearance and/or innate immunity: TREX1, specifying the He showed a normal karyotype. The phenotypic presentation is not of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 74 classical AS syndrome, however FISH analysis of PWS/AS had been eye malformations who were ascertained from the Hospital for performed in another laboratory, which showed no deletion. Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies, Bauru-SP, Brazil . They Analysis of a DNA sample using the MLPA kit P297-B1 for detection were divided in 9 groups: A/M + cleft lip and/or atypical cleft; Oculo- of any interstitial microdeletion found no deletion. Subtelomeric Ariculo-Vetebral Spectrum (OAVS); A/M isolated; Cerebro-Oculo- microdeletion analysis using P70 and P36 kits showed loss of Nasal; Frontonasal dysplasia and/or Oculo-Ariculo-Frontonasal; heterozygosity in the ‘15q11 probe’ which corresponds to the AS/PWS Holoprosencephaly; Anoftalmia-Waardenburg syndrome; CHARGE. region. No disease-causing mutations were identified in any groups. This study As these regions are in the critical region for PWS/AS, we further suggests that mutations in SOX2, OTX2, and PAX6 do not appear analyzed the region for imprinting defects and found an LOH of to be a common cause of ocular defects other than anophthalmia/ maternal origin. Further genetic and epigenetic analysis of the AS/PWS microphthalmia. Further studies with larger numbers of different region was performed and confirmed an imprinting defect and LOH of phenotypes may reveal mutations in these genes. the maternal allele in this patient. This genetic analysis confirmed the diagnosis of Angelman syndrome. P02.026 This is an interesting example of rigorous scientific work which could isolated congenital anosmia reveal a laboratory misdiagnosis and confirm the clinical diagnosis. H. G. Karstensen, N. Tommerup; Wilhelm Johansen Centre for functional Genome Research, Copenhagen N, P02.024 Denmark. Associated malformations among infants with anophthalmia and Which sense would you rather lose? A majority would answer smell. microphthalmia Despite this, smell has a major impact on our lives, i.e. related to C. Stoll, B. Dott, Y. Alembik, M. Roth; food consumption, daily hygiene, detection of dangerous gasses and Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. partner selection. Approximately 5% of the general population are Infants with anophthalmia and microphthalmia very often have other anosmic, but although many are unaware of their condition, anosmia associated congenital anomalies. The reported frequency and types has repeatedly been related to loss or gain of weight, depression and of associated malformations vary between different studies.The generally a poor quality of life. The majority of individuals suffering purpose of this investigation was to assess the frequency and types from anosmia have an acquired condition, which develops throughout of associated malformations among infants with an/microphthalmia life due to head trauma, allergies, sinonasal disease etc. A much in a geographically well defined population from 1979 to 2004 of smaller minority (~1% of the anosmic population) have no recollection 346,831 consecutive births. Of the 87 infants with an/microphthalmia of ever being able to smell and are thus classified as having isolated born during this period (prevalence at birth of 2.5 per 10,000), 89.6 % congenital anosmia (ICA). A genetic origin is likely to explain the had associated malformations. Infants with associated malformation anosmia in this group, however human mutations have yet to be found. were divided into recognizable conditions (22 (25.3%) infants with The scope of this review is to focus on the genetic basis of ICA through chromosomal and 15 (17.2%) with non chromosomal conditions), i) published families and cases with ICA, ii) anosmia in combination and non recognizable conditions (41 (47.1%) infants with multiple with other anomalies and iii) olfactory signal transduction pathway malformations). Trisomies 13 and 18 were the most frequent genes and animal models which may shed light on potential candidate chromosomal abnormalities. Amniotic bands sequence, CHARGE genes and pathways involved. The lack of knowledge about specific association, Meckel-Gruber syndrome and VACTERL association genetic causes of ICA is a challenge but also an opportunity, which were most often present in recognizable non chromosomal conditions. should now be within reach by application of the newest technological Malformations in the musculoskeletal, cardiovascular and central developments in genetic and genome research. nervous systems were the most common other anomalies in infants with multiple malformations and non recognizable conditions. A de P02.027 novo heterozygous loss-of-function point mutation in SOX2 was One mutation fits all: Phospholamban R14del underlies both reported in 10 to 20 % of severe bilateral an/microphthalmia. The arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy and dilated frequency of associated malformations in infants with anophthalmia cardiomyopathy and microphthalmia emphasizes the need for a thorough investigation P. A. van der Zwaag1, A. Asimaki2, J. D. Jongbloed1, M. P. van den Berg1, of these infants. Routine screening for other malformations especially A. C. Wiesfeld1, M. G. Cox3, L. T. van Lochem4, R. A. de Boer1, K. Y. van musculoskeletal, cardiac and central nervous systems anomalies may Spaendonck-Zwarts1, I. C. van Gelder1, D. P. Judge5, H. Calkins5, A. J. need to be considered in infants with anophthalmia and microphthalmia, Suurmeijer1, R. N. Hauer3, J. E. Saffitz2, A. A. Wilde4, J. P. van Tintelen1; and referral of these infants for genetics evaluation and counseling 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Harvard seems warranted. Medical School, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Academic P02.025 Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Johns Hopkins University School of Analysis of sOX2, OtX2, and PAX6 genes in 89 Brazilian Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. patients with severe eye malformation Background Although considered separate entities, arrhythmogenic L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo1, R. G. Quiezi1,2, A. Richieri-Costa1, D. FitzPatrick2; right ventricular cardiomyopathy (ARVC) and dilated cardiomyopathy 1Hospital de Reabilitacao de Anomalias Craniofaciais, Bauru, Brazil, 2Medical (DCM) show considerable clinical overlap. We hypothesized that Research Council, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. phospholamban gene (PLN) mutations could underlie both DCM and Anophthalmia/ microphthalmia (A/M) are major structural eye ARVC. malformations. The best estimates of the birth prevalence of methods We screened 240 DCM and 97 ARVC index-patients for PLN microphthalmia and anophthalmia from well maintained population mutations and evaluated clinical characteristics. Immunohistochemistry based registers are 14 and 3 per 100 000 births, respectively. A/M is a (IHC) was performed in 16 myocardial samples from PLN mutation heterogenous condition with various etiologies. One-third of individuals carriers. with A/M have associated malformations. Heritable causes of A/M Results Mutation R14del in PLN was identified in 31 of 240 (13%) include chromosome abnormalities and syndromic or nonsyndromic DCM and 12 of 97 (12%) ARVC index-patients. This mutation was single gene disorders fashion. A/M is clinically and etiologically also present in an ARVC cohort from a different continent. Haplotype heterogeneous, and it has been estimated that only 20-40% of patients analysis revealed a common founder mutation, estimated to be 575- receive accurate molecular information regarding the pathogenesis of 825 years old. A low voltage ECG was present in 42% of R14del+ their malformation. patients. R14del+ DCM patients more often demonstrated: appropriate Homozygous mutations in the PAX6 gene in the RAX and VSX2 ICD discharge (42% vs. 9%, P<0.001), cardiac transplantation (19% (CHX10) genes have been described as causing A/M. Mutations in vs. 3%, P<0.01), and a family history for sudden death (35% vs. 14%, SOX2 that segregate in an autosomal dominant pattern have been P<0.01), when compared to R14del- DCM patients. In ARVC patients, described in individuals with A/M. Mutations in OTX2 have been these differences were not significant. IHC revealed absent/depressed reported in up to 5% of individuals with A/M. Here, we analyzed levels for the desmosomal protein plakoglobin at intercalated disks in 5 SOX2, OTX2, and PAX6 genes in 89 Brazilian patients with severe of 7 (71%) R14del+ ARVC samples and in 1 of 9 (11%) R14del+ DCM Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 75 samples (P=0.03). microstomia, mandibular condyle hypoplasia, prominent cheeks. The conclusions The PLN R14del founder mutation underlies both psyhological development is normal. The genetic defect for ACS is still ARVC and DCM in a substantial number of patients. R14del+ DCM unknown; the gene could be probably map in 1p21.1-q23.3 region. patients demonstrate a severe phenotype. Reduced plakoglobin at the We describe a pacient CPN, a 6 months old girl, with a highly intercalated disk appears to track with the ARVC phenotype instead suggestive dysmorphic face (severe micro-retrognathia, round facial of the genotype. These findings challenge the distinction of DCM and appearance, prominent cheeks, dysplastic ears with abnormal lobule). ARVC as separate entities and support the concept of ‘arrhythmogenic The patient is the one child of a young and non-consanguineous cardiomyopathy’. couple. The mother revealed the same facial malformations as the child. We discussed a possible differential diagnosis. P02.028 We underline the importance for a good knowledge of the clinical molecular Genetic investigation of the Atm gene in iranian features and syndromes of first and second pharyngeal arches for a population correct diagnosis, clinical assessment and genetic counseling. E. Mohamadi Pargoo1,2, O. Aryani1, M. Houshmand1,3; 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Science & research P02.031 branch of Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National New case of Primrose syndrome with mild intellectual disability. Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic R. Posmyk1, R. Leśniewicz1,2, M. Chorąży3, A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk1, S. Republic of Iran. Wołczyński4; Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is characterized by progressive cerebellar 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Podlaskie Center of Clinical Genetics, ataxia beginning between ages one and four years, oculomotor Bialystok, Poland, 2Department of Reproduction and Gynecological apraxia, choreoathetosis, telangiectasias of the conjunctivae, Endocrinology, Medical University of Białystok, Białystok, Poland, 3Department immunodeficiency, frequent infections, and an increased risk for of Neurology, Medical University, Bialystok, Poland, 4Department of malignancy, particularly leukemia and lymphoma. Reproduction and Gynecological Endocrinology, Medical University, Bialystok, ATM is the only gene known to be associated with ataxia-telangiectasia. Poland. The normal gene has 66 (62 coding) exons and a 13-kb cDNA. More We report on a 27 years old man, who represents the sixth and the than 500 unique mutations are known. No common mutations (‘hot youngest published case of Primrose syndrome. Primrose syndrome spots’) have been identified. Most affected individuals in Europe (PS) (OMIM#295090) belongs to an extremely rare entities of and USA inherit different mutations from each parent, i.e., they are unknown etiology characterized by the progressive wasting of distal compound heterozygotes. Most mutations result in absence of ATM muscles of the legs, the small muscles of the hands resulting in protein. contractures, the presence of mental retardation, hearing problems, In this study, peripheral blood samples from 5 patients were extracted cataracts, brain calcification and the leading feature- ossification of by salt out method to isolate total genomic DNA. Methods were used ear cartilage. All the main manifestations, were present in our patient. for the detection of mutations were PCR amplification and direct Despite of strict phenotypic similarity to five other PS cases our patient sequencing. represented with a mild mental retardation. Additionally we have We found in 5 Iranian AT patients a homozygous nucleotide deletion found hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and a low bone density due was identified in ATM gene. We are going to discuss about clinical and to progressive osteoporosis. We discuss our observations in relation molecular aspects of our patients. We need further investigation to to previously published cases and we stress a need of the detail prove this mutation as founder effect in Iranian population. phenotypic descriptions of further cases as a syndrome remains a very rare finding and a genetic basis of PS is still undiscovered. P02.029 Antithrombin iii defeciency; a case report P02.032 A. Kondo, A. Narita, H. Ishii, S. Sato, T. Matsumoto, H. Ishimoto, S. Izumi; ZEB2 missense mutations leading to an unusual presentation of Tokai University, Isehara, Japan. mowat-Wilson syndrome with moderate intellectual disability Antithrombin III deficiency is first reported by Egeber et al. in 1965. The J. Ghoumid1, A. Briand-Suleau1, L. Drévillon1, L. Goodwin2, P. Raymond1, N. incidence for Japanese is 0.18% and is almost same as Caucasian. Bondurand1, J. Amiel3, M. Goossens1, S. Lyonnet3, D. Mowat4, I. Giurgea1; This lady is 30 y/o, G1P0 and has been followed up by vascular 1Service de biochimie et génétique and INSERM U955 IMRB équipe 11, Hôpital surgeon since she had deep vein thrombosis at 19 y/o. She is on low- Henri Mondor, Creteil, France, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Nepean dose aspirin since then and came to us because of her pregnancy. Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 3Département de Génétique and INSERM U-781, When she came to us first time, she had doubted a bit of familial Hôpital Necker Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, 4Department of Clinical condition but not been sure about that. She mentioned her mother side Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia. uncle had cerebral infarction and her second cousin had lost her first Mowat-Wilson syndrome (MWS, MIM#235730) is an intellectual child because of thrombosis. However, her mother does not have any disability-multiple congenital anomaly syndrome characterized history of thrombosis. We talked about the possibility of inheritance by severe intellectual disability, epilepsy, agenesis of the corpus because of family history and gave her information about genetic test callosum, distinctive facial dysmorphism, heart defects, urogenital as well. malformations and Hirschsprung disease. ZEB2 truncating mutations Her pregnancy went good and had a baby safely. The baby has been or deletions are disease causing. SIP1 (Smad Interacting Protein tested ATIII and ATIII activity which came back as normal. We talked 1), the encoded protein, is a two-handed zinc finger/homeodomain about some worries of her mother with the patient and she wanted her transcriptional factor. Two separate clusters of zinc fingers have been mother to take a blood test for ATIII, but her mother declined. We finally characterized (in N-terminus and in C-terminus), and both must bind did not have any chance to talk to her mother in this case. for transcriptional regulation. SIP1 target genes are numerous, and the It is still difficult to talk about familial condition sometimes in Japan. best characterized is E-cadherin. SIP1 is early expressed by several This could be big issue for us how to provide more information if there tissues during embryonic development, including the neural crest, are some prevention of life threatening situation. neuroepithelium and limb buds. We report two patients with heterozygote missense mutations P02.030 (c.3164A>G, p.Tyr1055Cys; c.3211T>C; p.Ser1071Pro) localized severe micrognathia, question mark ears - auriculo-condylar in the C-terminus zinc finger, and possibly resulting in ADN/protein syndrome: case report interactions. We performed in vitro functional tests, using the luciferase M. Volosciuc1, E. Braha2, A. Rugina1; reporter system and confirmed that both mutations abolished 1Paediatric Hospital “Sfanta Maria”, Iasi, Romania, 2University of Medicine and transcriptional repression of SIP1 on E-Cadherin. Both patients Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. have a facial gestalt of MWS and milder intellectual disability and no Auriculo-condylar syndrome (ACS) is an autosomal dominant disorder congenital malformations. of first and second branchial arches, with complete penetrance and In conclusion, we report an unusual clinical presentation of MWS with great intra- and inter-familial phenotypic variation; ACS is characterized moderate intellectual disability and a distinctive facial appearance by dysplastic ears (‘question mark ears’), micro-retrognathia, ascribed to ZEB2 missense mutations.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 76 P02.033 Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 3Department of Pediatrics, Recurrent duplication Xp11.22-p11.23 can be associated with Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway. propensity to autoimmune disease: a case report and review of Background. Copy number variations (CNV) in several chromosomal the literature regions have been associated with increased risk of autism spectrum O. M. Vanakker1, H. Verhelst2, L. De Groote3, R. Mercelis4, B. Menten1, R. Van disorders (ASD). Chromosomal regions implicated in studies of ASD Coster2, A. De Paepe1; and associated phenotypes such as schizophrenia, mental retardation 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, and developmental delay include 1p, 1q, 3p, 5q, 7q, 10q, 15q, 16p, 2Department of Paediatric Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 17p, 20p, 22q and Xq. Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, Maria-Middelares Hospital Ghent, Ghent, methods. We describe a child with de novo 7q deletion and maternal Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Ghent, 16p duplication and the genetic analyses performed in the family. Belgium. Results. The chromosomal analyses were normal while array Introduction. A recurrent 4.5 Mb duplication of Xp11.2 has been Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) identified the 7q deletion reported in females with variable degree of intellectual disability and the 16p duplication. and language impairment associated with endocrine abnormalities, conclusions. ACGH makes it easier to assess different clinical epilepsy and skeletal abnormalities. aspects of neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism with regard Case report. The proband is the first daughter of healthy non- to the chromosomal findings. consanguineous parents. She was born at term with normal antropometric measurements. At age 10, she was diagnosed with a P02.036 de novo 4,5 Mb Xp11.2p11.23 duplication syndrome because of mild Autism spectrum Disorders and seizure syndrome intellectual disability and speech delay, hirsutism, obesity and epilepsy. D. Bauze1,2, L. Kevere1, Z. Kronberga1, A. Rizevs1, S. Jelisejevs1, R. At age 12, she presented with rapidly progressive proximal muscle Andrezina3, B. Lace4; weakness of arms and legs. A positive Tensilon test was suggestive for 1Children’s University Hospital, Child Psychiatry Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 2Children’s Myasthenia Gravis. EMG evaluation revealed low evoked compound University Hospital, Medical Genetics Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 3Riga Stradins motor action potentials, consistent with Lambert-Eaton myasthenic University, Riga, Latvia, 4Children’s University Hospital, Medical Genetics Clinic, syndrome (LEMS). LEMS is a paraneoplastic disorder of neuromuscular Riga, Latvia. transmission, based on auto-immunity to the voltage-gated calcium iNtRODUctiON: Autism and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are channel. Only rare cases have been reported in childhood. Reviewing serious early childhood neurodevelopment disorders with a genetic the histories of other female patients reported with a similar Xp11.2 aetiology and increasing prevalence. Patients often have co-morbid duplication revealed that 3 out of 11 patients suffered from (potential) disorders. 11-39% may have seizure syndrome. According to the auto-immune disease such as rectocolitis, Wegener’s granulomatosis literature, 42% of patients with autism, ASD and mental retardation and hypothyroidism with hyperinsulinism. have seizure syndrome. The aim of the study was to obtain information Conclusion. The observation of a rare autoimmune myasthenic about patients with autism, ASD and seizure syndrome. syndrome in a young patient with a Xp11.2 duplication in conjunction mEtHODs: 158 patients with autism and ASD were ascertained who with previously reported autoimmune disorders suggest that carrier had been treated in the Children’s University Hospital, Child Psychiatry females of this recurrent duplication might have a propensity towards Clinic and Medical Genetics Clinic from 2006 - 2010. We recorded the autoimmune disease. Some genes within the duplication are involved patients’ clinical symptoms (ICD-10), ADOS, electroencephalography in either immune response (e.g. FOXP3) or calcium homeostasis (EEG) and IQ. SPSS 13 was used for statistical analysis. The (e.g. RGN) and could have a potential role in the occurence of auto- frequency of seizure syndrome in both patient groups was calculated. immunity in general or LEMS specifically. REsULts: Seizure syndrome was identified in four patients with autism and 11 patients with ASD. Two patients in the autism group had P02.034 their IQ within normal limits, four patients were moderately mentally A 273-kb duplication at 22q13.33 encompassing the sHANK3 retarded. In the ASD group, one patient had IQ within normal limits, gene in 2 sibs with microcephaly, behavioral disorder and four patients were mildly mentally retarded, four patients had severe learning disabilities mental retardation. A. Destrée, P. Hilbert, S. Boulanger, C. Verellen - Dumoulin, I. Maystadt; cONcLUsiON: The incidence of seizure syndrome was 9.5% in both Centre de Génétique Humaine - IPG, Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium. patient groups. Seizure syndrome is more frequent in patients with The 22q13 deletion syndrome is a not uncommon condition associated some degree of mental retardation than in patients with normal IQ. with global developmental delay, absent or delayed speech and hypotonia. Pure distal trisomy of the long arm of chromosome 22 are P02.037 rare. Twenty patients, including our two cases, with variable clinical sub-microscopic chromosomal imbalances in two children with phenotype extending from mild psychomotor delay to severe delay idiopathic autism spectrum disorder with congenital malformations, have been shown to have a pure distal D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, S. Hadjidekova2, B. Rukova2, D. Nesheva2, E. 22q trisomy. The size of the duplicated segment is extremely variable. Simeonov3, T. Todorov4, A. Todorova5, I. Dimova2, R. Tincheva1, D. Toncheva2; Here we report on a brother and a sister presenting the smallest cryptic 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical 22q13.33 duplication ever reported, detected by a salsa MLPA P188 kit University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, 22q13. The duplicated region spans about 273-kb which encompasses Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Pediatrics, 11 genes, including SHANK3. Both patients live in an institution University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical because of the desertion of the parents and show developmental Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, delay, especially in the language sphere, mild intellectual disabilities, 5Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria. behavioral disturbance, microcephaly, growth retardation and mild Autism is a childhood neurodevelopmental disorder apparent by 3 dysmorphic features. This phenotype was previously described in years of age and characterized by qualitative impairments in reciprocal patients with larger duplication 22q13.3 and a recognizable phenotype social interaction, deficits in verbal communication, restricted interests was suggested. We confirm here this phenotype and delineate a critical and repetitive behaviors. The exact aetiology of autism remains chromosomal region of 273-kb, including the SHANK3 gene, which unknown, although it is likely to result from a complex combination appears to be a strong candidate gene for the 22q13.33 duplication of genetic, neurological, and environmental factors. Recent high phenotype. resolution microarray-based studies in autism have identified a number of novel submicroscopic copy number variants (CNVs) including both P02.035 deletions and duplications. De novo 7q deletion in a family with 16p duplication, autism and We report two children with autistic behavior and mental retardation. dyslexia We have used genomic array CytoChip Oligo (BlueGnome, Cambridge, G. J. Braathen1,2, A. K. Eek1, R. Stornes3, K. O. Clausen1; UK), format 2x105K, version 1.1. and BlueFuse Multi software, version 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark 2.2. The 2x105K array detects 35 Kb imbalances on the backbone Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, and has tiling of 20 probes over 137 OMIM disease loci. Array CGH- Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 77 analysis revealed cryptic deletion of 16p11.2 region spanning 513 kb further studies to identify the pathogenetic mechanisms that play a in first patient and an amplification spanning 1,624 Mb of Xp22.31 critical role in the development of the eye and other organs. region in second patient. Deletions and duplications at chromosome 16p11.2 appear to be associated with ~1% of unexplained, idiopathic P02.040 and nonsyndromic autism. Several of the genes that reside within Baraitser-Winter syndrome: A new tunisian case the 16p11.2 microdeletion represent promising candidates for autism M. Trabelsi1, F. Maazoul1, Y. Laaribi1, M. Kossentini1, I. Ouertani1, M. based on known expression and functional data. Submicroscopic Chaabouni1, R. kammoun2, L. Ben Jemaa1, R. Mrad1, H. Chaabouni1; duplication of Xp22.31 has been reported as either a possible cause of 1Service des Maladies Congenitales et Hereditaires, EPS Charles Nicolle, tunis, intellectual disability and/or autistic behavior or a benign variant. . The Tunisia, 2Service d’ophtalmologie, EPS Charles Nicolle, tunis, Tunisia. Xp22.31 duplication included the steroid sulfatase (STS) gene. Introduction: Baraitser-Winter syndrome is a rare multiple congenital Our results indicate that array-CGH is a powerful tool to detect sub- anomalies characterized by iris coloboma, ptosis, hypertelorism, and microscopic pathogenic imbalances in patients with idiopathic autism mental retardation. It was first described by Baraitser and winter in and/or mental retardation. 1988. The genetic mechanism underlying this syndrome has not been elucidated P02.038 Case report: We report the case of a 9-year-old male who was the third children autism and mitochondrial DNA mutations child of unrelated parents. He was referred to our genetic counseling B. I. Radeva; service, since the age of 9 months, for evaluation of dysmorphic Medical Center “Childen’s Health”, Sofia, Bulgaria. features and psychomotor delay In the data of the WHO (World Health Organization) the prevalence of His face was characterized by brachycepahaly, hypertelorism, autism in children bilateral ptosis, short nose, long philtrum, micrognathia, malformed is reported as 1-6 per 1000. The number in Bulgaria is currently ears and short neck. Limbs examination showed valgus flat feets and unknown. But the hospitalization genu varum. Evaluation of his mental development revealed a mild of patients with speech, hearing and communication problems has intellectual deficiency (IQ=62) increased in the past 10 years. Our experience in clinical genetics Ophtalmologic examination identified a right retino-choroidal coloboma proved that childhood autism is a heterogeneous syndrome. The aim and a bilateral optic nerve coloboma. Brain TDM demonstrated a of our work was to analyze children with autism for mitochondrial DNA bilateral atrophy of the frontal cortex. The remaining investigations mutations and discuss the possibility of their treatment. We made including caryotype, cardiac and abdominal ultrasonographies were clinical and laboratory investigations and sequenced mt DNA regions normal in peripheral blood by the PCR-SBT method in 4 of our patients with Discussion: In this report we have presented a child with coloboma; autism. ptosis; hypertelorism and mental retardation. This phenotype We found different mt DNA mutations and polymorphisms. In a girl resembles the previous descriptions of patients with the Baraitser- suspected for Rett syndrome we found G6852A in mt-CO1,which Winter syndrome. Some of the peculiar craniofacial features changed Gly>Ser. In the 3 boys with autism we found the polymorphism (hypertelorism, bilateral ptosis,and short nose) which are highly T4216C (connected with predisposition to LHON or insulin resistance) characteristic and crucial to the diagnosis of the Baraitser-Winter in the first, syndrome are present in our patient. None of the multiple cerebral the polymorphism G9055A (protective of Parkinson disease) in the hemispheric malformations that have been described in the Baraitser- second, and a polymorphism connected with predisposition to LHON Winter syndrome like lissencephaly, pachygyria, cortical heterotopias in the third. The children with mt DNA changes improved on treatment or agenesis of the corpus callosum was described in our patient. This with a casein- and gluten-free diet and high dose vitamin Q10. We observation underlines the phenotypic heterogeneity of this syndrome. propose that children with autism should be investigated for mtDNA mutations and treated as mitochondrial disorders. P02.041 mutation spectrum in iranian patients with Bardet-Biedl P02.039 syndrome Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in a neonate with non-immune P. Rostami1, A. Najmabadi1, Z. Fatahi2, A. Kariminejad1; hydrops fetalis. 1Kariminejad–Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, tehran, Islamic S. Jougheh Doust, A. Guerin, J. So; Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, Rehabilitation Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. University of Toronto,, Toronto, ON, Canada. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a rare genetic disorder that affects Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) comprises a spectrum of rare, the brain and can cause multiple physical problems including a heterogeneous autosomal dominant disorders mainly affecting the deterioration of the intellect and neurological functions. BBS is anterior segment of the eye. ARS leads to blindness from glaucoma in typically inherited in as autosomal recessive manner. Fourteen genes about 50% of patients. Extra-ocular clinical manifestations of ARS are are known to be associated with BBS: BBS1, BBS2, ARL6/BBS3, highly variable and can include mid-face hypoplasia, dental anomalies BBS4, BBS5, MKKS/BBS6, BBS7, TTC8/BBS8, B1/BBS9, BBS10, and redundant umbilical skin. To date, several genes and loci on TRIM32/BBS11, BBS12, MKS1/BBS13, and CEP290/BBS14. In some chromosomes 4, 6, 13 and 16 have been found to be associated families, mutations in more than one BBS gene may result in a clinical with ARS, among them mutations in PITX2 and FOXC1, which are phenotype of BBS. However, such families are difficult to identify and responsible for the majority of ARS cases. may account for less than 10% of all BBS patients. We are reporting a neonate who was born at 32 weeks due to non- The object of this study was to detect the mutation spectrum of BBS immune hydrops and maternal mirror syndrome. Ocular findings in this genes in our patients. probands of 10 Iranian families with clinical patient consisted of bilateral anterior segment dysgenesis, glaucoma symptoms of BBS were tested for BBS1 and BBS2 gene mutations, and posterior embryotoxon. Facial dysmorphic features included which account for 23% and 20% of the mutations in BBS patients. edema of head and face, depressed nasal bridge, hypertelorism, Sequencing of BBS1 and BBS2 genes revealed a heterozygous upturned nose and posteriorly rotated, low-set ears. MRI of the brain mutation in one of the families, and 4 novel polymorphisms (c420, showed slightly small vermis, and echocardiogram revealed PFO and GCC>CCC, Ala>Pro, c424, AAA>AAT, Ala>Asn, c. 428 GCC>TCC, PDA. Ala>Ser & c.227 GAG>CAG, Glu>Gln) in BBS1 gene. We could not No mutations were found on sequencing of PITX2 and FOXC1, with detect any mutation except one polymorphism in BBS2 gene. MLPA studies pending. Microarray analysis revealed a duplication at Since we could not detect any mutations in the two most prevalent chromosome 3p26 of unknown significance, and parental chromosomal genes which account for over 40% of the mutations in BBS patients, studies are pending. our results suggest that other known or population specific genes may This case is the first report of an ARS patient with non-immune hydrops be involved in pathogenesis of BBS in Iranian population. Sequencing fetalis, further expanding the phenotypic spectrum in this group of of the remaining genes is under way. disorders. To date, about 60% of ARS patients have no identifiable genetic defect. The highly variable phenotype of ARS necessitates Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 78 P02.042 Poland. Natural history, diagnosis and genetic aspects of Barth Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth syndrome syndrome. New findings from a nationally commissioned service characterized by macroglossia, macrosomia, abdominal wall defects for Barth syndrome patients and predisposition to embryonal tumor development. BWS is caused R. A. Newbury-Ecob1, B. Tsai-Goodman1, M. Williams2, A. Bowron1, M. by defective expression of imprinted genes (IGF2, H19, CDKN1C, Pennock2, C. Steward1; KCNQ1, KCNQ1OT1) located on chromosome 11p15.5. The genes 1Bristol Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Molecular are functionally divided into two domains that are controlled by Genetics, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom. two Imprinting Centers: IC1 (H19DMR) and IC2 (KvDMR1). The Barth syndrome (BTHS) is an x-linked disorder presenting as a triad of most common defects in BWS patients are uniparental paternal cardiomyopathy, neutropenia and 3 methylglutaconic aciduria. disomy at 11p15.5 region, gain of methylation at IC1 and loss of A National clinic for patients and families with BTHS has been methylation at IC2. Here we present six Polish patients with clinical established in Bristol UK. This has allowed a comprehensive diagnosis of BWS. Molecular analysis was performed by methylation prospective clinical and genetic study of a cohort of boys with BTHS. sensitive multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification using We have shown that BTHS is a multisystem disorder or syndrome. MS-MLPA BWS/RSS ME030-B2 kit (MRC-Holland). The kit enables Facial dysmorphism gives BTHS boys a recognisable appearance. determination of methylation status of the 11p15.5 region, as well as Other features include early short stature followed by later tall stature, a duplications or deletions in that region. The analysis demonstrated nonspecific skeletal myopathy and food fads. Dilated cardiomyopathy hypomethylation in KvDMR1 region in four patients, hypermethylation and left ventricular compaction both occur and conduction defects are of H19DMR region in one patient and both KvDMR1 hypomethylation common and a cause of sudden death. Transplantation in earlier life and H19DMR hypermethylation in one patient. Molecular analysis is successful. Neutropenia may be cyclical and responds to treatment confirmed the diagnosis of BWS in all investigated patients. To our with GCSF. knowledge the presented study is a first attempt to introduce MS- Pedigree analysis showed that families had a history of miscarriages, MLPA in the molecular diagnosis of Polish BWS patients. We plan to stillbirths and male neonatal deaths. One family had three pregnancies conduct further studies to characterize the genetic background of BWS presenting as fetal hydrops in the mid trimester in Polish population. Caused by mutations in TAZ , BTHS can be reliably diagnosed by The study was supported by project no. N407 114940. measuring cardiolipin. This is a cheaper and quicker diagnostic test which can be followed by TAZ analysis in order to detect female P02.045 carriers. Retrospective diagnosis in affected males has been made on A girl with the features of Binder syndrome and partial trisomy samples from newborn screening tests. of the pericentromeric region of chromosome 5 Based on our figures for the prevalence of BTHS in the south west of K. Hadzsiev1, G. Szabó2, D. Dávid3, M. Czakó1, B. Melegh1, G. Kosztolányi1; England we suspect that BTHS remains and underdiagnosed condition 1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Dentistry, and should be screened for in all boys presenting with cardiomyopathy Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Pécs, Hungary, 3Department of Genetics, and neutropenia and suspected in families with multiple unexplained Lisboa, Portugal. male fetal loss or sudden death. In 1962 Binder assigned maxillonasal dysplasia as a distinct entity characterized by midfacial hypoplasia, flat vertical nose, and P02.043 malocclusion. The etiology of Binder syndrome (BS) is unknown. Here Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome: a report of a case we describe a 10-year-old girl with facial dysmorphism characterized A. G. Zamani1, K. Ozturk2, M. S. Yildirim1, A. Acar1; by features of BS, in whom a small ring from chromosome 5 was found. 1Selcuk UniversityMeram Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, The proposita was born at term after uneventful pregnancy to non- Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University Selcuklu Medical Faculty, Department of consanguineous parents. She visited our genetic clinic at 10 years of Otolaryngology, Konya, Turkey. age because of facial dysmorphism and moderate mental retardation. Nevoid basal cell carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), also known as Gorlin She had pointed chin, flat nasal bridge, left-deviated nasal septum, syndrome, is a rare autosomal dominant disease.It shows a high level hypertelorism, mid-facial hypoplasia, blepharophimosis, prognatism, of penetrance and variable expressiveness. This multisystem disorder pectus excavatum and inverted nipples. Radiographic survey characterized by multiple basal cell naevi, cysts of the jaw, pits of detected hypoplasic maxilla and ossis nasi, hypoplastic cervical the palms and soles, skeletal anomalies, and various other defects. vertebrae I-II. Psychological survey showed slight developmental Patients with Gorlin syndrome have a predisposition to basal cell delay. Chromosome analysis showed a small supernumerary marker carcinomas and other neoplasms. chromosome, which showed clear ring form. FISH analysis confirmed We present a patient with NBCCS who was diagnosed when he was that the marker chromosome derived from chromosome 5. 20 years old. He had a course face ,hoarse voice, hypertelorism, broad Array analysis revealed that the ring 5 chromosome contains a nasal bridge,pouting lips, parietal bossing with prominent supraorbital 19,168kb genomic region comprising cytogenetic bands 5p13.3 to ridges and heavy and fused eyebrows . He was tall and marfanoid. p11.1., detailed analysis of the region lead to identification of 62 genes. On his physical examination, nevoid basal cell carcinomas were seen Of these, three were disease associated dosage-sensitive genes, the over his neck,shoulders,arms thrunk and face . He has developed nipped-B homolog gene (NIPBL), the oncostatin M receptor gene basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) ,in particular on his lower eye lids and (OSMR) and the fibroblast growth factor 10 gene (FGF10). A causal he was operated. He has palmar pits on his both hands. He was relationship is suggested between these genes and BS. threated for dentical problems several times. He had malocclusion(i.e. displaced, impacted or missing teeth)and jaw cysts. He had pectus P02.046 excavatum and synostic, bifid and partially missing ribs detected in his microduplications 22q11.21 frequently associated with classic X-ray examination. Thoracolumbar spine films revealed scoliosis,too. bladder exstrophy Because of the autosomal dominant inheritance of this syndrome, the M. Ludwig1, M. Draaken2,3, F. Baudisch2, E. Bartels2, A. Ebert4, W. H. Rösch5, patient’s family was then investigated. A multidisciplinary approach to T. Boemers6, A. Schröder7, R. Stein7, S. A. Boyadjiev8,9, P. Hoffmann2,3, M. M. management, together with periodic follow-up, are advocated for the Nöthen2,3, H. Reutter2,10; general well-being of all NBCCS patients and their families. 1Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, P02.044 Germany, 3Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, ms-mLPA technique in diagnosis of Beckwith-Wiedemann 4Department of Pediatric Urology, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, syndrome Germany, 5Dept. of Pediatric Urology, University Regensburg, Regensburg, D. Jurkiewicz, A. Tanska, E. Ciara, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, M. Borucka- Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, Children’s Mankiewicz, S. Luczak, P. Kowalski, M. Pelc, J. Trubicka, M. Kugaudo, A. Hospital, Köln, Germany, 7Department of Urology, University of Mainz, Mainz, Jezela-Stanek, K. Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; Germany, 8Section of Genetics-Dept. of Pediatrics, University of California Department of Medical Genetics, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Davis, Baltimore, MD, United States, 9Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 10Dept. of Neonatalogy, University of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 79 Bonn, Bonn, Germany. out a randomized controlled trial to investigate these issues. Classic exstrophy of the bladder (CBE) is part of the rare exstrophy- methods: Newly diagnosed breast cancer patients with minimally epispadias complex (BEEC), a spectrum of urogenital anomalies in 10% risk of a BRCA1/2 mutation have been recruited from 12 Dutch which part or all of the distal urinary tract fails to close. Previously, four hospitals. They were randomized to an intervention group (RGCT) or CBE cases with underlying microduplication 22q11.2 in a cohort of 102 a usual care control group. Study outcomes include uptake of RGCT, BEEC patients have been reported (Lundin et al., 2010; Draaken et surgery choice, cancer risk perception, cancer-specific distress, quality al., 2010). of life and decisional satisfaction. Assessments take place at study Screening of additional 250 patients with CBE (223) as well as entry, and at 6 and 12 months follow-up. epispadias (9) and exstrophy of the cloaca (18) using multiplex ligation- Results: Between November 2008 and December 2010, 271 women dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis identified additional were recruited and randomized to the intervention (n=184) or control five CBE patients with a microduplication 22q11.2. Paternity was (n=87) group. Currently, 106 women have completed all assessments confirmed in all families. Among the nine cases the duplication had (intervention group n=70). Of the 70 women in the intervention group, been inherited three times from an unaffected parent (two mothers, 63 chose DNA-testing (90%) and 40 (57%) opted for accelerated DNA one father). All duplications differ in size ranging from about 0.07 Mb test procedures: 22 (31%) for rapid testing (<4 weeks) and 18 (26%) to 2.71 Mb. MLPA results were confirmed using Illumina’s Beadchips for semi-rapid testing (4 weeks-4 months). Normally, test results are thereby specifying the maximum region from SNPs rs2543958 to only available after 4 months. Eight (13%) patients were BRCA1/2 rs12484186. According to hg18 this region on chromosome 22 mutation carriers. (nt:17,257,787-19,965,324) comprises 2.71 Mb, harbouring 47 genes conclusion: Preliminary results indicate high uptake of RGCT among as well as the sequence information of at least four microRNAs. high-risk breast cancer patients. Thus far, the majority of patients who Given these observations, we were able to confirm the association are offered RGCT take advantage of this accelerated DNA-testing of causally underlying microduplications 22q11.2 in cases of isolated procedure. CBE and hypothesize that a single phenocritical gene might reside in the smallest region of overlap. P02.049 A case of breast cancer after radiation therapy for a skin P02.047 haemangioma in childhood in a woman carrying a BRcA1 What management for the asymptomatic men carriers of BRCA1 mutation and BRCA2 mutation? inquest to the French oncogenetics K. Baudry1, D. Azria2, P. Pujol1,3; centres. 1CHU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 2CRLC Val d’Aurelle, I. Brachot-Simeonova1, G. Morin2, C. Gillaux1, F. Amram2, B. Demeer2, J. Montpellier, France, 3INSERM U896 CRLC Val d’Aurelle, Montpellier, France. Gondry1, M. Mathieu2, R. Fauvet1; It has been shown that radiation therapy, most of all during infancy, 1Gyneco-obstetric Centre, Amiens, France, 2Clinical Genetics and increases the risk of developing cancers later on. Here we present the Oncogenetics, Amiens, France. case of a patient who received phosphorus ionizing therapy before the Objective: To define in the absence of guidelines, the management age of 1 for a skin haemangioma on the left breast. At the age of 25, the in France of asymptomatic men bearing a mutation of BRCA1-2 gene. patient noticed a lump at the exact place where she received radiation material and method: This multicentre study is a descriptive survey of therapy. At the age of 30, she was diagnosed with breast cancer. It was practice. A questionnaire was addressed to the professionals working an infiltrating stage III ductal carcinoma, estrogen receptor negative, in the 90 French oncogenetics centres. progesterone receptor negative and cerb2 negative, located exactly Results: We obtained the answers of 46 practitioners working in 58 beneath the spot where she was treated while a child. Because of centres. 100% of the responders offered this screening to determine her young age when she was diagnosed, she was offered a genetic the risk of transmission to the descent and 86% to offer a personal analysis of the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. A large deletion of 5 exons follow-up. This follow-up concerned for 94% the prostate cancer, for (8 to 13) of the BRCA1 gene was found. 68% the breast cancer, for 49% the pancreatic cancer, and for 12% We are making the hypothesis that the radiation therapy she received the melanoma. during her infancy caused late toxicity that increased the risk she The screening of the prostate cancer was proposed mainly to the men already had to develop breast cancer because of the mutation she bearing a BRCA2 mutation and from the age of 40 years. It was based carries on the BRCA1 gene. We thus made a radio-induced and on the clinical examination and the prostate-specific antigen. lymphocyte apoptosis test. The screening of breast cancer was offered to the patient bearing a The patient herself is worried that her breast cancer was caused by the BRCA2 mutation. It was proposed by self-palpation and/or medical treatment she received for her haemangioma and therefore refused to clinical examination and started between the age of 30 and 50 years. receive radiation therapy and refuses to undergo breast x-rays for her Imagery was only realized in case of symptoms. follow-up. The screening of the pancreatic cancer was offered after the age of 40 years and by computed tomography and/or pancreatic MRI. It was P02.050 mainly proposed in case of familial history of pancreatic cancer. Brittle cornea syndrome in an Omani family with a novel The general practitioner was considered to be the best to perform all mutation in ZNF469 gene these screenings. A. AlKindy; conclusion: These experts’ opinions can help to establish Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman. recommendations for the management of the asymptomatic men Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS-OMIM # 229200) is a rare autosomal carriers of BRCA1-2 mutation. recessive disorder that affects a variety of connective tissues with variable expressivity. The most dramatic feature of the disorder is the P02.048 ocular phenotype presenting in 50% of cases with recurrent rupture of Rapid genetic counseling and testing in newly diagnosed breast the thin and fragile cornea either spontaneously or secondary to minor cancer patients: Preliminary results of the timE-trial trauma causing progressive visual loss and blindness. All affected M. R. Wevers1,2, M. G. E. M. Ausems2, E. M. A. Bleiker1, D. E. E. Hahn1, T. individuals have blue sclera with many patients myopic. Secondary Brouwer2, M. Kuenen1, J. Melis1,2, E. J. T. Rutgers1, A. J. Witkamp2, R. B. van glaucoma and retinal detachments has rarely been reported. Systemic der Luijt2, F. B. L. Hogervorst1, N. K. Aaronson1, S. Verhoef1; manifestations of other organs with connective tissues are common 1Netherlands Cancer Institute-Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, but less severe including skin elasticity, hyper mobility of joints with Netherlands, 2University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. dislocation of large and small joints; kyphoscoliosis; dental anomalies; introduction: Female breast cancer patients carrying a BRCA1/2 reduced bone mass density, congenital hearing loss and minor cardiac mutation have an increased risk of second primary breast and ovarian defects. BCS affects diverse ethnic groups with most patients reported tumors. Rapid genetic counseling and testing (RGCT) may aid in from Middle East. We describe the clinical and morphologic features making informed decisions about therapeutic and preventive surgery of affected individuals in a highly inbred Omani family affected with and adjuvant treatment. Little is known about the effect of RGCT on BCS and molecular confirmation of a homozygous c.1444delC treatment decisions and psychosocial health. We are currently carrying mutation in the first exon of the ZNF469 gene. This is the first case Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 80 report of an Omani family with BCS with a novel mutation in ZNF469 dysfunction in vasoreactivity has been proposed as early event in the gene. The ZNF469 protein has 30% homology to the helical parts of pathogenesis of the disease. Aims of our study was to verify whether highly expressed corneal collagens, COL1A2, COL4A1 and COL1A1 endothelium-dependent and -independent function is impaired in and its proposed function is in the synthesis and/or organization of CADASIL patients compared to age-, gender-matched controls these collagen fibers. The differential diagnosis of BCS is the EDS stratified by the presence of cardiovascular risk factors (CVRF). type VI. Though the life expectancy of BCS patients is usually normal, methods. We studied vasoreactivity in 49 CADASIL patients (30- affected patients usual have progressive visual loss despite protective 65 years), 32 male (58%) without significant disability (Rankin measures. scale score equal or less than 2) and 25 controls by a non invasive pletismographic method. Endothelium-dependent vasodilation was P02.051 assessed by reactive hyperemia (FMD-PAT) while endothelium- Search for neutropenia should be part of the first screening in independent vasoreactivity was studied by glyceryl trinitrate (GTN- patients with poikiloderma PAT) administration. J. PIARD1, M. Holder2, B. Aral3, P. Callier4, N. Gigot3, M. Payet4, C. Ragon4, Results. FMD-PAT scores were similar (1.88 [1.57-2.43] vs 2.08 M. Tardieu5, E. Puzenat6, A. Goldenberg7, A. Toutain8, J. Franques9, K. [1.81-2.58], P=ns), while GTN-PAT values were significantly lower in MacDermot10, D. Bessis11, M. Rio12, L. Van Maldergem1, O. Boute2, P. Vabres13, CADASIL (1.54 [1.01-2.25] than controls 1.89 [1.61-2.59], P=0.041). L. Faivre14, C. Thauvin-Robinet14; Among CADASIL patients, values below the 10 percentile of FMD-PAT 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, CHU Besançon, France, 2Service de scores in the control population were found in 17 (35%) , P=0.013. Génétique, CHU Lille, France, 3Service de Biologie Moléculaire, CHU Dijon, FMD-PAT and GTN-PAT values correlated significantly both in controls France, 4Service de Cytogénétique, CHU Dijon, France, 5Service de Pédiatrie, (rho=0.648 P<0.001) and CADASIL patients (rho=0.563 P<0.001) Hôpital Kremlin-Bicêtre, Paris, France, 6Service de Dermatologie, CHU conclusions. The impaired vasoreactivity observed in our CADASIL Besançon, France, 7Service de Génétique, CHU Rouen, France, 8Service de patients highlights that both endothelial and smooth muscle Génétique, CHU Tours, France, 9Centre de Référence pour la prise en charge functional alterations may occur already in pre symptomatic subjects. des maladies neuromusculaires et SLA, APHM Marseille, France, 10North West The improvement of vascular function could be a new target for Thames Regional Genetics Service, NHS, London, United Kingdom, 11Service pharmacological trials in the CADASIL population. de Dermatologie, CHU Montpellier, France, 12Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, APHP Paris, France, 13Service de Dermatologie, CHU Dijon, France, P02.053 14Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « Anomalies du Développement et cantrell’s Pentalogy with complete thoracoabdominal Ectopia Syndromes Malformatifs » de la région Grand Est, Centre de Génétique, cordis and Asplenia - Expanding the clinical Phenotype? Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU Dijon, France. L. Iaria1, E. Cosmi2, K. Ludwig1, R. Manara3, R. Salmaso1, M. Rugge1; Poikiloderma occurs in a number of hereditary syndromes, the best 1Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & Special Therapies, Pathology known of which is Rothmund-Thomson syndrome (RTS). Differential Unit, Padova, Italy, 2Department of Gynecological Science and Human diagnoses include Dyskeratosis congenita and Clericuzio-type Reproduction, Padova, Italy, 3Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & poikiloderma with neutropenia (CPN). CPN is a rare autosomal- Special Therapies, Neuroradiology Unit, Padova, Italy. recessive genodermatosis characterized by poikiloderma, Cantrell’s Pentalogy (CP) is a rare, mainly sporadic, spectrum of pachyonychia and chronic neutropenia, exhibiting phenotypic overlap congenital midline thoracoabdominal defects, including sternal with RTS. The clearest distinction seems to lie in the neutropenia with defects, ventral diaphragmatic hernia, partial absence of the an increased susceptibility to infections. Mutations in the RECQL4 pericardium, supraumbilical abdominal wall defects, and congenital gene observed in two third of RTS patients appear to be absent in heart defects. The approximate incidence is 1 in 100000, with a 2:1 CPN patients. Recently, mutations in the C16orf57 gene has been male predominance. identified in CPN patients. To date, the 33 reported patients with We report the case of a fetus affected by complete ectopia C16orf57 mutations presented with neutropenia. In this study, we cordis, absence of the sternum and pericardium, defect of the report on the clinical data and the C16orf57 molecular analysis in ventral diaphragm, common aorticopulmonary trunk, cranio-facial 10 RECQL4-negative patients referred for syndromic poikiloderma. dysmorfisms (microtia and bilateral cleft lip and palate) and asplenia Other symptoms included photosensitivity (6/10), growth retardation without detected chromosomal anomalies on fetal karyotyping; thus (2/9), dysmorphism (6/10), dysplastic hair (7/10), nail dystrophy (2/10), leading to the diagnosis of CP with associated anomalies. bone abnormalities (1/10) and cataract (1/10). None had absent knee The severity of CP may range from incomplete to severe clinical caps, gastrointestinal problems nor osteosarcoma. Two C16orf57 phenotypes with the involvement of further organs/systems. Most of heterozygous nonsense mutations (p.W81X and p.Y89X) were CP cases are sporadic and have been associated viral infections, identified in one 5-year-old patient presenting with dental dysplasia, maternal abuse of beta-aminopropionitrile, chlorine inhalation and gingivitis, nail dystrophy, palmoplantar keratoderma, pachyonychia numerical chromosomal aberrations. of the great toenails and generalized poikiloderma. No history of Since the original Toyama’s classification, a number of non-typical CP recurrent infections was reported. Previously undetected neutropenia presentations have been reported (with a wide spectrum of multi-organ was discovered after C16orf57 molecular analysis. Neutropenia malformations). To our best knowledge, however, the association of was absent in C16orf57-negative patients. Our report confirms that CP with asplenia has never been previously reported. neutrophil count should be performed in all patients with poikiloderma to target the C16orf57 gene sequencing analysis, prior to RECQL4 P02.054 study. cat-eye syndrome phenotype and extragonadal mature teratoma: an unusual case of dup 22q11.1q11.21 P02.052 S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, K. Stefanaki2, A. Syrmou3, K. Kosma3, K. Giannikou3, V. Impaired vasoreactivity in CADASIL patients without significant Oikonomakis3, M. Choulakis4, A. Kolialexi3, P. Makrythanasis1, M. Tzetis1; disability 1Medical Genetics Laboratory, Choremio Research Laboratory, University of M. Frontali1, J. Campolo2, R. De Maria2, S. Romano1, E. Puca3, F. Taroni4, C. Athens, Present Address: Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals Tomasello5, C. Mariotti5, D. Inzitari6, F. Pescini6, L. Pantoni6, A. Federico7, M. of, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pathology and Anatomy, “Aghia Sophia Dotti7, M. Stromillo7, A. Tavani8, O. Parodi2; Children’s Hospital”,, Athens, Greece, 3Medical Genetics Laboratory, 1INMM-CNR, ROME, Italy, 2CNR Clinical Physiology Institute, MILAN, Italy, Choremio Research Laboratory, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 3Neuroscience Dept. La Sapienza University, ROME, Italy, 4Istituto neurologico 4Otorynolaryngology Department, “Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital”, Medical, ‘Carlo Besta’, MILAN, Italy, 5Istituto Neurologico ‘Carlo Besta’, MILAN, Italy, Athens, Greece. 6Depts. Neurologic & Psychiatric Sciences Univ. Florence, Florence, Italy, We report the clinical and molecular findings of a 9 month old 7Institute Neurological Sciences, Univ. Siena, Siena, Italy, 8Istituto di Ricerche girl presented with a palpable midline neck mass, proved to be Farmacologiche ‘Mario Negri’, MILAN, Italy. a extragonadal mature teratoma and also features of Cat-Eye Background and Purpose. CADASIL (Cerebral Autosomal Dominant Syndrome (CES). Cytogenetic analysis revealed a supernumerary Arteriopathy with Subcortical Infarcts and Leukoencephalopathy) is marker chromosome which was identified by molecular cytogenetic a rare genetic disease caused by mutations in the NOTCH3 gene. A analysis with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) to derive from Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 81 chromosome 22. High resolution micro-array based comparative nonspecific, except for cutis laxa in ATP6V0A2-CDG. Ophthalmologic genomic hybridization (array-CGH) confirmed the marker and malformations and ichthyosis were characteristic in SRD5A3-CDG. additionally clarified the size, breakpoints and gene content of the Neonatal complications included feeding problems, microcephaly, duplication [dup 22q11.1q11.21, 1.6 Mb; breakpoints: 15,438,946- hypotonia and neonatal bleeding. Three children diagnosed with either 17,041,773]. Cat-Eye syndrome is a disorder with a large variability, PMM2-CDG or ALG6-CDG had abnormal neonatal screening results ranging from almost normal phenotype to severe malformations, but for hypothyreoidism. Liver function tests were elevated in all neonatally to our knowledge teratoma has not been previously reported. Also evaluated cases. this is the first case of CES with well delineated breakpoints identified Dysmaturity, microcephaly, congenital eye malformations and skin with high resolution array-CGH. Our findings extend the phenotypic anomalies can be early signs of CDG syndrome. Screening for spectrum of the 22q11.1-q11.2 duplication syndrome, pointing out glycosylation disorders in these neonates is essential to obtain timely specific dosage sensitive genes that might contribute to specific diagnosis. phenotypic features. P02.057*** P02.055 cerebellar malformations: clinical and genetic heterogeneity ccR5 chemokine receptor polymorphism in HiV-1 patients from U. Kini1,2, E. S. Akha3,2, P. Anslow4, A. Deng5, V. Harrison1, V. Murphy6, G. Western india Quaghebeur4, H. Stewart1,2, J. Taylor3,2, D. Keays7,2, S. Knight3,2, J. Flint3,2; U. Shankarkumar, A. Shankarkumar, K. Ghosh; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, National Instiute of Immunohaematology, Mumbai, India. 2Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Background: Entry of HIV-1 into target cells requires both CD4 Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of and chemokine receptors. A 32-nucleotide deletion (?32) within the Neuroradiology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5University â-chemokine CCR5 gene has been described in HIV-1 subjects who of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 6Department of Psychiatry and Learning remain uninfected. Our objective was to determine the frequency of Disabilities, Ridgeway Partnership, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Research ?32 deletion in CCR5 among HIV-1 infected patients and compare Institute of Molecular Pathology, Vienna, Austria. them with normal uninfected healthy individuals belonging to the same Cerebellar malformations (CM) are common structural brain ethnic background. materials & methods: A total of 153 HIV-1 infected abnormalities, which are neuroradiologically, clinically and genetically patients confirmed for their HIV-1 status were and a total of 68 normal heterogeneous. Several autosomal recessive genes such as RELN, Healthy individuals from the same ethnic background confirmed HIV-1 VLDLR, SLOS, PMM2, TSEN54, etc have been implicated in its negative were studied. Genomic DNA from patients and controls were causation, as well as some X-linked genes such as OPHN1 and CASK. extracted and amplified for CCR5 gene segment using PCR. Amplified Chromosomal abnormalities have been described rarely. Access to products were analyzed on 12% acrylamide gel, which yielded an genetic testing is limited. Aim: To investigate the role and prevalence 189bp fragment for wild type allele and 157bp fragment for the deleted of copy number variants in patients with CM. methods: We performed (mutant) allele. Results: The results revealed that 7.19% were CGH (comparative genomic hybridisation) on 120 patients with varied homozygous ,0.65% were heterozygous and the remaining 92.16% brain abnormalities, recruited through the Oxford Brain Abnormalities had no deletion for ?32 allele among the infected subjects.10.29% Research Group, using customized 4x180K Agilent technologies were homozygous ,0.00% were heterozygous and the remaining arrays. Twenty five of these patients presented with a CM. Results: 89.71% had no deletion for ?32 allele among the control subjects. 4/25 patients (16 %) were found to have a microarray abnormality. conclusion: This study shows that the CCR5 allele frequency varies Three of the abnormalities were on the X chromosome (involving in different ethnic groups. Around 7.84% of the Patients have not been CASK and OPHN1) and the remaining was a homozygous deletion protected though they have the presence of the 32bp deletion. (involving NPHP1). The cerebellar phenotypes associated with these findings ranged from mild vermis hypoplasia to cerebellar hypoplasia P02.056 with brainstem involvement. Clinically, ataxia and developmental delay congenital malformations and perinatal complications in cDG were the most consistent findings, although developmental delay syndrome ranged from mild to severe. Other putative aberrations were identified, S. Funke1, E. Korsch2, M. Adamowicz3, J. Voduiputz4, L. Al-Gazali5, D. Lefeber6, but have not been proven to be pathogenic as yet. conclusion: CGH R. Wevers6, É. Morava7; is a useful genetic test for determining the cause of CM. X-linked CM 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pécs, Faculty of should be kept in mind due to its implication on reproductive risks. Medicine, Pécs, Hungary, 2Pediatric Hospital, Amsterdamerstrasse, Köln, Furthermore, genotypic and phenotypic variability highlights the need Germany, 3Department of Metabolic and Endocrine Disorders, Children’s for a targeted high throughput sequencing approach that can be used Memorial Health Inst., Warsaw, Poland, 4University Children’s Hospital, as a single diagnostic platform. Vienna, Austria, 5Department of Paediatrics and Pathology, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, 6Laboratory of Pediatrics P02.058 and Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (cFc) - a novel mutation and Netherlands, 7Department of Pediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical six new patients Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,2, E. Ciara3, M. Pelc2, A. Skórka1,2, K. Chrzanowska2, Congenital Disorders of Glycosylation is a growing group of more M. Krajewska-Walasek2; than 30 different types of inborn errors with multisystem involvement 1Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, 2Departmet of Medical and central nervous system presentation. Supportive therapy and Genetics, The Children Memorial Health’s Institute, Warsaw, Poland, adequate counselling rely on early diagnosis of the underlying defect. 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Children Memorial Health’s Institute, Warsaw, Recently several patients were reported with CDG syndrome and Poland. perinatal complications. Cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC) is a rare genetic condition We assessed 48 CDG patients from our patient cohort for the presence with sporadic occurrence. About 100 cases have been published, of prenatal and perinatal findings in various CDG forms. We included but this number seems to be underestimated. CFC is characterized 29 children with a type I transferrine isoelectric focusing pattern: 6 by distinctive facial features, heart defects, ectodermal abnormalities patients with PMM2-CDG, 2 with ALG6-CDG, 1 female with DMP3- and mental impairment. The syndrome is caused by gain-of-function CDG, 7 children with ALG1-CDG, 12 patients with SRD5A3-CDG and mutations in four different genes BRAF, KRAS, mitogen-activated 1 child with PMI-CDG. We evaluated 19 children demonstrating a type protein/extracellular signal-regulated kinases: MEK1 and MEK2. II TIEF pattern: 3 patients with COG7-CDG, 1 with B4GALT1-CDG, 12 We present six new patients with CFC syndrome, confirmed by patients with ATP6V0A2-CDG, and 3 with CDG-IIx. molecular studies. We identified five different mutations. One of these We found maternal complications in 4 cases, including maternal mutations has not been reported in the literature (c.785A>C in BRAF eclampsia and reduced fetal movements. Prematurity/dysmaturity gene). A patient with a novel mutation manifested typical dysmorphic were observed in 9 cases. Microcephaly and neonatal seizures were features, ectodermal anomalies and a heart defect. He presented with common, especially in ALG1-CDG, COG7-CDG, ATP6V0A2-CDG. only mild learning difficulties, contrary to the most patients with CFC Dysmorphic features were present in almost all cases, however, mostly syndrome, who are moderately or severely mentally retarded.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 82 Clinical and molecular findings will be discussed hereby in relation to Porto, Portugal, 3Botnar Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4SEEBMO the patients previously reported in the literature. - HSEAH, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 5University of Queensland, Brisbane, The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Australia. Higher Education (grant Nr 0056/B/P01/2008/35) and CMHI (grant No Twelve families with early onset of calcium pyrophosphate dehydrate 190/08). (CPPD) chondrocalcinosis (CC) and diffuse idiopathic skeletal hypersostosis (DISH) were identified in Terceira Island, the Azores, P02.059 Portugal. The interest in this disorder results from its unusual and A cGH-Array study in non-syndromic (primary) autism disorder exuberant radiological characteristics, its disabling potential at a young E. Gumuslu1, N. Cine1, B. Kara2, H. Savli1; age and the fact that it appears to be monogenic. 1Kocaeli University Medical Genetics Department, Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Kocaeli After clinical and radiological characterization, 92 individuals, from 12 University Department Of Pediatrics, Kocaeli, Turkey. unrelated families, were selected for a whole genome linkage study. iNtRODUctiON: DNA was extracted and HLA typing was carried out in probands and Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a strong genetic basis several family members; hereditary haemochromatosis mutations in its etiology. Cytogenetic abnormalities have been detected in were screened and microsatellite amplification was performed using 5-10% of the patients with autism. Conventional karyotype analysis LMS V.2. Mendelian inheritance errors were checked using PEDCHEK. has revealed that chromosomal structural aberrations such as Parametric and non-parametric linkage analysis was performed using translocation, inversion, deletion, and duplication play a role in causing GENEHUNTER and MERLIN. autism spectrum disorders (ASD). Unfortunately, there is not a single No association with HLA alleles was seen; haemochromatosis specific biological marker clearly responsible from autism. Array CGH mutations were identified in 31 individuals from 9 families. Suggestive is a molecular karyotyping method remarkable with fast analysis and linkage to an area of chromosome 16 (16q12.1-16q22.1) was obtained highly sensitive diagnostic value.We aimed to use this technology to in the whole genome analysis performed. screen autistic patient’s whole genome in order to investigate new Although the molecular basis of this disorder has not been totally dchromosomal abberations. clarified, this study showed that these families were not associated to mAtERiAL AND mEtHOD: chromosomal areas previously linked to either DISH or CC. Through We isolated DNA samples of 35 primary autism patients between 0-18 the analysis of pedigrees this disorder seems to be monogenic. Thus, years(median age:8.5).DNA samples which labelled according to the the results of this study suggest the involvement of a possible new protocol, were hybridized with CytoSure Syndrome Plus(v2) 4x44K major gene in the aethiopathogenesis of this disorder. (Oxford Gene Technology, Oxford, UK) microchips and scanned with Agilent Microarray Scanner( Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA P02.062 ). Obtained data were analyzed using Cytosure Analysis Software case report: additional malformations in isochromosome 18p v.2.0.8 software(Oxford Gene Technology, Oxford, UK). syndrome REsULts: J. R. M. Protta, I. C. Sgardioli, T. P. Vieira, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; We found 16p13.11 deletion in thirteen patients, 16p11.2 deletion in Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas(UNICAMP), twelve patients, 1q21 deletion in ten patients, 2q21.1 deletion in eight Campinas, Brazil. patients, 2p21 deletion in seven patients, 8p23.1 deletions in seven INTRODUCTION: Tetrasomy 18p resulting from an isochromosome patients. 18p is a rare karyotype and is not well established phenotypically. To cONcLUsiON: date, there are more than 40 patients described, mostly presenting Accordig to these data, we can postulate that 16p13.11 region mental retardation and minor features. CASE REPORT: A six month old and related genes also represent a predisposition to autism in our baby girl was referred for genetic evaluation because of psychomotor patients. Verification of the data belonging to these regions, may retardation and dysmorphic features. She is the first child of young and provide important clues for gene expression and proteomics studies healthy non-consanguineous parents. Familial history was negative. responsible from the pathogenesis of the disease and treatment The pregnancy was complicated by preterm labor and threatened strategies. abortion. She was born by cesarean due to pelvic presentation. The clinical evaluation of the proposita showed hypotonia, a broad P02.060 forehead, high hairline in front and back, oval facial shape, sparse char syndrome: A rare dysmorphic patient with new clinical hair and eyebrows, low-set and malformed ears, telecanthus, findings down-slanting palpebral fissures, convergent strabismus, infantile A. Yesilyurt1, A. Cifci2; hemangioma in front, glabela and philtrum, small nose, microstomia, 1Zekai Tahir Burak Women Health Training and Research Hospital, Genetic retrognathism, and proximally set thumbs. A cranial computed Center, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara Children’s Health and Diseases Hematology tomography scan showed abnormal enlargement of sulci and cistern Oncology Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. around the brain, with predominance of frontal areas. Echocardiogram Char syndrome is an extremely rare disorder, and exact prevalence revealed interventricular communication with hemodynamic effect. The of this syndrome has not been determined. Char syndrome is cytogenetic analysis with GTG-banding karyotype showed 47,XX,+mar. characterized by the triad of typical facial features, patent ductus Based on dysmorphic features and cytogenetics characteristics, it arteriosus (PDA), and aplasia or hypoplasia of the middle phalanges of was performed FISH with the centromeric probe chromosome 18, the fifth fingers. The patients with Char Syndrome have peculiar facial confirming the origin of the chromosome marker. Subtelomeric probe features incluiding flat midface, flat nasal bridge and broad (RP11-324G2) detected isochromosome 18p; karyotype was defined flat nasal tip, wide-set eyes, downslanting palpebral fissures, mild as 47,XX,i(18)(p10). DISCUSSION: Despite of common dysmorphic ptosis, short philtrum resulting in a triangular mouth, and thickened signs described in tetrasomy 18p, this girl presents two major features (patulous) everted lips. Our patients was born to a non-consangineous which have not been described. Thus, this report contributes to the family after 37 week-old gestation under medical supervision because delineation of this chromosomal aberration. of oligohydramnios. According to our knowledge tracheomalacia, astigmatism and oligohydramnios is being published in Char Syndrome P02.063 for the first time. New findings will be discussed and compared as well Clinical and cytogenetic findings in a girl with dup16 (q12.1q21) as other clinical findings with previously reported patients with Char L. Odak1, I. Barisic1, I. Petkovic1, M. Riegel2, A. Schinzel3; Syndrome. 1Children‘s Hospital Zagreb, Clinical Hospital Center Sisters of Mercy Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät P02.061 Universität Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland, 32Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Ectopic calcification in the Azores - Genetic aspects of DISH and Medizinische Fakultät Universität Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland. chondrocalcinosis families We describe a three year old girl admitted for evaluation because of A. R. Couto1,2, A. Timms3, M. R. Santos1, J. P. Pinheiro4, M. J. Peixoto1, J. speech delay, aggressive behaviour and dysmorphic facial features. Sequeiros2, J. Bruges-Armas1, M. A. Brown5; Family history and pregnancy were unremarkable. Newborn period 1SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2IBMC - Universidade do Porto, and early childhood were complicated with respiratory, gastrointestinal Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 83 and urinary tract infections. Associated structural anomalies of traits. Extended analyses suggested a link between haplogroup respiratory or urogenital tract as well as immune deficiency have been N3* and lower mean diastolic BP (P=0.009) but this finding was not ruled out. Clinical examination revealed mild dysmorphic features: replicated when a larger group of subjects (N=1077) was analyzed dysplastic ears, lower forehead, palpebral fissures slant down, (P=0.69, a trend in opposite direction). Analysis of STRs did not show hypoplastic supra-orbital ridges, blepharophimosis, epicanthic folds, statistically significant differences apart from the DYS385II marker flat nasal bridge, bulbous nose, long philtrum, thin upper lip, small whose distribution suggested effects on both BP (P=0.015) and LDL mouth, and short neck. Marked lumbar lordosis and broad thorax were (P=0.034) concentration. In conclusion, our study shows that the widely observed. Hands and feet were small with thick fingers. Audiometric studied Y chromosome HindIII variant and the YAP variant do not findings were normal. Ophthalmologic examination revealed left side influence blood pressure, lipid traits or anthropological characteristic. strabismus and hypetmetropy. Ultrasound examination of abdomen Although we cannot exclude an association between DYS385II and and pelvis was normal as well as EEG and CT of the brain. Routine BP/LDL concentration our results do not support a major role of Y cytogenetic chromosome analysis showed additional material on chromosome genetic variation as defined by major Y chromosome chromosome 16. FISH analysis with WCP-16 probe revealed that this haplogroups in determining cardiovascular risk in Poles. material originates from chromosome 16. Microarray analysis with a ≈75 kb resolution showed a gain on the long arm of chromosome 16 P02.066 at bands q12.1 through q21, which is approximately 9.92 Mb in size. Orofacial phenotype of van der Woude and Poplyteal Pterygium To the best of our knowledge, this is a first description of a patient syndrome patients mutated for iRF6 with dup16 (q12.1q21). The possible influence of the triple dosage of M. Quentric1,2, A. Petraud3, M. Legendre4, M. Ghassibé1, L. Desmyter1, I. genes located in this region on clinical presentation of our patient is Jeru4, S. Marlin4, M. Gonzales5, S. Amselem4, M. P. Vazquez2,3, A. Berdal2, M. discussed. Vikkula1, A. Picard2,3; 1Laboratory of Human Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique P02.064 de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Laboratoire de Physiopathologie Orale chromosome instability syndrome with congenital heart Moléculaire, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Pierre et Marie disease. Curie-Paris 6, INSERM, UMRS 872, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital d’enfants S. I. Olga; Armand-Trousseau, Service de Chirurgie Maxillo-Faciale et Chirurgie Plastique, Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian UFR de Médecine Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 4Institut National de Federation. Santé et de Recherche Médicale (INSERM) U.933, Université Pierre et Marie Clinical case: Female patient, 4 y.o., came under our observation with Curie-Paris 6 and Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Armand- congenital heart disease (CHF, atrial septum defect) required surgical Trousseau, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Hôpital d’enfants Armand-Trousseau, Unité correction. During clinical examination additional phenotypic features de Génétique du Développement Embryo-Foetal, Paris, France. (mental retardation, hidden facial cleft, epicanthi, clinodactyly) were Van der Woude syndrome (VWS, OMIM #119300) is a dominantly found. She had verbal development delay, and normal hematological inherited developmental disorder characterized by pits and/or conical parameters. elevations of the lower lip, cleft lip and/or palate, and hypodontia. Cytogenetic analysis was performed to identify chromosome Popliteal pterygium syndrome (PPS, OMIM #119500) shares the aberrations. Two consecutive karyotyping was carried out to confirm clinical features of VWS, with the addition of other signs such as primary finding. Lymphocytes from peripheral blood samples were popliteal webs (pterygia), synechiae connecting the upper and lower obtained from 72-h mitogen stimulated cultures, prepared according jaws, ankyloblepharon, syndactyly and genital anomalies. to standard cytogenetic procedures. The GTG-banding analysis Since many signs occur in the orofacial region and the penetrance revealed normal female karyotype, 46, XX, with common chromosome is incomplete, it is of great interest to better characterize VWS/PPS instability in 30-40% percent of cells. patients to see if an oral phenotype-genotype correlation exists. For Discussion: Patient was discharged after successful surgical correction this, nineteen families (17 VWS + 2 PPS) from Trousseau hospital of CHD with chromosome instability syndrome diagnosis. There were (Paris) were seen by a multidisciplinary staff, focusing on the orofacial no additional features usually associated with chromosomal breakage phenotype. Panoramic imaging were used to check for dental agenesis. syndrome. The chromosome instability syndromes are group of The coding exons of the IRF6 gene, including intron-exon boundaries, conditions associated with chromosomal instability and breakage, were sequenced, and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification and high risk of malignancy. In this case chromosome instability can was performed to test for intragenic deletions or amplifications. We modulate the risk of lympho-proliferative disease. The mean age of identified a mutation in IRF6 in 82% (14/17) of VWS and 100% (2/2) leukemia manifestation is 5-6 years old. We did unmask high risk of of PPS families. Affected individuals had clefts (79%), lower lip pits hematological complications in patient with primary cardio surgical (78%), dental agenesis (72%), and abnormal dental morphology problem. (60%). The upper lateral incisors and the second upper premolars Conclusion: Routine karyotyping performed for CHD patients can were the most affected. reveal chromosomal aberration in about 20%. We suppose this This prospective study demonstrates the high frequency of dental analysis has to be done routinely for such a group of patients even anomalies in VWS/PPS patients, affecting mostly the upper lateral after neonatal period. incisors and the second upper permanent premolars. This may be a useful clinical clue for correct diagnosis, as lips pits are not always P02.065 present. Genetic polymorphism of human Y chromosome and risk factors for cardiovascular diseases: a study in WOBAsZ cohort P02.067 G. Kostrzewa1, M. Konarzewska1, R. Ploski1, G. Broda2; Duplication of chromosome 15q22 in patient with severe 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, dysmorphic features Poland, 2Department of Cardiovascular Epidemiology and Prevention, Institute A. Matulevičienė1,2, V. Dirsė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland. 1Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital Santariškių Klinikos, Genetic variants of Y chromosome predispose to hypertension in Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Human and Medical Genetics Faculty of rodents whereas in humans the evidence is conflicting. Our purpose Medicine, Vilnius, Lithuania. was to study the distribution of a panel of Y chromosome markers in We report on one-year-old girl with chromosome 15 duplication a cohort from a cross-sectional population based study on prevalence and severe dysmorphic features. Our patient is the second child of cardiovascular risk factors in Poland (WOABSZ study). The HindIII of uncomplicated pregnancy with high risk of biochemical testing and YAP Y chromosome variants previously shown to influence blood on second trimester from non-consanguineous parents. The girl‘s pressure, lipid traits or height were typed in 3026 and 2783 samples. phenotype is characterised by microcephaly, ocular hypertelorism, In addition 4 subgroups (N~100 each) representing extremes of LDL downslanting palpebral fissures, intensive blue sclera, prominent concentration or blood pressure (BP) were typed for a panel of SNPs nasal bridge with periorbital fullness, short triangular philtrum, defining main Y-chromosome haplogroups and 19 STRs. The HindIII microstomia, partial cleft hard and soft palate, preauricular sinuses, or YAP polymorphism were not associated with any of the studied short neck, expressed hypertrichosis on the whole body, pilonidal Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 84 sinus, psychomotor retardation and grow delay. -There is a fifth healthy female sibling. Patient was karyotyped and a normal female karyotype was The mother has facial dysmorphism, CBC, SMC, clinodactyly and detected. We used subtelomeric FISH (ToTelVysionTM) for search of scoliosis. subtelomeric microdeletions/microduplications for the possible cause The propositus’ karyotype was normal. Array-CGH analysis showed of intellectual disability and congenital malformations of the patient. an interstitial amplification in Xp21.1, found in: the mother, propositus Analysis of FISH signals of chromosome 15 indicated additional (case 1), but also in the healthy girl and not found in Case 2. control signal (15q22 LSI PML) on terminal arm of other chromosome Discussion of undetermined origin. We suggest that duplicated region of 15q22 The clinical association of cleft palate and ophthalmic abnormalities is may be an appreciable cause of various severe dysmorphic features not rare and has been reported in over 50 syndromes, but there are of the patient. Array CGH analysis for verification and specification of few familial observations with 4 affected generations. this duplicated region is under the investigation. in conclusion Based on the genetic-clinical discordance we can wonder about the P02.068 deleterious impact of the Xp21.1 amplification that might be a copy cholestasis in patients with cockayne syndrome and suggested number polymorphism. It seems relevant to further study the underlying modified criteria for clinical diagnosis genetic mechanisms of this clinical association. T. Abdel Ghaffar1,2, E. Elsobky1,3, S. Elsayed3,1,2; 1Children’s hospital, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt, 21Yassin Abdelghaffar P02.070 Charity Center for Liver Disease and Research, Cairo, Egypt, 3Medical Coffin-Lowry syndrome: report of 3 novel mutations in RPS6KA3 Genetics Center, Cairo, Egypt. gene Cockayne syndrome (CS) is a rare autosomal recessive M. Kugaudo1, D. Jurkiewicz1, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,2, D. Piekutowska - neurodegenerative disease characterized by growth failure; brain Abramczuk1, E. Ciara1, A. Skórka1,2, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; dysmyelination, cutaneous photosensitivity; pigmentary retinopathy, 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of cataract, sensorineural hearing loss and hepatomegaly. To the best of Pediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. our knowledge, cholestatic liver disease was not previously reported Coffin-Lowry syndrome (CLS) is an X-linked semidominant in these patients. disorder characterized in male patients by mental retardation, facial Aim: To highlight the presence of cholestasis and liver dysfunction dysmorphism and skeletal malformations. Affected females usually in this group of patients and to suggest modified criteria for clinical show variable features. The only known gene associated with CLS is diagnosis. RPS6KA3 that encodes the serine/threonine kinase. Loss-of-function methods: The study included nine patients with CS from four different mutations are distributed throughout the gene. To date over 140 families (five males and four females) in which CS was suspected different mutations have been identified. clinically. For all patients cytogenetic analysis revealed spontaneous Here, we present 3 patients (two males and female) with CLS caused chromosomal breakage that was increased after mitomycin C by novel RPS6KA3 gene mutations. The molecular analysis was treatment. Diagnosis was confirmed by DNA repair assay. performed by single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) Results: Seven of these patients had evident liver affection ranging followed by sequencing of the gene. from mild elevation in liver enzymes to cholestatic liver disease The first male patient (1y3m) presented with hypotonia, developmental and liver cell failure. The attacks were recurrent in two patients and delay, and typical dysmorphic features: hypertelorism, frontal bossing, were sometimes preceded by infection. These attacks may lead to down-lanting palpebral fissures, anteverted nares, thick lips, broad and deterioration of liver condition or neurological symptoms or it may end tapering fingers. Molecular analysis revealed a substitution mutation in liver cell failure that may recover completely or it may end in death. c.1443+3A>C. His two sisters and mother had dysmorphic features conclusion: liver disease could be considered common in Egyptian suggesting CLS carrier status. patients with CS with the cholestatic form being the most evident. The second male patient (1y1m) presented with hypotonia, Chromosomal breakage study and positive family history should developmental delay and facial anomalies (hypertelorism, down- be included as major criteria for clinical diagnosis of CS especially slanting palpebral fissures, broad nose, everted lower lip). His hands in a population like ours whereas consanguineous marriage is very were fleshy with simian creases and tapering fingers. Molecular testing high and molecular testing and UV sensitivity tests are considered showed a deletion c.889_890 del AG. Mother revealed tapering fingers unaffordable. as her only feature. The third proband, female (2y4m), was referred for genetic evaluation P02.069 because of developmental delay. She had dysmorphic features: cleft palate and bilateral congenital cataract: a familial hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, frontal bossing, observation soft hands with tapering fingers and persistent anterior fontanelle. C. FRANCOIS-FIQUET1,2,3, A. Lorot1, O. Wavreille4, H. Ludot5, D. Gaillard2, E. Molecular analysis revealed a substitution c.823G>T. Landais2, P. Jonveaux6, M. Beri7, M. Poli-Merol1, M. Doco-Fenzy2,3; All mutations change the function of the serine/threonine kinase which 1Pediatric surgery, American memorial Hospital, Reims, France, 2department with typical symptoms of CLS in patients confirm the pathogenic of genetics, Hôpital Maison Blanche, Reims, France, 3EA 3801, University of character of changes. Champagne Ardenne, Reims, France, 4Department of Ophtalmology, CHU, Lille, France, 5Department of anesthesiology, American memorial Hospital, P02.071 Reims, France, 6Genetics laboratory, Brabois Hospital, Nancy, France, Frequency of 22q11.2 microdeletion in children with congenital 7genetics laboratory, Brabois Hospital, Reims, France. heart defects in Western Poland We report the observation of a family with a rare association of A. Wozniak1, D. Wolnik-Brzozowska2, M. Wisniewska2, R. Glazar2, A. Materna- congenital bilateral cataract (cBc) and cleft palate. The family Kiryluk2, T. Moszura3, M. Badura-Stronka2, J. Skolozdrzy4, M. R. Krawczynski2, pedigree has unveiled abnormalities over 4 generations, affecting 21 J. Zeyland5, W. Bobkowski3, A. Latos-Bielenska2, M. Szalata1,5, R. Slomski1,5, A. persons with CBC +/- cleft palate. The transmission seems autosomal Siwinska3; dominant. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, clinical history 2Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, We report 4 brothers and sisters (2G-2B), followed in pediatrics Poland, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Paediatric Cardiology and Nephrology, surgery, presenting a CBC associated to a cleft palate: Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poland, Poznan, Poland, 4Center -Case 1: Propositus, girl, CBC, Pierre Robin (Sub-mucous cleft (smc), for Medical Genetics Genesis, Poznan,, Poznan, Poland, 5Department of palate fistula), ptosis and growth delay (-2DS) Biochemistry and Biotechnology, Poznan University of Life Sciences, Poland,, -Case 2: girl, CBC, Pierre Robin (cleft of the soft-palate), strabism, Poznan, Poland. facial dysmorphism with mongoloid palpebral fissures and large nose The 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome refers to congenital abnormalities, -Case 3: boy, CBC, SMC and bifid uvula, facial dysmorphism with including heart defects and facial dysmorphy, thymic hypoplasia, cleft mongoloid palpebral fissures, large nose and language delay. palate and hypocalcaemia. Microdeletion within chromosomal region -Case 4: boy, CBC, bifid uvula 22q11.2 constitutes the molecular basis of this syndrome. The aim of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 85 this study was to determine the frequency of 22q11.2 microdeletion to the right. Sometimes it is associated with situs inversus totalis or in 87 children suffering from a congenital heart defect (conotruncal heterotaxy. The prevalence and the type of associated heart defects or non-conotruncal) coexisting with at least one additional 22q11.2DS are variable. feature and to carry out 22q11.2 microdeletion testing of the deleted We have analysed the prevalence and types of congenital heart defects children’s parents. We also attempted to identify the most frequent in 16 children with dextrocardia recorded in the files of Iasi Medical heart defects in both groups and phenotypic traits of patients with Genetics Center. There were 5 girls and 11 boys; 10 had associated microdeletion to determine selection criteria for at risk patients. situs inversus totalis, 5 had situs solitus and 1 heterotaxy. Heart The analysis of microdeletions was conducted using fluorescence in defects were present in 10 children (62.5%) - septal defect (27.7%), situ hybridization (FISH) with molecular probe specific to the HIRA Fallot tetralogy (12.5%), transposition of great arteries (12.5%), aortic region at 22q11. stenosis (6.25%), single ventricle(6.25%), left ventricle hypoplasia Microdeletions of 22q11.2 region were detected in 13 children (14.94% (6.25%), anomalous venous return (6.25%) and mitral valve prolapse of the examined group). Microdeletion of 22q11.2 occurred in 20% and (6.25%). The prevalence of heart defects was similar in boys (63.63%) 11.54% of the conotruncal and non-conotruncal groups respectively. and girls (60%). Complex heart defects were present only in males Tetralogy of Fallot was the most frequent heart defect in the first group and more frequent in situs solitus and heterotaxy group (50%) than of children with 22q11.2 microdeletion, while ventricular septal defect in situs inversus group (40%). In the literature common atrium, septal and atrial septal defect/ventricular septal defect were most frequent in defects, pulmonic stenosis, transposition of great arteries and right the second group. The microdeletion was also detected in one of the aortic arch are the most frequent congenital heart defects associated parents of the deleted child (6.25%) without congenital heart defect, with dextrocardia. In conclusion we present a study of 16 cases with but with slight dysmorphism. dextrocardia, 62.5% of them having heart defects. Cardiac defects are Our study suggests that screening for 22q11.2 microdeletion should commonly associated with dextrocardia and males are more severely be performed in children with conotruncal and non-conotruncal heart affected than females. When dextrocardia occurs in the context of situs defects and with at least one typical feature of 22q11.2DS as well as in solitus or heterotaxy, the risk of associated congenital heart defects is the deleted children’s parents. higher. P02.072 P02.074 molecular and clinical characterization of Estonian congenital Low level mosaicism detected by array cGH in congenital heart disease patients with septal defects: screening of NKX2.5, malformations syndrome GAtA4 and tBX5 genes. D. V. Nesheva1, I. Dimova1, R. Tincheva2, Y. Uzunova3, D. I. Toncheva1; I. Kalev1, K. Muru2,3, E. Vaidla1, T. Reimand4,5,6, R. Teek7, S. Virro8, M. 1Department of medical genetics, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sõnajalg5, K. Köbas9, L. Ginter5, K. Õunap2,5; 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 1Institute of general and molecular pathology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department 3Department of Urology, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, Congenital malformations present at delivery of an infant are due 3Children’s Clinic, Tartu university hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department to genetic or non genetic factors and occur in 15-20% of stillborn of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu university hospital, Tartu, Estonia, children. Most can be diagnosed prenatally by ultrasound examination, 5Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 6Department but some can only be diagnosed after birth. Seven to 10% of infants of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Tartu University hospital, Tartu, Estonia, with abnormal phenotype have numerical or structural chromosomal 7Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University hospital, Tartu, abnormalities that require identification for accurate diagnosis and Estonia, 8Cardiology Clinic, Tartu, Estonia, 9Children’s Clinic, Tartu University genetic counseling. Molecular-cytogenetic and array-based techniques hospital, Tartu, Estonia. have enabled screening at higher resolution for congenital anomalies Congenital heart disease (CHD) is one of the most common birth that result from genomic imbalances. We have examined four children defects (0.5-1% live births), but the genetic causes remain largely with congenital anomalies, with or without mental retardation, of unknown. The most frequent forms of the CHD are the septal defects unclear etiology. In one child, we detected a deletion (about 28 Mb) (SD). In earlier studies have been referred that mutations in genes of the region 18q21.1-18q23, in mosaic form. This abnormality was NKX2.5, GATA4, TBX5 may be associated with SD. The aim of our missed in a routine cyto genetic examination. We detected different study was the clinical and molecular characterization of patients with polymorphic copy number variations (CNVs) in the other children. After CHD. repeating the cytogenetic analysis in high number of metaphases, we Study group consisted of patients who were referred to genetic observed the deletion cytogenetically in 17% of the cells. We conclude counseling during 1990-2010 due to CHD, which included SD. SD that array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) is a was isolated or one part of combined malformation. NKX2.5, GATA4 powerful diagnostic tool for the detection of low level mosaicism. and TBX5 coding exons and intron-exon boundaries were analysed by PCR amplification and sequencing. In the study group there were 22 P02.075 patients (nine familiar cases): 15 index cases (8 females, 7 males) and congenital anomalies and legal abortion in iran 7 family members. In most of the cases there were combined CHD, M. Amirian1, S. Seyedhassani2,3, A. Seghatol-eslami1, M. Saffar4, Z. Nafaei4; which included SD (atrio- and/or ventriculo-SD). During analyses of 1Yazd legal medicine organization, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research NKX2.5 found a new mutation (C.178 G>C, p.Glu60Gln) in a patient and clinical center for infertility, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Seyedhassani with Fallot’ tetrad and 60% of probands had a known synonymous genetic center, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Yazd medical science university, mutation E21E (rs2277923) in exon 1. In GATA4 gene we found a Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. known mutation c.1647 A>G, p.S377G in the exon 6 in one affected Multiple congenital anomalies are common disorders that maybe family member and in TBX5 gene we found a frequent intronic SNP occur in fetus due to acquired, genetical or multifactorial causes. Every rs2236017 in 53% of index cases. Analyzed transcription factor time pregnant women or fetuses are seriously suffering from critical genes NKX2.5, GATA4 and TBX5 probably have modest effect on disorders can lead to infirmity, and the legal abortion is recommended. the formation of SD in CHD. The research of the regulatory variants This is done based on forensic permission in Iran. may add some more information. Supported by GARMP6573 and This case was referred to genetic counseling center for evaluation of GARLA6808 fetal health. Some anomalies were found by sonography including intra uterine growth retardation, microcephaly, and club foot and finger P02.073 anomalies. The pregnancy was terminated after three genetical and congenital heart defects in association with dextrocardia embryological consultations based on forensic ordinance. The proband M. C. Panzaru1, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha1, L. Butnariu1, L. Caba1, R. Popescu1, was gravid 3 and the result of consanguineous marriage. Two previous F. Rusen1, A. Sireteanu1, C. Rusu1; pregnancies led to neonatal death following to congenital heart 1”Gr. T. Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Medical disease. Two other unknown cases of multiple congenital anomalies, Genetics Centre, Iasi, Romania. one case of congenital heart disease, one case of mental retardation, Dextrocardia is a congenital anomaly in wich the heart is positioned one case of visual loss and two cases of hearing loss were seen in abnormally within the right side of the chest with the apex pointing familial pedigree. In proband, the other fetal clinical manifestations Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 86 consisted of cleft palate, short and webbed neck, micrognathia, simian and cDNA demonstrated an 8,152 base pair deletion of genomic DNA crease, clinodactyly, ectrodactyly, lung hypoplasia and joint stiffness. from exon 13 to intron 16. Although the loss-of-function effects of this The search of signs revealed several autosomal recessive differential deletion cannot be excluded, the resulting mRNA remains in-frame diagnosis such as Smith-Lemli- Opits syndrome type II, and Fryns suggesting a dominant negative effect. We hypothesize that the size syndrome. Bioethics which is the most important concept in medical of this deletion compared to previously reported mutations and the evaluation and intervention is affected by the law and religion. There presence of mosaic monosomy X likely contributes to the severity of are important conflicts in principle branches of Islam. Any disorder her phenotype. which can lead to infirmity or critical condition for pregnant woman is considerable in legal medicine. P02.078 HRAs mutation analysis in Polish patients with costello P02.076 syndrome Pediatric intestinal cancer and polyposis due to bi-allelic PMS2 M. Pelc, E. Ciara, M. Kugaudo, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, J. Trubicka, S. mutations: case series, review and follow-up guidelines Luczak, D. Jurkiewicz, A. Tanska, P. Kowalski, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, K. J. C. Herkert1, R. C. Niessen1, M. J. W. Olderode-Berends1, H. E. Veenstra- Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; Knol1, Y. J. Vos1, H. M. van der Klift2, R. Scheenstra1, C. M. J. Tops2, A. The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Karrenbeld1, F. T. M. Peters1, R. M. W. Hofstra1, J. H. Kleibeuker1, R. H. Costello syndrome (CS) is a rare congenital disorder with multiple Sijmons1; anomalies including characteristic dysmorphic craniofacial features, 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Leiden short stature, failure to thrive, developmental delay, skin anomalies, University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. cardiac and musculoskeletal defects and an increased risk of Bi-allelic germline mutations of one of the DNA mismatch repair genes, malignancy (about 10-15%). It has been demonstrated that de novo so far predominantly found in PMS2, cause constitutional MMR- missense mutations in the proto-oncogene HRAS resulting in increased deficiency syndrome. This rare disorder is characterized by pediatric activation of Ras-MAPK pathway cause Costello syndrome. We present intestinal cancer and other malignancies. We report the clinical, a group of five unrelated Polish patients with clinical diagnosis of CS. immunohistochemical, and genetic characterization of four families Mutation analysis of HRAS gene revealed heterozygous missense with bi-allelic germline PMS2 mutations. We present an overview of substitutions affecting aminoacid 12 of the protein product: c.34G>A published gastrointestinal manifestations of CMMR-D syndrome and (p.G12S) in two and c.35G>C (p.G12A) in three patients. Analysis propose recommendations for gastro-intestinal screening. of the available parental DNA confirmed four of the mutations as de The first proband developed a cerebral angiosarcoma at age 2 and two novo cases. The evaluated group represented relatively homogenous colorectal adenomas at age 7. Genetic testing identified a complete Costello phenotype with coarse facial features, feeding difficulties PMS2 gene deletion and a frameshift c.736_741delinsTGTGTGTGAAG and redundant skin with hyperpigmentation and deep plantar creases (p.Pro246CysfsX3) mutation. In the second family, both the on hands and feet. Neonatal macrocephaly was present in all of the proband and her brother had multiple intestinal adenomas, initially patients, as well as developmental delay, hypotonia and cardiac defects wrongly diagnosed as familial adenomatous polyposis. A splice site (cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia or pulmonary stenosis). Interestingly, c.2174+1G>A, and a missense c.137G>T (p.Ser46Ile) mutation in in one study case the coexistence of Turner and Costello syndrome PMS2 were identified. The third patient was diagnosed with multiple was observed. Our results deliver the first important information on colorectal adenomas at age 11; he developed a high-grade dysplastic the molecular basis of Costello syndrome in Polish population. They colorectal adenocarcinoma at age 21. Two intragenic PMS2 deletions indicate certain heterozygous missense mutations in HRAS to be were found. The fourth proband developed a cerebral anaplastic responsible for CS cases worldwide and confirm that the molecular ganglioma at age 9 and a high-grade dysplastic colorectal adenoma at analysis of HRAS provide a reliable diagnostic test for Polish patients age 10 and carries a homozygous c.2174+1G>A mutation. diagnosed with Costello syndrome. The research was financed by Tumors of all patients showed microsatellite instability and/or loss of MNiSW Project no. PB 0056/B/P01/2008/35 and CMHI Project no. PMS2 expression. 190/08. Our findings show the association between bi-allelic germline PMS2 mutations and severe childhood-onset gastrointestinal manifestations, P02.079 and support the notion that patients with early-onset gastrointestinal craniofacial indices as a tool in evaluation dysmorphological adenomas and cancer should be investigated for CMMR-D syndrome. features in parents with cleft children We recommend yearly follow-up with colonoscopy from age 6 and E. Nagle1, U. Teibe1, I. Grinfelde2; simultaneous video-capsule small bowel enteroscopy from age 8. 1Riga Stradiņš University, Riga, Latvia, 2Clinic of Medical genetics, Children`s Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia. P02.077 introduction. There are many genetic diseases associated with multi-Exon Deletion of SMC1A in a severely Affected Female abnormal craniofacial morphology. Comparison of craniofacial indices with cornelia de Lange syndrome in family members of patients with clefts and healthy individuals can D. Babovic-Vuksanovic, N. Hoppman-Chaney, J. Jang, J. Jen, J. C. Hodge; be used to evaluate dysmorphological features of the head and face. Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. Objective. To ascertain whether craniofacial indices could be used Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is a genetically heterogeneous in evaluation dysmorphological features. materials and methods. disorder characterized by dysmorphic facial features, cleft palate, limb The subjects of our study were parents of children with a clefts, defects, growth retardation and developmental delay. Approximately and clinically healthy individuals. Eight measurements were used 60% of patients with CdLS have an identifiable mutation in the NIPBL in calculation of the indices. Results. Five craniofacial indices were gene at 5p13.2. Recently, an X-linked form of CdLS with milder calculated separately for males and females. Results are presented in phenotype was attributed to mutation of the structural maintenance the table1 (for males) and table 2 (for females). of chromosomes 1A gene (SMC1A) at Xp11.22. Only a handful Table 1 of male CdLS patients with mutations in SMC1A are known. The clefts control phenotype in female carriers is limited to minor developmental and (N = 57) (N = 39) cognitive deficiency. To date, all mutations identified in SMC1A are index mean sD mean sD mD p missense or small in-frame deletions that likely have a dominant negative effect. We report a Turner mosaic female with a severe form Cephalic index 0,82 0,04 0,80 0,06 0,02 0,090 of CdLS who presented with growth and mental retardation, multiple Facial index 0,85 0,06 0,94 0,10 -0,09 0,001* congenital anomalies and facial dysmorphism. Array CGH identified a Intercanthal index 0,33 0,03 0,27 0,03 0,06 0,001* novel deletion of SMC1A spanning multiple exons which suggested Upper face index (R) 0,94 0,12 0,95 0,03 -0,01 0,577 a possible loss-of-function effect. Additional molecular studies Upper face index (L) 0,96 0,03 0,96 0,03 0,00 0,954 were initiated to more precisely define the deletion boundaries and the effect of this genetic alteration. Expression of a truncated RNA message was detected in lymphocytes. Sequencing of both genomic Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 87 Table 2 FAM105B and ANKH. We suggest that haploinsufficiency of CTNND2 clefts control causes the mild mental retardation in our patient, and that other (N = 67) (N = 38) genes in the region contribute the significantly more severe cognitive impairments frequently seen in patients with Cri-du-chat syndrome. index mean sD mean sD mD p Cephalic index 0,82 0,04 0,80 0,04 0,02 0,010* P02.082 Facial index 0,82 0,05 0,97 0,08 -0,14 0,001* A novel mutation in HLXB9 gene in currarino syndrome in an Intercanthal index 0,34 0,03 0,26 0,02 0,08 0,001* adult man: a case report Upper face index (R) 0,97 0,03 0,97 0,03 0,00 0,890 E. Domínguez-Garrido1, J. Aguirre Lambán1, C. Sainz Gómez2, C. Pérez Upper face index (L) 0,97 0,03 0,98 0,03 0,00 0,405 Vega-Leal2; 1Center for Biomedical Research (CIBIR), Logroño, Spain, 2Hospital San Pedro, * Statistically significant(p<0,05) Logroño, Spain. conclusions. Basic craniofacial indices show differences between 2 The Currarino syndrome (CS; OMIM 176450) has been described study groups and therefore could be useful in evaluation craniofacial as a triad of partial sacral agenesis with intact first sacral vertebra dysmorphology. (sickle-shaped sacrum), presacral mass, and anorectal malformations. The sacral agenesis in CS is typically incomplete and only involves P02.080 vertebrae S2-S5, a sacral anomaly distinct to this syndrome CS exhibits A novel de novo mutation within EFNB1 gene in a young girl variable expressivity, reduced penetrance and remarkable variability of with craniofrontonasal syndrome objective findings and subjective complaints, with a clinical spectrum D. Apostolopoulou1,2,3, A. Stratoudakis3, A. Hatzaki2,3, K. Panagopoulos3, O. ranging from anomalies localised only to the caudal region to those Kaxira3, P. Kollia1, V. Aleporou1; involving complex malformations of other organ systems including the 1Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, School of kidneys, brain and spinal cord. Physical Sciences, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Currarino syndrome is autosomal dominant inheritance and has been Greece, 2Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, “MITERA” General, associated with mutations of HLXB9, a homeobox gene that maps to Maternity and Children Hospital, Athens, Greece, 3Hellenic Craniofacial Center, chromosome 7q36. The prevalence is unknown and presentation in “MITERA” General, Maternity and Children Hospital, Athens, Greece. adulthood is extremely uncommon. Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) is mainly characterized by Here, we present a case of a 36-year old man with Currarino triad. He frontonasal dysplasia, telorbitism, broad nasal root and frequently a was diagnosed of CS after he suffered a motorbike accident. Until that bifid nose and coronal craniosynostosis. CFNS is an X-linked disorder moment, he presented chronic constipation. Mega-rectosigmoides with an unusual pattern of inheritance, as heterozygous females are and partial sacral agenesis was confirmed on X-ray and IRM. We more severely affected than hemizygous males. The CFNS-causing performed direct sequencing for HLXB9 gen. We identified one novel gene is EFNB1, localized in the border region of chromosome Xq12 mutation, c.264C>A, p. C88X. and Xq13.1, encoding for protein ephrin-B1. Ephrin-B1 belongs to the The presence of variable phenotypes suggests DNA alterations in B-subclass of ligands of Eph receptors (receptor tyrosine kinases). HLXB9 noncoding regions and/or in other genes encoding HLXB9 Eph/ephrin signaling is important for the developmental processes of regulatory molecules or protein partners. the embryo, including skeletal and craniofacial development. Here we aim to investigate the underlying genetic defect of a young girl with P02.083 CFNS. The patient underwent surgical correction of her craniofacial Duplication of 11p with clinical features of costello syndrome deformities. Genetic analysis was carried out by Polymerase Chain and cutis laxa Reaction (PCR). Products of exon 2 of EFNB1 gene were sequenced T. Gardeitchik1,2, N. de Leeuw1, L. Nijtmans1,2, P. Jira3, T. Kozicz4, I. van de as well as digested with BpmI enzyme. A novel de novo missense Burgt1, E. Morava1,2; mutation 373G>A was identified within EFNB1 gene, leading to the 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, replacement of Glutamic acid at amino acid position 125 with Lysine. 2Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Jeroen The replacement of Glu125 with Lys, which lies within the G-H loop, part Bosch Hospital, ‘s-Hertogenbosch, Netherlands, 4Donders Institute for Brain, of the dimerization ligand-receptor interface, is expected to disrupt the Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands. interaction between Eph receptor and ephrin B1 ligand, thus leading to Cutis laxa (CL) is a disorder of wrinkled, abundant skin with abnormal CFNS. Missense mutations in exon 2 of EFNB1 gene in patients with elasticity. Several genetic defects have been elucidated to cause cutis CFNS leading to aminoacid changes within the dimerization ligand- laxa, still, the etiology in the majority of cases remains unknown. We receptor interface have been described elsewhere. describe a CL patient with duplication of the short arm of chromosome 11. Our patient had birth parameters at 90 percentiles, cutis laxa, cleft P02.081 lip, several dysmorphic features, macroglossia, deep palmar/plantar An atypical 5p deletion, involving part of the critical region for creases, abnormal hair growth and hypotonia. She was diagnosed with cri-du-chat syndrome, in a girl with mild mental retardation hyperinsulinism, Meckel diverticulum, umbilical and inguinal hernias, A. Blomhoff, T. Barøy, E. Frengen, O. Rødningen, E. Ormerod, M. Fannemel; ventricular septum defect, aqueductal stenosis feeding difficulties and Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, Oslo, developmental delay. Histology of skin showed severe abnormalities Norway. of elastin fibers. Genetic analysis revealed a duplication of 11p Cri-du-chat syndrome results from a deletion of variable size on the of paternal origin, which is associated with Beckwith Wiedemann short arm of chromosome 5. The chromosomal region implicated in the syndrome (BWS). Many features in our patient are explained by the syndrome has been mapped to 5p15.1p15.3. Main clinical features are diagnosis of BWS, except for cutis laxa. Several clinical findings in a high-pitched cat-like cry, distinct facial features, microcephaly and our patient, including extensive skin wrinkling, could, however, also fit severe psychomotor and mental retardation. The phenotype varies into the diagnostic criteria of CS. Intriguingly, the HRAS gene, in which depending on the size and location of the deletion. The critical regions gain-of-function mutations cause CS, is also located on 11p15.5. for the typical cry and the mental retardation have been mapped to QPCR analysis in our patient showed an increase in HRAS expression 5p15.3 and 5p15.2, respectively. SEMA5A and CTNND2 located within in fibroblasts. Based on this genetic dosage effect and the observation the 5p15.2 critical interval have been suggested as candidate genes of similar phenotypes in other 11p duplication cases we suggest that for the mental retardation. CTNND2 is highly expressed in the brain, cutis laxa and the clinical features comparable to those of Costello and is implicated in neuronal function. Furthermore, CTNND2 knock Syndrome in our patient, occurred due to duplication of HRAS. out mice show severe cognitive dysfunction, and a correlation between deletion of CTNND2 and severe mental retardation in humans has been reported. We report on a patient with a 3.2 Mb deletion of 5p15.2p15.1 (chr5:11902869-15234290, hg19) that displays mild mental retardation and developmental delay, but no dysmorphic features. Her deletion involves the genes CTNND2, TAG, DNAH5, TRIO, FAM105A, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 88 P02.084 P02.086 cytochrome P450 2c19 genetic polymorphisms and symptoms An emerging phenotype of microdeletion Xq24 involving UBE2A of gastroesophageal reflux disease. gene - case report and literature review N. Zendehdel1, H. Gholami2, E. Ravanasa2, S. K. Hosseiny2, H. Sarie3, M. L. Wallin1, C. Chrapkowska1, L. Samuelsson2, E. Kärrstedt2, M. Stefanova2; Doughaiemoghaddam3, N. Zendehdel4, A. Poorshams1; 1Queen Silvia’s Children Hospital, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 1Digestive Disease Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Science, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Tissue Bank, Tehran University of Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Fayyazbakhsh Hospital, Microdeletion Xq24 encompassing SLC25A43, SLC25A5, CXorf56, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Shahid Beheshti University of Medical UBE2A, NKRF, and two non-coding RNA genes, 0.24-0.37 Mb in size, Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. was described in five males from four unrelated families (Honda et al, Background: Gastroesophageal reflux disease is a common disease 2010; Leeuw et al, 2010). Patients presented with intellectual disability, worldwide and has typical and atypical symptoms such as heartburn absent speech, seizures, craniofacial dysmorphism, multiple brain and and hoarseness.Cytochrome p450 (CYPs) enzymes, located mostly inner organs anomalies. in the liver, are responsible for the metabolism of omeprazole. Here we describe a 4-months-old boy with a 0.4 Mb maternally Cytochrome P450 2C19 (CYP2C19) gene has several polymorphisms, inherited Xq24deletion. He showed neonatal hypoglycaemia, low the most common of which are the CYP2C19* 2 and CYP2C19* 3 voice, swallowing difficulties, oesophageal atresia with tracheo- alleles.These two polymorphisms both decrease enzyme activity. oesophageal fistula, aortic isthmus hypoplasia, postnatally developed This study was performed to evaluate the influences of two common microcephaly, multiple arachnoidal cysts and white matter changes, CYP2C19 polymorphisms on the frequencies of typical and atypical divergent strabismus, short neck, arachno- camptodactyly, vertebral symptoms in the Iranian patients with gastroesophageal reflux disease. anomalies, hypospadias as well as developmental delay, vision methods: One hundred and sixteen patients with gastroesophageal and hearing impairment. Marked dysmorphic features include: wide reflux disease were enrolled in the study. A gastroesophageal reflux fontanels, hypertelorism, palpebral fissures slant up, depressed nasal questionnaire was completed for each patient by direct interview. It bridge, small nose, long philtrum, large mouth with thin vermilion of was comprised of information such as age, sex, BMI and symptoms the lip, crumpled ears. Initial diagnose severe form of Beals syndrome of disease. A volume of 2 ml of venous blood was sampled from each was ruled out by a negative FBN2 gene analysis. SNP-array analysis subject. CYP2C19 genetic polymorphisms were detected using the (Affymetrix 250k NspI) detected a 0.4 Mb Xq24 deletion which spans PCR-RFLP method. between base pair 118303222-118699727 (hg 18). The healthy mother Results: There was an association between the frequencies of some was a carrier of the same deletion which originated de novo with atypical gastroesophageal reflux disease symptoms such as belching, her. She showed a complete skewed X-inactivation. A copy number anorexia, chest pain and hoarseness and CYP2C19 polymorphism, variation, 1.3Mb deletion of 1p12, was detected in the boy, his mother as the frequencies of these symptoms were higher in the variant and the maternal grandfather. CYP2C19 genotype (P<0.040). Clinical and molecular data evaluation of all six patients with deletion conclusion: CYP2C19 genotype might influence the appearances of Xq24 suggests a new deletion syndrome different than the UBE2A some atypical symptoms in the patients with gastroesophageal reflux deficiency syndrome. The role of the other genes involved in the disease. deleted region remains to be further investigated. P02.085 P02.087 Developmental delay and facial dysmorphism in a girl with a X-inactivation studies in two different subtypes of Dent disease 9.5mb de novo interstitial deletion of 12q: further delineation of I. Vlasak, O. Rittinger, A. Mang; chromosome 12q15-q21 deletion syndrome Children’s Hospital, Paracelsus Medical University, Salzburg, Austria. N. Zarrouk1, B. Parmentier1, B. Grisart1, P. Lehette2, M. Deprez3, C. Verellen- Background. A subset of X-linked genes escape X-inactivation (XI) Dumoulin1, I. Maystadt1; and are expressed - randomly or skewed - from both X-chromosomes. 1Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies Charleroi, Belgium, 2Centre We report on 2 patients affected with 2 genetically different forms Hospitalier du Grand Hornu, Hornu, Belgium, 3Grand Hôpital de Charleroi, of X-linked hypercalciuric nephrolithiasis (Dent disease 1 and 2) Charleroi, Belgium. mapped to Xp11.22 and Xq26, respectively. We hypothesized that Mental retardation, as isolated symptom or as part of syndrome, X-inactivation patterns might suggest the more likely genetic subtype. is a common condition affecting 2-3% of individuals worldwide. Here we discuss the clinical impact of XI results. Chromosomal rearrangements identified by karyotype or array-based Case reports and results. 2 male unrelated normally developed patients, comparative genomic hybridization (CGH-arrays), account for about 4 and 5 y old, both with proteinuria, hypercalciuria, hypouricaemia and 15-20% of mental retardation etiologies. Interstitial deletions of the microhematuria with normal renal function. Dent disease, an X-linked long arm of chromosome 12 are rarely described in the literature. proximal tubular dysfunction disorder, was confirmed by molecular Here, we report on a 4-year-old girl presenting with a deletion involving analysis showing a mutation in the CCl5-gene in patient 1 and OCRL1 the 12q15-q21.31 region. Her clinical features include microcephaly mutation patient 2. X-inactivation studies revealed a significant at birth, developmental and speech delay, growth retardation with skewing in the mother of proband 1 and random XI in the other. progressive macrocephaly, facial dysmorphism, strabismus and small Discussion. Non-random X-inactivation is more common in joints hyperlaxity. heterozygous carriers of X-linked disorders and can be an important A 9.5 Mb deletion was detected by standard karyotype and confirmed diagnostic clue in MRX-syndromes. Moreover, there may be a distinct by CGH-array. This rearrangement was not found in the parents, correlation between the clustered fashion of genes which escape consistent with a de novo occurrence. The deleted region involves 27 inactivation and the likelihood of skewing. Our observation of clearly genes, 3 of them being hyperexpressed in the brain. different XI-patterns in two clinically similar but genetically different To our knowledge, only 4 other cases of deletion encompassing subtypes of an X-linked tubulopathy supports this relationship. Given the 12q15-q21 region are reported in the literature. All patients had the multitude of X gene loci of interest this may be useful for the developmental delay and mental retardation. Most of them presented proper timing of molecular investigations. Additional XI analyses in with microcephaly at birth, intra-uterine and postnatal growth delay, other females heterozygous for Dent disease are needed to prove this cardiac malformations and common facial dysmorphism (high hypothesis. forehead, broad nasal bridge, low-set ears, arched or cleft palate, and micrognathia). P02.088 Description of additional patients in the future will help to refine Desbuquois dysplasia type i and fetal hydrops due to novel genotype-phenotype correlations in this chromosomal region, mutations in the cANt1 gene improving genetic counseling for pre- and postnatal 12q deletion F. Laccone1, K. Schoner2, B. Krabichler3, B. Kluge1, R. Schwerdtfeger4, B. cases. Schulze5, J. Zschocke3, H. Rehder1; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Vienna, Austria, 2Institute of Pathology, Philipps- University Marburg, Marburg, Germany, 3Division of Human Genetics, Medical Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 89 University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4of Prenatal Diagnosis and Human cm, below 3rd percentile) and dystrophy (weight 9200 g, below 3rd Genetics, Hannover, Germany, 5Center of Prenatal Diagnosis and Human percentile). The child presented with an unusually small mouth, small Genetics, Hannover, Germany. teeth with dentinal spots and improper alignment, small chin, small We report on three hydropic fetuses of 17, 22 and 25 gestational weeks eyes, incipient cataract; small head and a prominent forehead, a small from three distinct families presenting with Desbuquois dysplasia type underdeveloped jaw, sparse hair, particularly that of the scalp, brows, 1. All fetuses showed brachymelia and characteristic dysmorphic and lashes. On the right cheek there was a scar secondary to surgical features. X-ray studies revealed delta-shaped extraphalangeal bones intervention for a mucous cyst done in the neonatal period. The and disease-specific prominence of the lesser trochanter, varying in karyotype of the child was 46, XY, 16qh+. The X-ray of the skull showed severity with fetal age. Early lethal manifestation of the disorder was hypoplastic facial bones, large skull and frontal bossing. Clinical and reflected in lung hypoplasia and in early death of similarly affected radiological findings from our child meet six of seven criteria of HSS siblings in cases 1 and 2. All families were German by descent. reported by Lee, Choi and Jung (dental anomalies, dischephalya, Sequence analysis of the CANT1 gene revealed two frameshift dwarfism, hypotrichosis, congenital cataract, microphthalmia). mutations, c.228_229insC and c.277_278delCT, in homozygous Conclusions: and compound heterozygous configuration respectively and a 1. Hallermann-Streiff is a rare syndrome but underdiagnosed. homozygously novel missense mutation, c.336C>A (p.D112E) located within a higly conserved region of exon 2. Haplotype analyses by 2. The disease is transmitted in a dominant manner but there high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism array showed that the are no specific anomalies of the karyotype. haplotype associated with c.228_229insC may be traced to a single founder in the German population. 3. Sophisticated genetic analysis is required for diagnosis of this syndrome. P02.089 Yield of genetic testing in patients with familial vs. non-familial idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy. P02.091 M. Rodríguez-García1, D. García-Giustiniani2, X. Fernández2, M. Ortiz-Genga2, DNA-diagnostics of various forms of X-linked primary R. Barriales-Villa2, L. Núñez3, E. Maneiro2, L. Cazón2, M. Pérez2, E. Álvarez2, E. immunodeficiencies at the Russian patients Veira2, M. Crespo-Leiro1, A. Castro-Beiras1, L. Monserrat1; I. Sermyagina, V. Zabnenkova, A. Poliakov; 1CHUAC.Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), A Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Coruña, Spain, 2Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), Primary immunodeficiencies (PID) are the hereditary diseases caused A Coruña, Spain, 3Universidad de A Coruña.Instituto de Investigaciones by rough infringement of functions of various links of immunity. They Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), A Coruña, Spain. grow out of the genetic defects leading to infringement proliferative, Purpose: It has been estimated that 20% to 50% of idiopathic DCM a differentiation and functions immune cells. By this time are known cases are of familial/genetic origin, generally with autosomal dominant about 80 PIDs. Despite their relative rarity, they occupy an important inheritance, but information about the efficiency of mutation screening place in structure of disease and death rate in the developed countries. is scarce. PIDs are characterised by difficultly recurrent infections, a high Methods : We report the results of ongoing genetic and familial study incidence of autoimmunity, and an increased risk of malignancies. of 125 index cases with idiopathic DCM (mean age at diagnosis 44±20 The greatest quantity are X-linked forms of congenital immunodeficiency years, 74% males) followed-up in a single reference unit. DCM was though there are also other types of inheritance. In laboratory of considered “familial” when there was at least one relative with DCM. DNA-diagnostics of the Research centre for Medical Genetics of Genetic study has included the screening by a Sequenom platform of the Russian Academy of the Medical science the molecular genetic 600 previously described mutations and the sequencing of LMNA in analysis of the reasons of such diseases as is carried out: X-linked all the patients. hyper-IgM syndrome (CD40L gene), X-linked ag-globulinemia (BTK Results: Familial DCM was present in 29 cases (23%). Till now we gene), Interleukin-2 receptor gene deficiency (IL2R gene), X-linked identified a potentially pathogenic mutation in 21 cases (13%): 9 of lymphoproliferative disease (SH2D1A gene), Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome 29 in cases with familial DCM (31%), and 12 in 96 (13%) in non- (WASP gene) and chronic granulomatous disease ( CYBB1 gene). familial cases (p=0.024). The majority of them were identified in Presence of a certain mutation at patients with PIDs allows to show MYH7 (45%) MyBPC3 (25%) and LMNA (20%). Thirteen mutations a molecular aetiology, to establish heterozygous carriers in relatives had been previously described in association with either DCM (LMNA: in a probands family and does possible performance of the prenatal R190W, S573L; MYH7: I201T; TNNT2: R131W), HCM (MYH7: G716R diagnosis. ; MyBPC3: IVS23+1G>A, A833T, V771M and A627V) or both (MYH7: We made DNA-diagnostics for 189 probands with various forms of I736T, R787H, T1019N and MYH6: A1004S). Five mutations had not primary immunodeficiencies, 110 various mutations are registered and been previously described (LMNA:S22X, R349L; MyBPC3: P873L, 22 prenatal diagnostics are executed.On the basis of the accumulated E838Q and MYH7: A1128T). We found two double and one compound data (a spectrum of mutations, presence of “hotspots”) in laboratory heterozygote. Conclusion: The probability to identify a causal mutation are developed effective algorithms of the mutational analysis of was significantly higher in patients with familial vs. non-familial various forms of PIDs. idiopathic DCM thus, familial evaluation would be the first step to improve the mutation screening efficiency in DCM. P02.092 Whole genome sequencing enables optimized patient P02.090 management Possibilities and limits in facial dismorphic syndrome in small W. Wiszniewski1, M. N. Bainbridge1, D. R. Murdock1, J. Friedman2, C. child -disscutions on a Hallermann-streiff syndrome case Gonzaga-Jauregui1, I. Newsham1, J. G. Reid1, J. K. Fink3, M. B. Morgan1, M. O. D. Marginean1, I. D. Simedrea1, C. I. Gug2, T. E. Marcovici1, A. K. Miliatru1, Gingras1, D. M. Muzny1, L. D. Hoang4, S. Yousaf4, R. A. Gibbs1, J. R. Lupski1; C. I. Daescu1, D. M. Chiru1, L. T. Olaru1; 1Baylor College of Medicine, HOUSTON, TX, United States, 2University of 11 Ist Pediatric Clinic, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medecine and California, San Diego, CA, United States, 3University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. MI, United States, 4Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States. introduction: Hallermann-Streiff syndrome (HSS) is a disorder Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) has revolutionized genetic of unknown origin. The early diagnosis of HSS is important for diagnoses, but its impact has not yet been realized in guiding management because many complications may occur early in this immediate patient treatment. Dopa Responsive Dystonia (DRD) is syndrome. a genetically heterogenous, clinically complex, movement disorder case report: We report N.D, a 1 year 4 month old boy, born at that can be misdiagnosed as cerebral palsy. Although L-DOPA is the term, with 3010g , 49 cm , Apgar 9, the second child of a non primary treatment mode for DRD, alternate treatments are available, consanquineous family. The child was admitted to our hospital for however, diagnosis and optimal management of the disorder requires seizures, fever secondary to pharyngitis and dysmorphic facial extensive clinical investigation. A 14 year old fraternal male and female features. Anthropometric criteria revealed short stature (height 73 twin pair with a 9 year diagnosis of DRD was identified. Prior treatment Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 90 was exclusively L-DOPA with carbidopa. Inheritance was apparently without applying of prenatal cytogenetic diagnostic methods. Using the recessive but point mutation negative for TH and GCH1. We cytogenetic method of prenatal diagnosis allows us to prevent the birth interrogated the genomes of both affected siblings by whole genome of children with DS and to decrease the frequency of this disease by sequencing (WGS) and array comparative genomic hybridization 10%. (aCGH) to identify causative variants. Three genes with compound heterozygous, protein altering, mutant alleles were identified. Two P02.095 of these genes (ZNF515, C2orf16) have no known function whereas Genetic polymorphisms of mtHFR (677t AND 1298c) and homozygous mutations in the third gene, sepiapterin reductase (SPR) homocysteine metabolism as maternal risk factor for Down ’s have been previously associated with DRD. The alleles in SPR were syndrome patients in North indian population. inherited from heterozygous carrier parents. Interestingly the carrier S. K. Pandey, P. Singh, S. K. Polipalli, S. Kapoor; mother has been diagnosed with fibromyalgia; a condition that can be Department of Pediatrics, Maulana Azad Medical College, University of Delhi, responsive to serotonin reuptake inhibitors. Our findings conclude a New Delhi, India. specific molecular diagnosis, suggest optimizing medical management Background &Aim: Down syndrome (DS) is caused by the presence with L-DOPA and Carbidopa using 5-hydroxy tryptophan (5-HTP) of three copies of chromosome 21, in most cases due to the failure supplementation in the DRD affected twins. of chromosomal segregation during maternal meiosis, as there was scanty data available from India the study was designed to investigate P02.093 the MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms, with homocysteine Hypothyroidism and oxidative stress in Down syndrome as a maternal risk factor for DS. materials and methods: Eighty S. Briuglia, D. Comito, C. Giovanna Elisa, M. Caterina, M. Emanuela, S. mothers of individuals with confirmed full trisomy 21, and 100 control Marzia, F. Valeria, S. Damiano Carmelo, A. Teresa; mothers of north Indian population were evaluated. Molecular analysis Dipartiment of Paediatric Science Messina, Messina, Italy. of MTHFR C677T and A1298C polymorphisms was performed by Background and aims: Thyroid disorders in Down syndrome (DS) PCR-RFLP. Results: The frequency of genotypes of MTHFR were subjects have been reported to have a prevalence of 15-54%. 677CC (82.5%), 677CT (15%) and 677TT (2.5%) in the patients with The spectrum of thyroid abnormalities ranges from congenital Down’s syndrome, and among the 100 individuals of the control group, hypothyroidism, primary hypothyroidism, autoimmune thyroiditis, genotypes 677CC (91.0%), 677 CT (6.0%) and 677TT (3.0%) were compensated hypothyroidism. The existence of a DS-specific thyroid found. As for polymorphism 1298C, the patients with Down’s syndrome disorder was hypotized. Thyroid hormones are the most important presented genotypes with frequencies 1298AA (15.0%), 1298AC factors involved in the regulation of the basal metabolic condition and (52.5%) and 1298CC (32.5%) respectively and in the control group are associated to the oxidative and antioxidative status. Literature’s the frequencies of genotypes were 1298AA (61.0%), 1298AC (22.0%) data on the oxidative status of hypothyroidism are limited and and 1298CC (17.0%) respectively. Homocysteine concentrations were controversial. The aim of this study was to assess the measurement significantly different in women with an MTHFR 1298CC genotype of serum MDA/HNE in DS patients with or without hypothyroidism, according to the groups, being higher in DS mothers than in control to evaluate biomarkers of oxidative stress. Methods: we enrolled a mothers. conclusion: No correlation was observed in MTHFR gene selected group of 30 children affected by DS (18 male and 12 female, polymorphism 677T in DS. However, the MTHFR gene polymorphism mean age 6 years), 15 with hypothyroidism (8 in LT4 therapy) and 15 at position 1298, mainly genotype 1298CC that reduces the enzyme without. All subjects had not inflammatory/infective diseases. Serum efficiency, was more frequent in the group of Down’s Syndrome MDA/HNE levels were measured by means of a colorimetric assay. patients, suggesting its involvement in mechanisms related to Results: serum MDH/HNE levels were significantly higher (p<0.05) chromosomal imbalances. in hypothyroid subjects without LT4 treatment than in those euthyroid and on LT4 therapy. Conclusions: the present study evidences an P02.096 increased circulating MDA/HNE levels in DS. We confirm the presence characterization of dysmorphic features in 1q21.1 of chronic oxidative stress in children with DS. This condition can microduplication syndrome: description of two patients and contribute to development of consequent oxidative cell damage and review of the literature long-term complications. In DS with hypothyroidism, therapy with LT4 S. Moortgat1, A. Destrée2, B. Grisart2, C. Verellen - Dumoulin2, I. Maystadt2; reduces oxidative stress. 1Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique (FRS-FNRS), 6041, Belgium, 2Centre de Génétique Humaine (IPG), 6041 Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium. P02.094 Array-CGH screening in large patient cohorts with unexplained mental Dynamic frequency of Down syndrome in the Republic of retardation, congenital anomalies or autism has recently lead to the moldova during the years 2005-2009 characterisation of novel microdeletion/microduplication syndromes. M. Sprincean1, M. Stratila2, N. Barbova1, E. Halabudenco1, A. Misina2; The low-copy-repeats spanning the region 1q21.1 mediate nonallelic 1¹National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, ²State homologous recombinations that result in rearrangements of 1q21.1. University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. Testemitanu”, Chisinau, Moldova, Recent data suggest that a recurrent 1,35 Mb microduplication Republic of, 2¹National Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, on chromosome 1q21.1 predisposes to autism spectrum disorder, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of. developmental delay and mental retardation. Other clinical features Prevention of birth of children with chromosomal abnormalities, include macrocephaly, hypertelorism and a wide range of congenital especially with Down syndrome (DS), represents the main task of anomalies. Variable expressivity, incomplete penetrance and non- medical genetic services. Average frequency of trisomy 21 or DS is 9.5 specific phenotypic features associated with 1q21.1 microduplication / 10,000 births in the countries EUROCAT. Was established correlation complicate genetic diagnosis and counselling. between frequency of DS and maternal age. The risk of having children We report on two unrelated girls of two and three years old, presenting with DS is 1/1000 births for 20 years old mothers, rising to 1/35 in pre- with developmental delay and similar facial dysmorphism such as menopausal age births. hypertelorism, flat nasal bridge, short nose with anteverted nostrils, Totally 232 cases with DS have been identified during the period 2005- prominent philtrum and thin upper lip. Head circonferences were in 2009, according to the cytogenetic laboratory data of the NCRHMG. normal ranges. At the age of three, one of them developed behavioral From this number, 209 cases have been detected after the birth of disorder with hallucinations and aggressivity. children. Other 23 DS cases have been identified during the interruption Array-CGH detected an identical 2.5Mb microduplication on 1q21.1, of pregnancy after prenatal medical indications. The frequency of DS encompassing the minimal critical region of 1.35Mb. Parental origin is in the population of Republic of Moldova was 12.02 / 10 000 (1:924), undetermined (paternal DNA was not available for analysis). registered during the years 2005-2009, which exceeds the average These two additional patients confirm that identification of 1q21.1 frequency of this pathology in countries EUROCAT and corresponds to microduplication by array-CGH should be considered as a the frequency of Down disease in Ukraine (12.4 / 10,000) and Norway predisposition factor for developmental delay and behavioral disorders. (13.1 / 10,000). Maximal frequency of DS has been recorded in 2005 We refine the 1q21.1 microduplication syndrome by suggesting a - 1:967 children, minimal in 2008 - 1:685 births with this chromosomal distinctive common phenotype, comparing facial dysmorphic features abnormality. Frequency of DS in Moldavian population could be 1:832, of our patients with previously reported cases.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 91 P02.097 P02.099** spondylocostal dysostosis associated with duodenal musculo-contractural Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDs type diaphragm: a case report. ViB): a new EDs-subtype caused by a defect in proteoglycan M. Cutrupi, R. Gallizzi, A. Talenti, A. Deak, I. Loddo, B. Piraino, C. Salpietro biosynthesis Damiano, S. Briuglia; F. Malfait1, D. Syx1, P. Vlummens1, S. Nampoothiri2, A. De Paepe1; UOC of Pediatric Genetic and Immunology,University of Messina, Messina, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Italy. 2Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Cochin, Kerala, We report a case of a 2-year-old boys, the only son of healthy non India. consanguineous parents. He presented skeletal abnormalities, short Musculo-contractural Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (MC-EDS) is a stature with short trunk in proportion to height, and dimorphisms (facial recently described autosomal recessive form of EDS characterized by asymmetry, strabismus, micrognathia, low-set ears, two preauricular craniofacial abnormalities, congenital joint contractures, especially of tags right, short neck). The radiological picture shows multiple fingers and toes, talipes equinovarus, tapering fingers and excessive abnormalities of the spine (hemivertebrae, absence of vertebrae, palmar wrinkling, severe progressive muscle hypotonia and multi- vertebral hypoplasia), fusion of ribs (5-6-7 right) and malformation (6th systemic tissue fragility with ophtalmological, gastro-intestinal and left). These skeletal abnormalities are diagnostic of the spondylocostal genito-urinary manifestations, in addition to skin fragility, wound healing dysostosis, a rare condition of variable severity. The disease is problems, bleeding diathesis and joint hyperlaxity. The condition is inherited as an autosomal recessive or autosomal dominant and four caused by homozygous mutations in CHST14, encoding dermatan- genes known are associated with autosomal recessive spondylocostal 4-sulfotransferase 1 (D4ST-1). The clinical phenotype of MC-EDS dysostosis: DLL3, MESP2, LFNG and HES7. The condition is strongly overlaps with that of adducted thumb-clubfoot syndrome characterized by multiple segmentation defects of the vertebrae (ATCS), and with a Japanese EDS-variant, “EDS Kosho type”, two (fusion of vertebrae, hemivertebrae), presence of malalignment of the conditions that were independently shown to be caused by CHST14 ribs with variable points of intercostal fusion, and a reduction in rib mutations. Detailed phenotypic analysis of the 20 patients reported number. Deformity of the chest with reduction of size of the thorax, with CHST14 mutations strongly suggests that these conditions form short neck, scoliosis, inguinal hernia are frequent complications of this a single entity with multi-systemic, but age-dependent and variable condition. Spina bifida, meningocele, renal abnormalities, hypospadias, phenotypic features, of which joint contractures and generalized congenital heart disease, anomalous pulmonary venous return have muscle weakness are distinguishing features, hence the name been reported, but are not common. The our proband was affected “musculo-contractural EDS”. by duodenal diaphragm, characterized by the presence of a mucosal Hitherto reported CHST14 mutations comprise six missense, two diaphragmatic membrane with an intact muscle wall. He presented frameshift and one nonsense mutation, some of which were shown bilious vomiting ,feeding intolerance and failure to thrive in neonatal to result in loss of function of D4ST-1. This is a key enzyme in the period. At one years old, he underwent surgical correction. We report biosynthesis of dermatan sulfate (DS), catalyzing 4-O-sulfation the first case, in absence of other data from the international literature, of N-acetyl-galactosamine. Loss of D4ST-1 activity results in the of spondylocostal dysostosis associated with duodenal diaphragm. replacement of DS by chondroitin sulfate. The broad array of physiological events in which DS plays a role, including the correct P02.098 assembly of collagen fibrils mediated by decorin, a DS proteoglycan, the arthrochalasis type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome: phenotype explains the multisystemic manifestations of this condition. at different ages M. Klaassens1, E. Reinstein2, Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee3, F. Malfait4, H. Staal1, L. P02.100 Speth5, J. Schrander1, D. Krakow2, A. De Paepe4, M. van Steensel1, G. Pals6, J. clinical and molecular characterization of a patient with Graham2, C. Schrander-Stumpel1; Osteogenesis imperfecta / Ehlers-Danlos phenotype: new 1Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Cedars Sinaï mutation in cOL1A1 Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3Leiden University Medical V. López-González1, M. Ballesta-Martínez1, Á. Uceda-Galiano1, E. Martínez- Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 5Adelante Salcedo2, A. De Paepe3, E. Guillén-Navarro1; Zorggroep, Valkenburg, Netherlands, 6VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, 1Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Netherlands. Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain, 2Unidad de Neurología Infantil. Servicio Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a clinically and genetically de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca., Murcia, Spain, heterogeneous group of inherited connective-tissue disorders 3Center for Medical Genetics. Ghent University Hospital. UZ Gent., Gent, characterized by hypermobility, tissue fragility and skin abnormalities. Belgium. Six subtypes have been characterized based on clinical features and Introduction: Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a connective tissue molecular genetic abnormalities. The arthrochalasis type EDS (former disorder characterized by skin hyperextensibility, abnormal wound type VIIa and VIIb) is characterized by bilateral congenital dislocation healing and joint hypermobility. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity of the hips, severe generalized joint hypermobility with dislocations, is described. Classification of patients in the several subtypes muscular hypotonia and distinct dysmorphic features. Early diagnosis is sometimes difficult. We report on a patient with Osteogenesis of arthrochalasis type EDS is of importance because of consequences Imperfecta / Ehlers-Danlos phenotype (OI/ED) and COL1A1 gene for mobility in later life. However, the differential diagnosis may be mutation. difficult because of overlap with other hypermobility syndromes. We Clinical Report: The patient, a 6 years old boy, was referred at 17 describe seven patients at different ages. Timing of diagnosis varied months of age with clinical diagnosis of Osteogenesis imperfecta. from antenatally to adult age. Genetic counselling is possible at the Motor retardation, fractures, osteopenia, blue sclerae, macrocephaly, adult age. short stature and dysmorphic features. Physical examination Diagnosis was confirmed in all patients by biochemical studies or revealed fine hyperextensible skin, abnormal healing, easy bruising, mutation analysis showing characteristic mutations in COL1A1 and hyperextensible joints, lumbar kyphoscoliosis, pectus excavatum, long COL1A2, resulting in skipping of exon 6, leading to the production of fingers and toes and inguinal herniae. Clinically suggestive of Ehlers abnormal procollagen and defective collagen synthesis. Danlos syndrome. We started treatment with byphosphonates due to For physicians treating patients with EDS type VII achieving mobility bone fragility. Biochemical collagen analysis in cultured fibroblasts for the patient is the greatest challenge. The prognosis for achieving was performed with identification of an extra band migrating above the independent walking may be poor due to recurrent dislocations type I collagen chain. Molecular analysis of COL1A1 gene revealed of nearly all joints in severe cases. We stress the importance of a a de novo heterozygous mutation in exon 8 c.607G>T (p.Gly203Cys, diagnosis at various ages. Gly25Cys). These results support clinical diagnosis of combined OI / ED phenotype. Discussion: A new mutation associated to OI / ED phenotype is described. This report extends the range of phenotypes caused by COL1A1 gene mutations. Consider treatment with byphosphonates in patient with Ehlers Danlos syndrome and bone fragility.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 92 P02.101 P02.103 intragenic EHmt1 mutations in French patients with Kleefstra mutations in ENPP1 associated with a new phenotype including syndrome hypophosphatemic rickets, skin abnormalities and hearing loss S. DRUNAT1, Y. Alembik2, C. Baumann1, M. Gérard1, C. Mircher3, M. Rio4, S. G. Baujat1, S. Hadj-Rabia2, M. Le Merrer1, B. Bader-Meunier3, N. Chassaing4, Whalen5, A. Verloes1; V. Couloigner5, C. Gay6, G. Guest7, K. Lambot8, A. Linglart9, L. Martin10, Y. 1Robert Debré University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 2CHU Strasbourg, Nitschke11, F. Rutsch11; Hôpital de Hautepierre, Strasbourg, France, 3Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, 1Dept of Genetics, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Dept France, 4Necker University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5La Pitié-Salpêtrière of Dermatology, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Dept of University Hospital, AP-HP, Paris, France. Rhumatology, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 4Dept of The Kleefstra syndrome is one of the first and most common clinically Genetics, CHU Purpan, Toulouse, France, 5Head and Neck Surgery, Hopital recognisable telomeric syndrome characterized by intellectual disability, Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 6Dept of Pediatrics, CHU, Saint chidhood hypotonia and distinctive facial features. In addition, heart Etienne, France, 7Dept of Nephrology, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, and urogenital defects, epilepsy and behavioural problems are also France, 8Dept of Radiology, Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, observed. The syndrome is either caused by a 9q34.3 submicroscopic 9Dept of Endocrinology, Hopital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France, 10Dept deletion (75 %) or by intragenic euchromatin histone methyl transferase of Dermatology, CHU, Angers, France, 11Dept of General Pediatrics, Muenster 1 (EHMT1) mutations leading to haploinsufficiency of the gene. University, Children’s Hospital, Muenster, Germany. We evaluated 42 patients referred by clinical geneticists presenting Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is an autosomal with the core phenotype of the syndrome but no deletion identified recessive disorder due to mutations in ENPP1 in most cases, and by routine subtelomere or whole genome chromosome testing. The characterized by diffuse vascular and periarticular calcifications, molecular analyses included a screen for small intragenic EHMT1 frequently leading to death in early infancy. A few patients present with deletions by MLPA and direct sequencing of the 27 exons for point a milder phenotype and hypophosphatemic rickets. Pseudoxanthoma mutations identification. elasticum (PXE) is another autosomal recessive multisystem disorder In total, 9 intragenic mutations or deletions were found that are characterized by ectopic mineralization and fragmentation of elastic highly likely pathogenic. 4 small deletions were identified by MLPA. fibers of connective tissue including skin, arteries, and the eye. Classic 5 mutations predicted to result in nonsense mediated mRNA decay PXE results from mutations in the ABCC6 gene. were found by sequencing: 1 previously described nonsense change We report on two unrelated children with an unusual phenotypic (p.Arg620X) and 4 novel frameshift mutations (p.Glu342fs, p.Glu187fs, overlap of GACI and PXE. They both presented with neonatal articular p.Val1026fs, c.2018_2018 +3 del 4). De novo occurrence was and vascular calcifications, with favourable evolution. Later in infancy, confirmed when DNA from both parents were available. As previously both patients developed abnormal mineralization in a number of described, mutations were spread all over the gene. organs, including ear ossicles, kidney, and eyes, associated with Frequently associated features reported in the Kleefstra syndrome hypophosphatemic rickets. Angiomatous cutaneous lesions were such as obesity, congenital heart defect or epilepsy do not seem to be noted in both patients. The older patient presented also with PXE skin as frequent in our patients suggesting that genes, apart from EHMT1, lesions, confirmed by histology. In both patients presence of ENPP1 included in larger deletions may be implicated in the phenotype. mutations, and absence of ABCC6 mutations was demonstrated. This particular phenotype, overlapping between PXE and GACI P02.102 appears to be associated with a better prognosis than the classical copy number variations in patients with electrical status GACI with respect to vascular calcifications. epilepticus in sleep Since ABCC6 was recently discussed as the causative gene in a S. H. G. Kevelam1, F. E. Jansen2, E. van Binsbergen1, K. Braun2, N. Verbeek1, case of GACI without mutations in ENPP1, we demonstrate here that, D. Lindhout1, M. Poot1, E. H. Brilstra1; conversely, ENPP1 may be involved in some cases of PXE in the 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, absence of ABCC6 mutations. We conclude that ENPP1 and ABCC6 Netherlands, 2Department of Child Neurology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of are probably involved in the same molecular pathway. Neuroscience, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Background: Electrical Status Epilepticus in Sleep (ESES) refers to P02.104 an electroencephalographic pattern of continuous, subclinical sleep Familial study of R217c mutation in Exon 7 of cHRNG gene in a induced spikes-and-waves. ESES related epilepsy syndromes share case of multiple Pterygia syndrome an association of infrequent seizures, deficits in language or global A. Zuñiga, G. Pi, Y. Bello, A. Guerrero; cognitive functioning and behavioural problems. The aetiology is often Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. unknown, but genetic risk factors have been implicated. BAcKGROUND: Escobar or multiple pterygia syndrome (OMIM Aim of the study: To detect copy number variations (CNVs) in patients 265000), a form of arthrogryposis multiplex congenital, is an autosomal with ESES syndrome in order to identify possible underlying genetic recessive condition characterized by excessive webbing (pterygia), risk factors. congenital contractures (arthrogryposis), and scoliosis. Congenital methods: We included a consecutive series of patients with ESES contractures are common and may be caused by reduced fetal between January 2000 en August 2009, at the Paediatric Neurology movements due to myasthenia gravis. Hereditary causes of congenital outpatient Clinic of the University Medical Centre Utrecht. CNVs myasthenic syndrome have also been identified, mostly mutations in were identified by array comparative genomic hybridization. To gain subunits of nicotinergic acetylcholine receptor (AChR). The AChR is more insight into the pathogenic contribution of the identified CNVs, composed of five subunits; two alpha, one beta and one delta subunit we reviewed the literature, searched in databases for similar CNVs are invariably present. The gamma subunit (CHRNG gene) is present in patients and studied the function of the genes located within the before the 33rd wk of gestation in humans but is replaced by a subunit CNVs. We compared the clinical characteristics of patients with CNVs in the late fetal and perinatal period, thereby forming the adult AChR. and patients without CNVs mAtERiALs AND mEtHODs: Proband case was a four year old Results: We detected seven CNVs in four of the thirteen patients with male. On clinical examination, the patient had all the characteristic ESES, which consisted of six novel gains and one loss, the recurrent features of multiple pterygium syndrome. He was of short stature, 15q13.3 microdeletion. The copy number variant genes in two of with flexion deformities of the wrists and hands and webbing across these patients belonged to the cholinergic pathway. There were no all flexion creases. Bilateral foot deformities were present with a right- differences in clinical characteristics between patients with CNVs and sided rockerbottom foot deformity and a residual club foot on the left. patients without CNVs. REsULts AND cONcLUsiONs: Genetic study of CHRNG gene was conclusion: Our data on CNVs in patients with ESES indicate that performed, patient was carrier of R217C mutation in exon 7 (c.715C>T) specific chromosomal loci and genes may be involved in the aetiology in homozygosis. Study of other members of family detected 35 of ESES. In particular, our findings point towards putative alterations in heterozygotic carriers and till three different familial pedigrees affected. the cholinergic pathway. CHRNG gene mutations have been identified in families with Escobar syndrome and showed that the trait is a congenital dysmorphology caused by the transient inactivation of the neuromuscular end plate.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 93 P02.105 P02.107 submicroscopic 7q36.1-36.3 deletion causes multiple congenital Floating-Harbor syndrome: report on a case in a mother and eye anormalies, associated with short stature in a boy with daughter, further evidence of autosomal dominant inheritance normal development S. Arpin1,2,3, A. Afenjar2, B. Dubern4, A. Toutain1,3, S. Cabrol5, D. Héron2; A. Beleza-Meireles1,2, E. Matoso3, R. Oliveira1, C. F. Reis1, J. B. Melo3, E. D. 1Service de Génétique,centre de référence «anomalies du développement et Silva4, I. M. Carreira3, L. Ramos1; syndromes malformatifs» , Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 2Département 1Serviço de Genética - Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, de Génétique et Cytogénétique et Centre de référence «déficiences 2School of Health Sciences, Aveiro University, Aveiro, Portugal, 3Cytogenetics intellectuelles de causes rares », Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, Laboratory, Institute of Medical Biology, Medical Faculty, Coimbra University, France, 3Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 4Service de Gastro Coimbra, Portugal, 4Department of Ophthalmology, Coimbra University Hospita, Entérologie et Nutrition Pédiatriques, Hôpital d’Enfants Armand Trousseau, Coimbra, Portugal. Paris, France, 5Explorations Fonctionnelles Endocriniennes, Hôpital d’Enfants The eye is a very complex structure that originates from constituents Armand Trousseau, Paris, France. derived from a number of sources, such as the neuro- and surface Floating-Harbor Syndrome (FHS) is a rare disorder characterized ectoderm and the periocular mesenchyme, which receives contributions by the triad of proportionate short stature with delayed bone age, from both the neural crest and mesoderm lineages. Proper eye characteristic facial appearance and delayed speech development. development requires many interacting proteins, such as PAX6 and The genetic basis of the syndrome is still unclear, most cases being SHH, which orchestrate a series of sequential inductions. Due to the sporadic. In the rare familial cases, three reports with either mother- complexity of eye development, it is not surprising that congenital eye daughter or mother-son transmission, fulfilling the diagnosis criteria of abnormalities occur, particularly in multiple malformation syndromes. FHS, suggest an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. This mode We report the case of patient LG, a 14 year old boy, referred to the of transmission is also suggested by advanced paternal age in almost Medical Genetics clinic due to multiple congenital eye abnormalities all sporadic cases. On the other hand, autosomal recessive inheritance (unilateral microphthalmia, bilateral microcornea, severe myopia, has also been suggested in three pedigrees where the phenotype is nystagmus, dysplasia of the optic disc with coloboma-like areas, vitreo- less convincing. In two other reports, autosomal recessive inheritance retinal degeneration), proportionate short stature, absence of the two seemed possible because of consanguinity although germinal maxillary central incisors and congenital unilateral vertical astragalus. mosaicism for an autosomal dominant gene mutation could not be Brain MRI scan, heart, abdominal and reno-pelvic ultrasound excluded. We report on the fourth case in a mother and daughter, were normal, evidencing the absence of additional malformations. review the familial cases of the literature and suggest autosomal Furthermore, he has a normal psychomotor development. dominant inheritance for this syndrome. The cytogenetic investigation detected a de novo submicroscopic deletion in terminal region of the long arm of chromosome 7 [46,XY,del(7) P02.108 (q36.1-q36.3). ish 7qsubtel(VY JyRM2000X2). arr 7q36.2q36.3 search for a gene responsible for Floating-Harbor syndrome (153206357-156133135)X1 dn). This region encompasses 10 genes E. Lopez1, P. Callier1,2, V. Cormier-Daire3, D. Lacombe4, A. Moncla5, A. Bottani6, reported in the OMIM morbid map, including SHH and MYP4, both S. Lambert7, L. Gueneau1, L. Duplomb-Jego1, A. Goldenberg8, B. Doray9, B. implicated in eye development and function. Aral7, C. Thauvin-Robinet10, L. Faivre1,10; This report indicates a contiguous gene disorder, causing multiple 1Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 2Cytogénétique, Dijon, France, congenital anomalies, particularly affecting the eye development, in 3Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, the absence of developmental delay. 4Génétique Médicale, CHU, Bordeaux, France, 5Génétique Médicale, CHU, Marseille, France, 6Génétique Médicale, Genève, Switzerland, 7Biologie P02.106 Moléculaire, CHU, Dijon, France, 8Génétique Médicale, CHU, Rouen, France, A novel mutation in the APc gene in a patient with attenuated 9Génétique Médicale, CHU, Strasbourg, France, 10Centre de Génétique, CHU, colonic polyposis and severe extra-colonic phenotype Dijon, France. S. Miccoli1, L. B. Amato1, E. Polmpilii1, L. Varesco2, P. Baccarini3, G. Tallini3, D. Floating-Harbor syndrome (FHS) is characterised by characteristic Turchetti1; facial dysmorphism, short stature with delayed bone age and expressive 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2S.S. language delay. To date, the gene(s) responsible for FHS are unknown Centro Tumori Ereditari, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, and the diagnosis is only made on the basis of the clinical phenotype. Italy, 3Servizio di Anatomia, Istologia e Citologia Patologica, Ospedale Bellaria, The majority of cases appeared to be sporadic but rare cases following Bologna, Italy. autosomal dominant inheritance have been reported. We identified a We describe a woman with no relevant clinical history until age 70, 4.7 Mb de novo 12q14.3-q21.1 microdeletion in a patient with FHS when she underwent right hemicolectomy for multiple colonic polyps. and mental retardation. Pangenomic 244K array-CGH performed Pathology examination revealed 40 adenomas, one of which, showing a series of twelve patients with FHS failed in identifying overlapping cancer foci, tested negative for microsatellite instability. At age 76 the deletions. We hypothesized that FHS is caused by haploinsufficiency patient developed an ampullar adenoma and at age 77 she underwent of one of the 19 genes or predictions comprised in the deletion found surgery for lung adenocarcinoma (she is non-smoker with no other in our index patient. Since none of them appears as good candidate lung cancer risk factors). Family history was negative for polyposis genes by their function, high-throughput sequencing approach of but her father and brother died at a young age for stroke, while the region of interest was used in eight FHS patients. This method her niece died at age 40 for medulloblastoma. Search for germline is based on the production of thousands or millions of sequences at mutations in polyposis genes detected the heterozygous mutation once during the sequencing process. The analysis only revealed a c.6156delG (p.L2052fs) in APC, whereas MYH was wild-type. The nonsense variant in the exon 2 on the TMEM19 gene in one patient, c.6156delG mutation was found in both duodenal adenoma and lung but segregation analysis showed that the mutation was inherited from adenocarcinoma at the heterozygous state, excluding the loss of the his unaffected mother. This approach failed in identifying the gene wild-type allele in tumor tissue. responsible for FHS, and it can be explained by 3 reasons: i) our index To our knowledge, the c.6156delG mutation has not been reported patient could be a phenocopy of FHS; ii) the disease can be clinically before. Its location at the 3’ terminus of the gene may explain the heterogeneous since the diagnosis only relies on clinical features, iii) attenuated colonic phenotype in this patient, consistently with the high genetic heterogeneity of the disease. reported genotype-phenotype correlations, but such extracolonic manifestations were unexpected. However, although molecular P02.109 analysis on tumor tissue failed to find LOH, several factors suggest A family with frontometaphyseal dysplasia in three generations that the APC mutation may be the cause of the neoplasms arisen C. Yapijakis1,2, A. Vylliotis1, E. Vairaktaris1; in the family: i) 50% of patients with classic FAP develop ampullar 1University of Athens Medical School, Athens, Greece, 2Cephalogenetics adenomas; ii) adenocarcinoma of the lung has been reported in three Center, Athens, Greece. patients with FAP; iii) APC mutations can cause Turcot syndrome, Frontometaphyseal dysplasia (FMD, OMIM 305620) is a rare X-linked featured by the association of colonic polyposis with the rare adult- craniofacial genetic syndrome first described by Gorlin and Cohen in onset medulloblastoma. 1969. It is characterized by supraorbital hyperostosis, hypertelorism, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 94 conductive hearing loss, downslanting palpebral fissures, anodontia or for intragenic copy number changes and demonstrated heterozygous oligodontia, as well as generalized skeletal dysplasia which manifests deletions in the 2 remaining cases (18%). Although based on a small with thickening of the calvarium, agenesis of the frontal, ethmoidal and sample, our study shows that intragenic GLI3 deletions may account sphenoidal sinuses together with bowing and undermodeling of the for a considerable proportion of GCPS/PPIV causative mutations. diaphyses and metaphyses of the tubular bones. FMD is caused by Therefore, we propose that MLPA or qPCR should be included mutations in the FLNA gene which encodes the cytoskeletal protein into routine molecular diagnostic of the GLI3 gene, especially if the filamin A that binds actin fibrils and participates in the modulation of the sequence analysis detects no pathogenic mutation. cytoskeleton. We describe here a Greek family with five FMD cases in three generations. Three brothers had typical severe manifestations of P02.112 the syndrome, while their mother and maternal grandmother had less Goldenhar syndome - report of three cases prominent signs. Genomic DNA was extracted from all patients, as well M. Puiu, S. Dumitriu, A. Chirita Emandi; as from the normal father of the three male patients. All 48 exons of University of Medicine &Pharmacy “V. Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. the FLNA gene including exon-intron boundaries were sequenced in Goldenhar Syndrome (oculo-auriculo-vertebral dysplasia), is a one male proband and a single mutation (D253E) was revealed. The rare congenital complex of abnormalities with various models of same mutation was found in all affected members of the family, both in expressivity. hemizygous males and in heterozygous females. Matherial and methods: We present three male infants with Goldenhar syndrome from Romania. Results: All cases were diagnosed in their P02.110 newborn period. There was no family history of facial syndromes or High prevalence of ectopic calcification in the Azores - Gitelman ocular condition. The children have normal anthropometric parameters syndrome as the cause for secondary chondrocalcinosis (head circumference, birth length and weight) and abnormalities S. Sieuve de Menezes1,2, A. R. Couto1,2, M. Soares1,2, M. R. Santos1,2, J. P. characteristic for the syndrome (consistent features of epibulbar Pinheiro1,2, S. Brum3, J. Bruges-Armas1,2; dermiods, pre-auricular tags, and vertebral anomalies). Investigation 1Hospital de Santo Espirito, SEEBMO, Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 2Institute and complex interdisciplinary consultations highlight the similar and for Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, different abnormalities present in the three cases. The severity of the 3Hospital de Santo Espirito, Serviço de Nefrologia, Angra do Heroísmo, syndrome is different for each case and consequently the management, Portugal. evolution and prognosis will be different. Conclusions: Due to the fact Gitelman syndrome (GS) is an autosomal recessive inherited that manifestations of Goldenhar syndrome can be similar to other renal disorder, characterized by defective tubular reabsorption diseases, to confirm the syndrome, genetic testing is a valuable tool of sodium, potassium and magnesium, due to loss of function to establish the diagnosis and allow appropriate genetic counseling. mutations of the SLC12A3 gene. This syndrome leads to hypomagnesemia, hypokalaemia, mild hypotension, mild metabolic P02.113** alkalosis and hyperreninemic hyperaldosteronism. It is thought that Looking at Gorlin syndrome from the perspective of the cilia of hypomagnesemia is the reason for the recurrent association of GS hedgehog with Chondrocalcinosis (CC). S. C. E. H. Sallevelt1, E. B. Gómez García1,2; A 59 years-old Azorean patient with CC, hypomagnesemia and 1Maastricht University Medical Center+, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Maastricht hypokalemia, was identified in the Rheumatic Diseases Clinic, University, Maastricht, Netherlands. Hospital de Santo Espírito, Azores, Portugal. The clinical diagnosis of Gorlin syndrome (GS), also known as basal cell nevus syndrome, GS was performed and, after informed consent, genomic DNA was is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by multi-organ extracted from peripheral blood cells. SLC12A3 direct sequencing developmental abnormalities, and neoplasms. In up to 85% of cases revealed three variants: a missense substitution in heterozygous of GS, a mutation can be identified in the patched homolog 1 gene state (c.296A-G, His99Arg), a synonymous heterozygous substitution (PTCH1). PTCH1 gene is a member of Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), an (c.366A-G, Ala122Ala) and a homozygous missense substitution important signaling pathway of the cilia. PTCH1 is the SHH receptor in exon 15 (Ser615Leu). Mutation in exon 15 has been previously and represses the SHH signaling through inhibition of Smoothend described as a genetic cause for GS. (Smo). Mutations in PTCH1 render it unable to repress Smo which In geographic regions, such as the Terceira Island (Azores, Portugal), enters the primary cilia resulting in permanent activation of SHH in which CC and enthesopathies are considered to be extremely signaling. So far, attempts to make genotype-phenotype associations prevalent, it is crucial to determine its genetic causes and to establish in GS have not been successful. However, no one has looked at GS the differential diagnosis. The genetic cause for the secondary CC from the pathogenic perspective of a cilia abnormality. We provide in this GS patient was identified. Further studies in family members evidence supported by research reports that the apparently unrelated of this patient will be needed in order to evaluate the segregation of phenotypic features of GS have a ciliary dysfunction as their common hypomagnesemia and CC. underlying mechanism. Support for this hypothesis includes firstly clinical overlap (cysts, hydrocephalus, medulloblastoma, skeletal P02.111 abnormalities) between GS and other ciliopathies. Secondly, the Deletions of the GLi3 gene can be the frequent cause of Greig important role of cilia in the development of the involved structures cephalopolysyndactyly and preaxial polydactyly type iV in GS (i.e. brain, skin, skeleton) and their malignant counterparts A. Jamsheer1,2, A. Sowinska1,2, A. Geppert3, A. Latos-Bielenska1,2; (basalioma, medulloblastoma). Furthermore, mutations in SUFU, 1Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 2Department a ciliary protein and a negative SHH regulator, have been found in of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, sporadic medulloblastoma, as well as in germline in a family with GS. 3Department of Neurology, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Also SUFU +/- mice have features of GS. The perspective of GS being Greig cephalopolysyndactyly syndrome (GCPS) and isolated preaxial a ciliopathy can be clinically relevant for treatment with drugs targeted polydactyly type IV (PPIV) are rare autosomal dominant disorders, to downstream components of the primary cilia. both caused by mutations in the GLI3 gene. GCPS is predominantly characterised by craniofacial anomalies (macrocephaly, high forehead P02.114 with frontal bossing, hypertelorism), and limb malformations such as Problems of differentiation between Huntington and preaxial polydactyly type IV, syndactyly, and postaxial polydactyly type Hallervorden-spatz disease A or B. Other congenital abnormalities are less frequent. The syndrome N. Galeeva, E. Dadali, A. Polyakov; exhibits high inter-individual and intra-familial clinical variability. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Mutations in the GLI3 transcription factor gene can also cause Huntington disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant progressive Pallister-Hall syndrome, and isolated postaxial polydactyly type A and neurodegenerative disorder with a distinct phenotype characterized B. In this study we screened 11 probands (8 familial and 3 sporadic) by chorea, dystonia, incoordination, cognitive decline, and behavioral with the clinical diagnosis of GCPS/PPIV by gene sequencing and difficulties. In the classic form age of onset is between 30 and 40 found 8 novel and 1 previously reported heterozygous point mutations. years. Hallervorden-Spatz disease is an autosomal recessive disorder Subsequently we performed MLPA (P179 MRC Holland Kit) to screen characterized by extrapyramidal movements, such as parkinsonism Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 95 and dystonia. In the classic form patients present within the first (17 mutations and 7 large deletions spanning 2q14.2). With the report decade of life with rapidly progressing disease and loss of ambulation of this GLI2 deletion we confirm that haploinsufficiency of GLI2 is approximately 15 years later. In classic forms differentiation of this associated with HPE-like features. Comparable to what has been disorders is not difficult for physicians. But there is juvenile-onset described in families with GLI2 mutations, we observed an incomplete Huntington disease (10% of all HD cases), typically defined as onset penetrance of the deletion in our family, illustrating the multifactorial before age 20 years and the atypical form of Hallervorden-Spatz etiology of HPE and HPE-like features. The deletion contains five disease, when patients have onset in the second decade with slow other genes, including the Epb4.1l5 gene. Based on observations progression and maintain independent ambulation after 15 years. In in Epb4.1l5 mutant mice embryo’s, we argue that haploinsufficiency our practice there were two cases wrong diagnosis “Hallervorden- of Epb4.1l5 might be the cause of the heterotaxy in our proband. A Spatz disease” when patient suffered from Huntington disease. pathogenic effect of the GLI2 deletion cannot be excluded. Finally, we Therefore we decided to draw attention of physicians for this problem. conclude that, while other HPE-genes have been excluded, GLI2 is still These disorders have overall symptoms such as dystonia, choreatic a candidate gene for the Holoprosencephaly-polydactyly syndrome, athetosis, dementia, ataxia, rigidity dysarthria, bradykinesia and only also known as Pseudotrisomy 13. patient suffered from Hallervorden-Spatz disease have deformation of foot, primary pigmentary degeneration of retina, blepharospasm, P02.117 tremor, spasticity, diphthongia. The main feature of Hallervorden- Alobar holoprosencephaly in two sibs: deletion of chromosome Spatz disease is the ‘eye of the tiger’ sign on brain MRI. The main 17 confirmation of Huntington disease is expansion of repeat number L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo1, R. M. Zechi-Ceide1, M. Guion-Almeida1, A. Richieri- more than 37 in IT15 gene. The main confirmation of Hallervorden- Costa1, T. Rodrigues2, A. C. V. Krepischi2, C. Rosenberg2; Spatz disease is presence mutations in the PANK2 gene. 1Hospital de Reabilitacao de Anomalias Craniofaciais, Bauru, Brazil, 2Instituto de Biociencias, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. P02.115 Most of the reported cases on HPE are sporadic, representing Hartsfield syndrome and Xq24 microduplication nonrandom chromosomal aberrations and environmental agents, R. Kosaki1, H. Okuno2, C. Torii2, K. Kosaki2; however, familial cases are described in some mendelian genetic 1Division of Medical Genetics, National Center for Child Health and syndromes. HPE recurring in sibs has been also reported as part of Development Hospital, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Pediatrics, Keio the clinical spectrum of some well recognized autosomal or x-linked University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. recessive syndromes such as the pseudotrissomy 13 syndrome, The combination of holoprosencephaly and ectrodactyly was first Genoa syndrome, Lambotte syndrome, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome, described by Hartsfield et al in 1984. Fifteen cases have been reported among other less frequent. Mutation in genes such as SHH, GLI2, to date and the condition is likely to represent a single genetic entity PTCH, TGIF, and SIX3 have been recently reported in patients with (Hartsfield syndrome). The genetic defect is yet to be unraveled. Based different types of HPE, in parents with minor anomalies, and in normal on the observation that male patients have preferentially been affected, carrier parents with an autosomal dominant patter of inheritance. In the X-linked recessive mode of transmission has been suggested for this present report we describe two affected brothers with alobar HPE and condition. Yet, no candidate genes have been suggested on the X one of them represent a case of recurrence in sibs with normal parents. chromosome. We report a patient with a full-brown Hartsfield syndrome Mutation screening for the genes SHH, GLI2, PTCH, TGIF, and SIX3 phenotype who had a microduplication at Xq24 that involved at least 5 was carried out. No evidence of mutation was found. Then, aCGH genes: A Japanese boy had bilateral ectrodactyly of the hands, midline analysis was carried out and a chromosome 17 deletion affecting cleft lip with aplasia of premaxillary segment, cleft palate, a low nasal the p12 band between 14052279 and 15102307 bp was found. The bridge and micropenis with undescended testes. A CT scan of the deficiency of this fragment has been associated to the hereditary brain revealed lobar-type holoproencephary. Cleft lip and palate was neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP). It is possible that repaired a age 2 years and ectrodactyly was repaired at age 3. He had the phenotype is associated to this chromosomal alteration. Genetics multiple episodes of hyper natremia with serum sodium level as high and clinical aspects involving the present family and recurrence risks as 194 mEq/l. His development was mildly delayed. His G-banded involved are discussed. karyotype was normal. Array comparative genomic hybridization using the Whole Human Genome CGH array (Agilent) revealed a duplication P02.118 of 0.3 Mb, on Xq24. The duplication has never been recognzied Duplication of tBX5 and tBX3 associated with Holt-Oram- as benign copy number variation in various CNV databases. The syndrome plus supernumerary mammary glands duplication was derived from the unaffected mother who had random M. Hempel1,2, N. Rivera-Brugués2, C. Daumer-Haas3, K. Hörtnagel3, T. X-inactivation pattern. The fact that the X-inactivation pattern was not Meitinger1,2, T. M. Strom1,2; incompatible with the notion that the duplication could be pathogenic. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, P02.116 Neuherberg, Germany, 3Pränatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany. A HPE-like phenotype and heterotaxy associated with a 1,3 mb Loss of function mutations in TBX5 are associated with Holt-Oram- deletion encompassing the GLI2 gene at 2q14.2 Syndrome (HOS), an autosomal dominant disease characterized S. H. G. Kevelam1, J. J. T. van Harssel1, B. van der Zwaag1, H. J. Smeets2, A. by radial limb defects and heart defects. Loss of function mutations D. C. Paulussen2, K. D. Lichtenbelt1; in TBX3 result in Ulna-Mammary-Syndrome (UMS), an autosomal 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, dominant disorder associated with ulnar limb defects, hypoplasia of Netherlands, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical breasts, and dental abnormalities. Here we report on a German family Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. in which a duplication of the two adjacent genes TBX5 and TBX3 was Loss-of-function mutations of GLI2 are associated with identified. Affected members in five generations suffered from mild holoprosencephaly (HPE)-features, including abnormal pituitary gland hand anomalies, heart defects, and supernumerary mammary glands. formation and/or function, craniofacial abnormalities, branchial arch The phenotype except accessory mammary glands resembled HOS. anomalies and polydactyly. We report a patient carrying a 1,3 Mb Sequencing of all TBX5 exons was performed with inconspicuous submicroscopic deletion in 2q14.2, encompassing the GLI2 gene. She results. Using a SNP oligonucleotide array, duplication at 12p24.21 presented with a HPE-like phenotype (bilateral cleft lip and palate and was detected extending 210 kb and encompassing exclusively the abnormal pituitary gland formation with panhypopituitarism),heterotaxy TBX5 and TBX3 genes. To our knowledge duplication of both TBX5 and normal psychomotor development. Submicroscopic deletions and TBX3 genes have never been described before. Previously encompassing GLI2 have not been reported so far. Large published studies have shown that TBX5 gain of function mutations microscopically visible interstitial deletions spanning 2q14.2 are rare are associated with HOS with mild skeletal involvement. Based on and have been reported sporadically in patients with multiple congenital this knowledge the mild hand malformations in the family described anomalies and mental retardation. The clinical and molecular findings here are likely caused by duplication of the TBX5 gene. Taking into in our proband and her family are presented. Additionally, we review the account that TBX3 loss of function mutations result in hyploplastic features of previously reported index patients with a GLI2 aberration breasts development, supernumerary mammary glands observed Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 96 in our cases are likely caused by duplication of the TBX3 gene. We P02.121 assume that duplication of TBX5 is associated with a HOS with milder comparison of prescreening methods and their effectiveness in skeletal involvement and duplication of TBX3 apparently leads to diagnostic of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy supernumerary mammary glands. P. Vanickova1, V. Drimlova1, J. Januska2, M. Branny2, P. Branny2, E. Prusova1, A. Boday1; P02.119 1P&R Lab a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Hospital Podlesi, Trinec, Czech Biallelic absence of tRmP1 may explain the retinopathy in Republic. patients with homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletions Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is characterized by A. Masurel-Paulet1, I. Drumare2, M. Holder3, J. Cuisset4, L. Vallée4, S. Defoort2, progressive hypertrophy of left (sometimes also right) ventricle, diastolic B. Bourgois5, P. Pernes6, J. Cuvellier4, J. Thevenon1, C. Thauvin1, L. Faivre1, J. dysfunction, heart failure and sudden death. HCM is heterogenic Andrieux7; disease, penetrance is incomplete with variant expressivity. Heredity 1Centre de génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement is autosomal dominant with frequency 1/500. Genetic heterogeneity et Syndrômes malformatifs, CHU, Dijon, France, 2Service d’ Ophtalmologie, is caused by mutations in approximately 12 genes that encode CHRU, Lille, France, 3Service de génétique clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de sarcomeric complex and others. Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France, 4Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHRU, Lille, France, Mutations in 3 genes: MYH7 (gene encodes heavy chain of β-myosin), 5Service de Pédiatrie, CH, Roubaix, France, 6Centre de soins Saint Exupery, TNNT2 (gene encodes troponin T), and MyBPC3 (gene encodes Vendin le Vieil, France, 7Laboratoire de génetique médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de myosin binding protein C) cause 2/3 of all cases of HCM. Flandre, CHRU, Lille, France. Because of the high frequency of disease and heterogeneity of HCM The 15q13.3 heterozygous microdeletion is a new frequent recurrent mutation analysis is extremely laborious and time-consuming. Neither microdeletion with high clinical variability and incomplete penetrance, the clinical phenotype is not guideline to genetic analysis, because with an average size of 1.5 Mb. Rare patients have been described there are no specific symptoms that would correlate with mutations in the literature with a homozygous microdeletion inherited from in genes. The only option is to follow the frequency of mutations in both parents. We describe 3 patients from a French cohort, aged 8 the genes: MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, TPM1, MYL2, MYL3, TNNI3 months to 6 years, including one sibship, with a 1.5 Mb homozygous and others. We compare and discusse the sensitivity and specificity microdeletion. The parents had mental retardation in one family of SSCP, DGGE and heteroduplex analysis and we propose testing of only. They all had congenital blindness with a peculiar rod-cone patients with HCM. The results put further emphasis on the need for dystrophy confirmed by electroretinography. The two oldest patients cooperation with cardiologist, clinical genetics and molecular genetics had convulsivant encephalopathy, major hypotonia, and one of them from diagnosis to interpretation the results of molecular genetic testing. had choreoathetosis movements. Contrary to the heterozygous microdeletion, the homozygous 15q13.3 microdeletion displays an P02.122 identifiable clinical phenotype. The neurological symptoms might be Genetic diversity of myosin-Binding Protein c (myBPc3) gene in explained by homozygous deletion of CHRNA7. Taking into account Russian patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (Hcm) another patient from the literature with a homozygous deletion not N. Ogorodnikova, V. Dolotov, H. Mardanyan, A. Pirkova, E. Zaklyazminskaya; including TRPM1 in one allele and absent eye manifestations, we Russian Research Centre of Surgery named by Petrovski, Moscow, Russian conclude that homozygous deletions of TRPM1 might be responsible of Federation. the retinopathy. This data is supported by the finding that homozygous Background: Primary HCM is an inherited cardiac disorder mutations lead to congenital stationary night blindness. In conclusion, characterized by clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Mutations in the association of retinopathy and convulsive encephalopathy should the MyBPC3 gene account for 20% of HCM cases and are usually lead to the search of a 15q13.3 homozygous microdeletion. associated with a favourable prognosis. Despite the good survival of MyBPC3 mutation carriers, they may also be at risk of sudden cardiac P02.120 death (SCD). interstitial duplication of HUWE1 supports the role of this gene methods: A panel of 30 patients with primary HCM was formed. We in X-linked mental retardation. screened coding and adjacent intronic areas of the MyBPC3 gene by V. M. Siu; direct sequencing in 4 patients. Patients had a medical examination, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada. personal and family history was collected, physical examination, Ubiqitin ligases have been implicated in various neurogenetic standard ECG, 24-hr HM and Echo-CG. disorders, most notably Angelman Syndrome (UBE3A). The Results: Two known mutations (S217G, Q1233ter), 2 known HUWE1 ubiquitin E ligase gene is an X-linked gene involved in HCM-associated polymorphisms (S236G, R326Q) and 2 new the ubiquitination of proteins in the nervous system. It functions variants (c.2067+38 A>T, V449E) were found. One patient carried upstream of the N-Myc-DLL3-Notch pathway and plays a crucial role heterozygous variants R326Q, Q1233ter and c.2067+38 A>T, had in regulating the balance between proliferation and differentiation of early manifestation, fast progression and a positive SCD family history. neural cells. Mutations in HUWE1 have been described in a family with Compound heterozygosity of Q1233ter and R326Q variants was Turner-type mental retardation associated with macrocephaly (OMIM previously described as associated with HCM but without SCD events. #30706) and 2 families with nonsyndromic XLMR. As well, 6 unrelated A patient with a mild form of HCM had a heterozygous S217G mutation families have been reported with various duplications of the Xp11.2 shown previously as leading to both dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) region, encompassing both HSD17B10 and HUWE1. We present a and HCM (with sudden infant death). male child with severe MR, partial complex seizures, and moderate to A carrier of the new V449E variant had a positive family history with profound sensorineural hearing impairment. He was nondysmorphic SCD. A fourth patient with the HCM-associated polymorphism S236G, as a child, but at 15 years, had poor eye contact, with long narrow face had mild HCM with late-onset at 45 y.o. Population analysis of unknown and anterior maxillary overbite. MRI showed multiple hyperintensity variants (c.2067+38 A>T, V449E), and genetic screening of HCM- foci on the T2 flare images with a large area involving the right associated genes will be further provided in this group of patients. temporal lobe. Array CGH demonstrated a microduplication involving conclusion: Genetic screening of HCM-related genes in HCM the HUWE1 gene within cytogenetic band Xp 11.22. This represents a patients can be used for confirmation of diagnosis, clarifying personal partial duplication of the gene with minimum size of 55 KB from exons and familial prognosis and genetic counseling. 37 to 84 and maximum size of 99 KB including exons 24 to 84. His Research was partly supported by grant 02740110783 mother and 2 of his maternal half-sisters have the same duplication and mild learning disabilities. This case represents the first description P02.123 of an interstitial duplication of HUWE1 and supports the implication of Regional distribution of mutations associated with hypertrophic HUWE1 alterations in abnormal brain development and functioning. cardiomyopathy in the Northwest of spain X. Fernández-Fernández1, M. Ortíz1, R. Barriales-Villa1, M. I. Rodríguez- García2, L. Núñez3, E. Veira1, D. García1, L. Cazón1, E. Maneiro1, M. Pérez1, E. Álvarez1, A. Castro-Beiras2, L. Monserrat2; 1Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), La Coruña, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 97 Spain, 2CHUAC. Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), to 15 times more frequently in patients with celiac disease (CD) than La Coruña, Spain, 3Universida de A Coruña. Instituto de Investigaciones in healthy subjects.IgAD has been associated with chromosomes Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), La Coruña, Spain. 18,14 and 6.Certain MHC haplotypes have been associated with Background/objectives: Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy has been susceptibility to IgAD:HLA-A, B14, B8, DR3. Objective: The goal of associated with more than 600 different mutations in sarcomeric this study was to assess the association between HLADQ and IgAD genes. Several studies performed in reference centers have reported in Romanian children. Methods:From 122 celiac patients diagnosed the presence of multiple families with the same mutation in a given between 2000 and 2010, 9 associated IgAD (diagnosis was IgG geographic area. Our objective was to evaluate the potential founder serology and histology based).A second study lot consisted in 10 IgAD effects in a regional population. children without autoimmune associations.The lot of control consisted Methods: Analysis of the geographic origin of HCM families with in 20 healthy children.DQ2/DQ8 alleles were typed by PCR-SSP in all mutations in sarcomeric genes identified in Galicia (Northwest Spain). children. Results:Alleles distribution for children with CD and IgAD was:8 Results: We have identified 67 different mutations in 376 carriers of cases (89%) presented homozygous DQ2 haplotypes (DQA1*0501/ 136 apparently independent families (32 MYBPC3 mutations in 61 DQB1*0201 and DQA1*0501/DQB1*0201) and one (11%) associated families, 26 MYH7 in 49 families, 4 TNNT2 in 8 families, 3 TNNI3 in heterozygous DQ8 haplotype (DQA1*0301/DQB1*0302 and 8 families, 1 TNNC1 in 1 family, and 1 ACTC mutation in 9 families). DQA1*0301/DQB1*0103).From the second lot IgA deficient without Forty-four of the 67 mutations (65%) had been previously described. CD, 3children (30%) presented homozygousDQ2 haplotypes.From Eighty-eight of the 136 families (65%) shared mutations with other the contol lot, one healthy children (5%) associated DQ2homozygous families, and 58 of those 88 (68%) were repeated within the same or a alleles. HLA DQ2 homozygous haplotype was present in 58% of total bordering district, strongly suggesting a common origin. Twenty-four of IgAD patients comparing to 5% in controls (p<0,00012).We found a the 67 different mutations appeared in more than one family: 4 were in significant correlation between DQ2 homozygous haplotype and IgAD 2 different families, 9 mutations in 3 families, 3 mutations in 4 families, (r=0,62).Conclusions:Presence of HLA DQ2/DQ8 is mandatory but not and 1 mutation was repeated in 5,6, 7,8 and 9 families respectively. sufficient for developing CD.Susceptibility to IgAD is associated with Conclusions: Multiple families with the same mutations are frequent DQ2 alleles,but it is not equally in different populations.Differences in our population. The knowledge about the geographic origin of in HLA association of IgAD reported by various studies suggest that the families in a regional setting may be useful to focus the genetic multiple different genes within the MHC region might be involved in the studies. The identification of a high proportion of previously described pathogenesis of this immunodeficiency. mutations in multiple families can improve our knowledge about genotype-phenotype correlations. P02.126 mental retardation, microcephaly and cerebellar dysplasia in a P02.124 child with mosaic interstitial duplication 16q11.2-q12.1 Partial, homozygous deletion of PREPL and C2orf34 on 2p21 in C. Vinkler1, A. Zerem2, L. Ben-Sira3, M. Michelson1, T. Lerman-Sagie2, D. Lev1; siblings with atypical hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome (Hcs) 1Institute of Clinical Genetics Wolfson Hospital, Holon, Israel, 2Pediatric D. Bartholdi, R. Asadollahi, B. Oneda, A. Baumer, A. Rauch; Neurology Unit Wolfson Hospital, Holon, Israel, 3Radiology Department Ichilov Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel. Homozygous contiguous gene syndromes are rare. On 2p21, Intersitial duplications in the long arm of chromosome 16 have been however, two overlapping homozygous contiguous gene syndromes previously reported in a small number of patients. Whereas no distinct have been described. The first syndrome, referred to as 2p21 deletion common dysmorphic features can be defined for these patients, they syndrome, is characterized by neonatal hypotonia, seizures, severe all had in common, mental retardation, speech delay and behavioral developmental delay, elevated serum lactate concentrations, poor problems. feeding, growth retardation, facial dysmorphisms and cystinuria type I. We describe a boy who presented with mental retardation, cerebellar The deletion affects at least four genes, PPM1B, SLC3A1, PREPL and signs and mild dysmorphic features who had an interstitial duplication C2orf34. The second syndrome, hypotonia-cystinuria syndrome (HCS, of the long arm of chromosome 16. MIM606407) is characterized by infantile hypotonia, poor feeding, This boy is the first child of unrelated parents of Ashkenazi origin. growth hormone deficiency, mild facial dysmorphism and cystinuria IUGR was noticed at 31w gestation and delivery was induced at 36 type I; affected individuals carry homozygous deletions encompassing weeks due to reduced growth. His birth weight was 1,730 g. He had the SLC3A1 and the PREPL gene. Cystinuria is due to the loss of the poor sucking and general psychomotor delay. On examination at the SLC3A1 gene. age of 4y, he had microcephally, high nasal bridge, deep set eyes, thin We describe two siblings with a homozygous deletion of 83 kb lips, and mild retrognatia. He had low muscle tone and wide-based encompassing exon 1 of the PREPL gene - implicated in both gait due to clumsiness or ataxia. He used only 5 verbal words and syndromes - and the first three exons of the C2orf34 gene - implicated communicated mainly with gestures and signs. Brain MRI revealed in the 2p21 deletion syndrome. To our knowledge, this is the first cerebellar cortical dysplasia. Large forth ventricle with mild elongated homozygous deletion on 2p21 not disrupting the coding sequence superior cerebellar peduncles and small vermis with atrophy of the of the SLC3A1 gene. The affected individuals display the classical inferior aspect were noted. symptoms of HCS such as severe muscular hypotonia in infancy and Microarray and FISH analysis detected a 3.3 Mb mosaic gain from pronounced feeding difficulties with growth failure, but no cystinuria. 16q11.2-16q12.2 . and identified a marker chromosome in 17/30 They also show additional features such as cleft palate and genital metaphases cells examined. The parents had normal karyotypes. abnormalities which have not been reported so far, neither in the This is the first report of cerebellar anomalies in a patient with partial 2p21 deletion syndrome nor in HCS. Our findings confirm that PREPL trisomy 16q. More patients with an interstitial duplication of 16q11-q12 is the key gene in causing the complex growth and neuromuscular and brain imaging findings will help to further characterize the phenotype in HCS. The role of C2orf34 still remains to be determined. phenotype. P02.125 P02.127 HLA Assessment in Romanian children Associating igA Report of a Jacobsen syndrome with a mild facial dysmorphism, Deficiency severe hearing impairment and trombocytopenia O. Belei1, I. Simedrea1, L. Tamas2, O. Marginean1, C. Daescu1, T. Marcovici1, L. Cimbalistienė, V. Dirsė, V. Kučinskas; M. Puiu3; Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania. 1First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Jacobsen syndrome (JBS), also known as 11q deletion syndrome, Timisoara, Romania, 2Biochemistry Department, University of Medicine is a rare syndrome with variable phenotypic expression. To date, and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 3Genetic Department, over 200 cases of JBS have been described, with an estimated University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. prevalence of 1:100000 birth. The most characteristic symptoms are Introduction:Selective IgA deficiency (IgAD) is a genetic disorder short stature, craniofacial anomalies, congenital heart defects, visceral characterized by decreased or absent level of serum IgA. IgAD is 10 malformations, developmental delay and thrombocytopenia.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 98 case report. The proband, 11 months old boy was referred to our - Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 9Service de cytogénétique, Strasbourg, department due to suspected genetic disorder. He was born by France, 10Service de génétique médicale, Rennes, France, 11Service de Cesarean section after a full term pregnancy. His Apgar score was 10- génétique, CHU Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 12Medical Genetics, 10, birth weight 3000 g, height 50 cm and head circumference 36cm. Ashgrove House, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom. At the age of 2 months he was hospitalized due to atopic dermatitis The oral-facial-digital syndrome type VI (OFD VI) or Varadi syndrome and severe foliculitis on the face. Laboratory investigations revealed (OMIM 277170) is characterized by the association of malformations a low platelet count. Ophthalmological and otolaryngologic evaluation of the face, oral cavity and extremities, and distinguished from the 12 revealed optical nerve subatrophy and severe hearing impairment. other OFD syndromes by cerebellar and metacarpal abnormalities. Clinical examination revealed short stature, macrocephaly, short Cerebellar malformation in OFD VI syndrome has recently been neck, ocular hypertelorism, strabismus, epicanthal folds, slight described as a molar tooth sign (MTS), including OFD VI syndrome retrognathia, abnormal palmar creases. There were no cardiac, among the « Joubert syndrome related disorders » (JSRD). We report genitourinary and renal anomalies. Cerebral MRI was normal. Slight on the clinical and radiological data of 9 OFD VI cases with normal delay in psychomotor development was noted. According clinical signs OFD1 analysis and molecular investigations of six genes implicated diagnosis of Jacobsen syndrome was considered. in JSRD. Among the nine collected cases, two were fetuses and 8/9 FISH analysis using subtelomeric specific probes (ToTelVysionTM) cases were female. All patients presented oral malformations, facial for all long and short arms of chromosomes have been performed. dysmorphism and distal abnormalities including mainly polydactyly Subtelomeric FISH analysis has detected submicroscopic deletion at (70%), 50% in hands and 70% in feet. All patients presented with 11q25. Array CGH analysis for revealing the breakpoints and the size neurological symptoms with mental retardation (5/5 cases), from of the aberration is under the way. The present report emphasizes the moderate to severe impairment. Supratentorial abnormalities, importance of the FISH as rapid, precise and useful method in such brainstem malformations, cerebellar malformations with constant MTS cases with hearing impairment and trombocytopenia. and cystic dilatation of the posterior fossa were always present. In conclusion, the OFD VI syndrome defined by the association of OFD P02.128 features and cerebellar malformations presents with constant MTS A patient with features reminiscent of Johanson-Blizzard associated to constant brainstem and supratentorial malformation and syndrome and cortical malformations could definitively be considered as JSRD and an additional ciliopathy. P. Accorsi1, L. Giordano1, V. Uliana2, F. Forzano2, L. Pinelli1, G. Olioso1, M. Six of the nine causative genes implicated in JBS and JSRD (INPP5E; Zenker3, E. Di Maria2,4, F. Faravelli2; CORS2; TMEM67/MKS3; RPGRIP1L; ARL13B and CC2D2A) were 1Pediatric Neuropsychiatric Division, Spedali Riuniti, Brescia, Italy, 2Division studied in 5/8 families but no pathogenic mutation was found. The of Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Institute of Human responsible gene(s) probably interact(s) with OFD1 gene and the Genetics, University Hospital of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4Dept. of JSRD genes. Neuroscience Ophthalmology and Genetics, University of Genova, Genova, Italy. P02.130 Johanson-Blizzard syndrome (JBS; OMIM 243800) is a rare severe Aortic stenosis in a child with Joubert syndrome autosomal recessive syndrome, clinically characterised by distinctive and Related Disorders (JsRD) - a case Report and Review of facial features, with aplastic or hypoplastic alae nasi, and exocrine congenital Heart Defects Reported in the Human ciliopathies pancreatic insufficiency. The clinical spectrum of the disorder include N. Karp, S. Blaser, L. Grosse-Wortmann, S. Bowdin; others features as short stature, deafness, mental retardation, scalp The Hostpial for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada. defects, oligodontia, hypothyroidism, rectourogenital malformations, We report a case of a 2 year-old boy with classical features of JSRD ocular abnormalities, heart defects and central nervous system including oculomotor apraxia, postaxial polydactyly, episodes of rapid anomalies. Mutations in the UBR1 gene (15q14-q21) are the only breathing and developmental delay. Magnetic resonance imaging genetic cause of JBS known to date. demonstrated the pathognomonic “molar tooth sign”. In addition, the We describe a boy with a phenotype reminiscent of JBS, in particular child was also diagnosed with severe congenital aortic stenosis and facial features, abnormal hair pattern, micropenis and hypopituitarism, underwent valvular balloon dilatation. The results of gene sequencing and no signs of exocrine pancreas insufficiency at 12 years of age. of the AHI, TMEM67, CEP 290 and NPHP1 were negative for causative He also presented an ovalar skull defect (about 2 cm of maximum mutation. We are in the process of testing several other genes, diameter) in the frontal bone, normal IQ at two cognitive evaluations including CC2D2A, INPP5E, RPGRIPIL, ARL13B and TMEM216. (5 and 12 years of age) and cortical malformations (nodules of JSRD is one of a group of conditions known as ‘ciliopathies’, whose heterotopic gray matter, incomplete development of the right fronto- multi-organ involvement results from primary cilia dysfunction. Human temporal operculum, dysplastic cortex and mild cerebellar atrophy). ciliopathies present with distinct but overlapping phenotypes whose The parents reported a previous pregnancy with severe IUGR and core features include retinal degeneration, cystic disease of the liver, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. The molecular analysis of UBR1 gene pancreas and kidney, postaxial polydactyly and situs inversus. To date, did not identify mutations. there have not been other reported cases of aortic stenosis associated The proband could present either a novel condition partially overlapping with JSRD. Indeed, cardiac screening is not currently recommended in with JBS, genetically distinct and characterized by a normal pancreatic the management guidelines for individuals suspected of having JSRD. function, or a variant of JBS phenotype. We speculate that while the presence of congenital aortic stenosis in this child could be caused by an unrelated genetic mechanism, it could P02.129 also represent a phenotypic overlap with another ciliopathy, the Bardet OFD Vi syndrome with cerebellar malformations: clinical, Biedl syndrome, in which aortic stenosis is present in about 38% of radiological and molecular characterisation cases. V. Darmency-Stamboul1, L. Burglen2, N. Méjean3, B. Franco4, D. Rodriguez5, We also review the range of cardiac lesions reported to be present in D. Lacombe6, I. Desguerres7, V. Cormier-Daire8, B. Doray9, L. Pasquier10, M. all human diseases known to be ciliopathies, in order to assist with Gonzales11, J. Dean12, L. Faivre1, T. Attié-Bitach8, C. Thauvin-Robinet1; the investigation and management of individuals with a suspected or 1Centre de Génétique et Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Développement proven ciliopathy. et Syndromes Malformatifs », Dijon, France, 2Unité de génétique clinique et neurogénétique et Centre de Référence des Anomalies du cervelet CHU P02.131 Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 3Hopital d’Enfants. Centre de Génétique Neuroimaging, clinical and genetic analysis of novel and known et Centre de Référence « Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes congenital neurodevelopemental brain malformations followed Malformatifs », Dijon, France, 4Telethon Institute TIGEM, Naples, Italy, 5Service by deep sequencing de Neuropédiatrie et Centre de Référence des Anomalies du cervelet, CHU K. Kahrizi1, J. Jalal Shokouhi2, M. Garshasbi3, S. Abedini1, M. Hosseini1, Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 6Service de Génétique et Centre de M. Mohseni1, L. nouri1, F. Larti1, S. Arzhangi1, S. Banihashemi1, A. Kuss3, A. Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Hôpital Tzschach3, H. Ropers3, H. Najmabadi1; Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Necker - 1Genetics Research Center, USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Jam- Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 8Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Jam Imaging Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 99 Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. affecting approximately 1:30,000 live births. Key features are a Intellectual disability (ID) occurs as a symptom in heterogeneous characteristic face, growth retardation, developmental delay and groups of neurodevelopemental disorders. additional features such as hypodontia and persistent foetal fingertip Three of the most important contributions in understanding of the pads. Recently, a gene causing KS was identified through exome structural or functional brain defects are the capacity to perform detailed sequencing, reporting de novo mutations in the histone methyl neuroimaging, the ability to perform highly advanced genomic testing transferase (HMT) gene MLL2 in 66% of 53 patients with Kabuki and the accurate and professional characterization of the patients. syndrome (Ng et al., Nat Genet.42(9):790-3, 2010). We confirmed the Neuroimaging could provide more refined correlations between clinical pathogenic significance of this gene in KS in our first published series, and molecular evaluations, and could result in to the identification of demonstrating 76% MLL2 mutations in 45 KS cases (Paulussen et genetic causes of nurodevelopemental brain diseases. al, Hum Mutat. 32(2), 2011). In another series of 31 patients, we We have investigated one hundred mentally retarded patients clinically identified 21 additional novel MLL2 mutations. Thus the combined candidate for neurodevelopental brain malformations .Up to now we mutation yield of Sanger-based MLL2 exon sequencing for both series have performed neuroimaging for 60 families, which for some of is 55/76 = 72%, further supporting the major contribution of MLL2 them next generation sequencing have been recently done to identify mutations to the disease. We collected detailed clinical data of the genetic defects as well. 76 patients from both series (49 female, 27 male). Relevant clinical We could identify 15 families with cerebellar hypoplasia or atrophy, features were selected from the Dyscerne guidelines for KS (www. two families with Joubert syndrome type3 (with mutations in AHI1), two dyscerne.org) and interrogated using standardised questionnaires families with CP like syndrome and mutations in AP4A1 as a recently and checklists. Analysis focused on 7 clustered feature groups: facial, identified syndrome and two families with spinocrebellar ataxia type 14 growth and development, cardiovascular, sensory (vision, speech, syndrome (with mutations in PRKCG). hearing), skeletal/orthopaedic malformations and accessory minor Our findings suggest that more than thirty percent of autosomal feautures. Statistical analysis using SPSS v12 was used to correlate recessive ID (ARID) families with neurologic symptoms suffer from (clustered) clinical features to MLL2 mutation carrier status We will different types of neurodevelopemental brain malformations. present data from an extended pheno-genotype analysis, including the contribution of type-specific clustered mutations (i.e. nonsense, frame- P02.132 shift, missense and splice-site). microdeletion 10q23 and juvenile polyposis syndrome: a case report P02.134 T. Reimand1,2,3, O. Uibo2,4, K. Luts5, I. Talvik2,6, O. Zilina1,7, K. Muru1,2, K. “Kabuki make-up syndrome” - characterization of rare findings Õunap1,2; of 2 new patients 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, N. Rumiantsava1, H. Iljina2, I. Naumchik2, R. Chmel2; Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 1Republican Scientific and Practice Center, Minsk, Belarus, 2Republican 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Scientific and Practice Center “Mother&Child”, Minsk, Belarus. 4Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Tallinn Children`s “Kabuki make-up” syndrome (KS, MIM 14792) is a clinically distinct Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia, 6Children’s Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, MCA/MR disorder with uncertain inheritance (most cases are Austria, 7Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, sporadic). The main diagnostic criteria are well-known, but a phenotypic University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. spectrum of rare abnormalities have delineated. We present clinical Juvenile polyposis syndrome is a rare disease characterized by pictures of 2 new unrelated patients and characterize rare features in hamartomatous polyps in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. For clinical comparison with literature. Patients were a single child of young healthy diagnosis there has to be one of the three following findings: more nonconsanguineous couples. Pregnancy, labor were unremarkable. than five juvenile polyps of the colorectum; multiple juvenile polyps Growth delay, mental retardation, craniofacial dysmorphisms, heart throughout the GI tract; any number of juvenile polyps and a family involvement, fingertip pads were common. Karyotype (GTG): 46,XX; history. Approximately 20% of individuals with JPS have mutations in 46,XY. Metabolic disorders, prenatal infections were excluded. Case BMPR1A and approximately 20% have mutations in SMAD4. 1: Girl, 2 years old, showed typical facial appearance, dysmorphic We describe a 4-year-old boy who was born with congenital heart ears, preauricular fistulas, lower palpebra eversion, cleft palate, defect (atrioventricular septal defect), macrocephaly and dysmorphic diaphragmatic hernia, heart defect (ASD,VSD). Case 2. 12 years old features. His karyotype from lymphocytes was normal (46,XY). boy presented severe mental and speech delay, tetraparesis, brain According to his clinical picture (facial dysmophism, failure to thrive cyst, large prominent malformed ears, hearing loss, arched eyebrows, and heart anomaly) Noonan syndrome was clinically diagnosed at the long palpebral fissures, nystagmus, strabismus, bilateral coloboma age of 1 year although no mutations in PTPN11 and KRAS genes was of iris, chorioidea and optic nerves, myopia, cataracts, high palate, detected. At the same age the iron deficiency anaemia was diagnosed malocclusion of teeth, scoliosis, thorax deformation, flat feet. Heart and in the second year of life he has blood in the stool. At the age defect (AVC, VSD, insufficiency of valves). At the time of counseling of 4 years polyps were found all over the GI tract. His development mother was pregnant and underwent to standard combined prenatal was delayed, he was dysmorphic with macrocephaly (+4 SD), in MRT screening. No fetal malformations were detected. Families were of the brain showed mild ventriculomegalia. There was a suspicion reffered for genetic counseling due to affected child for diagnostics to 10q microdeletion according to his clinical picture. Whole-genome and prognoses. We have established KS (sporadic origin) based on genotyping was performed, using the Illumina platforms and 5,1Mb association of characteristic facial features, growth and mental delay. deletion in the region 10q23.1-23.3 was found. This finding was Uncommon malformations were preauricular fistulas, cleft palate, confirmed also by quantitative PCR analysis. In 10q23.1-23.3 region diaphragmatic hernia (case 1), ophtalmological abnormalities, scoliosis both BMPR1A and SMAD4 genes are located so the deletion is (case 2). Rare signs could not influence for diagnostics if main criteria responsible to the polyposis of the patients. were found. P02.133 P02.135 Extended genotype - phenotype correlation study in Kabuki MLL2 gene sequencing in a series of 79 patients with Kabuki syndrome patients comparing mLL2 mutation carriers vs. non- syndrome. carriers D. Geneviève1, D. Sanlaville2, C. Michot3, S. Poisson3, E. Sanchez1, E. Alix2, C. Schrander-Stumpel1, M. Blok2, D. Tserpelis1, C. Posma-Velter1, C. Rusu3, H. Kayirangwa3, C. Baumann4, A. Toutain5, N. Philip6, M. Holder7, L. Faivre8, S. K. Devriendt4, J. Schrander2, Y. Detisch1, B. Smeets1, A. Stegmann1, A. Odent9, M. Delrue10, M. Till2, M. Cordier2, M. Jacquemont11, A. Goldenberg12, Paulussen1; D. Lacombe10, B. Gilbert-Dussardier13, J. Roume14, A. Moncla6, M. Willems1,3, 1Dpt Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Dpt. Clinical Genetics, L. Pinson1, M. Le Merrer3, V. Cormier-Daire3, P. Sarda1, A. Pelet3, K. Le Quan Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Dpt Clinical Genetics, Iasi, Romania, 4Dpt Clinical Sang3, J. Amiel3, S. Lyonnet3; Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. 1Département de Génétique Médicale, CHRU Montpellier, Université Kabuki syndrome (KS, MIM: 147920) is a clinically recognizable Montpellier 1, Unité Inserm U844, CLAD, Montpellier, France, 2Département syndrome of multiple congenital anomalies and mental retardation de cytogénétique, Hospices civil de Lyon, Centre des neurosciences, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 100 Tiger, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 3Département de Genetics, University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Private Practice for Génétique, Unité Inserm U781, Hôpital Necker enfants Malades, CLAD, Paris, Human Genetics, Erfurt, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University of France, 4Département de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, CLAD, Paris, Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. France, 5Service de Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, CLAD, Tours, France, Epigenetic control of developmental processes is a fascinating 6Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital de la Timone, CLAD, Marseille, mechanism by which spatial and temporal expression of distinct genes France, 7Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CLAD, and pathways is regulated. Alterations of epigenetic mechanisms have Lille, France, 8Centre de Génétique, Hôpital d’enfant, CLAD, Dijon, France, been mainly associated with the pathogenesis of cancer, but recently 9Service de Génétique médicale, Hôpital Sud, CLAD, Rennes, France, also with the occurrence of congenital malformation syndromes. An up- 10Service de Génétique, Hôpital Pellegrin, CLAD, Bordeaux, France, 11Service to-date example is the identification of de novo dominant mutations in de Génétique, Hôpital saint Pierre, GH Sud Réunion, Ile de la Réunion, the MLL2 gene using a whole-exome sequencing strategy in patients France, 12Service de Génétique, CHU de Rouen, Rouen, France, 13Service de with Kabuki syndrome. Kabuki syndrome is a classical, clinically well- Génétique, CHU La Milétrie, CLAD, Poitiers, France, 14Service de génétique, known multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation syndrome, Hôpital Poissy-saint Germain, Poissy, France. mainly characterized by a distinct facial appearance in addition to Kabuki syndrome (KS, MIM 147920) is a MCA-MR syndrome e.g. developmental delay, short stature, persistent fingerpads, and characterized by a facial gestalt, intellectual disability, visceral and urogenital tract anomalies. In our study, we sequenced all 54 coding skeletal malformations and, postnatal short stature with overweight. exons of the MLL2 gene in 34 patients with Kabuki syndrome. We An exome sequencing strategy recently identified MLL2 as the identified eighteen distinct mutations in nineteen patients and twelve of disease-causing gene with heterozygous, de novo CDS mutations in thirteen tested de novo. Mutations included four nonsense mutations, about 70% of the patients fulfilling clinical diagnostic criteria. two splice-site mutations, six small deletions or insertions, and six Here we report the identification of an MLL2 mutation in 80% of the missense mutations. The mutations were located throughout the MLL2 cases from a series of 79 KS patients. All patients were sporadic gene without a clustering in specific exons of the gene or domains of except for one KS familial case with two sibs and their mother being the protein. Interestingly, genotype-phenotype comparison indicated affected. Mutations are spread throughout the gene with no hot-spot. a higher frequency of specific symptoms in MLL2-positive cases. Nonsense, frameshift ,splice site, Missense and in frame duplication/ Mutation-negative patients were subsequently tested for mutations deletion mutations were found in 15 (23%), 27 (42%), 2 (3%) 18 (28%), in 12 highly relevant functional candidate genes (e.g. MLL1, ASC2, and 2 (3%) patients respectively. ASH2, and WDR5) and we identified one alteration in MLL1 with a Phenotype/genotype correlations were investigated for yet unclear causative role. Our results indicate that MLL2 is the major intellectual disability, growth, seizure, cleft lip/palate, cardiac and gene for Kabuki syndrome with a wide spectrum of de novo mutations renal malformations, endocrine disorders (GH deficiency and and they provide evidence for further genetic heterogeneity. hyperinsulinism), and dysimmunity (immunoglobulin deficiency and auto-immune manifestations).We also compared patients with and P02.138 without MLL2 mutations in an attempt to delineate clinical, biological is Hardikar syndrome distinct from Kabuki (Niikawa-Kuroki) and skeletal features allowing to differentiating the 2 groups. syndrome? Report of a case with a novel mutation in the mLL2 gene. P02.136 I. Ejarque1, V. Uliana1, F. Forzano1, V. Viassolo1, C. Marciano1, G. Merla2, L. A novel de novo splice-site mutation in mLL2 gene in a patient Zelante3, E. Di Maria1,4, F. Faravelli1; with Kabuki syndrome 1Division of Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory E. Sarasola-Diez, C. Ruiz-Espinosa, M. Fernandez-Cuesta, J. Garcia, E. of Medical Genetics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Achalanbaso, B. Santos, M. J. García-Barcina; Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain. Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 4Dept. of Neuroscience Kabuki syndrome (KS, MIM# 147920) is a rare disorder characterized Ophthalmology and Genetics, University of Genova, Genova, Italy. by developmental delay, distinctive facial features and short stature. Kabuki syndrome (Niikawa-Kuroki syndrome) is characterised Recently, Ng et al. identified mutations in MLL2 gene as causative of by distinctive facial features, skeletal anomalies, dermatoglyphic KS. Up to date, approximately 65 mutations have been described in abnormalities, mental retardation, and growth deficiency. Recently, MLL2 gene related to KS, being most of them truncating mutations mutations in the MLL2 gene were identified as the genetic cause of with a de novo origin. Kabuki syndrome. Hardikar syndrome is a rare condition of unknown In this work, we describe the case of a 14 month old female patient cause in which cleft lip and palate, patchy pigmentary retinopathy referred to our Hospital in order to study her developmental delay and (‘‘cat’s paw’’) and obstructive liver disease are associated. growth retardation. She presented microcephaly, ventricular septal We describe a patient with typical facial features of Kabuki syndrome defect, hypotonia and joint laxity, persistence of fetal finger pads and who also developed a hepatoblastoma and retinal pigmentation a sacral dimple. She showed facial features as arched eyebrows anomaly cat’s paw type. The pathogenic c.11119C>T nonsense with sparseness of hairgrowth in the lateral half, long eyelashes, mutation in the exon 39 of MLL2 was found. By comparing our patient’s long palpebral fissures with an one third of the lower lid everted phenotype with the patients with Hardikar syndrome described to date, lateral, broad nasal tip and prominent ear lobes (anteverted and with we focussed on the overlapping features of the two syndromes. As a simplified morphology). She also showed feeding difficulties and conclusion, we suggest that Hardikar syndrome could be an extreme breast development from 3 months of age. of the wide phenotypic spectrum of Kabuki syndrome. In order to confirm the clinical suspect of KS we performed complete sequencing of MLL2 gene. This genetic study revealed the presence of P02.139 a splice site mutation, not previously reported in the literature. De novo A case with Kallmann syndrome and ichthyosis: not always a origin of the mutation was confirmed due to its absence in patient’s contiguous gene syndrome parents. Currently, RNA studies are being carried out to determine the E. Trevisson1, A. Casarin2, K. Ludwig3, C. Daolio2, L. Salviati2; causal mechanism of the mutation. 1Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Univeristy of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, P02.137 Padova, Padova, Italy, 3Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & Special A large mutation screen in patients with Kabuki syndrome Therapies, Pathology Unit, Padova, Italy. N. Bögershausen1,2, Y. Li1,2, Y. Alanay3, P. Simsek Kiper3, N. Plume1,2, K. Kallmann syndrome consists of congenital, idiopathic hypogonadotropic Keupp1,2, E. Pohl1,2, B. Pawlik1,2, M. Rachwalski1,2, E. Milz1,2, M. Thoenes1,2, B. hypogonadism and anosmia. The X-linked form is caused by mutations Albrecht4, M. Lehmkühler4, S. Demuth5, G. Utine3, K. Borduroglu3, G. Borck2, G. in the KAL1 gene on chromosome Xp22.3. Some patients have larger Gillessen-Kaesbach6, G. Yigit1,2, D. Wieczorek4, B. Wollnik1,2; deletions encompassing neighbouring genes and thus may present 1Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, with other clinical features, such as X-linked ichthyosis (XLI), which Cologne, Germany, 2Insititute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, results from steroid sulfatase deficiency due to loss of function Cologne, Germany, 3Pediatric Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, mutations of the STS gene at Xp22.3. Hacettepe University Medical Faculty, Ankara, Turkey, 4Institute of Human We report a 9 year and 7 month old boy who was diagnosed with Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 101 ichthyosis and Kallmann syndrome on the basis of hypogonadotropic Results: During hospitalization evolution were wavy; gaining slowly in hypogonadism, left kidney agenesis and hyposmia. Close examination weight; abnormal development: the absence of sucking reflex (gavage of the patient’s family history revealed an apparently X-linked pattern feeding); poor muscle tone; he required antibiotics for respiratory of ichthyosis with three affected male relatives of the mother. On problems, cardiologic and neurological treatment. examination auxological parameters were normal. Skin appeared dry Conclusions: The prognosis is variable, depending on the types of and scaly, particularly at limbs, ears, trunk and feet. His parents and complications. younger brother were phenotypically normal, without detectable renal Increased incidence of cardiac malformations requested cardiologic anomalies on ultarsounds. consult in every case because congenital heart disease is the major Array-CGH analysis on peripheral blood lymphocytes detected a cause for early mortality. deletion of about 500 kilobases, involving the 5’ region of the KAL1 The development and growth is usually delayed and often average gene, but not the STS gene; the same deletion was then confirmed in height and developmental milestones are not reached. the proband’s mother. Quantitative PCR analysis of the STS transcript showed normal expression levels and sequencing of the whole coding P02.142 region of the STS gene did not reveal any sequence variant. Laryngomalacia (Omim 150280): unexpectedly high frequency in Our excludes a potential positional effect of the genomic rearrangement population on the expression of the STS gene and supports the hypothesis of A. Y. Petrunitchev; additional loci for ichthyosis on the X chromosome. Saint-Petersburg medical academy of postgraduate studies, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. P02.140 The diagnosis of laryngomalacia is based on endoscopic revealing Lafora disease with a new inheritance of inspiratory collapse of laryngeal vestibule. Many investigators M. S. YILDIRIM1, M. BALASAR1, E. TUNCEZ1, B. O. GENC2, M. C. proved this disorder as the most common congenital malformation AVUNDUK3, A. G. ZAMANI1; of upper airways. Despite this, no one medical geneticist reasonably 1Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, regards this diagnosis as real genetic syndrome “laryngomalacia” Konya, Turkey, 2Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Department (OMIM 150280). No data on frequency of this syndrome in population of Neurology, Konya, Turkey, 3Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, appeared to be found in world literature. Department of Pathology, Konya, Turkey. Complex investigation in three groups was performed: 369 children A type of progressive myoclonic epilepsy called Lafora Disease (OMIM (1 to 38 months old) with congenital stridor (separation of genetic 254780) is a very rare autosomal recessive fatal genetic disorder syndrome), 10 children with laryngomalacia and no surgical treatment caused by mutations in laforin gene or malin gene. It is described as (follow up more than 5 years), 300 adults with absence of laryngeal starting in early adolescence as grandmal seizures and/or myoclonus problems in anamnesis (assessment of laryngeal vestibule). and characterised by the presence of periodic acid-Schiff-positive Identical findings, most close to genetic syndrome “laryngomalacia”, staining intracellular inclusion bodies. We report a patient diagnosed as were obtained in 77 cases of congenital stridor. They include typical Lafora disease with a possibility of an autosomal dominant inheritance. stridor, inspiratory supraglottic collapse, anatomic anomalies of A 25 years old girl reffered from neurology clinic to genetic clinic laryngeal vestibule, any of related pathology (gastroesophageal for pedigree analysis who has myoclonic and grandmal tonic-clonic reflux, failure to thrive, obstructive sleep apnea, chokes), typical seizures started at age 15, dysarthria, ataxia, visual hallucinations and course, family character (the last was found just in 27 cases). All depression. Intracellular PAS positive polyglucosan inclusion bodies cases with prominent catarrhal changes, neurological problems, other (Lafora bodies) has been showed in skin. Pedigree analysis revealed congenital malformations of upper airway were excluded. Thereby, an autosomal dominant inheritance which is not described in literature “laryngomalacia” (as syndrome) provides more than 40 % events of before. Patient’s parents aren’t consanguineous. Her father, aunt and congenital stridor. grandfather diagnosed as Lafore,too. So, we suggest that a new gene Ten cases of laryngomalacia were followed up till anatomic peculiarities or mutation may cause Lafore in this family . Further studies will be of laryngeal vestibule became stable (children reached 7 to 9 years done for highlighting the reason of this unexpected inheritance. old) and tried to find the same changes in 300 healthy adults. It had been successful in 13 (4 %) cases, that represents minimal frequency P02.141 of syndrome “laryngomalacia” in population. Langdon-Down syndrome in a newborn from mother with epilepsy - case report P02.143 D. Iacob1, M. Boia1, C. Ilie1, R. E. Iacob2, A. Manea1, M. Tira3; Leber congenital Amaurosis (LcA): development of a 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinical comprehensive molecular genetic test panel using next- Emergency County Hospital, Arad, Romania, 3Clinical Emergency Hospital for generation sequencing Children “L. Turcanu’, Timisoara, Romania. F. Coppieters1, B. De Wilde1, E. De Meester1, S. Lefever1, N. De Rocker1, C. Introduction: Down syndrome is the most common and known Van Cauwenbergh1, F. Pattyn1, B. P. Leroy1,2, J. Vandesompele1, E. De Baere1; chromosomal disorder. 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, This syndrome is characterized by mental retardation, facial 2Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. dimorphism and other phenotype distinctive traits. Leber Congenital Amaurosis (LCA) is associated with 16 genes, Many individuals with Down syndrome have also heart defects. accounting for 70% of cases. Generally, genetic testing is limited Objective: Describe a case of Down syndrome from mother with to screening of a selected number of mutations and/or Sanger severe epilepsy under treatment. sequencing of a subset of genes. We aimed to design an accurate, Material and methods: Medical history: the patient is a 2.500 gram fast and affordable molecular test for all known LCA genes using next- male newborn, GIV, PIV, delivered by cesarean section at 38 weeks generation sequencing. of gestation; his 38-year-old mother is known with: Severe epilepsy We developed a novel protocol consisting of qPCR, ligation, partially controlled by medication - 4 seizures/month (she was treated fragmentation, sequencing on an Illumina GAIIx, and data analysis by throughout pregnancy); his father is 41-year-old. NextGENe. As a proof-of-concept, ten LCA patients were included, five Physical examination admission revealed: serious general condition, of which had a known molecular defect. short neck, facial dismorphism: hypertelorism, upward slanting Using in-house primer design, 375 amplicons were developed to cover eyes, epicanthal folds, low set ears; perioral cyanosis; short hands; 236 exons and intron-exon boundaries of 16 genes (RD3, RPE65, hypospadias; poor muscle tone, poor reflexes; systolic murmur grade CRB1, MERTK, IQCB1, LRAT, LCA5, TULP1, IMPDH1, CEP290, III/VI. RPGRIP1, RDH12, SPATA7, AIPL1, GUCY2D and CRX). Following Cytogenetic analysis showed 100% of 21 trisomy; karyotype: 47XY, +21 amplification, ligation and shearing, amplicon pools were sequenced Imagistic examination in one GAIIx lane (1x100bp, indexing). This yielded sufficient coverage - Echocardiography: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; atrial and for 93-95% of exons. In total, 104/107 previously identified variants ventricular septal defect; aortic stenosis and tricuspid insufficiency. were detected, including the known mutations in the positive controls. - transfontanelar ultrasound : hypoxic ischemic encephalopathy. In addition, mutations were identified in 2/5 mutation-negative patients.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 102 In conclusion, we developed a cost-efficient workflow for parallel P02.146 sequencing of all known LCA genes, which enables sequencing Leigh syndrome in two iranian sisters with mild phenotype with of regions with variable length, such as exons, on a short-read novel missense mutation in sURF1 sequencer. The flexibility of this approach allows easy expansion with h. soltani1, a. kariminejad1, m. karimi1, a. baradaranfar1, b. bozorgmehr1, m. other genes, providing an excellent basis for molecular testing of other garshasbi1, h. hu2, a. kuss2, j. hoffer2, h. ropers2, a. tzschach2; retinal dystrophies. Finally, our protocol enables an early molecular 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Path. & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of diagnosis for LCA, which is essential with respect to reproductive Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Human Molecular Genetics, issues, prognosis and eligibility to gene therapy. Berlin, Germany. Leigh syndrome (LS) is a rare inherited neurometabolic disorder that P02.144 affects the central nervous system. This rapidly progressive disorder New primary mutations in iranian LHON patients usually occurs in infants while rarely in teenagers and adults. LS is a A. Arastehkani1, V. Ghodsinejadkalahroudi1, S. Dadgar1, O. Aryani1, M. heterogeneous condition with at least 3major causes , each defferent Houshmand1,2; modes of inheritance; X-linked, autosomal recessive and mitocondrial. 1Medical Genetic Dep. Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, SURF1 locus is identified to be affected in LS patients. Insertion/ 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, delition and missense/ nonsense mutations in exons and splicing sites Islamic Republic of Iran. in introns have been detected in LS patients. Missense mutations Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) is a maternally inherited have been reported to cause mild LS. Symptoms include hypotonia, blinding disease caused by missense mutations in the mitochondrial ataxia, seizures, brain stem and basal ganglia dysfunction, spasticity genes that encode subunits of NADH dehydrogenase (complex 1 of and ophtalmoplegia. Generalized weakness and episodes of lactic respiratory chain), include MT-ND (1-6). It is characterized by bilateral, acidosis may also be diagnosed. painless, subacute visual failure that develops during young adult life. We report a novel missense mutation in SURF1 locus Sequence analysis of the all ND genes was performed in 30 Iranian (c.679T>C,W227R) in two iranian sisters ages 25 and 27 years old patients with clinical symptoms of LHON. The result showed that 20% with ataxia (started from 3 years of age), disarthria, short stature and only have primary mutations (3460G>A, 11778G>A, 14484T>C) while normal cognition. To the best of our knowledge they are the longest 17% just present secondary mutations (4216Y>H, 4917N>D,...) ,of survivng LS patients. which only 6% have both types of mutations. 50% of patients with primary mutations showed 11778G>A while 33% have 3460G>A and P02.147 16% present 14484T>C mutation. Also 17% of patients are lack of LMNA mutation in Hutchinson-Gliford progeroid syndrome in any mutations and even polymorphisms and finally 46% revealed new association with strokes homoplasmic mutations (9949V>I, 13802T>I, 3893T>S) which were L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, J. Juan-Mateu1, E. Verdura1, V. Delgadillo2, M. not reported before and not existed in LHON patients with primary or/ Rodriguez1, M. Pineda2, E. Tizzano1, M. Baiget1, P. Gallano1; and secondary mutations. Because the mitochondrial genome contains 1Genetics Dept. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, U-705 CIBERER, a large number of apparently neutral polymorphisms that have little Barcelona, Spain, 2Pediatric Neurology Dept. Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, pathogenic significance, along with secondary homoplasmic mutations Barcelona, Spain. that do not have primary disease-causing effect, the pathogenic role Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome is a very rare but well of all newly discovered mutations must be rigorously established with characterized genetic disorder that causes premature ageing. The familial assay, investigation of nuclear genes and evaluation of other clinical features affect growth, skeleton, body fat, skin, hair and the diseases which have common symptoms with LHON . We believed cardiovascular system. It is caused by mutations in LMNA gene, the that these new mutation may have primary effect in LHON. most frequent being p.Gly608Gly (c.1824C>T) in exon 11. Here we present a four-year-old HGPS patient presenting a P02.145 heterozygous LMNA missense mutation in exon 2. This mutation is molecular-clinical correlation in a family with a novel located far from the C-terminal region implicated in the posttranslational heteroplasmic Leigh syndrome missense mutation in the processing of prelamin A, but it lies within the rod domain of lamin A/C mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase iii gene that represents a highly conserved domain specific to nuclear lamins. E. MKAOUAR-REBAI1, I. CHAMKHA1, E. ELLOUZE2, F. KAMMOUN2, C. We hypothesize that this region could be involved in early and severe TRIKI2, F. FAKHFAKH1; strokes in HGPS, as those presented by our patient. This is the first 1Laboratoire de Genetique Moleculaire Humaine. Faculte de Medecine de Sfax, report of an HGPS patient with Maghrebian origin. Sfax, Tunisia, 22. Service de Neurologie Infantile, C.H.U. Hédi Chaker de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia. P02.148 The clinical spectrum of mitochondrial disorders is extremely severe Lysosomal storage Disease of Liver in del(1)(p36): A New heterogeneous, affecting young and adult patients at any age, with Presentation involvement of a wide variety of tissues. More than 100 mitochondrial M. Haimi1, T. Iancu2, L. Shaffer3, A. Lerner4; DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been described in association with 1Children’s Health center, Clalit Health services, Haifa, Israel, 2Pediatric different neurological disorders and with respiratory chain deficiency. Research and Electron Microscopy Unit, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine Besides the most frequently reported mitochondrial tRNA mutations ,Technion, Haifa, Israel, 3Signature Genomic Laboratories,, Spokane, WA, and deletions, pathogenic mutations affecting structural genes of United States, 4Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition Unit, Carmel Medical mtDNA-encoded respiratory chain subunits, mainly cytochrome b Center, Haifa, Israel. and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) subunit genes, have been reported 1p36 deletion is the most common terminal deletion syndrome with in association with various mitochondrial disorders such as Leigh an estimated occurrence of 1:5000 live births. The deletion is of syndrome. Cytochrome c oxidase is an essential component of the variable size. It usually involves less than 10 Mb in the 1pter-1p36.23 mitochondrial respiratory chain that catalyzes the reduction of molecular interval. Variability of the phenotype is partially related to the extent of oxygen by reduced cytochrome c. In this study, the authors report the the deletion. Some children with a 1p36 deletion were reported with second mutation associated with Leigh syndrome in the blood and obesity and hyperphagia, raising the question of possible phenotypic buccal mucosa of 2 affected members of a Tunisian family. It was a overlap with Prader-Willi syndrome. Correlation between presence novel heteroplasmic missense mitochondrial mutation at nucleotide of obesity and the size of the deletion has only be documented in 9478 in the gene specifying subunit III of cytochrome c oxidase one case. We report an 11-year-old girl with 1p36 deletion and the substituting the valine at position 91 to alanine in a highly conserved classical dysmorphological features. In late infancy, she developed amino acid. It was found with a high mutant load in tissues derived from an uncontrolled voracious appetite, overweight, truncal obesity endoderm (buccal mucosa) and mesoderm (blood). However, it was and elevated serum transaminases. Liver biopsy disclosed severe nearly absent in tissue derived from ectoderm (hair follicles). It was steatosis. The hepatocytes contained accumulation of lipofuscins. absent in 120 healthy controls, and PolyPhen analysis showed that the Lipolysosomes were abnormally numerous and extremely enlarged. hydropathy index changed from +1.276 to +0.242, and the number of These features have not been previously reported in 1p36 deletion. structures of the 3D protein decreased from 39 to 32. Oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis showed a subtelomeric 2.2 Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 103 Mb deletion at 1p36.33p36.32. This suggests that this chromosome abrogation of MAOA since 1993, when Brunner et al. reported a Dutch segment is a critical region for obesity and hyperphagia. The nondysmorphic kindred with borderline mental retardation, prominent accumulation in the liver with abnormal ultrastructure may be an behavioral disturbances and an inactivating point mutation in MAOA. additional feature of this form of syndromal obesity. 1p36 deletion The behavioral problems noted in our proband seems similar to the syndrome should be considered in patients with obesity, hyperphagia symptoms in the Dutch kindred. The subjects in the original family and liver fat accumulation. were not obese, but other studies have suggested an association between low MAOA activity and increased BMI. P02.149 mabry syndrome: the evidence for genetic heterogeneity P02.151 M. D. Thompson1, T. Roscioli2, M. N. Nezarati3, E. Sweeney4, P. M. Meinecke5, Marfan syndrome: role of inflammation in dilatation or P. M. Krawitz5,6, C. C. Mabry7, D. Horn6, R. Londono-Mendoza2, H. van dissection of the aorta Bokhoven2, F. Stephani2, C. C. Marcelis2, D. E. Cole1, A. Munnich8, F. J. R. Zhuraev, D. Zerbino; Sharom9, H. B. Brunner2, D. M. Andrade10; Lviv National Medical University after Danylo Halytski, Lviv, Ukraine. 1Dept. Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Background. The primary cause of early death in untreated Marfan Canada, 2Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University syndrome (MFS) patients is aortic dilatation and dissection. A defective Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Division of Clinical and gene causing MFS, FBN1, encodes for an extracellular matrix protein Metabolic Genetics, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Royal called fibrillin-1, a component of the elastic fiber system. The fibrillin-1 Liverpool Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5Medizinische deficient mouse, an accepted model of MFS that recapitulates the Genetik, Altonaer Kinderkrankenhaus, Hamburg, Germany, 6Institut für cardiovascular phenotype, shows medial degeneration in the aortic Medizinische Genetik, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, wall that was surprisingly associated with inflammatory infiltrates prior 7Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Berlin, to dilatation or dissection. Germany, 8Department of Genetics, North York General Hospital, Toronto, Methods. We examined 13 patients with MFS after aortic valve- ON, Canada, 911Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University replacing root operations. Full aortic segments and blood samples of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada, 10Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, were collected from patients undergoing repair. Immunohistochemistry Canada. staining was performed using antibodies directed against markers of Mabry syndrome (hyperphosphatasia with developmental lymphocytes and macrophages. disability) was first described by Mabry et al. in 1970 a single family Results. Immunohistochemisty demonstrated that the media and (OMIM#239300) [1970]. At first considered rare, our work to describe adventitia had increased numbers of T lymphocytes and macrophages, the disorder has led to recruitment of over twenty families world-wide. indicating the role of inflammation in the onset and progression Descriptions of this cohort have resulted in the recognition of several dissection of the aorta. Macrophages were significantly increased in other salient features of the disorder including: a characteristic facial the aortic media with infiltrated aneurysms. CD3+ cells were localized dysmorphology (hypertelorism, a broad nasal bridge and a tented in the media and surrounding the vasa vasorum in the adventitia. mouth); subtle hand bone abnormalities (variable shortening of middle Transmural inflammation was associated with increased aortic external and distal phalanges) and nerve abnormalities (plaques disrupting diameter, intimal thickening, preserved vascular smooth muscle cell Schwann cells). Like many infantile metabolic storage disorders, density, and decreased matrix proteins. We found elevated level of seizures associated with Mabry syndrome have an onset in the first TNF-α, IL-2, IL-6, IL-8 in 12 patients. year of life. Persistently elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) Conclusions. These results indicate that infiltration of inflammatory levels are now known to be associated with abnormalities of the cells contributes to the pathogenesis of MFS. Immune mediated aortitis phosphoinositol glycan (PIG) anchor, which was found to be disrupted may contribute to pathogenesis of dilatation or dissection of the aorta in eight of these families. Lysosomal storage material detected in in MFS formation involve inflammatory infiltrates in the aortic media. patients with Mabry syndrome has been putatively identified as Superantigen-driven stimulation of T lymphocytes may contribute to glycolipid material. As PIGV mutations have not been identified in all the initial immune response. patients with a clinical diagnosis of Mabry syndrome, we describe this cohort. As twenty genes are integral to PIG anchor synthesis, PIGV P02.152 mutations negative patients or those with vacuolar plaques may result mccune-Albright syndrome - importance of active screening for from disruptions to other genes in the PIG anchor biosynthesis pathway. complications This work will assist in elucidating the inborn errors of metabolism that A. Chirita Emandi1, M. Puiu2, I. Micle2; underlie Mabry syndrome. 1„Louis Turcanu” Emergency Hospital for Children Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2„Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, P02.150 Timisoara, Romania. Identification of an additional putative Brunner syndrome family McCune-Albright syndrome (MAS) is classically defined by the clinical in southern sweden by means of genomic microarray analysis triad of fibrous dysplasia of bone, café-au-lait skin spots, and precocious T. Jonson1, M. Bidgoli1, I. Sjöberg2, M. Soller1, H. Ehrencrona1; puberty. MAS is a rare disease with estimated prevalence between 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, Lund University, Lund, Sweden, 2Dept of Pediatrics, 1/100,000 and 1/1,000,000. We present a case of a 9 year old girl Lund University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. who shows deformations of the hand bones, 2 café-au-lait skin spots We have identified a Swedish family with a partial deletion of the MAOA and development of breast tissue. Her height and weight is normal gene located on the X-chromosome. MAOA (monoamine oxidase for age, wihle the bone age is slightly advanced.The endocrinological A) is involved in the degradation of neurotransmitters. The detected examination showed elevated prolactin and estrogen, with other deletion presumably leads to a complete lack of functional MAOA in hormones in normal range. All other investigations are in normal male carriers. range. GH (growth hormone) and prolactin excess are common (21%), The proband in the present study is a 13-year-old boy who was but the signs and symptoms can be very subtle. Most GH secreting subjected to genomic microarray analysis using the Affymetrix tumors are co-secretors of GH and prolactin, GH excess can worsen Cytogenetics Whole-Genome 2.7M Array due to a history of behavioral craniofacial bone disease and hyperprolactinemia can independently problems including social interaction and slow learning. His intelligence have an adverse affect on gonadal function. Consequently, it becomes has been classified within normal range, but he has a diagnosis of important to assess prolactin level and have an oral glucose tolerance ADHD with symptoms in line with DAMP (deficit of attention, motor test to look for non-suppressible GH at least once, in order to make the control and perception). He is obese with BMI 33,8. The proband also diagnosis and treat. has a brother with a diagnosis of ADHD. We detected a 1.2 Mb deletion on Xp11.3-p11.4 in the proband, including the first three exons of the gene MAOA as the only known gene. An identical deletion was detected in the boy’s mother. Functional analyses and extended characterization of the family is ongoing. This study describes the first kindred with an isolated functional Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 104 P02.153** P02.154 meier-Gorlin syndrome: Genotype-phenotype characterization Audiological caracteristics of syndromic and nonsyndromic of 23 patients with mutations in five separate genes of the pre- patients carrying mtDNA 3243A>G mutation replication complex K. Iwanicka Pronicka1, A. Pollak1, A. Skorka1,2, U. Lechowicz1, M. Rzeski1, L. S. A. de Munnik1, L. S. Bicknell2, S. Aftimos3, J. Y. Al-Aama4,5, M. Bober6, A. Y. Korniszewski1, R. Ploski2; Edrees7, M. Feingold8, A. Fryer9, L. H. Hoefsloot1, D. Johnson10, J. M. Opitz11, B. 1Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical J. Otten12, A. Ross13, P. Sarda14, J. Schoots1, K. I. Temple15, A. Toutain14, C. A. University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Wise16, M. Wright17, N. V. A. M. Knoers18, H. G. Brunner1, A. P. Jackson19; Background: Patients harbouring the 3,243A>G mutation in tRNA 1Department of Human Genetics, Institute for Genetics and Metabolic Disease, leucine (UUR) gene (MTTL 1) frequently develop multisystemic Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, disease, however they may present an isolated sensorineural hearing 2Medical Research Council (MRC) Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics loss (SNHL). and Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Aim: To compare audiological parameters of syndromic and Kingdom, 3Northern Regional Genetics Service, Auckland Hospital, Auckland, nonsyndromic patients carrying the 3,243A>G mutation. New Zealand, 4Department of Genetic Medicine, Faculty of medicine, King Methods: Study group include 32 patients (16 probands) carrying the Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 5Princess Al Jawhara Center of 3,243A>G mutation. We analysed DNA samples isolated from blood Excellence in the Research of Hereditary Disorders, King Abdulaziz University, leukocytes, hair follicles, urinary sediments, buccal mucosa and nails Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 6Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, A.I. of each patient. DuPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, DE, United States, 7Princess Al Molecular search for the 3,243A>G mutation was performed on Jawhara Center for Excellence in the Research of Hereditary Disorders, RealTime PCR using TaqMan Assay; a heteroplasmy level was King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 8National Birth Defects assessed using PCR-RFLP analysis. Center, Waltham, MA, United States, 9Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Results: Among 16 nonsyndromic patients (11 women), aged from 6 Liverpool Children’s Hospital, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 10Sheffield Children’s to 62 yrs; mean age 19 yrs postlingual, stable SNHL or normal hearing Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 11Human Genetics and Obstetrics was frequently observed. and Gynecology, University of Utah, Medical Genetics, Salt Lake City, UT, 17 syndromic patients (10 women) aged from 12 to 75 yrs; mean age United States, 12Department of pediatric endocrinology, Radboud University 39 yrs mainly present poslingual progressive SNHL or retrocochlear Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 13Department of Medical hearing loss. Tinnitus was reported by five, vertigo by six patients. Genetics, Medical School, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 14Service Maternal inheritance was revealed in all families but one. de Génétique Médicale, centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement Conclusions: Patients with postlingual isolated SNHL demonstrating CHRU de Montpellier, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, maternal inheritance require a diagnosis for the 3243A>G mutation. 15Division of Human Genetics, University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, Progressive postlingual SNHL in syndromic patients seems to be a Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 16Sarah M. good phenotypic marker of mitochondrial disorder. and Charles E. Seay Center for Musculoskeletal Research, Texas Scottish Rite Hospital for Children, Dallas, TX, United States, 17Northern Genetics P02.155 service, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Trust, Newcastle Upon Tyne, Evidence of germinal mosaicism associated with MEN1 gene United Kingdom, 185Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre deletions: implications for genetic counseling Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 19Medical Research Council (MRC) Human L. Dix1, O. Bonny2,3, J. Blouin4, M. Addor1, F. P. Pralong5,6, M. Matter7, J. S. Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, Western General Beckmann1,8, S. Giraud9, F. Fellmann1; Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 1Service of Medical Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of Meier-Gorlin syndrome (MGS) is an autosomal recessive disorder Internal Medicine, Service of Nephrology,CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3DPT, characterized by microtia, patellar aplasia/hypoplasia and short UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Service of Genetic Medicine, HUG, Genève, stature. Additional common features encompass a characteristic facial Switzerland, 5Service of Endocrinology, Diabetology and Metabolism, CHUV, appearance, lung and genitourinary malformations. Lausanne, Switzerland, 6UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 7Department of General Recently, we identified mutations in five genes from the pre-replication Surgery, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8Department of Medical Genetics, complex, crucial in cell cycle progression and growth, in 23/38 (61%) UNIL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9Hospices Civils, Lyon, France. individuals with MGS. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant Here, we report on genotype-phenotype studies in this unique cohort disorder characterized by combinations of more than 20 endocrine (13 females, 10 males; age 3 months - 47 years). The triad of microtia, and non-endocrine tumours. The penetrance is 95% by age 40 years. absent/hypoplastic patellae and short stature was observed in 60% of Germline MEN1 mutations are identified in about 85% of individual with individuals. Microtia and short stature with normal patellae was seen familial MEN1 syndrome, large deletions are rare. We report 2 families in 15%; microtia and abnormal patellae without short stature in 15%; with MEN1 gene deletions and evidence of germinal mosaicism. short stature only in 10%. Family 1: MEN1 was diagnosed in a 30-y-o male. Family history was Intrauterine growth retardation was present in 76%, postnatal growth negative. MEN1 sequence analysis failed to detect any mutation. Few retardation in 86% and microcephaly in 50%. Compound heterozygous years later, his 54-y-o father was referred for MEN1. Quantitative or homozygous mutations were detected in ORC1 (39%), ORC4 analysis of MEN1 in the proband showed a heterozygous deletion of (13%), ORC6 (13%), CDT1 (31%) and CDC6 (4%). Seventeen exons 2-10. Father’s blood and saliva DNA analysis was repeatedly different mutations were identified: ten missense, three nonsense, two negative. The mutation was present in tumor sample. Predictive frameshift, two splice-site mutations. genetic testing in proband’s siblings identified one 30-y-o carrier. Pre-replication complex mutations appear to be associated with a Family 2: MEN1 was diagnosed in two adolescent sisters. MEN1 broader phenotypic spectrum than previously expected. No clear analysis failed to detect any mutation. Several years later, quantitative genotype-phenotype association was observed, although compound analysis of MEN1 showed a heterozygous deletion of exons 1-6. At heterozygous frameshift mutations seem to give rise to a more that time, family history revealed a paternal uncle was treated for HPT. severe phenotype compared to homozygous mutations, particularly Genetic analysis showed that he and the asymptomatic 45-y-o father in ORC1 and ORC4. Homozygous missense mutations in CDC6, carried the exons 1-6 MEN1 deletion. QMPSF in their mother sample however, resulted in more severely impaired growth than compound showed ratio compatible with mosaicism. heterozygous nonsense mutations in CDT1. Further studies in MEN1 somatic mutation is assumed in sporadic MEN1 cases with additional individuals are needed to substantiate these observations negative blood analysis. To our knowledge, we present the first and to understand the role of the separate genes in normal and evidence of germinal mosaicism in MEN1. In both cases, MEN1 disrupted organ development. mutations are deletions events, associated with a lower penetrance. This observation raised questions regarding genetic counseling in MEN1 families.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 105 P02.156 P02.158 Approach to molecular screening in Polish patients with hearing Hereditary palmoplantar keratoderma and hearing loss with loss mutations in GJB2 gene - A case report A. Pollak1, U. Lechowicz1, M. Mueller-Malesinska1, A. Skorka2, M. Oldak3, G. R. Pourová, M. Malíková, M. Havlovicová, A. Křepelová; Kostrzewa4, K. Iwanicka-Pronicka1, L. Korniszewski1, H. Skarzynski1, R. Ploski4; Dept. of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University in Prague, Second 1Institute of Phisiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2II Medical Faculty and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, Mutations in the GJB2 gene, encoding Connexin-26, are the most 3Department of Histology and Embryology, Medical University of Warsaw, common cause of nonsydromic hearing loss with autosomal recessive Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of inheritance (DFNB1), but also cause autosomal dominant hearing Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. loss - isolated (DFNA3) or syndromic (KID, HID, Vohwinkel and Bart- Background: In European countries, about 2/1000 children suffer from Pumphrey syndromes). severe congenital or prelingually hearing loss, another 1 / 300 children We present a Czech family where 3 members suffer from hearing loss are born with a minor degree of hearing loss. Causes of hearing (HL) and palmoplantar keratoderma (PK). loss are complex and in most cases harbor a combination of genetic The proband is a 22 year-old boy who presents late-onset epilepsy and environmental factors. It is assumed that approximately 60% of in addition to HL and PK. Since the first year of age the proband has isolated cases of hearing loss are genetic. For this type of hearing loss shown several squamous focuses on his hands, feet, knees, and most often are responsible mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 genes. The elbows. The skin lesions are progressive and have been becoming optimal diagnostic algorithm for this group of patients can reduce the psoriasis-like and ichtyosis-like in character. The HL was verified at cost of conducting effective research and genetic counseling. the age of 4, with a strong indication that it is congenital. The epilepsy Aims: The aim of the study was to present an algorithm of molecular appeared at the age of 12, presenting itself as motoric seizures during investigations in patients with a suspicion of a genetic based hearing sleep, and is well balanced with Valproic Acid monotherapy. There is loss. no pathology on MRI brain scan. Materials: 6882 DNA samples retrieved from patients suffering from Mother and sister of the proband suffer from HL and PK, but not bilateral hearing loss prelingual and postlingual, varying in degree from epilepsy. Proband’s father is deaf after early meningitis and has no mild to severe. Only non consanguineous patients (probands) were skin problems. All grandparents are hearing well and without any skin included for the analysis. lesions. Methods: Mutliplex PCR test for 5 common Polish GJB2 mutations, We found two GJB2 gene mutations in our patient - p.Arg75Trp direct sequencing of coding exon of GJB2 gene, rtPCR test for the (c.223C>T) and p.Met34Thr (c.101T>C). The first mutation has presence of IVS1+1G>A mutation, AS-PCR for the detection of GJB6 already been described as a pathogenic dominant mutation; however, D13S1830 deletion, real time PCR for the detection of MELAS 3243 the role of the second one still remains unclear. With regards to the A>G mutation. low-compliance of the family, all molecular-genetic analysis are not Results: Molecular analysis, performed step by step, revealed yet completed. presence of the two pathogenic mutations in a group of 720 among Supported by MZ0FNM2005, IGA NS 9913-4. 4103 analyzed probands. Conclusions: Application of the optimal algorithm of molecular tests P02.159 can detect the cause of hearing impairment in about 18% of patients. contributions about the incidence of hearing-speaking disorders in a population with mental deficiency P02.157 I. Tomulescu, C. Pusta; Detection and assessment of mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania. in patients with mELAs disease Deafness is determined in many cases by genetic causes. For U. Lechowicz1, A. Pollak1, K. Iwanicka-Pronicka1, A. Skorka2, M. Mueller- example, it is estimated that one of 1000 children has hereditary Malesinska1, M. Franaszczyk3, H. Skarzynski1, R. Ploski3; deafness. In 50% of cases, is a genetic cause, but is important 1Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2II to mention that in different families can occur diverse types of Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, inheritance. We investigated 596 children interned in Neurology 3Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, and Psychiatry Clinical Hospital of Oradea between 1999 and 2001 Poland. period. The methods utilised were cytogenetic, clinical investigations, Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and strokelike somatometrical, statistical, psychiatric investigation and hearing tests, episodes -MELAS, is one of several mitochondrial diseases. Clinical too. There were realised family investigations and were constructed features also may include: short stature, seizures, episodic vomiting, pedigrees. We recorded 50 cases of hearing-speaking disorders in sensorineural hearing loss and others. Symptom onset can occur studied population, which means a frequency of 8,39%. Eight cases protean, also incomplete or milder phenotypes are recognized. (16%) of all cases recorded, have no mental deficiency associated. We studied 1478 Polish subject recruited from a consecutive cohort of Over 10% of the cases with mental deficiency have hearing-speaking 7000 treated at the Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing disorders. It were observed increased frequencies in groups with between 2000 and 2010. Patients were unrelated and suffered from moderate and severe mental deficiency. The frequency of hearing- nonsyndromic, postlingual, bilateral sensorineural HI ranging from mild speaking disorders in group with severe mental deficiency could be to profound. All individuals were previously tested for the presence of more increased because of the young age of children, when they common GJB2/GJB6 mutations. can’t cooperate with the person who investigate them. Most of cases Searching for the mutation A3243G was performed using different proceed from rural area, perhaps because of agglomeration of some molecular techniques (direct sequencing, RealTime TaqMan Assay, mutant genes. We could assume an autosomal recessive or dominant PCR-RFLP, dHPLC). inheritance. Also, we could assume an X-linked inheritance. MELAS mutation was found in 15 unrelated patients. Tests were conducted also in their family members, among whom another 13 P02.160 cases of MELAS were found. study about the incidence of the congenital bony abnormalities Molecular tests were performed on DNA samples isolated from blood in a population with mental deficiency leukocytes, buccal swabs, hair follicles, urine sediment cells and nails. C. Pusta, I. Tomulescu; In our group of MELAS patients A3243G mutation ratio is significantly University of Oradea, Oradea, Romania. higher in urine than in blood and other type of material. Measurement It is known that genetic disorders cause mental disorders and of A3243G mutation ratio in urine is a non-invasive, convenient and malformative disorders, including bony abnormalities.The most rapid method with its diagnostic meaning superior to blood testing. frequent congenital bony disorders observed in the studied population Direct sequencing might not be sufficiently sensitive method for are: congenital hip sprain, club foot, flat foot and vertebral column detecting A3243G mutation. abnormalities. We investigated 596 children interned in Neurology and Psychiatry Clinical Hospital of Oradea between 1999 and 2001 period. In 596 children, 393 associated different levels of mental deficiency. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 106 The methods utilised were cytogenetic, clinical, statistical, psychiatric individuals a specific cause can not be identified. Aim of this study investigation and were constructed pedigrees. We reported 81 cases was determining chromosomal aberrations in patients with mental of congenital bony disorders. In this total, 55 cases (67,9%) associated retardation by scanning whole genome. mental deficiency. In general, the frequency in rural has a meaningful materials and methods: Peripheral blood samples were collected increase than in urban. In studied population, 13 cases associated from 52 individuals between the ages of 0-18 with mental retardation mild mental deficiency, 10 cases associated moderate level of mental regardless of gender. Genetic deletions/duplications were detected on retardation and 32 cases associated severe mental deficiency. Most DNA level using array-CGH method. Isolated gDNAs from peripheral of cases proceed from rural area. The most often is observed the blood samples were hybridized on CytoSure Syndrome Plus(v2) congenital vertebral column disorders. The frequency is meaningfully Microarray 4x44K microchips. Obtained data were analyzed using increased in children group with severe mental deficiency. This CytoSure Analysis Software v.2.0.8. result can be explained because of the existence of congenital bony Results:Deletions and duplications with various sizes were detected abnormalities, such as common traits in chromosomal syndromes in various regions of the genome on 38(73%) patients. No deletions/ or other syndromes which cause plurimalformative phenotypes duplications were found on 14(27%) patients. Deletions/duplications associated with mental deficiency.Cranial and facial dysmorphism with different sizes were found in different parts of the genome on has a frequency of 13%. This frequency is increased in the group of 7(70%) of non-syndromic mental retardation patients, 22 (78.6%) of severe mental deficiency. These abnormalities could be caused by patients with mental retardation associated with dysmorphic findings, some genetic disorders which cause bony abnormalities, too. The (87.5%) of patients with mental retardation accompanied by epilepsy explanation of these frequencies is the presence in the children group and 2(33.3%) of patients with mental retardation associated with with associated mental deficiency of many genetic disorders which epilepsy and dysmorphism. could cause congenital abnormalities. conclusion:The diagnostic yield of array CGH in general population of individuals with mental retardation is at least twice as high as P02.161 that of standart GTG-banded karyotyping and fluorescence in situ Deletion 10q24.32 in a patient presenting with a sms-like hybridization (FISH) in terms of high resolution. The limited ability phenotype and the undetectable level of L-DOPA in the to differentiate between inherited copy number variations (CNV) cerebrospinal fluid which cause abnormal phenotypes and rare variants unrelated to E. Obersztyn1, K. Derwińska1, H. Mierzewska2, A. Goszczańska2, K. clinical alterations currently constitutes a limitation for guiding genetic Kuśmierska3, E. Szczepanik2, Z. Xia4, A. Kutkowska-Kaźmierczak1, E. Bocian1, counselling. T. Mazurczak1, P. Stankiewicz1,4; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, P02.163 Poland, 2Clinic of Neurology of Children and Adolescents, Institute of Mother investigation of microdeletion syndromes by mLPA in iranian and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Biochemistry and Experimental patients with mental Retardation Medicine, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, H. Loghmani Khouzani, A. Kariminejad, R. Kariminejad, H. Imanian, H. 4Department of Molecular & Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Najmabadi; Houston, TX, United States. Kariminejad - Najmabadi Pathology & Genetic center, Tehran, Islamic Republic aCGH has significantly improved the ability to identify cryptic of Iran. chromosome rearrangements in patients with MR/MCA, dysmorphism, Mental Retardation (MR), defined as a state of developmental deficit, and behavioral abnormalities. We report on a 17-year-old patient with results in significant limitation of intellect and poor adaptation behavior. a Smith-Magenis syndrome-like phenotype, including mild intellectual Karyotyping is a usual method for primary screening of MR patients, impairment, hyperactivity, aggressiveness, and self-destructive however, detection of small duplications and deletions require a more behavior. Sleep disturbances and nocturnal cry have been noted sensitive technique. Because of the large number of known genes from childhood. After an episode of seizures at 10 years, antiepileptic involved in MR, mutation screening in all of them is not a feasible treatment was successfully initiated. No mutation or exonic deletion and cost effective approach. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe were found in RAI1. Using a clinical oligonucleotide aCGH, we have Amplification (MLPA) has the ability of relative quantification of several identified a unique ~ 317 kb hemizygous deletion at chromosome target DNA sequence in a single reaction by using specific probes for 10q24.32 harboring seven genes, including transcription factor PITX3 each target. that is known to regulate the development of midbrain dopamine (DA) During the last year a total of 71 patients with dysmorphism and MR neurons together with other transcription factors. Pitx3-/- mice have a have been referred to us. Initially, all patients were clinically evaluated selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra, leading and karyotype analyses were performed. All of the patients had normal to the significantly reduced DA levels in the nigrostriatal pathway and karyotypes. By using MLPA method, we investigated duplications and manifest anomalous striatum-dependent cognitive impairment and deletions for 21 different microdeletion syndromes by MRC-Holland abnormal lens development. Heterozygous missense mutations in kit. We identified 10 (~14%) aberrations as follow (table): PITX3 have been reported in patients with dominant congenital cataract miller- and anterior segment mesenchymal dysgenesis. Interestingly, no eye syndrome Williams sotos DiGeorge Angelman Others Dieker anomalies were found in our patient and analysis of neurotransmitters chromosomal 7q11.23/ 17p13.3/ 5q35.3 22q11.21/ 4p16.3/ in his cerebrospinal fluid revealed undetectable level of L-DOPA and 15q12/ del region del del / del del dup significantly decreased levels of catecholamine metabolites. Based on No. of Probes 3 2 2 3 4 2 our data and the results of the experiments with dopamine agonists in the Pitx3 deficient mice, we suggest that the abnormal neurobehavioral No. of patients 3 3 1 1 1 1 phenotype in our patient, likely resulting from the decreased levels of detected dopamine, could be mitigated with tetrahydrobiopterin and/or L-DOPA. Supported by grant R13-0005-04/2008 from Polish Ministry of Science Our MLPA results indicate a high degree of concordance between the and Higher Education. clinical data, and the genotype. We suggest MLPA as a first screening method for patients suffering from MR with normal karyotypes. In the P02.162 case, in which clinical findings was not completely compatible with the Detection of deletions and duplications that cause mental microdeletion syndrome detected by MLPA, array CGH was performed retardation by whole genome array cGH revealing a larger duplication/deletion in the critical region. D. Sunnetci1, N. Cine1, B. Kara2, S. Eren1, B. Enguzel1, H. Savli1; Key words: Mental Retardation, MLPA, Iran 1Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Department of Child Health and Diseases, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey. introduction:Mental retardation is one of the most common developmental disorder and its prevelance is known as %1-3 percentage of population. In the majority of mentally retarded Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 107 P02.164 and technical limitations of routine cytogenetics. Methods for molecular clinical features associated with submicroscopic chromosomal karyotiping are invaluable in clarifying the etiology of MR/DD and the aberrations in patients with mental retardation/ developmental approach of “reverse phenotypics” broadens our understanding of delay human genome architecture and functioning. E. Preikšaitienė1,2, J. Kasnauskienė1,2, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, V. Dirsė1,2, L. Cimbalistienė1,2, A. Utkus1,2, A. Matulevičienė1,2, B. Tumienė1,2, P. Magini3, J. P02.166 Baptista3, P. Patsalis4, A. Kurg5, V. Kučinskas1,2; Fryns mesomelic dysplasia: a new familial case 1Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, A. Toutain1,2,3, B. de Courtivron4, C. Bonnard4,2; 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital, Vilnius, Lithuania, 1Service de Génétique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire, Tours, France, 3University of Bologna, Unit of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 4Department of 2Université François Rabelais, Tours, France, 3INSERM U930, Tours, France, Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, 4Service de Chirurgie Orthopédique Pédiatrique, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tours, France. Tartu, Estonia. Mesomelic dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of inherited Objective: To compare the spectrum of congenital anomalies (CA) and skeletal dysplasias among which Leri-Weill dyschondrosteosis minor anomalies (MA) between mentally retarded/developmentally caused by SHOX haploinsufficiency and its homozygous form, delayed (MR/DD) patients with clinically significant CNVs and MR/DD Langer mesomelic dysplasia, are the most frequent and best patients with normal molecular karyotyping results. known. In addition to Kantaputra dysplasia, an autosomal dominant Methods: Molecular karyotyping using oligo arrayCGH and SNP form caused by duplications of the HOXD locus on chromosome microarrays was performed on 114 MR/DD patients with/without CA 2q, various unclassified forms of unknown cause, mostly with a and dysmorphic features. Based on the molecular karyotyping results, unique phenotype in single families, have been reported. In these patients were divided into two groups. Group A consisted of patients observations, mesomelic dysplasia of the upper limbs was associated with clinically significant CNVs (N=16) while group B consisted of with involvement of the lower limbs and in most cases with other patients with normal molecular karyotyping results (N=98). CA and MA skeletal problems. However, in 1988, Fryns et al., described a female were coded using Eurocat Malformation coding guides. patient and her father presenting with bilateral mesomelic dysplasia of Results and Discussion: CNS congenital anomalies occurred more the upper limbs without any other features. In 2005, Mégarbané et al. often in group A versus group B (31% versus 11%, P=0.048). No reported a similar clinical picture in a boy whose father, interestingly, significant differences were found between these two groups when had unilateral involvement. In both families, the patients had severe analyzing the rate of CA in the organ systems included in other blocks developmental abnormality of the ulna, which was extremely short and of the XVII chapter (ICD-10 classification, Q00-Q99). Interestingly, thick, associated with marked radial bowing, and resulting in a severely patients with chromosomal rearrangements (group A) were more shortened and angulated forearm with ulnar deviation of the hand but likely to have at least one MA (P=0.02) and had a significantly higher with no Madelung deformity. The tibiae and fibulae were completely frequency of eye, ear, face and neck MA (Q10-Q18) compared to normal and the patients had normal stature. patients from group B (68.8% versus 38.8%, P=0.04). The increased We report a female patient and her similarly affected father who have rate of CA in the CNS and MA of the eye, ear, face and neck in MR/ exactly the same phenotype with mesomelic dysplasia confined to the DD patients with clinically significant CNVs provides useful information upper limbs. This new family adds further arguments to the existence for counseling and may aid in the identification of submicroscopic of a separate condition, probably autosomal dominant, consisting of chromosomal rearrangements in other patients. mesomelic dysplasia of the upper limbs as the unique feature. This research was funded by the European Union 7th Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] as part of the CHERISH project (www. P02.167 cherishproject.eu, grant agreement n°223692). New recessive syndrome of microcephaly, cerebellar hypoplasia, and congenital heart conduction defect P02.165 M. S. Zaki1, G. M. H. Abdel Salam1, S. N. Saleem2, W. B. Dobyns3, M. Y. Issa1, clinical and molecular characterization of two cases with rare S. Sattar4, J. G. Gleeson5; chromosomal microduplications 1Clinical Genetics Department, National Research Centre, Dokki, Cairo, Egypt, R. V. Vazharova1, I. M. Bradinova1, S. Bichev1, A. Savov1, V. Bojinova2, E. 2Radiology Department, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, 3Clinical Genetics Simeonov3, I. Kremensky1; Department, National Research Centre, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Clinical 1National genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2USBALNP “Saint Naum”, Sofia, Genetics Department, National Research CentreNeurogenetics Laboratory, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital “Alexandrovska”, Sofia, Bulgaria. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neurosciences, University After introduction of methods for molecular karyotiping many new of California, San Diego, CA, United States, 5Neurogenetics Laboratory, microdeletions/ microduplications were characterized and their Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neurosciences, University of association with specific phenotypes recognized. We report two California, San Diego, CA, United States. patients with chromosome duplications involving regions associated We identified a two-branch consanguineous family in which 4 affected with common microdeletion syndromes. Among 90 patients affected members (3 females and one male) presented with constitutive growth with mental retardation (MR) / developmental delay (DD) screened delay, severe psychomotor retardation, microcephaly, cerebellar by MLPA for common microdeletion syndroms and subtelomeric hypoplasia, and second degree heart block. They also shared distinct rearrangements two were found to carry small duplications - at 3q29 facial features and similar appearance of their hands and feet. and 10p15 respectively. Both patients are ascertained because of Childhood-onset insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus developed in MR and dysmorphism of unknown etiology. Both cases are sporadic. one affected child around the age of 9. Molecular analysis excluded At age of 13 years patient with 3q29 duplication presents mild MR, mutations in PTF1A locus and EIF2AK3 gene being pathogenetics microcephaly and dysmorphism. Patient with duplication of 10p15 was for insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus with cerebellar agenesis or refereed to our department at age of 18 months because of DD and microcephaly, respectively. To our knowledge, this phenotype does not epilepsy. After initial cytogenetic and metabolic investigations MLPA meet diagnostic criteria of any known condition, and thus suggests a was performed using consecutively kits P245, P70 and P36 (MRC unique clinical entity of autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. Holland). Duplications were detected with at least two of the used Key Words: kits. Chromosomal rearrangements were further characterized using Microcephaly, insulin-dependent diabetes, cerebellar hypoplasia, arrayCGH. Phenotypes of our patients share similarities with cases mental retardation, heart block reported recently by other investigators. Contiguous gene syndromes involving small chromosome P02.168 microduplications are typically less frequently reported than their septo-optic dysplasia: a new manifestation of microdeletion microdeletions counterparts. Although these rearrangements can 22q11.2? arise from a common mechanism involving nonallelic homologous L. Gwanmesia1, S. Gimelli1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2, A. Bottani1, F. Béna1; recombination, microduplication syndroms are usually less commonly 1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, recognized, possibly due to their milder and more variable phenotype Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 108 Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. P02.170 22q11.2 microdeletion is a well known entity affecting potentially Array-cGH (Agilent 244K and 4X140K) analysis in patients with almost any organ and with more than 180 signs described. We report mR/DD /mcA a female patient with a seemingly new manifestation, namely septo- M. Tzetis, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, H. Frysira, K. Giannikou, V. Oikonomakis, A. optic dysplasia. Syrmou, K. Kosma, E. Kanavakis, E. Kanavakis; She was seen for genetic counseling at the age of 24 years because Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece. of mental handicap, short stature and visual impairment. Pregnancy No Length and delivery were uneventful. Birth growth parameters were at Gain/ start/ end of chromosome Range P90. Nystagmus was present since birth and severe amblyopia Loss Ucsc hg18 Pat. (mb) diagnosed in infancy. Motor development was delayed, with walking 7 1p36.33-p36.32 4 L/ 3 G 554268->6141121 0.69->5.6 at 5 years. Puberty was uneventful with menarche at 12 years and 1 1p31.2-p22.3 1 L 69154817->87595434 18.44 regular menstrual cycles. Complete growth hormone deficiency was diagnosed at 20 years and brain MRI showed septo-optic dysplasia 1 1q21.1 1 G 145009467->146212234 1.2 with agenesis of the anterior pituitary. At examination, the patient was 1 1q44 1 L 242886313->244525547 1.64 overanxious and talkative. Height was 139 cm (-4.4 SD), weight 44 kg 1 2p16.3 1 L 51090504->51167934 0.077 (-1.5 SD) and OFC 52 cm (-2.5 SD). Erratic nystagmus, divergent left 2 2q24.2-q31.1 2 L 163364586->170720574 2.1->7.4 strabismus, broad neck and slender fingers were noted. 1 2q37.3 1 L 238465588->242690037 4.2 As the phenotype was not evocative of a known syndrome, array-CGH 1 3p25.3 1 L 9499872->11406036 1.9 (Agilent 244k) was performed and showed, surprisingly, a classical 3 3 3p14.1 3 L 70598263->71601477 0.083->1.2 Mb de novo heterozygous 22q11.22 microdeletion, confirmed by FISH. To the best of our knowledge, septo-optic dysplasia has not been 934536->2209449 1.01->1.26 previously reported in microdeletion 22q11.2. Whether this is a new 3 5p15.33 3 L 11095452->11368310 0.034- and rare finding associated with this deletion or the chance occurrence 4 5p15.2 4 L 124232611->135251538 >0.052 of two separate conditions (a frequent deletion on the one hand, and, 1 5q23.2-q31.1 1 L 11 on the other hand, a mutation in a gene such as HESX1 causing in 2 5q33.1 2 L 149716211 ->150082767 0.015- itself the dysplasia) cannot be answered at present. >0.37 1 7p22.2-22.3 1 L 250232->2801328 2.55 P02.169 3 7p22.2-p22.1 2 G; 1 L 4340544->7025368 1.7->2.7 subtelomeric study of the patients with developmental delay, 2 7q11.23 2 L 72022051->73923281 0.029->1.9 dysmorphy and/or congenital anomalies of unexplained etiology 5 8q24.23-q24.3 4 L, 1G 138221526->146250824 3.7-8 N. Maksimovic1, T. Damnjanovic1, G. Cuturilo2, V. Kostic3, V. Dobricic3, T. 1 8q24.3 1 L 145944589->146264902 0,413 Varljen4, B. Jekic1, L. Lukovic1, I. Novakovic1; 1 8q21.11-q21.13 1 L 77016764->80392452 3.4 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2University Children’s Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute of Neurology, Clinical Center of 1 9p24.3-p22.1 1 G 194193 ->19203881 11,0 Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia, 4Institute of Legal Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia. 1 9q31.2 1 L 107304497->109588754 2.3 Submicrosopic chromosomal rearrangements involving the 4 9q34.2-34.3 4 L 134831651->140241935 0.7-5.4 subtelomeric regions are considered to be a significant cause of 1 13q33.1-q34 1 L 100510439 ->114114568 13.6 idiopathic mental retardations (MR). Their prevalence is about 4 15q11.2-q14 2 L; 2 G 18362555->36837570 5->17.8 5.2%, depending on the preselection criteria. Because of the small 7 15q11.2 5 L; 2G 18683110->25373779 0.02->2.1 size of involved segments, these aberrations are undetectable by conventional banding techniques. Subtelomeric regions can be 2 15q21.3-q22.31 2 L 54118678->62432440 8.13 screened by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). 5 16p13.3 4 L; 1 G 70350->3229290 0.08->2.9 We have studied a series of 60 unrelated patients with MR and normal 1 16q21-q22.1 1 L 64772843->66806006 2.03 results of GTG-banded chromosomes. Subtelomeric assays using 2 17q12 2 L 31474518->34217217 1.1->2.7 MLPA with SALSA P036-E1 and P070-B1 kits were performed. 5 17q21.31-q21.32 3 L, 1 G 41288843->42142422 0.25->0.8 The MLPA screening revealed subtelomeric chromosome aberrations 2 18p11.32-p11.21 2 L 4316->15370683 9.6->15.3 in three cases(5%). 2 20q13.3 2 L 61433519->62419593 0.29->0.99 Case 1: A 3- year-old girl, born from healthy unrelated parents, with growth retardation, facial dysmorphism, microcephaly, syndactily, 1 22q11.1-q11.21 1 G 15438946->17041773 1.6 tumor hepatis and severe mental retardation. Deletion of 1p and 1 22q11.21-q11.23 1 L 20128705->21984222 1.86 duplication 12q has been detected. 1 22q11.21 1 L 17299942->19794119 2.5 Case 2: A 28- month-old girl, born from healthy unrelated parents, with Xp22.32 5818688->5918660 1 1 G 0.1 severe growth retardation of prenatal onset, mental retardation, mild 3 Xp22.31 3 G 6477006->8124803 1.6 facial dysmorphism, epilepsy and hemiparesis. Deletion of 4p has 1 Xp11.3 1 L 43208140->43765770 0.56 been detected. 1 Xp11.22 1 L 53238335->53251848 0.013 Case 3: A 28- month-old girl, born from healthy unrelated parents, with craniostenosis, facial dysmorphism, microcephaly and moderate 2 Xq13.3 2 L 74410307->74516096 0.041->0.1 mental retardation. Deletion of 9p and duplication of 15q have been 2 Xq28 2 L 151370278->153127086 1.5 1 1 L 0.087 detected. Xq28 153248667-> 153335811 Parents of the patients with disclosed subtelomeric aberrations were also tested in order to clarify the origin of aberrations. In all cases de Clinical characteristics of patients are not always related to specific novo origin was confirmed. syndromes. Array comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) is These results demonstrated that MLPA may be very useful tool in used to detect small copy number changes within the genome that order to approach genetic diagnosis of mentally retarded patients. are not always visible by conventional karyotyping. We analysed with aCGH (Agilent 244K & 4x140K), 253 patients with various degrees of MR, DD, dysmorphic features and/or single or multiple congenital abnormalities, normal previous conventional karyotype and negative genetic tests (FRAX, RETT, single FISH or metabolic screens). Clinically significant submicroscopic imbalances were detected in 92 (~30%) patients. The high percentage of positive patients is probably due to the strict criteria of patient selection. Some patients presented with more than one aberration relevant to their phenotype. A total of eleven aberrations were detected on the X chromosome regarding Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 109 genes related to MR/ DD. Array CGH has proven a powerful tool for Pal Hospital, Budapest, Hungary, 4Department of Molecular Genetics and the identification of novel chromosomal syndromes, for more accurate Diagnostics, NIEH, Budapest, Hungary, 5Reference centre of neuromuscular prognosis and phenotype-genotype correlations. pathologies and ALS, Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, France, 6Service d’Anatomie Pathologique et de Neuropathologie, Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, P02.171 France, 7University Children’s Hospital, Technical University Dresden, A novel deletion at 3q13.31-22.1 causes dysmorphia and multiple Dresden, Germany, 8Friedrich-Baur-Institut, Department of Neurology, Ludwig congenital malformations. Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, A. Materna-Kiryluk1,2,3, S. Sanna-Cherchi4, K. Burgess4, K. Kiryluk4, A. G. Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Gharavi4; Congenital myopathies are a group of disorders characterised by 1Departments of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, muscle weakness due to abnormalities in muscle fibres, disturbing Poznan, Poland, 2Polish Registry of Congenital Malformations (PRCM), their normal function. The muscle biopsy usually also shows abnormal Poznan, Poland, 3Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, structures, such as protein aggregates. Mutations in the nebulin gene 4Division of Nephrology, Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New (NEB) are the main cause of autosomal recessive nemaline myopathy York, NY, United States. (NM), with clinical presentations ranging from mild to severe proximal We describe a 14-year-old Polish girl with dysmorphic features and muscle weakness and protein aggregates, nemaline bodies, seen in multiple congenital malformations, who carries de novo heterozygous the muscle fibres. At present over 130 NM-causing NEB mutations deletion of 15Mb at 3q13.31-22. The child’s clinical presentation have been identified in more than 110 families. In addition to mutations included mental retardation, epilepsy, myopia, hypothyroidism, causing NM, compound heterozygous mutations in NEB have been and hypotonia. The dysmorphic features included: macrostomia, identified causing core-rod myopathy (CRM) in one patient, and narrow left palpebral fissure, right auricular tags, short stature, homozygous missense mutations in NEB causing distal myopathy with scoliosis, contraction of the left forearm and left hand phalangeal no or almost no nemaline bodies in four different Finnish families. It hypoplasia, absent radial bones, hypoplastic thumbs, left clubfoot was concluded that perhaps the presence of two missense mutations varus, and prominent clitoris. Moreover, the child demonstrated the in NEB would lead to distal myopathy, while more disruptive compound following congenital malformations: right renal agenesis, grade IV left heterozygous mutations would cause NM or CRM. Recently, however, vesicoureteral reflux, left thyroid lobe aplasia, patent ductus arteriosus, we have identified four different compound heterozygous NEB and hypoplasia of corpus callosum. The karyotype was 46XX. We mutations, only one of which is a missense mutation, in three non- performed a genome-wide analysis of copy number variants using the Finnish patients in two unrelated families with distal myopathy and Illumina 610-Quad array. We identified a large deletion of 14,960,554 nemaline bodies in their muscle biopies. One of the mutations has bp at the 3q13.31-22.1 locus that was absent in public databases and previously been identified in one family with the severe form of NM. >15,000 controls. The deletion was confirmed by qPCR and SNP We conclude that NM and distal myopathy caused by NEB mutations genotyping, and was absent in both parents, indicating a de novo form a clinical and histological continuum. NM should be considered event. These data provide strong support for pathogenicity. as a differential diagnosis in patients presenting with an early-onset, predominantly distal myopathy. P02.172 Autosomal dominant natal teeth with selective tooth agenesis P02.174 J. M. Graham1, N. Kramer1, V. Funari1, O. Klein2, K. Seidel2, P. Kantaputra3, K. Molecular investigation of neonatal hypotonia : 27 floppy infants Taylor1; D. H’mida, I. Fekih, S. Trabelsi, S. Sassi, A. Msakni, M. Gribaa, S. Mougou, A. 1Cedars Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2University of Saad; California, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3Chiang Mai University, Chiang Unit of Cytogenetic, Biology of Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, SOUSSE, Mai, Thailand. Tunisia. We report a 5-generation family with multiple natal teeth and selective The neonatal hypotonia is the call sign of many diseases of the tooth agenesis segregating in an autosomal dominant fashion. Natal newborn and infant. Taking into account the diseases covered by a teeth are usually a sporadic isolated finding in an otherwise normal molecular diagnosis certainty and with neonatal hypotonia as a major infant, and familial occurrence is uncommon. Selective tooth agenesis clinical sign, we are interested in three neurological disorders: Prader is usually genetic and not associated with natal teeth. In affected Willi Syndrome (PWS), spinal muscular atrophy type I (AMSI), and persons in the family we report, at least 6-8 natal teeth are usually myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1). present at birth, and this is followed by selective tooth agenesis that The aim of our work is to establish a molecular diagnosis strategy of results in absence of as many as 16 permanent teeth. Natal teeth neonatal hypotonia with neurological origin (SPW, AMSI, and DM1). with hypodontia occurs in some ectodermal dysplasia syndromes. Our study was performed in 27 newborns referred to our laboratory In the family we report, natal teeth with selective tooth agenesis did for neonatal hypotonia. We carried the diagnosis of PWS by both not include ectodermal dysplasia or any other problem. DNA from MS-MLPA techniques and TP-PCR, for AMSI we have deployed the 28 family members was analyzed on the Illumina OMNI-express technique of PCR-RFLP, for the DM1, both techniques of TP-PCR and chip using 733,120 SNPs and mapped to an approximately 2Mb QMPSF were used. Patients without clinical suspicion of predilection segment on chromosome 1q36.11 with LOD score 2.97 at 23.8 Mb were investigated with all these techniques. to 25.8 MB (GRCh37/hg19; MERLIN). By dividing the pedigree into The PWS diagnosis was confirmed in only one patient. Among 17 three 3-generation families, a region of association was found located patients with AMSI suspicion this diagnosis was confirmed for only between LOC284632 and GRHL3 (parenTDT, p=0.005 for rs11249039, 7. For the remaining 19 patients none of the 3 molecular diagnostics rs11249045, or rs7526505). GRHL3 is a gene expressed exclusively (AMSI, DM1 and SPW) could be confirmed and etiology of neonatal in surface ectoderm in drosophila, where it plays an essential role hypotonia is to unveil. in cuticle formation. Expression of the murine Grhl3 gene is evident Our work provides clinicians a strategy for the diagnosis of neonatal in ectodermally derived tissues, including the oral epithelium. We hypotonia. However this strategy remains incomplete and a multitude speculate that variation in the regulation of this gene may play a role in of other etiologies will have to be explored. the phenotype we describe in this family. P02.175 P02.173 Nijmegen breakage syndrome in siblings with atypical cardiac Nemaline myopathy caused by mutations in the nebulin gene involvement may present as a distal myopathy G. Doros1, M. Gafencu1, A. Popoiu1, M. Bataneant1, A. But2, A. Botiz2, M. Puiu1; V. Lehtokari1, K. Pelin2, A. Herczegfalvi3, V. Karcagi4, J. Pouget5, J. Franques5, 1III rd Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, J. F. Pellissier6, D. Figarella-Branger6, M. von der Hagen7, A. Huebner7, B. Romania, 2Louis Turcanu - Emergency Children Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. Schoser8, H. Lochmüller9, C. Wallgren-Pettersson1; Background: Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) is a rare autosomal 1The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, recessive congenital disorder, caused by a mutation in the NBS gene, Finland, 2Department of Biosciences, Division of Genetics, University of located on chromosome 8q21. Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Paediatric Neurology, Heim Aim: To present two siblings with NBS, a boy 8 yrs old and a girl 3 Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 110 yrs old, detected because of progressive microcephaly and recurrent the phenotypic variability of disease. Case 1: girl, born at term, APGAR sino-pulmonary infections. The boy was born with a severe cyanotic 7, first child of an apparently healthy couple; clinical examination: congenital heart defect (CHD). dysmorphic face with: hypertelorism, down-slanting eyes, small and material and methods: We performed clinical, cardiology, neurology, upturned nose, low set and backward rotated ears, short and webbed ultrasound and genetic examination on both patients, followed by neck, muscular hypotonia, without any type of cardiac problems. complex laboratory investigations. The clinical examination of the mother indicated a phenotype of NS Results: The patients have a distinctive facial appearance, with short stature, mild mental retardation, short and webbed neck, microcephaly, short stature, recurrent infections and multiple splenic facial dysmorphism, without cardiac problems. Case 2: girl, born tumours. The sister also has convergent strabismus of the right eye, premature at 35 weeks, APGAR 5, after a pregnancy complicated right palpebral ptosis, areas of skin hypopigmentation, and severe IgA with polyhidramnios detected at 22 weeks, 2nd children of a healthy immunodeficiency. She was treated with intravenous immunoglobulin. couple; clinical examination: generalized lymphoedema, dysmorphic The boy has CHD with double outlet right ventricle, ventricular septal face with hypertelorism, small and upturned nose, short palpebral defect, inefficient pulmonary artery banding, severe pulmonary fissures, short and webbed neck, thoracic hypoplasia, and cardiac artery hypertension, NYHA III cardiac failure, cachexia, severe anomalies: pulmonary valvular stenosis, and ventricular septal defect, thrombocytopenia, severe motor delay, low mental retardation, and hepatomegalia. Unfortunately, the girl dies at 2 days after delivery. In cellular immunodeficiency. A paravertebral T8-T9 tumour was detected both cases the karyotype was normal: 46,XX and we have not had the in the boy. He was treated for heart failure. Thrombocytopenia is a opportunity for molecular diagnosis. Our cases confirm the phenotypic contraindication for treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension. variability in NS and the importance of clinical examination. Splenic tumours and paravetebral tumour have to be investigated. Genetic tests are in progress for both, looking for mutation, and colony P02.178 survival assay. Parents have Slavic origin. A patient with hyperactivity, speech delay and dysmorphic conclusions: NBS is rare in siblings and needs to be diagnosed features associated with a deletion of the NRXN1 gene at 2p16.3 because of immunodeficiency that has to be treated, because of and a 10q22.3q23.1 duplication radiation sensitivity, which means radiation exposure must be avoided, K. Konska1, G. Annerén1,2, M. Ingstedt3, A. Thuresson1; and a strong predisposition to lymphoid malignancy, which has to be 1Clinical Genetics, Uppsala University Children’s Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, sought. CHD is a particular association. 2Dept of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Dept of Paediatrics, Västerås Medical Centre Hospital, Västerås, P02.176 Sweden. NiPBL gene mutation analyses among 70 Polish cdLs patients We report on a 7 years old boy with hyperactivity, concentration J. Limon1, A. Kuzniacka1, J. Wierzba2, M. Malinowska1, M. Ratajska1, M. difficulties, speech delay and discrete dysmorphic features. The patient Brzeskwiniewicz1; is the third child to non-consanguineous parents. A sister is healthy 1Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, and a twin brother has suspected attention deficit disorder (ADD). The Poland, 2Department of Paediatrics, Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, mother has a family history of ADD, autism spectrum disorder and mild Poland. mental retardation. Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) (MIM 122470) is a rare dominantly Micro-array analysis of the proband revealed a 174 kb deletion at inherited multisystem disorder, characterised by a typical but variable 2p16.3 inherited from the healthy father and a 508 kb duplication at phenotype, which includes developmental delay, characteristic facial 10q22.3q23.1 inherited from the mother. The deletion comprises features, pre- and post-natal growth retardation and limb abnormalities. the NRXN1 gene but no other coding sequences. NRXN1 has About 50-60% of cases of CdLS are caused by mutations in one previously been associated with autism spectrum disorders and of three genes, mainly in a regulator of cohesion - NIPBL, and less the deletion can, in part, explain the neuropsychiatric features of frequently in two building the cohesin ring - SMC1 and SMC3. Cohesin the boy. Furthermore NRXN1 gene variants may segregate with a is involved in control chromosome segregation during cell divisions reduced penetrance1 explaining the inheritance from a healthy father. and also in double strand break repair and/or transcriptional regulation. The maternal family history and the complex phenotype in the boy, We screened 32 patients with the CdLS classical phenotype and 38 including dysmorphisms, made us also consider the maternally with mild phenotype for NIPBL point mutations, using a combination inherited duplication. The duplication spans 5 genes; ANXA1, of denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and direct CTSLL6, MAT1A, PLAC9 and SFTPD. The gene product of ANXA1 sequencing. We identified 26 different NIPBL sequence variants. has been implemented as a central player in the anti-inflammatory Eight of them were frame shift (exclusively present in the classical and neuroprotective role of microglia2. MAT1A is the only gene that type), 15 were missense and three splice mutations resulting in exon is sensitive to haplo-insufficiency and MAT deficiency can lead to skipping. Moreover, within the group of patients without identifiable neurological abnormalities, including brain demyelination3. Studies are point mutations, we performed an MLPA analysis and detected two ongoing to further investigate the phenotype of the proband and the heterozygous deletions of the entire NIPBL gene, confirmed by aCGH. genotypes of additional family members. In our group, NIPBL point mutations account for 37% of CdLS patients. Large rearrangements were detected only twice, which explains only P02.179 7% of all detected mutations. These findings are in agreement with A 10.46 mb 12p11.1-12.1 interstitial deletion coincident with a other published data. 0.19 mb NRXN1 deletion detected by array cGH in a girl with scoliosis and autism P02.177 Y. Soysal1, J. Vermeesch2, N. Ardeshir Davani2, K. Hekimler1, N. İmirzalıoğlu1; the phenotypic variability in Noonan syndrome - clinical 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Center for Human consideration on two new cases diagnosed in neonatal period Genetics, University Hospital, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. E. V. Gorduza1, M. Stamatin1, L. I. Butnariu2, S. Ghironte3, A. Petrariu3, M. We present a 12-year-old girl with de novo karyotype 46,XX,del(12) Volosciuc4, E. E. Braha2, G. Iliev3, L. Caba1, R. Popescu1, M. Panzaru1, C. (p11.1p12.1). Array CGH revealed in addition to a 10.466 Mb interstitial Rusu1; deletion on 12p11.1→12p12.1 a 0.191 Mb deletion on 2p16.3. The girl 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, Iasi, Romania, 2University presented with mild facial dysmorphism consisting of microcephaly, of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 3”Cuza Voda” Obstetrical Hospital, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, broad Iasi, Romania, 4”Sf. Maria” Children Hospital, Iasi, Romania. nasal base, bulbous nose, short philtrum, micro/retrognathia, irregular Noonan Syndrome (NS) is a common autosomal dominant disorder tooth arrangement, phalangeal deformity in distal phalanges of that affects both sexes. The main features are congenital heart defect, hands, 5th finger camptodactyly, brachydactyly in feet, history of short stature, learning problems, pectus excavatum, impaired blood joint hypermobility and scoliosis. She was considered to have mild to clotting, webbed neck, and a facial dysmorphism. The incidence is moderate mental retardation and ascertained for an autism spectrum 1/1,000- 1/2,500 newborn. The range and severity of features can vary disorder. Interstitial deletions of short arm of chromosome 12 are rarely greatly in patients with NS, and thus the diagnosis is often delayed. We reported whereas point mutations and deletions of NRXN1 which is present two cases of NS in newborns with clinical features that attest located on chromosome 2p16.3 are associated with autism spectrum Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 111 disorders. In this article we present and discuss the phenotypic P02.182 consequences of a patient who was effected by deletions of two Oculoauriculovertebral spectrum: 1.34 mb duplication in 14q23.1 different chromosomal regions. in a family with autosomal dominant inheritance M. Ballesta-Martínez1, V. López-González1, D. Calvo-Martínez1, L. Armengol- P02.180 Dulcet2, E. Guillen-Navarro3; three uncommon cases of OAVs 1Hospital Universitario VIrgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Quantitative C. Barone, E. Gitto, A. Salpietro, S. Aversa, V. Ferraù, C. Cuppari, P. Vicchio, Genomic Medicine Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Universitario S. Meduri, M. Caruso, D. C. Salpietro, S. Briuglia, A. Talenti; Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain. Department of Pediatric Science Policlinico Messina, Messina, Italy. Introduction: Oculoauriculo vertebral spectrum or OAVS (OMIM Oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS) is a heterogeneous 164210) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous congenital condition results from a defect of blastogenesis involving abnormal disorder involving developmental defects of first and second branchial development of facial structures derived from the first and second arch derivatives. Main features are unilateral/bilateral ear anomalies branchial arches with in same cases cardiac, vertebral and CNS (anotia, microtia, preauricular tags, pits), hemifacial microsomia, ocular defects. defects and vertebral malformations. Other features are cleft lip and/or We describe three uncommon newborns’ case with OAVS. First is a palate, cardiac, cerebral , renal malformations and mental retardation. male with OAVS and severe caudal regression: the clinical features Diverse chromosomal abnormalities have been associated with OAVS were marked right hemifacial microsomia, hypoplasia of the right (trisomies/monosomies). mandibular ramus and right external ear with atresic external auditory Clinical Report: We report a 31 year old patient, with clinical diagnosis canal and ossicles agenesia; “frog-like” appearance of the lower of Treacher Collins syndrome and several affected family members extremities, flexed knees due to bilateral popliteal pterigium and suggestive of autosomal dominant inheritance. Normal pregnancy equinovarus deformity of bilateral feet. Abdomen US showed crossed and delivery. No gestational diabetes, uterine malformations, toxic renal ectopia, lower spine X-rays revealed absence of vertebra below environment. Physical examination: Long narrow face, bilateral D12 level, spine and brain RMI showed the spinal cord terminated at preauricular pits and tags, left anotia, agenesis of middle and inner left D6 level and corpus callosum hypoplasia. The association between ear, micrognatia, macrostomia, high arched palate. Length: 167 cm, OAVS and caudal regression is a typical manifestations of the axial PC: 55 cm. Normal cardiological evaluation. Spine Xray: dorsolumbar mesodermal dysplasia complex. scoliosis. No vertebral defects. Father: right macrostomia. No The second is a female with OAVS and left labial cleft: the clinical hearing defect. Born with preauricular tags. Other 4 family members features were left hemifacial microsomia, microtia, left labial cleft and with preauricular tags, and macrostomia; suggestive of autosomal dysmorphic right ear implanted in mandibular region. dominant inheritance. High density array-CGH was performed: 1,34 The third is a female with OAVS and anterior cervical meningocele: the Mb duplication at 14q23.1. clinical features were left hemifacial microsomia, hypoplasia of the left Discussion: This is the second report of a 14q23 duplication in mandibular ramus and reduced motility of the tongue due to a functional OAVS with autosomal dominant inheritance (previous description deficit of hypoglossal nerve and anterior cervical meningocele. with a 11.79 Mb duplication at 14q22.3-23.3 with 4.38 Mb deletion So the management of OAVS requires a multidisciplinary approach to at 13q21.31-q21.32: complex rearrangement). We discuss clinical provide the most appropriate treatment even more if, as in our cases, heterogeneity as well as support the fact that 14q23 is a candidate typical manifestations are associated with other specific malformations. region for OAVS phenotype. Our case narrows down the candidate region to 1,34 Mb, including SIX1 and SIX6 genes. P02.181 Association of mitochondrial disorders with oxidative stress in P02.183 obsessive compulsive disorder Novel pathogen mutation in tYR gene in an iranian patient with N. Orhan1, C. I. Kucukali1, U. Cakir2, N. Arican3, M. Aydin1; Oculocutaneous Albinism type i(OcAi) 1Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Istanbul V. Ghodsinejadkalahroudi, A. Arastehkani, O. Aryani, M. Houshmand; University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Biochemistry, Eyup State Hospital, Medical Genetic Dep. Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Istanbul, Turkey, 3Department of Forensic Medicine, Istanbul Faculty of Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a severe genetic disorder Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. characterized by reduced or absent biosynthesis of melanin pigment Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a common psychiatric in melanocytes of the skin, hair follicle, and eye. Type I OCA results disorder defined by the presence of obsessive thoughts and repetitive from deficient activity of melanocyte tyrosinase, a copper containing compulsive actions. The mutations or polymorphic variants in enzyme that catalyzes the first two steps in the melanin biosynthetic mitochondrial DNA-encoded genes or nuclear genes result in oxidative pathway. In classic, type IA OCA tyrosinase activity and melanin stress, which has recently been associated with various psychiatric biosynthesis are entirely absent, and in type IB OCA tyrosinase activity disorders. In order to understand the association of mitochondrial and melanin production are greatly reduced. Types IA and IB OCA disorders with oxidative stress in OCD, we examined genetic variants were result from allelic mutations of the tyrosinase gene. of MnSOD and UCP-2 antioxidant genes, whose product imported In This study a patient with clinical phenotype of OCA I and her into mitochondrion, and MDA and GSH, markers of oxidative stress. parents were investigated for mutations in TYR gene by PCR and The study sample comprised 102 patients with OCD and 104 healthy sequencing method. This patient was homozygote for c: 89 T → A controls. For MnSOD, the frequencies of CT (Ala/Val) genotype mutation that changes amino acid Cysteine to Serine while her parents (p<0.01) in patients were significantly lower than those of controls. were heterozygous for this mutation. This mutation was not reported However, CC (Ala/Ala) genotype was significantly more frequent in previously and was not found in healthy controls and literatures. We patients than controls (p<0.05). For UCP-2 (I/D), the frequencies of believed that this mutation may have effect in patient phenotype. ID genotype (p<0.01) and I allele (p<0.05) were lower in patients as compared with controls. In contrast, DD genotype was more prevalent P02.184 in patients than controls (p<0.01). While serum GSH was significantly Oesophageal atresia with tracheoesophageal fistula, anal atresia depleted (p<0.0001), serum MDA was significantly elevated in patients and thumbs hypoplasia in a patient with a de novo gain in 17q12 compared with controls (p<0.0001). MDA levels were significantly detected by genome wide sNP array analysis. elevated in subjects with DD genotype of UCP-2 (I/D) (p<0.05) and R. Smigiel1, C. Marcelis2, D. Patkowski3, N. de Leeuw2, K. Mascianica3, M. CC genotype of MnSOD (p<0.05) as compared with II or ID and TT Sasiadek1, H. Brunner2; or CT genotype, respectively. MDA levels in patients carrying CC 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, (p<0.05) or CT (p<0.05) genotype were significantly higher than those 2Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Nijmegen, of carrying TT genotype. In conclusion, CC genotype of MnSOD or Netherlands, 3Pediatric Surgery and Urology Department, Wroclaw Medical DD genotype of UCP-2 might result in mitochondrial disorders by University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland. increasing oxidative stress in OCD. Oesophageal atresia (OA) and tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF) are foregut malformations with a heterogeneous etiology. OA/TOF may occur as an isolated anomaly or as part of a syndrome. Several Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 112 syndromes have OA/TOF as a clinical feature. The best known (radial ray defects), improper eye movements (Duane anomaly), and is the VACTERL association that is seen in 10-30% of OA/TOF. congenital bilateral non-progressive sensorineural and/or conductive Chromosomal anomalies have been reported in 6-10% of OA/TOF, hearing loss. Other less consistent deformities include anal, renal, but no single specific chromosomal defect has been confirmed as a cardiac, ear, and foot malformations. This disease results from of a main etiological factor. Several genes have been implicated in cases mutation in the SALL4 gene, a human gene related to the developmental of syndromic OA/TOF. It is thought that a combination of genetic and regulator spalt (sal) of Drosophila melanogaster. SALL4 mutations environmental factors play a role in the etiology of OA/TOF. may also cause Acro-Renal-Ocular syndrome (AROS), which is We report a male infant, born at 33 weeks of gestation with IUGR characterized by radial ray malformations, renal abnormalities, ocular presenting the combination of multiple congenital defects (OA/TOF, coloboma, and Duane anomaly. The majority of the mutations are anal atresia, thumbs hypoplasia, tracheomalacia, sacral bone defect, truncating point mutations, which are expected to result in nonsense- cryptorchidism) resembling VATER association. Follow-up examination mediated mRNA decay and are considered to cause the phenotype via showed psychomotor and somatic retardation. Genotype analysis haploinsufficiency. The only truncating mutation predicted to escape revealed a normal male karyotype and absence of subtelomeric nonsense-mediated mRNA decay is associated with extensive clinical imbalances. Genome wide 250k SNP array analysis showed a 1.4Mb variability and severe hemifacial microsomia in one member of a gain in 17q12. This gain appeared to have occurred de novo (normal large family.The only missense mutation identified so far is predicted result in the patient’s parents) and is likely to explain the clinical picture to cause an increase of DNA binding capacity and is associated with of this patient. central midline defects [Kolhase J, GeneReviews 2008]. Here we Recently, aberrations of this 17q12 region that is flanked by low-copy present an Austrian family with four members affected by Okihiro repeats have been described by Nagamani et al. in patients with renal syndrome, in which we have identified a novel SALL4 mutation in defects, epilepsy, brain abnormalities and intellectual disability. Among exon 2 leading to an in frame deletion c.694_696delAcc (p.t232del). these patients, one presented with OA/TOF and vertebral defect. Family members had varying degrees of radial ray malformation and We propose to consider a role for selected genes in the 17q12 region facial characteristics without Duane anomaly, but no hearing loss, nor in the development of OA/TOF. malformation of other organs. This is the first report of an in frame deletion of SALL4 that causes Okihiro syndrome. P02.185 GLi3 is rarely implicated in OFD syndrome with midline P02.187 abnormalities A diagnosis of X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome by array-cGH in M. Avila1, B. Aral2, P. Callier3, N. Gigot2, M. Payet3, C. Ragon3, J. Thevenon1, L. a boy and a girl Pasquier4, E. Lopez1, A. Goldenberg5, C. Baumann6, V. Cormier7, S. Marlin8, A. M. C. Maiburg, E. van Binsbergen, E. H. Brilstra, P. A. Terhal; Masurel1, F. Huet9, T. Attié-Bitach7, L. Faivre1, C. Thauvin-Robinet1; University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. 1Centre de Génétique - CHU de DIJON- Hôpital d’enfants- Université de X-linked Opitz G/BBB syndrome (OS) is characterized by facial Bourgogne, DIJON, France, 22 Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Plateau dysmorphisms, laryngo-tracheo-esophageal and genitourinary Technique de Biologie, CHU, DIJON, France, 33 Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, abnormalities with mental retardation in 50% of (male) patients. MID1 Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU, DIJON, France, 44 Service de Génétique, analysis detects mutations, deletions or insertions in 15-45% of males CHU, RENNES, France, 55 Departement de Génétique, CHU, ROUEN, France, clinically diagnosed with OS. We report a male and female patient 66 Service de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, APHP, PARIS, France, 77 in whom the diagnosis of OS was either confirmed or suggested by Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, PARIS, array-CGH. France, 88 Service de Génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, PARIS, France, 99 A girl with severe mental retardation had facial dysmorphisms Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, DIJON, France. including hypertelorism. Additional abnormalities included Oral-facial-digital (OFD) syndromes represent a heterogeneous group laryngotracheomalacia, tracheo-esophageal fistula, and absent of clinical entity characterized by the association of malformations of the puberty. Sequencing of MID1 revealed no mutations. However, array- face, oral cavity and extremities. Thirteen subtypes have been currently CGH showed a deletion in Xp22.2p22.32, including MID1, as well distinguished, characterized by specific extra-OFD features. Only the as KAL1, STS and OA1. X-inactivation studies are pending. Female OFD1 gene has been identified in the OFD type I and mutations in the carriers of a MID1 mutation usually manifest only hypertelorism. A CORS2 gene in two patients with an OFD type VI. Recently, 6 mutations few male cases with a deletion of the entire MID1-gene have been within the GLI3 gene, responsible for Greig cephalopolysyndactyly and reported, but to our knowledge this is the first female patient with a Pallister-Hall syndrome (PHS), have been reported in some cases (6/21 MID1 deletion. cases, 29%) who presented features of OFD syndrome associated to A boy presented with cryptorchidism, kidney cysts, glottic web, heart midline abnormalities. Five of the 6 mutations were similar in position defect and thin corpus callosum. Dysmorphic features included within GLI3 to other mutations that have been described in PHS. We hypertelorism, dysplastic ears and a midline defect of his upper lip. report the results of GLI3 sequencing analysis in 8 cases with OFD Array-CGH revealed two duplications in Xp22.2, with one of the syndrome and midline abnormalities, including pituitary gland deficit breakpoints mapping within the MID1-gene and therefore possibly (5/8 cases) with pituitary stalk interruption (3/5 cases), hypothalamic disrupting it. Mate-pair analysis could provide insight into the structure hamartoma (HH) (1/8 cases), corpus callosum agenesis (1/8 cases) of MID1 in this patient. One patient with OS due to a duplication of the and imperforate anus (1/8 cases). No GLI3 mutation was identified. first exon of MID1 has been reported in the literature. The difference between our cohort and the previous published results These cases illustrate that there can be a role for array-CGH in the could be explained by the frequent HH (4/6 cases) in the previous diagnosis of OS and show an example of full OS in a female patient. published data and the rare prevalence (1/8 cases) in our cohort. When pooling with the previous studies, the frequency of GLI3 mutations P02.188 in OFD syndromes with midline abnormalities is 21%, and 36% if a Large duplication of the miD1 gene in a patient with Opitz GBBB HH is associated. In conclusion, further studies are required in order syndrome to evaluate the implication of the GLI3 gene in OFD phenotype with S. Rajaei, L. Lovmar, A. Erlandsson, J. Rundberg, M. Stefanova; midline abnormalities. Department of Clinical Genetics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. P02.186 Opitz GBBB syndrome (OS, MIM145410 and MIM300000) is A novel mutation in sALL4 causes Okihiro syndrome with a congenital midline malformation syndrome characterized by mainly skeletal involvement hypertelorism, hypospadias, cleft lip/palate, laryngotracheoesophageal S. Uhrig1, C. Rotky-Fast2, D. Horn3, F. Laccone4; abnormalities, imperforate anus and developmental delay. The 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Paediatrics, Graz, X-linked form is caused by a large variety of mutations in the MID1 Austria, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute of of gene. They involve point mutations, small sized (less than 1kb) Medical Genetics, Vienna, Austria. insertions, deletions and duplications. Okihiro syndrome (Duane-Radial Ray syndrome; DRRS) is an Here we report a maternally inherited duplication involving part of autosomal dominant condition characterized by upper limbs anomalies MID1 gene, minimum 37kb in size, in a 2-months-old-boy with Opitz Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 113 syndrome. The patient presented with feeding and swallowing difficulties P02.191 and following features: brachycephaly, large fontanel, pronounced study of allelic variants in patients with neuropathic pain from hypertelorism, shallow orbits, alternated divergent strabismus, broad salamanca (spain) flat base of the nose, mid-cleft of the tongue, short fraenulum, high M. López1, P. Armero1, Á. Paula1, J. Santos2, L. San Norberto2,3, C. Muriel2,3, R. palate and posteriorly rotated ears. Laryngooesophagofibroscopy González-Sarmiento1; and X-ray failed to detect laryngotracheoesophageal abnormalities. 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina. Universidad de SNPs array analysis (Affymetrix 250k NspI) detected a 37-176kb Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Unidad del Dolor. Servicio de Anestesia. duplication which involves exon 1 of MID1 gene (NM_000381.2) and Hospital Clínico de Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, 3Cátedra Extraordinaria del spans between base pair X:10415285-10451959 (NCBI36/hg 18). The Dolor. Fundación Grünenthal. Universidad de Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain. aberration and its maternal origin were confirmed by MLPA. Patients’ Introduction mother showed subtle clinical features, such as feeding difficulties in Perception of pain is a complex process which implies multiple the infancy, hypertelorism and shallow orbits. Variable clinical features biochemical pathways together with unknown processes of cortical of OS presented also maternal grandfather, his sister and her son. All integration. The existence of individual differences in the response affected family members have normal intelligence. to painful stimuli suggest that genetic factors can be involved in This report defines a novel type of genetic defect in patients with its modulation. The aim of our study was to investigate the genetic X-linked OS that is undetectable by the classical sequence analysis on variation of 25 genes involved in different pathways of pain in patients the DNA level. Further studies for larger duplications/deletions of the from Salamanca (Spain), diagnosed with neuropathic pain. MID1 gene on patients with a clinical diagnosis Opitz syndrome may Methods be appropriate and could confirm the molecular diagnosis. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes by standard techniques. We selected 29 non-synonymus SNPs. Studies P02.189 were performed using TaqMan probes (Applied biosystems) for the De novo R304W mutation in the P63 gene associated with analysis of the polimorphisms in the following genes: IL6, IL4, IL1B, variable expressivity of the EEc syndrome NOS, eNOS, nNOS, TRPV, GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1, CYP2D6, A. Singer1, J. McGrath2, C. Vinkler3; COMT, PTGS2, HTR2A, SLLC6A4, OPRD, OPRM, OPRK, CNR1, 1Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel, 2St John’s Institute of Dermatology Guy’s DRD2, GABRA1, GABRA6, PPARG, EDN1, BDNF and CHRNA5. Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Genetic Institute Wolfson Medical Center, Statistical analysis was performed comparing the different allelic Holon, Israel. variants of the genes in subgruopus of patients: patients with a VAS Mutations in the transcription factor gene p63 is associated with several below and over 50. syndromes each including various combinations of limb malformations Results and conclusion ectodermal dysplasia and orofacial clefting. Ectrodactyly, ectodermal, Preliminary analysis has shown significant differences (p<0.05) clefting ( EEC, OMIM 604292) is the prototype of these syndromes. comparing both groups of patients in the IL1B and PTGS2 genes. Il1B Most patients present with all three components. is an important mediator of the inflammatory response, involved in a We present a case with mutation in p63 and no limb involvement variety of cellular activities, including cell proliferation, differentiation, The proband is a 7 years old boy who was born at term to unrelated and apoptosis. PTGS2 is the key enzyme in biosynthesis of the parents of Jewish origin. He had cleft lip and palate which as well as prostanoids, regulated by specific stimulatory events, suggesting that it lacrimal duct stenosis which were corrected. He has spars thin and is responsible for the prostanoid biosynthesis involved in inflammation pale hair. He has hypodontia with 17 teeth missing. On his back there and mitogenesis. are hyperpigmented lesions. No abnormality was noted in his hands This results support the hypothesis that polymorphisms in genes feet or nails. He has no abnormal sweating, no hearing impairment or involved in different pathways could be asociated with increased kidney abnormality. He has no developmental problems. susceptibility to suffer pain. A diagnosis of EEC syndrome was suspected. Screening for mutations in the p63 gene revealed an R304W mutation, known to be a disease P02.192 causing mutation in this syndrome. The parents do not carry this iNew mutation of ARX gene as a cause of Partington syndrome. mutation. M. Simandlová1, A. Křepelová1, D. Novotná1, H. Bémová2, J. Kraus2, T. Even though ectrodactyly is a hallmark in EEC syndrome and is Maříková1, M. Havlovicová1; found in the vast majority of the patients, it should be included in the 1UBLG, FN Motol, V úvalu 84, P5, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Dpt of Pediatric differential diagnosis when the other two major components exist (i.e. Neurology , FN Motol, V úvalu 84, P5, Prague, Czech Republic. ectodermal and clefting ). Lack of involvement of the limbs in this boy Infantile spasms, mental retardation, autism, and dystonia represent may be due to other genes affecting the expression of the mutated disabling diseases for which little etiologic information is available. p63 in this case pointing at a more complex mechanism for the mild Mutations in the Aristaless related homeobox gene (ARX) have been phenotype in this boy. found in patients with these conditions .Aristaless related homeobox (ARX) is a transcription factor containing highly conserved octapeptide, P02.190 homeobox, acidic, and aristaless domains, as well as four polyA A boy with intranasal hamartomatous polyp and pericallosal tracts.. The most common mutation, the c.428_451dup, is associated lipoma further expands Pai syndrome phenotype. with a wide spectrum of phenotypes, ranging from the most severe D. J. Lederer, P. Lefesvre, C. Verellen-Dumoulin; West syndrome to Partington syndrome (MR and hand dystonia), and Center For Human Genetic, IPG, Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium. even nonsyndromic X-linked mental retardation (NS-XLMR). Here, we Pai syndrome is characterized by mild hypertelorism, midline cleft lip, report the boy with clinical manifestation of Partington syndrome (PS) nasal and facial polyps, pericallosal lipoma, ocular anomalies and , where the mutation of poly A tract is slightly different: c.426_458 dup. normal neuropsychologic development. The boy presents with brachial dystonia, ataxia and severe mental We describe an 8 years old child presenting with congenital nasal retardation- typical symptomps of PS. . hamartomatous polyp and peri-callosal lipoma. The association Mutations in the homeobox gene, ARX, cause a diverse spectrum of of these two extremely rare findings in the same patient is highly disease that includes cognitive impairment, epilepsy, and in another suggestive of Pai syndrome. Thirty patients with Pai syndrome are group of patients severe cortical malformations. Although the precise described in the literature. Nasal polyp is a constant feature in Pai prevalence of ARX mutations is unclear, ARX may rival Fragile X as a syndrome patients described so far. Peri-callosal lipoma was present cause of mental retardation and epilepsy in males. in all but one patients screened with brain MRI. Another common The work was supported by the grant MZOFNM2005 feature is midline cleft lip described in 26/30 patients. In view of this case and literature review, we suggest as minimal clinical criteria for P02.193 Pai syndrome: congenital midline nasal polyp, peri-callosal lipoma and/ Bilateral persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous - case report or midline cleft lip. Furthermore, our patient expands the phenotype T. Marcovici1,2, I. Simedrea1,2, O. Marginean1,2, L. Olariu1,2, O. Belei1,2, C. of Pai syndrome with some atypical findings such as bucco-lingual Daescu1,2, D. Chiru1,2, A. Militaru1,2, M. Puiu1,2; dyspraxia, true tracheal bronchus, sacral dimple and hypospadias. 1”Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 114 2”Louis Turcanu” Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. équipe 11, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 4Serviço de Genética Background: Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) is a rare Médica, Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 5Service génétique congenital condition due to failure of regression of the embryological, clinique, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, primary vitreous and hyaloid vasculature. It typically presents France, 6Laboratoire et Consultations de Génétique Chromosomique, CHU unilaterally (90%) without associated systemic findings. Between the Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 7Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de three variants of PHPV(anterior, posterior or a combination of anterior Nice, Nice, France, 8Centro Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, INSA, and posterior presentations) the last one is the most commonly seen. Porto, Portugal, 9Service de Néonatologie, Centre Hospitalier d’Amiens, The patient usually has microophthalmia, leukocoria and reduced Saint Quentin, France, 10Service de Génétique et d’Embryologie médicales, vision. Cataract and anomalies of the anterior chamber angle are Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 11Service de Génétique Médicale, present. Accompanying retinal lesions (detachment, dysplasia) may CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France, 12Northern Regional Genetic Service, be seen. Other complications in PHPV are : amblyopia; strabismus; Auckland City Hospital, Auckland, New Zealand, 13Department of Clinical loss of vision; glaucoma.The treatment is surgical and the procedures Genetics, Erasmus MC, Universitair Medisch Centrum Rotterdam, Rotterdam, depend on the clinical presentation. Early surgical rehabilitation may Netherlands, 14Département de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Marseille, Hôpital facilitate a better visual outcome. Material and methods: We present La Timone, Marseille, France, 15Service de Génétique Clinique, CHU de a 3 years old girl with visual impairment and moderate psychomotor Rouen, Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 16Département de Génétique, delay. She is the product of an uncomplicated full-term pregnancy. In Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 17Clinical genetics, Guy’s her mother’s family are present some cases of cataract and strabismus. and St Thomas Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 18Klinische genetica, VU Full evaluation (history, clinical exam, biological and imagistic tests, medisch centrum, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 19Service génétique clinique, ophthalmological, neurological and genetic evaluation, audiometry) CHU Pellegrin, Paris, France, 20Clinical genetics, Institute for Human Genetics, was done. Results: Bilateral strabismus, enophtalmia, amblyopia Newcastle, United Kingdom, 21INSERM U975, Centre de Recherche de l’Institut and cataract were noticed. Ocular ultrasonography revealed bilateral du Cerveau et de la Moelle Épinière, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous. No hearing impairment was France. identified. Patient’s family disagrees with surgical eye procedures Pitt Hopkins syndrome (PHS, MIM#610954) patients present with (vitrectomy). Conclusions: The visual prognosis is poor in this case severe intellectual disability with no speech, typical facial gestalt because it is a bilateral complicated presentation of PHPV. The delay and hyperventilation episodes. In 2007, TCF4 was indentified as of the surgical rehabilitation would lead to irreversible amblyopia, even the disease causing gene with de novo heterozygous mutations or loss of vision. Genetic and family counseling, ophthalmological and deletions. Since, about 60 patients have been reported. neurological follow up are mandatory. Here, we report a novel series of 30 patients diagnosed with PHS and refine the neurological and morphological phenotype. P02.194 Within a two years period we identified heterozygous de novo TCF4 Variation of clinical expression in family with Pfeiffer syndrome gene mutations or deletions in 30 patients with severe intellectual caused by p.P252R mutation in FGFR1 gene disability and the PHS facial gestalt. All patients were clinically A. Jakubiuk-Tomaszuk1,2, R. Leśniewicz3, W. Sobaniec1, R. Posmyk4; revaluated with special attention to neurological presentation, with 1Department of Pediatric Neurology and Rehabilitation, Medical University films whenever possible, and available brain-MRIs were reviewed. of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Podlaskie All our patients had severe intellectual disabilities with no speech. Center of Clinical Genetics, Bialystok, Poland, Poland, Poland, 3Department Twenty-seven have facial features typical for the syndrome. A majority of Gynecological Endocrinology, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, of the patients presents stereotypic movements (arm flapping, rapid Poland, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Podlaskie Center of Clinical movement of fingers, hand nibbling or rubbing and head rotation) Genetics, Bialystok, Poland, Bialystok, Poland. and restless movements increasing with anxiety and excitation. Pfeiffer syndrome (OMIM#101600) is a genetic disorder which belongs Hyperventilation is frequent and often triggered by anxiety or to craniofacial dysostosis group, inherited autosomal dominant with excitement. Epilepsy and microcephaly are very inconstant findings. change in clinical expression. It affects about 1 in 100,000 live-births. Cerebral MRI shows minor morphological changes only. Typical features include: premature fusion of certain bones of the skull PHS is not rare among patients with severe intellectual deficiency. We (craniosynostosis), maxillary hypoplasia and digital abnormalities of report the clinical features of 30 PHS patients, with special emphasis the hands and feet. This condition can be caused by heterozygous on the neurological phenotype and key diagnostic features in the Rett- mutations in either fibroblast growth factor receptor gene type 1 or like group of patients. Genotype-phenotype correlation will also be 2 (FGFR1 or FGFR2). FGFR1 mutations often result in less severe discussed. craniofacial involvement and abnormalities of the limbs. The family of three members (father, his son and daughter) affected P02.196 by Pfeiffer syndrome has been reported. Father demonstrated mutation analysis of the NPHs2 gene with the direct DNA brachycephaly, hypertelorism, midfacial hypoplasia, stiff and broad sequencing method in Russian children with steroid-resistant thumbs, 2rd and 3rd toe syndactyly, very broad, flat, medially nephritic syndrome. deviated great toes and normally developed intelligence. Son during V. Kornienko1, A. Tsygin1, A. Asanov1,2, V. Pinelis1; examination showed severe mental retardation without ability of 1Scientific center for children’s Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, speaking, total 2rd to 4rd syndactyly toes at both feet, slightly medially Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical deviated great toes and he did not express craniosynostosis features. Universit, Moscow, Russian Federation. In case of daughter insignificant signs of stiff thumbs, slight, partial 2rd The NPHS2 gene encodes podocin protein, which plays an important and 3rd toes syndactyly without craniosynostosis features and normal role in glomerular ultrafiltration and controlling slit membrane intelligence were reported. In affected family we showed p.P252R permeability. Podocin is a raft associated component of the glomerular mutation in FGFR1 gene. membrane where it is localized at the insertion of the slit-diaphragm. It was known that mutations of an NPHS2 can determine specificity P02.195 of treatment for children with nephrotic syndrome (NS). In Russian Pitt Hopkins syndrome: further delineation of the neurological patients with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) mutations phenotype of the NPHS2 gene have remained mainly unknown. The aim of S. Whalen1, A. Jacquette1,2, T. Gaillon3, O. Moldovan4, M. Rossi5, F. Devillard6, present study was to screen for podocin mutations in Russian children F. Giuliano7, G. Soares8, M. Mathieu-Dramard9, A. Afenjar1,10,2, L. Burglen10, P. with SRNS. There were 61 patients with SRNS and 15 age-matched Charles1,2, L. Van Maldergem11, S. Aftimos12, G. Mancini13, P. Dias4, N. Philip14, healthy children. Mean age at onset of proteinuria was 6,3±4,8 years. A. Goldenberg15, M. Le Merrer16, D. Josifova17, A. Van Hagen18, D. Lacombe19, Mutation analysis was performed in eight exons of the NPHS2 gene P. Edery5, R. Fisher20, M. Goossens3, J. Amiel16, D. Héron1,21,2, I. Giurgea3; using the direct DNA sequencing method. We identified mutations 1Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié and polymorphism variants in the NPHS2 gene: rs3738423 (S96S), Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Centre de Référence Maladies Rares «Déficiences rs61747728 (R229Q), rs1410592 (A318A), rs3818587 (L346L), Intellectuelles de causes rares», Groupe Hospitalier Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, rs1410592 (A318A), IVS3+1507 C>T, IVS3+1460 C>T, IVS7+7 France, 3Service de biochimie et génétique and INSERM U955 IMRB A>G, IVS7+1078 G>C. First discovered in the Russian patients the Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 115 polymorphism IVS7+7 A>G (N.Poltavetz) was also represented in our Statistics for all these criteria will be provided, as well as a SRNS patients. We revealed two new mutations I255T and V338L. comprehensive model for the investigation, education and therapy It is known that R229Q polymorphism associates with the SRNS in offered to a child diagnosed with PWS, in order to reduce major different ethnic groups. In our study frequency of R229Q polymorphism psychological and behavioral problems. Particularities found will be in children with SRNS have met in two times often than in the healthy underlined. group. The frequencies of other polymorphisms was approximately the In conclusion, we have analyzed the psychological and behavioral same in both groups. Thus the detected NPHS2 gene polymorphisms profile of 57 cases diagnosed with PWS. Based on this, we have in our patients must be borne in mind when choosing therapy of SRNS. elaborated a model of investigation, education and therapy in order to optimize the recovery of the psychological problems that these P02.197 patients are facing. two cases of Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia type 2: clinical, neuroradiological and moleculargenetical findings P02.199 A. Bier1, C. Finetti2, H. Böhrer-Rabel3, S. Reif1, J. Plaschke1, F. R. Kreuz1, S. Prader-Willi/ Angelman syndromes: different molecular Krüger1; approaches. 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Klinikum A. Botezatu1, A. Cosmin2, N. Cucu2, M. Puiu3, C. C. Diaconu1, I. V. Iancu1, G. Duisburg Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin Abteilung für Neuropädiatrie, Anton1; Duisburg, Germany, 3genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany. 1Institute of Virology “St.S.Nicolau”, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Pontocerebellar hypoplasias (PCH) are rare autosomal recessive Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and neurodegenerative disorders which are characterised by severe Pharmacy “V.Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. mental and motor impairments, hypoplasia of the cerebellum and Prader-Willi (PWS) and Angelman (AS) syndromes are distinct ventral pons, microcephaly, and variable degrees of cortical atrophy. neurogenetic disorders, caused by chromosomal deletions, uniparental PCH are subdivided into six types (PCH1 to PCH6), of which PCH2 is disomy or loss of the imprinted gene expression in 15q11-13 region. most common accounting for about 90% of all PCH cases. While PWS occurs from a lack of the paternally expressed gene PCH2 is characterised by progressive microcephaly from birth contribution, AS originates from a lack of the maternally expressed combined with extrapyramidal dyskinesia, lack of voluntary motor gene expression in the region, specifically UBE3A. or mental development, severe chorea, and frequently epilepsy. It The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinical diagnosis using is caused by biallelic mutations in TSEN54, whereby a homozygous different comparative molecular methods. c.919G>T (p.Ala307Ser) mutation has been identified in approximately The study group consisted in 14 children (age 2-10 years) 90% of PCH2 cases. This mutation is thought to be a founder mutation presumptively diagnosed with PWS and one case with AS at UMF descending of a single couple that lived in the seventeenth century in Timisoara- Pediatric Hospital and 10 normal patients (control). Volendam, The Netherlands. Most children die before age ten years, DNA and RNA samples were isolated from white cell blood. For although survival beyond age 20 has been reported. Typical findings MS-PCR 700ng of DNA was sodium bisufite treated. RNA samples in PCH2 in cerebral Magnetic Resonance Imaging (cMRI) are, beyond were reverstranscribed with Access Quick Kit (Promega). Epigenetic ventral pontine atrophy/hypotrophy, cerebellar hypoplasia whereby the changes at SNRPN gene locus were evaluated with MS-PCR cerebellar hemispheres are more affected than cerebellar vermis with technique. Two non-imprinted genes expression (NIPA1 and OCA2) a relative sparing of the flocculi. These cMRI features were termed as was evaluated by qReal-Time PCR for identification of deletions type dragonfly-like cerebellar pattern and recognised as pathognomic for 1,2,3. SALSA MS-MLPA kit ME028 was used to detect copy number TSEN54 mutations. changes and to analyze CpG islands methylation of the 15q11 region. Here we report on two female patients aged 9 months and 13 years, 4/14 children presented deletions type 1,2,3 and 6/14 display respectively. Both children were born by non consanguineous imprinting defect (all PWS). In children with 15q11-13 deletions, no or parents of German descent. After an uneventful pregnancy and birth, poor NIPA1, OCA2 gene expression was found, depending on deletion they developed neurological signs resembling to PCH. Cranial MRI type. The deletions was confirmed in FISH and MLPA analysis thus displayed typical pattern of PCH2. Sequencing of TSEN54 revealed recommending NIPA1 and OCA2 gene expression as an alternate homozygousity for the TSEN54 c.919G>T mutation in both patients. method for deletions investigation. P02.198 P02.200 Psychological and behavioral profile of Romanian Prader Willi the oro-maxillo-facial anomalies in patients with Prader Willi patients syndrome: a survey of 13 cases C. Rusu1, E. Braha1, M. Volosciuc2, V. Gorduza1, C. Skrypnyk3, V. Plaiasu4, C. E. Braha1, C. Rusu1, V. Gorduza1, M. Volosciuc2, C. Skrypnyk3, D. Dan4, M. Badiu5, A. Szekely6, M. Puiu7, D. Dan6; Puiu5; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Sf Maria Children’s 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Pediatric Hospital, Iasi, Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 3University of Medicine, Oradea, Romania, 4Institute Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 4Asociaţia for Child and Mother Protection, Bucharest, Romania, 5University of Medicine Prader Willi din România, Zalau, Romania, 5University of Medicine and and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 6Prader Willi Association, Zalau, Romania, Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. 7University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Prader Willi syndrome PWS is a chromosomal microdeletion or Prader Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex disorder that includes disomy disorder due to deletion or maternal disomy 15q11-13. It prenatal/neonatal central hypotonia, poor suck and infantile failure-to- is characterized by severe neonatal hypotonia, childhood-onset thrive, characteristic facial appearance, hyperphagia and obesity, short stature, facial dysmorphy (narrow developmental delay, childhood onset obesity, short stature, bifrontal diameter, almond-shaped palpebral fissures, down turned hypogonadism and a characteristic behavior disorder. mouth), hypogonadism, mental retardation and anomalies of the oral We have studied the 57 patients registered with Romanian Prader region. Willi Association in order to appreciate the psychological and The purpose of this report is to evaluate carefully the patients with behavioral profile. The major aims of this study were to identify PWS and to describe the oro-maxillo-facial anomalies. specific behavioral patterns and early ways to improve developmental We followed 13 PWS patients (age range 26 years- 5 years 8 months; delay and behavioral problems, for the benefit of patient and family. 8 girls, 4 boys) in Centres for Medical Genetics Iasi and Timisoara: Criteria studied included concordance of the different developmental dysmorphologic and clinical examination, dietetic and GH treatment fields (motor/language/cognitive), severity of developmental delay, history, cognitive function and behavior problems, oral and radiologic personality (stubbornness, preferences, communication, manipulation, exam, reviewed all the laboratory studies. selfmutilation etc) and evolution of personality characteristics in time, All the patients presented characteristic facial features, thick saliva, memory and functioning, sleep problems and how do they influence speech articulation defects, 2 patients had microstoma, 1 with behavior, evolution of hypotonia in time. After a global analysis, the microdontia, 5 with malloclusion, 5 with enamel dysplasia, and 9 cases have been grouped according to the genetic defect and all these patients presented multiple dental caries (erosive and pour oral parameters have been compared. hygiene, bruxism).Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 116 PWS is frequent associated with oro-maxillo-facial anomalies and P02.203 typically dysmorphic face. Clinical proper management is essential for Estimation of prevalence of malformation syndrome by a favorable oral health status. population-based birth defects monitoring system in Japan K. Kurosawa1, K. Enomoto1, N. Furuya1, A. Ishikawa1, M. Tominaga1, T. Wada1, P02.201 M. Masuno2, Y. Kuroki2; Early death in an infant diagnosed with Prader-Willi syndrome 1Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kawasaki University M. Stoian1, V. Belengeanu1, S. Farcas1, N. Andreescu1, M. Puiu1, M. Boia2; of Medical Welfare, Kurashiki, Japan. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Genetics, Multiple malformation syndromes are recognized by characteristic Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of anomalies and need specialized medical cares. For the study Neonatology, Timisoara, Romania. of genetic diseases, epidemiology plays a central role in public Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), a disorder with severe implications in health, improvement, and disease prevention. However, evaluation child pathology marked by hypotonia in neonate period and obesity and ascertainment of the incidence of these disorders is limited after the age of two years may have fatal evolution. The death causes because of difficulties of diagnosis and rarity in general population. may vary according to patient’s age and also depend of the initiation To elucidate the incidence of malformation syndromes, we used data of growth hormone therapy. We report the history of a PWS case with from population-based monitoring system and genetic clinic of highly early death. The male infant delivered by caesarian section with low specialized children’s hospital in the same prefecture. KAMP is one of birth parameters, due to breech presentation, presented hypotonia, the population-based birth defects monitoring program operating from but no feeding difficulties. The clinical examination revealed: high 1981 in Kanagawa Prefecture, Japan. It covers a half of total births, forehead, slight upslanting palpebral fissures, low nasal bridge, 40,000 annually. During the study period, the annual number of patients microretrognathia, short neck and cryptorchidia. Conventional with Down syndrome in the genetic clinic has been correlated with cytogenetic analysis was performed and the karyotype was normal. the prevalence in the KAMP. These results suggested the hypothesis Due to hypotonia hormonal profile was evaluated: FT3, FT4, and TSH that other recognizable malformation syndromes may visit the clinic indicating congenital hypothyroidism defined later as transitory. At with the same ratio. According to the known prevalence of Down age of 7 months the persistent hypotonia, imposed the microdeletion syndrome (1/800), we calculated the incidence of the recognizable FISH analysis with SNRPN probe for the Prader-Willy syndrome, malformation syndromes. The estimation indicated that the incidence which confirmed the diagnosis. Echocardiography revealed hypoxic of Costello syndrome is 1/60,000-120,000 births, CHARGE syndrome hypertrophic cardiomyopathy with atrial septal defect. In evolution 1/30,000 births, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome 1/50,000-60,000 births, metabolic disturbances were identified with high levels of cholesterol, Young-Simpson syndrome 1/100,000 births, and ATR-X syndrome glycemia and GPT. The investigation of gonadotrophins sexual 1/60,000 male births respectively. Although the syndromes are very hormones indicated high levels of LH and low levels of FSH and rare, the total number of diseases is high and has large impacts on the testosterone. The patient was admitted several times due to recurrent public health. This methodology may be successfully applied to other episodes de bronchiolitis and pneumonia and at the age of eight malformation syndromes. months died due to cardio respiratory failure. For the next pregnancy the parents agreed to prenatal diagnosis although the recurrence risk P02.204 is only 1-2% due microdeletion etiology of the case. Dopamine gene receptors expression in psoriatic patients M. Mohammadian1, G. Ahangari1, H. Mortazavi2, R. Torabi1, S. Ghasemi1; P02.202 1Dept. of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering Diagnosis in Prader-Willi syndrome by methylation test in Brazil and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department C. L. A. Paiva, C. R. Rocha, L. A. Agostinho, E. Paradela, A. S. Figueiredo, R. of Dermatology, Razi hospital, Tehran university of medical science,, Tehran, P. Alvarenga, S. R. dos Santos; Islamic Republic of Iran. Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Dopamine plays roles as a neurotransmitter and neuromodulator with Brazil. functions in brain and peripheral tissues. Dopamine receptor (DRD) PWS is caused by loss of paternal contribution of genes located on subtypes are related to depression and also have been shown to chromosome 15 (15q11-13). Most of patients show obesity and mental be present in certain cells of the immune system. There are some disability. Holms et al. (1993) proposed the criteria for its clinical evidences that suggest that DRD subtypes are responsible for high diagnosis. These criteria were revised by Gunay-Aygun et al. (2001) lymphocyte activation in psoriasis. Psoriasis is a proliferative and aiming to define criteria for selecting patients who should undergo inflammatory disease. There are at least five subtypes of DRDs, D1, molecular testing. The aim of this work was to identify PWS in 34 D2, D3, D4, and D5. The D1 and D5 receptors are members of the Brazilian patients with putative diagnosis, and to verify whether the D1-like family of DRDs, whereas the D2, D3 and D4 receptors are molecular results were compatible with the clinical diagnosis based members of the D2-like family. The aim of this study is evaluation of on Holms and Gunay-Aygun’s criteria. The patients were sent to the DRD (3,5) genes expression in psoriatic patients in comparison with Genetics Outpatient Clinic of HUGG by different clinicians. They were normal individuals by Real Time PCR. reassessed and had the methylation test done. The method employed The PBMC was separated from whole blood by Ficoll-hypaque. The McrBC endonuclease that digests the site 5’...PumC(N40-3000) total cellular RNA was extracted and the cDNA was synthesized. This PumC...3’ of exon-1 of SNRPN gene (methylated only in normal process was followed by real-time PCR using primer pairs specific for chromosomes of maternal origin). Amplification of exon-1 SNRPN DRD mRNA and beta-actin as internal control. Results show relative gene was achieved by PCR with SNRPN primers. The amplicons overexpression of DRD3 gene has significant changes between two were detected by 3% agarose gel if the SPW region of paternal origin groups, but we could not find significant changes between two groups was normal. This method can detect SPW caused by deletion or for DRD5 gene. Considering these results the present study has shown abnormal methylation on chromosome 15 of paternal origin, as well a change in DRD3 gene expression in PBMC of psoriasis patients. as by maternal uniparental disomy. Out of 34 patients, 23 were judged Due to this data, we conclude that significant increased expression of clinically by Holms criteria and 29 were offered the molecular test DRD3 gene may has an important role in psoriasis. based on Gunay-Aygun. We found 8 patients with a molecular result compatible with PWS. Therefore, PWS is best diagnosed clinically by P02.205 experienced clinicians backed by DNA analysis. The diagnosis should PtEN-Associated macrocephaly/Autism syndrome be done as early as possible for appropriate counselling and dietary M. Havlovicová, P. Vasovčák, A. Křepelová, M. Simandlová, Z. Sedláček; management initiation. Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 2nd Medical School, Charles University and Faculty Hospit, Prague, Czech Republic. There is a strong genetic component to autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) but due to significant genetic heterogeneity individual genetic abnormalities contribute a small percentage to overall total. PTEN hamartoma tumour syndrome (PHTS) is a heterogeneous group of disorders (Cowden syndrome, Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 117 syndrome, Proteus syndrome and Proteus-like syndrome) Renal Center, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands. characterized by germline mutations in the PTEN gene and an Renal adysplasia is part of the spectrum of congenital anomalies of increased risk of different tumours. the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) that forms a major cause of Previous studies have proved PTEN mutations in a portion of end-stage renal disease in children. Little is known about the origin of individuals with ASDs and macrocephaly that do not exhibit features renal dysplasia, though it is anticipated that genetic and environmental of PHTS. factors are involved. There is a role for genes expressed during early From a group of patients currently genetically investigated in our nephrogenesis in CAKUT etiology. In this study, two genes, uroplakin institute we have selected 21 children with a head circumference range 3A (UPK3A) and fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7), were screened for from 2.0 to 4.8 standard deviations above the mean for the PTEN variants in a phenotypically diverse cohort of 19 Dutch renal adysplasia mutation analysis. Three novel (p.Asp331ThrfsX11, p.Thr321GlnfsX23, patients. Four novel, inherited, UPK3A mutations were identified in p.Glu242X) and one known germline mutation (p.Pro246Leu) have 3/19 (16%) patients with unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney. The been found in four (19%) of 21 probands. mutations - c.356T>C (p.Ile119Thr), c.418G>A (p.Gly140Arg), c.450C>A Our data support former findings that PTEN mutations are relatively (p.Gly150Gly) and c.545G>A (p.Trp182X) - were not described before frequent in children with ASDs and macrocephaly and therefore PTEN and not observed in 96 control chromosomes. As c.418G>A was gene testing should be considered in such patients. The gene findings detected in a patient with VACTERL association (Vertebral defects, may impact on assessment of the recurrence risk as well as medical Anal atresia or stenosis, Cardiac defects, Tracheo-Esophageal fistula, management of early cancer prevention. Radial defects and Renal anomalies, Limb defects), 25 additional DNA The work was supported by the grant MZOFNM2005 and CHERISH samples of VACTERL cases were screened; no mutations in UPK3A were detected. In FGF7, no likely pathogenic mutations were detected. P02.206 This is the first time a stop-mutation in UPK3A is reported. All UPK3A Absence of influence of gender and BMPR2 mutation type on mutations published so far were reviewed and in silico analyses are clinical phenotypes of pulmonary arterial hypertension presented. This study revealed novel UPK3A mutations strengthening B. GIRERD1,2, D. MONTANI1,2, M. EYRIES3, A. YAICI1,2, B. SZTRYMF1,2, F. the position of variants in UPK3A in the etiology of renal adysplasia. COULET3, O. SITBON1,2, G. SIMONNEAU1,2, F. SOUBRIER3, M. HUMBERT1,2; 1Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital Antoine Béclère, Clamart, France, 2Inserm P02.208 U999, Centre Chirurgical Marie-Lannelongue, Le Plessis-Robinson, France, the low penetrance of retinoblastoma for the V654L mutation in 3Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France. RB1 gene Background: Previous studies indicate that patients with pulmonary C. Hung1,2, S. Lin3,4, C. Lee4, Y. Su1,2,3; arterial hypertension (PAH) carrying a mutation in the bone 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of morphogenetic protein receptor type 2 (BMPR2) gene, develop the Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan disease 10 years earlier than non-carriers, and have a more severe University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, hemodynamic compromise at diagnosis. National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department Methods: We reviewed data from all patients with PAH considered of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, as idiopathic and patients with a family history of PAH who Taiwan. underwent genetic counseling. We compared clinical, functional, and Background hemodynamic characteristics between carriers and non-carriers of a Retinoblastoma is caused by compound heterozygosity or BMPR2 mutation, according to gender or BMPR2 mutation type. homozygosity of retinoblastoma gene (RB1) mutations. In germlinal Results: PAH patients carrying a BMPR2 mutation (n=115) were retinoblastoma, mutations in RB1 gene predispose increase cancer significantly younger at diagnosis than non-carriers (n=267) (35.8±15.4 risk during development and segregates as an autosomal dominant and 47.5±16.2 respectively, p<0.0001). The presence of a BMPR2 trait with high penetrance (90%). mutation was associated with a younger age at diagnosis in females Methods (36.4±14.9 in BMPR2 mutation carriers and 47.4±15.8 in non-carriers, In this study, we screened 30 family members from a certain families p<0.0001), and males (34.6±16.8 in BMPR2 mutation carriers and using high resolution melting assay (HRM) and DNA direct sequencing. 47.8±17.1 in non-carriers, p<0.0001). BMPR2 mutation carriers had We evaluate the phenotype and penetrance of a germ-line mutation of a more severe hemodynamic compromise at diagnosis, but this was RB1 gene in a large Taiwanese family. not influenced by gender. No differences in survival and time to death Results or lung transplantation were found in male and female PAH patients The molecular analysis and clinical details of this family showed carrying a BMPR2 mutation. No differences were observed in clinical phenotypic variability associated with certain V654L mutation in outcomes according to the type of BMPR2 mutations (missense, exon 19 of RB1 gene in 11 individuals. The phenotype varies from truncating, large rearrangement or splice defect). asymptomatic to unilateral tumor. Only 4 individuals (2 males and Conclusion: When compared to non-carriers, BMPR2 mutation 2 females) developed unilateral retinoblastoma, which results in carriers from the French PAH network are younger at diagnosis and calculated low penetrance of 36% (4/11). In particular, none of them present with a more severe hemodynamic compromise, irrespective of relatives in this family exhibited the variable severity and bilateral gender. Moreover, BMPR2 mutation type had no influence on clinical retinoblastoma. phenotypes in our patient population. ConclusionsThe diseased-eye ratio (DER) for this family was 0.36, lower than current estimates. This suggests that the RB1 V654L P02.207 mutation was itself insufficient to develop the retinoblastoma. UPK3A and FGF7 mutation analysis in Dutch renal adysplasia patients provides further evidence for the role of UPK3A in P02.209 congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract (cAKUt) A case of bilateral retinoblastoma with later development of a pathogenesis jaw osteosarcoma as a second primary malignant tumor A. M. van Eerde1, K. Y. Renkema2, K. Duran1, E. van Riel1, R. B. van der Luijt1, F. F. Cionca1, L. Cionca2, C. Nastasia2, C. Ardeleanu1; W. F. Feitz3, E. M. H. F. Bongers2, C. Marcelis2, M. R. Lilien4, T. P. V. M. de 1”Victor Babes” National Institute for Research and Development in Pathology Jong5,6, C. G. F. de Kovel1, N. V. A. M. Knoers1,2, J. C. Giltay1; and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Prof. Dr. Dan Teodorescu” 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center, Utrecht, the Clinical Hospital of Oro-Maxilo-Facial Surgery, Bucharest, Romania. Netherlands, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud introduction University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department Retinoblastoma represents a rare type of eye malignant tumor that of Urology, Pediatric Urology Centre, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical usually develops in early childhood in the retina. Most cases present Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Nephrology, inactivating mutations in the RB1 gene, located on chromosome University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Pediatric Renal 13q14, a tumor suppressor gene which regulates the cell growth. 40 % Center, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Pediatric of all retinoblastomas are germinal, concerning all bilateral forms and 15% of the unilateral ones. The mutation in the RB1 gene is inherited in a autosomal dominant pattern, with a high penetrance rate. Patients Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 118 with this form have an increased risk of developing second site primary performed by array-CGH technique with resolution of about 60 kb (kit malignant tumors, including osteosarcoma , pinealoblastoma, Ewing 105K AGILENT) has revealed: a duplication of about 6.7 Mb of the long sarcoma, leukaemia, lymphoma, epithelial or brain tumors. Genetic arm of a chromosome 15 [dup(15)(q26.1)], with proximal breakpoint counseling and analysis are indicated for every patient, including an falling between 88,860 Mb (normal) end 88,885 Mb (duplicated) anticipation examination schedule for testing and direct and indirect and a deletion of about 4.8 Mb of the long arm of a chromosome 15 molecular tests. [del(15)(q26.2→qter)] with proximal breakpoint between 88,885 Mb case presentation (duplicated) and 95,606 Mb (deleted). Phenotype -genotype correlation A 17 years old female presented with a large, unilateral tumor located changing with the age was evaluated using dysmorphological protocol on the right upper jaw. From her antecedents we mention: she was of Stengel-Rutkowski et al for quantitative phenotype evaluation of boy born at full term, by normal vaginal delivery, she had developmental for each from 4 periods of development separately and differences milestones adequate for the age. At the age of three she was operated have been observed. and then chemo and radio treated for bilateral retinoblastoma. Family history for retinoblastoma was negative (including a brother and a P02.212 sister). The upper maxilla tumor was histopathologically diagnosed as Rubinstein-taybi syndrome: case report a osteosarcoma. M. O. Mkheidze, E. S. Shabanova; conclusion Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian The patient presented bilateral retinoblastoma in childhood, caused by Federation. germline mutation of the RB1 gene, surgical, chemo and radio treated, Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS; MIM180849) is a congenital with an increased risk of developing second site primary malignant disease characterized by postnatal growth deficiency, microcephaly, tumors, which explains the later development of a jaw osteosarcoma specific facial characteristics, broad thumbs and big toes, and mental in her case. retardation. Estimated prevalence of RSTS is 1 per 10,000 live births. It occurs generally sporadic, and can be caused by a microdeletion of P02.210 chromosome 16p13.3, or by mutations in CREB or EP300 genes. Here Novel triple deletion of the mEcP2 gene in atypical Rett we reported on 6 years old girl with multiple congenital anomalies and syndrome patient mental retardation. Proband was born premature at 35-36 weeks of I. Sansović, I. Barišić, K. Dumić; seventh pregnancy complicated with anemia, threatened miscarriages Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Clinical Hospital Center Sisters of Mercy, Zagreb, at 10-12, 29-30 and 34-35 weeks of gestation. She was the second Croatia. child of non-consanguineous parents. At birth her father was 25 years Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant neurodevelopmental aged. Her mother 27 years aged suffered from thyroid enlargement, disorder with variable clinical presentation. About 75-90% patients chronic urogenital infection and had a professional contact with with classical and 40% with variant RTT have heterozygous mutation industrial hazards. Proband’s birth weight was 1950g and length in the X-linked MECP2 gene. We report on a 5.5 year old girl with was 42 cm. At 6 yr her weight was 10,000g, her length 68cm, chest a novel C-terminal MECP2 triple deletion and atypical clinical circumference 51cm, head circumference 49cm. Clinical findings presentation. The girl was born at term after an uneventful pregnancy. of the proband 6 yr aged included mental retardation and speech Her development was slow from birth. She started sitting at the age of difficulties, facial abnormalities (down-slanting palpebral fissures, 12 months and walking at the age of 18 months. By the age of 1 year highly arched eyebrows, ptosis, epicanthal folds, strabismus, OD with she acquired several words, thereafter speech deteriorated. Postnatal atypical cataract, hypermetropia of high degree, astigmatism, OS with deceleration of head growth was not present. She was evaluated at the hypermetropia of average degree and astigmatism, prominent beaked age of 2 years and 8 months due to moderate global developmental nose, hypoplastic maxilla with narrow palate, malformed ears), digit delay and behavioural problems (aggressiveness, hyperactivity, abnormalities (broad great toes and thumbs, broadness of other screaming and laughing spells and impaired social interaction). At that fingers, persistent fetal finger pads, syndactyly), cardiac symptoms time her height was 95.5cm (+1SD), weight 18.5kg (+2.5SD), head (tricuspid regurgitation, incomplete right bundle-branch block, circumference 50cm (+1SD). On follow up no progression of mental premature ventricular repolarization). X-ray examination of upper deterioration was observed. Her gait is only mildly disturbed, she is extremity showed marked malformation of hand bones. able to walk unsupported, purposeful hand use is preserved, with only occasional stereotypic movements. DNA bidirectional sequencing of P02.213 MECP2 coding exons revealed de novo triple deletion in C-terminal clinical and molecular analyses in a series of 28 patients region of MECP2 gene - c. [1021_1037del17; 1057_1089del33; carrying a pathogenic SALL4 mutation 1162_1179del18,] not previously described. Result was confirmed E. Dumortier1, F. Escande-Narducci2, M. Holder-Espinasse1,3, J. Andrieux4, H. with MLPA analysis. The variability of the clinical presentation of RTT Kayserili5, J. Amiel6, J. Alessandri7, D. Boggio8, D. Bonneau9, V. Cormier-Daire6, emphasizes the need of the molecular analysis of MECP2 gene in all A. David10, M. Delrue11, B. Doray12, B. Gilbert13, B. Leheup14, G. Morin15, L. girls with developmental delay. Perrin16, N. Philip17, S. Manouvrier-Hanu1,3; 1Department of clinical genetics, University hospital, Lille, France, 2Department P02.211 of molecular genetics, University hospital, Lille, France, 3Lille Nord de France the age related changes of phenotype in boy with ring University, Lille, France, 4Department of cytogenetic, University hospital, Lille, chromosome 15 and del(15)(q26.2-qter) together with dup(15) France, 5Department of medical genetics, Institute of child health, Istanbul, (q26.1) . Turkey, 6Department of medical genetics, Necker University hospital, Paris, A. T. Midro1, B. Panasiuk1, M. Gogiel1, O. Zuffardi2; France, 7Department of paediatrics, La Reunion hospital, Saint-Denis, France, 1Department of Clinical Genetic Medical University Bialystok Poland, Bialystok, 8Department of medical genetics, Lyon University hospital, Lyon, France, Poland, 2. Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Universite di Pavia, Italy, 9Department of medical genetics, Angers University hospital, Angers, France, Pavia, Italy. 10Department of medical genetics, Nantes University hospital, Nantes, France, In case of ring chromosomes occurring in karyotype the monosomy 11Department of medical genetics, Bordeaux University hospital, Bordeaux, of the terminal long arm of ring chromosome and mitotic ring France, 12Department of medical genetics, Strasbourg University hospital, instability are taking into consideration as a explanation of peculiar Strasbourg, France, 13Department of medical genetics, Poitiers University morphologic and behavioral phenotype. Recently inv dup del hospital, Poitiers, France, 14Department of medical genetics, Nancy University rearrangements have been described in some of ring chromosomes hospital, Nancy, France, 15Department of clinical genetics, Amiens University which may influenced phenotype. We present natural history of 26- hospital, Amiens, France, 16Department of medical genetics, Robert Debré years old of boy with developmental delay, short stature and peculiar University hospital, Paris, France, 17Department of medical genetics, Marseille morphological phenotype and late onset diabetes mellitus type 2. The University hospital, Marseille, France. ring chromosome 15 in his karyotype were detected using GTG and Introduction. We report on a series of 28 patients, 16 probands and RBG banding techniques. The loss of chromosome material from short 12 relatives, presenting with heterozygous SALL4 mutations on and long arm of chromosome 15 leading to monosomy 15q26.2→qter chromosome 20q13.13-q13.2. were confirmed by FISH using IGF1R probe (Posejdon). The analysis Patients. Sixteen probands were initially referred for Okihiro syndrome Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 119 (7/16), or other overlapping phenotypes such as Holt-Oram (8/16) 1. There were no observations of sudden cardiac death and heart or Townes-Brocks (1/16) syndromes. After clinical expertise, final diseases in this family. considered diagnoses were Okihiro (11) and Holt-Oram (5) syndromes. A single nucleotide substitution of A to G at nucleotide position 260 Methods. The clinical and molecular characteristics were analyzed changed the coding sense of exon 2 of the SCN5A from tyrosine to in order to identify genotype-phenotype correlations. Clinical details cysteine (Y87C) was found. were obtained from the referent practitioners. Direct sequencing of the Conclusion: We recently identified the Y87C variation by DNA complete SALL4 coding region and quantitative real time PCR were sequencing of SCN5A, which have not been previously described. performed. After identification of the causal mutation or deletion, 12 A new variation may be associated with the risk of sudden cardiac affected relatives were also tested. death. Population analysis of ethnically-matched controls will be Results. We identified 100% radial ray malformations (28/28), 39% perfomed. Duane anomalies (11/28), 28.5% renal anomalies (8/28), 25% heart This work was partly supported by grant N°02740110783. defects (7/28), 21% growth-retardation (6/28), 14% deafness (4/28), 11% scoliosis (3/28) and 11% gastrointestinal abnormalities (3/28). P02.216 Most of the patients carry either a frameshift mutation or a deletion in screening of BscL2 in spanish patients with spastic SALL4 within exons 2 (68%: 19/28) and 3 (21%: 6/28). Two patients paraparesis and motor neuropathies. were mutated in exon 4, and 1 presented a complete SALL4 deletion. B. Quintáns1,2, S. Piñeiro3, P. Blanco-Arias3,2, J. Pardo4, J. M. Prieto4, S. I. Thirteen mutations had never been reported previously. Pascual-Pascual5, A. Ordoñez-Ugalde2, I. Sanz6, A. Rojo7, P. Suárez-Gil8, Á. Discussion. We confirm in this large series that SALL4 mutations Carracedo2,3, M. J. Sobrido3,2; cause a range of variable phenotypes, including Okihiro and Holt- 1Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Grupo de Oram syndromes. These results suggest that all patients presenting Medicina Xenómica, Universidade de Santiago de Compostela, CIBERER- with a radial ray malformation should be referred to an ophthalmologist Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Fundación and tested for SALL4 if an anomaly was to be identified. The clinical Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, characteristics are more precisely defined but genotype-phenotype 4Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de correlations are not yet obvious. Compostela, Spain, 5Servicio de Neuropediatría, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 6Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, P02.214 Spain, 7Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Príncipe de Asturias, Role of the scN1A gene in the pathogenesis of familiar febrile Alcalá de Henares, Spain, 8Servicio de Neurología, Complejo Hospitalario seizures and GEFs+ Universitario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain. V. Sansoni1, D. Grioni2, S. Redaelli3, L. Dalprà3, R. Combi1; BACKGROUND: While recessive mutations in Seipin/BSCL2 cause 1Dept of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano Bicocca, Milano, Berardinelli-Seip lipodystrophy, dominant gain-of-toxic-function Italy, 2Infantile Neuropsychiatry Clinic, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, mutations affect upper and lower motor neurons, causing Silver 3Dept of Neurosciences and Biomedical Technologies, University of Milano syndrome (SS), hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP-SPG17), distal Bicocca, Milano, Italy. hereditary motor neuropathy (dHMN) and Charcot-Marie-Tooth Febrile seizures (FS) are epileptic phenomena occurring in course of disease type 2 (CMT2). p.N88S and p.S90L in the glycosylation site fever in children with an age ranging from 6 months to 6 years old. FS are the only mutations identified in neurologic seipinopathies, however are the most common type of epilepsy in childhood, with an incidence screening was generally limited to the canonical 398 aa seipin isoform. rate of 2-14%. If febrile seizures persist after six years old, they are A longer isoform of 462 aa has been proposed but its role remains considered as an epileptic syndrome named GEFS+, a rare familiar unknown. disease that arises as FS and progresses to generalized epilepsy in AIMS: To investigate the contribution of BSCL2 to HSP and motor adults. GEFS+ presents an extremely heterogeneous spectrum of neuropathies. epileptic phenotypes whose acuteness varies from mild to severe. METHODS: Sequencing the whole coding region of the large BSCL2 It is well known that the gene coding the α-1 sodium channel subunit isoform (NM_001130702.1; NP_001124174.1) in: a) 106 cases of (SCN1A) is mutated in GEFS+ patients; moreover it has been recently spastic paraplegia without mutations in spastin and atlastin; b) 10 suggested as a possible susceptibility locus for FS. We investigated patients with peripheral neuropathy and pyramidal signs without the involvement of SCN1A in a group of GEFS+ and FS families mutations in other CMT genes. Sequence variations were checked in by means of mutation analysis. The study indentified two missense 180 control individuals. mutations (R542Q and T297I) in highly conserved regions of the RESULTS: One family with the p.N152S (p.N88S in short isoform) channel together with several known SNPs. The R542Q is a de mutation showed manifestation spectrum from pure-HSP to SS and novo mutation already known to be associated with both autism and pyramidal signs without subjective symptoms. One family with the myoclonic epilepsy, while the T297I, previously associated with SMEI, p.S154L (p.S90L) mutation presented pure HSP, CMT2 or dHMN. was identified in all affected members of a family showing FS. Seven new BSCL2 sequence variations were detected (4 missense, Functional studies aimed at evaluating the effect of these mutations on one in-frame deletion, two intronic). the physiological properties of the channel are currently in progress. CONCLUSIONS: Seipin mutations account for at least 1% of spastic Preliminary results suggest that these variations can compromise the paraparesis and 10% of motor neuropathies with pyramidal signs functionality of the protein altering the activation/inactivation properties in our series. Variable expression within a given kindred is the rule, of the channel. difficulting diagnostic awareness. The role of BSCL2 isoforms in the nervous system, as well as the functional effect of sequence variants P02.215 in motor neuron disorders remains to be elucidated. New genetic variation (Y87c) in scN5A gene in patient with asymptomatic Brugada syndrome P02.217 A. G. Shestak, E. I. Gutovskaya, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya; scalp-Ear-Nipple (Finlay-marks) syndrome. A new case with Russian Research Center of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. renal involvement.thirty six year follow-up and molecular Background: Mutations in the cardiac sodium channel gene (SCN5A) cytogenetic studies. have been identified in people with Brugada syndrome, which causes M. Giovannucci Uzielli1, L. Di Medio2, G. Scarselli1, D. Nannini1, N. Dayan2, S. idiopathic ventricular fibrillation and sudden cardiac death (SCD). Guarducci3; Methods: We have screened coding and contiguous intronic areas 1University of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Genetic Science, Florence, Italy, of SCN5A gene by DNA sequencing in asymptomatic patient, who 3Children’s Hospital “A. Meyer”, Florence, Italy. was examined in our Centre. He has been observed by physical Finlay-Marks syndrome, or Scalp-Ear-Nipple (SEN) syndrome (MIM ID examination, standard ECG, 24-h Holter monitoring and Echo-CG. %181270) is a very rare Autosomal Dominant disorder, first described Results: Asymptomatic male patient (46 y.o.) with spontaneous in 1978 by Finlay and Marks in a family with 10 affected individuals over Brugada syndrome type 1 characterized ECG-pattern BrS 1 revealed five generations. The clinical diagnosis is based on the occurrence of during planned examination. There were no syncopes, ventricular scalp defects, dysplastic ears, and absent or rudimentary nipples and fibrillation episode, but his son (23 y.o.) also had ECG-pattern BrS breasts. Urinary tract malformations and/or disfunctions, and diabetes, Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 120 were reported in three cases. P02.220 We report the follow-up study in the affected one of two dyzygotic Autosomal recessive form of severe combined immune female twins, since the age of 2 years and during 36 years. The Deficiency Disease as the predominant pattern in Iranian periodical clinical evaluation, with the recurrent, diagnostic, laboratory patients and instrumental tests, in order to follow the natural history, revealed M. Malek, M. Houshmand; a progressive number of additional features. Normal intelligence and Special Medical Center. Genetic Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. behaviour, and the characteristic phenotype confirm the data reported introduction : Severe Combined Immune Deficiency (SCID) is a in the very few cases of the literature. The patient was submitted rare syndrome which can show an X-linked or autosomal recessive to surgery correction of the congenital bald nodules over the scalp, inheritance pattern. World-wide investigations showed nearly 48% reduction of the hypertelorism, correction of the prominent and X-linked inheritance, caused by mutations of the IL-2 receptor. This dysplastic ears, and correction of the bilateral athelia and amastia. form of SCID is characteristically T-/NK-/B+. On the other hand many Unilateral renal hypoplasia, identified by ultrasounds at age 5 years genes are involved in the autosomal recessive form. The aim of this is now associated with severe renal hypertension. Normal 46,XX study was to determine the inheritance pattern of SCID among affected constitutional karyotype and normal CGH array. By using a battery of families in Iran. polymorphic DNA markers we confirmed the DZ twinning. methods: Genomic DNA of 20 unrelated male patients with T-B+ clinical symptoms of SCID was purified from peripheral blood. PCR P02.218 and sequencing of the IL2RG gene was performed in patients to find cryptic chromosome 18 microdeletion encompassing sEtB1 out if they harbour any mutation. gene in a patient with expressive speech impairment and minor Results: Because the patients were considered to have T-B+ SCID , physical anomalies. we analyzed the IL2RG gene of the patients for mutations by direct G. Marseglia1, M. R. Scordo2, G. Nannetti1, C. Pescucci1, F. Gerundino1, E. genomic sequencing. The X-linked mode of inheritance was not Biagini2, A. Magi1, M. Benelli1, D. Parrini1, F. Torricelli1; detected in any patient. The IL2RG gene of all the patients was normal, 1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy, 2Infantile suggesting an autosomal mode of inheritance of SCID. Neuropsychiatric Unit, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy. Discussion: About 48% of SCID patients worldwide are reported Missense heterozygous mutations in SET binding protein 1 gene to have IL2RG deficiency, but our preliminary result shows that the (SETBP1) have been recently demonstrated to cause Schinzel- autosomal recessive pattern is predominant in Iranian SCID patients. Giedion syndrome (SGS, MIM #269150). SGS is characterised by The high frequency of consanguineous marriage makes it less likely severe mental retardation, distinctive facial features, and multiple that isolated cases of SCID are caused by IL2RG mutations. However, congenital malformations abnormalities (skeletal anomalies, hearth this conclusion is based on only a small number of patients. This is defects, genitourinary and renal malformations) (Hoischen et al, a pilot study and much more investigation is needed to clarify which 2010). More recently, some authors describes two patients with gene is most frequently causative in Iranian patients. de novo chromosomal microdeletions in 18q12.3 and SETBP1 haploinsufficiency. The patients shows a milder phenotype distinct from P02.221 SGS and characterised by moderate developmental delay and peculiar Molecular karyotyping identifies CNVs in individuals with short facial features including prominent forehead, sparse eyebrows, mild stature ptosis (Filges et al, 2010). Both patients exhibit expressive speech D. Zahnleiter1, U. Trautmann1, A. B. Ekici1, D. Wieczorek2, A. Reis1, H. Doerr3, impairment. Here, we describe a patient with an apparently balanced A. Rauch4, C. T. Thiel1; de novo translocation t(2;18)(q24;q21) and mild mental retardation, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Human peculiar facial features and expressive language impairment in Genetics, Essen, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent presence of conserved receptive language skills. Oligo array-CGH Medicine, Erlangen, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach- analysis revealed the presence of a cryptic interstitial deletion of Zurich, Switzerland. about 372 Kb. The microdeletion is located near the breakpoint Shortness of stature is one of the most common concerns in genetic region at 18q12.3 and causes the disruption of SETBP1 gene. The counselling. Overall, 3 % of the population present with a body height patient here described shows a significant phenotypic overlap with the below -2 SD score (SDS). In about 80% of cases (idiopathic short previously reported patients with SETBP1 haploinsufficiency. All these stature) the underlying cause remains unknown. patients differ significantly from the Schinzel-Giedion syndrome. The To identify novel genetic causes of growth retardation we performed fundamental phenotypic feature of our patient and of the previously molecular karyotyping in 105 individuals with idiopathic short described two patients is the discrepancy between expressive and stature. We found a total of 3,787 aberrations with an average of receptive language abilities, suggesting an essential role of SETB1 in 36 copy number changes per individual. To rule out copy number expressive speech development. Functional studies will be necessary polymorphisms, a screening of all identified CNVs was carried out to unravel the exact function of this gene. against an independent control cohort of 820 healthy individuals. To narrow down our search for potential pathogenic CNVs, we analysed P02.219 all remaining 1,499 aberrations based on their gene content. A total of A Large turkish setleis syndrome Family 46 CNVs (27 duplications, 19 deletions) in 34 patients were retained R. O. Rosti1, Z. O. Uyguner2, S. Pehlivan1, M. Bekerecioglu3; for follow-up. Inheritance of 30 CNVs (2 de novo, 14 maternally and 14 1Gaziantep University Medical Biology and Genetics Department, Gaziantep, paternally inherited) could be verified in 23 families. After re-evaluating Turkey, 2Istanbul University Istanbul Medical Faculty Department ofMedical the parental growth phenotypes, 10 CNVs (2 de novo, 6 maternally Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Gaziantep University Plastic and Reconstructive and 2 paternally inherited) in 9 families, including 5 duplications and 5 Surgery Department, Gaziantep, Turkey. deletions, were scored as potentially pathogenic. These CNVs cover a Focal facial dermal dysplasias ( FFDDs) are a group of rare ectodermal range of 34 to 14,229 kb in size with only one aberration smaller than disorders characterized by bitemporal scar-like lesions that resemble 100 kb.This is the first report of a systematic approach using molecular forceps marks and additional facial findings that give an aged-leonine karyotyping to identify novel genetic causes of shortness of stature. appearance. Three subtypes have been delineated based on clinical We identified individual potentially pathogenic CNVs in 9% of affected features. Lately, it has been found that homozygous nonsense individuals, supporting a “rare variant - frequent disease” hypothesis. mutations in TWIST2 cause type III FFDD, or Setleis syndrome. We describe a Setleis syndrome family of Turkish origin in which there P02.222 are three affected sibs born to a first degree cousin marriage. Detailed SHOX gene polymorphic variants and their association with clinical features and pedigree will be included along with detailed isolated short stature imagery of characteristic facial findings. Mutational analysis are under K. Hirschfeldova, V. Kebrdlova, R. Solc, M. Florianova, P. Lnenicka, J. way for TWIST2. These mutational data will be shared in the poster Stekrova, R. Mihalova, A. Baxova, M. Florianova; as well. Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st FM and GTH, Charles University Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 121 in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. P02.225 Mutations or deletions affecting production of the short stature 11p15 familial duplication causing silver-Russell syndrome in homeobox-containing gene (SHOX) are responsible for a small portion the daughter and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome in the mother. of cases with isolated short stature (ISS). We were interested if SHOX R. Teek1, T. Kahre1,2, K. Muru1,2, O. Zhilina1,3, P. Mee4, K. Õunap1,2; gene polymorphic variants predispose for the ISS phenotype. 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Our sample was made of 43 unrelated probands in charge of Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, the Department of Medical Genetics (GTH and 1stFM, Charles 33Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University in Prague). Study inclusion criteria were the presence of University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4United Laboratories, Tartu University short stature (-2,0 SD) in combination with at least one of following Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. symptoms: disproportionate stature, cubitus valgus, short forearm, Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a clinically and genetically bowing of forearm, muscular hypertrophy, or dislocation of ulna (at heterogeneous disorder characterized by severe intrauterine and elbow). A population sample of 96 individuals was used to compare postnatal growth retardation. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) the frequencies. DNA sequencing was done of SHOX gene exons 1 is defined by overgrowth, hemihyperplasia and an increased risk of (including promotor), 2, 3, 4, 5 and coding parts of exons 6a and 6b. childhood tumors. It is known that SRS and BWS are both resulted by Overall, eleven polymorphic variants (promoter, exon 1, exon 2, and methylation defects in chromosomal region 11p15. Most of cases SRS exon 6b) were detected and one unique mutation in exon 6a. Four and BWS are sporadic but some familial cases are also reported. We polymorphisms were already described in the SHOX database (SHOX report here a familial case, where daughter has SRS and her mother @ http://www.hd-lovd.uni-hd.de/). Three promoter polymorphism and BWS caused by duplication in 11p15 chromosomal region. one sequence variant from the exon 1 are in a strong linkage. There The proband was consulted by geneticist at the neonatal age due to was no statistically significant difference in rare allele frequencies dysproportionate intrauterine and postnatal growth retardation and between ISS group and population sample. dysmorphic features typical to SRS. We performed the chromosomal Our study indicates that SHOX gene polymorphic variants are not microarray analysis (CMA) of the child and found ~1.3-Mb size significantly associated with isolated short stature. duplication in chromosomal region 11p15.5. CMA analysis of her This work was supported by Grant No. IGAMZCR NS/ 10327-3/2009. parents revealed that the duplication is inherited from her mother, who has the same duplication at the region 11p15.5. Patients’ mother has P02.223 overgrowth since the birth and clinical features of BWS. The further Duplication of pseudoautosomal region 1 and SHOX gene could investigations of grandparents are in work. be linked with characteristic phenotype SRS and BWS have been linked with a variety of epigenetic and genetic K. Dumic, L. Morozin-Pohovski, I. Barisic; defects affecting a cluster of imprinted genes at chromosome 11p15.5. Childrens University Hospital Zagreb, University Clinical Centre “Sisters of More than 50% BWS patients have aberrant methylation patterns in Mercy”, Zagreb, Croatia. 11p15. In SRS patients were found hypomethylation patterns in up The reports on duplications of SHOX gene and pseudoautosomal to 63%; 11p15 duplication in maternal material was found in only region 1 (PAR 1) are scarce and thus the information on the possible 1-2%. There is previously only one report in the literature about 11p15 phenotypic consequences is lacking. We report on five new patients duplication resulted in SRS and BWS phenotype in single family. from two families with large duplication of SHOX gene and downstream PAR 1 region. All of them were of normal or even short stature, with P02.226 no signs of skeletal deformities or Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser molecular investigations of Polish patients with silver-Russell type I syndrome. However all patients had a distinct phenotype, syndrome characterized with dysmorphic facial features (deep set eyes, high A. Tańska1, E. Ciara1, A. Marczak-Hałupka2, M. Kugaudo1, M. Kalina3, D. forehead, retrognathia), developmental delay/mental retardation, Jurkiewicz1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, S. Łuczak1, M. Pelc1, speech delay and stereotypic mouth movements which segregated D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, J. Trubicka1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, K. with duplication of SHOX gene and PAR 1 in both families. Chrzanowska1; So far, data on only 4 patients with large duplications of both SHOX 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, gene and PAR 1 downstream of the SHOX gene have been published. Warsaw, Poland, 2Genetic Out-patient Clinic, Regional Institute for Mother, In three of them mental retardation and dysmorphic features similar to Child and Adolescent Care, Katowice, Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics, those observed in our patients were described. Endocrinology and Diabetes, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Analysis of the size and position of duplications indicates that the ~50 Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a clinically and genetically kb large region of overlap between 626 kb and 678 kb, located in the heterogeneous syndrome characterized by intrauterine growth PAR 1 could be responsible for the distinctive phenotype. It is very restriction, body asymmetry, relative macrocephaly and a typical likely that duplications of SHOX gene and PAR 1, which still hasn’t triangular face. SRS is caused by epigenetic dysregulation of the been completely sequenced, are under-ascertained. With increasing imprinted genes controlled by two Imprinting Centers Regions: ICR1 application of molecular cytogenetic methods like MLPA, more patients and ICR2 located on chromosome 11p15.5. Hypomethylation of ICR1 with large duplication of the SHOX gene and PAR 1 or isolated PAR is found in ~40% of patients with SRS. In addition, hypomethylation of 1 will be eventually discovered delineating phenotypic consequences other imprinted loci can be detected in ~7% of ICR1 hypomethylation in more details. carriers. Moreover, 5-10% of SRS individuals have epigenetic alterations due to maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 P02.224 (mUPD7). Brachydactyly: a rare complication of sickle cell anaemia We analyzed 87 patients with clinical diagnosis of SRS. We examined D. G. M. Bosch, C. A. van Nieuwenhoven, A. J. M. Hoogeboom; the methylation profile of the ICR1 by MS-MLPA analysis and mUPD7 Erasmus MC Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands. by STR analysis for chromosome 7. We confirmed hypomethylation We present a 17 year old woman with acquired brachydactyly. The left of ICR1 in 31 individuals. Interestingly, 2 of these patients were hand showed a short metacarpal, proximal phalanx and mid phalanx monozygotic twins with both ICR1 and ICR2 hypomethylation. STR of the fourth digit. There is also a deformation of the proximal phalanx. analysis carried out on patients without detected hypomethylation The right hand showed shortening of the third and fourth metacarpals. of ICR1 revealed mUPD7 in 8 patients. We demonstrated maternal The pattern of the skeletal involvement did not fit with the known hetero-, isodisomy and a mixture of hetero- and isodisomy. Applied congenital brachydactyly groups. She was known with sickle cell molecular techniques enabled us to confirm clinical diagnosis of SRS anaemia and she endured dactylitis in childhood. In 40% of the cases in ~45% of patients. The cause of almost half of SRS cases is still with HbSS, the first clinical manifestation is dactylitis, also known as unknown. It is hypothesized that other imprinted loci and molecular hand-foot syndrome. Dactylitis in sickle cell anaemia is the result of factors can be involved in SRS etiology. Our findings concerning ICR1 vaso-occlusion and infarction of the bone. In rare cases infarctions of and ICR2 hypomethylation are consistent with the assumption. the epiphyses result in an asymmetric brachydactyly, like in our case. The study was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education (grant No NN 407 285339).Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 122 P02.227 (SGBS). molecular karyotyping is indicated in growth-retarded patients Apart from the visceromegaly, neonatal liver involvement is very with sRs features rarely associated to the SGBS. We will precisely describe this case, S. Spengler1, M. Begemann1, M. Baudis2, B. Denecke3, B. Schulze4, C. especially the hepatic data, and compare it to the literature. Spaich5, P. Kroisel6, T. Eggermann1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, P02.229 Germany, 2Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Zurich, Expanding the Phenotype of spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia- Switzerland, 3IZKF Aachen, RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Brachydactyly and Distinctive speech syndrome in patients of Germany, 4Practice of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany, 5Institute of Diverse Ethnic Backgrounds Clinical Genetics, Stuttgart, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, A. Guerin1, L. Dupuis1, L. Fishman-Shapiro1, B. Alman1, C. Le Goff2, V. Austria. Cormier-Daire3,2, R. Mendoza-Londono1; Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a congenital disorder characterized 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Hôpital Necker, Paris, by severe growth retardation, relative macrocephaly, a triangular face France, 3Paris Descartes University, Paris, France. and asymmetry. The clinical spectrum is broad and the diagnosis is Spondyloepiphyseal Dysplasia-Brachydactyly and Distinctive Speech rather subjective. In nearly half of patients (epi)genetic alterations dysplasia (SED-BDS, MIM 611717) is characterized by postnatal short can be detected: >38 % show a hypomethylation of the imprinting stature, brachydactyly, platyspondyly, facial dysmorphisms, delayed control region 1 in 11p15; 10 % carry maternal uniparental disomy epiphyseal ossification and characteristic voice. Only a few cases of chromosome 7 (upd(7)mat). Besides conventional cytogenetic have been described and the molecular etiology is uncertain. We findings recently submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances have been present two unrelated individuals who share clinical and radiological reported in single cases.To determine the relevance of submicroscopic features of SED-BDS and compare them with other conditions with imbalances for the aetiology of the SRS, we performed molecular similar phenotypes. karyotyping of 39 patients referred as SRS without 11p15 (epi) Patient 1 was born to a non-consanguineous Chinese couple. At 13 mutations and upd(7)mat using the Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0. In three years of age he had severe short stature with height below the third patients probably pathogenic de-novo imbalances were identified: a centile. Dysmorphic features included upslanting palpebral fissures, 5.4 Mb microdeletion in 15q26 including IGF1R, a 2.5 Mb microdeletion mildly coarse face and brachydactyly. He has a high pitched hoarse of the DiGeorge region and a 9.1 Mb duplication in Xq26. In further 18 voice were noted. Skeletal survey showed platyspondyly, metaphyseal patients we detected a total of 26 different, so far unregistered copy irregularity and delayed bone age. Patient 2 was born a non- number alterations (CNAs): up to now, 15 were determined to be consanguineous Ghanian couple. He was diagnosed with congenital probably apathogenic rare familial CNVs; for three CNAs a de-novo heart disease in infancy. At 7 years of age his height was below the origin was discovered. To our current knowledge it is unclear whether third centile and had round face, brachydactyly and hoarse voice. they are causative for the patients’ clinical features. In summary, in Skeletal survey showed shortening of long bones with brachydactyly. three of 39 (7,7%) patients pathogenic de-novo imbalances were SED-BDS is a recently described skeletal dysplasia. Conditions detected. In further three patients the pathogenic significance of the that must be considered in the differential include acromicric and CNAs remains unclear. In conclusion, submicroscopic chromosomal geleophysic dysplasias. Mutations in ADAMTSL2 have been identified imbalances significantly contribute to the mutational spectrum of in some patients with geleophysic dysplasia and is thought to interact the SRS. Therefore molecular karyotyping is indicated in idiopathic with TGF-β, which is important for cell proliferation, migration, patients with SRS features. differentiation, and survival. As these conditions have clinical and radiological overlap distinguishing between them can be a challenge. P02.228 Molecular studies of ADAMTSL2 in our patients are underway to A simpson-Golabi-Behmel patient with severe neonatal liver further investigate the molecular defect underlying these disorders. involvement B. Demeer1, G. Morin1, D. Djeddi2, G. Jedraszak1, F. Lacaille3, M. Raynaud4, J. P02.230 Micheli5, F. Amram1, R. Rhazlane6, S. Lanta7, M. Mathieu1; Extense spanish pedigree affected of smN1 gene deletion 1Genetics department, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 2Pediatrical diagnosed by mLPA gastroenterology unit , CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 3Pediatrical A. Zuñiga, I. Pitarch, Y. Bello, A. Guerrero; gastroenterology department, Necker Enfants Malades hospital, Paris, France, Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. 4Molecular genetics department, CHU Tours, Tours, France, 5Pediatrical BAcKGROUND: Spinal muscular atrophy (OMIM 253300) refers to a oncology and haematology unit, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 6Paediatrics group of autosomal recessive neuromuscular disorders characterized department, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France, 7Gynaecology and Obstetrics by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord, leading to department, CHU Amiens, Amiens, France. symmetrical muscle weakness and atrophy. SMA is the second most Patient prenatal period was marked by the discovery, on the 22 common lethal, autosomal recessive disease in Caucasians after gestation weeks (GW) ultrasound of an hydramnios and fetal cystic fibrosis. More than 95% of SMA patients show homozygous macrosomia (biparietal diameter and abdominal circumference deletion of at least exon 7 of the telomeric SMN1 gene. SMA carriers >97 percentile). There was no gestational diabetes, and no fetal can be identified by the presence of only a single copy of SMN1 exon caryotype was performed. At 27 GW, a bilateral nephromegaly without 7. pyelocaliectasis was found. A close ultrasound follow-up till the end of mAtERiAL AND mEtHODs: We report a three month-old infant who the pregnancy showed a stability of the ultrasound signs. was hospitalized because she refused to eat. Clinical examination The patient was delivered by ceasarean section at 38 GW, and birth revealed an alert infant with weakness of all four limbs, hypotonia and parameters were : weight : 4kg105, height 52cm and OFC 37cm. absent deep tendon reflexes. Serum creatine kinase and liver enzyme On examination, he had hypotonia, feeding difficulties and was studies were normal. Electrophysiological studies revealed reduced icteric. He also presented facial dysmorphism with coarse features, compound muscle action potential amplitudes (CMAPs). Distal hypertelorism, anteverted nares and macrostomia. Three abdominal latencies, F-waves latencies, and sensory nerve action potentials supernumerary nipples and a abdominal diastasis recti were noted. (SNAPs) were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and Extremities were normal. No neonatal hypoglycemia was noted. spine was appropriate for age. A genetic test detected a complete Abdominal ultrasounds confirmed the bilateral nephromegaly, and deletion of the SMN1 gene by MLPA. Members of the family were then showed an hepatomegaly at 2 weeks of age. Blood tests showed studied in order to detect carriers of the SMN1 deletion. a hepatic cholestasis and jaundice. REsULts AND cONcLUsiONs: Genetic study of a SMN1 deletion At the age of 6 weeks, because of worsening of cholestasis, persistent was performed in 21 members of both sides of the family. In the paternal jaundice and difficulties displaying the biliary ducts on CT scan, a family, a deletion was confirmed affecting SMN1 and the BIRC gene, liver biopsy was performed. It showed no biliary atresia, but found a which is located close to SMN1. In the maternal family, the deletion was significant proliferation, portal fibrosis and cholestasis. confined to the SMN1 gene. We detected 16 heterozygous carriers for The study of the GPC3 gene found a single base deletion in the exon this deletion and proper genetic counseling was offered. 7, confirming the diagnosis of Simpson-Golabi-Behmel syndrome Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 123 P02.231 P02.233 A patient with short stature, microcephaly and mental intrafamilial variability in a large kindred with sVAs and an ELN retardation associated with 5q35.2 duplication reciprocal to the mutation common sotos syndrome deletion M. Gonçalves-Rocha1, S. Magalhães1, C. Cruz2, R. El Malti3, E. Dias4, P. O. Zilina1, A. Kurg1, K. Õunap2,3; Bouvagnet3; 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 1Unidade de Genética Médica - Departamento de Genética, Centro de 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Genética Médica JM, INSA,IP, Porto, Portugal, 2Cardiologia – Unidade Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. de Medicina, Hospital São João, EPE, Porto, Portugal, 3Laboratoire de The higher-order architecture of the human genome has been shown Cardiogénétique Moléculaire, Centre de Biologie et Pathologie Est, Hospices to predispose to structural rearrangements that are frequent cause of Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 4Cardiologia Pediátrica – Unidade da Mulher e da human diseases. Recombination- and replication-based mechanisms Criança, Hospital São João, EPE, Porto, Portugal. have been described to generate genomic rearrangements. The Supra Valvular Aortic Stenosis (SVAS; MIM ID #185500) has an mechanism responsible for the vast majority of common-sized incidence of 1/20 000 live births and is associated with mutations in recurrent rearrangements is nonallelic homologous recombination elastin gene (ELN). SVAS can occur sporadically, as a dominant trait or (NAHR) between region-specific low-copy repeats (LCRs). This as a part of Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). WBS is characterized mechanism assumes that recombination between the same pair of by developmental delay, particular psychological phenotype and directly oriented LCRs could result either in deletion or reciprocal dysmorphic features, and is caused by a microdeletion ~1,5Mb at duplication. So far, only a few duplications reciprocal to the recurrent 7q11.23 which encompasses ELN and at least other 24 genes. deletions associated with different syndromes (e.g. Williams-Beuren We report on a large family with 17 affected members spanning 4 and Smith-Magenis syndrome) have been described. generations with variable phenotypic presentation with isolated or Here we present a patient with 5q35.2 duplication of the Sotos a combination of several major arteries stenosis, namely: SVAS, syndrome critical region. The Sotos syndrome is characterized common pulmonary stenosis or peripheric pulmonary stenosis. by childhood overgrowth, learning disability and distinctive facial No developmental delay, particular psychological phenotype or appearance, and is caused by NSD1 gene defects (point mutations, dysmorphic features of WBS were present in any of the affected partial gene deletions and 5q35 microdeletions). Clinical evaluation of individuals. the patient at 13 years revealed short stature (-4SD), microcephaly ELN exons and intron-exon boundaries were amplified by PCR and (-3.5SD), dysmorphic face, bradydactyly, cone shape epiphyses, mutation screening was performed by High Resolution Melting (HRM). delayed bone age, and mental retardation. A 2-Mb duplication at Exons showing an abnormal amplification profile or with frequent 5q35.2 (5:174950741-176979615 (NCBI36)) was detected applying SNPs were sequenced. After testing 18 coding exons, a heterozygous HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip (Illumina Inc.) analysis. So far, only transversion G>T was found at position 34 (c.34C>T) changing the two patients with duplications reciprocal to the Sotos common deletion Glycine at position 12 to a stop codon (p.Gly12X). This nonsense have been reported, with phenotypes very similar to that observed in mutation is presumably responsible for haploinsufficiency as often our patient. Thereby, our patient supports the hypothesis that NSD1 observed in ELN mutations in SVAS. plays a role in regulation of somatic growth in humans, and gene’s Remaining affected members are currently being investigated for the dosage reduction or increase may lead to reversed phenotypes. More mutation what will expectably confirm segregation within this family. patients and further investigations are needed to reveal the exact This report underlines the clinical intrafamilial variability of ELN mechanisms. mutations and highlights the importance of cascade screening enabling a proper genetic counseling. P02.232 cutis laxa associated with sotos syndrome: a clinical and P02.234 molecular puzzle. A six year old boy with temple syndrome due to segmental O. M. Vanakker1, H. Verhelst2, B. Menten1, P. Verloo2, R. Van Coster2, A. De maternal uniparental disomy 14 and clinical features of Prader Paepe1; Willi syndrome 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, K. Platzer1, I. Stefanova1, K. Buiting2, S. Purmann1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1; 2Department of Paediatric Neurology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Belgium. Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. Introduction. Cutis laxa, characterized by fragmentation of elastic Temple syndrome is associated with a recognizable phenotype fibres, has been associated with several syndromic phenotypes with consisting of pre- and postnatal growth retardation, neonatal heterogeneous mode of inheritance. Besides the skin symptoms, hypotonia, feeding problems and precocious puberty. The molecular related systemic features are diverse, including skeletal, pulmonary, cause of Temple syndrome comprises a deficiency of imprinted gene cardiovascular and metabolic symptoms. expression in the paternal chromosome region 14q32 due to maternal Results & discussion. The first child of healthy non-consanguineous uniparental disomy 14 (upd(14)mat), an epimutation or deletion on the parents is presented, born at 38 weeks’ gestation. During pregnancy, an paternal allele. Chromosome 14 contains an imprinted gene cluster, isolated unilateral hydronephrosis was detected. At birth, dysmorphic which is regulated by a differentially methylated region (IG-DMR) features were noted, including macrocephaly with sparse frontal between the genes DLK1 and GTL2. hair, a pointed chin and low-set, posteriorly rotated ears. In addition, We report on a six year old boy with severe neonatal hypotonia and redundant skin folds in the neck, hands and lower limbs were present. feeding difficulties, followed by hyperphagia with onset during his third Skin biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of cutis laxa. Soon after birth, year of life with absence of satiety and leading to obesity. Additional he developed episodes of hypoglycaemia. Radiographies revealed an features were short stature, small hands and feet, delayed psychomotor advanced bone age (4.5 months for 5 weeks of age) and advanced development, sleep apnea and fever attacks. His phenotype was bone maturation. strongly suggestive for Prader Willi syndrome, but methylation analysis The phenotype of this patient showed resemblance to Costello of the 15q11-q13 region revealed no abnormalities. Considering Temple syndrome. However, these patients do not have advanced bone age syndrome as an important differential diagnosis we consequently and maturation. Micro-array analysis revealed a 5q35.2q35.3 deletion, performed methylation analysis of the 14q32 region, which revealed compatible with Sotos syndrome. Cutis laxa is however not a classic lack of the paternal band. Further analysis with microsatellite markers feature. Three cases of alleged Sotos syndrome with cutis laxa have and SNPs detected a segmental upd(14)mat of the 14q32 region in been previously reported; however, contrary to our patient, neither our patient. advanced bone age nor hypoglycaemia were present. To our knowledge, there are no reported patients with a segmental Conclusion. The phenotype of our patient does not fully comply with upd(14)mat of the 14q32 region so far. We provide a review of the the Sotos with cutis laxa syndrome. This might suggest that this patient literature on patients with Temple syndrome and discuss on the harbours a second mutation in the deleted 5q35 region which may phenotype genotype correlation. explain the presence of cutis laxa.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 124 P02.235 We assessed 141 Romanian subjects (37 primary SS patients and Partial tetrasomy 14 associated with multiple malformations 104 healthy unrelated matched controls) for all three polymorphisms. J. Winberg1, K. Lagerstedt Robinson1, A. Liedén1, B. Anderlid2, C. Graff3, A. TNF-α -857C/T (rs1799724), -308 G/A (rs1800629) and -238G/A (rs Nordenskjöld4, A. Nordgren1, P. Gustavsson1; 361525) polymorphisms were genotyped by Real Time PCR (Taqman 1Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, SNP Genotyping Assays C_2215707_10, C_7514879_10 and Stockholm, Sweden, 2Department Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska C_11918223_10 respectively, Applied Biosystems, USA). Association Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and tests for each SNP were performed using SPSS 12.0 (T student test) Society, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Department of Woman and and p values ≤0.05 were considered significant. Child Health, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. The Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium assessed using Chi-square test was We report a 6-year-old girl with multiple malformations including bilateral respected in all studied groups for all polymorphisms. cleft lip and palate, coloboma and craniosynostosis. The girl also The frequencies of minor alleles -857T, -308A and -238A, were similar suffers from severe mental retardation, seizures and gastrointestinal in primary SS patients and controls (0.21/0,16/0.09 and 0.18/0,15/0.04 dysfunction. In addition she has a mitochondrial defect with reduced respectively). Primary SS patients carriers of A allele (-238G/A) seems function of complex I and III of the respiratory chain. An abnormal to have less digestive (t= 2,95) and systemic (t=1,4) manifestations karyotype was identified showing an extra marker chromosome. The than G carriers. The primary SS patients carriers of T allele (-857C/T) marker chromosome was identified in all cells in both peripheral blood seems to have more xerophthalmia (t=2,8) and xerostomia (t=3,04) lymphocytes and cultured fibroblasts whereas parental chromosomes than C allele carriers. were normal. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) Conclusion: TNF-α polymorphisms (-857C/T and -238G/A) seems to revealed tetrasomy for proximal 14q corresponding to a 14,6 Mb region influence clinical manifestations. The three polymorphisms of TNF-α on 14q11.2q13.2 spanning more than 60 known genes. To determine does not influence susceptibility to SS. These results should be the origin of the marker chromosome we analyzed polymorphic confirmed on larger patients cohort. markers using quantitative fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR). The results from the QF-PCR indicate formation of the marker chromosome in P02.238 maternal meiosis. Partial tetrasomy 14q has previously been reported Unusual family advice causes turner-like syndrome in four cases, however, this is the first described non-mosaic case not M. A. Soylemez; resulting in early lethality. Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. Objective: To recognize long term use of high potency steroids from an P02.236 early age as a potential cause of iatrogenic Cushing Syndrome (CS) the incidence and morbidity of congenital thoraco - abdominal and Turner-like symptoms. wall defects Case Presentation: A 16 year old teenage girl was referred from M. C. Popoiu1, V. L. David2, A. V. Popoiu1, M. Puiu1, G. F. Brad2, A. Timofte3, P. her gynecologist with diagnosis of Turner syndrome (TS). The most Fuicu1, E. S. Boia1; consistent features of TS are short stature and premature ovarian 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, failure. She had initially presented for follow up of amenorrhea 2Emergency Children’s Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, about 8 weeks prior to referral and was noted to have short stature 3Municipal Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. (<3.p) at a hospital. Upon presentation to our clinic, she was noted Background: Congenital abdominal and thoracic wall defects remain to have a round plethoric face, supraclavicular/dorsocervical fat pads, a source of significant morbidity and mortality, despite the advances centripetal obesity and short stature. Lab tests showed ACTH 15pg/ in neonatal and pediatric surgical care. The abdominal wall is much mL (6-46pg/mL) and 8 a.m cortisol of 0.3mcg/dL (6-30mcg/dL). TSH, more often involved in congenital birth defects than the thoracic LH, FSH, and prolactin were normal. Chromosomal analysis revealed wall, which are more severe and have dismal outcomes more often. a 46,XX karyotype. Iatrogenic and factitious Cushing Syndrome Material and methods: This is a 4 years period analysis of the entire was investigated. Further discussion with the patient and her family cases of congenital thoracic and abdominal wall defects admitted revealed oral use of 0.75 mg/day dexamethasone for 12 years. The to the pediatric surgery department of our hospital. Results: There patient is a 16 year-old teenage girl who had begun to take high dose were six cases of gastroschisis, two omphaloceles, one sternal cleft deksamethasone by the advice of her family at the age of four. She and one case of ectopia cordis. Surgical repair was performed in continued to use the steroid so far. emergency conditions for all gastroschisis and omphalocels with good Conclusions: Oral intake of high dose steroid at the beginning of the outcomes. Postoperative complications were: intestinal adhesions childhood can cause iatrogenic CS and Turner-like symptoms. An after one case of gastroschisis repair and rezidual eventration after inspection is not enough searching for the right diagnosis of genetic omphalocele closure, considered with no significant influence over the syndromes. We recommend a careful patient history and a detailed final outcomes. For ectopia cordis surgical covering was performed physical examination in terms of Turner syndrome and other genetic but, unfortunately the patient died 24 hours after surgery. No diseases. surgical treatment was necessary for the sternal cleft. Conclusions: Although the prenatal diagnosis is accessible, there are many cases P02.239 diagnosed after birth. This study helps to bring together the most Unbalanced chromosomal translocation 3;5 in child with recent epidemiological data regarding outcomes and interventions for dysmorphic features and developmental delay. case report. thoracic-abdominal wall defects and to compare the epidemiology of D. Locmele, Z. Krumina, G. Kalnberza, A. Dzalbs; such kind of malformations in different regions of the country. State Medical Genetic Clinic, Riga, Latvia. We report a clinical case of a unbalanced translocation between 3p P02.237 and 5q chromosome terminal regions which results in 3rd chromosome three tumor Necrosis Factor promoter polymorphisms in short arm subtelomeric region deletion and 5th chromosome long arm Romanian patients with sjogren’s syndrome - Results from a subtelomeric region trisomy. pilot-study Consulted for the first time at the age 4y6m due to speech delay and R. Sfrent-Cornateanu, D. Opris, O. Popa, C. Bara, R. Ionescu; changed behavior. Anamnesis: boy was born from 5th pregnancy, 3rd Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. delivery to 38 years old mother from nonconsanguinous marriage. Sjögren’s Syndrome (SS) is an autoimmune disorder which affects During first trimester mother had flu. Delivery on 38/39th week of exocrine glands. Tumor Necrosis Factor alpha (TNF-α) contributes to gestation, birth weight 2360g, length 49cm. He had poor weight gain the physiopathology of autoimmune diseases including SS. The -857C/ during 1st year of life, he started to walk at the age of 1y4m. He had T, -308G/A and -238G/A polymorphisms of TNF-α gene demonstrated one episode of seizures at the age 4y 5m. Speech- he use less than their influence on the susceptibility and clinical phenotype of 10 words. Hearing test has not been performed. autoimmune diseases. Investigation: height 96cm (<<3rd percentile), weight 14kg ( 3rd pc), We aimed to investigate the influence of these three TNF-α OFC 46.6cm (<<3rd pc), 6.5cm, 3rd finger 4.5cm. Dysmorphic features: polymorphisms on the susceptibility and clinical phenotype of primary deformed skull, almond shaped eyes, small mouth, irregular tooth Sjögren’s syndrome in Romanian patients. placement, smooth philtrum, over folded helix, fetal pads, changed Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 125 dermatoglyphics in left hand, unilateral cryptorchism. Behavior: comes P02.242*** to sit in lap and wants to kiss during consultation, puts hair and dog fur Wang syndrome- Four new cases each with a different into mouth, touches himself, no toilet training. underlying molecular mechanism There was performed a karyotyping and FISH for subtelomeric region. A. Dixit1, S. Naik2,3, D. Mackay2,3, K. Low4, P. Fleming5, W. van Hensbergen6, Result: 46,xy.ish der(3)t(3;5)(pter-;qter+). Karyotyping was performed M. Lever2,3, R. L. Poole2,3, H. Bullman2,3, S. Smithson4, I. K. Temple2,3, M. Suri1; to both parents and father is a carrier of balanced translocation with 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, result- 46,xy,t(3;5)(p26;q32~33). United Kingdom, 2Division of Human Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton,, Southampton, United Kingdom, 3Wessex Genetics Service, P02.240 Southampton University Hospitals NHS Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom, clinical expression of an inherited unbalanced translocation in 4Department of Clinical Genetics, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, Bristol, United chromosome 6 Kingdom, 5St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 6Bristol Royal B. B. Ganguly1, V. Kadam2, N. N. Kadam3; Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. 1MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, Navi Mumbai, India, 2MGM’s Background Medical College, Navi Mumbai, India, 3MGM’s New Bombay Hospital, Navi Wang syndrome is the eponym for paternal uniparental disomy Mumbai, India. for chromosome 14 (UPD14pat). Affected children present with Congenital malformation in newborns is the first visible expression polyhydramnios, narrow thorax with characteristic coat-hanger ribs, of major chromosomal alterations followed by growth and hypotonia, abdominal wall defects, high birth weight but poor postnatal mental retardation and systemic complications. The unbalanced growth, developmental delay, and typical facial dysmorphism including rearrangements are not common; however, have significant clinical prominent, hisute forehead, elongated philtrum, micrognathia, short expression. The parental balanced translocation produces unbalanced neck and mild joint contractures. We report four new cases of Wang chromosome, which is eventually transmitted to next generation through syndrome with different underlying molecular mechanisms. fertilization of gametes carrying the derivative chromosome. The Report carriers of balanced rearrangements mostly do not have recognizable Polyhydramnios and relatively increased abdominal circumference phenotypic expression. We report a family comprising of healthy and were noted during pregnancy in all cases. All patients showed non-consanguineous young parents and their primi newborn severely characteristic chest x-ray and clinical features of Wang syndrome in the affected with multiple congenital anomalies and systemic disorders. neonatal period. Methylation-specific PCR of the 14q32.2 differentially Conventional G-banding analysis of somatic chromosomes identified a methylated region (DMR) showed only a methylated (paternal) product balanced translocation, t(6;10)(p23;q24) in mother and an unbalanced in all cases. rearrangement, der(6),t(6:10)(p23;q24)mat in the child. The child has Case 1: Male child with an epimutation at maternally inherited 14q32.2 inherited a derivative chromosome 6 with partial deletion of 6 (p23-pter) DMR. and partial trisomy 10(q24-qter), which has obviously resulted in fusion Case 2: Female infant with segmental UPDpat for the 14q32.2 region. of genes of two different chromosomes. The prominent phenotypic Case 3: Male infant with a de novo microdeletion of the 14q32.2 DMR features of del(6p), including high forehead, flat nasal bridge, agenesis on his maternally inherited chromosome 14. of left year, atrio septal defect (ASD), craniosynostosis and growth Case 4: Female infant with isodisomy for paternal chromosome 14. retardation were overlapping with specific Axenfeld-Reiger -, Larsen Conclusion - and Ritscher-Sinzel/3-C syndromes; however, lacking in ocular These cases demonstrate that Wang syndrome is a clinically anomalies, skeletal laxity or cerebellar malformation. Therefore, this recognisable phenotype with typical radiological findings. Further report rules out the isolated effect of del(6p23) or trisomy 10(q24) on studies are required to delineate the long-term prognosis and correlate distinct previously reported syndromes and proposes the combined this to the underlying molecular mechanism. effect of unbalanced chromosomal alteration. P02.243 P02.241 Van Maldergem syndrome - a report of the first male patient and Paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) 14 is an important cause of expansion of the clinical spectrum. infantile hypotonia in a south African cohort N. Tyshchenko1, K. Hackmann1, D. Müller1, A. Rump1, E. Schrock1, S. K. E. Kuhn, F. Essop, A. Krause; Tinschert1, T. M. Neuhann1,2; Division of Human Genetics, NHLS and School of Pathology, the University of 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Medizinisches the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa. Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany. Paternal and maternal uniparental disomy (UPD) for chromosome Two unrelated female patients with a combination of mental 14 are associated with two distinct phenotypes, accounted for by retardation, hypotonia, distinctive combination of minor facial two oppositely imprinted genes on chromosome14, DLK1 (paternally anomalies with telecanthus, epicanthus, broad flat nose, large mouth expressed) and MEG3 (maternally expressed). Maternal UPD 14 is with an everted lower lip, small dysplastic ears, finger camptodactyly, characterised by intrauterine growth retardation, hypotonia at birth, and joint hyperlaxity were described by van Maldergem et al (1992) short stature, small hands and feet, scoliosis, mild developmental and Zampino et al (1994). delay, early childhood obesity and precocious puberty, a phenotype We report on the first male patient with the proposed diagnosis of van overlapping with Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS). Paternal UPD (14) Maldergem syndrome. His parents are first cousins. is reportedly less common, more severe and is characterised by At the age of 4 years the boy presented severe developmental delay, severe neonatal respiratory problems, hypotonia, abdominal muscular talipes equinovarus, genital abnormalities, finger camptodactyly with defects, skeletal anomalies, and characteristic facies. interdigital webbing, joint laxity and a dysmorphic facies. The medical The study aimed to determine the frequency of UPD14 in 238 patients history was significant for pharyngeal instability requiring the placement who were referred for PWS (86 patients) or SMA (152 patients) of a tracheostomy tube and an inquinal hernia. He showed bilateral testing and who tested negative for the requested disease. Patients epicanthus, telecanthus, short palpebral fissures, broad flat nasal were sub classified into an infantile hypotonia group and a childhood bridge, dental malocclusion, bilateral microtia. Due to severe feeding PWS phenotype group. Genomic DNA was modified with a bisulfite difficulties permanent tube feeding is required. The combination of the modification kit. Multiplex methylation PCR of the modified DNA was specific facial features with camptodactyly, interdigital webbing, joint used to determine whether UPD14 was present. Thirteen (5.5%) patients laxity and developmental delay lead to the working diagnosis of van tested positive for paternal UPD14, while no patients tested positive for Maldergem syndrome. Metabolic tests and chromosomal analysis maternal UPD14. All paternal UPD 14 patients were from the hypotonic were normal. Array-CGH (Agilent 2x400K) revealed two parental infants group. Further clinical and molecular analysis is in progress. CNVs, which are not listed as polymorphisms but might contribute to Paternal UPD14 which is reported to be rare was identified in a the patient’s phenotype. Taking together, the report of the third patient significant number of infants (<1 yr) referred for PWS and/or SMA with van Maldergem syndrome adds new features to the clinical testing, suggesting that neonatal and infantile hypotonia is a significant spectrum such as male genital malformations, hernia, pharyngeal feature. UPD 14 analysis should be included in the routine genetic instability and severe feeding difficulty. workup of patients with infantile hypotonia.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 126 P02.244 Potential candidates genes for these multiple phenotypes have been A case of adult-onset vanishing white matter disease with identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation with antibodies raised EIF2B3 gene mutations against the BAZ1B unusual tyrosine-kinase. Y. Ohnuki1, A. Kondo1, T. Yanagimachi1, T. Matsukawa2, S. Izumi1, S. Takagi1; 1Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan, 2Tokyo University, P02.247 Tokyo, Japan. Pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 deficiency leads to a Leukoencephalopathy with vanishing white matter (VWM) is a rare complex clinical phenotype; Report of 6 patients neurological disease associated with gene defects in EIF2B1-5. It is A. Kariminejad1, R. Kretz2, B. Bozorgmehr1, M. Rohrbach2, I. Hausser3, A. an autosomal recessive disorder with spasticity, cerebellar ataxia, and Baumer4, M. Baumgartner5, C. Giunta2, J. Häberle2, M. H. Kariminejad1; a relatively mild mental impairment. In most reported cases, EIF2B5 1Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic mutations were identified. This is the first report of a patient with adult- Republic of Iran, 2Kinderspital Zurich, Division of Metabolism, Zurich, onset VWM associated with mutation in EIF2B3. Switzerland, 3Electron Microscopic Laboratory, Dermatological Department A 31-year-old woman with progressive ataxic gait was referred. At and EM Core Facility, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Institut für age 20, an MRI study had shown diffuse leukoencephalopathy in the Medizinische Genetik, Switzerland, Switzerland, 5Kinderspital Zurich, Division absence of any clinical neurologic signs. Five years later, headache of Metabolism, Switzerland, Switzerland. and sensory disturbance appeared. At age 28, amenorrhea and ataxic Wrinkly skin syndrome is a heterogeneous condition characterized by gait appeared. All laboratory investigations, including evaluation of cutis laxa, wrinkly skin over hands and feet, progeroid appearance, blood lactate and pyruvate,α-galactosidase and arylsulfatase A, were visible veins over thorax, congenital hip dislocation with or without normal. Genetic study confirmed the diagnosis, revealing that the mental retardation. Loss of function mutations in the ATP6V0A2 gene patient was homozygous for the novel T80A mutation in EIF2B3. By and mutation in the gene encoding pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase age 31, she has become bed-ridden. (ALDH18A1; 138250), has been reported in some patients diagnosed with wrinkly skin syndorme. P02.245 Recently, mutations in PYCR1 were described in patients with Waardenburg syndrome: intrafamilial clinical variability in a similar features (Guernsey et al. 2009; Reversade et al. 2009). The 4-generation family. pathophysiological basis appears to be an impaired mitochondrial I. M. Furquim, A. C. de Paula; function leading to developmental defects through increased apoptosis. Hospital Municipal da Crianca e Adolescente, Guarulhos, Brazil. Here, we describe six patients with clinical manifestations of a wrinkly Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a rare syndrome with estimated skin disorder. The patients all have distinct facial features comprising prevalence of 2-3/100,000 in the general population within the of thin triangular face, loss of adipose tissue, and thin pointed nose. Netherlands. Main features include facial dysmorphisms and Additional features are IUGR, short stature, wrinkling over dorsum of congenital deafness. WS is classified into several forms based on hand and feet, visible veins over chest, hyperextensible joints (mostly whether dystopia canthorum is present (WS1) or absent (WS2), and of fingers and toes), congenital hip dislocation, loss of muscle bulk. whether upper limb defects (WS3) or Hirschsprung disease (WS4) are The age ranges from 4 months to 55 years. Three of the patients present. WS1 exhibits autosomal dominant inheritance with complete from a large consanguineous family did not have mental retardation penetrance and variable expressivity. Mutations in PAX3 gene are while the remaining three patients from 3 separate families had responsible for WS1 phenotype. The index case is a 4-year-old female, mental and or developmental delay. Mutation analysis revealed the first child of a young non-consanguineous couple, presented with presence of disease-causing variants in PYCR1. Light- and electron displacement of the medial canthi, heterochromia iridis, white forelock microscopy investigations showed alterations of collagen and elastic and bilateral congenital sensorineural hearing loss. Her family history, fibres compatible with the involvement of collagen and elastin in the however, showed other 06 affected relatives with different features of pathophysiological mechanism. WS1.The purpose of this report is to describe the clinical variability among the affected members of this family. Molecular analysis is P02.248 important to confirm the diagnosis and may help determining genotype- Giant congenital melanocytic nevi mistaken for phenotype correlations. neurofibromatosis type 1 K. E. Stuurman, C. J. Dommering; P02.246 Department of clinical genetics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Knockouts of the murine ortholog of the atypical Williams- Netherlands. Beuren tyrosine-protein kinase gene Baz1b present cardiac and An 80-year old developmentally normal male was referred to our circadian rhythm impairments department with a clinical diagnosis of neurofibromatosis type 1. The G. Didelot1, C. Berthonneche2, G. Ricard1, Y. Emmeneger1, P. Franken1, T. patient was born with numerous diffuse lenticular erythematous and Pedrazzini2, A. Reymond1; brownish firm papules covering his entire body. The papules differed 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Cardiovascular in size from several millimeters to one giant plaque covering almost Assessment Facility, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, his entire back. At the age of one year, part of this lesion was removed Switzerland. from his neck in order to allow better movement of his head. Over The Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a multisystem disorder the years two more papules were removed. Removed papules did not caused by the hemizygosity of 25 genes, five of which encode grow back. His medical history showed basal cell carcinoma which transcription factors or chromatin remodeler. Modest perturbations was diagnosed on two occasions. He had an otherwise unremarkable in the dosage of the latter might substantially alter the expression of medical and family history. His two sons and grandson were reported multiple target genes. Hence these genes are prime candidates to play not to be affected by this disorder. Upon examination, no freckling, a role in the phenotype of the patients. café-au-lait spots or Lisch noduli were noted and testing of the NF1- To address the physiological and molecular role of one of these genes, gene did not reveal a mutation. Array CGH was normal. Pathology the Bromodomain Adjacent to Zinc finger 1b gene (BAZ1B), in vivo, results showed that the skin lesions were nevi naevocellulares, fitting we ablated by transposable element insertion the expression of its the diagnosis of giant congenital melanocytic nevi (GCMN). GCMN ortholog in mice. Almost all Baz1b-/- embryos (97%) die a few hours are disfiguring lesions, consisting of cutaneous melanocytes. These after birth. The rare survivors do not present any of the craniofacial GCMN, presenting at birth and covering minimally 2% of the total body abnormalities previously identified in knockouts of the murine orthologs surface area, are uncommon and have an estimated prevalence of one of other genes of the WBS interval. They are, however, smaller in in 20.000 in live born children. GCMN usually occur sporadically, but size than their control littermates and present a smaller heart with familial cases have been described. The genetic background however larger ventricular walls. Noticeably, this abnormal heart appears to remains unknown. To our knowledge this is the first time a case with be associated with an increased cardiac function as measured by the such an extensive and unusual presentation of GCMN is described. percentage of blood ejected with each contraction. This translates in a significant increase in nighttime activity and sleep perturbation. We are currently characterizing histologically the heart of Baz1b-/- embryos.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 127 P02.249 P02.251 Identification of a WWOX germinal mutation in a Spanish family A case of Zimmemann-Laband syndrome with supernumerary without diagnosed cancer: insights into its supposed tumour phalanx suppressor function Y. Capri1,2, C. Baumann1, A. Aboura3, S. Drunat4, A. Verloes1,2, L. Perrin- J. Gardenyes1, Ó. Abad1, P. Fàbregas1, R. Ciordia2, M. A. López-Ariztegui3, V. Sabourin1; Volpini1, B. Campos1; 1Clinical genetic, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, 2University of medecine, 1Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) - IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Paris 7 Diderot, Paris, France, 3Cytogenetic, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France, Llobregat, Spain, 2Servicio de Neurología, Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo, 4Molecular genetic, CHU Robert Debre, Paris, France. Spain, 3Servicio de Genética, Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain. Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (MIM 135500) is the association of The WW domain-containing oxidoreductase (WWOX) gene is located gingival fibromatosis, aplasic or hypoplasic nails, skeletal anomalies, at 16q23.3-q24.1, within the fragile site FRA16D. It has nine exons hypertrichosis and facial dysmorphism. Occasionally, patient can and an open reading frame of 1,245 bp, encoding a 414 amino acids display mental retardation, hepatosplenomegaly, mild hearing loss and protein. supernumerary teeth. Molecular basis is still unknown but pattern of In the last few years, considerable amount of data has shown that inheritance is more likely autosomal dominant. WWOX participates in a number of cellular processes including We report on a 7 year-old girl with the hallmark of Zimmermann- growth, differentiation and apoptosis. Moreover, inactivation of WWOX Laband syndrome and particular distal phalanges. A large spectrum of has been observed in a variety of human malignancies, and targeted phalangeal abnormalities could be seen such as classical hypoplastic deletion of one allele of Wwox in mice causes increased spontaneous but also epiphyseal hypertrophy, bi-partita or supernumerary phalanx. and chemically induced tumour incidence, including lymphomas, We discuss the spectrum of skeletal anomalies in this syndrome. In lung papillary carcinomas, liver tumours, and gastric squamous fact, if gingival and oral findings are frequently and well described, cell carcinomas. Altogether, these data indicate that WWOX is a skeletal aspects of this disease are less known. tumour suppressor and that inactivation of one allele is sufficient for Cytogenetic exploration and CGH-array have been practiced on this tumourigenesis. patient’s blood sample and results will be discussed. Here we report the identification of a WWOX germline mutation in a 52-years-old female with psoriasis and an extradural mass (neurogenic P02.252 tumour versus hemangiopericytoma or meningioma were considered clinical spectrum of heritable disorders connective tissue in as differential diagnosis), who was referred to our laboratory for Russian cohort patients molecular testing of Neurofibromatosis 1. The mutation consists in a V. A. Rumyantseva, O. M. Bogopolskaya O.M., E. R. Charchyan, E. V. 48.6 kb deletion and a 14 bp insertion, resulting in exclusion of exons Zaklyazminskaya; 6-8 from the mature transcript. The same mutation was detected in the Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian proband’s father and two siblings, without diagnosed cancer. Federation. Our findings show that inherited mutations in WWOX gene do not lead Background: Heritable disorders of connective tissue (HDCT) often to a high predisposition to develop malignancies, as could be expected predispose patients to aortic aneurysm and acute aortic dissection. from mouse models and other reported data. Future identification of Forms of HDCT caused by mutations in the TGFBR1 or TGFBR2 more families with germinal mutations in WWOX will allow clinicians to genes have a severe prognosis due to the high risk of aortic rupture. define its associated phenotype. Patients and methods: We performed clinical and genealogical examination of patients undergoing surgical repair of aortic root P02.250 dilation/aneurysm and their relatives. Personal and family history were Maternally inherited duplication Xq11.1-Xq13.1 in a boy collected, and clinical examination (standard and 24-hour Holter ECG, with craniosynostosis, mild mental retardation and facial EchoCG, Dopplerography, chest radiography) and genetic analysis dysmorphism were performed. C. Rigon1, K. Ludwig2, A. Casarin1, E. Trevisson1, L. Salviati1; Results: We examined 66 index patients and relatives (mean age 33 1Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, Padova, Italy, y.o., range 4 to 64 y.o.) with HDCT symptoms (57% male). A positive 2Department of Medical Diagnostic Sciences & Special Therapies, Pathology family history was detected in 21%. A significant number of patients Unit; University of Padova, Padova, Italy. (77%) required operation because of large vessel aneurysm and/or Partial duplications involving the long arm of chromosome X valvular insufficiency. The phenotypic spectrum within the HDCT group have been reported as causing mental retardation and multiple was as follows: Loeys-Dietz Syndrome 5%, Marfan Syndrome 16%, malformations. Although data regarding these specific chromosomal Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome type IV 14%, Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome type anomalies in males are limited and duplication extensions are variable, VI 4%, TAAD 26%, functional valvular insufficiency 11%, aneurysms a clear pattern of characteristic features, including short stature, of large vessels 7%, MASS phenotype 3%, non-differentiated developmental delay, cryptorchidism, restricted joint mobility and HDCT 14%. The overwhelming majority of patients had had cardiac cranio-facial dysmorphisms has been identified. arrhythmias. Mutation screening in the TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes We report the case of a 14 year old male patient with craniosynostosis, is in progress now. mild mental retardation, facial dysmorphisms and non specific conclusion: Correct molecular confirmation in families with HDCT is polyarthritis. Chromosomal analysis on peripheral blood lymphocytes required to identify probands at high risk for aortic dissection. Even in showed a normal male karyotype. Array-CGH, MLPA and quantitative the absence of identified mutations causing HDCT, we recommend PCR analysis revealed a duplication of approximately 5.9MB on standardized examinations of first-degree relatives in affected families. the long arm of the X chromosome, subsequently identified in the Prophylactic aortic root replacement should be considered for patients proband’s mother and grandmother. at risk. As far as we know this is a unique rearrangement as there are no This work supported by grants from Russian Ministry of Education and previous reports about a Xq11.1-Xq13.1 duplication. Among the 35 Science 02.740.11.0783. duplicated genes, EDA appeared to be the best candidate to explain at least some of the phenotypic peculiarities in our patient being the only P02.253 gene known to have been associated to a gain of function phenotype A case with Noonan syndrome and renal hypoplasia in mice. It encodes ectodysplasin, a TNF- family protein required C. Daescu1,2, I. Maris1,2, I. Simedrea1,2, O. Marginean1,2, M. Puiu1,2, T. for normal morphogenesis and differentiation of several ectodermal Marcovici1,2, O. Belei1,2, A. Militaru1,2, R. Stroescu1,2, C. Duncescu2; organs. We therefore analysed the levels of EDA transcript and some 1„Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, of its downstream interactors by quantitative PCR. 2”Louis Turcanu” Emergency Hospital for Children, Timisoara, Romania. Our data showed marked hyperexpression of EDA, supporting its role Introduction: Noonan syndrome comprises an unusual facies and in determining, at least partially, the phenotype of our patient. Dosage multiple malformations, including congenital heart disease. Aim: To sensitive genes as cause of the phenotype of our patient will then be present the case of a boy with Noonan syndrome and right renal discussed. hypoplasia. Material and Methods: 19 months old B.M., of male gender, was referred to our department for a urinary tract infection. We Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 128 based our diagnosis on clinical features and imaging studies. Results: Municipal Hospital 3, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. During the physical we noted the following features: micrognathia, low- We report a case of diagnosis of Sanfilippo syndrome, the first in set posteriorly rotated ears, hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral the territory of the Novosibirsk region. The diagnosis was made at fissures, epicanthal folds, proptosis, strabismus, dental malocclusion, a medicogenetic consultation at a children’s psychoneurological short neck with low posterior hairline, shield chest, pectus excavatus, dispensary. The proband, a girl of five years, was observed by the brachydactyly, blunt fingertips, retractile left testis. Furthermore, psychiatrist with a diagnosis of serious mental retardation (F72). the child had a short stature. The neurologic consult found a mild Psychoneurological features were prominent. In development of the motor delay. The cardiac ultrasound showed aortic regurgitation and child there was a retrogression of mental functions with a crushing obstructive hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We performed an abdominal defeat of intelligence, speech and communication functions, ultrasound which revealed right renal hypoplasia. The audiologic and disturbances of behaviour with excitation and aggression. A lack of ophthalmologic examinations were unremarkable at this time, but the skills of self-care becomes perceptible. Craniofacial dysmorphism child will require ongoing follow-up. Discussion: Renal anomalies are and signs of an osteal dysostosis were expressed moderately. The present in 10% of patients and are not usually clinically significant. In neurologic status: a lower spastic paraparesis, Babinsky positive this case, a condition associated with this anomaly led to the proper signs, disturbance of gait and coordination, a divergent squint. diagnosis. Conclusion: Although described for the first time almost Functional examination showed CT signs of hydrocephaly, signs of an 50 years ago, Noonan syndrome can still reveal itself in unusual intracranial hypertension; a thickening of the cusps of the mitral valve, circumstances. a sinus arrhythmia and episodes of transient sinuatrial blockade. The clinical diagnosis has been confirmed in the laboratory of hereditary J02.01 diseases of metabolism of the RAMS Research Center for Medical Deafness- associated DFNB599 gene (Pejvakin) mutations in Genetics (Moscow). In the SGSH gene the mutation p.R74C was sistsn va Bluchestan province. identified. Distinctive features of the present case are absence of the m. abolhasani1, E. Farrokhi1, M. Taher zadeh1, f. azadegan1, A. Asgari1, D. cramps characteristic of the classical variant of MPS III, neurosensory Farhood2, S. Raisi1, Z. Noeparast3, G. Bani Talebi1, M. Hashem Zadeh1; deafness and diarrhoea. It is possible to assume that this is related to 1Cellular and Molecular Reserch Center, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, the early diagnosis of disease. 2Genetic Clinic, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Walf Organization, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. J02.04 Background and aim: Hearing loss is a common disorder affecting Pierre Robin syndrome - Evolution and Prognostic at Distance millions of individuals worldwide with opproximately 1 in 1000 M. Boia, E. S. Boia, A. Manea, D. Iacob; newborns. A novel gene, DFNB59 encods Pejvakin has been recently University of Medicine and Pharmacy V. Babes, Timisoara, Romania. shown to cause neural deafness. The aim of this study was to introduction: Pierre Robin syndrome is a rare condition in current determine the frequency of DFNB59 gene mutations in 93 deaf pupils medical practice, with an incidence of 1/8500-1/30000. in Sistsn va Bluchestan province. Clinical diagnosis is easily accomplished in the presence of typical Methods: We investigated the frequency of DFNB59 gene mutations in associated malformations. the coding regions (exons 2-7) of the gene. Objectives: We present the case of a newborn with Pierre Robin DNA was extracted following the standard phenol chloroform syndrome associated with omphalocele in major form. procedure, the frequency of DFNB59 gene mutations was investigated material and method: A premature newborn, gestational age 35 using PCR-SSCP /HA strategy. weeks, female, from a pathological pregnancy, presented at birth Results: No pathogenic variant was detected in samples studied. with a major omphalocele, requiring rapid surgical intervention. However, one polymorphism including 793C>G was determined in 3 The particular phenotype with severe micrognathia, cleft palate, of 93 ( 3.2%) subject examined. glossoptosis associated with stuck sternum and intraventricular septal Conclusion: The results of this study showed no associated between defect easily suggested the clinical diagnosis. DFNB59 gene mutations and hearing loss in Sistan va Baluchestan Results: Low birth weight, early surgical intervention, cardiac province. malformation, associated respiratory distress and abdominal wall defect made a difficult clinical evolution. There were no karyotypic J02.02 abnormalities. Progress was difficult due to feeding difficulties and New mutation in Notch3 gene of cADAsiL in iranian patients recurrent respiratory infections that led to weight loss and prolonged M. Balali, o. Aryani, S. Saber, M. Houshmand; hospitalizations. special meddical center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. conclusions: 1. Clinical diagnosis of Pierre Robin syndrome is easily Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with sub cortical infarcts effected. 2. Even though severe associated malformations were and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL (is an inherited cerebrovascular present there were no karyotypic abnormalities. disease due to mutations of the Notch3 gene at the chromosome locus 3. The long-term prognosis is good through treatment and management 19p13. The clinical spectrum includes recurrent ischemic episodes, by a multidisciplinary team. cognitive Deficits, migraine and psychiatric disorders. MRI reveals extensive J02.05 cerebral white matter lesions Prevalence of the A1555G, A3243G and A7445G mitochondrial And sub cortical infarcts. Notch 3 gene, encodes a transmembrane mutations in non-syndromic hearing impairment in Khuzestan receptor and contains 33 exons. The mutation responsible for province of the iran CADASIL are located within the extracellular domain of Notch 3, with G. Banitalebi1, M. MOntazerozohori1, E. Farokhi1, M. Abolhasani1, S. Reisi1, strong clustering within exon 3 and 4 in more than 70% of patients. F. Azadegan1, Z. Ataii2, H. Majed1, S. Keshavarz3, M. Hashemzadeh1, A. In this study DNA was extracted from a patient suspected to CADASIL Hosseinipor4; with clinical manifestations. Exon 3 and 4 of Notch 3 gene was 1cellular and molecolar reaserch center, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, amplified by PCR. After sequencing we found a c.347A>T mutation in 2cellular and molecolar reaserch center of Iran univercity, Tehran, Islamic exon 4 0f Notch 3 gene .This mutation alters Aspartic acid to Valine.. Republic of Iran, 3department of Exeptional children,Ministry of Education and Training, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Dept of Exeptional children, J02.03 Ministry of Education and Training, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. The first case of diagnostics mucopolysaccharidosis type III in Background and aime: Hearing impairment (HI) is one of the most Novosibirsk region. prevalent sensorineural handicaps that occurs 1 in 1000 at new A. R. Shorina1, V. A. Makasheva1, N. V. Ganina2, N. P. Fedoruk3; born. More than 50 nuclear genes have been shown to be involved 1Novosibirsk Regional Children’s Clinical Psychoneurological Dispensary, in nonsyndromic HI, but mitochondrial mutations might also cause Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2State Novosibirsk Regional Clinical Hospital, HI.Mitochondrial mutations are present in 0-2% hereditary hearing Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Paediatric Departament, Urgent Children’s impairment .In the present study, we investigated three common mutation of the mtDNA molecule among 62 subject with non syndromic hearing impairment in Khuzestan province of the Iran.Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology 129 method: Individual’s DNA was extracted using standard phenole- J02.08 chloroform method. We screened known mtDNA mutations (A1555G, A case of Noonan syndrome A3243G and A7445G) by PCR-RFLP procedure. Finally, the mutations V. L. David1, M. C. Popoiu2, M. Puiu2, V. Trestianu1, A. V. Popoiu2, P. Fuicu2, F. were found confirmed by direct sequencing. Horhat2, A. Timofte3, G. F. Brad1, E. S. Boia2; Results: A1555G and A3243G mutations were not found in our study. 1Emergency Children’s Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, However, mutations screening by PCR-RFLP technique and direct 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, sequencing revealed a known A7445C mutation and an unknown 3Municipal Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. G3316A mutation in two hearing impaired patients with frequency of Background: Noonan syndrome (NS) is a sporadic or inherited 3.2%.conclusion: we concluded that contribution of mitochondrial developmental disorder with an incidence of one in 1.000-2.500 mutations in hearing impaired patients in Khuzestan province can be children. Clinical manifestations of NS include a typical dysmorphic importantly. Then testing for mutation in mtDNA should be considered appearance, congenital heart defects, short stature, skeletal only when other frequent deafness causing mutations have been malformations like scoliosis and chest malformations, cryptorchidism, excluded. eye abnormalities and various degrees of cognitive deficits. NS is genetically heterogeneous, recent discoveries revealed a disorder of J02.06 upregulated RAS-MAPK signaling. Case report: A 12 years old male Hereditary hearing loss and consanguinity child was admitted to the Department of Pediatric Surgery of our M. Khaleghian1, C. Azimi1, Z. Safari2, A. Fathpour1; hospital for multiple musculoskeletal deformities: severe scoliosis with 1Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, a 400 Cobb angle, funnel chest, bilateral flat feet, joint laxity, and curved Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young thumbs. In addition the child had bilateral cryptorchidism, micrognathia, Researchers Club, Varamin-Pishva Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, astigmatism and mental retardation. A management strategy was Islamic Republic of Iran. developed for each type of pathological dysfunctions: for scoliosis we Many of the patients which referred to the departments of preferred brace correction using Cheneau brace; for cryptorchidism a otolaryngology are suffering from some sort of hearing loss. Hearing surgical intervention was scheduled; for astigmatism optical correction problem usually place stress upon interpersonal relationships, was recommended, for mental retardation intervention programs social isolation, and even sadness and depression.The most of the and individualized education strategies were proposed and for short hearing loss is hereditary and follow autosomal recessive pattern of stature therapy with growth hormone was consider. The opportunity inheritance. Therefore, the frequency of hearing loss is more among of intervention for other problems like: the deformity of the chest, foot those populations which consanguineous marriage is an old tradition. and thumbs is still in debate, a balance between risks and benefits The aim of this study was to find out the frequency of hearing loss being considered. Conclusion: Multidisciplinary treatment is the key to among the consanguineous marriages. success in managing children with Noonan syndrome and the pediatric We investigated all the pedigrees of patients which referred to our surgeon play an important position to lead the health team. Department for genetic counseling during the last three years. We found 206 pedigrees with some sort of otolaryngology disorders, J02.09 and out of them 157 pedigrees were with consanguineous Diagnostic and therapeutic management of a case with marriages. Among these 157 pedigrees, 496 cases were the result myelomeningocele in the context of a complex plurimalformative of consanguineous marriages, and 219 patients were affected with syndrome otolaryngology disorders, Therefore, these 219 cases were studied A. Manea1, M. Boia1, C. Ilie1, D. Iacob1, I. Ursache2; according to consanguineous and non-consanguineous marriages, 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinical kind and degree of relationship of their parents, patterns of inheritance, Emergenc Hopital for Children “L. Turcanu’, Timisoara, Romania. and sex, by using SPSS software. Out of 496 cases, 115 patients Myelomeningocele is a complex congenital spinal cord anomaly (the (23.2%) revealed total deafness, and 53 patients (10.7%) exhibited most severe form of spina bifida, localized mainly thoracic-lumbar partial hearing loss. 85%, also thoracic 10%, cervical 5%) that causes various degrees of Our results showed that, on the whole, there is a relationship between myelodisplasia. In the context of plurimalformative syndrome, it is most hearing loss and consanguinity, and the most affected individuals have commonly associated with hydrocephaly. The diagnosis is set clinic consanguineous parents. and imagistic. Aim: presentation of diagnostic and therapeutic management of a case J02.07 with thoracic-lumbar myelomeninocele with closed medullar area, in investigation of thyroid transcription Factor-1 and tsH Receptor plurimalformative circumstances. genes variant in iranian children with congenital hypothyroidism Material and method: we present the case of a newborn, gestational F. Fattahi1, F. Mahjoubi1, M. Hashemipour2; age 37 weeks, birth weight 2000g, APGAR 8, cranial presentation, from 1nigeb, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Isfahan Endocrine & Metabolism an unmonitored pregnancy, pregnant 1 para 1, with cytomegalovirus Research Center, Isfahan University of, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. infection, prolonged jaundice, anemia, admitted in our service 4 days Congenital hypothyroidism(CH) is a metabolic disorder which occurs after birth. Clinic: spina bifida with exulceration at thoracic-lumbar in 1:3000 or 1:4000 live births. The patients may suffer from thyroid level, flaccid paraplegia, bilateral varus equin, short neck, cranial gland dysgenesis or dyshormongensis. Thyroid dysgenesis (TD) may perimeter in evolution. be caused by mutations in Thyroid Transcription Factor1 (TTF-1) or Results and discussions: Due to malformative associations TSH Receptor (TSHR) genes. This study was aimed to analyze TTF- interdisciplinary exams were performed: ophthalmic, cardiologic ( 1 and TSHR (exons 5 and 7) genes in Iranian CH patients. Blood atrial septal defect), neurosurgical, transfontanellar ultrasound (dilated samples were collected from the 30 patients and family members in lateral ventricles, absence of corpus callosum), MRI for cervical, EDTA supplemented vacutainers. Informed consent was obtained from thoracic, lumbar spine and head (widening of lateral ventricles, parents or guardian of patients. Genomic DNA from each individual absence of septum pellucidum, lumbar-sacral spine rotated in axis was extracted using a QIAamp Blood Kit (QIAGEN) according to the and right lateral, lumbar disraphia with myelomeningocele 1/3.7cm, manufacturer’s instructions. The final concentration of extracted DNA malrotated kidneys), There were no modifications of cariotype. was adjusted to a 50 ng/µl to develop the assay. Mutations in TTF1 Conclusions: 1. Due to malformative association interdisciplinary team and TSHR genes were investigated by PCR-SSCP followed by direct cooperation was important especially for ventricle - peritoneal drainage sequencing. In this presentation our data regarding TTF1 and TSHR and surgical cure of mielomeningocele. 2. There were no modifications genes mutations screening will be presented and the correlation of cariotype, the only modification was the cytomegalovirus infection. between each mutation and clinical manifestation will be discussed. 3. Genetic consult and antenatal diagnosis can lead to a favorable prognostic of mielomeningocele and minimal further complications.Cytogenetics 130 J02.10 de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil. A woman with 45,X/46,XY karyotype and clinical features of Partial duplication-deletion of the short and long arms of chromosome turner syndrome 18 has been rarely reported in literature with few cases including F. Mortezapour1, M. Rahnama1, F. Nasiri1, F. Manoochehri1, F. Mahjoubi2, R. molecular cytogenetic studies. We describe a 18-month-old boy Torabi2; with severe growth deficiency pre-and post-natal, microcephaly, 1Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization Reasearch center, Tehran, Islamic dysmorphic features, epilepsy and intense hypotonia. The 18q Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic deletion was first detected by G-banding karyotype and appeared to Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. be a small deletion. Molecular techniques, including whole genomic 45,X/46,XY mosaics have a wide spectrum of phenotypic appearances array, multiplex-ligation probe amplification (MLPA) and fluorescence such as female or ambiguous external genitalia with bilateral streak in situ hybridization (FISH) with BAC probes were required in order to gonads or asymmetrical gonadal differentiation. They also have an better define the rearrangement, to determine the breakpoints and to increased risk of developing gonadoblastoma, and a minority of them better delineate the genotype/phenotype correlation. The Cytogenetics are masculinized.Structural X chromosome abnormalities are thought Whole-Genome 2.7M Array (Affymetrix) showed a result arr 18p11.3 to occur as a result of breakages in the X chromosome with subsequent 2p11.22(234,125-9,782,925)x3, 18q21.2 q23(50,293,625-76,084,580) reunion of X chromosome sequences. x1 dn. Thus, the patient presented a 9.6 Mb duplication, from 18p11.32 Here we report a 31-year-old woman referred to our laboratory due to 18p11.22, and a 25.8 Mb deletion, from 18q21.2 to 18q23. MLPA to infertility. The patient has irregular menstrual cycle. There was with subtelomeric probes revealed three copies of 18 psubtel and one a familial history of infertility in her family. Chromosome analysis copy of 18 qsubtel. FISH technique using RP11-113J12 and RP11- revealed mos45,X[22]/46,XY[8] karyotype. The clinical features of this 231N16 probes confirmed the results, since these probes were in case will be discussed and compared with the published cases. upside down order. Thus, the duplication/deletion rearrangement probably originated due to an abnormal meiotic recombination within a pericentric inversion. The deleted and duplicated regions encompass genes whose imbalances contributed to the severe phenotype in P03 cytogenetics the patient. These data highlight the fact that concomitant deletions associated with inverted duplications are more frequent than classical cytogenetic methods alone have been able to identify. Furthermore, our results show the usefulness of high-resolution molecular cytogenetic P03.001 analysis both in the delineation of chromosome rearrangements and intra-familial variable expression of a recurrent 16p13.11 in clinical diagnosis. deletion: a severe phenotype associated with a second genomic event. P03.003 K. Schlade-Bartusiak1,2, M. Van Allen3, L. Brown1,2, P. Eydoux1,2; Familial 1q21.1 microduplication associated with 1Cytogenetics Laboratory, BC Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, cardiomyopathy and absent pulmonary valve 2Department of Pathology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, J. M. A. Verhagen1, D. N. M. Papatsonis2, E. W. M. Grijseels1, R. R. de Krijger1, Canada, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, N. de Leeuw3, M. W. Wessels1; Vancouver, BC, Canada. 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Amphia Genomic disorders are recurrent microrearrangement syndromes Hospital, Breda, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, that arise through non-allelic homologous recombination mediated by Nijmegen, Netherlands. segmental duplications (SD). Over 20 novel genomic disorders have introduction: The chromosome region 1q21.1 contains several low- been described in recent years. Recurrent microdeletions at 16p13.11 copy repeats which makes this region susceptible for cytogenetic span 1.5 - 3 Mb and are located between three sets of SD-associated rearrangements. These rearrangements are associated with abnormal breakpoints (BP1-BP2-BP3). There are no clear phenotypic differences head size, mental retardation, autism and congenital anomalies. Most between BP1 - BP2 and BP1 - BP3 deletions. The 16p13.11 deletion often, microdeletions and -duplications of 1q21.1 occur de novo. We is associated with a broad spectrum of neurocognitive diseases, describe a large family with a 1q21.1 microduplication. including autism, intellectual disability, epilepsy and schizophrenia, as methods & Results: The proband is the first child of non- well as skeletal and cardiac malformations. It is characterized by a high consanguineous Dutch parents. Prenatal ultrasound revealed an phenotypic variability, with some carriers having a normal phenotype. enlarged heart with a ventricular septal defect and wide aortic and Here we report a family with a father and two daughters carrying a pulmonary arteries. After pregnancy termination, external morphologic 16p13.11 deletion (BP1-BP3), as determined by Affymetrix 6.0 SNP examination demonstrated a proportioned fetus with a round face, array. The oldest daughter has speech delay. The youngest daughter hypertelorism and short palpebral fissures. Autopsy showed a presented at birth with failure to thrive, congenital heart defect and grossly enlarged heart, perimembranous ventricular septal defect, features of oto-palato-digital syndrome. In addition to the 16p13.11 absent pulmonary valve, dysplastic tricuspid valve, persistent left deletion, she carries a 7.5 Mb deletion at 10q22.3-q23.2. This deletion superior vena cava and abnormally wide and thickened wall of the is a recurrent, SD-associated, genomic disorder, which has been ascending aorta. Genome wide SNP array analysis on DNA from previously reported in 7 unrelated patients with developmental delay cultured amniocytes revealed a 1q21.1 microduplication of 2.2 Mb. and congenital abnormalities. This microduplication was also found in the mother, who presented This is the first report of coexistence of a 16p13.11 deletion with an with mild mental retardation. Subsequently, this rearrangement was additional imbalance, causing a severe phenotype. Additional large detected in 9 family members. All displayed dysmorphic features imbalances have been previously observed in 25% of patients with including hypertelorism and macrocephaly. Normal development was 16p11.2 and 16p12.1 deletions, and were proposed to be responsible present in most 1q21.1 microduplication carriers. for the phenotypic variability of 16p rearrangements. Interestingly, the Discussion: Congenital heart malformations have been reported in additional imbalance at 10q22.3-23.2 in our patient is also a recurrent 4/26 patients with 1q21 duplication from two large cohorts [Mefford genomic disorder. 2008, Brunetti-Pierri 2008], including ventricular septal defects and univentricular heart. GJA5 and PRKAB2 are good candidate genes for P03.002 the cardiac defects observed in these patients. Genomic rearrangement dup(18p)/del(18q) studied by sNP-array, conclusion: Our description of this unique 3-generation family mLPA and BAc-FisH techniques underlines the incomplete penetrance and extreme phenotypic L. D. Kulikowski1, S. S. Takeno2, A. R. Dutra2, D. M. Christofolini2, S. I. N. variability of 1q21.1 microduplications. Belangero2, F. T. S. Bellucco2, A. J. S. Duarte1, D. Brunoni2, M. Melaragno2; 1Department of Pathology, LIM 03, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal Cytogenetics 131 P03.004 P03.006 congenital heart defects in a novel recurrent 22q11.2 deletion 2q34-qter duplication in a patient with developmental delay syndrome harboring the genes CRKL and MAPK1 A. Rashidi-Nezhad1,2, S. M. Akrami1, N. Parvaneh3, F. Farzanfar4, C. Azimi4, A. J. Breckpot1, B. Thienpont2, L. Tranchevent3, J. R. Vermeesch1, M. Gewillig4, Y. Reymond2; Moreau3, K. Devriendt1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 1Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Center for Integrative 2Laboratory of Molecular Signalling and Laboratory of Developmental Genetics Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of and Imprinting; Babraham Research Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Pediatrics, Children’s Medical Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 3Bioinformatics Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, ESAT-SCD, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Pediatric Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Cardiology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Islamic Republic of Iran. The proximal region of the long arm of chromosome 22 contains eight Patients with 2q3 duplication syndrome show variable developmental low copy repeats (LCR), known as LCR22s. Non-allelic homologous delay, facial and visceral anomalies. The 2q34-qter duplication is recombination (NAHR) between these recombination substrates apparently crucial in determining the phenotype, as shown by seven explains the existence of recurrent rearrangements within the 22q11.2 previously reported cases of 2q34-qter duplications. region, and the high prevalence of de novo events. The most common We present a 10 months boy with developmental delay, growth recombination event occurs between LCR22-2 and LCR22-4, and retardation, hearing problem, facial and non-facial minor anomalies. gives rise to a 3.0 Mb deletion, associated with DiGeorge syndrome. He was born to a 30 years old mother with a history of recurrent fertility We report on a novel recurrent 22q11.2 deletion syndrome in a problems. She went through 3 spontaneous abortions, 2 of her children 14-months-old girl with a common arterial trunk, growth delay and died at 8 days and 4 months as a result of water loss or hypotonia and mild dysmorphic features. She presented a normal development. cleft palate, respectively, and now she has one healthy boy. Karyotype The current deletion spans LCR22-4, the distal part of the common analysis of the proband showed an additional segment of unknown 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and the proximal part of the distal 22q11 origin on 4q35. Karyotyping of both parents showed that the mother deletion syndrome. This deletion did not occur by NAHR between any carries a balanced translocation t(2;4)(q34;q35) and identified 2q34- of the major LCR22s. However, by means of extended long template qter as the origin of the additional segment. PCR the proximal and distal breakpoint containing regions were found The proband has a round face with high forehead, broad nasal bridge, to coincide with a 3.7 kb block of 97% homology between 19,351,886- high arched palate, macrostomy, long philtrum, thin upper lip, ear 19,355,637 and 20,799,044-20,802,748. We believe that these pit and flat occiput, confirming the importance of the distal region homologous regions served as recombination substrates for this novel of HSA2 in the 2q3 duplication phenotype. Other findings include 22q11.2 deletion. shawl scrotum with undescendent and hypoplastic testes, bilateral An identical deletion was described recently in a normally developing simian creases, clinodactyly with short fifth finger, hyperflexible joints, girl with imperforate anus and multiple septal defects (Ogilvie et hypotonia, growth retardation, slow developmental motor function, and al., 2009). Interestingly, both cases presented with a congenital mild ventriculomegally in brain CT scan. Notably, none of the major heart defect (CHD) and growth delay, but no developmental delay. congenital anomalies, such as congenital heart disease or urinary Automated gene prioritization, based on ENDEAVOUR technology tract malformations found in more proximal duplications, are present (Aerts et al., 2006), was applied to identify candidate genes for CHD suggesting a critical region from band 2q31 to q34. within this region. The highest ranking genes were CRKL and MAPK1. P03.007 P03.005 5q35.2 → ter deletion in a patient with craniofacial feature of molecular cytogenetic characterization in a child with 2q sotos syndrome and growth retardation deletion and 4q duplication A. Rajaee, K. Najafi, G. Abbassi, H. Loghmani Khouzani, B. Bozorgmehr, A. N. Andreescu1, A. Belengeanu2, M. Stoian1, S. Farcas1, E. Ormerod3, V. Moshtagh, H. Najmabadi, R. Kariminejad, A. Kariminejad; Belengeanu1, C. Popa1, B. E. Kristiansen3; Kariminejad-Najmabadi Path. & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Genetics, Iran. Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Sotos Syndrome (SoS) is a congenital disorder characterized by Cellular and Molecular Biology, Timisoara, Romania, 3Oslo University Hospital, excessive growth, typical craniofacial features, and various degrees Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway. of developmental retardation. Mutation of NSD1 (nuclear receptor Many patients referred for psychomotor retardation (PMR), dysmorphic SET-domain-containing protein) located at 5q35.3 are responsible for features and/or congenital anomalies are predicted to have cytogenetic most cases. We present a 2 1/2-year-old girl in this study with unusual imbalances, which can not be identified by conventional methods. phenotype including macrocephaly, prominent and wide forehead, We present here genetic study on an 18 years old male investigated coarse face, hypertelorism, wide mouth, prominent jaw, premature for severe mental retardation associated with dismorphic features, eruption of teeth, low-set ears, hypotonia, hallux valgus, wrinkled limb anomalies, cadiac and renal malformations. Conventional skin, hearing loss, developmental delay and growth retardation cytogenetics: abnormal chromosome 2, with additional material on (height and weight below the 3rd percentile) . Based on the clinical the long arm, add(2q). The banding pattern of abnormal chromosome findings chromosomal study and Multiple Ligation Dependent suggested that the additional segment 2q belongs to telomeric short Probe Amplification (MLPA) was requested with suspicion of Sotos arm, or telomeric long arm of chromosome 4. WCP4 probe was used syndrome. MLPA showed microdeletion at q35.3 which is associated and hybridized to the additional region of derivative chromosome 2. with Sotos syndrome. Karyotyping confirmed deletion of long arm of For differentiation, in addition a telomeric 4p probe was used, which chromosome 5 (q35.2 and the segment distal to this band. Since our did not hybridise to the segment attached to the long arm of the patient had additional findings and differences compared to Sotos derivative chromosome 2. We concluded that the additional material syndrome namely coarse features, wrinkled skin, hyperextensibility of chromosome 2 belongs to chromosome 4. To delineate correctly of joints, mainly in digits, growth retardation, while Sotos patients the region implicated in the chromosomal rearrangement aCGH have excessive growth (>97th centile) array comparative genomic analysis (105A Oligo Microarray Kit) was performed and revealed a hybridization (aCGH) was performed showing a 0.5 Mb deletion in 7.5 Mb deletion on 2q37.3 and a 29 Mb duplication on 4q32-4q35.2. 5q35.2◊ ter with maximum,174416712 and minimum,174837769 We compared the clinical features of our patient with other cases breakpoint boundaries. The additional findings are most probably described in the literature and we found more than 60 cases of 2q37 related to deletion of adjacent genes to NSD1. terminal deletion reported with features ranging from developmental delay, mental retardation, dysmorphism, autism, cardiac or renal abnormalities. The chromosomal bands 4q32-q35 was associated with PMR, axial hypotonia, multiple congenital anomalies and hand/foot malformation. The aCGH analysis is a useful method for the detection and characterization of chromosomal rearrangements.Cytogenetics 132 P03.008 complex chromosome rearrangement, consisting of a reciprocal characterization of a case with an atypical deletion 8p23.1 translocation plus a deletion detected by conventional karyotype: B. Hernández-Charro, R. C. Narvaiza Martínez, A. Bengoa Alonso, M. Artigas 46,XY,t(3;13)(q26.2;q22),del(6)(q15q21). FISH analysis with López, A. Pérez-Juana del Casal, M. A. Ramos-Arroyo; subtelomeric probes confirmed the translocation. Further studies Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. with array-CGH analysis (Agilent, 180K) demonstrated the Distal deletions of chromosome 8p are associated with congenital heart presence of several copy number variants, including a duplication defects. Other features include microcephaly, mental retardation and on chromosome 3, two deletions on chromosome 6, and a deletion facial anomalies. GATA4 has been involved in the heart defects and, on chromosome 13: arr 3q26.1(163,992,703-164,108,151) the TNKS in the behavioural problems and learning disabilities. The x3, 6q13q14.1(75,314,285-76,187,164)x1, 6q14.1(80,785,392- region between them, including MSRA and SOX7, has been suggested 80,911,216)x1, 13q31.3(89,597,407-90,636,021)x1. to play a critical role in microcephaly and facial dysmorphism. Deleted regions on chromosome 6 were 873Kb and 126Kb in size, Some cases share a commonly deleted region of ~6Mb with and were separated by a 4.6Mb normal region. The deletion included breakpoints clustering in the same regions (low copy repeats 8p-OR- 4 genes, one of which (COL12A1) is a known candidate gene for REPD and 8p-OR-REPP). However, there are exceptional cases with connective tissue pathology and is probably involved in the kyphosis larger or smaller deletions with variable phenotype so, it is necessary and foot deformities seen in our patient. to investigate the precise deleted region in atypical cases, to define the The small size of the 6q deletion (~1Mb) and the presence of copy minimal critical region. number variations on both chromosomes 3 and 13, suggest the We report a 3 year-old non dysmorphic girl with microcephaly, speech existence of a more complex rearrangement than the one previously and developmental delay and normal cardiac evaluation. Karyotype described. Therefore additional analyses should be done to unravel showed a de novo del(8)(p23). FISH and MLPA confirmed a terminal the nature of this rearrangement. deletion between 10.2 and 11 Mb involving TNKS and MSRA, but not This study provides further evidence that cryptic genomic imbalances including the GATA4 region (TelVysion 8 Vysis, P036 telomere, P096 are common in patients with apparently balanced translocations MR2 and P311 congenital heart disease, MRC-Holland). and abnormal phenotypes, and emphasizes the importance of using Although the patient presents a larger deletion than previously high resolution genome-wide analysis to characterize complex reported, she presents less features, therefore it is important to rearrangements. test which specific genes are deleted. On one hand, GATA4 was not deleted as we expected. On the other hand and as it has been P03.011 proposed, MSRA deletion could explain microcephaly in our case but A 2p16.1 deletion in a boy with mR/mcA syndrome detected by other specific molecular analysis (aCGH) will be performed to find out mLPA if SOX7 is present, explaining the absence of facial dysmorphism. I. M. Bradinova, R. Vazharova, S. Bichev, A. Savov, I. Kremensky; National genetic laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. P03.009 Chromosomal abnormalities are a common cause of mental retardation molecular cytogenetic analysis of 8p23.1 deletion associated / multiple congenital anomalies. The advent of new technologies with moderate mental retardation without heart defect for molecular cytogenetics such as FISH, MLPA, array CGH has H. Ben khelifa1, N. Soyah2, H. Hannechi1, S. Mougou1, I. Ben Abdallah1, H. dramatically increased the number of novel microdeletions and Elghezal1, A. Saad1; microduplications associated with a wide range of clinical phenotypes 1Laboratory of cytogenetics,molecular genetics and reproductive biology - of a relative stable and distinctive MCA/MR syndromes. Farhat Hached hospital, sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of pediatrics- Farhat We report a 5 months old boy with developmental delay, failure to thrive, Hached hospital, sousse, Tunisia. severe hypotonia, hypoplastic genitalia (micropenis, cryptorchism), To date more than 50 cases of interstitial or terminal 8p23.1 deletions syndactily 4-5 of the left hand and facial dysmorphic features, including have been reported. This aberration is especially prone to various brachycephaly, strabismus, short and narrow palpebral fissures. genomic rearrangements mainly because of the existence of the Routine cytogenetic studies at amniocentesis and postnatally (300- two olfactory receptor gene clusters (REPD and REPP) which is 400 band level) were normal. associated with a spectrum of anomalies that can include congenital MLPA, performed using kit P245 (MRC Holland), detected deletion heart malformations and congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). of the loci FANCL, 2p16.1 and REL, 2p16.1 and follow-up studies by We report on a 5-year-old boy with psychomotor delay, moderate arrayCGH were performed.Despite the early age our patient presents mental retardation, hypotony, vertebral anomalies, and dysmorphic some of the characteristic feature of the 2p15-16.1 microdeletion features without heart malformations nor any overlapping features of syndrome. The clinical follow up of the patient and the determination Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS). of the deletion size by additional molecular techniques (array CGH, Using Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH array) on a FISH etc.) will contribute to the further delineation of the syndrome 44K resolution, we identified an interstitial deletion of 1,181,530 pb phenotype and the underlying genes since a few cases are described in 8p23.1: arr 8p23.1 (8,229,404 - 9,410,934) X1. Fluorescence in up to now. situ hybridization (FISH) analysis confirmed the deletion using RP11- 429B7 probe. P03.012 The mental retardation presented by our case seems to be associated A de novo 1.8 mb 17q21.33 microdeletion detected by sNP-cGH to genes haploinsuffiency included in the 8p deletion. This deletion in patient with mental retardation and dysmorphic features includes TNKS gene, known as a candidate gene for CdLS, supporting V. Dirsė1,2, J. Kasnauskienė1,2, A. Utkus1,2, E. Preikšaitienė1,2, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, K. other studies invalidating TNKS in CdLS. In addition, the absence of Männik3, A. Kurg3, V. Kučinskas1,2; cardiac malformations often associated with the 8p deletions could be 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius explained by the retention of SOX7 and GATA4 genes, known for their University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University major role in cardiac development. Even though, further studies based Hospital Santariškių Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell on the high-resolution characterization of additional cases are needed Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. to establish more clearly the role of the discussed candidate genes in We report 16 years old male presenting with mild mental retardation and carriers of 8p23.1 deletions. dysmorphic features (slight shortness of stature, poor weight gain, long face, beaked nose, thick lower lip, micrognathia, malocclusion of teeth P03.010 and clinodactyly of the 5th fingers). The boy was born to healthy, non- molecular characterization of a complex rearrangement consanguineous Lithuanian couple after a normal pregnancy in a normal associated with an apparently balanced translocation delivery. His older half brother was healthy. The proband had a normal A. Bengoa Alonso, B. Hernández-Charro, R. Narvaiza Martínez, A. Pérez- motor development, but language development was severly retarded. Juana Del Casal, M. Artigas López, M. Ramos-Arroyo; Karyotyping of peripheral blood cells revealed an inconspicuous COMPLEJO HOSPITALARIO DE NAVARRA, PAMPLONA, Spain. karyotype. Analysis of patient genomic DNA by Illumina whole-genome We report on a 42 year-old male with moderate mental retardation, genotyping (Infinium HD) assay using HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip facial dysmorphic features and skeletal anomalies, carrier of a revealed an interstition 1.8 Mb deletion of 17q21.33. FISH analysis Cytogenetics 133 of patient and both parents confirmed the microdeletion as de novo. related with MR and speech impairment, the possibility of disruption of Among 23 genes in deleted region, haploinsufficiency of CACNA1G regulatory sequences by downstream deletion should be considered. and CA10 genes can play crucial role in developmental delay. Both of The research leading to these results is funded by the Research Council genes are involved in brain development and neurological processes. of Lithuania National Scientific Programme Chronic Noninfection The CACNA1G gene, which predominantly is expressed in brain, Diseases (PROGENET project, No. LIG-1007). encodes voltage-dependent calcium channels which are thought to be involved in neuronal oscillations and resonance, pacemaking activity P03.015 in central neurons, neurotransmission. The CA10 gene encodes the molecular cytogenetic studies of 1p36 deletion syndrome in protein which is acatalytic member of the alfa-carbonic anhydrase children with mental retardation and congenital malformations subgroup and is thought to play significant role in the central nervous I. A. Demidova1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, A. D. Kolotii1, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, I. Y. system, especially in brain development. Based on this information Iourov2,1; the reported de novo deleted region is considered as pathogenic. 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Minzdravsotsrazvitia, Moscow, The research leading to these results is funded by the European Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Community’s Seventh Framework Programme [FP7/2007-2013] under Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and grant agreement n° 223692, CHERISH project. Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. Deletions of 1p36 are associated with a common microdeletion P03.013 syndrome affecting one in 5000 live borns. Diagnosis of 1p36 deletion Recurrence of a 19p13 duplication by a familial represents a challenge for cytogeneticists inasmuch as these deletions intrachromosomal insertional translocation are hardly visible by classical cytogenetic techniques. The solution is C. Orellana, S. Monfort, M. Roselló, S. Mayo, S. Oltra, F. Martínez; the application of FISH or array CGH. However, the former shows only Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. loss of a small chromosomal region, whereas the latter is expensive for Introduction: the occurrence of pure 19p13 duplication in two first numerous laboratories around the world. To avoid significant expenses, grade cousins led us to investigate the presence of an insertional we have tested whether high-resolution CGH (HR-CGH) can be used translocation. Intrachromosomal insertional translocation was found in for diagnosis of 1p36 deletion syndrome. Cytogenetic studies of 3500 at least three generations. Three mentally retarded cases and multiple children with mental retardation and congenital malformations allowed abortions in the family were found. to identify the deletion in one case only. Additional analysis of 100 cases Material and methods: whole genome array-CGH was performed on non-randomly selected according to phenotypical manifestations by Agilent oligo-chip 44K. Microsatellite markers and MLPA were used to HR-CGH provided for detection of three other 1p36 deletions: del(1) confirm the array-CGH findings. FISH using BAC probes were used to (p36.1p36.3), del(1)(p36.13p36.21), del(1)(p36.22p36.23). Array CGH locate and confirm the insertional translocation. analysis has confirmed data obtained. Deletion sizes varied from 4.4 Results: in a series of 200 patients with mental retardation associated Mb to 12 Mb and encompassed regions previously reported to be with congenital anomalies, we found one patient with an interstitial involved in 1p36 deletion syndrome. It is noteworthy that one case duplication in 19p13. Initially it was thought that this change had arisen demonstrated multiple chromosome abnormalities: constitutional de novo because the duplication was not present in the parents of 47,XXY and mosaic 12p tetrasomy in addition to 1p36 deletion. the index case. However, the appearance of another case with the Phenotypic manifestations were similar to those usually observed in same duplication in the family made us suspect the presence of an 1p36 deletions, being, however, insufficient for the clinical diagnosis insertional translocation. This was confirmed by FISH with region- of the syndrome. Our data shows that HR-CGH can be used for specific probes. diagnosis of 1p36 deletion syndrome (prescreening before array-CGH Discussion: Insertional translocations can be much more common than application). Finally, we have demonstrated 1p36 deletion to occur initially thought. Therefore, following the detection of a pure duplication as frequent as 1/875 in a clinical population of children with mental or deletion that causes disease in a patient, it should be characterized retardation and congenital malformations inhabiting Central Russia. by FISH in order to offer adequate genetic counselling. P03.016 P03.014 Overlapping microdeletions in 15q22.1-q22.2 in two patients De novo deletion 10p14 in patient with mental retardation, with intellectual disability - characterization of the critical region speech impairment and hypothyroidism using the DEciPHER database J. Kasnauskiene1, Ž. Čiuladaitė1, E. Preikšaitienė1, J. Hettinger2, P. C. A. M. Zink1, E. Wohlleber1, R. Cohn2, R. C. Betz1, W. Kleffmann1, J. A. Lee1,3, Patsalis2, V. Kučinskas1; M. J. V. Hoffer4, M. H. Breuning4, C. Ruivenkamp4, E. Lisi2, H. Engels1; 1Vilnius University, Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2McKusick- Lithuania, 2The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Department of Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United Cytogenetics and Genomics, Nicosia, Cyprus. States, 3Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, The use of array CGH for clinical testing of patients with mental Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical retardation/ developmental delay and/or congenital anomalies has Center, Leiden, Netherlands. provided a possibility to identify novel recognizable microdeletion/ Here, we report two patients with intellectual disability (ID) and de novo microduplication syndromes, as well as to expand the phenotype. microdeletions in 15q22.1-q22.2 detected by molecular karyotyping. Additional report of smaller chromosomal rearrangements, allow The smallest region of overlap (SRO) of the two microdeletions to establish more accurate phenotype-genotype correlation or contained 26 genes, 8 of which are listed in OMIM. single genes impact to the phenotype. Microdeletion of 10p14- Patient 1, a 14 1/2 year old boy presented with moderate ID, slightly 15 is characterized by HDR or DGS2 syndromes. We report on disproportional growth retardation, truncal obesity, strabismus and 11years old boy carrying 2.77 Mb interstitial deletion at 10p14, with mild facial dysmorphisms. His IQ at the age of 6 8/12 years was 55-60. mild mental retardation, speech impairment, hypotonia, hypoplastic After an initial speech delay, his language skills at the age of 14 1/2 corpus callosum, hypothyroidism with good respond to levothyroxin years were significantly better in comparison to his IQ. therapy, hypermetropia, syndactyly, dysmorphic features (narrow Patient 2, a 6 1/2 year old male, was identified in the DECIPHER forehead, round face, simple ears, small nose). 2.77 Mb deletion database. He presented with mild global developmental retardation, was detected by Agilent 105K oligo-array genome hybridization and muscular hypotonia, uncoordinated movements, joint hypermobility, involves the genomic region between 8,255,605 and 11,023,139 base and mild dysmorphisms. pairs on chromosome 10 (NCBI build 37.2). This deletion is one of the Molecular karyotyping detected de novo microdeletions in smallest from previously reported, involving only two genes (SFTA1P1 15q22.1-q22.2 of 5.3 Mb and 5.5 Mb with an SRO of 4.97 Mb and 8 and LOC254312). We do not observe symptoms of HDR or DGS2 OMIM genes. However, the critical region could be reduced tentatively syndromes. Besides MR and speech impairment (characteristic for by the deletion in a third DECIPHER patient without ID, obesity, other patients with deletion in 10p15), our case is associated with muscular hypotonia or dysmorphisms. His deletion overlaps the few distinct features, as brain structure abnormalities and thyroid proximal 1.87 Mb of the SRO of patient 1 and 2, narrowing down the hypofunction. As adjacent region (10p15) contains many genes and is critical region to 3.09 Mb and 11 genes. Only two of the three remaining Cytogenetics 134 OMIM genes are promising candidate genes for ID: VPS13C which is P03.019 highly expressed in the central nervous system and RORA (retinoic Array genomic hybridization characterization of an interstitial acid receptor) which is involved in neuronal development and may 2q36 deletion also cause the muscular phenotype of patient 2 since it interacts with S. Mougou-Zerelli1, H. Ben khélifa1, h. hannechi1, n. soyah2, S. Dimassi3, h. MYOD. Elghezal1, A. Saad1; 1Department of Cytogenetics, Reproductive Biology and Molecular Biology P03.017 Hospital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia, 2departement sNP-array analysis in 64 Polish patients with intellectual of pediatry- Farhat hached hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3DDepartment of disability - first results of the CHERISH project Cytogenetics, Reproductive Biology and Molecular Biology Hospital Farhat S. Dębicki1,2, M. Badura-Stronka1,2, B. Budny1, M. Wiśniewska1,2, R. Glazar2, Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia. A. Materna-Kiryluk2, A. Jamsheer1,2, E. Bonora3, P. Magini3, K. Männik4, C. Interstitial 2q36 deletion is a rare event. Less than 10 patients have Graziano3, A. Kurg4, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; been reported with interstitial deletions involving this region. Patients 1Department of Medical Genetics Poznań University of Medical Sciences, carrying this deletion exhibit mental retardation usually severe. This Poland, Poznań, Poland, 2Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, aberration involves at least three genes known for their role in the Poland, 3U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 4Institute developing nervous system. of Molecular and Cell Biology University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. We report here, the case of a 9 years old boy from non consanguineous The CHERISH consortium was established in 2009 with the main goal couple and with familial severe mental retardation, language delay, of developping a standardized approach to genetic tests in patients epilepsy and mild facial dysmorphism. Conventional cytogenetic with intellectual disability (ID) in Eastern European and Central Asiatic analysis was performed on the peripheral blood lymphocytes at 450-550 countries. RHG banding showed a little asymmetry on the terminal chromosome In recent years, 239 Polish families of well clinically characterized 2q. Using array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH array Agilent patients with idiopathic ID have been included in the CHERISH study. 44K), we identified an interstitial deletion of 2(q36.3-q37.2) of 8,06Mb: Preliminary analysis (karyotype, FMR1 molecular test, metabolic arr2q36.3 (227,508,858- 235,569,556)X1. investigation) was followed by MLPA screening for microdeletions/ This chromosomal aberration carries at least 24 genes, 3 genes are microduplications and subtelomeric rearrangements. In patients with mainly involved in mental retardation: SLC19A3 (Solute Carrier family normal results or with complex chromosomal rearrangements search 19 member 3), DNER (Delta and Notch-like EGF-related receptor) and for cryptic chromosome rearrangements was carried out through TRIP12 (Thyroid hormone receptor- interacting 12). All are involving array-CGH or SNP array analysis in partner laboratories in Bologna in the nervous system developing. Besides mental retardation, other and Tartu. clinical disorders such as renal cysts, congenital abnormalities could The authors present results of SNP array in 64 investigated individuals. be associated to this anomaly but this phenotypic spectrum depends The size of structural aberrations with potential clinical significance on the deletion size and so the deleted genes. Therefore, further found in 10 out of 64 investigated individuals varied from 800 Kb to studies are needed to establish more clearly the effect of 2q deletion 23 Mb. especially on the mental status These data demonstrate that SNP array analysis is necessary to tie complex karyotypes to phenotypes of patients with ID and that P03.020 cooperation on the European level is crucial to achieve diagnostic mendelian molecular cytogenetics in familial microcephaly: the standards in ID. Leuven’s experience This research is funded by the European Community‘s 7th FP E. Chabchoub1, K. Ballon2, N. Gielissen2, A. Raaijmakers2, J. R. Vermeesch1, [FP7/2007-2013] under grant agreement n° 223692, CHERISH project. P. Decock2, J. P. Fryns1; 1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, P03.018 Belgium, 2Centre for developmental disorders - University Hospital A patient with a 7 mb de novo 2p12p13.3 deletion associated to Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. cerebral anomalies, muscular hypotonia and dysmorphisms Microcephaly is an important neurologic sign and represents a frequent F. Forzano1, M. Malacarne2, V. Uliana1, V. Viassolo1, I. Moroni3, C. Marciano1, reason for reference to neuropediatric and neurogenetic clinics. C. Viaggi2, D. Coviello2, M. Pierluigi2, E. Di Maria1,4, F. Faravelli1; Microcephaly is usually defined as an occipitofrontal circumference 1Division of Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory (OFC) more than 2 standard deviations (SDs) below the mean for age of Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Division of Child Neurology, and gender. Microcephaly may result from any event disturbing the Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milan, Italy, 4Dept. of initial stages of brain development and can be associated with more Neuroscience Ophthalmology and Genetics, University of Genova,, Genova, than 450 syndromes listed in the London Dysmorphology Database. Italy. Coexistent neurologic disorders include intellectual disability (50%), We describe a patient with moderate mental retardation, atrial septal epilepsy (40%), ophthalmologic manifestations (20%-50%) and defect type II, epilepsy and peculiar facial features. Brain MRI revealed cerebral palsy (20%). A genetic etiology is found in 15,5% to 53,3%. hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis and widespread dilatation of We applied high-resolution molecular cytogenetics using BAC and cerebral sulci and fissures. The neurological examination revealed oligonucleotide-based array comparative genomic hybridization hypotonia, ataxia and dysmetria. (aCGH) (successively the 1 Mb resolution BAC aCGH and the 32k Array-CGH with an average resolution of about 75-100 Kb showed BAC aCGH (The Sanger Institute-UK) and the OGT CytoSure ISCA a 7 Mb de novo 2p12p13.3 deletion. The rearrangement includes 180k DNA oligoarray set (OGT, UK)) to investigate the genetic bases 75 genes, 10 of which are known disease gene. Five patients with of microcephaly in familial cases referred between 2007 and 2010, to del2p11.2p13, detected with traditional cytogenetic analysis, have been the genetics and pediatric neurology clinics of the University of Leuven reported in literature and overlapping with the deletion reported. The for developmental delay and multiple congenital anomalies. deletion present in our case also overlaps with three cases reported We identified 2 novel loci for microcephaly in 2 families investigated in DECIPHER database and identified with molecular cytogenetic for primary microcephaly and intellectual disability associated with, analysis: a case with a smaller deletion, 780 kb, in region 2p13.3p13.2 respectively, a 3,7 Mb del(1q43) and a 6,25 Mb dup(4q13). Both and two cases with wider duplication, a 25.17 Mb duplication in region were inherited from affected mothers and maternal grand-mothers. 2p16.2p12 and a 12.13 Mb duplication in region 2p13.3p12. In addition, we mapped two familial microcephalies to the boundaries We discuss the phenotype of the patient, the overlap with other cases of the 16p11 (180 kb) and 16p12 loci (670 kb). Candidate genes are reported to date and the possible genotype-phenotype correlation. prioritized and genotype-phenotype correlations will be discussed together with the genetic counseling in these heterogeneous and challenging clinical conditions.Cytogenetics 135 P03.021 literature. The ELKS/ERC1 gene is found in the commonly deleted Array cGH detection of genomic/chromosomal rearrangements region, and appears as a good candidate for speech delay. in children with mental retardation and congenital These results reinforce the hypothesis that the 12p13.33 subtelomeric malformations: the first Russian experience or interstitial deletions can be responsible of a variable phenotyope I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova2,1,3, O. S. Kurinnaia2,1, A. P. Silvanovich1, N. L. ranging from normal developpement, speech delay, to mental Gorbachevskaya3, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3; retardation and ASD. 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Minzdravsotsrazvitia, P03.023 Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and First familial case of partial 3p trisomy and Xp monosomy Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. resulting from a maternal translocation characterized by array Array CGH has become one of the most popular molecular cytogenetic cGH techniques for diagnosing genomic and chromosomal disorders. O. S. Kurinnaia1,2, S. G. Vorsanova2,1,3, V. Y. Voinova2,3, A. K. Beresheva2,1, Y. However, this powerful approach has never been systematically applied B. Yurov1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov1,2; to Russian cohorts of children with mental retardation and congenital 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian malformations. Here, we present an array CGH study of 30 children Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Minzdravsotsrazvitia, with mental retardation and congenital malformations non-randomly Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and selected according to clinical and cytogenetic data. We were able Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. to detect genomic/chromosomal rearrangements in 14 cases (47%). Partial trisomy of 3p is an uncommon chromosome abnormality These were additional chromosome X with 1p36 deletion and mosaic usually produced by an unbalanced translocation and characterized isochromosome 12p; del(3)(p21.32p21.33); del(4)(p16.1pter)/dup(8) by recognizable patterns of malformation. Here, we report on two (p23.1pter); del(7)(q36.2qter); del(9)(q34.2q34.3)/del(21)(q22.3q22.3); sisters presenting with mental, growth and psychomotor retardation, del(10)(q26.2q26.3); dup(10)(q25.2qter)/del(13)(q33.3qter); r(11) seizures, pectus excavatum and square facieses with prominent (p15.5q24.1)(loss of 11q24.1qter); dup(19)(p13.3pter); del(19) cheeks who exhibited 46,X,add(X)(?::p?22->qter),16qh- karyotype (q13.12q13.13); del(20)(q11.21q11.21); del(X)(p22.2pter)/dup(3) after G-banding karyotyping. Array CGH analysis with Spectral Chip (p22.3pter); dup(X)(q28qter); del(Y)(q11.223q11.223). Size of the allowing genome scan at 0.3-1Mb resolution has demonstrated rearrangements varied from 1.2Mb to 36.3Mb. Clinically relevant duplication of 3pter->p22.3 spanning 36.3 Mb and deletion of Xpter- CNVs were detected in 9 cases (30%). Pathological value of CNVs >Xp22.2 spanning 6.4 Mb resulted from an unbalanced translocation was assessed by bioinformatic assays using gene expression and t(X;3). Cytogenetic evaluations of parents have shown a presumably proteome (interactome/reactome) meta-analysis by Gene Expression balanced translocation between chromosomes X and 3 in mother. Omnibus, BioGPS, Cytoscape 2.8.0 and Pathway Commons. One Therefore, partial 3p trisomy and Xp monosomy in the index cases have case exhibited constitutional genomic instability manifested as multiple resulted from a maternal translocation. In silico analysis of rearranged deletions and duplications (size: from 1Mb to 2.5Mb). To date, similar chromosomal regions has shown that 3p duplication involves 285 cases have not been reported in the available literature. These results genes (107 genes are indexed in OMIM) whereas Xp deletion involves generally agree with those of previous array CGH cohort studies, 50 genes (22 genes are indexed in OMIM). Additionally, copy number showing, however, previously unreported genomic rearrangements in variations (CNVs) located on 9q12, 10q11.22, 15q11.2 and 15q26.3 mental retardation and a higher incidence of clinically relevant CNVs. were detected. However, these CNVs are likely to be benign, taking Moreover, we found the application of bioinformatic assays to be into account data obtained by bioinformatic analysis (meta-analysis of valuable for proper interpretation of array CGH data. Finally, to the gene expression) and by comparison with previously reported benign best our knowledge, this communication represents the first reported CNVs indexed in genome variation databases. Although there are no array CGH study of a clinical cohort of children with mental retardation fewer than 30 reports on similar chromosomal abnormalities, to our and congenital malformations in Russia. knowledge there are no descriptions of array CGH analysis of partial 3p trisomy in the available literature. Therefore, these are the first P03.022 cases of partial 3p trisomy addressed by high-resolution molecular 12p13.33 microdeletion syndrome: redefining the associated cytogenetic technique of array CGH. clinical phenotype J. THEVENON1, F. Mugneret2, P. Callier3, A. David4, J. Andrieux5, B. Delobel5, P03.024 S. Sukno5, A. Mosca3, N. Marle3, D. Sanlaville6, D. Minot1, A. Masurel-Paulet1, molecular cytogenetic and bioinformatic studies identify loss L. Gaunt7, C. Thauvin-Robinet1, J. Clayton-Smith7, L. Faivre1; of LIMBR1 and MNX1 as a cause of lumbosacral dysgenesis: 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2cytogénétique, Dijon, array cGH, FisH and gene expression meta-analysis in two France, 3Cytogénétique, Dijon, France, 4Centre de génétique, Nantes, France, independent unbalanced terminal rearrangements of 7q 5Hopital Jeanne de Flandres, Lille, France, 6Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, I. Y. Iourov2,1, V. Y. Voinova1,3, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2, A. D. Lyon, France, 7Genetic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. Kolotii1, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3; Subtelomeric rearrangement associated with developemental 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Minzdravsotsrazvitia, Moscow, disabilities detection rate represents 5% of the etiologies. Sub-telomeric Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, or interstitial deletions of less than 5 Mb involving chromosome Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and 12p13.33 is one the least frequently deleted region. Only 5 patients Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. diagnosed with FISH telomere analysis or array-CGH have been Previously, cytogenetic analyses of terminal 7q imbalances have reported. The most phenotypic manifestation of this microdeletion suggested that loss of 7q36 can lead to lumbar or sacral dysgenesis/ seems to be speech delay associated with autism spectrum disorders agenesis. However, apart from reports on MNX1 mutations in Currarino (ASD) phenotype. Two of them were inherited from an apparently syndrome (partial sacrum absence and anorectal anomalies), intrinsic healthy parent, suggesting variable expressivity and incomplete causes of lumbosacral dysgenesis associated with genetic defects penetrance. within the terminal part of chromosome 7q have not been established. A French collaboration together with a search in the Decipher database Here, we present molecular cytogenetic and bioinformatic analyses permitted to gather 6 novel patients (4 probands) with a 12p13.33 of two cases of terminal 7q loss. The first case is an unbalanced subtelomeric or interstitial rearrangement identified by high resolution translocation t(7q;21q)(q34;q22.13) reported previously (Vorsanova et array-CGH to further delineate this rare microdeletional syndrome. al., 2008), whereas the second one is a deletion of 7q36 both featured Speech delay was found in 5/6 patients, with dysarthry in 3/6, mental by characteristic facial dysmorphisms, mental retardation, lumbosacral retardation in 4/6 patients, ASD phenotype in 3/6 patients, mild non- dysgenesis. Using array CGH and FISH, we have narrowed the specific dysmorphism (3/6) with prominent ear lobes in 2/6 patients, region of chromosome 7 - 7q36.2q36.3 (from ~152Mb to ~158Mb) normal growth parameters with macrocephaly in 1/6 patient and - associated with common phenotypic features in these two cases. microcephaly in 1/6. Variable expressivity or incomplete penetrance To identify genes associated with lumbosacral dysgenesis, we have was found in both familial cases. The clinical and molecular data of further studied the deleted region by gene expression meta-analysis this group of patients were compared to the other observations of the using Gene Expression Omnibus and BioGPS. Comparative analysis Cytogenetics 136 of expression profiles of 45 genes located within the aforementioned short arm of chromosome 6/deletion of subtelomeric region of long chromosomal region in fetal and postnatal tissues have indicated arm of chromosome 10, and duplication of subtelomeric region of that two genes LIMBR1 and MNX1 are the most likely candidates for short arm of chromosome 19/deletion of subtelomeric region of long lubosacral dysgenesis. Taking into account that LIMBR1 is involved in arm of chromosome 22. MLPA studies using both kits were carried out bone morphogenesis and mutations in MNX1 are likely to lead to sacral on the parents. Only the case with dup X/Yp was inherited from the agenesis, we have concluded that loss of LIMBR1 and MNX1 causes mother. The other three patients had normal results for the parents. lumbosacral dysgenesis. Finally, array CGH genome screening in Therefore these abnormalities are pathogenic. FISH investigation on combination with gene expression meta-analysis seems to represent the parents in order to see whether the abnormalities are inherited or a powerful approach for identification of genetic causes of diseases. not are pending. Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis will be recommended to the affected families. P03.025 Molecular karyotyping identified pathogenic CNVs in 3 patients P03.027 with developmental delay and/or multiple congenital anomalies Use of sNP-array in a cohort of Armenian children with mental S. P. Hadjidekova1, D. M. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, B. B. Rukova1, D. V. Nesheva1, I. retardation I. Dimova1, R. S. Tincheva2, D. I. Toncheva1; D. Babikyan1, S. Midyan1, K. Männik2, S. Parkel2, A. Hovhannisyan1, H. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Mkrtchyan1, A. Gasparyan1, A. Kurg2, T. Sarkisian1; 2Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, University, Sofia, Bulgaria. 2Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia. Oligo array-CGH was applied in 3 patients with developmental delay The genetic diagnostics of mental retardation (MR) is difficult to establish and multiple congenital anomalies in order to unravel the underlying and presently many cases remain undiagnosed and unexplained. genetic abnormalities. We have used BlueGnome CytoChip oligo Over the last few years, rearrangements below the detection level of 2X105K microarray, v1.1, with 35kbp backbone resolution. All abnormal conventional karyotyping have been proved to contribute significantly results were confirmed with fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). to the cause of MR. The implementation of SNP-array has enabled In one of the patient with karyotype 46,XY,inv(9)(p11q13) array CGH the high resolution analysis of copy number variants (CNVs) as revealed duplication of (8)(q24.13q24.3) region involving 22764514bp duplications/deletions and uniparental disomy (UPD). and deletion of (9)(p24.3p22.2) region encompassing 18023616bp. Here we report use of the SNP-array analysis for the first time in It was initially assumed that the patient’s imbalances are de novo, an Armenian cohort of 95 children with MR who had no visible but the subsequent examination of the proband’s family and the cytogenetic abnormalities ascertained by standard karyotyping as well fine analysis of the FISH results revealed that it comes to familial as microdeletion/microduplication, and subtelomeric abnormalities reciprocal translocation between the chromosome 8 and the inverted determined by FISH. We applied InfiniumHD whole-genome chromosome 9. The second patient was with blurred karyotype - genotyping assay with the HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChips (Illumina 46,XY,add(15q),add(18)(p11.2). Array CGH detected two pathogenic Inc.). Obtained data were analyzed with Illumina GenomeStudio and CNVs - dup(18)(p11.22p11.21) spanning 5479842bp and dup(6) QuantiSNP software. Most of the detected CNVs have already been (q16.1q21) with 21333134bp involved. The FISH validation highlighted reported in the Database of Genomic Variants or recurrently present in the chromosomal rearrangement: it comes to insertion of the duplicated our cohort. Recurrent microdeletion syndromes and UPD-associated region of chromosome 6 in the long arm of chromosome 15 and partial syndromes were detected in nine cases (9.5%). Furthermore, 7 trisomy 18p. The karyotype of the third patient was normal - 46,XX. rare de novo CNVs (<5Mb) considered to be clinically relevant as The molecular karyotyping identified deletion of 12978687bp in (6) well as 7 aberrations (>5Mb) also of potential clinical significance (q25.3q27) region and duplication in (10)(q25.2q26.3) region involving were discovered in syndromic and non-syndromic cases (16.8%) 21360000bp. in chromosome regions, including 2p21-2p16.2, 6q22.1-6q22.32, This study proves that array-CGH is a powerful method to identified 9q22.33-9q31.2, 10q26.11-10q26.3, 12q21.2-12q21.32, and 14q23.1- genomic imbalances not detected at the level of GTG banded karyotype 14q24.3. The majority of CNVs encompass several genes for which analysis. Furthermore, it shows that for provide correct diagnosis, one genotype-phenotype correlations have to be delineated. molecular cytogenetic method is not enough, although some of them Thus, in addition to its clinical diagnostic use in unexplained MRs, (i.e. array CGH) have high-resolution capability. the introduction of SNP-array has facilitated identification of novel Acknowledgements: Grant 02/76-21.12.2009, National Science Fund, microdeletion/microduplication regions and corresponding disease Bulgaria. genes. Supported by FP7-CHERISH project 223692. P03.026 investigation of subtelomeric chromosome Abnormalities in 50 P03.028 patients with idiopathic mental Retardation and its comparison Identification of two unrelated families with mentally retarded with 50 control Normal cases children extends the phenotypic spectrum of 15q25 deletions F. Behjati1, K. Kahrizi1, S. Ghasemi-Firouzabadi1, M. Najafi1, B. Ebrahimi M. Hančárová, T. Maříková, M. Malíková, J. Drábová, Z. Zmítková, D. Novotná, Zadeh1, M. Mohseni1, Z. Hadipour2, F. Hadipour2, S. Banihashemi1, S. M. Vlčková, Z. Sedláček; Arzhangi1, K. Jalalvand1, I. Bahman1, R. Pazhoomand1, H. Najmabadi1; Department Of Biology And Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics Microarrays can considerably contribute to the identification of & Sarem Cell Research Center, Sarem Women’s Hospital, Tehran, Islamic novel microdeletion and microduplication syndromes. Deletions Republic of Iran. of 15q25.2-q25.3 have recently been associated with autism and Mental Retardation (MR) has heterogeneous etiology mostly with schizophrenia in 3 patients. We report additional patients with these genetic causes. It has been shown that 4-12% of idiopathic MR have deletions from 2 unrelated families identified primarily due to mental subtelomeric rearrangements using MLPA technique. In this study, using retardation (MR). One patient is a 5 year old boy affected with high MLPA technique, the subtelomeric abnormalities were investigated in functioning autism, mild MR, obesity and speech delay. The second 50 patients with idiopathic MR with or without dysmorphism, with non case is a 4 year old boy suffering from mild MR, microcephaly, speech consanguineous parents as well as 50 normal people. All the patients delay and chorioretinitis. Karyotyping revealed a normal karyotype had normal karyotypes and were negative for fragile-X. The patients in both patients. SNP array analysis (Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12) were first screened with one MLPA kit, P036-E1. The abnormal cases demonstrated in both cases identical ~800 kb deletions of were re-checked using a different set of MLPA kit, P070-A2. All the 15q25.2-q25.3 (chr15:82.7-83.5Mb (hg18)) flanked by low-copy controls were normal for the subtelomeric regions. However, four repeats (LCRs). The deletions are adjacent to recurrent 15q25.2 patients (8%), using both P036 and p070 kits, had abnormal results. deletions associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia, cognitive In this study, the abnormalities were duplication of subtelomeric region deficits and Diamond-Blackfan anemia which are also flanked by of long arm of chromosome 19, duplication of subtelomeric region of LCRs. Chromosome 15q25.2-q25.3 has been predicted to be a hotspot short arm of chromosome X/Y, duplication of subtelomeric region of for rearrangements based on its genomic architecture predisposing Cytogenetics 137 to non-allelic homologous recombination. The region deleted in our developmental delay in the 4-year-old child. In four additional patients patients encompasses 9 protein-coding genes, of which at least 3 phenotypical consequences of the found de novo aberrations are good candidates for the phenotypes observed. The ZNF592 (deletions in 1q25.1 (71kb) and 19q13.43 (24kb) and duplications in gene product plays a role in the regulation of genes involved in brain 12q13.13 (116kb) and 15q25.1 (61kb)) cannot be excluded. Further development, the PDE8A gene is involved in learning and memory, clarification is in progress. and the NMB gene is associated with body weight regulation and In total, the finding of causative chromosomal microrearrangements in obesity. The data currently available on the 15q25.2-q25.3 deletions a minimum of four out of 39 patients (10 %) with epilepsy and mental suggest that they may represent another aberration from the growing retardation but without major malformations shows again the power of list of genetic defects predisposing to neuropsychiatric phenotypes. DNA-arrays to find new disease-related genes and further expands the Supported by CHERISH (EC FP7 223692) and MZOFNM2005. clinical indication for DNA-array investigations. P03.029 P03.031 molecular karyotyoping of children with idiopathic mental A complex 21q deletion: molecular characterization marker retardation and/or dysmorphic features in slovenian population chromosome by array-cGH. D. Krgović1, A. Zagorac1, N. Marčun Varda2, B. Zagradišnik1, A. Erjavec E. Mansilla1, S. García-Miñaur1, E. Vallespín1, R. Rodriguez2, J. Nevado1, F. Škerget1, Š. Stangler Herodež1, N. Kokalj-Vokač1,3; García-Santiago1, N. Muñoz3, M. de Torres1, P. Lapunzina1, M. Mori1; 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, 1Hospital Universitario la Paz.INGEMM.IdiPaz. CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, Slovenia, 2Department of Paediatrics, University Medical Centre Maribor, 2Servicio de Fisiopatología Fetal Hospital Universitario la Paz., Madrid, Spain, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Medical Faculty Maribor, University of Maribor, Maribor, 3Servicio de Pediatria Hospital Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain. Slovenia. introduction: Partial deletions of 21q are rare and these patients Molecular karyotyping has become important tool for detecting display a highly variable phenotype depending on size and position chromosomal aberrations, which are overlooked with standard of the deletion. Proximal and distal deletions are associated with a cytogenetic methods. Recently, it was proposed that arrayCGH milder phenotype, whereas deletions involving 31.2-36 Mb have a should become first choice when unexplained developmental delay or more severe phenotype. congenital anomalies are involved. case report: We report a female four month old. During pregnancy Therefore, arrayCGH analysis of children with idiopathic mental a retarded growth intrauterine was detected. She was born in week retardation and/or dysmorphic features was performed to evaluate 35 with a low birth weight for gestational age. At clinical examination the importance of this diagnostic test in our laboratory. A series of mycrocephaly and dysmorphic features were noted including: mid-face karyotypically normal patients without subtelomeric abnormalities hypoplasia, anteverted nares, retrognathia, hypertelorism, prominent were included. In total, copy number variations (CNVs) in almost eyes, broad base to nose and bulbous nasal tip and high palate. 45,5% of analysed patients were detected. CNVs with potential clinical The patient was hypertonic, ophthalmological and hearing examination significance were found in 18% of patients. Among them, 11% had showed strabismus and hypoacusia. aberration in regions with known microdeletion syndromes. In all Magnetic resonance imaging revealed hypoplasia of corpus callosum cases, aberrations were causative for patients condition, therefore, and wide ventricles. they were determined to be pathogenic. Additionally, 7% of CNVs Results: Chromosome analysis showed a marker chromosome, the were characterized as probably pathogenic, based on their size and karyotype were reported as 46,XX,-21,+mar. A custom made array position. One male patient showed ~1,1 Mb duplication in region based on Agilent Technologies, called KaryoArray®, revealed two Xq21.32, and one female patient had ~2,3 Mb duplication in 8q23.1. separate deleted segments: deletion 1 with a size of 21.65 Mb in Two additional patients had smaller deletions in 11q22.3 and 20q13.33 21q11.2-q22.12, and deletion 2 with a size of 4.04 in 21q22.2-q22.3. respectively. In 5,5% of patients, CNVs were identified as probably Extensive FISH analysis was performed on metaphase to validate the benign, based on their inheritance pattern. In the rest of the patients, array-CGH results. aberrations were marked as variants of uncertain clinical significance. We review the literature and discussed about possible candidate Further investigations should be carried out in these cases. genes. To conclude, diagnostic yield in our study was considerably higher (18%) than estimated average (~11%), due to the selected choice P03.032 of patient. Nevertheless, we stress the importance of this test and High frequency of genomic imbalances detected by array-cGH emphasize the need of much bigger studies in Slovenian population. in patients with syndromic developmental eye anomalies A. Delahaye1,2,3, S. Drunat4, N. Chassaing5, M. Gérard-Blanluet4, P. Bitoun6, P03.030 A. Toutain7, S. Passemard3,4, F. Gatelais8, M. Legendre9, L. Olivier-Faivre10, Epilepsy as a leading symptom in patients with mental C. Francannet11, C. Baumann4, A. Verloes4,3, A. Aboura4, S. Kaltenbach4, C. retardation and chromosomal microdeletions/-duplications Dupont1,4, A. Tabet4, S. Quentin12, S. Amselem9, B. Benzacken1,2,4, J. Elion4,13, P. A. Spreiz1, K. Rostasy2, C. Fauth1, G. Utermann1, J. Zschocke1, D. Kotzot1, E. Gressens3, E. Pipiras1,2,3; Haberlandt2; 1Service d’Histologie, Embryologie, et Cytogénétique, AP-HP, Hôpital Jean 1Division for Human Genetics, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Verdier, Bondy, France, 2UFR SMBH, Université Paris 13, Bobigny, France, Austria, 2Clinical Department of Pediatrics IV, Medical University of Innsbruck, 3INSERM, U676, Paris, France, 4Département de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Innsbruck, Austria. Debré, AP-HP, Université Paris 7, Paris, France, 5Service de Génétique Epilepsy is defined as a chronic disorder of the brain, the occurrence Médicale, CHU Toulouse, Hopital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 6Consultation of at least one epileptic seizure, and its neurobiological, cognitive, de génétique médicale, Service de Pédiatrie, AP-HP, Hôpital Jean Verdier, psychological, and social consequences, and is a common finding in Bondy, France, 7Département de Génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU de chromosomal rearrangements detected by conventional karyotyping. Tours, Tours, France, 8Service d’endocrinologie diabétologie pédiatrique, CHU Only few aberrations show a constant pattern of seizures. So, d’Angers, Angers, France, 9INSERM, U933, Université Paris 6, AP-HP, Hôpital impairment of a single gene but also combined deleterious effects of Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 10Centre de génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, several genes were assumed to be causative. CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 11Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Here, we investigated 39 children with various patterns of epileptic Clermont-Ferrand, Univ Clermont1, UFR Médecine, Clermont-Ferrand, France, seizures, mental retardation, and minor dysmorphisms and their 12Plateforme génomique, Institut Universitaire d’Hématologie, AP-HP, Hôpital healthy parents with the Illumina® Infinium Human1M-DuoV3 array to Saint-Louis, Université Paris 7, Paris, France, 13INSERM, U763, Paris, France. find de novo microrearrangements carrying epilepsy related genes. Developmental eye anomalies (DEA) encompass a spectrum of In four patients without any malformations or major dysmorphisms severe structural defects of the eye caused by the disruption of the we found most likely causative de novo CNVs, i.e. deletions in smooth process of ocular morphogenesis. With a birth prevalence of 1q41q42.12 (3.3Mb), 19p13.2 (832kb), and Xq24 (165kb), and a approximately 1 in 3,000-4,000, DEA are considered to account for two-part duplication in 17p13.2 (263kb) and 17p13.1 (464kb). One at least 25% of childhood visual impairment worldwide. There are of the aberrations carries only one gene, which might be responsible up to 400 different chromosome aberrations described associated to for generalized tonic-clonic and myoclonic seizures and moderate DEA in the various dysmorphology databases. The exact frequency Cytogenetics 138 of chromosomal deletions and duplications causing DEA is unknown. the same CCR as previously was found in the mother. However, by With the advent of whole genome array-CGH analysis, the number use of array-CGH and FISH we discovered that during transmission especially of interstitial genomic imbalances increased dramatically. of the CCR, a de novo deletion and duplication were evoked on two Seventy patients with unexplained DEA associated to another of the breakpoints by a mechanism of inversion/duplication on one of congenital malformation or mental retardation were analyzed using the derivative chromosomes. This is the first presented case of this oligonucleotide arrays (Agilent). mechanism in a structurally abnormal chromosome. Furthermore In 4 patients, clinically relevant deletions encompassing genes with this case we demonstrate the importance of breakpoint analysis already known to be involved in eye development (FOXC1 and in CCRs and stress that genetic counseling of a familial CCR is not OTX2) were identified. In 4 other patients pathogenic deletions not straightforward. classically associated to DEA were found: del(17)(p13.3p13.3), del(10) (p14p15.3) and del(16)(p11.2p11.2). The pathogenicity of 11 additional P03.035 copy number variation (6 duplications and 5 deletions) is discussed. clinical molecular karyotyping: an overview of 560 array Altered segments ranged in size from 0.11 to 5.57 Mb. These results experiments using 180k Agilent array. show that array-CGH provides a high diagnostic yield in patients with A. M. Polstra, K. Huijsdens, M. Bagnaij, M. Berens, A. Mul, N. Nibbering, J. DEA syndromes and point to novel chromosomal regions associated Rozendaal, A. C. Knegt; with these conditions. Besides their importance for diagnosis and Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands. genetic counselling, these data may pave the way to the search of Array-based comparative genomic hybridization has become an genes involved in eye development. indispensable tool in the detection of submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations in patients with multiple congenital anomalies and/or P03.033 idiopathic mental retardation (MCA/MR). Once introduced into the microdeletion of the Down syndrome critical region and diagnostics, it is gradually replacing karyotyping. It is now the first duplication of the terminal section of chromosome 21 in a child diagnostic tool of choice for patients with mental retardation and or with a distinct morphological phenotype multiple congenital abnormalities at the AMC in Amsterdam. Since the B. Pabst1, D. Gonzalez-Fassrainer1, D. Steinemann2, K. Miller1, M. Stuhrmann1, introduction of array CGH different resolutions have been used. For J. Schmidtke1, M. Arslan-Kirchner1; over a year now we have been using the 180k Agilent array in the 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, diagnostics. An overview will be given. We have processed over 560 2Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, experiments consistent of both index (n=385) and family members Germany. (n=184) so far. Of the index patients almost 40% warranted additional We report on a child with a de novo combined interstitial deletion of testing of the parents or other family members to clarify the meaning of 21q22.12-q22.3 and duplication of the terminal region of chromosome the aberrations that were found. We present a summery of our result 21. to date, such as diagnostic yield, type of aberrations, size, number The patient is the 7th child of healthy parents. Birth weight and length of aberrant probes and parental origin. An overview such as this is were within a normal range, head circumference was below the important as they may warrant change in the way the array data are 3rd percentile. Myocardial hypertrophy without clinical impact was analysed and interpreted. detected, a finding that decreased over the years. At the age of 3 years and 10 months, microcephaly persists and weight and length are P03.036 under the 3rd percentile. The boy presented with several dysmorphic interstitial deletion 13q: case report features, e.g. brachycephaly with bitemporal narrowing, dysplastic, M. Quintanilla1, A. Gómez1, I. Onsurbe2, E. Balmaseda3, G. M. Varo1, L. cup-shaped ears, hypertelorism, micropenis. There are feeding Navarro1; difficulties and regurgitations. He has a global developmental delay, 1Unidad de Genética Clínica. Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Complejo especially speech development is impaired. There are an autistic-like Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete., Albacete, Spain, 2Neurología manner and phases of behaviour problems with restlessness and Pediátrica. Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain, laughter-attacks. 3Gastroenterología Pediátrica. Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Molecular cytogenetic analysis of the subtelomeric regions identified Albacete, Spain. a secondary signal of the chromosome 21 subtelomere probe on Chromosome 13q deletion is associated with varying phenotypes, the distal short arm of one chromosome 21. An additional interstitial which seem to depend on the location of the deleted segment. The deletion was detected with a probe specific for the Down critical region most common clinical features are mental and growth retardation, and other region specific probes. The deletion encompasses 6.5 Mb malformations of brain, eye, kidney or heart, craniofacial dysmorphy distal to RUNX1 and the duplication 4.85 Mb as determined by tiling and various congenital defects. array-CGH analysis. STR marker analysis revealed that both the We report a 4 years old boy, patient of Neuropediatrics. Controlled deletion and the insertion originate from the same parent. Both parents pregnancy with threat of miscarriage in the second quarter. Birth showed normal karyotypes. weight: 3.100 g. He walked between 17 and 18 months and he Several of the clinical features reported in the patient can be assigned didn´t crawl. He presents poor suck and swallowing reflex, bronchial to the interstitial deletion of 21q whereas behavioural troubles hyperreactivity, hypotonia, hypertransaminemia, shy behaviour, and described in the present case are not commonly mentioned. psychomotor and growth retardation. He has congenital absence of gallbladder and atopic dermatitis. P03.034 Conventional cytogenetic analysis using G-banding revealed a de A first report of an unstably transmitted familial complex novo 46,XY,del(13)(q?21q?31) karyotype. Whole Chromosome chromosome rearrangement Paint (WCP) DNA FISH probe of chromosome 13 showed one pair E. van Binsbergen, R. Hochstenbach, J. Giltay, M. Swinkels; of acrocentrics hybridized. 244K array-CGH characterization of University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. chromosome 13q identified an 15.4 Mb deletion in 13q21.31-q22.3. Complex chromosome rearrangements (CCRs) are rare structural To date, there is still no consensus on possible correlations between aberrations involving three or more breakpoints on two or more the monosomy of distinct 13q regions and specific clinical features. chromosomes. CCRs are classified as type I when they contain four Since 13q21 is a region with very few genes, deletion of band 13q22 is or fewer breakpoints, or type II, when they contain more than four probably responsible of the patient´s phenotype. breakpoints. About one third of all CCRs are familial. Transmittance of such a CCR results either in non-disjunction at meiosis or is P03.037 stably passed on to the next generation. Here we present a case Genetic instabilities in the ataxia-telangiectasia brain: evidence of a phenotypically normal mother with a type II CCR involving for a neuroprotective effect of non-malignant genome/ chromosomes 1, 3 and 5 that gave birth to a phenotypically abnormal chromosome instability son. The boy presented with hypotonia and mild facial dysmorphisms. Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova2,1,3, T. Liehr4, M. K. Tagirova1, I. Y. Iourov1,2; At the age of three he was severely mentally retarded, hypotonic and 1National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian there were feeding disorders. Conventional karyotyping revealed Federation, 2Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Minzdravsotsrazvitia, Cytogenetics 139 Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and P03.039 Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Institute of Human Genetics and cytogenetic evaluation in congenital Blepharophimosis ptosis Anthropology, Jena, Germany. epicanthus inversus syndrome patients Ataxia-telangiectasia is a chromosome instability (CIN) syndrome Y. Kumar1, M. Kumar2, B. Chawla3, R. Dada2; caused by ATM mutations associated with DNA damage and repair 1Dr. RP Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, defects. The role of CIN in this neurodegenerative disorder is New Delhi, India, 2Lab for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, All India incompletely understood. Molecular cytogenetic analysis allowed Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3Dr. RP Centre for Ophthalmic us identification of a dramatic increase in aneuploidy in the AT brain Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (Iourov er al., 2009). Additionally, degenerating cerebellum exhibited BPES is a rare eye genetic disorder which either occurs sporadically non-random breaks of interphase chromosomes and dramatically or familial. BPES is a genetic disorder which generally displays an increased chromosome 7-, 14- and X-specific aneuploidy. CIN more autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The purpose of this study severely affects the cerebellum than the cerebrum. Paradoxically, is to identify chromosomal abnormalities in patients with congenital AT patients’ longevity has positively correlated with CIN rates in BPES. It has been shown that penetrance is 100% in type I when the cerebellum. To solve this paradox we propose two alternative the transmission is by males only and 96.5% in type II in which hypotheses: (1) overproduction of immature neural cells with transmission occurs through both sexes. In this study 20 sporadic unrealized chromosome breaks and aneuploidy takes place exclusively and 3 familial cases of congenital BPES were enrolled for cytogenetic during early brain development, and chromosomally aberrant cells analysis. In all familial cases pedigree showed autosomal dominant might be resistant to apoptotic clearance throughout ontogeny and, pattern of inheritance. Disease information and all medical records therefore, survive; (2) an age-dependent increase of the percentage were reviewed. Peripheral blood was collected and lymphocyte of chromosomally defective cells could be explained by abnormal cultures were set up for chromosomal analysis. 20 metaphases were adult neurogenesis in the degenerating cerebellum during brain analyzed using GTG banding. Review of reported cases concluded aging. Therefore, we have to admit that adult neurogenesis can occur that locus for eyelid development is situated at the interface of long in the diseased AT cerebellum. We suggest the longer the lifetime arm of chromosome 3. Various reports linked the deletions (3q21, of AT individuals the bigger amount of immature neuron-like cells is 3q22, 3q23, 3q24, 3q25) and translocations [t(3:7)(q26-qter:q+), accumulated in the degenerating cerebellum. The persistence and t(X:3)(p22:q21), t(3:8)(q23:p22.1)] to the BPES. Thus cytogenetically age-dependent accumulation of neural cells with chromosome breaks different deletions and translocations of chromosome 3 have been during ontogeny (even immature and chromosomally abnormal) described in patients with BPES. Deletions of 3q24-25 and 3q26.3 could protect the diseased cerebellum against dramatic cell loss and, regions were found in two familial cases. We also found 3q-ter, 3q24- therefore, partially prevents the progression of neurodegeneration with 25 and 3q26-qter region deletions in three sporadic cases. 3qter region possible neuroprotective effect. Finally, CIN represents an important deletion found in 2 cases has been already been linked to the BPES. genetic phenomenon mediating variety of cellular processes leading Theses finding may represent a severe manifestation of the disease. to neurodegeneration in brain. BPES is a heterogeneous entity, and evaluation and counseling of affected individuals should be undertaken with caution. P03.038 Identification of chromosome abnormalities in screening of a P03.040 family with manic depression and psoriasis; predisposition to Breakpoint characterization in a patient with a complex aneuploidy rearrangement of chromosome 7 including a dup(7)(q22.1q32.2) B. Demirbek1, O. Demirhan2, N. Inandiklioglu2, I. Uslu2, M. Izmirli3, S. Cetiner4; and an inv(7)(q31.31q31.33) 1Psychiatric and Neurolojic Disease Hospital, Adana, Turkey, 2Department of A. Frühmesser1, M. Erdel1,2, H. Duba1,3, C. Fauth1, G. Utermann1, J. Zschocke1, Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey, D. Kotzot1; 3Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Bezmialem University, 1Division for Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Central Laboratory of Balcalı Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Austria, 2Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Tumorcytogenetics, Department Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey. of Internal Medicine, Hospital of the Sisters of Charity Linz, Linz, Austria, Manic depression (MD) is a severe psychiatric disorder that affects 3Department for Human Genetics, General Women and Children Hospital, Linz, approximately %1 of the world’s population. The etiology of MD is Austria. presently unknown, but epidemiological studies of families, twins and For the understanding of the impact of small chromosomal adoptions have consistently supported a genetic base. Some studies rearrangements, the knowledge of the exact breakpoint-position have supported the presence of autosomal dominant major loci. In is important, but breakpoint characterization on the base pair level this study, we aimed at detect the relationships between chromosomal is rare to find in the literature. However, by high resolution CGH- or aberrations (CAs) and immunological markers and MD. We used SNP-arrays it is possible to localize the breakpoint region to a size the cell cultivation and conventional G-banding. Random and non- that can be detected by simple PCR techniques. Here, we report random imbalances CAs were found in %51, %25 and %7-11 of cells. on the breakpoint characterization of a de novo 46,XY,der(7)(pter- We found numerical abnormalities of chromosomes 8, 15, 21, 22, >q31.33::q31.31->q22.1::q32.2->q31.33::q31.31->q32.2::q32.2->qter) X and Y. However, structural aberrations consisted of duplications, karyotype in a 12-year-old boy with multiple congenital anomalies and deletions and translocations, with a focus on: loci on del(1)(q12-q23), mental retardation. del(1)(q21.1-q24), del(1)(q21.1-q23), del(10)(p11.2-pter), der(2) The size and the breakpoints of the duplication were narrowed with t(2;4)(p25;p12), t(2;22)(p14;p13), t(19;Y)? and dup(10)(q26). The the Illumina® Infinium HD HumanOmni1-Quad v1.0 BeadChip, which susceptibility genes of MD may be located on these loci. Numerical covers more than 1 million SNPs, between rs17720576 (98.616.657 sex CAs included 4(%4.6) with 45,X, 3(%4,3) with 47,XXY, and bp) and rs10275844 (98.621.315 bp) and rs10954272 (130.296.528 4(%5,8) with structural chromosome X; del(X)(q13); del(X)(p11-pter) bp) and rs6467310 (130.313.744 bp), respectively. So, the size of del(X)(q21.3) and inv(Y)(q11.2). The other characteristic finding was the duplication as a whole is about 31,7 Mb. Breakpoint-spanning the presence of marker chromosome. The percentage of CD2+, CD4+ long-range PCR revealed a PCR product of approximately 18 kb. and CD8+ lymphocytes of the father were significantly higher, whereas Sequencing of this product is in progress and should identify the CD4+ lymphocytes were decreased in the mather. The percentage of duplication breakpoints on the base pair level. CD4 level of the son were decreased, whereas CD8+ lymphocytes The distal breakpoint of the inversion which is about 25 Mb in size were higher. These results may suggest that and MD have a significant was narrowed by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) with the impact on both genetic and immunological parameters, and continuing breakpoint-spanning probe RP11-111J7 (BlueGnome®, Cambridge, anti-inflammatory state in the family and this process may explain the UK) between 117.631.652 bp and 117.790.729 bp. Fine-mapping of cause of MD. the proximal breakpoint of the inversion by FISH is in progress. In conclusion, combination of FISH and high-resolution CGH- or SNP- arrays allows narrowing the breakpoints in complex chromosome rearrangements more easily than previously applied techniques. This could be important for a better genotype-phenotype correlation.Cytogenetics 140 P03.041 like t(4;12), t(7;16) and t(1;9;10) were also observed that have not Recurrence of cat-eye syndrome secondary to parental somatic yet been reported in literature, to the best of our knowledge.. Some mosaicism cases revealed heteromorphic variants in chromosome 1 (n=96) and G. Morin1, S. Kanafani2, K. Braun3, G. Jedraszak1, J. Andrieux4, H. Copin2, M. 9 (n=102). The detection of these novel chromosomal anomalies Mathieu1; reiterates the importance of conducting cytogenetic analysis in couples 1Clinical Genetics and Oncogenetics, Amiens, France, 2Cytogenetics with history of reproductive failure. Laboratory, Amiens, France, 3Paediatric Endocrinology, Amiens, France, 4Jeanne de Flandres Hospital, Lille, France. P03.044 We report on the observation of 2 brothers presenting the association Gene Expression Profiling of Karyotypically Normal, Trisomy 12 of an anal atresia, preauriculat tags and growth hormone deficiency. and XXY Human Embryonic stem cells Their ophthalmologic examination was normal. Their father was H. Seol1, H. kim1,2, J. Baek1, N. Song1, K. Kwon1, S. Oh1,2, S. Ku1,2, S. Kim1,2, S. asymptomatic. Their mother presented bilateral preauricular pit. But Moon1,2, Y. Choi1,2; she had no history of anal atresia or short stature. On blood karyotype, 1IRMP, MRC, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2OB&GY, the 2 boys had a supernumerary marker of the chromosome 22 on Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. all the analysed cells. Their father had normal blood karyotype. Their Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are well known to have mother presented only on few lymphocytes the same supernumerary the ability to proliferate unlimitedly and to differentiate into all cell marker. types. Recently, a number of reports have been published in which This observation is original if we consider the recurrence secondary to chromosomal abnormalities has been observed in hESCs. We parental somatic mosaicism. The growth hormone deficiency is also analyzed gene expression profiles of normal cell lines (SNUhES3: an unusual feature of this disease. S3 and SNUhES4: S4), two variants of SNUhES3 (trisomy 12: S3v12 and XXY: S3vX), and one variant of SNUhES4 (trisomy 12: S4v12) P03.042 using the Illumina HumanRef-6 BeadChip including 48,095 probe sets chromosomal imbalance detected by acGH in a female with to find epigenetic difference between normal cells and chromosome obesity and schizoaffective disturbance variants. Gene expression patterns were showed that 55 genes were V. Belengeanu1, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, E. Frengen2; up-regulated and 28 genes were down-regulated in S3v12 to compare 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Genetics, with S3 and 98 up-regulated genes and 75 down-regulated genes were Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Oslo, Department of Medical Genetics, identified in S3vX. Also, 87 genes were up-regulated and 61 genes Oslo, Norway. were down-regulated in S4v12 to compare with S4. In particularly, We present a 29 years old female with androgynous body evaluated for three genes, PUS7L (synthetase), INHBE (growth factor) and PKIB epimenorrhagia. At examination the patient showed minor anomalies (kinase inhibitor), were up-regulated and two genes, ERG1 (KRAB box in facial appearance: almond shaped eyed, abnormal aspect of the transcription factor) and GALNT9 (glycosyltransferase) were down- inner angle of the eyebrows, arched like upper lip. Her height was 168 regulated in S3v12, S4v12 and S3vX compared to normal hESC lines. cm, weight-117 kg, body mass index-41.45, head circumference-58 Gene expression profiling in variant hESC lines with trisomy 12 or XXY cm. Other findings were mental retardation, square hands with chromosome as well as normal hESC lines may provide insights to brachydactyly. the development of research field for cell differentiation and clinical Developmental milestones were delayed, with sitting at 24 months approach such as cell replacement therapy. and walking at 4 years, babbling at the age of 5 years. At the age of This research was supported by a grant (SC-1150) from Stem Cell 18, the patient’s behaviour showed cyclic maniacal changes, needing Research Center of the 21st Century Frontier Research Program funded psychiatric assessment. Endocrinlogic markers for pituitary gland and by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Republic of Korea. cortisol were within the normal values. Cytogenetic analysis showed a normal 46,XX karyotype. Due to P03.045 morbid obesity, FISH analysis using Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome Novel and known chromosomal imbalances associated with probe was done, but the result was negative. Subsequently, because congenital heart defects found by screening with a sNP-array of the psychiatric disturbances we suspected a possible genomic E. Piñero1, F. García Algas2, M. de la Fuente2, M. Juan3, A. Tubau3, B. Sierra4, imbalance and aCGH was performed (244k). Several duplications or A. Schmidt1, M. Oliver1, J. Rosell4, D. Heine-Suñer4; deletions of very small size with poor gene regions were detected on 1Investigació-Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, chromosomes 11p, 10q, 19q and 21q. A small duplication containing 2Cardiologia Pediatrica-Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, several genes was detected on 22q13.33 region. For the genes in this Spain, 3Obstetricia- Hospital Son Llatzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 4Genetica- region we did not find any correlations with the phenotype of our patient Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. but rather would fit into manifestations for SHANK3 gene located in the Cardiac development is controlled by complex genetic and/or same chromosomal region but further towards the telomere. Also a environmental interactions. In an effort to identify new genetic factors small duplication of 16-33 kb involving LHX4 gene was identified on associated with congenital heart defects (CHD) we selected a subset chromosome 1q25.3, but clinical and the investigations do not sustain of 118 patients on which we typed 660.000 SNPs for intensity and Machinis syndrome determined by LHX4 gene mutations. genotype using the Illumina 660W beadchip. 38 were syndromic (had at least another major malformation and/or developmental delay) and P03.043 80 had an isolated CHD. Typed CHD included Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF chromosomal analysis in 1450 couples with reproductive n=27), Ventricular and auricular septal defects (ASD and VSD; n=17; disorders n=27), transposition of great vessels (TGV; n=19) and other (n=21). R. Talwar, S. K. S. Vats, M. K. Verma, A. Singh, C. Singh; Of all the found imbalances we only considered those larger than 75 Super Religare Laboratories (SRL), Gurgaon, India. kb, include at least a known or predicted gene, and that do not overlap Most reproductive disorders have underlying chromosomal imbalance any imbalance found in the Database of Genomic Variants (DGV). as a major cause for spontaneous pregnancy loss, infertility and Previously, we had screened for the 1.5-3 Mb 22q11.2 deletion and childhood disability thereby, contributing significantly to the genetic for frequent aneuploidies (13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes), and burden on society. The diagnosis of chromosomal anomalies is made excluded patients that were positive from this study. 24% of patients by karyotyping of GTG banded chromosome preparations obtained with an isolated CHD and 34 % of those syndromic, were found to carry from whole blood. In the present study, conventional cytogenetic a putatively causative imbalance (12 deletions and 22 duplications). analysis was conducted in peripheral blood samples from 1450 couples Among previously known recurrent syndromes we identified 3 patients with history of spontaneous abortions, mainly in the first trimester and with an 11q24 deletion (Jacobsen syndrome); 3 patients with atypical infertility. Cytogenetic analysis revealed chromosomal abnormalities in 22q11.2 imbalances; 1 patient with 17q21.31 deletion syndrome and 1 585 cases. Balanced reciprocal translocations were observed in 262 with a 17q12 duplication. Some of the novel, previously not described cases while Robertsonian translocations were observed in 11 cases. imbalances were found to include suggestive candidate genes. Apart from this, inversions in chromosomes 3, 17, X, Y and deletion Although further studies are needed, our study underpins the important of X chromosome was also observed. Novel cytogenetic anomalies role that submicroscopic deletions and duplications play in CHD.Cytogenetics 141 P03.046 P03.048 telomere shortening in cOPD: potential protective effects of cytogenetic investigation among patients with primary coffee consumption amenorrhea J. M. J. de Vos-Houben1, A. Schuijlenburch1, M. A. Spruit2, E. F. Wouters1, F. J. C. Azimi1, M. Khaleghian1, Z. Safari2; van Schooten1, G. J. Hageman1; 1Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, 1Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Program Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young Development Centre, Ciro, a centre of expertise for chronic organ failure, Horn, Researchers Club, Varamin-Pishva Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Netherlands. Islamic Republic of Iran. introduction: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is One of the sex chromosome aberrations in women is Turner’s characterized by incompletely reversible airflow obstruction, and syndrome, which is much less common than other sex chromosome chronic systemic oxidative stresss and inflammation play a major aneuploidies. The frequency of the Turner’s syndrome is about 1 in role in the pathophysiology of COPD. Telomere length has been 5000 live female births. The most frequent chromosome constitution in observed to be inversely associated with increased oxidative stress Turner’s syndrome is 45,X. However, about 50 percent of cases have and inflammation. Since chronic oxidative stress plays a major role in other karyorypes. About 25 percent of cases reveal mosaic karyotypes, COPD, telomere length is hypothesized to reduce at a faster rate in in which only a proportion of cells show 45.X. The chromosome COPD. The first aim of this study was to investigate telomere length constitution is clinically significant, and different cases show rather in COPD patients in relation to oxidative stress and inflammation. The different manifestations according to their karyotypes. second aim of this study was to investigate the effects of caffeine, The typical abnormalities in Turner’s syndrome include short stature, coffee, tea and alcohol intake on telomere length in COPD patients webbing of the neck, characteristic unusual face, a broad chest with and healthy controls. widely spaced nipples, gonadal dysgenesis, low posterior hairline, and methods: We measured telomere length in PBMC’s of 89 COPD sometimes with renal and cadiovascular malformations or hearing patients and compared these with 93 healthy, (ex-)smoking controls. loss. In addition, the cytokines IL-8, IL-6 and TNF-α were determined, as A total of 267 cases were referred to our Department with primary well as CRP, SOD and plasma homocysteine. amenorrhea. Cytogenetic studies were performed on peripheral blood Results and conclusions: We found that telomere length was shorter cultured for 72 hours in the presence of PHA. For routine chromosome in COPD patients compared to controls. Cytokine plasma levels as analysis, 20-30 Giemsa-banded cells were analyzed , with two cells well as CRP and homocysteine plamsa levels were inreased in karyotyped. COPD patients and SOD activity was decreased, indicating elevated 219 (82%) patients showed normal karyotypes. 48 (18%) patients oxidative stress in COPD patients. In addition, this study provides a showed X chromosome abnormalities. first indication of the possible beneficial effects of coffee consumption 21 (43.7%) cases revealed 45,X. 11 (23%) cases were either and negative effects of alcohol consumption on telomere length. Future 45,X/46,XX or 45,X/46,XY mosaics. studies should focus on interventions with dietary antioxidants or anti- 9 (18.7%) cases showed either 46,X,i(Xq) or 45,X/46,X,i(Xq) mosaics. inflammatory compounds, such as those found in coffee, and their The rest of 7 (14.6%)cases include: 46,X,t(X;19)(q22;q13) [two cases]; possible beneficial health effects in patients with chronic inflammatory 46,X,delX(q13) [two cases]; 47,X,-X+derXp,derXq; 47,XXX; and diseases. 45,X/47,XXX mosaics. P03.047 P03.049 contiguous interstitial deletion encompassing both PtEN and A familial translocation t(14;21) in four generations affected by BmPR1A associated with cowden syndrome trisomy 21 M. Hiljadnikova Bajro1, E. Sukarova-Angelovska2, M. Chaffanet3, A. J. R. M. Lago Leston, R. Rodriguez Lopez, J. M. Carbonell Perez, J. Saenz Dimovski1; Hurtado, M. E. Sanchez Gutierrez, T. Herrera Moreno, M. Garcia de Caceres, 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University St. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, M. Gonzalez-Carpio Serrano; The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 2Pediatric Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, Hospital Infanta Cristina, Badajoz, Spain. University St. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav INTRODUCTION: Only 4% of Down Syndrome (DS) occurs whit Republic of, 3Centre de Recherche en Cancerologie de Marseille, Institut Paoli a homologous or heterologous translocation (13q, 14q, 15q or 22q) Calmettes Department d’Oncologie Moleculare, Marseille, France. of chromosome 21, of which 1% of all DS are familiar. This type of We report on a patient with contiguous interstitial germline deletion aneuploidies is caused by the incorrect distribution of homologous of chromosome 10q23 encompassing BMPR1A and PTEN, with chromosomes during meiosis. clinical manifestations of Juvenile polyposis and Cowden syndrome. PATIENTS AND METHODS: In 149 from 600 pregnancies between The patient presented dysmorphic features including macrocephaly, 2007-2009 was requested molecular testing for early aneuploidy wide fontanel with partly opened structures, wide forehead with screening. 6 postnatal and 6 prenatal cytogenetic studies were carried prominent frontal protuberances, coarse features of the face with wide out in individuals of three generations belonging to a family carrying a carp-shaped mouth, hypoplastic midface, small nose, retrognathia, heterologous translocation. The DNA obtained from 3 related prenatal prominent furrowed tongue, long philtrum, small low set ears, short and 2 postnatal samples were amplified for 7 hypervariable genetic neck, bilateral cryptorchidism, broad fingers with deep creases over markers in chromosome 21 using QF-PCR techniques. small joints, short dorsally placed hallux and developmental delay at RESULTS: We identified one family carrying the t(14;21) translocation the age of 5 months. Multiple colonic polyps were diagnosed at the with 5 affected by DS, 9 non-affected carriers and 5 abortions. The age of 3 years, following an episode of severe abdominal pain and definition of associated markers to translocated chromosome 21 in an intestinal bleeding. Comparative genomic hybridization revealed a affected individual, revealed identical genetic makeup except for the deletion of 6.12MB in the chromosome arm 10q23. Genotyping using more distally located. The third chromosome 21 (paternal) differed in 5 microsatellite markers confirmed a de novo deletion on the allele all markers with the two previous. originating from the father encompassing both PTEN and BMPR1A The pedigree identified a set of individuals at possible risk of fathering genes. The karyotype analysis additionally identified a balanced children with DS. translocation involving chromosomes 5q and 7q, and inversion at CONCLUSIONS: The origin of trisomy 21 was maternal, but double- chromosome 2: 46,XY,t(5q;7q)(q13.3-q36), inv(2)(p25q34). The recombination in meiosis I generated an exchange of genetic material mother was exposed to X-irradiation within the first 2 weeks of translocated, except the most telomeric region, before the incorrect pregnancy which could explain the multiple genetic and phenotypic distribution of homologous chromosomes 21 in meiosis II. defects as well as the presence of chromosomal rearrangement in Our results identified an unusual mechanism of double-recombination all analyzed cells. Current clinical findings and deletion of BMPR1A of the extra chromosome and expose the diversity of causal etiology. point to Juvenile Polyposis, but the dysmorphic features and the PTEN loss, strongly suggest a diagnosis of Cowden Syndrome which should be confirmed later in life with development of late onset phenotypic features.Cytogenetics 142 P03.050 the karyotypes from conventional cytogenetic analysis. Amniotic fluid mosaic interstitial duplication 17q samples were obtained between the 16th and 28th weeks of gestation. K. B. M. Hansson, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp, K. Szuhai, M. E. Hoogenboom, C. The most frequent indication performed FISH analysis was the Knepfle, T. Segboer, S. Kant, N. S. den Hollander; ultrasonographic (US) findings of fetal anomalies (54.6%). Aneuploidy Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. was identified in 6 out of 175 uncultured amniotic fluid samples by Interstitial duplications in the long arm of chromosome 17 are rarely FISH. Three cases of trisomy 18 and three cases of trisomy 21 encountered. We report a female patient who was born with multiple were detected. 4 out of 6 cases with aneuploidy were with structural congenital anomalies. She had loose skin in the neck, narrow forehead, abnormalities at US. Conventional cytogenetic results revealed 4 depressed nasal bridge, long philtrum, split uvula, a sacral dimple, chromosomal abnormalities not detectable by FISH such as 47,XXY, rhizomelic shortening of all extremities, postaxial polydactyly of hands 45,X/46,XX mosaicism, balanced reciprocal translocation, and and feet, bilateral pes equinovarus and extreme hypermobility of the marker chromosome. These results suggest that FISH in uncultured large joints. amniotic fluid samples indicated the abnormal US findings in fetus is Conventional karyotyping demonstrated a mosaic (87%) interstitial a reliable method for the rapid prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 18 and duplication in the long arm of chromosome 17 between q21 and q25. trisomy 21. FISH analysis should generally be used as an adjunct The duplication was also present in fibroblasts from skin (83%) and to the conventional cytogenetic analysis and not be used alone. cartilage (97%). SNP array analysis was performed to characterize the Genetic counseling for prenatal diagnosis is important for patient’s duplication in more detail. Additional FISH analysis revealed that the understanding about the limitations of FISH for detection of aneuploidy duplication was direct. Both parents had a normal karyotype. Detailed in uncultured amniotic fluid cells. molecular characterizations and reports of chromosomal imbalances in combination with clinical phenotypes are important for accurate P03.053 genotype-phenotype correlations in genetic counseling. ‚inherited complex mosaicism associated with fragile site at 16q22‘ P03.051 B. Burnytė1,2, A. Matulevičienė1,2, V. Dirsė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; the Dyke Davidoff masson syndrome as the indicative feature in 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius a child with a 22q11.2 deletion University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University S. Dimassi1, S. Mougou1, R. Bousoffara2, H. Hannechi1, N. Moulazem2, A. Hospital Santariškių Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. Saad1; The fragile site of 16q22 is found in 1%-5% of individuals. We report a 1Department of Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached case of familial chromosomal mosaic fragile site 16q22 in a 17-year- University Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatrics, Tahar old caucasian adolescent girl with secondary amenorrhea. Pedigree Sfar University Teaching Hospital, Mahdia, Tunisia. data showed a few cases with menstrual disorders from father‘s side. Cerebral hemiatrophy with homolateral hypertrophy of the skull and Hirsuitism in spine, upper and lower limbs and linea alba region was sinuses (resulting in facial asymmetry) and elevation of the sphenoid observed during physical examination of proband. Pelvic and thyroid wing and petrous ridge, associated with contralateral hemiplegia, ultrasonography did not show any abnormalities. Serum hormones seizures, mental retardation, difficulty and impairment of speech levels were in reference ranges. development are features of the radiological syndrome: Dyke Davidoff Conventional G-banded karyotype analysis from GTG banded Masson Syndrome (DDMS). metaphase chromosomes revealed chromosomal rearrangements We report here, the case of 4 years old boy, with facial asymmetry, in the girl and her father such as: mos 46,XX,del(16)(q22)[8]/ hemiparesis, mental retardation and epilepsy. The cerebral MRI showed 46,XX,fra(16)(q22)[11]/ 46,XX[31] and mos 46,XY,del(16)(q22) a cerebral hemiatrophy and a fronto-parietal polymicrogyria (PMG). A [5]/ 47,XY,del(16)(q22),+ace(16)(q22qter)[3]/ 46,XY,fra(16)(q22) cytogenetic study was performed on R-banded chromosomes showed [12]/46,XY[30], respectively. Chromosomal analyses of the proband’s a 46,XY formula. A fluorescence in-situ hybridizing (FISH) using mother showed normal karyotype. We used subtelomeric FISH for the specific Tuple1 probe showed a 22q11.2 deletion, well characterized chromosome 16 to confirm and determine ratio of these cell clones. by array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH array) revealing a FISH analysis showed no del(16)(q22) since we observed both signals 3Mb 22q deletion, extended from 16,597 to 19,712Mb including TBX1 of chromosome 16q. One signal of a long arm was detected on the gene. acentric fragment of chromosome 16. FISH analysis of patient‘s The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome or velocardiofacial (VCF) syndrome parents indicated fragile chromosome 16 was inherited from patient‘s is a microdeletion syndrome associating conotruncalcardiac father. QT-PCR testing for sex chromosomes aneuploidies was malformation, palatal dysfunction or cleft, facial dysmorphism, immuno- performed. Normal result was obtained, sex chromosomes XX. deficiency, developmental delay and vascular anomalies. Several brain malformations as PMG have been described in association P03.054 with VCF. These anomalies seem to result from abnormal cortical Whole-genome array-cGH screening in autosomal dominant organisation caused by ischemia occurring during a critical period of sensorineural hearing loss patients detects two chromosomal cortical development. The TBX1 gene on 22q11.2 encodes T-box1 alterations at 5q32 and 7q31.1 protein, necessary for the normal development of large arteries, could É. L. Freitas1, D. T. Uehara1, R. C. Mingroni-Netto1, A. C. Krepischi2, C. be a good candidate for DDMS. The deletion of this gene in our case Rosenberg1; could then explain the PMG observed in the frontal and parietal lobes. 1Department of Genetics and Evolutionary Biology, IB, University of São Paulo, This data, improves also the check of the 22q11.2 deletion in DDMS São Paulo, Brazil, 2Hospital A.C. Camargo, São Paulo, Brazil. or PMG cases even in the absence of other VCF syndrome features. Hereditary hearing loss is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous sensory disorder. In 20% of cases is inherited in an autosomal P03.052 dominant pattern with no additional clinical signs (ADNSHL). To date, Rapid Prenatal Diagnosis of trisomy 18 and 21 by Fluorescence 59 loci for ADNSHL have been mapped to chromosomal regions. Due in situ Hybridization (FisH) on Uncultured Amniotic Fluid cells to tremendous genetic heterogeneity, the identification of genes that N. Song1, M. Woo1, J. Choi1, H. Ko1, K. Kwon1, S. Oh1, C. Park2, K. Park3, J. affect the process of hearing has been challenging, so in order to verify Park2, J. Jun2, Y. Choi2,1, S. Moon2,1; whether genomic alterations contributed to the hearing loss etiology 1IRMP, SNU, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 22) Department of Obstetrics and and to discover novel DFNA locus, we investigated 40 patients with Gynecology, College of Medicine, SNU, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 33) Seoul ADNSHL by oligonucleotide array-CGH. Copy number alterations National University Bundang Hospital, Bundang, Korea, Republic of. were detected in two ADNSHL patients (5%), both alterations inherited Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in uncultured amniotic fluid from their affected fathers. The first one, a 56 Kb deletion on 5q32 samples is a useful tool for rapid prenatal diagnosis in pregnancy with region, encompasses only one gene, the POU4F3. Mutations in high risk for chromosomal abnormality. FISH using specific probes for this gene had already been associated with hearing loss in other chromosome 18 and 21 was performed in 175 amniotic fluid samples four cases; the total deletion of the POU4F3 had not been reported. referred to the Institute of Reproductive Medicine and Population, POU4F3 protein has an important role in the maturation, differentiation Seoul National University. All of the FISH results were compared with and survival of cochlear hair cells, defects in these cells may therefore Cytogenetics 143 explain sensorineural hearing loss. The second alteration was a 438 The cytogenetic analysis of PHA-stimulated lymphocytes of the Kb duplication located on 7q31.1 region affecting two genes: IMMP2L same patient showed that 14,4% of cells (23 from 160) featured and DOCK4. In this case the DOCK4 is a strong candidate gene for abnormal karyotype. The cells with polyploidy, tetrasomy 21, double causing the ADNSHL since previous studies indicate that a DOCK4 trisomy(+10,+20), trisomy21, double monosomy(-2,-10,), monosomy harmonin-activated signaling pathway regulates actin cytoskeleton 18,21,22,Y; derivatives of chromosomes 4,14, isochromosome 9, organization in stereocilia. We report for the first time a case of translocation between chromosomes 8 and 10, homogeneously ADNSHL caused by deletion of the entire POU4F3 gene, and point stained regions in chromosomes 1and4 were registered. Monosomy DOCK4 as a deafness gene in representing a novel DFNA locus. Y was detected in 5cells and trisomy 21 in 2 cells. Thus, concordance in karyotype aberrations in MSC and lymphocytes was showed for P03.055 chromosomes 2,14and21. Possible association of heterochromatin variants in human In conclusion, karyotype aberrations, revealed both in MSC and karyotype with reproduction failure lymphocytes substantiate genome instability in this particular patient. A. Sipek jr., A. Panczak, R. Mihalova, M. Janashia, L. Celbova, M. Kohoutova; Supported by RFBR and Administration of Saint-Petersburg. Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. P03.057 Heterochromatin abnormalities of chromosomes are believed to be co-localization of acetylated histone H3 and methylated DNA clinically insignificant variants of the human karyotype. Chromosomes demonstrates band and stage-specificity in distribution in with areas of constitutive heterochromatin (chromosomes 1, 9, 16 and human metaphase chromosomes Y) are commonly involved. However, several authors have studied J. G. Lezhnina1, A. A. Pendina2, O. A. Efimova2, A. V. Tikhonov1, I. A. the possible association of heterochromatin variants with selected Galembo1, O. G. Chiryaeva2, L. I. Petrova2, V. S. Dudkina2, N. A. Sadik2, T. V. clinical diagnoses, especially with reproduction failure (sterility and/or Kuznetzova2, V. S. Baranov2; repeated abortions). 1Saint-Peterburg State Universuty, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, We have compared the incidence of heterochromatin variants in 2D.O.Ott’s Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, laboratory for the group of patients with reproduction failure to the incidence in Prenatal Diagnosis of Human Inborn and Inherited Diseases, Saint-Petersburg, the control group. The study group was composed of 761 patients Russian Federation. (93 individuals and 334 couples) with reproduction failure diagnosis Distribution of acetylated histone H3 (AcH3K9) in human metaphase karyotyped between 2007 and 2009 in our cytogenetic laboratory. The chromosomes from lymphocytes of adults was studied. 60 DAPI- control group was composed of 885 fetuses who were karyotyped stained metaphases (~400 bands per haploid genome) from 5 only because of the advanced age (35 years or more) of their mothers individuals were analyzed with antibodies against AcH3K9 (Abcam, between 2003 and 2009 in our laboratory; cases with unequivocally USA). AcH3K9-rich regions (the brightest AcH3K9-fluorescence) pathologic findings were not included. corresponded to 32 R-bands. Medium to weak fluorescent AcH3K9- Heterochromatin variants have been found in 106 patients (13.9%) signals were detected in 86 R-bands. All G-bands demonstrated weak in the study group and only in 74 individuals (8.7%) among controls. AcH3K9-fluorescence. AcH3K9 was absent in heterochromatic blocks The difference was statistically significant (p < 0.001). The most of chromosomes 1, 9, 16, Y. common variants were those of chromosome 9 (including pericentric This H3K9 acetylation profile was compared to the relevant DNA inversions); they were detected in 51 (6.7%) patients with reproduction methylation patterns after 5-methylcytosine antibodies staining. Non- failure but only in 32 (3.7%) fetuses. This difference was statically acetylated heterochromatic regions were hypermethylated. Among significant (p < 0.01), too. There was no significant difference in the R-bands with medium to weak acetylation 6 demonstrated weak, 48 - incidence of heterochromatin variants in men and women karyotyped medium and 32 - high DNA methylation level. 32 AcH3K9-rich R-bands for reproduction failure. showed variable DNA methylation levels: 17 - high, 12 - medium and Our results in Czech population correspond to findings of other 3 (1p13, 2q31, 2q33) - low. Low level of DNA methylation in highly authors. However, the causal mechanism for these observations acetylated bands favors their specific function in lymphocytes. remains unknown for now. Both H3K9 acetylation and DNA methylation were also studied in lymphocyte chromosomes from fetal cord blood. Two highly P03.056 methylated regions 2q31 and 2q33 and one hypoacetylated one - 2q31 Karyotype instability in morphologically abnormal culture of - distinguished fetal chromosomes from their counterparts in adult. mesenchymal stem cells and PHA-stimulated lymphocytes of The co-location of acetylated and methylated chromosome patterns the patient suggests feasible distribution of active and inactivated chromatin I. A. Galembo1, A. V. Voskresenskaya2, O. A. Efimova2, A. A. Pendina2, A. V. regions which looks to be band and stage specific. Tikhonov1, J. G. Lezhnina1, P. V. Kruglyakov3, A. V. Krylov3, T. V. Kuznetzova2, Supported by RFBR and S.C.02.740.11.0698. V. S. Baranov2; 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, P03.058 2D.O.Ott’s Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, laboratory for case report: A male with two idic(Y) chromosomes Prenatal Diagnosis of Human Inborn and Inherited Diseases, Saint-Petersburg, D. Begovic, D. Begovic, L. Letica, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, Russian Federation, 3Trans-Technologies, Ltd, Saint-Petersburg, Russian R. Lasan Trcic, M. salamon, M. Salamon, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic; Federation. Medical School University of Zagreb, Department of pediatrics, 10000 Zagreb, The results of cytogenetic study of one bone-marrow derived Croatia. mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) culture, distinguished from other 200 Idic(Y) cause several sex-linked phenotypes ranging from typical Turner cultures from donors in stem cell bank by its abnormal morphology syndrome, to phenotypic males, and to those with ambiguous genitalia. are reported. This culture demonstrated spontaneous disturbances We report a 17-year-old boy with male development, hypogenitalism, in morphology and proliferation at the early passages - cells grew in small stature, slight obesity and normal inteligence. Cytogenetic size, lost adhesion properties, detached from the flask surface, and analysis and GTG-banding were performed on metaphases from persistently divided in the suspension. They also showed up-regulated cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes. As a result, the lymphocyte expression of CD106. The donor of this culture had no clinical or culture revealed a karyotype 45,X with a pericentric inversion of laboratory features of bone marrow pathology chromosome 9 of maternal origin. Chromosome analysis was also We analyzed 58 metaphases of the abnormal MSC culture and revealed performed on fibroblasts from the skin. Two cell lines were observed: various genomic and chromosomal mutations, including tetraploidy, 45,X,inv(9)mat[18] and 47,X, inv(9)mat,+marx2[17] Fluorescent in additional marker chromosomes, monosomy 2,8,13,14,15,16,17,21, situ hybridization (FISH) analysis was performed on fibroblasts using insertions of chromosome7; derivatives of chromosomes 3,7,9,17, the probe for the chromosome X centromere (DXZ1) and the DYZ3 deletions of chromosomes 2,14. Cells with abnormal karyotypes probe for chromosome Y centromere according to the manufacturer’s accounted for 22% of all cells studied. No repeatability of karyotype instructions. The presence of four Y-centromeric signals and an aberrations was observed, which could be attributed to their single cell X-centromeric signal was observed in 40% of cells while in the remaining origin. 60% of the metaphase cells only one signal for the X chromosome Cytogenetics 144 centromere was present. Dual color FISH with an SRY (Yp11.3) and one can speculate on the involvement of one of them in eyelid DYZ3 (YCEN) and DYZ1 (Yq12) probes demonstrated the presence differentiation. Our report confirms that developmental delay and of two centromeres and two SRY regions per one marker. The probe malformed eyelids is suggestive of a 2q31 microdeletion syndrome, in for the Y heterochromatic region DYZ1 didn’t show any signal. Thus, addition to the well-known 3q23 BPES microdeletion syndrome. the patient karyotype was mos 45,X,inv(9)mat[18]/47,X,+idic(Y)(q11) x2dn. ish idic(Y)(q11)(SRY++,DYZ3++,DYZ1-)x2[10]. Only several P03.061 patients with a cell line containing two isodicentric Y-chromosomes Familial segregation of an interchromosomal insertion (9;15) with a break in Yq resulting in tetrasomy of Yp have been described. (q33;q21.1-q22.31) with three individuals carrying an unbalanced Correlation between phenotype and karyotype is not yet well defined, karyotype characterized by high resolution array this clinical report will be helpful in defining the phenotypic range of this I. C. Sgardioli, T. P. Vieira, M. Simioni, N. L. V. Campos, J. R. M. Prota, F. P. chromosomal abnormality. Monteiro, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), P03.059 Campinas, Brazil. tetrasomy 15q in a girl with epilepsy and hypomelanosis Chromosome insertions are complex rearrangements occurring A. Gómez1, M. Quintanilla1, P. Martín-Tamayo2, G. M. Varo1, L. Navarro1; in about 1/5.000 live births. Originally balanced chromosome 1Unidad de Genética Clínica. Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Complejo insertions, after meiotic segregation, can cause unbalanced structural Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete., Albacete, Spain, 2Neurología Pediátrica. rearrangements with deletions or duplications of the translocated Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Albacete, Albacete, Spain. segment, which explains the high risk (50%) of producing an abnormal The inv dup (15) or idic (15) is the most common of the heterogeneous offspring. Here, we report an interchromosomal insertion in three group of the extra structurally abnormal chromosomes (ESAC). Two generations of a family. The proband presented neurological disorders, cytogenetics types have been identified. One is a metacentric or mitral stenosis, velopharyngeal insufficiency and facial dysmorphisms. submetacentric and heterochromatic chromosome, not containing The G-banded karyotype showed an insertion in the long arm of the Prader-Willi Syndrome/ Angelman Syndrome Critical Region chromosome 9 in q33 region. His mother is carried of a balanced (PWS/ASCR) [dic(15)(q11).dic(15)(q11)], can be familial or de novo insertion [ins(9;15)(q33;q21.1-q22.31)]. The cytogenetic analysis of and most children show a normal phenotype. The second type has other family members identified six individuals carrying an apparently 15q euchromatin including PWS/ASCR [dic(15)(q12 or q13)], that balanced rearrangement and two other members carrying the same frequently derives from the two homologous maternal chromosomes unbalanced rearrangement [der(9)ins(9;15)(q33;q21.1-q22.31)]. at meiosis. This condition is associated with an abnormal phenotype, Despite the clinical heterogeneity these individuals present some which constitutes the idic(15) syndrome, and is nearly always sporadic. similar characteristics such as RDNPM, short stature and dysmorphic The inv dup (15) displays distinctive clinical findings represented features. The high resolution array analyses (Genome-Wide Human by early central hypotonia and intellectual disability, epilepsy and Array 6.0,Affymetrix®) of three individuals with unbalanced karyotype autistic behaviour. Expressive language is absent or very poor and revealed a duplication of 19.3Mb on chromosome 15 ranging from often echolalic. Epilepsy with a wide variety of seizures, as a typical q21.1 to q22.31 [44275184-63567267 - hg18]. The array analyses Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome (LGS), can occur in these individuals. of an apparently balanced carrier presenting mental retardation and Areas of increased and reduced skin pigmentation can be occasionally speech delay showed normal results and is still in investigation. Despite observed. some rare reports of overlapping duplications in 15q21.2-q22.31, this We report on a 6 years old girl, patient of Neuropediatrics, with family herein described seems to be the first one with duplication of language delay, LGS and hypopigmented streaks on the trunk. this specific region. The combined approach of karyotype and array Cytogenetic studies and FISH analysis showed that she had a de analysis allowed the correct characterization of the rearrangement in novo 46,XX,+idic(15)(q13) karyotype. Cytogenetic analysis confirm most of the family members. Financial support: Fapesp and CNPq the diagnosis of idic(15) syndrome in our patient. P03.062 P03.060 Prominent transformation of karyotype of human mesenchymal A de novo 9mb deletion into an inherited 2q paracentric stem cells 4BL6 in long-term culture inversion gives rise to severe developmental delay and eyelids H. Akopyan1, N. Huleyuk1, V. Kushniruk2, D. Mykytenko3, A. Iatsyshyna2, I. malformation Kovaliv1, V. Zukin3, L. Lukash2; A. BRIAND-SULEAU1, C. Metay1, M. Portnoi2, J. Bouligand3, B. Tou3, W. 1Institute of Hereditary Pathology of National Academy of Medical Sciences, Verbecq-Morlot1, A. Guiochon-Mantel3, M. Goossens1, L. Van Maldergem4; Lviv, Ukraine, 2Institute of Molecular Biology & Genetics of National Academy 1HOPITAL HENRI MONDOR, CRETEIL, France, 2Hopital Trousseau, Paris, of Sciences, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3Clinic of reproductive medicine “Nadiya”, Kyiv, France, 3Hopital Bicetre, Le Kremlin-Bicetre, France, 4Centre Hospitalier Ukraine. InterCommunal, CRETEIL, France. 4BL6 cells were obtained from donors peripheral blood and were Our patient, a girl, presented at 14 months- with developmental grown in standard monolayer culture. During the observation period delay and hypotonia. Her clinical examination also displayed ptosis, (219 passages) the cells maintained fibroblast-like morphology, blepharophimosis, and a toe malformation. Her karyotype indicated, sensitivity to colchicine and proliferative potential. At 205-th passage an apparently balanced 2q paracentric inversion (46, XX, inv(2) 4BL6 cell population contained 36% of polyploid cells and 62.5% of (q21q37)) inherited from her normal father, and confirmed by FISH. In neardiploid cells. Among polyploid cells, 81% were tetraploid and addition, Agilent 105k array-CGH proved positive for a 9Mb deletion 12.5% were triploid. The number of chromosomes in neardiploid (2q31.1q31.3) within the inverted region in the index patient. By cells varied from 30 to 49. 80.8% of these cells contained 39-44 and contrast, array-CGH was normal in her normal father also harboring 60% - 41-43 chromosomes (possible modal clone). The number the 2q31 paracentric inversion. Its de novo character was confirmed of chromosomes in diploid and polyploid cells (42-43 and 84-85 by FISH and qPCR. respectively) and their ratio in culture (1.7 : 1) allows to assume that An interstitial (an not terminal) secondary rearrangement occurring upon reaching 205-th passage, the reproduction of 4BL6 cell line within an inverted segment is a rare event that is not readily explained occurs by symmetrical division of polyploid cells. To define the nature by non allelic homologous recombination (NAHR). The advent of array- of chromosomal anomalies, GTG, QFH/AcD, Cytocell OctoChrom CGH as an additional mandatory investigation in case of abnormal stainings and array CGH were used. X monosomy, t(1;11)(q12;p15) phenotype and an apparently balanced translocation has shown in a and t(2;?)(q11;?) were defined as most common aberrations and number of cases an additional loss of chromosomal material in the observed in 80%, 65% and 46% of metaphases respectively. 23% close vicinity of the breakpoints (neighboring regions). However, in of cells contained t(5;15)(p10;q10) and 10% - t(5;15)(p10;q10), that the present case, the deletion occurred at distance of the breakpoints, were never registered together. Chromosomes 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 14, 18, suggesting an unusual mechanism. The phenotype of our patient 20, 21 and 22 showed normal number and constitution, whereas deserves consideration, since an eyelid malformation has been also chromosomes 1, 2, 4, 10, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19 demonstrated unbalanced reported in the three patients with similar microdeletions retrieved structural rearrangements (deletions/duplications) from 0.6 to 10 and from literature. More than 50 genes are included in the deleted interval more Mb. In our opinion, long-term transformation of the 4BL6 cell line Cytogenetics 145 occured due to formation of typical chromosomal rearrangements that role in neurite outgrowth and synaptogenesis. changed the dose of genes-suppressors of cancer growth and genes- We found two attractive genes, whose haploinsufficiency caused the inducers of proliferation. distinct phenotype of 6q deletion syndrome with dysgenesis of corpus callosum P03.063 congenital stationary night blindness, high myopia and severe P03.065 mental retardation: search for a homozygous microdeletion Detection efficiency of FISH vs MLPA method in microdeletion 15q13.3 ! syndromes patients K. Aliferis1, S. Gimelli1, F. Borruat2, S. E. Antonarakis1,3, F. Béna1, A. Bottani1; R. Mihalova, K. Hirschfeldova, A. Baxova, V. Kebrdlova, P. Lnenicka, R. Solc, 1Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, CMU, Geneva, J. Stekrova, K. Vesela; Switzerland, 2Neuro-ophthalmology Unit, Jules-Gonin Ophthalmic Hospital, Inst of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine of Charles Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University, Prague, Czech Republic. University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. Microdeletion syndromes are complex genetic disorders caused Heterozygous microdeletions 15q13.3 are not rare and have been by different changes of contiguous genes located in particular associated, among other findings, with intellectual disability, autism, chromosomal regions. These changes are usually cryptic chromosomal and schizophrenia. It has also been found in controls and healthy aberrations - microdeletions or microduplications. The OMIM database relatives of affected individuals. The reason for this wide phenotypical currently contains more than 100 microdeletion/duplication syndromes variability is poorly understood. On the contrary, homozygous deletions of various types but due to the extensive phenotypic variation and of this same area have so far been reported in only 4 patients and overlapping phenotypes the correct diagnosis is often difficult to be seem to be linked with a specific clinical presentation, namely severe determined. mental retardation, seizures and visual impairment. We have analysed 64 probands with normal karyotype and specific The 12-year-old female patient was born at term with normal growth clinical findings such as mental retardation or developmental parameters. Absent visual pursuit was noticed at 2 months and delay combined with neonatal hypotonia, congenital anomalies or congenital stationary night blindness (CSNB) was diagnosed at 9 facial dysmorphism. We used the MLPA method to scan for cryptic months by electroretinography. At 10 months, severe developmental rearrangements. Each proband was analysed by the P245 kit to detect delay was evident and seizures were noticed. High myopia (-10 21 most common microdeletion syndromes. Additional microdeletion dioptries) is known since the age of 21 months. Karyotype, methylation syndromes were analysed using the P297kit. Moreover, subtelomeric of the AS/PWS region and MECP2 analysis were normal. Array CGH regions were analysed with the P036kit. Overall 10 positives (16%) (Agilent 244K) revealed a homozygous 1.5 Mb 15q13.3 deletion were detected, 3 duplications and 7 deletions, respectively. The (28719136-3029809 bp, UCSC Hg19). The deleted interval comprises MLPA kit P245 was able to detect 9 of all found rearrangements. One 6 genes: MTMR15, MTMR10, KLF13, OTUD7A, CHRNA7, TRPM1. abnormality was detected only by the MLPA kit P036. A homozygous mutation of TRPM1 has been recently associated We have used the FISH method with locus specific probes to confirm with CSNB and myopia (Audo et al., AJHG 2009; 85: 720-729). The the findings and to compare the efficiency of both methods in cases of asymptomatic parents are both heterozygous carriers. MLPA positive probands. Surprisingly, we have found the discrepancy This report confirms that the clinical picture of homozygous 15q13.3 in 2 cases. The deletion of 10p14-15 and 1p36 was detected by MLPA deletions is very homogeneous and comprises, besides severe mental and not confirmed by FISH. retardation and seizures, CSNB with myopia as a key feature. It also Although the application of FISH method is the matter of choice for proves that CSNB due to TRPM1 recessive mutations is caused by a the diagnostics of microdeletions, the MLPA method appears as more loss of function of the coded protein. sensitive and more effective. Supported by grant IGA MZCR NS10327-3/2009. P03.064 Delineation of the interstitial 6q25 microdeletion syndrome: P03.066 refinement of the critical causative region contribution of cell cycle control genes epimutations to the M. Michelson1,2, C. Vinkler1,2, I. Nezer1,2, M. Yanoov-Sharav1,2, T. Lerman- origin of chromosomal mosaicism in human miscarriages: a Sagie2,3, D. Lev1,2; model and experimental evidences 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Holon, Israel, 2Metabolic Neurogenetic Clinic, A. A. Kashevarova, E. N. Tolmacheva, N. N. Sukhanova, I. N. Lebedev; Holon, Israel, 3Pediatric Neurology Unit, Holon, Israel. Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Cryptic chromosomal aberrations are associated with various Russian Federation. syndromes. Microdeletion of the long arm of chromosome 6q is rare Chromosomal mosaicism is a hallmark of human miscarriages. Among but specific clinical entity. Phenotypic presentation includes mental different factors underlying abnormal chromosome segregation the retardation, acquired microcephaly, dysmorphic features, structural epimutations of cell cycle genes is of particular interest. Epigenetic brain malformations and other features. The smallest reported region reprogramming during early ontogeny may predispose to methylation of microdeletion responsible for the phenotype was mapped between abnormalities. We aimed to determine the mechanisms and stages 6q24 and 6q27 and spans >3MB with more than 12 coding genes. of cytogenetic and epigenetic errors origin and suggest a model A 2 years old boy presented with mental retardation, acquired for identification of epimutations impact on mosaicism formation. microcephaly, dysmorphic features and dysgenesis of corpus callosum. Extraembryonic tissues of 69 diploid-aneuploid miscarriages, 20 He has deep set eyes, prominent forehead, posteriorly rotated ears, diploid miscarriages and 22 induced abortions of similar gestational short neck, short proximal phalanges, transverse creases, fetal pads age were examined for epimutations of cell cycle control genes and hypoplastic scrotum. Neurological examination revealed mixed RB1 and P14ARF which were hypermethylated in 42% and 10% of axial hypotonia with limbs hypertonia. mosaic embryos, respectively. Cytotrophoblast and extraembryonic He is the fourth child of an unrelated generally healthy couple. The mesoderm appears a convenient model to determine ontogenetic mother is carrier of a Robertsonian translocation (14;15). stages of aneuploidy and epimutations origin because they are derived Our patient was found to be a carrier of the same translocation and his from different germ layers, isolate after implantation and differ in DNA karyotype is 45 XY,der(14;15)(q10;q10) methylation. Diploid-aneuploid mosaicism originates postzygotically Affymetrix Wnole-Genome 2.7M Array Chip revealed deletion of 1191 due to trisomy rescue or de novo mitotic error. If mitotic errors occur kbp at 6q25.3. The deleted region contains 2 coding genes: before germ layers divergence then both tissues will be mosaic. ARID1B and ZDHHC14. Mosaicism will be confined by one tissue if mitotic mutation occurs after These genes are highly expressed and evolutionarily conserved. divergence. Epimutations may originate from demethylation and de ARID1B encodes a subunit of chromatin-remodeling complex. The novo methylation errors during epigenetic reprogramming. Analysis of encoded protein is expressed in different brain regions during fetal all possible combinations of cytogenetic and epigenetic abnormalities development suggesting its important role in CNS development. underlies our model. Interpretation of the methylation role in the origin ZDHHC14 belongs to a palmitoylating enzyme family proteins. Protein of mosaicism using the model allowed concluding that RB1 and palmitoylation is crucial in CNS development and plays an important P14ARF epimutations are primary to diploid-aneuploid mosaicism in Cytogenetics 146 at least 4,7% of mosaic embryos. This study was supported by Federal P03.069 Program N P806, P1161 and State Contract for National Educational mosaicism with a normal cell line and a cryptic unbalanced Center 02.740.11.0281. autosomal reciprocal translocation: three new cases A. C. J. Gijsbers, J. Dauwerse, C. A. J. Bosch, E. M. J. Boon, W. van den P03.067 Ende, S. G. Kant, K. M. B. Hansson, M. H. Breuning, E. Bakker, C. A. L. Use of mLPA as a screening method for patients with Ruivenkamp; unidentified chromosomal abnormalities Center for Human and Clinical Genetics; Leiden University Medical Center R. Popescu1, I. Ivanov2, M. Volosciuc3, E. Braha1, L. Butnariu1, M. Panzaru1, L. (LUMC), The Netherlands, Leiden, Netherlands. Caba1, C. Bujoran3, A. Sireteanu1, E. Gorduza1, C. Rusu1, P. van der Vlies4; Mosaicism involving a normal cell line and an unbalanced autosomal 1Gh. T. Popa University of Medicine and Pharmacy - Medical Genetics translocation are rare. In this study we present three new cases Department, Iasi, Romania, 2Saint Spiridon Hospital - Immunology and with such a mosaicism, which were detected by Single Nucleotide Genetics Laboratory, Iasi, Romania, 3Chidren Hospital - Medical Genetics Polymorphism (SNP) array analysis in our routine diagnostic setting. Department, Iasi, Romania, 4Dept. Genetics UMCG, Groningen , The These cases were further characterized using Fluorescence in situ Netherlands, Groningen, Netherlands. Hybridisation (FISH) analysis and conventional karyotyping. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) is a variant of The first case is a mentally retarded male who carries an unbalanced polymerase chain reaction that permits multiple targets to be amplified translocation in 87% of his cells. The phenotypically normal mother using a single primerpair. It is a robust, facile, flexible and inexpensive carries the balanced form of the translocation in all her cells. technique that can detect both deletions and duplications for more The second case is a phenotypically normal female who has an than 40 loci in one assay. Clinical applications of this modern method unbalanced translocation in 52% of her cells. The inheritance could not are extending quickly. be determined. The third case is a female referred for Rubinstein-Taybi Due to the advantages mentioned above, we have introduced syndrome who carries an unbalanced translocation in 60% of her cells. subtelomeric MLPA as a screening method (before more complex and Both parents of this case showed a normal karyotype. expensive molecular methods) for patients with complex/ unidentified The mechanisms that might be responsible for these mosaic chromosomal rearrangements. Its’ application will be illustrated for karyotypes are discussed. Furthermore, we demonstrate that high- 6 cases with mental retardation and multiple congenital anomalies. resolution whole-genome SNP array is a powerful tool to reveal cryptic The karyotype of the patients (G-banding) was abnormal, each one unbalanced translocations and mosaicisms, including the more rare presenting an additional terminal chromosomal fragment (involving cases. chromosome 4,9,15, 8). ). Using MLPA we identified in 5 cases terminal duplications and in one case a known polymorphism (chromosome P03.070 15). Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) was used in 3 simultaneous detection of genomic rearrangements in cases to validate our MLPA results. All the abnormalities identified with myelodysplastic syndromes (mDs) using the multiplex Ligation- subtelomeric MLPA have been confirmed, but in one case an extra Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) assay defecthas been identified. Clinical features, karyotype, MLPA and O. Scarciolla1, A. Fragasso2, C. Mannarella2, A. Ciancio2, R. Cifarelli3, M. aCGH results will be will be presented in detail. Gentile4, C. Dininno3, C. Mazzone4, A. G. Recchia4, P. Servillo4, E. Vigna4, P. In conclusion, we preset 6 cases with mental retardation associated Casieri5, L. Anelli5, F. Morabito4, G. Specchia5; with multiple congenital anomalies and abnormal karyotype in which 1Internal Medicine, Medical Genetics - Hospital, Matera, Italy, 2Internal subtelomeric MLPA contributed to the precise description of the Medicine, Hematology Unit Hospital, Matera, Italy, 3Centro ricerca e diagnosi chromosome abnormalities. Confirmation by array CGH provides X-Life, Hospital, Matera, Italy, 4U.O.C. di Ematologia, Azienda Ospedaliera di evidence that MLPA is a very useful tool for the characterization of Cosenza, Cosenza, Italy, 5Univeristy of Bari, Hematology, University of Bari unbalanced karyotypes. Medical School, Bari, Italy. Cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow is indicated in MDS not only P03.068 for diagnostic purposes, but also to assess individual prognosis and clinical and molecular cytogenetic characterization of two cases to plan tailored therapy. Conventional cytogenetic (CC) analysis is of mosaic ring chromosome 13 performed in clinical practice to detect chromosomal abnormalities. G. Pierquin, A. Uwineza, A. C. Hellin, M. Jamar, J. H. Caberg, V. Bours; A new method has recently been described for the measurement of Center for Human Genetics, CHU Sart-Tilman, University of Liège, Liège, the gene/chromosome copy number using genomic DNA: Multiplex Belgium. Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). The purpose of this The mosaic ring chromosome 13 syndrome is a rare chromosomal study was to compare the results of the MLPA assay with the CC data abnormality. The mechanism of ring chromosome formation is usually obtained in a series of 38 MDS patients (M: 28, F:10, median age 70 associated with loss of genetic material. years, range 44-87). Our study showed a good correlation between We report 2 cases of mosaic ring chromosome 13. For the first patient, the MLPA and CC results (Table I), discrepancies were found in 7 a male with a karyotype: 46, XY,r(13)[40]/45,XY, -13 [10]. He presented samples (18.5%). MLPA analysis did not detect the presence of a a delayed psychomotor development, mental retardation, dysmorphic chromosomal (chr.) translocation (sample n°4); a chr. deletion and a features and bleeding disorders. The second is a case of prenatal chr. translocation (sample n°11); a chr. deletion (sample n°15); several diagnosis; completed with the postmortem autopsy of a foetus of 33 chr. translocations and deletions (sample n°20); a chr. gain (sample week of gestations. The genetic amniocentesis analysis showed a n°27). On the other hand, CC analysis did not show a small deletion mosaic karyotype : 46, XY, r (13) [8]/45,XY,-13[5] ; which was different of in 2 samples: a deletion of the MLL gene in 11q23 (sample n°23) and that of the cordocentesis analysis: 46,XY, r(13)(q32q34)[18]/46,XY,dic deletion of 7q22 (sample n°37). With CC we also observed a karyotype r(13) (q32q34)[2]. Sonography showed intrauterine growth retardation, failure (no metaphases) in 4 samples, while the MLPA assay showed 3 holoprosencephaly that have been confirmed by the autopsy report; chr. deletions (sample n°14), but no anomalies in the other 3 samples which revealed additional anomalies such as the partial agenesis of (25, 29, 32). MLPA and CC resulted complementary techniques, MLPA the pancreas. The chromosomal terminal regions exploration by MLPA being particularly useful in MDS cases with karyotype failure and for and FISH techniques revealed a 13qter deletion, for both cases. For the identifying small rearrangements. first patient, the array CGH (Affymetrix Cytogenetics Whole-Genome 2,7 M Array) identified two terminal deletions of the ring chromosome 13, one of 350 kb and another of 3740 kb in the 13q34 region. We reported 2 cases of mosaic ring chromosomal 13 associated with deletion of the terminal region of the chromosome 13. This report describe how molecular cytogenetic and array GCH technologies can give more knowledge about the correlation of genotype-phenotype in the mosaic ring chromosome 13 syndrome; and allow to identify the candidate gene responsible for the clinical features of this syndrome.Cytogenetics 147 Table I understand the frequency of embryonal chromosome aberrations (CAs) in pregnancies of active or passive smoking mothers. In order sample mLPA Karyotype to do so, we examined the effect of nicotine sulphate on amniocytes 1 No anomalies 46, XX by designing an experimental setting consisting amniocytes grown in 2 No anomalies 46, XY nicotine containing medium, study group, and amniocytes grown in a 3 No anomalies 46, XY medium which did not contain nicotine (nicotine sulphate), in control 4 Del 5q 46, XY, Del 5q, t(1;12) group. Here, we provide the evidence that nicotine exposure in vitro (25 ng/ml) (in fetal serum, range 0.5-25ng/ml), has detrimental effects 5 Del 7 45, XY, Del 7 on fetal cells. According our findings, there is a significant difference in 6 No anomalies 46, XX terms of CAs between nicotine containing medium and control medium, 7 No anomalies 46, XY determined by the χ2 test (P <0.001). Nicotine containing medium 8 No anomalies 46, XY grown cells, totally 577 cells, revealed mainly numerical aberrations 9 No anomalies 46, XY (112 cells, %90.3 of all aberrations). Numerical aberrations observed, usually consisted of polyploidy and aneuploidies. We found, most 10 Del 5q 46, XY, Del 5q frequently, numerical abnormalities of chromosomes 21, 22, 8, 15 and 11 Del 5q, Del 45, XY, Del 11q23, Del 15, der 5 t(5;15) 20. In conclusion, results of this study confirm an association between 11q23 [16] / 46, XY [4] prenatal exposure to cigarette smoke and in utero aneuploidies. The 12 No anomalies 46, XX nicotine leads to significant direct genotoxic effects in human fetal cells 13 Trisomy 8 47, XY, Trisomy 8 in vitro. Further studies are needed to clarify the modulation of the genotoxicity of smoke causing various genetic polymorphisms. Del 7q, Del 14 No metaphases 12p, Del 20q P03.072 46, XX, Del 11q23 [5] / 46, XX, Del 9q22- 15 Del 11q23 Detection of copy number variants in patients with Noonan 23, Del 11q23 [15] syndrome or cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome 16 No anomalies 46, XY E. Seo1, J. Lee2, B. Lee1, I. Park1, H. Yoo1; 17 No anomalies 46, XY 1University of Ulsan College of Medicine and Asan Medical Center, Seoul, 18 No anomalies 46, XY Korea, Republic of, 2Genome Research Center, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. 19 No anomalies 46, XY Noonan syndrome (NS) and cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome (CFC) 42~47, XX, Del 1p34 [3], Del 3 [6], are autosomal dominant congenital anomaly disorders associated Del5q, Del t(4;18) [10], Del 5q [18], der 9 [3], Del 12 with gain-of-function mutations of genes in the RAS/MAPK signaling 20 12p, Del17p [10], t(13q;17q) [3], der 15 [4], Del 20 [3], pathway. Diagnosis is based mainly on clinical grounds characterized Del 21 [2], Trisomy 22 [3], +m [10] [cp18] by a distinctive craniofacial appearance, heart defects, musculoskeletal / 46, XX [2] and cutaneous abnormalities, and mental retardation. Although Del 20q, molecular genetic testing is available for all known genes, PTPN11, 48, XY, Trisomy 19, Del 20q, Trisomy Trisomy 21q, KRAS, SOS1 and RAF1 in NS, and BRAF, MAP2K1, MAP2K2 and 21 21[12] / 48, XY, Trisomy 8, Trisomy 19, Trisomy 19p, KRAS in CFC, overall mutation detection rates are 60% to 70% in both Del 20q[8] Trisomy 8 syndromes. To detect pathogenic copy number variants (CNV) for NS 22 No anomalies 46, XY and CFC patients who did not have any mutations in sequence analyses of all causative genes, we performed high-resolution CGH-based Trisomy 11q23 23 46, XX microarray in 13 NS and 5 CFC patients. Three CFC patients were (MLL gene) found to have probably pathogenic CNVs; 3.7 Mb loss in 12q12q13.11, 24 No anomalies 46, XX 1.3 Mb gain in 22q11.23, and simultaneous 2 Mb loss in 1p36.33 and 25 No anomalies No metaphases 13.0 Mb gain in 17q24.3q25.3. This 22q11.23 duplication has been 26 No anomalies 46, XX reported as a recurrent microduplication syndrome. Five CNV regions 27 No anomalies 46, XY,add(11)(p15)[10] / 46, XY[10] of unknown clinical significance were observed in 4 NS patients, including gains of GOLGA4, NDUFA4, THSD7A, TPD52L1, EIF3H and 28 No anomalies 46,XY FBXO7. In present study, pathogenic CNVs are significantly frequent in 29 No anomalies No metaphases CFC than NS patients. This result suggests that patients with CFC-like 30 Del5q22-33 46, XY, Del5q15-33[8] / 46, XY[7] features can be likely to have large CNVs and need a chromosomal 31 No anomalies 46, XY microarray test. And also gene copy changes of unknown significance should be evaluated to validate the clinical relevance. 32 No anomalies No metaphases 33 Trisomia 11 47, XY, Trisomy 11 P03.073 34 No anomalies 46, XY Know how to recognize and appropriately follow-up a 35 No anomalies 46, XY recombinant pericentric inversion detected by array cGH 36 No anomalies 46, XY T. Dijkhuizen, L. K. Leegte, B. Sikkema-Raddatz, R. F. Suijkerbuijk, J. B. G. M. Verheij, R. J. Sinke, C. M. A. van Ravenswaaij-Arts; 37 Del 7q22 46, XY Department of Clinical Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. 38 No anomalies 46, XY Nowadays, array-based analysis is the first diagnostic tool to examine patients with mental retardation and congenital anomalies. If a genetic P03.071 imbalance is observed and confirmed by karyotyping and/or FISH, the First Report: the Genotoxic Effect of Nicotine on parents are usually analysed with FISH using probes localized in chromosomes of Human Embryonic cells in culture: the Effect the unbalanced regions to exclude a balanced rearrangement. This of cigarette smoking on the Embryo is needed to assess the risk for further children with an unbalanced O. Demirhan1, E. Tunç1, N. Inandiklioglu1, C. Demir1, E. Sutcu2, N. Sadikoglu3, chromosome complement and to provide prenatal diagnostic options. B. Ozcan3, M. Izmirli4; We present a 20-year old male patient with severe developmental 1Cukurova University, Adana, Turkey, 2Local Health Authority, Konya, Turkey, delay and autism. Array CGH analysis revealed a terminal gain of 1.07 3Science School, Adana, Turkey, 4Bezmialem University, Istanbul, Turkey. Mb of 18p11.32 and a terminal loss of 16.8 Mb of 18q21.33q23. The Nicotine can affect embryonic development, leading to the formation terminal deletion 18q, also known as DeGrouchy syndrome, explained of multinucleated blastomeres and polyploidy in blastocysts. Many the phenotype in our patient. At this point, parental chromosome studies have shown that nicotine interferes with oocyte meiosis and studies were offered but denied. Recently, we received amniotic fluid of chromosome disjunction. In this regard, in this study we tried to the sister-in-law of our proband, because of ultrasound abnormalities. Cytogenetics 148 Chromosome analysis showed an abnormal chromosome 18, 33 unrelated patients with ID/developmental delay (DD), dysmorphic suggesting an unbalanced 18;18 translocation with extra 18q-material features and/or multiple congenital anomalies were analysed using on terminal 18p. After karyotyping, the prospective father and paternal subtelomeric FISH. Two subtelomeric aberrations - monosomy of grandfather proved to be carriers of an inv(18)(p11.32q21.33). chromosome 1q and monosomy of chromosome 5q were detected. Consequently, the fetus and the proband exhibited each a different We have chosen subtelomeric FISH as rapid, precise method recombinant chromosome 18. The paternal pericentric inversion would for confirming balanced translocations in cases where G-banded remain unrecognized when FISH with probes from the abnormal chromosome analysis results were ambiguous - unclear translocated regions was performed. fragment size or origin. Combining different subtelomeric FISH In conclusion, the concomitant gain and loss of the terminal long and probe mixtures, we validated two translocations - t(2,12) and t(4,18). short arm of the same chromosome at array diagnostics should alert Breakpoints of ring chromosomes may be specified by subtelomeric to a recombinant pericentric inversion. Further karyotyping studies in FISH too. We revealed p15 and q35 breakpoints of ring chromosome proband and parents are highly recommended, if necessary combined 5. In one case FISH analysis indicated derivative chromosome 6 which with metaphase FISH. probably has been formed due to pericentric inversion in germline of one of the parents. We confirmed isochromosome X and specified the P03.074 ratio of the cell clones of mosaicism in patient with Turner syndrome. A new variant of Potocky- Lupsky syndrome in two unrelated patients affected by severe epileptic encephalopathy, detected P03.076 by Genome Array-cGH Genetics study of Premature Ovarian Failure in tunisian A. Nucaro1, C. Montaldo2, S. Zorco2, N. Santini2, T. Dettori3, P. Caria3, A. Milia4, Population C. Cianchetti5, D. Pruna5; N. BOUALI, B. LAKHAL, R. BERGUIGA, I. BEN ABDALLAH, S. MOUGOU, H. 1Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, ELGHEZAL, A. SAAD; 2Dipartimento di Scienze Chirurgiche, Laboratorio OBL , Università di Cagliari, Cytogenetics and Reproductive Biology Department CHU Farhat Hached, Italy., Cagliari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze e Tecnologie Biomediche, Tunisia, Tunisia. sez. Biologia e Genetica, Università di Cagliari, Italy., Monserrato( Cagliari), Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a common cause of infertility Italy, 4Dipartimento di Biologia Sperimentale, Università di Cagliari, Italy., in women and it affects 3 % of females. It is characterized by Monserrato( Cagliari), Italy, 5Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Azienda Ospedaliero- amenorrhea, hypo-oestrogenism and elevated gonadotrophin levels in Universitaria, Cagliari, Italy., Cagliari, Italy. women under the age of 40. Known causes include iatrogenic agents The duplication 17p11.2 syndrome, associated with dup(17) that cause permanent damage to the ovaries, such as chemotherapy, (p11.2p11.2), is a recently recognized syndrome of multiple congenital radiation therapy and surgery, autoimmune conditions, X-chromosome anomalies and mental retardation. It is the first predicted reciprocal abnormalities and autosomal genetic conditions. However, few genes microduplication syndrome described_the homologous recombination have been identified that can explain a substantial proportion of cases reciprocal of the Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) microdeletion of POF. (del(17)(p11.2p11.2)(Potocky et al, 2007). The present study is interested in the evaluation of the implication Herein, we report a novel pathologic variant of this syndrome detected of genetic disorders in etiology of POF. Genetic explorations were by Genome Array-CGH in two non consanguineous subjects with used and consist to a chromosomal analysis using karyotyping to dup(17)(p11.2p11.2), detect chromosomal abnormalities, interphasic Fluorescent InSitu Array analysis was performed using the BAC Cyto-chips Blue-Gnome Hybridization (FISH) to detect 45,X mosaicism, molecular analysis platform, at 0.5 Mb median resolution, and revealed the presence of to detect mutation in FMR1 and comparative Genomic Hybridization the same BAC duplication in both patients. (CGH) to detect X chromosome microdeletions. 6 chromosomal The duplicated BAC (RP11-78O7), of about 140 Kb, maps in 17p11.2 aberrations were found among the 39 analyzed Karyotypes (15%). and contains an interesting gene, presumably involved in the pathology. Among patients with normal karyotype, interphasic FISH allows us The parents did not show the duplication, suggesting that it was a de to detect 45,X mosaicism in 12% of cases. FMR1 gene premutation novo rearrangement. was detected in 16 cases. One microdeletion was detected among Cytogenetic and clinical features of subjects with partial trisomy of 4 patients explored using array CGH (44K Agilent): a 425 kb proximal 17p have been described, mostly in isolated case reports or microdeletion was found on the chromosome 5 of one patient: arr literature reviews, and non specific and non characterizing findings 5p14.1 [28981864-29407781] × 1. The pathological character of this include developmental delay, mental retardation, and dysmorphic abnormality remains to confirm. features. Further genetic studies of POF are needed to identify a genotype- Our patients present a peculiar form of epileptic encephalopathy phenotype correlation. associated with severe mental retardation and autistic behaviour. Molecular and genetic studies are in progress to define and characterize P03.077 the rearrangement and for better genotype/phenotype correlation. Design of diagnostic tests for carrier testing in families with rare microdeletions using molecular genetic methods P03.075 M. Vlckova1, M. Hancarova1, J. Drabova1, Z. Zmitkova1, A. Krepelova1, A. Subtelomeric fluorescence in situ hybridization in clinical Janda2,3, E. Mejstrikova3, O. Hrusak3, I. Hrachovinova4, T. Freiberger5, V. cytogenetics: results of analysis of Lithuanian patients Curtisova6, S. Vejvalkova1, M. Koudova1,7, Z. Sedlacek1; V. Šliužas1,2, V. Dirsė1,2, Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, V. Kučinskas1,2; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius, of Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Centre Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University Hospital of Chronic Immunodeficiency (CCI), University Medical Centre Freiburg Santariškių Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania. and University of Freiburg, Feriburg, Germany, 3Department of Paediatric Background: Subtelomeric fluorescence in situ hybridization Haematology and Oncology, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine and (FISH) is very multifunctional method in clinical cytogenetics. University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Coagulation Laboratory, Usually, subtelomeric FISH is used for detection of subtelomeric Institute of Haematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague, Czech Republic, rearrangements in patients with intellectual disability (ID). In parallel 5Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and with detection of subtelomeric deletions/duplications, we have also Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, 6Department of Medical Genetics and applied subtelomeric FISH in search or confirmation of other types Foetal Medicine, University Hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic, of chromosome rearrangements: ring chromosomes, translocations, 7Present address: GHC, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. recombinat chromosomes, isochromosomes, mosaics. methods: The assessment and carrier testing for rare microdeletions was Analysis has been performed using the set of ToTelVysionTM difficult in the past. Nowadays, using MLPA, FISH and array CGH subtelomeric FISH probes, Nikon Eclipse 80i epifluorescence (aCGH), this task is much easier. We present 4 families with different microscope and LUCIA v1 software. Thirty-eight Lithuanian patients unique microdeletions. The proband from Family A suffered from with various clinical features were selected for subtelomeric FISH developmental delay, obesity and suspected haemophilia B. Molecular analysis. Results: For detection of subtelomeric deletions/duplications genetic testing revealed a deletion of all exons of the F9 gene. The Cytogenetics 149 phenotype of the boy suggested a larger deletion, and aCGH indeed have also demonstrated up-regulation of BTRC. showed that the deletion affected 5 additional protein-coding genes. We present 4 new cases with overlapping, different sized duplications A boy from Family B was tested because of familial malignant of 10q24, detected by array CGH: two cases with SHFM had histiocytosis. A deletion affecting all SH2D1A exons was identified duplication of FBX4, LBX1, BTRC and POLL, one case without using PCR, and aCGH revealed that the deletion also included a part SHFM had duplication of BTRC, POLL and FBX4, and a further case of the ODZ1 gene. Family C had a history of non-syndromic aniridia. without SHFM had duplication of BTRC and POLL only. Our results MLPA confirmed a PAX6 gene deletion in the proband, and aCGH therefore indicate that duplication of BTRC is not in itself sufficient to indicated that the deletion also encompassed 3 additional genes. A cause SHFM and therefore do not support the hypothesis that over- boy from Family D died of Norrie disease in infancy. PCR identified a expression of BTRC alone can lead to split hand foot malformation. deletion of the whole NDP gene, and aCGH showed that the deletion included also the MAOA and MAOB genes. The aCGH results allowed P03.080 us to select locus-specific FISH probes and to test a total of 14 patients sNP-array analysis in prenatal and postnatal molecular from these 4 families. Eight of them were females at risk in reproductive karyotyping. age, and 3 were shown to be carriers of the microdeletions. FISH is a M. Trková1, V. Bečvářová1, I. Soldátová1, J. Horáček1, L. Dvořáková1, very reliable method not only for carrier testing, but also for prenatal or M. Putzová1, V. Krutílková1, D. Rašková1, M. Hejtmánková1, E. Hlavová1, preimplantation diagnostics in these families. Supported by CHERISH A. Baxová2, G. Křečková3, D. Smetanová1, E. Kulovaný1, M. Hynek1, M. (EC FP7 223692) and MZOFNM2005. Matoušková1, D. Stejskal1; 1Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 2UK 1.LF a VFN, Prague, Czech Republic, P03.078 3Gennet, Liberec, Czech Republic. Patients with ring chromosome 11: molecular characterization SNP array represents the unique technique for the identification and review of the literature of cytogenetically undetectable submicroscopic alterations S. G. Kant1, F. A. de Snoo1, C. A. Ruivenkamp2, W. Oostdijk3, K. B. Hansson2; (microdeletions, microduplications) and copy number neutral events 1CHCG-Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, (LOH, UPD). During one year (02/10 - 02/11) the whole genome Netherlands, 2CHCG-Laboratory for Diagnostic Genome Analysis, Leiden genotyping of 298,649 SNPs in previously (or simultaneously) University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Dept. of Pediatrics, Leiden karyotyped patients was performed using the Illumina HumanCytoSNP- University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. 12v2.1. All data were analysed by the GenomeStudiov2010.2 and Ring chromosomes are uncommon cytogenetic findings. Most patients some of the postnatal samples by the QuantiSNPv2.0. A total number carrying a ring chromosome are phenotypically abnormal due to of 251 samples were analysed. deletions at one or both arms of the chromosome. In prenatal diagnosis the array analysis was performed in 99 Patients with a ring chromosome 11 usually have growth retardation karyotypically normal foetuses with prenatally identified serious and developmental delay to some degree, while only some of them ultrasound anomalies. In 9 cases, healthy parents (n=15) were have clear facial dysmorphic features. Café au lait spots have been examined for the assessment of the clinical relevancy of discovered described in almost half of the patients. copy number variations. In additional 9 foetuses cytogenetic findings We present five new patients carrying a ring chromosome 11, with (marker chromosome, de novo translocation, derivative chromosome) three of the patients belonging to the same family. All patients do were clarified. have growth problems and café au lait spots. Four of them have In postnatal diagnosis, 82 patients with PMR and normal karyotype microcephaly, while one has a head circumference just within normal and 31 healthy parents were examined. Precise identification of limits. Developmental problems are severe in one patient, but do not cytogenetically detected chromosomal “balanced” and unbalanced exist in two other patients. aberrations was performed in additional 15 patients. In four patients a terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome In total, 15% (16/108) of foetuses with abnormal ultrasound findings 11 was demonstrated. In one of them an additional terminal deletion were found to carry clinically relevant CNVs (microdeletions or of chromosome 11q was detected, which does not contain any coding microduplications). In 12% (10/82) of patients with PMR and normal genes. The terminal 11p deletion in the familial ring chromosome karyotype clinically relevant CNVs were detected and in additional contains six more genes than in the other patient. For the extra deleted 17% (14/82) of the CNVs parental samples have not been analysed genes no relationship has been reported with growth retardation or yet. Chromosomal imbalances were detected in nearly all (13/15) microcephaly. In contrast to the other patients, the fifth patient showed patients with abnormal karyotype. Our data suggest that SNP analysis a considerable terminal deletion of 14 Mb on 11q, which fits with a is clinically significant complementary technique in both prenatal and diagnosis of Jacobsen syndrome. postnatal diagnosis. In PMR cases SNP analysis should be used as The differences in clinical characteristics are most likely due to the first-choice approach. differences in size of the deletions these patients have, and the genes involved in these deletions. P03.081 somatic mosaicism for chromosome X and Y aneuploidies in P03.079*** monozygotic twins heterozygous for sickle cell disease mutation BTRC upregulation alone is insufficient to cause SHFM3 - H. R. Razzaghian*1, M. H. Shahi*1, L. A. Forsberg*1, T. Diaz de Ståhl1, D. evidence from 4 new cases. Absher2, N. Dahl1, M. P. Westerman3, J. P. Dumanski1, *authors have equally A. B. R. Bergbaum1, M. Irving2, S. Mansour3, T. Homfray3, B. Dimitrov2, F. contributed to this paper; Flinter2, C. Mackie Ogilvie2; 1Rudbeck laboratory, Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, 1GSTS Pathology (Guy’s Hospital), London, United Kingdom, 2Guy’s and St Uppsala, Sweden, 2HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, Thomas’ Foundation Hospital Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3St George’s United States, 3Hematology Research, Mount Sinai Hospital Medical Center, Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. Chicago, IL, United States. Split hand-foot malformation (SHFM) is a limb reduction defect, Somatic genetic variation in health and disease is poorly explored. resulting most commonly in absence of the central rays. Severity is Monozygotic (MZ) twins are a suitable model for studies of somatic variable, often with asymmetric expression, and penetrance may be mosaicism since genetic differences in twins derived from the same reduced. It is either isolated or it may be part of a wider, syndromic zygote represent an irrefutable example of somatic variation. We report condition. The aetiology of isolated SHFM is complex and remains to the analysis of a pair of generally healthy female MZ twins, discordant be fully elucidated; it has so far been mapped to five loci: 7q21, Xq26, for somatic mosaicism for aneuploidy of chromosomes X and Y. 10q24, 3q27 and 2q31; however, the critical genes for all except one Both twins are heterozygous carriers of sickle cell disease mutation. of these loci have not been identified. Genotyping of blood DNA from both twins using Illumina Human 610 SHFM3 has been mapped to 10q24 and previous studies have shown SNP array revealed a copy number imbalance for chromosome X in a it to be associated with a duplication of a minimum region of ~325kb, proportion of cells in one twin. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) thereby implicating several candidate genes including FBX4, LBX1, analysis confirmed monosomy X (45,X) in 7% of proband nucleated and BTRC. FISH and expression studies have previously narrowed blood cells. Unexpectedly, FISH analysis of cells from the other twin the minimal region of involvement to two genes, BTRC and POLL, and revealed 45,X and 46,XY lineages, both present in 1% of cells. The Cytogenetics 150 mechanism behind formation of these aneuploidies suggests several probe for chromosome 3. It demonstrated that marker chromosome aberrant chromosome segregation events in meiosis and mitoses derived from chromosome 3 resulting in partial duplication of proximal following conception. Our report contributes to the delineation of the 3p and q chromosomal regions. The supernumerary chromosome frequency of somatic structural genomic variation in normal MZ twins. involves more then 30 genes, including EPHA3, POU1F1, ROBO1, These results also illustrate the plasticity of the human genome for ARL13B, which play role in developmental processes. Overdosage of tolerating large copy number changes in healthy subjects and show these genes could affect normal development because most embryonic the sensitivity of the Illumina platform for detection of aberrations that developmental processes depend on strictly balanced levels of are present in a minority of the studied cells. proteins. We hypothesize that supernumerary chromosome resulting in extra gene copies lead to severe psychomotor developmental delay P03.082* and facial dysmorphism. Unrelated hEscs and hiPscs share a common genomic The research is funded by the Research Council of Lithuania National aberration, detected by molecular cytogenetic techniques. Scientific Programme Chronic Noninfection Diseases (PROGENET M. Dekel1,2, A. Aviram-Goldring2,1, T. Litmanovitch2, J. Shamash1,2, I. Laevsky3, project, No. LIG-1007). M. Amit3, J. Itskovitz-Eldor3, E. Schiff4, S. Rienstein2; 1Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2The Danek Gertner Institute of Human P03.084 Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3Stem Cell Center, Bruce Refined molecular cytogenetic characterization of the Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, breakpoints of small supernumerary marker chromosomes Israel, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology & Institute of Endocrinology, derived from chromosome 15 Tel Hashomer, Ramat Gan., Israel. J. B. Melo1, A. Jardim1, N. Lavoura1, M. Pires1, E. Matoso1, J. R. Vermeesch2, Multipotency and proliferative capacity of human embryonic stem N. Kosyakova3, T. Liehr3, I. M. Carreira1; cells (hESCs) make them a promising source for basic and applied 1Cytogenetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, research as well as in therapeutic medicine. The introduction of human Portugal, 2Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, induced pluripotent cells (hiPSCs) holds great promise for patient- University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Jena University Hospital, tailored regenerative medicine therapies. However, in order to use Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. hESCs and hiPSCs for therapeutic purposes, they must maintain long Many rearrangements may occur in the imprinted chromosome region term genomic stability in culture. 15q11->q14, which is known for its instability due to the presence of Until recently, G-banding was considered to be the gold standard repeated DNA elements. This region harbours six common sites that for chromosomal abnormalities’ detection in stem cells. Our goal in mediate chromosomal rearrangements (BP1 to BP6). Supernumerary this study was to apply high resolution techniques (FISH and CGH), marker chromosomes (SMC) originating from chromosome 15 are that will enable us to examine stem cells genome with an ever finer the most common SMCs. Genotype/phenotype studies have not resolution. been able, to date, to show any correlation between type and size of Analysis of three hESC lines and two hiPSC lines over long term clinically relevant SMC(15)s and the degree of severity of the clinical culture revealed a recurrent genomic instability, involving the gain of spectrum. chromosome 1q. This finding was detected in two unrelated cell lines We report 6 new cases of patients with a SMC(15) that were of different origin and implies that gains of chromosome 1q may endow characterized by molecular cytogenetics (Multicolour FISH) and array a clonal advantage in culture. CGH techniques, followed by microdissection, for the evaluation of the In addition, aneuploidy rate was evaluated at different passages, exact genetic content, correlating clinical features with SMC(15) sizes. using FISH probes (12,13,16,17,18,21,X,Y). Genomic integrity was One case is a small SMC(15)s and without clinical features and/or shown to be maintained at early passages of hESCs and hiPSCs. development delay. The other 5 cases are large SMC(15)s with the However, at late passages, we observed higher rates of aneuploidy in Prader-Willi/Angelman syndrome critical region, all having clinical hESCs, implying a direct correlation between number of passages and features associated. Of these large SMC(15)s described, two cases increased aneuploidy rate. are from group B, having symmetrical pattern corresponding to BP3 These findings, which couldn’t be detected by conventional cytogentic, (BP3:BP3). The other 3 cases have large SMC(15)s from group A, emphasize the importance of using molecular cytogenetic methods showing an asymmetrical pattern with distal margins at the known for tracking genomic instability in stem cells. It also demonstrates breakpoint BP4. the phenomenon of genomic instability of hESC lines, which bear a A full characterization of SMC(15) by array CGH techniques is resemblance to tumorogenic processes. essential to establish with more precision breakpoints position and size of duplicated segments. Array CGH analysis, after microdissection of P03.083 the marker, showed to be a powerful approach to detect the duplication small supernumerary marker chromosome derived and its extent. from chromosome 3 in patient with severe psychomotor developmental delay and dysmorphism P03.085 Ž. Čiuladaitė1,2, A. Matulevičienė1,2, J. Kasnauskienė1,2, B. Aleksiūnienė1,2, V. Genomic microdeletions in patients with syndromic mental Kučinskas1,2; retardation diagnosed by molecular cytogenetic and cGH-array 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius analysis. University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics at Vilnius University I. Ben Abdallah1, H. Ben Khelifa1, S. Mougou2, N. Soyah3, H. Hannachi1, I. Hospital Santariškių Clinics, Vilnius, Lithuania. Malek1, B. Lakhal1, S. Brahem1, S. Bouraoui1, R. Berguiga1, H. Elghezal1, A. We report on 7 years old girl with severe psychomotor developmental Saad1, G. Tunisian Network on Mental Retardation.4; delay and dysmorphic features with a de novo mosaic partial trisomy 1Laboratory of cytogenetic and biology of reproduction, Sousse, Tunisia, of chromosome 3, involving euchromatic material from 3p and 3q. 2Laboratory of cytogenetic and biology of reproduction, SOUSSE, Tunisia, Dysmorphic features characterised by high triangular forehead 3Paediatric Department, Farhat Hached University Teaching Hospital, with expressed sagital suture, hypertrichosis, wide spaced eyes, SOUSSE, Tunisia, 4Ministère de l’enseignement supérieur et de la recherche, ptosis, down-slanting palpebral fissures, strabismus, broad nasal Tunisie, Tunisia. root, very short nose with anteverted nares, short grooved philtrum, Non allelic homologous recombination is supposed to generate cryptic triangular mouth, high narrow palate, micrognathia, malformed ears microdeletions as well as microduplications, in the field of mental with preauricular sinus on one of sides and skin lesions typical for retardation numerous well-known microdeletion syndromes have been chromosomal mosaicism: streaked, whorled and mottled areas described. We explore twenty five patients with mental retardation of hypopigmentation on trunk and limbs. CT scan showed corpus and known to be the target of microdeletion (Table 1). The patient’s callosum agenesis and hydrocephaly, X-ray: abnormal feet position. chromosomes were characterized by fluorescence in situ hybridization Conventional cytogenetic analysis revealed female karyotype with (FISH) with probe which contains two or three locus region-specific presence of supernumerary marker chromosome in 85% of analyzed probes. Hybridizations were performed following manufacturer’s cells (47,XX,+mar [17]/ 46,XX [3]). The origin of supernumerary marker instructions (Vysis®). In this series, we found a 7q11.23 deletion chromosome was identified by FISH using whole chromosome painting removing the ELN gene in four patients with congenital cardiopathy, Cytogenetics 151 profound MR and, retrospectively, craniofacial feature of Williams- P03.087 Beuren syndrome, a 17q13.3 deletion in a patient with a lissencephaly constitutional tetrasomy 18p in a female child - a new case revealed by magnetic resonance imaging, a 15q11-q13 deletion in a report boy with craniofacial feature of Prader-Willi syndrome and a UBE3A V. N. PLAIASU1, D. Ochiana1, G. Motei1, E. Neagu2, B. Iancu2, D. Iancu2; deletion caused an Angelman Syndrome in a boy with microcephaly, 1IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Institute of Legal severe epilepsy, language delay and ataxia. For the eighteen normal Medicine ”Mina Minovici”, Bucharest, Romania. patients, we explore the DNA with The 44000 Agilent® oligonucleotides. Tetrasomy 18p is a very rare chromosomal disorder and is the result Array-CGH analysis of the 18 patients showed a deletion of 200 Kb in of a spontaneous mutation early in embrionic development in most of 2q23.1 in a patient presenting similar pseudo-Angelman phenotype, the cases. It has a prevalence of 1/140000 live births and affects both this deletion will be verified with BAC clone RP11-659J19. genders equally. The systematic screening of patients with syndromic MR, using In this paper we reported a de novo tetrasomy 18p in a 3 months old FISH and CGH-array diagnoses, should facilitate the estimation of female dysmorphic child. The clinical features were distinctive, with microdeletions frequency in MR population and the characterisation a particular facies, strabismus, neonatal hypotonia and microcephaly. of novol syndrome A small metacentric marker chromosome has been identified after Table 1. Diagnosed patients with fluorescence in situ hybridization standard cytogenetic analysis, without recognized parental origin of the supplementary genetic material. The child’s parents were also Number of tested and their karyotype results were normal. diagnosed Syndromes Localization Targeted gene The characterization of the marker chromosome using only conventional patients cytogenetic methods was difficult. Consequently, the marker was 4 Williams-Beuren 7q11.23 ELN evaluated by molecular cytogenetic techniques. Fluorescence in Situ 3 Prader -willi 15q11-q13 SNRPN Hybridization (FISH) analysis was the first step of diagnosis. Two types 9 Angelman 15q11-q13 UBE3A of DNA FISH probes were used in our study to describe the structure 4 Digeorge 22q11.2 TUPLE1 of the marker: a probe for the centromeric region of chromosome 1 Wolf-Wirschhorn 4p16.3 WHSC1 18 and probes for the subtelomeric regions of chromosome 18. A more detailed description of the identified isochromosome 18p was D5S23 , 1 Cri-du-chat 5p15.2 performed using MLPA technique. D5S721 Our patient was compared with other published cases with tetrasomy 1 Miller-Dieker 17p13.3 LIS1 18p. 1 Sotos 5q35 NSD1 1 Smith-Magenis 17p11.2 RAI1 P03.088*** Balanced translocations and inversions in the genome of Finns T. M. Luukkonen1,2, M. Pöyhönen3, K. O. J. Simola4, K. Aittomäki3, R. Salonen- P03.086 Cajander5, J. Ignatius6, L. Peltonen7,1,2, A. Palotie7,1, J. Terwilliger8,1, T. Varilo9; molecular analysis of telomere length in subjects with 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2National intellectual disability Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Dept. of Clinical Genetics, C. Cieza-Borrella1,2, L. Barrio-Real1,2, J. Mirón-Canelo3, R. González- Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Dept. of Pediatrics, Sarmiento1,2; Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 5The Department of Medical 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca., Genetics, Väestöliitto, Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Dept. of Clinical Genetics, Salamanca, Spain, 2IBMCC. Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (USAL/CSIC), Turku University Central Hospital, Turku, Finland, 7Welcome Trust Sanger Salamanca, Spain, 3Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Dept. of Genetics and University of Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain. Development, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 9Dept. of Telomeres are non-coding regions of DNA that maintain genomic Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. stability. Telomere length decreases with cell divisions despite Finland is acknowledged of its high standard of clinical medicine telomerase which consists of two subunits: TERT (the catalytic unit) and in the disease gene hunt of its founder populations. What is and TERC (the RNA component). This process is related directly with perhaps not so well recognized is that Finland has probably the cellular and individual aging. The aim of this study was to analyze most comprehensive health registers and records: hospitalizations, differences between telomere length in people with Down Syndrome surgeries, chronic diseases, cancers and prescriptions etc. have been (DS), people with cerebral palsy (CP) and people without intellectual filed for decades. disability. We collected saliva samples from 122 subjects with DS (with Relying on this infrastructure we have gathered clinical information a mean age of 34,61) 59 with CP (mean age: 30,85) and 115 without from all distinct hospitals and laboratories on all reciprocal balanced intellectual disability (mean age: 47,65). Genomic DNA was extracted translocations and inversions identified in Finland, and are currently from buccal cells and telomere length was measured by qPCR relative constructing a national database (www.fintransloc.org). By analyses of comparative. In addition, we analyzed two polymorphisms associated the medical records and by searches of additional national registers, with lower activity of telomerase: TERT-1327C>T (rs:2735940) and we are obtaining novel information of not only monogenic traits with TERC-63G>A (rs:2293607). The relative telomere length and the unidentified mutations, but also of multifactorial traits associated with polymorphisms analysis are shown in table. The analysis of the any given chromosomal abnormality. Moreover, we believe that such telomere length in subjects over and under 40 years old, shows a database will greatly assist genetic counseling efforts and scientific significant results in DS and CP (p=0,021 and p=0,050 respectively) collaborations. but not in controls (p=0,202). To date, we have surveyed 2575 hospital or laboratory contacts tERt tERc involving translocations or inversions consisting of 572 families plus telomere length singletons. Some 25 families associating with interesting abnormal (-1327c>t) (-63G>A) phenotypes are selected to investigate the breakpoints’ potential Probands Vs controls P<0,001 P=0,152 P=0,055 effect on the phenotypes. A nationwide systematic sample collection Ds Vs controls P<0,001 P=0,316 P=0,102 of DNA, RNA and cells with so far over 80% coverage of participants cP Vs controls P<0,001 P=0,145 P=0,181 was launched in Aug 2010, and we are breakpoint mapping three Ds Vs cP P=0,952 P=0,711 P=0,898 pilot families providing presumed shortcut in the identification of their Our data demonstrate premature biological aging in people with DS predisposing disease genes. and show, for the first time, that people with CP has chromosomal telomeres smaller than people without intellectual disability. The lack of correlation between TERT-1327C>T and TERC-63G>A polymorphisms and telomere shortening suggests the existence of other biological factors involved in the process.Cytogenetics 152 P03.089 Acknowledgements: Financial support: Research National Projects: two rare modes of paternal malsegregation of a translocation PN 09.33.02.03, PNII 140/2008, and CNCSIS 1203/2009. t(11;13)(q25;q14) in his two sons C. METAY1, L. Lecerf1, A. Briand-Suleau1, V. Delattre1, S. Serero2, P. P03.091 Kleinfinger3, M. Goossens1, D. Amram4; Double partial trisomy 14q and 22q due to maternal translocation 1HOPITAL HENRI MONDOR, CRETEIL, France, 2Centre de Biologie et de t(14;22)(q23.2;q13.32) with unusual clinical findings Cytogenetique Medicales, Evreux, France, 3Laboratoire Cerba, Cergy Pontoise, K. T. Abe1, M. D. V. Oliveira1, B. L. S. Dias2, F. M. Lima2, L. M. Formigli1, M. France, 4Centre Hospitalier InterCommunal, Creteil, France. Schneider1, A. L. V. Coelho1, C. E. Speck-Martins1; We report a rare case of malsegregation of paternal balanced 1SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil, 2SARAH Network chromosomal reciprocal translocation t(11;13) in his two sons. The of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. family was seen in genetic counseling for moderate psychomotor Trisomies of two autosomes in the same karyotype, even parcially, delay associated with dysmorphy and immunity deficiency for one son are very rare in livebirths. We report on 18-month-old male presenting (son 1) and strong psychomotor delay associated with dysmorphy and partial proximal trisomy 14q and partial distal trisomy 22q resulting cardiopathy for the other son (son 2). from a maternal translocation. At 13th day of life, he started feeding Conventional cytogenetic studies show a paternal karyotype with difficulties, failure to thrive and oliguria. A ventricular septal defect and balanced reciprocal translocation t(11;13)(q25;q14) and a maternal West syndrome had been diagnosed. At 13 month-old was observed normal karyotype. For the son 1, karyotype followed by 105K-Agilent neuropsychomotor delay, hypotonia, microphthalmia, hypertelorism, aCGH study revealed partial trisomy of 11q (780Kb) associated with broad nasal bridge, low-set ears, short neck and phimosis. A cerebral partial trisomy of 13q (28Mb). The son 2 carried a partial monosomy of MRI disclosed callosum corpus dysgenesis and ultrasonography 11q and partial trisomy of 13q. showed abnormal rotated kidneys. Neurophysiologic studies were This is an unusual occurrence of paternally inherited unbalanced of suggestive of auditory dysfunction. Radiographic studies showed toes (1) double partial trisomies (11q;13q) resulting from 3:1 segregation, anomalies. Cervical and lumbar CT studies demonstrated C1, C2, C3, and (2) partial trisomy 13q and monosomy 11q from adjacent-2 L5 and sacral dysraphism besides T4 and T5 lateral processes fusion. segregation, both in paternal meiosis. Indeed these two modes of EEG disclosed hemi hypsarrhythmia. He is under anticonvulsivant malsegregation, rather described in female meiosis, are uncommon and gastroesophageal reflux therapy. Cytogenetics analysis showed in male meiosis and implicate the acrocentric 13 chromosome. karyotype 47,XY,t(14;22)(q23.2;q13.32)mat,+der(14)t(14;22). The Differences in severity of clinical features of both sons are observed. FISH performed on metaphases with commercially available N25/ The son 2 developed a more serious phenotype resulting particularly SHANK3 probes confirmed the karyotype. from the monosomy 11qter described associated with Jacobsen To our knowledge, the patient is a first case with partial proximal syndrome. Clinical features of the son 1 will be discussed in relation trisomy 14q and partial distal trisomy 22q. The patient is resultant of with the types of anomalies, the genes localized in the duplications or alternate 2:2 meiotic segregation containing t(14;22)(q23.2;q13.32) at their breakpoints with genotype/phenotype correlation and will be in his chromosome complement. A second event occurred probably compared with previous reports. This report emphasizes the added in meiosis II with no-disjunction leading to extra der(14)t(14;22). The importance of array-CGH to analysis of offspring born to chromosomal phenotype includes characteristics of trisomy 14 mosaicism, partial reciprocal translocation carrier parents. trisomy of proximal 14q, and trisomy of 22q13.3-qter. Moreover, some aditional features are presented on this patient: low-set rotated kidney, P03.090 skeletal abnormalities with vertebral anomalies, and West syndrome. Unbalanced transmitted translocation t(3;20) associating epilepsy, behavioral disorders, and severe mental retardation: P03.092 case report true trisomy 2 mosaicism in cVs and amniocytes: a new case S. F. Chirieac1, M. Budisteanu2,1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, D. Barca2, I. Borcan1, M. F. Girard1, V. Kremer1, M. Kohler2, B. Viville3, R. Favre2, B. Gasser4, L. Cristea1, A. Arghir1; Marcellin5, B. Samama6, N. Boehm6, E. Flori1; 1”Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2”Alex. 1Service de Cytogénétique Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Obregia” Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry, Bucharest, Romania. France, 2Département de Gynécologie-Obstétrique Hôpitaux Universitaires de We prezent a two year-old boy referred for genetic investigations due Strasbourg, Schiltigheim, France, 3Département de Gynécologie-Obstétrique to epilepsy and behavioral disorders with heteroagresivity. In addition, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Service he exhibited dysmorphic features (large ears, bilateral preauricular d’Anatomie Pathologique Centre Hospitalier Régional, Mulhouse, France, pit, long eyelashes, hairy eyebrows, depressed nasal bridge, bulbous 5Service d’Anatomie Pathologie Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, nose, thick lips, ogival palate), severe mental retardation. Congenital Strasbourg, France, 6Institut d’Histologie Faculté de Médecine Université Louis heart and renal defects, left umbilical and inguinal hernia were Pasteur, Strasbourg, France. detected. True trisomy 2 mosaicism is a very rare event. Few cases with variable Classical and molecular cytogenetic investigations were performed phenotypic outcome are reported in the literature. We report a new on peripheral blood cultures by GTG-banding and FISH standard case of prenatally diagnosed mosaic trisomy 2. protocols. Transabdominal chorionic villus sampling was performed at 15 weeks’ Cytogenetic analysis showed trisomy for the region 3q26.2-qter and gestation (WG) on a 37-year-old woman because of an increased risk monosomy for 20q13.3-qter as a result of an unbalanced translocation. of aneuploidy (1/40). Fetal ultrasound revealed hyperechogenic bowel, The rearragement was inherited from his clinically healthy mother, who oligoamnios, hypotrophy and moderate ventriculomegaly. Among the presented a balanced translocation: t(3;20)(q26.2;q13.3). The results 21 cells observed from the direct preparation, 19 showed 47,XX,+2 were confirmed with BAC-probes FISH. karyotype. Trisomy 2 was also present in almost all cells observed Both anomalies, duplication of distal 3q and deletion of distal 20q, from cultures as well as with conventional cytogenetics and with in situ were previously reported and some of the associated clinical features hybridization. At 17 WG, ultrasound revealed only hypotrophy. Follow are also present in our patient. Moreover, trisomy 3q2 is known as up amniocentesis was performed at 18 WG and showed on in situ a rare syndrome with variable phenotype, depending on the size of preparations, a mosaic karyotype mos 47,XX,+2[14]/46,XX[86]. At 21 the duplicated fragment and the involvement of other chromosomal WG, ultrasound displayed hyperechogenic bowel, retrognatism and regions. hypotrophy. Parents opted for termination of pregnancy. No trisomic The regions involved in our patient chromosomal rearrangement cells were observed at cordocentesis. At post mortem examination, include several genes known to act in nervous system development, there was moderate intrauterine growth retardation, no dysmorphy such as: NLGN1 on 3q region and ARFGAP1, CHRNA4, KCNQ2 on and no malformations. Nevertheless, examination of the brain showed 20q region. pachygyria, micro-polygyria and focal neuronal heterotopia. By our knowledge, this is the first reported unbalanced translocation This case is compared with other reported cases of the literature and involving 3q and 20q regions, further contributing to a better the follow-up of prenatally diagnosed mosaic trisomy 2 is discussed. understanding the role of these two chromosomal abnormalities in producing of a such complex phenotype.Cytogenetics 153 P03.093 To confirm these results, FISH analysis with PAX3 breakapart probe combine application of different cytogenetic techniques for was performed. characterization of dicentric X mosaicism in case with turner Results of our study indicate, that WS can also be caused by syndrome chromosomal microdeletions involving PAX3 region. S. Midyan1, A. Hovhannisyan1, H. Mkrtchyan1, C. Halgren2, L. Nazaryan2, N. Tommerup2; P03.095 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, Report of a patient with distal Williams-Beuren deletion. 2Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Institute of B. Grisart, S. Vidrequin, K. Rack, C. Verellen-Dumoulin, A. Destrée; Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Centre de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Denmark. Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium. Phenotype of Turner syndrome includes short stature, ovarian A 7-years-old boy was referred to the genetic consultation given failure and other somatic stigmata. It is associated not only with X psychomotor delay, learning difficulties and dysmorphism. He chromosome complete monosomy, but also with its mosaic and partial presents behavioral disorders as depression, impulsivity, hyperactivity monosomy forms. Here we describe a case with Turner-like phenotype and relationships difficulties with other children. EEG shows epilepsy. in 19-year-old female. Initial chromosome analysis of cultured He uses short sentences but with pronunciations difficulties. leukocytes revealed female karyotype with derivative X chromosome Developmental quotient was evaluated at 63 (Terman-Merrill). Minor in all metaphases, where existence of extra chromosomal material dysmorphic features were observed with upslanting palpebral fissures, was predicted. strabismus, mild retrognathia and protruding upper lip with long However, Afymetrix SNP 6.0 array data of peripheric blood DNA shown philtrum. Growth parameters at 7-years are in the normal range. only a 48Mb terminal deletion of Xq22.3-qter region (chrX:106762523- CGH analysis showed a 2.015 Mb deletion distal to the Williams- 127573136; chrX:127574179-154887041) and no gain of X nor other Beuren deletion. The deletion is maternally inherited. The family chromosomal material, which contradicted the karyotype picture. We belongs to underprivileged socio-cultural environment with relatives assumed that der(X) is a dicentric chromosome derived from two presenting learning difficulties and intellectual disabilities. Given this Xpter-q22.3 chromosomal materials represented in mosaic form in blurring familial situation, this deletion was initially considered as being peripheral blood cells. of unknown clinical significance. Furthermore polymorphic CNV were Further FISH application on cultured leukocytes using centromere reported in this region. probe SE X (Kreatech) confirmed that derivative X chromosome has Two publications (Edelmann et al., 2007 ; J Med Genet 44:136-143 two X centromere material and thus is dicentric - 46,X,dic X(pter-q22.3). and Ramocki et al., 2010 ; Am J Hum Genet 87:857-865) reported Despite the fact that der(X) was presented in all metaphases in addition deletions or duplications distal to the Williams-Beuren deletion. These to normal X chromosome, in 30% of interphase cells we detected only patients exhibit variable expression of epilepsy, learning difficulties, two signals. In buccal mucosa cells mosaicism was detected with intellectual disabilities (mild to severe developmental delay or following ratios: 70%, 17% and 13% of cells with one, two and three intellectual disability with autistic features in some patients) and/or signals, respectively. neurobehavioral abnormalities (inattention, hyperactivity, impulsivity Thus, neither conventional karyotype study nor SNP array didn’t and aggression including self-abusive behavior and depression). find cells with 45,X. Only interphase FISH on buccal mucosa cells The majority of the patients have a deletion inherited from a normal discovered monosomy X which could explain our patient phenotype. or less affected parent. HIP1 and YWHAG genes are also deleted in Our results demonstrate the importance of different tissues study by our patient. However the inheritance from normal relatives, strongly conventional and molecular cytogenetic techniques to reveal true suggests an incomplete penetrance of this deletion which preclude a mosaicism. unambiguous genetic counseling. P03.094 P03.096 A de novo interstitial deletion del(2)(q36.1) including PAX3 gene Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBs) atypical phenotype due in a girl with hearing loss and subtle dysmorphic features. to rare familial inversion inv(7)(p10q11.23) in mother and her M. Drożniewska1, A. Chacińska2, O. Zuffardi3, O. Haus1,4; child: fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Collegium Medicum UMK, Bydgoszcz, rearrangement breakpoints Poland, 2Genetic Counseling Centre, University Hospital, Wrocław, Poland, A. Polityko1, S. Batt2, O. Khurs1, A. Kulpanovich1, L. Isakovich1, N. Yakutina3, 3Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Universita di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, A. Frolova3, N. Kvasnikova3, I. Naumchik1, T. Liehr2; 4Department of Hematology, Medical University, Wrocław, Poland. 1National Medical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 2Institute of Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is an autosomal dominant syndrome Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany, 3Regional Genetic Center, which is reported to be the most common form of inherited congenital Gomel, Belarus. deafness, with a prevalence of 1:42.000. It is strongly heterogenous WBS is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by distinct with wide spectrum of phenotypes, which resulted in identification of 4 facial features, supravalvular aortic/peripheral pulmonary stenosis, forms of this syndrome. The most characteristic dysmorphic features mental retardation and typical behavioural features, growth deficiency, are pigmentary abnormalities of the hair, iris heterochromy and infantile hypercalcemia. Typical WBS is characterised cytogenetically congenital sensorineural hearing loss. Types 1 and 3 of WS are mainly by hemizygous 1,55-1,83 Mb deletions including 26-28 genes at caused by mutations in the PAX3 gene. Deletions of this gene are less chromosomal segment 7q11.23. Diagnostic test for the standard frequently reported. microdeletions detection for classical and atypical WBS is FISH A 16 years old girl was referred for genetic counseling due to hirsutism, analysis using DNA probes bearing elastin gene locus ELN. hearing loss, hypertelorism and minor phenotypic features. She was a We present a rare family case with atypical WBS phenotype in mother second child of healthy, unrelated parents. and her 1,2-years old daughter who both had a cytogenetically The dysmorphy included wide set eyes with brilliant blue irides, visible (GTG about 550-600 bands) apparently pericentric inversion. synophrys, shortened eyelids, hypoplastic alae nasi, low set ears, Molecular cytogenetic analysis of chromosome 7 breakpoints using large hands and feet and profound hearing loss. Her intellectual DNA probes for WBS critical region 7q11.23, specific centromeric development was normal. 7alpha-satellit probe and set of BAC-probes RP4-771P4, RP11- Routine cytogenetic analysis revealed normal karyotype (46,XX). 467H10, RP11-343J14 revealed the inv(7)(p10q11.23) in mother and Molecular screening of GJB2 gene excluded its most common in her child. FISH showed that one breakpoint of inversion is localised mutation (del35G). within the centromere 7p10 dividing it into two alphoid segments and Array CGH analysis with Agilent SurePrint 3G Human CGH Kit (4x180K making abnormal chromosome 7 as pseudodicentric. The second platform) showed an interstitial deletion of long arm of chromosome breakpoint was mapped in segment 7q11.23 more distal regarding 2 [del(2)(q36.1)] of 860 kb, including the PAX3 gene. Subsequent to centromere of WBS single copy region and distal to the low copy analysis performed in parents revealed no rearrangements in the repeats (LCR) sequences B mid, A mid, B tel, A tel and C tel blocks. same region, which led to the conclusion that deletion present in the ELN gene was not disrupted or deleted, therefore supravalvular child was de novo. aortic/peripheral pulmonary defects were absent in the mother and Cytogenetics 154 child, though both of patients had distinctive WBS facial features. the available literature, we concluded that this is the first reported case We present the clinical data of cases and hypothesize that balanced of mosaicism involving idic(X)(p11.2) without 45,X cell line. Finally, intrachromosomal rearrangement induces position effect in WBS this case shows that such mosaicism is a karyotypic marker of X critical region neighbouring with centromeric sequences. chromosome isodisomy and X-linked mutations as well as supports association of autism with mosaic X chromosome aneuploidy. P03.097 A balanced translocation t(5 ;7)(q32 ; q11.22) disrupting the P03.099 WBscR17 gene in a patient with incomplete Williams-Beuren A case of the de novo large duplication of 3pter-p13 and deletion syndrome of Xpter-p11.3 in a patient with clinical features of turner F. Abdelhedi1, M. Chaabouni2, A. Lebbar1, A. Coussement1, D. Letessier1, H. syndrome Chaabouni2, J. M. Dupont1; I. N. Lebedev, O. Y. Koryagina, N. N. Sukhanova, A. D. Cheremnykh, E. N. 1Cytogenetic Laboratory, Cochin Hospital, Paris, France, 2Human Genetic Tolmacheva, L. P. Nazarenko; Laboratory, Medical School, Tunis, Tunisia. Insitute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. The molecular characterization of balanced chromosomal Phenotypic manifestations of unbalanced X;autosome translocations rearrangements associated with an abnormal phenotype (6% of in female carriers are usually modulated by X-inactivation. Spreading balanced chromosomal rearrangements), has been a successful of inactivation on the autosome fragment can provide gene silencing. approach for the identification of disease-causing genes. But there are controversial data about continuous or discontinuous Here we describe the breakpoint mapping of a de novo balanced mode of this process. We report a case of the de novo unbalanced translocation t(5;7)(q 32;q 11.22) in a male patient presenting with translocation between chromosome X and 3 in a girl with major a psychomotor delay and moderate mental retardation, associated clinical features of Turner syndrome, gonadal dysgenesis and normal with facial anomalies observed in Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). intellectual development. Patient is a 16-year-old girl from first He has neither cardiovascular malformations nor abdomino-renal pregnancy. She had a short stature (142 cm), short webbed neck, low anomalies. frontal and nuchal hair level, slight epicanthus, synophrys, alae nasi Breakpoint mapping on chromosome 7 with FISH, using BACs clones hypoplasia, rotated auricles with adherent earlaps, macrostomia, high showed that WBSCR17 gene (Williams-Beuren syndrome critical arched palate, flat chest, pectus excavatum, hypertelorism of nipples, region 17) was disrupted. However, breakpoint characterization on forearm valgus, hypoplasia of little fingers, camptodactily of 3, 4, and chromosome 5 was not achieved yet. For this we will perform a new 5 fingers, short big toes, sandal fissurae, hirsutism, hypertrichosis, technology called array painting, which could map the position of uterus and ovarian aplasia. The patient had a pronounced myotonic translocation breakpoints more precisely either on chromosome 7 and syndrome. The karyotype was 46,X,der(X)t(X;3)(p11.3;p13). Both 5 in a single experiment. parents had normal karyotype. The presence of the almost entire Array-CGH (Whole genome Tiling NimbleGen :Hg18,72K) confirmed additional short arm of chromosome 3 had no visible effects because that the translocation was balanced, and showed the absence of other of suspected X inactivation. Analysis of allele polymorphism in the AR unbalanced rearrangements which could explain the phenotype. gene by HpaII digestion has confirmed a 100% skewed X-inactivation. These results strengthened the hypothesis that WBSCR17 is However, the spreading of gene silencing was probably discontinuous responsible for the neuropsychological findings in our patient, in because of the presence of camptodactily, which was reported line with its known implication in brain development. However, its previously in patients with partial trisomies 3pter-p23. Short neck and implication in facial anomalies is less likely. For this the fine mapping pectus excavatum were also observed in cases of dup(3)(pter-p25). of breakpoints on the two translocated chromosomes by array painting To our knowledge this is a first report of large duplication without major will help us to better understand the genotype / phenotype correlation clinical malformations of trisomy 3p syndrome. in our patient. P03.100 P03.098 A 17q24.2-q24.3duplication in a patient with hypertrichosis and Rare case of 46,X,idic(X)(p11.2)/46,XX mosaicism in an autistic gingival hypertrophy child with developmental delay: a karyotypic marker of X E. Vallespin1, C. Gomez-Fernandez2, M. Palomares1, K. Kutsche3, R. Lucas- chromosome isodisomy and an X-linked mutation Laguna2, M. Feito-Rodriguez2, R. Martin-Arenas1, C. Crespo1, S. Garcia- A. D. Kolotii1, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, V. Y. Voinova1,3, O. S. Kurinnaia1,3, I. A. Miñaur1, F. Santos1, M. Mori1, A. Delicado1, M. Torres1, L. Fernandez1, E. Demidova1,3, A. K. Beresheva1,2, V. S. Kravets1,3, I. V. Soloviev2, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, Mansilla1, F. Garcia-Santiago1, P. Lapunzina1, J. Nevado1; I. Y. Iourov2,1; 1INGEMM-IDIPAZ-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 2Department of Dermatology-HULP, 1Institute of Pediatrics and Children Surgery, Minzdravsotsrazvitia, Moscow, Madrid, Spain, 3Institut für Humangenetik-Universitätsklinikum Hamburg- Russian Federation, 2National Research Center of Mental Health, RAMS, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Moscow City University of Psychology and A 6-year-old boy was referred for evaluation of generalized Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. hypertrichosis that was marked at birth. Furthermore he presented Isodicentric chromosomes X are frequent in females with Turner gingival overgrowth that began during early childhood causing syndrome demonstrating 45,X mosaicism. In contrast, the case hoarseness and difficulty in speaking and in chewing. reported herein represents mosacism manifesting as 46,X,idic(X) Array experiments were performed with a custom made array based (p11.2)/46,XX without Turner syndrome phenotype and without a cell on Agilent Technologies, called KaryoArray®. The array comprised with 45,X karyotype. In average, 46,X,idic(X)(p11.2) was detected specific probes covering all microdeletion and duplication syndromes, in 10% of cells. The latter was found using multiprobe FISH on 350 telomeres and peri-centromeric regions and also probes of backbone. metaphase plates and 1000 interphase nuclei. The structure of idic(X) The average density of the probe coverage is 43 kb. This focused was determined by FISH, as well. BrdU replication banding showed oligonucleotide chip covers more than 350 clinically relevant regions consistent inactivation of idic(X) in all affected cells. Phenotypic of genomic imbalance. features referred to autistic and aggressive behavior (including KaryoArray® identified a copy-number gain of 30 oligo probes spanning self-mutilation), severe developmental delay, lack of speech, mild 1.579 Mb at 17q24.2-q24.3 (chr17:64150313-65728881-NCBI_ microcephaly, abnormal pigmentation and mild facial dysmorphisms. Build36). Also array CGH analysis was performed on both parents Taking into account the severity of the phenotype and the amount and neither parent was found to carry a duplication. The duplication of abnormal cells, we came to a conclusion that the index case is identified in our case encompasses 8 genes: ABCA8, ABCA9, ABCA6, likely to be associated with an X-linked mutation and X chromosome ABCA10, ABCA5, MAP2K6, KCNJ16 and KCNJ2. isodisomy. To support this hypothesis, we have analyzed length of In one previous reported patient with duplication in chr17:64306843- (CGG)n and (CAG)n repeat expansions of FMR1 and AR genes, 65736803 the authors points MAP2K6 as a candidate for hypertrichosis respectively, using methyl-sensitive restriction and QPCR, which and gingival hypertrophy because activating mutations in components showed the same parental origin of chromosomes X. Therefore, X of the RAS-MAPK pathway can result in a group of phenotypically chromosome isodisomy and an X-linked mutation are most likely to overlapping genetic syndromes with several dysmorphic features explain phenotypic manifestations in the index case. Looking through common to the patients reported in their paper. Altered expression Cytogenetics 155 of the dosage-sensitive genes caused by copy-number mutations J03.03 has traditionally been viewed as the general pathogenic mechanism Familial Pericentric inversion of chromosome 12 for genomic disorders. and Congenital hypertrichosis has been S. Gunes1, H. Ozyurek2, G. Okten1, S. Tural1; documented in several cases with chromosome 17q trisomy, 1Ondokuz Mayis University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, suggesting that hair overgrowth can result from increased function of Samsun, Turkey, 2Ondokuz Mayis University Faculty of Medicine, Department the gene(s) on chromosome 17q. of Child Neurology, Samsun, Turkey. Granted by Redes/FIBHULP08 Chromosomal inversion is a balanced rearrangement defined as two breaks with reinsertion of the chromosome after the segment J03.01 rotates 1800. The frequency of chromosome inversions is estimated A normal man with uncommon t(15;16) approximately 0.13 in 1,000 in the general population. Most of the A. Faraj Pour, C. Azimi, B. Ferizadeh; individuals carrying inversion are phenotipically normal. Although rarely Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, seen, pericentric inversions are among the most common constitutional Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosome rearrangements and typically involve chromosomes 1, Reciprocal translocations are usually an exchange of material between 3, and 7. Pericentric inv (12) is extremely rare, with only 25 reported nonhomologous chromosomes. Estimates of incidence range from families in the literature. The common constitutional inversions are the about 1 in 500 to 1 in 625 human newborns. whole-arm translocations pericentric p11q13 and p13q13. The inv (12) is difficult to detect and result from centric fusion of two chromosomes. Such translocations may be misinterpreted as a partial deletion by routine cytogenetics. are usually harmless and may be found through prenatal diagnosis. Pericentric inversion of chromosome 12 can be associated with However, carriers of balanced reciprocal translocations have increased epilepsy, mental retardation and hematological malignancies. Here, risks of creating gametes with unbalanced chromosome translocations we report on a familial inv (12) (pter→p11::q13→p11::q13→qter) in leading to miscarriages or children with abnormalities.Most balanced father and two siblings who did not have any clinical manifestations. translocation carriers are healthy and do not have any symptoms. The mother’s chromosomes were normal in blood lymphocytes. But about 6% of them have a range of symptoms which may include Karyotyping was routinely performed by G-banding by using trypsin- autism, intellectual disability, congenital anomalies, or subfertility. In Giemsa staining technique. In the light of the findings of our family, we contrast, patients with unbalanceed whole-arm translocations have will discuss the literature about pericentric inv (12). abnormal phenotypes. We report a normal couples which referred by the gynecologist for J03.04 genetic counseling just because the wife had irregular menstrual Numeric chromosomal changes in Acute Leukemia cycles. They had a normal son as well.This couples were interested C. A. Popa1,2, H. Ionita1,3, M. Serban1,2, N. Andreescu1, A. Belengeanu1; to participate in one of our research project as a normal control. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy„Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, Cytogenetic studies were performed on lymphocyte cultures using 2Emergency Children Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania, 3City G-banding techniques. It was interesting that all the mitoses of the wife Universitary and Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. showed a reciprocal whole-arm translocation between chromosomes Acute myelocytic leukemia (AML) and Acute lymphoblastic leukemia 15 and 16, which according to literatures is very uncommon. (ALL) is characterized by a variety of numerical and structural The karotype of wife was: 46,XX,t(15;16)(p10;p10). chromosome aberrations. Gains and losses of whole chromosomes Chromosomal investigation on her parents, her husband and her son occur frequently in AML and ALL, both as solitary changes, usually revealed normal karyotypes. found at diagnosis, and as additional aberrations in later disease stages. 120 cytogenetic analyses of patients with leukemia with ages J03.02 between 6 month -73 years have been performed in the Cytogenetic chromosomal evaluation in couples with reproductive disorders laboratory of the University of Medicine and Pharmacy Victor Babes - retrospective study of a selected group of 266 couples Timisoara during 2004-2010. The cytogenetics diagnosis is a L. I. Butnariu1, M. Covic2, M. Onofriescu2, M. Gramescu2, C. Bujoran3, L. prognostic factor with the capacity to predict the remission rate, the Caba2, V. Gorduza2; length of the remission and the survivorship period, regardless of 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Gr. T. Popa”, Iasi, Romania, 2University the haematological, immunological and clinics parameters. For the of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 3Saint Mary Childrens Hospital, Iasi, confirmation of previous data, CGH may provide useful information Romania. regarding the nature of genomic aberrations that take place in cases Chromosomal evaluation in couples with reproductive disorders with complex karyotypes. - retrospective study of a selected group of 266 couples (Abstract): Reproductive Disorders (RD), manifested by the biological inability J03.05 to conceive (primary sterility) or inability to carry a pregnancy to full Report of five de novo translocation Down‘s syndrome term (infertility), affect 10-15% of reproductive-aged couples. The M. Moutabi Alavi, C. Azimi, F. Farzanfar, M. Khaleghian; genetic etiology of RD is represented, in the majority of cases, by Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, the chromosomal abnormalities. Aim: To retrospectively analyze the Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. karyotype results in a selected group of couples with RD. Material and The frequency of Down’s syndrome in the most populations is around methods: The present study was performed in 266 couples with RD: one in 700-800 live births and shows different karyotypes. Trisomy 21 is 80 (30,07%) with primary sterility (ST), 149 (56,01%) with Recurrent the main cause of approximately 95% of observed Down’s syndrome, Spontaneous Abortions (RSA) and 37 (13,90%) with Stillborn Children with 88% coming from nondisjunction in the matenal gamete and 7% (SC). A GTG-banded karyotype was performed on both parteners of coming from nondisjunction in the paternal gamete. Robertsonian each couple. Results: We identified a chromosomal abnormality in 43 translocation and isochromosome of the long arm of chromosome 21 individuals (16,16%): 20 cases (7,51%) with ST, 13 cases (4,88%) with are the cause of 2-3% of observed cases of Down’s syndrome. It does RSA and 10 cases (3,75%) with SC. The affected partner was female not show the maternal age effect, and is just as likely to have come in 23 cases (8,64%) and male in 20 cases (7,51%). A X chromosome from fatherts as mothers. The remaining 1-2% are mosaicism.In about (numerical or structural) abnormality was detected in 18 cases three-fourths of translocation Down’s syndrome, neither parent is a (6,76%), most frequent X chromosome monosomy mosaicism in carrier, and a mutation in the germ cells of one parent has caused the female and trisomy XXY in male; a balanced structural chromosomal translocation. The causes of these mutations are unknown. abnormality (BSC) was detected in 23 couples (8,64%); in other two We report five infants (three boys and two girls) from the five different males with ST, the karyotype result was 46,XX. Conclusions: The families, all revealed typical clinical features of the Down’s syndrome. results of our study are similar to other reported studies and underline The parental age of the five cases were between 20-30 years old. the major etiologic role of chromosomal abnormalities in RD and the Cytogenetic study were carried out, using the standard banding importance of chromosomal analysis for the etiologic diagnosis and techniques, for the cases and their parents. The karyotypes of the three genetic counselling of these patients. cases were: 46,XY,der(21;21)(q10;q10),+21 and the other two cases showed: 46,XX,der(14;21)(q10;q10),+21. Chromosomal analysis of the parents of the five infants were normal.Cytogenetics 156 J03.06 J03.09 cytogenetics studies im mild mental Retardation Untargeted cytogenetic effects in human 25 years following J. M. Pina-Neto, L. S. Abreu, L. F. Mazzucatto, C. M. Lourenço, L. M. Batista; chernobyl accident School of Medicine of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, O. V. Shemetun, Y. B. Dibskaya; This study was developed to review the clinical criteria for karyotyping Research Centre for Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. studies in mild mental retardation (MR ) patients. 25 years following Chernobyl accident one of the most actual problems We created 2 patients groups: a) in the first we had 107 patients with of human radiation cytogenetics is evaluation of late untargeted mild MR and we do karyotype analysis in 34 selected using the classical cytogenetic effects, especially, different types of chromosome clinical criteria ( 2 ou more malformations and /or dysmorphic features instability and bystander effect. Such effects in some critical groups associated) and only in 3 patients (2.8%) we detected chromosomal of Chernobyl accident victims had been investigated using the anomalies (all sexual chromosomal aberrations: 46, XX/45,X; 47, following models: long-termed cultures of human blood lymphocytes; XYY; 48, XXYY). B) in the second group we had 187 patients and G-bleomycin sensitivity assay; mixed human lymphocytes culture 2 we did karyotype analysis in 172 of them independently of the patient consisted of cells differed by cytogenetic sex markers. In children born had malformations and / or dismorphic features and we detected 10 to irradiated parents increased frequency of chromatid breaks in long- patients (5.8%) with chromosomal aberrations [ 6 of them with sexual term cultures confirmed expression of delayed chromosome instability chromosomal aberrations: 47, XXX (2); 47, XYY; 48, XXXY; 46, XX/45, in consequent mitosis; appearance of stable aberrations may testify X; and 4 with autosomal aberrations). about Our work suggested, similar to others authors, that in mild MR the transmissible chromosome instability. Among unexposed donors, karyotype may be indicate in all patients, independently of the liquidators and shelter’s personnel no more than 33% persons presence of malformations and / or dysmorphic features. hypersensitive to testing bleomycin exposure had been identified that can be considered as genetically caused phenomenon. Among J03.07 patients recovered from acute radiation sickness ~58% persons Peculiarities of replication of 1qh, 9qh, 16qh and Yqh regions of expressed hidden chromosome instability that confirmed possibility human chromosome from chorionic villi and embryonic tissues. of modification of inherited chromosome susceptibility to mutagens I. Trofimova1,2, M. Lyapunova1, E. Evdokimenko1, T. Kuznetzova2; by high doses of ionizing radiation. Under joint incubation of targeted 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, lymphocytes from Chernobyl male-liquidators with intact female 2Ott’s Institute of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian lymphocytes the frequency of chromosome aberrations in bystander Federation. cells was significantly higher than their background level. The The aim of study was analysis of replication of 1qh, 9qh, 16qh and difference between spectrum of aberrations in exposed and intact Yqh regions of human chromosome on semi-direct preparations from cells had been established - in targeted cells cytogenetic markers chorionic villi samples (CVS) and embryonic tissues (ET). CVS were of irradiation dominated just as in bystander cells chromatid breaks incubated with BrdU during 12, 24, 36, 48, 72 hours, and ET - 12, 24 mainly induced. The data received confirmed reality of untargeted hours. cytogenetic effects in delayed terms following Chernobyl accident Bright red fluorescence of 1qh, 9qh, 16qh and Yqh regions on that can be risk factor for realization of late medical consequences of chromosomes with and without sister chromatid exchanges using human radiation exposure. acridine orange staining was registered, thus indicating BrdU incorporation in these regions of both CVS and ET. J03.10 Indeed, ET BrdU-antibody signals was observed in these three cases of de novo isodicentric X chromosome heterochromatin regions as well as along chromosome arms. However S. Ahmadpour, C. Azimi, M. Khaleghian, F. Farzanfar; in CVS BrdU-antibody signals were detected along of chromosome Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, arms in both chromatids and asymmetric in Yqh region, which indicated Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. that cells passed one cell cycle, but no any signals was detected in Isodicentric X chromosomes, which formed by fusion of two X 1qh, 9qh and 16qh regions. chromosomes, are rare. The phenotypic effects of this X chromosome The reasons of this unusual cytogenetic phenomenon are discussed, aberration are variable and depend on the amount of material deleted such as technique artifact, cell cycle specificity or underreplication and whether the chromosomes are fused by the short or the long arms. DNA constitutive heterochromatin of CVS. Despite the variable presence of a 45,X cell line, they form two distinct This work was supported by Carl Zeiss Company grant. groups. Those joined by the short arms reveal shorter than average stature, while those attached by the long arms exhibit normal stature, J03.08 both with gonadal dysgenesis. Other Turner’s syndrome features A case of monosomy 9q: clinical data and molecular cytogenetic can occasionally be present in both groups, but are more frequently characterization of a patient associated with short arm fusions. P. Botelho, M. Souto, O. Moutinho, M. Martins, R. Pinto Leite; We report three cases which were referred to our Department due to Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. primary amenorrhea. First case was 21-year-old, 159 cm height, 55 High resolution cytogenetics analysis techniques are becoming an kg weight and with intermediate IQ. She presented with the features indispensable tool in the investigation of idiophatic mental retardation of Turner. Sonography report showed lack of ovaries and hypoplasia and dysmorphic syndromes, allowing previously unrecognized of uterus. Her FSH and LH were high. Karyotyping was performed on chromosomal rearrangements to be identified. peripheral blood lymphocytes using banding techniques according to In recent years many new syndromes have been established, including standard Methods: Her karyotype was: 46,X,idic(X)(q24). the clinically recognizable 9q subtelomeric deletion syndrome, in Second case was 20-year-old, 156 cm, 63 kg and subnormal patients with severe mental retardation, hypotonia, brachycephaly, intelligence. She showed some Turner features. Her sonography flat face with hypertelorism, synophrys, anteverted nares, cupid bow revealed hypoplastic uterus and absence of gonads.She had elevated or tented upper lip, everted lower lip, prognathism, macroglossia, FSH and LH. conotruncal heart defects and behavioral problems. The minimal critical Her karyotype was: 45,X [80%] / 46,X,idic(X)(q22) [20%]. region responsible for this 9q subtelomeric deletion (9q34) syndrome Third case was 23-year-old, 170 cm, 51 kg, with gonadal dysgenesis. has been estimated to be 1 Mb and comprises the euchromatin histone She showed raised FSH and LH. methyl transferase 1 gene (EHMT1). Her karyotype was: 45,X [8%] / 46,X,idic(X)(p22.3) [72%]. We describe a child with a de novo 9q microdeletion detected Chromosomal studies of the parents of all three cases and all their sibs by subtelomeric FISH probe. This case contributes to the better revealed normal. characterization of the genotype/phenotype relationship of chromosome 9 rearrangements and emphasizes the role of molecular cytogenetics in the characterization of rare chromosomal disorders.Cytogenetics 157 J03.11 resolution GTG banding technique. The karyotype was abnormal with trisomy 21 in a boy whose mother is a carrier of a marker a double chromosome abnormalities containing a pure trisomy 21 and chromosome an isochromosome X described as 47,X,idic(X)(P11.2),+21. Parent’s M. Rahnama1, F. Razazian1, F. Nasiri1, F. Manoochehri1, F. Mortezapour1, F. karyotypes were normal. The clinical profile of the Patient in relation to Mahjoubi2, R. Torabi2; the double chromosome abnormalities will be presented. 1Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization Reasearch center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic J03.14 Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cytogenetic studies among 50 iranian patients with ambiguous A marker chromosome (mar) is a structurally abnormal chromosome genitalia in which no part can be identified. The significance of a marker is very Z. Safari1, S. Morovvati2, F. Farzanfar3; variable as it depends on what material is contained within the marker. 1Young Researchers Club, Varamin-Pishva Branch, Islamic Azad University, It is essentially a partial trisomy. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center for Human Genetics, Here we report a 8-month -old boy with history of open heart surgery Baqiyatallah University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, because of his heart located in right side. He had developmental delay. 3Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, His father had also same heart problem. Her mother was deaf and Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mute. She had irregular menstrual cycle and received treatment. Human sexual differentiation is a highly complex process that is under His parents were first cousin. Karyotyping after lymphocyte culture the control of multiple genes and hormones. Abnormalities in normal revealed 47,XY,+21, del (21)(q22.3) karyotype. The mother had sexual differentiation are relatively common and occur one in 4500 47,XX,+mar karyotrype. C-banding revealed that the marker had live births, hence it needs immediate and rational management and heterochromatin origin. assignment of sex for rearing should be guided by the etiology of the Here we discuss the risk of carrying a marker chromosome with no genital malformation. Using cytogenetic analysis may help determining major clinical symptoms and trisomy of small chromosome in the next suspicious cases, since ambiguity can result from chromosome progeny abnormalities. Diagnosis and sex determination were made using a combination of J03.12 clinical, radiological and laboratory investigations. subtelomeric chromosomal rearrangements in idiopathic mental Chromosomal studies were performed on peripheral blood samples retardation by fluorescent in situ hybridization using conventional GTG banding techniques in more than 100 H. Akin, E. Karaca, O. Cogulu, B. Durmaz, A. Durmaz, C. Ozkinay; metaphases for each sample. Ege University Medical Faculty, İzmir, Turkey. 50 patients with ambiguous genitalia were referred for confirmation of Mental retardation (MR) affects about 3% of the populations. Final sex by karyotyping. They were aged between one month to 24 years. diagnosis could be reached in approximately one third of all cases, Our results showed that 29 patients (58%) had normal karyotype. and no diagnosis is available in the rest of the patients. Chromosomal The karyotypes of the rest of the cases were as follows: abnormalities comprise 30-40% of moderate to severe mental 14 patients (28%) were congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), twelve retardation; and nearly 30% of mild mental retardation. Standard of whom showed 46,XX and two cases were 46,XY karyotype (both cytogenetic analysis is capable of detecting DNA rearrangements 3B-hydroxylase deficiency). of larger than 3-5 Mb. Cryptic subtelomeric rearrangements are 4 patients (8%) were 21-OH deficiency. responsible in idiopathic mental retardation etiology for 5% to 1 patient (1%) was phenotypically male but 46,XX karyotype (XX 10% of cases. The aim of the study is to evaluate the incidence male). of subtelomeric cryptic rearrangements in cases with idiopathic 2 cases (2%) have 46, XX/46,XY karyotype. There is a great mental retardation. Eighty-six moderate to severe mentally retarded discrepancy between phenotype-karyotype in individuals having a patients who were referred to the Department of Medical Genetics chromosomal mosaicism. between 2008-2010 years. Definite perinatal brain injury, abnormal karyotype, positive FMR1 gene mutation, inherited metabolic or J03.15 specific neurodegenerative disorders were excluded from the study. cryptic imbalances detected by array cGH in cases with Fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis with identified cytogenetic alterations subtelomeric specific probes was used to detect cryptic rearrangement. I. M. Carreira1, S. I. Ferreira1, J. Ferrão1, A. Mascarenhas1, M. Pinto1, E. Six cases were identified with subtelomeric rearrangements (7%). One Matoso1, J. Saraiva2, J. B. Melo1; had de novo deletion whereas five had unbalanced translocations due 1Cytogenetics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, to balanced translocations of Portugal, 2Serviço de Genética, Hospital Pediátrico de Coimbra, Centro the parents. There was no consanguinity between the parents in any of Hospitalar de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. the cases and all had both mental retardation and multiple congenital Array-CGH has been assuming a major role in the diagnosis of anomalies.This study showed ones more that the subtelomeric patients with mental retardation, developmental delay and multiple rearrangements are one of the most significant cause of idiopathic MR congenital abnormalities and in the further characterization of with dysmorphic features. cytogenetically detected alterations. Among the available platforms, BAC and oligonucleotides, the last ones allow the detection of J03.13 smaller imbalances, offering a higher diagnostic yield. Meanwhile, a Report of a Down syndrome baby girl with double chromosome drawback of this higher resolution is that the generation of more data abnormalities of trisomy 21 and an isochromosome X makes the interpretation increasingly challenging. This is particularly N. Mohammadkhani1, F. Hadipour1, Z. Hadipour1, Y. Shafaghati1, P. Sarkheyl1, important when talking about copy number variants (CNVs), due to the M. Asami1, I. bagherizadeh1, F. Behjati1,2; progressive discovery of CNVs of unclear significance. 1Sarem Cell Research Center & Hospital, Medical Genetic Department, Tehran, We performed array-CGH using Agilent 180K, an oligonucleotide Islamic Republic of Iran, 22- Genetics Research Center, University of Social microarray with 180 000 sixty-mer probes and 17 Kb average probe Welfare Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. spacing. The patient’s samples were hybridized in a loop strategy, Down syndrome features was referred to the medical genetics where the three samples are labeled in the two colour dyes, Cy3 and department of Sarem Hospital. Her parents had non consanguineous Cy5, and then each patient sample is hybridized against the two other marriage with no family history of abnormal child. Mother was 21 samples. years old at the time of the pregnancy and had no complication except In a small cohort we have identified a cytogenetically detected oligohydramnios. Baby girl showed typical clinical features of Down chromosome 21 duplication that turned out to be an insertion from syndrome including: hypotonia, hypothyroidism, sandel gap, short chromosome 4, a 6q21 deletion in a patient with a t(13;15) and a nose, clinodactyly, up ward slanted palpebral fissure, deep nasal cryptic 20p12 deletion in Alagille syndrome region in a del2p patient. bridge, short neck, small ear, high narrow palate and bilateral simian Our experimental group shows that more than one structural crease. She also had heart complication and jaundice from the birth chromosomal alteration in the same patient might occur and that time. Chromosomal analysis was carried out using standard high its frequency is probably underestimated. Array-CGH will allow the Cytogenetics 158 identification of cryptic imbalances that otherwise would be missed. These results suggested the presence of a nuclear modifier factor specific to females which enhances the apparition of diabetes. J03.16 couples with two or more spontaneous abortions during the J03.19 years 2000-2010 - performed in center for medical genetics and the role of streptococcus pyogenes and some metabolites in immunology- montenegro formation of genomic instability by tonsillitis of patient. S. Teofilova, M. Bulatović, O. Miljanović, T. Ostojić; I. E. Kravchenko, V. V. Semenov, E. S. Koshpaeva; Clinical Center of Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro. Kazan State Medical Universiy, Kazan, Russian Federation. Research has shown that couples with balanced translocations are We investigated content of two metabolites: malonic dialdehid more likely to have miscarriages and increase risk for aberration (characterized the intensity of lipid peroxidation in cell membrane) and offspring than couples without balanced translocations. The reported intercellular DNA (showed the motion of DNA from the cell). incidence of balanced chromosomal translocations in couples We used extract of Streptococcus pyogenes as primary initiator with multiple spontaneous abortions (SABs), for years 2000- 2010 increasing the intensity of endomutagenesis. It was inspect ed 48 performed in Centre for Medical Genetics and Immunology KCCG patients with tonsillitis - 38 patients with genomic instabilities and - Montenegro. After genetic counselling, family pedigree was 8 patients with low level of genomic damaging. The concentration drawn by genetic counselor. Some couples had more spontaneous of metabolites in blood plasma was determined on third day after abortions plus a malformed child or stillbirth. Cytogenetic analysis beginning of disease. on blood specimens was needed for 325 couples (650 cases) and Mutagenic activities of Streptococcus pyogenes extract was carried karyotyping was conducted by analysis of G-band.Chromosomal out by abdominal injection to white mice and processing of seeds of status was analysed using CytoVision,4.02 Applied Imaging. Balanced Crepis capillaries. translocations were found in 25 cases with an incidence of 3,85%, It was established that content of malonic dialdehid and intercellular indeed 7,69% couples. Of the 25 persons with balanced translocations DNA in blood plasma of patients with genomic instabilities exceeded the 4 persons had Robertsonian translocation, another had translocation normal concentrations of ones in 3 times and more. In patients without among different autosomes chromosomes. genomic instabilities the content of above-mentioned metabolites was approximately normal. We worked up the method for determination of J03.17 free iDNA and iDNA binding with cell membrane. It gives possibility to A mosaic turner girl with ring chromosome X determine the intensity of apoptosis and necrosis of cells in patients F. Manoochehri1, F. Mortezapour1, M. Rahnama1, F. Nasiri1, F. Mahjoubi2, R. with tonsillitis. Torabi2; It was also established that the number of micronuclei in erythrocytes of 1Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization Reasearch center, Tehran, Islamic peripheral blood of mice was increased after injection of Streptococcus Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic pyogenes extract in comparison with the mice without injection. Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Number of chromosomal aberration in seeds of Crepis capillaries after Women with the ring X chromosome are more likely to have exposition with extract of Streptococcus pyogenes was significantly psychological sequelae but are less likely to have structural congenital riser in comparison with control samples. Mutagenicity of extract abnormalities, and spontaneous menses occur in about a third. depends from the bacterium concentration and rises with increasing A 12-year-old girl was referred to our laboratory for chromosome study of concentration. because of short stature (about 1 meter). Her IQ was within normal range. Other than being short she was physically and mentally normal. J03.20 Her mother had to consume drug during the pregnancy since she cytogenetic investigation among women with multiple recurrent had kidney disease. The karyotype of the patients was found to be abotiotions 45,X[50]/46,X,r(X)(p?q?)[4]. M. Pilechian Langeroudi, C. Azimi, F. Farzanfar; The clinical manifestation of this patients will be discussed and Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, compared with the similar reported cases. Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Some of the cases with multiple recurrent abortions are caused by J03.18 chromosomal aberration in one of the parents. Many investigations screening of mitochondrial DNA mutations in the tRNAGlu have been carried out in various countries to determine the role gene and in tRNA Leu in buccal mucosa and in leucocytes in a of chromosomal aberrations in couples with repeated fetal loss. tunisian family with mitochondrial diabetes Approximately 15 to 20 % of pregnancies in which the fetuses are n. mezghani; affected with chromosomal abnormalities end to spontaneous abortion. genetic laboratory, sfax, Tunisia. A proportion of spontaneous abortions is caused by a balanced Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized chromosomal aberration in one of the parents, which is of importance by the presence of chronic hyperglycemia. Genetic factors play an in genetic counseling. Several studies have been done among couples important role in the development of this disorder, and several studies with multiple recurrent abortions. reported mutations in nuclear genes implicated in the insulin function. This study was carried out among Iranian couples with the same Besides, DM can be maternally transmitted in some families, possibly problem. A total of 944 cases (472 couples) with a history of multiple due to the maternal mitochondrial inheritance. recurrent abortions were examined, and chromosomal analysis was In this report, we screened a Tunisian family with mitochondrial diabetes done using the G-banding technique. for the m.3243A>G and the m.14709T>C mutations, respectively, in 26 females (5.5%) and 21 males (4.4%) were found to have the tRNALeu(UUR) and the tRNAGlu genes. abnormal karyotypes. These abnormalities included: one case with The polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length a mosaic karyotype 46,XX/46,XX,t(21/21),+21, 8 balanced reciprocal polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and the sequencing analysis in the translocations, 14 Robertsonian translocations, 13 inversions, 4 leucocytes and the buccal mucosa in the members of this family marker chromosomes, 2 cases with fra(16)(q21), and four cases of X showed the absence of the m.3243A>G mutation and the presence of chromosome mosaics. the heteroplasmic m.14709T>C mutation in the tRNAGlu gene in the two tested tissues. We conclude that the m.14709T>C mutation in the tRNAGlu gene could be a cause of mitochondrial diabetes in Tunisian affected family. In addition, the heteroplasmic loads of the m.14709T>C mutation in the leucocytes and buccal mucosa didn’t correlate with the severity and the onset of mitochondrial diabetes in the tested Tunisian family suggesting the presence of environmental factors or nuclear modifier genes. Moreover, our results showed that the clinical manifestations of mitochondrial diabetes in this tunisian family appear only in females. Reproductive genetics 159 P04 Reproductive genetics Kinderwunschzentrum, Linz, Austria. OBJEctiVE: Despite strongly improved culture conditions approximately 10 - 20 % of IVF embryos show a permanent cell cycle arrest state. Of special interest for this study is an increased rate of P04.01 numerical chromosomal abnormalities found in embryos with early Preventive examination of patients with balanced translocation developmental arrest. R. Gaillyová1,2, K. Kašíková1,3, M. Vozdová4, E. Oráčová4, P. Kuglík1,5, M. mAtERiALs/mEtHODs: The study was approved by the local ethical Vilémová1, J. Rubeš4; review board and can be accomplished in accordance with the strict 1Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, Austrian legal regulations. Arrested embryos used in this study were 2Biological Institute, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech donated by patients undergoing IVF treatment for infertility, and Republic, 3Dept. of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk written patient consent was obtained in each case. Embryos were University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Dept. of. Genetics and Reproduction, considered to be arrested when no cleavage had occurred during 48 Veterinary Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Dept. of Genetics h. Blastomeres of embryos with developmental arrest were analysed and Molecular Biology, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, using Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). Arrested embryos Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. were classified into different categories: normal diploid (euploid), Karyotypes of 5416 patients were examined at Dept. of Medical homogeneously abnormal (aneuploid), abnormal mosaics, chaotic Genetics between January 2007 and December 2010. 25 men and (complex), polyploid and haploid. 38 women had balanced translocation in their karyotype. Families REsULts: The most frequent finding in the study was the chaotic of these patients were offered genetic consultancy with cytogenetic pattern with various numerical chromosome abnormalities, which can examination, its purpose was to find out whether translocation is be different from cell to cell. Polyploidy comes a close second and inherited or arisen de novo. In cases when couples planed a child, represent a special case, since here probably not the polyploidy is prenatal genetic diagnostic eventually preimplantation genetic the reason for embryonic arrest, but the arrest is the cause for the diagnosis was offered too. Free of charge analysis of frequencies of polyploidy. chromosomally unbalanced sperms in ejaculate was offered to adult cONcLUsiON: Almost 70% of the analysed arrested embryos men (17) but only 4 (23 %) accepted this offer. The frequencies of displayed chromosomal abnormalities, suggesting that the elevated unbalanced sperm ranged from 5.8 to 23.5 % in Robertsonian and levels of chromosomal abnormalities represent a not negligible factor from 40.1 to 70.3 % in reciprocal translocation carriers. It is noteworthy for developmental arrest. that if a translocation (balanced or unbalanced) was found in children patient then in 80 % cases parents and other relatives underwent P04.04 cytogenetic examination. When translocation was found in adult Genomic alterations in Endometriosis (usually examined because of infertility), in only 20 % cases their M. Saare1, K. Vaidla2, D. Sõritsa3, L. Järva3, P. Palta4, K. Madissoo5, M. Laan6, relatives underwent the examination. H. Karro7, A. Sõritsa8, A. Salumets9, M. Peters1; 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, P04.02 2Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia, Functional analysis of ccDc54, a protein likely involved in 3Tartu University Hospital’s Women’s Clinic, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute of spermatogenesis. Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 5University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, A. Massart1,2, K. Breckpot3, H. Tournaye4,2, W. Lissens1,2, K. Stouffs1,2; 6Department of General and Molecular Pathology, Tartu, Estonia, 71Department 1Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 8Elite Clinic, of Embryology and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, Tartu, Estonia, 92Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, 3Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Therapy, Department of Physiology- Tartu, Estonia. Immunology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 4Center for The origin and genetic background of endometriosis are still Reproductive Medicine, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. unknown. Several studies have reported presence or absence of In search for proteins involved in the complex process of genomic alterations and copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH) spermatogenesis, coiled-coil domain containing 54 protein (CCDC54), in eutopic and ectopic endometrium of women with endometriosis. In a human testis-expressed protein with unknown function, was studied. this study, we used high-density SNP-arrays to determine inherited Expression of this gene is predomintantly in testis and in silico analysis DNA copy number variations (CNVs), de novo somatic copy number of the CCDC54 gene suggested it is a conserved gene. A yeast two aberrations (CNAs) and LOH pattern in DNA samples extracted from hybrid screening was performed, which identified Testis specific Zinc endometriosis lesions and compared to the original situation in blood Finger Protein (TZFP), a transcriptional repressor, as a binding partner cells and eutopic endometrium to reveal the genetic component of of CCDC54. To further investigate the effect of the binding of CCDC54 endometriosis development. Peripheral blood samples, endometrial on the activity of TZFP, a luciferase reporter assay was performed. biopsy and laser microdissected ectopic endometriotic tissues This suggested that CCDC54 is a negative co-regulator of TZFP. were collected from 11 women with endometriosis. The data was Immunohistochemical staining of human testis tissue shows an overall analysed using QuantiSNP and PennCNV programs. We examined expression of the CCDC54 protein in the seminiferous tubules. the genomic changes in microdissected endometriotic foci matching At the DNA level, conservation of the CCDC54 gene was verified and with endometrium and blood samples. An average of 9 CNVs was mutation analysis was performed. To detect the reported c.316G>T detected per investigated genome with a size range from 700 bp to or p.Glu106X polymorphism, a restriction digestion with BccI was 350 kb. We found that CNVs and LOH pattern are largely invariable performed on a control group of 150 European normozoospermic in different compartments (blood, endometrium and ectopic tissue) of men, but the polymorphism was not found. The CCDC54 gene of 16 each individual patient. Likewise, no endometriosis-specific CNVs or European men with a maturation arrest of spermatogenesis and 32 LOH regions were found when different endometriosis patients were European men with Sertoli cell-only syndrome (SCOS) was sequenced compared. Majority of detected CNVs were common CNVs. Also, and only one missense mutation was found in 2 SCOS patients. ectopic endometrial tissue showed no large chromosomal aberrations These preliminary results suggest that CCDC54 could be an important in our study group. Therefore, we conclude that there is no convincing protein for spermatogenesis. evidence that endometriosis originates from genomic alteration in eutopic endometrium and the disease is not accompanied by extensive P04.03 genomic rearrangements. Early embryonic developmental arrest and chromosomal aneuploidies P04.05 M. Maurer1, T. Ebner2, H. Duba1; search for genes associated with number of pregnancies 1Landes- Frauen- und Kinderklinik Linz, Humangenetische Untersuchungs- T. Laisk1,2, T. Esko3,4,5, A. Salumets1,2, A. Metspalu3,4,5; und Beratungsstelle, Linz, Austria, 2Landes- Frauen- und Kinderklinik Linz, 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Competence Centre on Reproductive Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia, Reproductive genetics 160 3Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of and premature ovarian failure (POF) as well. Gleicher et al reported a Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, direct statistical association between the number of CGG repeats (at Estonia, 5Genotyping Core Facility, Estonian Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia. 35 to 55) an ovarian reserve. While data about the genetic background of different infertility-related The goal of this study is investigated whether CGG repeats on the conditions in women is growing rapidly, the genetic component of FMR1 gene have predictive value for ovarian response to stimulation general fertility and fertility potential is still largely unknown. Research with gonadotropins and cycle outcome during an oocyte donors in this field is hindered by the fact that in modern societies the number programme. of pregnancies is mostly determined by socioeconomic, psychological mAtERiALs AND mEtHODs:We performed fragile X genetic and environmental factors, and the availability and awareness of screening routinely to all our oocyte donors from 2008. We include contraception, whereas the original genetic determinants fade into the the results of X fragile genetic screening from 204 (141 control and 63 background. In Estonia modern contraceptives became available in study groups) oocyte donors. The study population was divided into the beginning of the nineties, illustrated by the fact that in 1994 only three groups: women with 35-39 repeats (n=34), 40-45 (n=12) and 234 out of every 1000 fertile women were using effective means of >45 (n=17). contraception and the abortion rate was 54 per 1000 women of REsULts: No significance differences in cycle outcome was observed reproductive age. between groups, neither between different subgroups. According to We analyzed data from 944 women aged 40-101 (average age 65.2 ovarian stimulation, no differences were observed in donor age and years) with an average of 3.5 pregnancies (range 1-14); furthermore, number of oocyte yield between control and population groups and 43% of the studied women had had at least 4 pregnancies. Preliminary subgroups. Gonadotropin dosages and days of stimulation correlated analysis of data obtained from genome-wide association study with respect to the number of CGG repeats. These results disagreed revealed possible association between the number of pregnancies with previously work performed on infertility patients. and regions in or near genes previously associated with menarche, DiscUssiON: For the first time we present data showing the relation pathophysiology of placental diseases, steroid hormone receptor between normal and intermediated sized CGG repeats on FMR1 gene modification, maintenance of normal pregnancy, VEGF signalling and and ovarian stimulation using a non-confusion model as oocyte donor. adiponectin levels. Our data suggest that ovarian stimulation does not be affected by In conclusion, although research regarding the genetic component of CGG repeats on normal and intermediated range. fertility potential is complicated due to numerous confounding factors, our results suggest genetic determinants can still be found. Analysis of P04.08 data obtained from further studies might reveal additional associations the utility of methylation sensitive high resolution melting assay and confirm current findings. at imprinted genes in the diagnosis of complete and partial hydatidiform mole P04.06 H. Landolsi1,2, L. Philibert3, C. Rittore3, S. Brahem2, M. Gribaa2, A. Saad2, S. chromosomes aneuploidies detected in decondensed sperm Hmissa1, M. Yacoubi1, I. Touitou3; nuclei using FisH 1Laboratoire d’anatomie et de cytologie pathologiques, CHU. Farhat Hached, A. Belengeanu1, M. Stoian2, N. Andreescu2, V. Belengeanu2, D. Stoicanescu2, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, de Génétique Moléculaire et S. Farcas2; de Biologie de la Reproduction, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Unité 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Cellular and Molecular Médicale des Maladies Auto-Inflammatoires, Laboratoire de Génétique, Hôpital Biology, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France. Department of Medical Genetics, Timisoara, Romania. Background: Hydatidiform mole (HM), represents a disorder of The aim of this study was to evaluate the hypothesis that infertile genomic imprinting, a phenomenon whereby genes are monoallelically men, having oligoasthenozoospermia present a higher grade of expressed from the maternally or paternally-derived copy of the gene. chromosomal aneuploidies than men with normal fertility. FISH HM are classified as partial (PHM) or complete (CHM). The aim of technique allows the study of a significant number of spermatozoa this study was to analyze and to compare the methylation patterns of in a relatively short period. This is very important for the correct imprinted genes in CHM and PHM. evaluation of the patients with oligoasthenozoospermia, knowing that material and methods: We used methylation-sensitive high- the frequency of chromosomal anomalies in spermatozoa of infertile resolution melting technique (MS-HRM) for the methylation analysis of men is 10 times bigger than in men with normal fertility. In this study three paternally expressed genes, SNRPN, KCNQ1OT1 and GNAS- we included 15 men with oligoasthenozoospermia and a control XLaS, that are normally only methylated on the maternal allele, and a lot of donors for whom at least 1000 spermatozoa were evaluated. maternally expressed gene, H19, which is normally only methylated on Sperm count revealed a number varing betwen 3x103 and 3x106 and the paternal allele. DNA samples including 25 CHM and 20 PHM were 50-80% of the spermatozoa were imobile. All the patients inluded in scored as hypermethylated, normal, or hypomethylated. this study had normal constitutional karyotype. We performed FISH Results: We found loss of cytosine methylation in 19 CHM and 1 PHM technique using Abbott Vysis 13, 18, 21, X and Y chromosomes at SNRPN DMRs, 20 CHM and 1 PHM at KCNQ1OT1 DMRs, and in probes following the standard protocol provided by the manufacturer 24 CHM and 3 PHM at GNAS-XlaS DMRs. Hypermethylation at H19 with slight modifications. We assessed the chromosomes that DMRs was showed in 21 CHM and 1 PHM. Abnormal DNA methylation have most frecquently major clinically signifiance in children with patterns at all imprinted genes were highly correlated to CHM than aneuploidies. The aneuploidies rate of the studied chromosomes in PHM (p<0.05). our oligoasthenozoospermic patients spermatozoa was 13.61%, the conclusion: Our data confirm that abnormal methylation status higher incidence was recorded for gonosomes followed by disomy of imprinted genes is significantly associated to androgenic CHM of chromosomes 13, 21, 18. Our results show an increase frequency characterized by diffuse trophoblastic hyperplasia and the lack of foetal of sperm chromosome abnormalities in infertile patients compared development. So, we confirm the correlation between phenotypic with control donors. Patients with normal karyotype, low sperm variability of different forms of HM and various degrees of disorder of concentration and reduced spermatozoa motility have an increased imprinting. MS-HRM analysis is a rapid, specific and sensitive method, risk of producing spermatozoa with chromosomal number aberrations, which can be applied for the accurate differentiation between CHM particularly for the sex chromosomes. and PHM. P04.07 P04.09*** intermediate and normal sized cGG repeat on the FmR1 (fragile Prenatal diagnosis for Huntington disease in the Netherlands X) gene does not affect ovarian response (1998-2008) J. A. Ortiz1, J. Guerrero2, B. Lledo1, R. Morales1, J. Ten2, J. Giménez2, J. P. A. M. de Koning Gans1, M. C. van Rij2, C. M. Aalfs3, M. Elting4, P. F. Llacer2, R. Bernabeu2; Ippel5, J. A. Maat-Kievit6, C. C. Verschuuren-Bemelmans7, M. van Belzen1, R. 1IB Biotech, Alicante, Spain, 2Instituto Bernabeu, Alicante, Spain. Belfroid1, M. Losekoot1, A. Tibben1, E. K. Bijlsma1; iNtRODUctiON: Fragile X syndrome is not just the most common 1Centre for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Dept of cause of inherited mental retardation, but of of low ovarian response Clinical Genetics MUMC, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Dept of Clinical Genetics Reproductive genetics 161 AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept of Clinical Genetics VUmc, Amsterdam, no acceptable normative parameters. Netherlands, 5Dept of Clinical Genetics UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Dept We investigated germ and somatic cells of 20 men with normal of Clinical Genetics ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Dept of Clinical male karyotype: 10 patients with oligozoospermia and 10 fertile Genetics UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. normozoospermic men. The karyotyping was performed by GTG- Prenatal diagnosis for Huntington’s disease (HD) is possible using banding technique. Aneuploidy level for chromosomes 13, 18, linkage analysis since 1987 and using direct mutation analysis since 21, X, and Y was investigated in cultivated lymphocytes and fixed 1993, when the HTT-gene was identified. decondensed sperms by FISH. Limits and confidence intervals were In a previous study in the Netherlands (Maat-Kievit et al. 1999), scored for control group. Semen analysis was performed according to prenatal diagnosis for HD was categorized for the period 1987-1997. the standard WHO criteria. In this study we categorized the next decade: 1998-2008. A total of 20000 sperm and 20000 lymphocytes were scored for five We studied the medical records from all couples that had prenatal chromosomes. We found significant differences in aneuploidy level diagnosis between 1 Jan 1998 and 31 Dec 2008, to collect data for five chromosomes between OS patients and control group both regarding reproductive history, DNA results (predictive and prenatal) in lymphocytes: 2.04±0.21% and 1.04±0.07% (increase of limit) and and decisions made in pregnancies. in sperm: 2.17±0.28% and 1.17±0.14% (P=0.001). Inverse correlation In the study period 126 couples had 218 prenatal tests, 187 (86%) was found between sperm aneuploidy level and sperm concentration in direct mutation analyses and 31 (14%) exclusion tests. In the previous ejaculate (r=0.644). There was a mild association between aneuploidy decade, figures/data were respectively 41 and 31. level in blood and germ cells for chromosomes 13 and 18 (r=0.426 Of the couples that had their first prenatal test in this period, 13% opted and r=0.392). for an exclusion test. In our investigation we determined limits of sperm and lymphocyte We identified a new category of at risk parents opting for prenatal aneuploidy in the control group. These data can be useful for cases of testing: carriers of a CAG repeat in the low penetrance or intermediate mosaicism (especially low level) and sperm aneuploidy analysis. OS range. In 92 prenatal tests the result indicated an affected fetus. Of patients had elevated aneuploidy level. those, 11 pregnancies were continued (12%). Though the proportion of direct tests has increased, linkage analysis is P04.12 still the first choice for a minority. We found that quite some pregnancies Hemochromatosis gene mutations (HFE) in infertility with an unfavorable result were continued. The circumstances that led T. Adyan, O. Schagina; to this decision will be specified.In a separate survey we will investigate Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. how many couples switched to preimplantation genetic diagnosis at Hemochromatosis - an autosomal recessive disorder, the most some point in their reproductive choice. common causes of it are two mutations of HFE gene: C282Y and H63D. The HFE gene mutations lead to increased iron absorption P04.10 in the gastrointestinal tract. Detailed clinical symptoms occur in 4-5 idiopathic Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism in Finland decade of life. Before that, the iron is gradually accumulates in the body J. Tommiska1,2, K. Vaaralahti1,2, E. Eklund1, R. Koivu1, E. Laitinen1,2, T. tissues. So violations of the male reproductive function as impotence, Raivio1,2; testicular atrophy, azoospermia, and so female reproductive function 1University of Helsinki, Institute of Biomedicine, Helsinki, Finland, 2Children’s as amenorrhea may occur long before the major symptoms of Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. hemochromatosis. Based on these data and high-frequency carrier Idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (IHH) is a clinically of fhe disease in different populations, the search of C282Y and and genetically heterogeneous disorder characterized by absent or H63D mutations of HFE gene was carried in a group of 132 men incomplete puberty with anosmia (Kallmann Syndrome; KS), or with a with infertility diagnose. As a control, we studied a sample of 204 not normal sense of smell (normosmic IHH; nIHH). The molecular genetic clinically surveyed residents of the Russian Federation. cause can only be identified in ~30% of patients. We investigated C282Y mutation in the heterozygous state was detected in 12 patients epidemiological, clinical, and genetic features of IHH in Finland. The from the infertile group and in 13 ones from the group of population minimal incidence estimate of KS was 1:48 000, with a clear difference controls, H63D in 47 and 35 ones, respectively. H63D mutation in the between males (1:30 000) and females (1:125 000) (p=0.02). The homozygous state was detected in 2 patients from the infertile group phenotypes of 30 KS probands (25 men; 5 women) ranged from and in 7 persons of the control group, 1 patient and 2 persons from the severe IHH to partial puberty. Mutation analysis of KAL1, FGFR1, comparison group were compounds for investigated mutations. Neither FGF8, PROK2, PROKR2, NELF, CHD7, and WDR11 genes revealed statistically significant differences of C282Y and H63D mutations allele mutations in KAL1 (3 men) and FGFR1 (all 5 women vs. 4/25 men), but frequencies for studied groups no differences between the incidence not in other genes. In addition, 15 patients with nIHH were phenotyped, of two mutations carriers were found. and screened for mutations in FGFR1, FGF8, PROK2, PROKR2, Thus, it was found that the HFE gene mutations do not contribute to the NELF, CHD7, WDR11, GNRHR, GNRH1, KISS1R, KISS1, TAC3, development of infertility among residents of the Russian Federation. TACR3, FSHB (6 females), and LHB (9 males). Three patients were compound heterozygotes for GNRHR mutations, but no mutations P04.13 were found in other genes. The lack of mutations in PROK2, PROKR2, study of Gt-repeat expansion in Heme oxygenase-1 gene TAC3, and TACR3, implicated in recessive IHH, may reflect the special promoter as genetic cause of male infertility genetic features of the Finnish population. No evidence of oligogenic S. Aleyasin1, F. Jahanshad2, E. Siasi3, H. Saheb Kashaf2; inheritance, suggested to contribute to IHH, was observed. Altogether 1National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic 30 patients (67%) remained without identified mutations in any of the Republic of Iran, 2Navid Insistute of Infertility, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, known IHH genes, and we expect to identify mutations in previously 3Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. undescribed genes underlying IHH among the Finnish patients. A reduction in the level of HO-1 protein has been observed in the seminal plasma and reported to be associated with oligospermia and P04.11 azoospermia in men with infertility. The length of GT-repeats polymorphic sperm and lymphocyte low level aneuploidy in patients with region in the promoter of human Heme oxygenase-1 gene (HO-1) olygozoospermia alters the level of its transcriptional activity in response to oxidative N. V. Zotova, E. V. Markova, O. A. Serebrennikova, A. V. Svetlakov; stress. This is the first study to investigate the association between Krasnoyarsk Center for Reproductive Medicine, Krasnoyarsk, Russian GT-repeat expansion in the promoter of HO-1 and male infertility in Federation. Iranian population. The GT-repeats alleles were determined in 100 Karyotype abnormalities contribute to male infertility. But normal male cases and 100 normal controls by molecular analysis method such as karyotyte does not exclude low level aneuploidy in somatic cells and PCR-PAGE, ABI fragment analysis genotyping and sequencing. Two sperm aneuploidy. Abnormal semen parameters in chromosomally classes of S allele with 27 GT-repeats were specified as 4 to 6 alleles. normal men could be a risk factor of sperm aneuploidy. Numerous The L allele frequency was significantly higher (54.5%) among case data are available regarding sperm aneuploidy in patients with group than that in the normal controls (37.5%). Statistical analysis oligozoospermia (OS) but they are very disconnected, and there are provide significant relationship between L alleles and male infertility Reproductive genetics 162 (P<0.001). This study shows for the first time that GT repeat expansion Conclusions: Our experiments demonstrated that MFI-APEX assay in promoter of the HO-1 gene is associated with oligospermia and is suitable for the rapid single-step, robust, reliable and cost-effective azoospermia in male infertility among Iranian infertile cases. detection of possible genetic cause for male infertility problem. Furthermore, MFI-APEX testing is recommended before the couple P04.14 undergoes assisted reproduction in order to prevent the possible cytogenetic investigations in Assisted Reproductive technology inheritance of the genetic lesion to the next generation. (ARt) - experiences of center of Reproductive medicine (Belarus) P04.16 S. Zhukovskaya, L. Savenko, N. Rumiantsava, H. Abramchik, L. Shamgina; Array-cGH analysis in patients with maturation arrest of Center of Reproductive Medicine, Minsk, Belarus. spermatogenesis Cytogenetic investigations of sterile patients, couples with K. Stouffs1,2, D. Vandermaelen1,2, A. Massart1,2, B. Menten3, H. Tournaye4, W. reproductive failures, fetuses suspected for chromosomal disorders Lissens1,2; play an important role in diagnostics of etiology of infertility, fetal loss, 1Reproduction and Genetics, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, handicapped offspring. We present a scheme of genetic service, 2Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 3Center for cytogenetic results, selective fetal reduction data. Genetic service Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 4Center for of CRM provides counseling of infertile couples, pregnant women Reproductive Medicine, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. after ART with fetal loss or abnormalities; cytogenetic and molecular introduction. The past decades, many studies have been analyses, prenatal combined (US + serum markers) screening, genetic performed aiming to identify genetic causes of maturation arrest risk calculation. Among 3865 examined patients (lymphocytes, GTG) of spermatogenesis (MA). However, these studies were rather aberrations were detected in 1.2%. Balanced rearrangements (71%) disappointing. In the present study, we looked for the presence of copy presented Robertsonian and reciprocal translocations, inversions number variations (CNVs) in patients with MA and controls with normal of chromosomes 2;5;6;7;9;10;X;Y. Unbalanced aberrations (29%) sperm parameters included numerical gonosome abnormalities, markers (47,XYY; material and methods. CNVs were identified using 244K arrays in 9 47,XYY/46,XY; 47,XY,+mar; 47,XY,+mar/46,XY; 45,X/46,XY,gh+; patients. For regions of possible interest, more patients and especially 47,ÕÕÕ; 47,XXX/46,XX; 45,X/46,XX; 45,X/48,XXXX/46,XX), X larger groups of control men were investigated by qPCR. and Y deletions. 1312 pregnant women underwent screening in the Results. In the patient and control groups, on average 25±4 and 24±7 1st trimester. Couples with increased risk - advanced maternal age CNVs were detected, respectively. After elimination of regions that are (27.7%), calculated risk for combined screening ≤1:360 (9.7%), not containing any known genes and regions that were also detected parental balanced rearrangements - were selected for prenatal as CNVs in controls, 32 regions remained. A further reduction to nine karyotyping (CVS, GTG). 14 reductions of fetuses with aneuploidy regions was done by eliminating deletions that are completely intronic were performed in the 1st trimester using Berkowitz’s method (one (fi in PRKG), regions that were recently amplified in evolution (f.i. test-positive couple refused which resulted in the birth of a child with BAGE and PNMA genes) and regions with a well-known function not Down’s syndrome). 13/14 terminated cases presented twin pregnancy involved in spermatogenesis. The remaining nine regions are being after IVF (4) or IVF+ICSI (9) with one affected fetus (trisomy 21, 18, 13, investigated by qPCR in order to investigate large numbers of controls monosomy X; inherited structural autosomal unbalance). Pregnancies (>100) and to conclude whether the observed CNVs are common or resulted in deliveries of healthy newborns. Conclusion: Prenatal related to the fertility problems. Preliminary results show that at least testing for fetal abnormalities is a necessary preventive measure - some of the regions are exclusively detected in the patients. in cases of elevated risk of severe consequences for an offspring’s conclusions. In this study, a small group of patients with MA have health, reduction of the affected fetus is preferred. been thoroughly investigated using array-CGH. No common region was detected in the patient group that was absent in control samples. P04.15 Six promising regions will be further investigated. Diagnostic testing for male Factor infertility using APEX microarrays P04.17 E. Oitmaa1,2, A. Tammiste1,3, S. Suvi2, M. Punab4, M. Remm1, A. Metspalu1,5, A. Association of polymorphisms in eight genes (FAsLG, JmJD1A, Salumets3,6; LOc203413, tEX15, BRDt, OR2W3, iNsR and tAs2R38) with 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, male infertility 2Asper Biotech Ltd, Tartu, Estonia, 3Competence Centre on Reproductive D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, P. Noveski1, T. Plaseski2, G. D. Efremov1; Medicine and Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 4Andrology Centre, Tartu University 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Centre for Genetic Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5The Estonian Genome Center of University of Tartu, Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Tartu, Estonia, 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Republic of, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Tartu, Estonia. Disorders, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. Objective: Male factor infertility (MFI) issues are causative in The analysis of polymorphisms in genes involved in spermatogenesis approximately 15-20% of infertile couples. The unfavourable genetic represents an exciting area of research in genetics of male infertility. background is thought to cause for 15-30% of male factor infertility Polymorphisms in these genes are considered potential risk factors cases. Therefore, the correct determination of genetic basis of which may contribute to the severity of spermatogenic failure. Here we infertility is very important for further treatment of patients. Here, we have investigated the possible association of nine single nucleotide demonstrate a single-step Arrayed Primer Extension (APEX) based polymorphisms (SNPs) in eight different genes (FASLG, JMJD1A, microarray assay for the MFI diagnosis. LOC203413, TEX15, BRDT, OR2W3, INSR and TAS2R38) with male Design & Method: The MFI-APEX assay enables analysis of numerous infertility. The SNPs were selected because they were found to be genetic factors simultaneously, like AZF-microdeletions; Klinefelter associated with azoospermia and /or oligozoospermia in a recent syndrome; mutations in cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance study (Aston KI et al, Hum Reprod, 25:1383-97, 2010). regulator (CFTR) gene; genes involved in folate metabolism; We have analysed a total of 136 men with idiopathic infertility (60 cryptorchidism, hypogonadism, spermatogenic failure linked genes; azoospermic and 76 oligozospermic) and 161 fertile controls. Ninety and polymorphisms in androgen receptor gene. For validation of the three of the infertile men were Macedonians, 32 were Albanians and MFI-APEX assay we used blood samples obtained from 22 infertile 11 men were of other ethnic origin. The control group was composed men and 10 fertile men as controls. of 125 Macedonian and 36 Albanian men. The methodology included Results: We developed MFI-APEX microarray assay for the detection multiplex PCR/SNaPshot method, followed by capillary electrophoresis of genetic factor of the male infertility. Analysis of the APEX results on ABI3130 Genetic Analyzer. revealed that 14 out of 22 patients had Klinefelter syndrome; 2 patients Of the nine SNPs evaluated, we have found significant association had Klinefelter syndrome and mutations in CFTR gene; 2 patients had (p<0.05) for three. The most significant association was found AZFbc microdeletion; 5 patients had AZFc microdeletion; and 1 patient for rs5911500, an intergenic SNP located on the X chromosome. had AZFc deletion and mutation in CFTR gene. No alterations were This SNP as well as rs3088232 in BRDT gene showed association found in fertile men with MFI-APEX assay. with azoospermia both among Macedonians and Albanians, while Reproductive genetics 163 rs11204546 in OR2W3 gene was also associated with azoospermia, P04.20 but only among Macedonian men. Another SNP (rs34605051 in study of t886c sNP in tAs2R38 gene association with JMJD1A gene) was present with higher frequency among all groups of azoospermia and oligospermia in idiopathic infertile men. infertile men in comparison to fertile controls, but the differences were e. siasi1, A. Aleyasin2; not significant. 1Tarbiat modares university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National institute of genetic and biotrchnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P04.18 Back ground- Genome wide SNP association study (GWAS) by Analysis of DLK1 gene and microRNA expression in male microarray method could identified several SNPs that had potential infertility due to idiopathic testicular dysfunction relevance to oligospermia and azoospermia have occurred due to S. Bonache1, R. A. de la Fuente1, F. Algaba2, L. Bassas2, S. Larriba1; idiopathic infertile men. One such study by Aston et al in 2010 has 1IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Fundació Puigvert, reported significant SNPs in European population. The most significant Barcelona, Spain. association found for an intergenic SNP (T886C) in TAS2R38 gene Cellular interactions between germ-line and somatic components of with male infertility. This SNP results in a conservative amino acide the testicular seminiferous tubule form a complex network, and are change of Isolucine to Valin. essential for efficient germ-cell development. Gene expression of Objective- This is the first study to evaluated association between Leydig cells is crucial to maintain male fertility. T886C SNP in TAS2R38 gene with oligospermia or azoospermia in We have assessed the expression profile of DLK1 gene (preferentially idiopathic infertile men in Iranian population. expressed by Leydig cells) and its regulation by miRNAs (involved in methods- This relationship has been studied in 96 idiopathic infertile posttranscriptional gene silencing) in impaired spermatogenesis. men with azoospermia and oligospermia and 100 normal control men. We have analysed DLK1 and three DLK1-target miRNAs (miR-33a, Primer pairs were designed to amplify 192bp fragment contained miR-514 and miR-377) expression levels in testicular biopsies of 33 T886C polymorphism. Analysis of SNP was performed by PCR-RFLP non-obstructive infertile men (patients), who showed total absence and High Resolution Melt (real time PCR-HRM corbett). Amplified of germ cells (SCO; n=14), complete meiotic arrest (MA; n=7) and fragment was sequenced to determine the PCR product and allelic hypospermatogenesis (HS; n=12), and 16 men with obstructive identify. azoospermia and conserved spermatogenesis (controls). The current Results- Genotype frequencies of the TT, TC and CC were as method was the real time RT-PCR (7300 Real Time PCR System and 20.8%, 34.4% and 44.8%, in the case group and 21%, 34% and TaqMan Assays) and the 2-ΔΔCt strategy. PGK1 gene was selected 45% in the control group respectively. The prevalence of tested SNP as normalizer for DLK1 data and RNU6B for miRNA data. The Mann- was approximately similar in both infertile patients and fertile control Whitney U test was used to analyse expression differences between groups. Statistical analysis showed no significant relationship P=0.9 groups. for this SNP (T886C) in TAS2R38 gene. Preliminary results show significant DLK1 over-expression in the three conclusion- This result is indicated that (T886C) in TAS2R38 gene patient subphenotypes compared to controls. The expression levels was not associated with oligospermia and azoospermia that could of the three miRNAs were found significantly increased in the SCO caused idiopatic male infertility in Iranian population. subphenotype. These results suggest that changes in the expression of DLK1 in P04.21 Leydig cells might be associated to spermatogenic impairment. These Gene expression alteration of the YBX2 and DAZ genes is differences in expression are not associated to miR-33a, miR-514 and associated with male factor infertility miR-377 miRNA regulation. These data would contribute to a better F. Raicu, R. Cocoş, L. Bohîlţea; understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying male infertility. University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. Supported by FIS (PI09/01727) and Generalitat de Catalunya Y chromosome microdeletions are the major molecular determinants (CES09/020) for male infertility by removing key-genes for male germ cell development and maintenance. Despite the large number of studies P04.19 about the molecular basis of male infertility the molecular mechanism Role of genetic factors and oxidative stress in male infertility leading to spermatogenesis disruption is still largely unknown. Several J. Thilagavathi, S. Venkatesh, M. B. Shamsi, R. Dada; forms of male infertility can be determined by a common pathogenic All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. mechanism related to alterations in testicular mRNA storage. DAZ and Introduction: Infertility affects 15% of couples in their reproductive YBX2 are the main genes involved in the regulation of the stability age group where 30 to 40% of males are the sole contributor and and storage of male germ cell mRNAs. We previously analyzed majority of these are idiopathic. Methods: The study included 200 men using quantitative real-time SYBR Green PCR assays the YBX2 and with idiopathic infertility and 100 fertile controls. The work involved its direct interacting genes: PRM2, ODF1, TP1, ACTL7B and found cytogenetic and Y chromosome micro-deletion analysis, evaluation large reductions in mRNA levels in all patients with spermatogenic of seminal reactive oxygen species levels by chemiluminescence defects except patients with idiopathic oligozoospermia. Patients with assay and sperm DNA damage by sperm chromatin structure assay idiopathic azoospermia had similar levels of gene expression as those (SCSA). Results and Discussion: Out of 200 infertile men screened, carrying Y chromosome microdeletions independently from their SCOS 13% harbored cytogenetic abnormalities. Azoospermia factor (AZF) or HS phenotype, suggesting a possible link of the selected genes microdeletions were detected in 9.5% infertile men, where AZFc to a common pathway leading to infertility and that variability of the deletion were predominant followed by AZFb and AZFa deletions. This histopathology is related to other genetic and environmental factors. frequency is similar to that reported in French & Danish population. Further investigations revealed that DAZ gene was not expressed Level of ROS in both washed and neat semen was found to be in six patients without the AZFc deletion in the peripheral blood as significantly (P<0.0001) higher in infertile men compared to controls. expected. Testis biopsy was obtained from patients with obstructive The average mean DNA fragmentation index (DFI) in infertile men azoospermia (10 normospermic controls) and infertile male (10 with Y was found to be 40.85% which was significantly higher (p<0.0001) microdeletions and 10 with idiopathic infertility) with the histopathology compared to average mean DFI (25.62%) in controls. Conclusion: ranged from SCOS to severe hypospermatogenesis Cytogenetic abnormalities and Yq microdeletions are present in about 22% of men with idiopathic infertility. Analysis of sperm DFI and the cut P04.22 off level of 30.42% is useful to predict outcome of ART as conventional Association of b2/b3 deletion with spermatogenic failure semen analysis is a moderate predictor of fertility potential. Early P. Noveski1, T. Plaseski2, G. D. Efremov1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; detection of OS and suitable antioxidants therapy may prevent further 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts; Research Centre for Genetic deterioration of semen quality and improves chances of fertilization Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav as it improves membrane integrity. Thus genetic analysis, assessment Republic of, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic of ROS levels & DFI has both diagnostic and prognostic capabilities. Disorders, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. The b2/b3 deletion removes 1.8Mb of the AZFc region on the Y chromosome, including 12 members of 8 testis-specific gene families. Reproductive genetics 164 It was suggested that geographical and ethnic differences might affect materials and methods: A total of 100 Iranian azoospermic infertile the Y chromosomal background and phenotypic expression of this men was selected for the molecular study of Y chromosome deletion. The association of the b2/b3 deletion with male infertility microdeletions and mutations in the AR gene. The presence of eight has been reported in Chinese men, whereas no predisposition was sequence tagged site (STS) markers from AZF region was investigated detected in several other populations. The b2/b3 deletion is found using multiplex PCR. Screening for AR gene mutation was performed fixed in the Y haplogroup N which is widely distributed among men in using PCR-SSCP (Single-strand conformational polymorphism) and the Northern Europe. It is present with low frequencies among other sequencing. European populations. We studied the occurrence of partial AZFc Results: 12% of the patients showed Y chromosome microdeletions deletions among 77 men with azoospermia, 93 with oligozoospermia, and among these patients, deletion in AZFb region was the most 44 normozoospermic individuals with unexplained couple infertility frequent (66.67%). PCR-SSCP and sequencing analysis revealed a and 233 fertile controls (proven fathers). The methodology included novel 1510C→A transversion in the exon 1 of the AR gene resulted in analysis of AZFc specific STS markers, DAZ and CDY gene dosage p.Pro504Thr substitution. Analysis of CAG repeats in the exon 1 of the and single nucleotide variants. The Y chromosome haplogroups were AR gene showed a significant statistical difference between the CAG determined by 28 Y-chromosome SNP markers, which were typed length in the patients and fertile controls (P=0.014). by multiplex PCR/SNaPshot reactions. We found 6 men with b2/b3 conclusion: According to the relatively high incidence of Y deletion, one azoospermic men, 4 oligozoospermic and one fertile chromosome microdeletions among Iranian azoospermic patients control. The b2/b3 deletion was significantly more frequent among molecular screening should be advised to infertile men before using men with impaired spermatogenesis (5 out of 170 men or 2,9%) than assisted reproductive treatments. Furthermore, the present study among fertile controls (1 out of 233 or 0,4%; p=0,04). The highest indicates that molecular analyses of AR gene play an important role frequency was present in oligozoospermic men (4,3%; p=0,01). There in diagnosing the cause of infertility in patients with azoospermia and was a difference in the distribution of the Y haplogroups among males therefore, may be useful for genetic counseling of candidates for with b2/b3 deletion; all five infertile men belonged to haplogroup E3b1, assisted reproductive techniques. while the only fertile men belonged to haplogroup N3. P04.25 P04.23 mutation analyses of the tsPYL1 gene in infertile patients with High prevalence of two Y chromosomal haplogroups N1c1-m178 azoospermia, cryptozoospermia or oligozoospermia and N(xm178) in Russian infertile men with b2/b3 deletion P. Javaher-Haghighi1, M. Stuhrmann1, C. Wilke1, E. Frenzel1, G. Manukjan1, F. V. B. Chernykh, T. M. Sorokina, L. V. Shileiko, L. F. Kurilo, O. P. Balanovsky, Dechend2, E. Schwaab3, C. Hübner1, J. Schmidtke1, S. Schubert1; M. A. Kuznetsova, A. V. Shanko, E. V. Balanovskaya, O. P. Ryzhkova, A. V. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, Polyakov; 2Laboratory of Cytogenetic and Molecular Genetics, Hildesheim, Germany, Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. 3Human Genetic Practice, Wiesbaden, Germany. An association between Y chromosome deletion b2/b3 and haplogroup Background: Recently, mutations in the TSPYL1 gene have been N is well defined. The aim of our study was to evaluate a frequency reported to be associated with an autosomal recessive sudden infant of partial AZFc deletions and to analyze of Y haplogroups in Russian death with dysgenesis of the testes syndrome (SIDDT) and with 46,XY infertile men with b2/b3 deletion. disorder of sex development (DSD) and male idiopathic infertility, materials and methods: We screened 2933 infertile Russian men for respectively. However, the exact function of TSPYL1 in testicular Y microdeletions. Complete AZF deletions were detected according development and spermatogenesis is currently uncertain. to Laboratory guidelines EAA/EMQN (1999). Partial AZFc deletions Methods: Mutation analysis was performed for TSPYL1 in a cohort were tested by mPCR for STSs: sY142, sY1197, sY1192, sY1291, of 106 infertile men with idiopathic non-obstructive azoospermia, sY1206, sY1054, sY1125. Y haplogroups were analyzed in randomly cryptozoospermia and oligozoospermia, and in a control group of up to selected 158 individuals with b2/b3 deletions. DNA samples have been 105 men with proven paternity. genotyped by the set of Y chromosomal SNPs to identify the association Results: 8 known SNPs were detected in the TSPYL1 gene of with Y haplogroups. SNP typing was performed by the custom TaqMan which none was significantly associated with male infertility. One assays on the real-time PCR instrument 7900 (Applied Biosystems). azoospermic man was heterozygous for the yet undescribed missense Results: Partial AZFc deletions were found in 12.1% infertile men. The mutation c.419C>G (p.Ser140Cys). This sequence variation was not b2/b3 deletion was detected in 8.6% individuals. The patients with b2/ observed in 102 fertile men with proven paternity. Additionally, one out b3 deletions presented with a wide range of spermatogenetic failure, of 101 fertile men was shown to be heterozygous for the missense at that severe oligozoospermia to azoospermia were prevalent. About change c.487G>A (p.Val163Ile). The p.Val163Ile variant was not 80% of samples fall into haplogroup N1c1-M178, 10% fall into the identified in 106 infertile men. We analyzed both missense mutations related haplogroup N-LLY22 (xM178), and only the rest 10% fall into with the online-softwares “Mutation Taster” (www.mutationtaster.org), other haplogroups, including R1a-M198. Note, that 90% of the studied “PolyPhen2” (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph2/) and “PMut” individuals were ethnic Russians, and the obtained frequencies of (http://mmb.pcb.ub.es/PMut/), and none of these programs predicted Y haplogroups drastically differ from the frequencies in the general a disease causing effect for c.419C>G (p.Ser140Cys) and c.487G>A Russian population. (p.Val163Ile), respectively. These assessments await confirmation by conclusion: The b2/b3 deletion is commonest Y chromosome functional studies. microdeletion in Russian infertile men. We conclude that this Conclusions: Mutations in the TSPYL1 gene do not seem to play a deletion exhibit strong association with two related Y chromosomal major role in the pathogenesis of idiopathic male infertility. Mutation haplogroups: N1c1-M178 and N-LLY22(xM178). screening of the TSPYL1 gene can currently not be recommended in diagnostics of idiopathic male infertility. P04.24 the study of Y chromosome microdeletions and mutations in P04.26 the androgen receptor gene in iranian patients with idiopathic mtHFR c677t and A1298c mutations in couples with infertility non-obstructive azoospermia problems R. Mirfakhraie1, M. Montazeri1, S. M. Kalantar2, N. Salsabili3; S. Stangler Herodez1, B. Zagradisnik1, K. Zerjavic2, A. Erjavec Skerget1, V. 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotecnology, Tehran, Islamic Vlaisavljević3, N. Kokalj Vokac1,4; Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Department, Research & Clinical Centre for Infertility, 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Clinical Centre Maribor, SI- Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3IVF Department, Mirza Kouchak Khan Hospital, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 2Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Clinical Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Reproductive Medicine introduction: Genetic factors, including Y chromosome microdeletions and Gynecologic Endocrinology, University Clinical Centre Maribor, SI-2000 and androgen receptor (AR) gene mutations are responsible for male Maribor, Slovenia, 4Medical Faculty, University of Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, infertility. The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of AZF Slovenia. deletions and the prevalence of AR gene mutations among Iranian INTRODUCTION. Infertility is a worldwide reproductive health infertile men with idiopathic non-obstructive azoospermia. problem that affects approximately 15% of married couples. Reproductive genetics 165 Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) C677T and A1298C P04.28 mutations are associated with recurrent spontaneous abortions and High incidence of Y-chromosome AZF microdeletions and AZFc may be overrepresented in couples who have fertility problems or have region partial deletions among azoospermic/oligospermic males experienced recurrent miscarriages. In this study we have analyzed from Western Ukraine the MTHFR C677T and A1298C genotype distributions in couples with H. Makukh1, M. Tyrkus1, D. Zastavna1, O. Hnateyko1, S. Gavrylyshyn2; unexplained fertility problems and healthy controls. 1State institution ï¿½Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical METHODS. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples and Science of Ukraineï¿½, Lviv, Ukraine, 2Prycarpatian Center of Human allele specific PCR was performed for the detection of each mutation. Reproductions,, Ivano-Frankivsk, Ukraine. The MTHFR C677T and A1298C mutation frequencies between Genes of AZF regions of Y chromosome play an essential role patient groups and the control groups were analyzed using the Chi- in spermatogenesis. The objective of the study was to establish square test. P-values of <0.05 were taken as statistically significant. frequency and spectrum of Y-chromosome microdeletions and AZFc RESULTS. Comparison of combined MTHFR C677T/A1298C region partial deletions among idiopathic azoospermic/oligospermic genotype distributions between probands and controls is presented males from Western Ukraine. in table. Two hundred idiopathic infertile men (100 with azoospermia and 100 severe oligospermia) and one hundred random fertile men, all with Female male Genotype infertility controls Female controls male controls karyotype 46, XY from western region of Ukraine were included in the mtHFR probands probands probands study. DNA of the above samples was isolated using the salting out (n = 222) (n = (n = c677t/A1298c (n = 200) (n = 100) (n = 100) method and microdeletions of AZF region and AZFc partial deletions 111) 111) were analyzed by multiplex PCR. cc/AA 17 21 8 10 9 11 AZF microdeletions were detected among 13.0% males with cc/Ac 35 49 20 22 15 27 azoospermia (p=0.0001) and 8.0% (p=0.004) males with severe cc/cc 26 24 11 15 15 9 oligospermia: AZFa subregion was deleted in one patient (4.8%), AZFb ct/AA 36 45 ) 17 22 19 23 - 3 (14.3%), AZFb+c - 7 (33.3%), AZFc - 10 (47.6%) As AZFc subregion ct/Ac 49 47 25 24 24 23 was the most frequently altered the study of AZFc partial deletions was ct/cc 6 8 3 4 3 4 done. 8.0% azoospermic/oligospermic men without AZF microdeletions were detected to have AZFc partial deletions. The analysis of AZFc tt/AA 20 25 11 11 9 14 partial deletions has shown the presence of AZFc gr/gr deletion among tt/Ac 8 1 3 1 5 0 2.5% persons (mainly with oligospermia), b2/b3 deletions - 4.5% (three tt/cc 3 2 2 2 1 0 with aspermia and six with oligoastenoteratospermia) and absence of chi square (all samples vs. controls) 9.25, p = 0.03 (df = 8) sY1291 locus in 1.0% of patients. chi square (female infertility vs. femal controls) 1.33, p = 0.72 (df = 8) No carriers of AZF microdeletions or partial AZFc deletions were chi square (male samples vs. male controls) 13.23, p < 0.001 (df = 8) identified among control group of fertile men. The differences in Y-chromosomal partial AZFc deletions frequencies between infertile CONCLUSIONS. The present finding indicates that significant men (azoospermic/oligospermic) versus group of fertile men are difference in the prevalence of MTHFR C677T/A1298C mutations significant (p=0.004) and substantiated AZFc partial deletion testing can be found in probands with fertility problems when compared with for practical purposes. controls without an infertility history. However, only male probands contributed to the association indicating that MTHFR mutation may P04.29 be a gender specific factor which affects fertility of grown adults. The Detection of DNA fragmentation in human spermatozoa of presence of combined MTHFR C677T/A1298C genotypes highly patients with asthenozoospermia increased the risk of men infertility. Our presented data highlight the S. Brahem, M. Mehdi, H. Landolsi, H. Ghédir, A. Bennour, R. Berguiga, I. Ben importance of MTHFR mutation screening in couples with unexplained Abdallah, S. Bouraoui, N. Bou Ali, H. Ben Khélifa, H. Elghezal, A. Saad; infertility, especially by male adults. Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Biologie Moléculaire et Biologie de la Reproduction Humaines, sousse, Tunisia. P04.27 Objective: The aim of the present study was to evaluate levels of Disruption of the gene for zona pellucida binding protein sperm nuclear DNA fragmentation in a population of infertile men with detected by array cGH in male infertility asthenozoospermia (low motility) and to compare the results from that V. Damyanova, I. Dimova, A. Savov, D. Nesheva, S. Hadjidekova, B. Rukova, of fertile population. R. Jivkova, V. Nikolova, I. Vatev, D. Toncheva; materials and methods: Semen samples were collected from 30 Medical faculty, Sofia, Bulgaria. asthenozoospermic infertile men selected from couples attending the The infertility affects 10-15% of all couples. In about 40% of the cases infertility clinic with a history of infertility ≥ 1 year and 30 healthy fertile the male factor is reported to be the main reason for unsuccessful men with normal semen parameters served as the control group. fertilization. Although in 70% of male factor infertility the etiology is After routine sperm analysis according Word Health Organisation recognizable, in the remaining 30% the reason is unknown and the (WHO) guidelines, DNA fragmentation was determined using the male infertility is named idiopathic. In the current study, we selected terminal desoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated deoxyuridine 14 patients with idiopathic infertility, affected by azoospermia and triphosphate biotin nick-end labeling (TUNEL) assay. Approximately oligoasthenoteratozoospermia. All patients were subjected to DNA 500 cells were counted, and the percentage of spermatozoa with analysis for deletions of Y chromosome and cytogenetic analysis for fragmented DNA (DFI) was calculated. chromosomal aberrations. After these analyses, the patients without Results: There are no significant differences in the mean of participant’s such kind of abnormalities were further analyzed by array CGH. age, sperm concentration, normal sperm morphology in two groups Cytogenetic analysis revealed two patients with chromosomal but the mean of sperm motility of fertile males was significantly higher mutations - inv(9)(p11;q13) and t(Y;9)(q12.3;q21.1). Other two patients than that of asthenozoospermic males. were detected to have deletions of AZFc region of Y-chromosome. The difference was not significant between the percentage of Thus, we applied array CGH analysis for the ten patients without DNA fragmentation in patients with asthenozoospermia and the chromosomal or Y-chromosome aberrations. Despite of the presence normozoospermics men (9.46 ± 8.68 and 8.19 ± 6.84). In addition, of known polymorphisms, we established copy number alteration in no significant correlation was found between the degree of 17q12-17q21.2 - a region, containing the gene for zona pellucida asthenozoospermia and the DFI value in the asthenozoospermic binding protein ZPBP2. This protein plays a crucial role for the proper group, when this group was subdivided into moderate, severe, and spermatogenesis. Our results prompted for investigation of this gene extreme asthenozoospermia. and protein as a potential candidate for spermatogenic failure. conclusion: Asthenozoospermia was not associated with an increase of DNA fragmentation. So impairment of sperm motility is not a critical parameter for analysis of sperm DNA damage.Reproductive genetics 166 P04.30 P04.32 Evaluation of SHOX duplications in Finnish patients with Pleiotropic effects of human Growth Hormone/chorionic müllerian aplasia somatomammotropin (hGH/csH) genes on the fetal growth and M. Sandbacka1,2, M. Puhakka2, M. Halttunen3, V. Jokimaa4, H. Laivuori2,5, K. maternal metabolism Aittomäki1,6; J. Männik1, P. Vaas1,2,3, K. Rull1,2,3, P. Teesalu3, M. Laan1; 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Haartman Institute, 1Department of Biotechnology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tartu 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Helsinki University Central University Hospital Womens’s Clinic, Tartu, Estonia. Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The hGH/CSH locus at 17q22-24, consisting of a pituitary-expressed University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 5Women’s Health Research Program, GH1 and four placenta-expressed genes GH2, CSH1, CSH2, and University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, CSHL1, is implicated in regulation of postnatal and intrauterine growth, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. and in the maternal metabolic adaptation to pregnancy. Duplications of the short stature homeobox (SHOX) gene have been We hypothesized that the mRNA expression profiles, including reported in some patients with Müllerian aplasia (MA), a reproductive alternative splice-products of placental hGH/CSH genes contribute to disorder presenting as congenital absence of uterus and upper two the determination of the birthweight and normal course of pregnancy. To third of the vagina. We have performed MLPA (Multiplex Ligation- address this question we developed a sensitive, fluorescently labeled dependent Probe Amplification) studies in a cohort of 98 Finnish semi-quantitative RT-PCR assay coupled with gene-specific restriction patients with MA (sporadic, N=96 and familial, N=2) and 118 healthy resolved on an ABI capillary electrophoresis. The detailed profile of women in order to identify SHOX duplications. A commercial kit alternative transcripts of GH2, CSH1, CSH2, and CSHL1 genes in (SALSA MLPA kit PO18-E1 SHOX, MRC Holland) including probes placental samples of REPROMETA collection from uncomplicated for each exon of SHOX as well as probes for regulatory areas of the term pregnancies was determined in association with the birthweight gene were used in the analysis. All patients and controls showed of newborns, grouped as appropriate-for-gestational-age (AGA; n=23), normal amplification of SHOX. Aberrant amplifications for regions small-for-gestational-age (SGA; n=15), and large-for-gestational-age downstream of SHOX were detected in a few patients and in some of (LGA; n=34), and by maternal pregnancy-related conditions of pre- the healthy controls. However, these observed copy number changes eclampsia (PE; n=17) and gestational diabetes mellitus (GD; n=11). were reported in the Database of Genomic Variants (http://projects. The majority of pregnancies with SGA newborn show down-regulation tcag.ca/variation), indicating that these were harmless polymorphisms. of the entire hGH/CSH cluster in placenta, while in case of LGA the Our MLPA results from a large cohort of patients with MA suggest that expression of CSH1-1, CSH2-1 and CSHL1-4 mRNA transcripts duplications of SHOX are not a frequent cause of the disorder. Further in placenta is significantly increased compared to AGA newborns genetic studies are needed to find out the underlying cause(es) for (P<0.0001, P=0.009, P=0.002, respectively) (Männik et al., 2010, J MA. Clin Endocrinol Metab. 95:2433-42). Similarly, the entire hGH/CSH cluster shows reduced expression in placentas of PE compared P04.31 to uncomplicated pregnancies. In case of GD, the individual genes the Association between LH, FsH, testosterone hormones’ in hGH/CSH cluster demonstrate differential expression pattern serum levels and prevalence of gr/gr, b1/b2, b2/b3 compared to uncomplicated pregnancies. polymorphisms in iranian oligozoospermia males Our results show that the expression level of placental hGH/CSH genes M. Ataei1, N. Salsabili2, P. Yaghmaei1, N. Hayati1, R. Mirfakhraei3, M. correlates with fetal growth and may influence maternal metabolism. Montazeri3, M. Ataei Talebi1; 1Science and Research branch of Islamic Azad University, tehran, Islamic P04.33 Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, clinical relevance of sF-1 (NR5A1) gene mutation screening in 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic primary ovarian insufficiency Republic of Iran. L. M. de With1, F. Janse1, B. C. J. M. Fauser1, C. B. Lambalk2, J. S. E. Laven3, Introduction: Infertility is a main healthy problem. About 10-15% A. J. Goverde1, J. C. Giltay1; of couples suffer this problem and in the 50 %, the male factor 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2VU MC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, affects. The human Y chromosome contains essential genes for 3Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. spermatogenesis specially those which are located on four major introduction: Steroidogenic Factor-1 (SF-1), encoded by the NR5A1 intervals defined as AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd. Partial deletions gene, regulates the transcription of multiple genes associated with of the AZFc region is reported as a significant risk factor for oligo-/ steroidogenesis, sexual development and reproduction. Recently azoospermia. The main purpose of this study is to investigate the NR5A1 mutations were found to be associated with sporadic and association between Testosterone, FSH, LH serum levels and the familial primary ovarian insufficiency (POI). The high mutation rate in prevalence of partial deletions in the AZFc region (gr/gr, b1/b2, b2/b3) the previously published paper prompted us to further establish the in Iranian oligozoospermia males. significance of NR5A1 mutations in a large cohort of women with POI. Material and methods: Multiplex PCR technique and agarose gel materials & methods: In 2005 a nationwide phenotype and genotype electrophoresis were used to assess complete and partial deletions study on POI was initiated in the Netherlands; all study cases were in 30 oligozoospermia infertile and 50 fertile men, and Levels of included for the current study. The entire coding region (exon 2-7) and hormones were measured by Imunoenzymatic kit (EIA) in all samples. splice sites of the NR5A1 gene were PCR-amplified and sequenced. Results: 3.3% of the patients showed AZFb deletion but no The pathogenicity of identified mutations was determined with splice microdeletion was detected in the control samples. In AZFc region, site involvement, Align-GVGD class and Grantham scores. 17% patients showed deletions, in which 13.7% had gr/gr and 3.4% Results: 383 Women with POI were included, 77 of them had a had b2/b3 deletions. 12% of the healthy individuals showed partial family history for POI. Adrenal dysfunction was excluded in all women. deletions, including gr/gr (10%) and b2/b3(2%). No significant Five non conservative missense mutations (mutation rate 1.3%) in 3 correlation was detected between the presence of gr/gr microdeletion sporadic and 2 familial cases of POI were found. Grantham variations and the testosterone serum level (p=0.856). However, the serum were 29, 64, 98, 99, and 113. Splice sites were not involved. Align- levels for FSH and LH were significantly higher in patients with gr/gr GVGD classes ranged from C0 to C25, indicating low to intermediate microdeletion (p=0.0001, p=0.0001 respectively). pathogenicity. Conclusion: The present study suggests that applying molecular conclusions: The prevalence of NR5A1 mutations in a large investigation in oligozoospermia patients with increased serum levels cohort of women with POI (1.3%) is lower than published previously. for FSH and LH may be informative before using assisted reproductive Furthermore, low to intermediate pathogenicity was predicted for treatments. these mutations. There seems to be limited value for the inclusion of SF-1 gene mutation screening in the diagnostic work-up for women with POI.Reproductive genetics 167 P04.34 Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, Norway, Tromsø, the frequency of DNA- repair and cell cycle control Norway, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Akershus University polymorphisms and pregnancy Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, Oslo, Norway, 4Occupational and Environmental V. Lotnik, E. Mashkina, T. Shkurat; Medicine, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, TROMSOE, Research Institute of Biology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Norway, 5Women’s Health and Perinatology Research Group, Department of Russian Federation. Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, Norway, Recently increasing attention is paid to the study of allelic polymorphism TROMSOE, Norway, 6Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of genes related to gene regulatory network of pregnancy pathology. Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, Tromsø, Norway. The aim of this work was to study the frequency of polymorphic genes We reported previously that mRNA levels of laeverin, a membrane- of DNA-repair APEX 1 (APE 1) (Asp148Glu), XPD (Lys751Gln), XPG bound aminopeptidase, are 10-fold up-regulated in placentas from (Asp1104His), XRCC 1 (Arg194Trp), hOGG 1 (Ser326Cys ) and cell severely preeclamptic women compared to their healthy controls. In the cycle control CHEK 2 (1100delC) in women with physiological (control present study, using immunofluorescence of tissue sections and tissue group) and pathological (miscarriage) pregnancy. The investigated arrays, we demonstrate a shift in laeverin protein expression from material included samples of the endometrium (E), chorion (Ch) the cell membrane in healthy trophoblast to cytosol in preeclampsia. obtained after medical or spontaneous abortion, as well as blood (B), Electronmicroscopy indicated that laeverin is retained in the Golgi taken from the cubital vein. apparatus in preeclamptic placentas. Additionally, we tested the In reviewing the study groups for the presence of a combination of hypothesis that laeverin gene-silencing reduces the invasiveness of the several unfavorable genetic factors revealed that in women with cell line HTR-8/SVneo trophoblasts through a basement membrane- recurrent miscarriages 3.1% (Ch), 3.7% (E) were simultaneously like matrix (Matrigel). Trophoblast invasion was reduced by 58% in heterozygotes for five genes, which were not observed in the control laeverin knock-out cells compared to controls. Wound healing assay group. Moreover, in the group with pathological pregnancy the number demonstrated reduced migration of trophoblast cell line transfected of heterozygotes for the four genes simultaneously increased: 18,7% with siRNA against laeverin. We further performed gene expression (Ch), 18.5% (E) 5,9% (B) (5.9% (Ch), 16,7% (E) 0% (K) in the control profiling using RT2 Profiler TM PCR Array in order to find the molecular group, respectively). It is important to note that in the group with the pathways that might be affected by laeverin-silencing. Among the 84 pathology of pregnancy 6.3% (Ch), 3.7% (E) were homozygous for genes present on the array, three genes were significantly (>4-fold) polymorphic alleles of two genes simultaneously - APEX 1 and XPD, down-regulated: integrin alpha-2 (39-fold), matrix metalloproteinase 13,6% (B) - homozygotes for polymorphic alleles of three genes 1 (36-fold) and integrin beta-3 (5-fold). In conclusion, laeverin is up- simultaneously - APEX 1, XPD, hOGG 1. regulated in the preeclamptic placenta both at transcriptional and Analyzing the data, it was found that the combination of certain protein level. It appears to regulate trophoblast invasion by affecting genotypes in polymorphic loci of DNA-repair and cell cycle control cell adhesion molecules and degradation of the extracellular matrix genes may influence on susceptibility to reproductive pathology. and thus might have a role in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia. P04.35 P04.37 Risk assessment of ARt and its related factors in the A simple approach for detecting novel short-tandem repeat development of Prader - Willi syndrome (stR) markers for preimplantation genetic diagnosis K. Matsubara1,2, N. Murakami2, S. Sakazume2, Y. Ooto2, T. Ogata1, T. Nagai2; M. Malcov, T. Frumkin, V. Gold, S. Peleg, D. Ben Yosef, N. Mey Raz, B. Almog, 1National Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan, A. Amit, Y. Yaron; 2Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Saitama, Japan. Racine IVF Unit, Department of Ob/Gyn, Lis Maternity Hospital, Sourasky To examine whether assisted reproductive technology (ART) and its Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Tel Aviv, Israel. related factors can be a risk factor for the development of Prader-Willi Introduction: Misdiagnosis in PGD occurs mainly due to allele drop- syndrome (PWS), we studied 74 Japanese PWS patients who were out (ADO), but can be prevented by the use of flanking polymorphic born during the years 1997-2008 when statistical data on ART are markers (most commonly CA-repeats). The reliability of diagnosis available in Japan. depends on the number, heterozygosity and informativity of such Of the 74 patients, seven were born after ART (six after ICSI and one markers. When database search yields insufficient results, it is after IVF). Molecular studies revealed underlying genetic causes in essential to discover novel markers. all patients, including the seven patients born after ART of whom two Aim: To describe a simple approach for detecting novel locus-specific had deletion of the paternally derived 15q imprinted region and five polymorphic markers. had trisomy rescue type upd(15)mat (TR-upd(15)mat). The maternal Material and Methods: To detect CA-repeats, we copy the sequence of ages at birth were increased in PWS patients conceived after ART interest spanning 1 Mb upstream and downstream from the mutation (36-45 years), especially in those with TR-upd(15)mat (38-45 years), site into a MS Word file. Then we search this sequence using the Ctrl-F consistent with the notion that the advanced maternal age is a risk function for (CA)n or (TG)n, (where n>10). Such STRs will often be factor for the development of TR-upd(15)mat. polymorphic. Primers are then designed for each site. A marker is The frequency of births after ART was significantly higher in PWS considered informative when the CA repeat size is different among the patients than in the general population (P=2.2×10-9), even after various alleles in family members. adjusting maternal ages (≥35 years) (P=5.4×10-6). Among PWS Results: Over the last 8 years we performed PGD for 65 different patients, however, although the relative frequency of TR-upd(15) disease genes, using 545 flanking polymorphic markers. Of these, mat was significantly higher in patients conceived after ART than in 344 (63.1%) were obtained using published data. However, for more those conceived naturally (P =0.008), it became non-significant after than 20 disease genes, with insufficient informative markers, we were adjusting maternal ages (≥35 years) between the two groups (P=0.22). able to detect an additional 201 (36.9%) novel CA-repeats using The results imply that ART and/or ART-related parental and this approach. More than 90% of these sites indeed proved to be environmental factors can be a risk factor for PWS in general. In polymorphic. This allowed the use of at least 4 informative markers for addition, the relative predominance of TR-upd(15)mat in patients born each case of PGD. after ART is primarily ascribed to an ART-related maternal age factor Conclusion : We demonstrated a simple approach for search of novel rather than ART itself. informative CA-repeats that allows maximizing accuracy in PGD and prevention of ADO. This approach is now routinely used in our PGD P04.36 lab. Laeverin expression and its role in invasion and migration of human trophoblast cells: Possible implications in the pathogenesis of preeclampsia M. Nystad1,2, V. Sitras3, M. Larsen4, G. Acharya5,6; 1Division of Child and Adolescent Health, Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway, TROMSOE, Norway, 2Women’s Health and Perinatology Research Group, Department of Clinical Reproductive genetics 168 P04.38 P04.40 Deduction of meiotic segregation patterns by pachytene shape Preimplantation genetic aneuploidy screening by fluorescent in analysis in PGD for translocation carriers situ hybridization T. Frumkin, M. Malcov, D. Ben Yosef, T. Schwartz, A. Carmon, F. Azem, B. E. Karaca1, E. Tavmergen Göker2, B. Durmaz1, A. Akdogan2, C. Gunduz3, M. Almog, A. Amit, Y. Yaron; Bilgin2, E. Tavmergen2, F. Ozkinay1; Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel. 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine,Department of Medical Genetics, izmir, Introduction: In translocation carriers, meiosis produces different Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Assisted Reproductive Techniques segregation variants. Most studies of segregation variant frequencies Unit of Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, izmir, Turkey, 3Ege University were obtained from observations of viable probands. PGD provides a Faculty of Medicine,Department of Medical Biology, izmir, Turkey. unique insight into this phenomenon. Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is a method used to Aim: Deduction of meiotic segregation patterns as assessed in identify genetic defects in embryos created through intracytoplasmic embryos of translocation carriers undergoing PGD. sperm injection (ICSI) or in vitro fertilization (IVF). Single gene M&M: Ninety PGD cycles were performed for 35 translocation defects, hereditary chromosomal disorders (especially couples carriers. Two blastomeres were aspirated from each embryo for FISH with translocations carriers) and aneuploidy screening are the most analysis. The resulting segregation variants were deduced. Observed frequent indications for PGD. The aim of the study is to evaluate frequencies of different segregants were compared to predicted the incidence of embryo aneuploidy and pregnancy outcome rates. frequencies, based on pachytene shape analysis, taking into account Thirty-three ICSI/IVF patients with various indications who referred to the length of the centric versus the translocated fragments. Assisted Reproductive Techniques Unit of Department of Obstetrics Results: Overall 583 embryos were analyzed: 441 from reciprocal and Gynecology were included in the study between 2008-2010 years. translocation carriers and 142 from Robertsonian translocations. In Biopsies are performed in their 3rd day embryos with 6-8 blastomers reciprocal translocations, alternate segregation (balanced) was seen and aneuploidy screening was performed by fluorescent in situ in 23.1% of embryos, whereas most were unbalanced (adjacent-1 in hybridization (FISH) method on the same day. Aneuploidy screening 29.4%; adjacent-2 in 5.9%; 3:1 segregation in 25.6%; and 16% had for chromosomes 13, 16, 18, 21 and 22 were analyzed except low other anomalies).The overall incidence of unbalanced embryos was grade Turner mosaicism cases. In these cases X and Y chromosomes 71.4%, but was significantly higher in reciprocal translocations. In most were analyzed instead of chromosomes 16 and 22. Blastomere biopsy translocations, adjacent-2 segregation was rare, but when present, was performed on 165 embryos, which had grade I or II quality. The the rate of balanced gametes was lower. There was no significant indications for PGD were as follows; history of a recurrent implantation difference in the rate of unbalanced embryos between female and failure (no: 17, 51.5%), low grade Turner mosaicism (no: 10, 30%), male carriers. Finally, the distribution of segregation modes was recurrent abortion (no:5, 15%) and Klinefelter syndrome (no: 1, 3.5%). predicted correctly in 82%. Embryo transfer was performed in 23 patients after PGD, chemical and Conclusions: Translocation carriers have a significantly high frequency clinical pregnancy rates were 3 (13%) and 8 (34%), respectively. In of unbalanced embryos, more so among reciprocal translocation conclusion PGD seems to be an effective method in ICSI/IVF patients carriers. In PGD, the frequencies of the different segregation patterns with chromosomal anomalies. can be predicted by pachytene shape analysis. Some translocations predispose to a higher rate of unbalanced gametes, as compared to P04.41 others. Health of babies born after Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis; results of a multi-centre retrospective study piloting a parental P04.39 questionnaire Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for spinal muscular atrophy A. Lashwood1, T. Solomonides2, M. Olive2, G. Harton3, C. Patch4, F. Flinter1; at the blastocyst stage 1Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis, Guy’s Hospital, London, C. Hung1,2, S. Chen3, S. Lin3,4, C. Lee4, Y. Su1,2,3; United Kingdom, 2University West of England, Bristol, United Kingdom, 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of 3Reprogenetics, Livingston, NJ, United States, 4Clinical Genetics, Guy’s Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan Hospital, London, United Kingdom. University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, Follow up of babies born after preimplantation genetic diagnosis and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department screening (PGD/PGS) is recommended and international collaboration of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, is required as the number of PGD babies born is low. A pilot parental Taiwan. postal questionnaire was developed to retrospectively collect Background: Approximately 94% of spinal muscular atrophy information about treatment cycles, pregnancy, birth, longer term child (SMA) cases are caused by common homozygous absence of the health and development. An open source relational database was SMN1 gene. Although preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is constructed using MySQL. an alternative option for couples at risk of having a child with single Six European PGD centres provided data on 401 deliveries; 112 gene disorder, blastomere biopsy has been employed in most in vitro PGD, 288 PGS cycles and one for both. Between December 1999 fertilization procedures. and October 2007 493 babies were born: 307(62.3%) singletons, 180 Methods: In the present study, we validated and applied protocol (36.5%) twins & 6(1.2%) triplets (2 not known). Mean birth weights clinically for PGD through the use of blastocyst biopsy, whole genome were 3.17, 2.55 and 1.67kgs respectively. Eighty one percent of amplification, mini-sequencing genotype coupling with genetic linkage babies were born at ≥36 wks, 14.5% between 30-36 wks and 3.2% ≤ of SMN gene involving three informative microsatellite markers, and 30 wks gestation. Neonatal problems occurred in 129 babies (26%), thawed embryo transfer. We report data to identify the SMN1 gene 113 babies (22.9%) requiring special care. Nine abnormalities were deletion on eighteen clinical embryos obtained from one participating recorded in 7 babies (1.42%) included tongue tie, cardiac anomalies, couple, where both partners are heterozygous SMA carriers with hip dysplasia, talipes, hypospadias & undescended testes. Since birth 1-SMN1/3-SMN2 genotypes. 378 (76.7%) babies were recorded as having no health problems. Results: Approximately 78% (14/18) of blastocysts were successfully The study allowed the development of standardised nomenclature amplified in a single PGD cycle. Among these embryos, ten (72%, for data capture which used in a web based format, could provide 10/14) were diagnosed as unaffected, two (14%, 2/14) as affected, and easy access to a wide demographic population for prospective data two embryos (14%, 2/14) had no conclusive diagnosis due to allele collection. The birth abnormality rate in this cohort is low at 1.42%. drop-out (ADO). Two unaffected embryos were thawed and transferred However 22.9% of PGD infants required special care and the incidence in the next cycle resulting in a singleton pregnancy, and the birth of a of health problems since birth was 23.3%. Further analysis of these healthy girl who carries the 1-SMN1/3-SMN2 genotype. health problems is required to determine major & minor rates. Conclusions: The strategy of PGD using blastocyst biopsy and thawed embryo transfer increased the reliability of the results and permitted more time for the execution of molecular diagnosis. The improved protocol for PGD could be adopted for other monogenic diseases in the future.Reproductive genetics 169 P04.42 P04.44 ten years experience of prenatal diagnosis and preimplantation Preimplantation diagnosis of monogenic diseases in GENNEt genetic diagnosis for Huntington disease in the Netherlands M. Putzová, I. Eliášová, I. Soldátová, V. Krutílková, A. Langerová, J. Míka, R. M. C. Van Rij1, P. de Koning Gans2, M. van Belzen3, C. E. M. de Die1, E. K. Křen, D. Stejskal; Bijlsma2, J. P. M. Geraedts1; GENNET, s.r.o., Praha 7, Czech Republic. 1Dept. Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, In 2007 we completed the first in vitro fertilization cycle (IVF) followed Netherlands, 2Dept. Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, by preimplantation genetic diagnostics (PGD) of cystic fibrosis. Since Leiden, Netherlands, 3Laboratory for Diagnostic Genome Analyses, Leiden than, we have performed over 120 cycles with scheduled PGD for 43 University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. different monogenic diseases. The list of diagnosis where we can offer INTRODUCTION: In the Netherlands prenatal diagnosis (PND) for PGD is being continually extended. Huntington disease (HD) is available since 1987. Preimplantation In our center we use genetic haplotyping technique by multiplex PCR genetic diagnosis (PGD) was first applied in 1999. For this study we technique on products of MDA (multiple displacement amplification) surveyed all couples referred for PND and/or PGD for HD between from 1 blastomere biopsied from the cleavage-stage embryo. 1996 and 2008. In rare cases of unambiguous results from the blastomere, analysis METHODS: Information on couples’ reproductive history, pregnancies can be repeated from trofoectoderm and embryo is still managed with/without PND, PGD cycles, and follow up of all subsequent to be transfer on the day 5. We have been working on expanding pregnancies was included until December 2010. of PGD cases resolvable in our center. This year we successfully RESULTS: 184 couples were surveyed. For the first pregnancy 59% completed first cycle of male partner de-novo mutation case based opted for PND, 14% started PGD, 13% had their first child untested, on sperm-haplotyping analysis supplemented by proof of mutation by 11% refrained from PGD after intake and had no PND in subsequent sequencing analysis. pregnancies, 3% had a miscarriage. In 79.9% of couples one partner Up to now, we have accomplished 120 IVF cycles with PGH. In was a known carrier (61 males/86 females). In 20.1% one of the average 7-8 embryos were biopsied in one IVF cycle, as preferably partners was at risk (26 males/11 females). mild stimulation protocols were applied. In subsequent pregnancies, 29 couples started PGD (24 after a history We completed accreditation of the method by ISO regulation of PND and/or miscarriage). 22 couples secondarily underwent PND 15189:2007 in 2009. We annually participate in EQA organized by UK (19 after untested pregnancies, 3 after ≥1 PGD cycles). 68 couples NEQAS. applied for PND in ≥ 2 subsequent pregnancies. PGD represents an alternative within prenatal diagnosis services and In total 132 couples performed PND in 266 pregnancies (86% direct so offers a chance for many couples in risk of genetic disease to have testing, 14% exclusion testing): more details will be provided. a healthy baby and to avoid the risk termination of the pregnancy from PGD was performed in 51 couples (1 exclusion PGD): 123 cycles genetic reasons or birth of affected child. Currently available PGD resulted in 25 deliveries (23 couples). technology can help eliminate some genetic diseases in the future. CONCLUSIONS: According to the alternating use of PND and PGD we conclude that couples reconsider their choices in every subsequent P04.45 pregnancy based on their previous experience, personal beliefs, and PRm1 and PRm2 gene polymorphisms in czech men with probably time pressure. idiopathic oligozoospermia, normozoospermic men and men with proven fertility P04.43 P. Křenková1, F. Tüttelmann2, P. Paulasová1, J. Diblík1, M. Macek jr.1, M. Macek Preimplantation genetic diagnosis for chromosomal sr.1; rearrangements: results of 2000 embryos 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, University Hospital Motol, C. Beyazyurek, C. Cinar Yapan, G. C. Ekmekci, H. Yelke, H. Karagozoglu, S. Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Münster, Kahraman; Münster, Germany. Reproductive Endocrinology and Genetics Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey. The most frequent ACC haplotype formed by PRM1 230A>C and Preimplantation genetic diagnosis is a technique used to identify PRM2 298G>C/373C>A variants was associated with increased genetic defects in embryos created through in vitro fertilization (IVF) sperm counts in German males [1]. The aim of our study was to before transferring them to the uterus. Carriers of chromosomal verify this impact on spermatogenesis in Czech males with idiopathic rearrangements are one of the major group of patients who get benefit oligozoospermia. from this technique. Here we present our results for PGD performed PRM1 and PRM2 sequencing was performed on 3130xl Genetic for translocation and inversion carriers. From 2001 to 2011, 213 Analyzer in 52 men with idiopathic oligozoospermia, in 52 patients underwent PGD following 304 assited reproductive treatment normozoospermic and in 75 males with proven fertility. (ART) cycles. 136 patients were carrying reciprocal translocation In PRM1 we detected one common variant (230A>C) with an overall (RecT), 63 patients were carrying robertsonian translocation (RobT), minor allele frequency (MAF) of 28.5% and three rare variants 1 patient was carrying both reciprocal and robertsonian translocation, (c.54G>A, c.102G>T and c.166C>T) with overall frequencies of 0.56%, 1 patient was carrying a complex translocation and 12 patients were 0.28% and 0.28%, respectively. In PRM2 we detected two common carrying inversions. Blastomeres or trophectoderm tissues were fixed polymorphisms (298G>C and 373C>A) with overall MAFs of 49.1% with hypotonic solution/3:1 fixative method.Commercially supplied and 29.3%, respectively, and two rare variants (c.201C>T, c.377C>T), telomeric,locus specific and centromeric FISH probes were used. both with overall frequencies of 0.28%. For cases done in years between 2007 and 2011, aneuploidy panel The prevalence of all detected variants and the ACC haplotype (13,16,18,21,22) was also included in the PGD study. From a total between men with idiopathic oligozoospermia and controls was not of 2000 biopsied embryos, 90% were diagnosed. For RecT carriers significantly different. The rare protamine gene variants are also 197 cycles, for RobT carriers 90 cycles and for inversion carriers 14 not directly related to disorders of spermiogenesis in Czech males cycles were performed. The clinical pregnancy rates were 36.8%, and as previously described in German males [1]. In contrast, we have 31.1% respectively. For RecT carriers 20.3% and for RobT carriers not confirmed any relationship of the ACC haplotype with sperm 34.7% of embryos were found to be normal or balanced. It was found concentration. Our results indicate that the impact of PRM1 and PRM2 that; the gender of the translocation carrier, maternal age and the type gene variants on increased sperm counts is dependent on population of the translocation affected the percentage of normal or balanced genetic background and/or epigenetic impacts of different environment embryos. To date, 59 healthy babies have been born for translocation and lifestyle factors. and inversion carriers. Supported by MZ0FNM2005. References: [1] Tüttelmann et al. Int J Androl. 2010 33(1):240-248.Reproductive genetics 170 P04.46 P04.48 Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis in female and male carriers Locus copy number variation (cNV) may contribute to recurrent of Reciprocal translocations: clinical outcome of 312 cycles. miscarriage K. Keymolen1, C. Staessen1, W. Verpoest2, M. Bonduelle1, I. Liebaers1; L. Kasak, L. Nagirnaja, P. Palta, K. Rull, M. Remm, M. Laan; 1Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, Reproductive Medicine, Brussels, Belgium. Estonia. Introduction: Carriers of Reciprocal Translocations (RecT) are at risk Recurrent miscarriage (RM; ≥3 miscarriages) is a heterogeneous for reproductive problems. For some carrier couples Preimplantation condition occurring in 1-2% of fertile couples. Despite a wide spectrum Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) could be an option to fulfil their child wish. of known causes and mechanisms leading to RM (disruptions of In this study we retrospectively analyse the results of PGD for RecT thrombophilic, immunologic or endocrine pathways), 50% of the cases at our centre. are defined as idiopathic. The aims of the current study were (1) to Materials and methods: An observational study was performed of all explore whether gene copy number variations (CNV) may contribute to cycles for PGD for RecT at a tertiary referral centre between January inheritable predisposition to RM, and (2) to identify novel loci involved 1997 and December 2007. in establishing a successful pregnancy and to provide new insights into Data on patient characteristics and cycle outcomes were registered. the mechanism of RM. Results: During a period of 11 years 312 PGD cycles were performed In total, 73 Estonian samples (43 RM patients and 30 fertile) were for 69 male and 73 female carriers of RecT. The mean female age analyzed on Illumina Infinum genome-wide genotyping platform. In was 32.8years, the mean male age 35.8 years. Most carriers were order to predict the presence of a CNV, two algorithms (PennCNV diagnosed with a translocation because of fertility problems or and QuantiSNP) were used in parallel to analyze the genome-wide recurrent miscarriages and most of them opted for PGD to avoid these data. For twelve genomic loci number of gene copies in each discovery problems. individual (n=73) was experimentally validated by TaqMan qPCR. Six In 150 of the 312 cycles, embryo transfer was feasible and 40 women validated CNV regions were selected for the replication experiment delivered a healthy singleton or twin. This gives a live birth delivery in an independent sample (Estonians; n=119 RM patients and n=128 rate of 12.8% per started cycle and of 26.7% per cycle with embryo controls). transfer. In the Estonian discovery and replication samples, three tested rare Conclusion: Due to the large number of abnormal embryos, PGD cycles CNVs (MAF <10%, 25-52 kb) showed concordant allele frequency for RecT often lead to cancellation of embryo transfer, explaining the differences between cases and controls. Two of these CNVs cover loci, low success rate when expressed per cycle with oocyte pick-up. which have been previously shown to function in the establishment Once embryo transfer was feasible, the live birth delivery rate was of a successful pregnancy - regulation of trophoblast invasiveness or similar to that of PGD in general at our centre. immunological response. In order to confirm the impact of the identified PGD is therefore an established option for specific RecT carriers and CNVs in susceptibility to recurrent pregnancy loss, experiments for the its availability should be discussed during reproductive counseling. replication of these initial findings in other populations are ongoing. P04.47 P04.49 multiple epimutations of imprinting genes in early pregnancy Diagnostic value of a-cGH method for recurrent miscarriage and loss implantation failures E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev; R. Akkoyunlu, B. Enguzel, N. Cine, D. Sunnetci, N. Uzulmez, S. Eren, E. Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Gumuslu, Z. Ilkay, D. Yavuz, H. Savli; Genomic imprinting plays a critical role in regulation of fetal Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, development. Previously we have reported a tissue-specific loss Turkey. of methylation in KCNQ1OT1 and PLAGL1 in 9.5% and 10.3% iNtRODUctiON: Endometrial and tubular problems, defective spontaneous abortions, respectively. The aim of the present research embryo, genetic factors and environmental impacts are among the was identify DNA methylation levels of 115 differentially methylated reasons for recurrent miscarriages and implantation failures. A-CGH sites of 52 imprinting genes in samples of first-trimester spontaneous is a new method to investigate these impacts.A-CGH can detect abortions using GoldenGate Methylation Cancer Panel I (Illumina, chromosomal abnormalities in a reliable way and this technology USA). We have analyzed cytotrophoblast (CT) and extraembryonic compares the copy number of segments in two different genomes. mesoderm (EM) from 13 first-trimester spontaneous abortions (8.3±1.8 mAtERiAL AND mEtHOD: Whole genome scan was performed on weeks) with normal karyotype and 4 induced abortions (7.8±0.7 50 patients admitted to Kocaeli University Medical Genetics Laboratory weeks) as a control group. Fourteen (27%) imprinting genes have with the prediagnosis of recurrent miscarriage and implantation failure. revealed abnormal methylation in most miscarriages. Eight of these DNA of the patient was hybridized on 4x44K microchips as per the genes (PEG10, GRB10, CPA4, PHLDA2, WT1, ZNF215, HTR2A, protocol. Microarray scanner (Agilent Microarray Scanner; Agilent GABRB3) were hypomethylated, whereas 6 genes (DCN, TRPM5, Technologies, Palo Alto, CA) was used for scanning. The data was H19, INS, GABRA5, PWCR1) were hypermethylated. Significantly, pooled in Agilent Feature Extraction software and normalized using epimutations were found in both tissues (22%) or confined by EM CytoSure Analysis Software v.2.0.8. (65%) or CT (13%). Presence of hypomethylation in both tissues REsULts: In our study, various genetic aberrations were observed in indicates reprogramming errors in the primordial germ cells during 4 patients out of 50 who underwent whole genome scan with a-CGH gametogenesis or at early stages of preimplantation development. method. Array-CGH results are as follows: in Xp22.31 region deletion The hypermethylation of imprinted genes in both tissues can be a of 1.5 Mb; and the following duplications were detected: in 17q12 result of reprogramming errors during gametogenesis. Whereas, region 1.383 Mb, in 20p12.3 region 1.37 Mb, between the bands 4q12 tissue-specific epimutations allows suggesting independent sporadic 570 Kb. epigenetic errors in imprinting maintenance in derivates of various cONcLUsiON: Conventional cytogenetic methods help by 5-8% and embryonic germ layers after its divergence. Our results provide first a-CGH method helps by 10% in the diagnosis of recurrent miscarriage evidence for the multiple germinative and somatic epimutations of and implantation failures. A-CGH technology could be a new diagnostic CpGs within imprinting genes, which can be responsible for the opportunity to screen recurrent miscarriage and implantation failures. dysfunction of imprinted loci during early embryo development. This study was supported by Federal Program (contracts P303 and P806). P04.50 Recurrent Pregnancy Loss and its Relation to combined Parental thrombophilic Gene mutations O. Ozdemir1, G. I. Yenicesu2, F. Sılan1, M. Cetin2, B. Koksal2, S. Atik1, F. Ozen2, M. Gol1, A. Cetin2; 1Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Faculty of Medicine, Sivas, Turkey. Background and Aim: Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is a heterogeneous disorder that has been associated with antiphospholipid Reproductive genetics 171 syndrome and other prothombotic parameters. The contribution of were included in the study. The study subjects were divided into specific thrombophilic genes to the pathophysiology of RPL has male partners of RSA couples with abnormal sperm parameters remained controversial. We aimed to investigate the prevalences of (SA) (N= 16), male partners of RSA couples with normal sperm 12 thrombophilic gene mutations in RPL couples in the current results. parameters (NS) (N=32) and age matched fertile controls with normal Method :In the current prospective case-control study, in a total of 543 sperm parameters (FC) (N=20). Semen analysis, Karyotyping and Y Turkish women with RPL and 327 of their male partners (870 individuals chromosome microdeletion analysis were carried out as per standard with RPL) , and a control group of 106 fertile couples (control) were protocol. Sperm DNA damage was measured by flow cytometry and analyzed for FV Leiden, factor V H1299R, factor II prothrombin expressed as DNA fragmentation index (DFI). One of 48 RSA men G20210A, F XIII V34L, β-fibrinogen −455G>A, plasminogen activator (2%) showed 46, XY (1qh-) chromosomal complement. None of the inhibitor-1, GPIIIa L33P (HPA-1 a/b L33P), MTHFR C677T, MTHFR subject showed Yq deletions. Sperm count was found be significantly A1298C, ACE I/D, Apo B R3500Q, and Apo E genes.Results: The lower in SA cases compared to group NS cases (p<0.0001) and FC overall, heterozygous and/or homozygous point mutations in FV Leiden (p<0.005). Male partners of RSA couples with abnormal and normal - FVR2, ApoE2, PAI-1, MTHFR C677T - A1298C and ACE genes were sperm parameters had higher sperm DNA damage (P<0.0001). Other associated with RPL. There was no meaningful association between than chromosomal anomalies, sperm DNA fragmentation may be the RPL and other studied genes. Conclusion: In contrast to the other underlying pathology in RSA, thus screening for DNA fragmentation point mutations and polymorphisms, the homozygosity of 4G in PAI-1 has diagnostic capabilities. However, Yq microdeletion screening in and MTHFR C677T genes in women with recurrent pregnancy loss, male partners of RSA couples has no diagnostic or prognostic value. and heterozygosity of FV Leiden, FVR2, ACE, ApoE2 genes in both parents play crucial role in RPL and should be considered as a risk P04.53 factor in RPL. Current results showed that RPL is related to combined Paternal factors: sperm oxidative stress and DNA damage in parental (not only maternal) thrombophilic gene mutations. idiopathic recurrent spontaneous abortions K. Kishlay, S. Venkatesh, M. B. Shamsi, D. Deka, R. Dada; P04.51 All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Polymorphisms in the annexin A5 gene promoter in Japanese Aim: The most common problem in couples attempting pregnancy women with recurrent pregnancy loss is recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA). In majority of the couples H. Kurahashi1, H. Miyamura1, H. Nishizawa2, S. Ota1, M. Suzuki1, A. Inagaki1, experiencing RSA, the causes are unknown. This study was planned H. Egusa1, S. Nishiyama1, T. Kato1, K. Pryor-Koishi2, I. Nakanishi3, T. Fujita3, Y. to analyze seminal oxidative stress (OS) as well as the level of DNA Imayoshi3, R. Negi4, A. Markoff5, I. Yanagihara3, Y. Udagawa2; damage of sperm in couples with history of idiopathic RSA. 1ICMS, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan, 2Fujita Health materials and methods: Twenty two (22) couples experienced RSA University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan, 3Osaka Medical Center and 30 fertile controls were included in the study. OS were evaluated and Research Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Izumi, Osaka, Japan, by assessing ROS levels in the semen by chemiluminescence assay 4National Cerebral and Cardiovascular Center, Suita, Osaka, Japan, 5Institute and were expressed as RLU/min/20 million sperm. For analysis of the of Medical Biochemistry, Center for Molecular Biology of Inflammation, DNA fragmentation, SCSA (Sperm chromatin structure assay) was University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany. used as it delivers a highly accurate measure of fertility potential. Recent findings have raised the possibility that polymorphisms within Results: RSA and control groups did not show any significant the annexin A5 gene (ANXA5) promoter contribute to the etiology of differences in the sperm parameters. However, the mean seminal recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). In our present study, 243 Japanese reactive oxygen species levels were found to be significantly higher in women who had suffered more than three fetal losses and a group RSA group as compared to controls (12629.23 ± 3245.12 Vs 2535.55 of 119 fertile controls were genotyped for four ANXA5 gene promoter ± 135.24). Fourty percent (40%) of RSA group had higher ROS levels SNPs (SNP1-4: g.-467G>A, g.-448A>C, g.-422T>C, g.-373G>A) (>2535.55) as compared to controls. Sperm DFI in patients was previously reported to be associated with this disorder. Additional two 32.88±7.41% as compared to 22.50±2.8% in controls. SNPs located within the 5’-untranslated region of the ANXA5 (SNP5 conclusion: Thus seminal oxidative stress and sperm DNA and 6: g-302T>G, g.-1C>T) were also evaluated. Our case-control fragmentation may be one of the causes for unexplained RSA. Thus study revealed that the minor allele was significantly frequent in the DFI (DNA fragmentation index) and OS could be a good clinical RPL group for all six of these SNPs, among which SNP5 showed the prognostic marker and helps to predict outcomes of both assisted highest significance (P=0.002). As with the M2 haplotype for SNP1-4 and spontaneous conceptions. Treatment with antioxidant can reduce (A-C-C-A) suggested for a western population in previous reports, a ROS levels and after 3-6 months result in significant decline in sperm haplotype comprising all of the minor alleles for SNP1-6 (A-C-C-A- DNA damage. G-T), the third major haplotype in the Japanese population, showed a significant frequency in our current RPL subjects (P=0.025). In P04.54 addition, the second major haplotype (G-A-T-G-G-C) was also found Habitual abortion and de novo 2q37 deletion to confer a significant risk of RPL (P=0.036), implicating SNP5 as a A. K. Eek1, K. O. Clausen1, K. E. Klovning2, G. J. Braathen1,3; major risk determinant for this disease. Our present findings support 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark the hypothesis that genomic variations within the ANXA5 gene Hospital, Skien, Norway, 2Department of Gynecology, Telemark Hospital, upstream region impact upon the disease susceptibility to RPL. Our Skien, Norway, 3Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus data also indicate that SNP5 is a novel risk factor for this disease in University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway. the Japanese population. Background. Habitual abortion or recurrent miscarriage is the occurrence of three or more pregnancies ending in miscarriage, P04.52 usually before 20 weeks of gestation. Miscarriages frequently occur cytogenetic, Y chromosome microdeletion, and sperm DNA in the population. integrity analysis in male partners of couples experiencing methods. We describe a couple with recurrent miscarriages and the recurrent spontaneous abortions genetic analyses of placental material from their last spontaneous S. Venkatesh1, K. Kumar1, J. Thilagavathi1, D. Deka2, P. Talwar3, R. Dada1; abortion in first trimester. 1Lab for Mol. Reprod and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, All India Results. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) identified Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Obsetrics and a de novo 2q37 deletion. Gynecology, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3ART conclusions. The identified mutation and the deleted genes may Centre, R & R Hospital, New Delhi, India. broaden the clinical spectrum around abortions. ACGH may be the Couples experiencing recurrent spontaneous abortions (RSA) investigation of choice rather than ordinary chromosomal investigations undergo severe physical and emotional stress, where the aetiology since it is difficult to culture cells from aborted material. in majority of (60%) cases is still unknown. The aim of the study was to find the role of cytogenetic, Y chromosome microdeletion, and sperm DNA fragmentation in male partners of couples experiencing RSA. Forty eight couples with history of RSA and 20 fertile controls Reproductive genetics 172 P04.55 MTHFR C677T, MTHFR A1298C, MTR A2756G and MTRR A66G) Recombination hotspots and preimplantation genetic were investigated using multiplex SNaPshot analysis and separation haplotyping for sickle cell anaemia of the fragments by capillary electrophoresis. The prevalence of these H. Patel, C. Ogilvie, Y. Khalaf, P. Renwick; thrombophilic markers was studied in 95 women with history of fetal loss Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. (40 of Macedonian and 55 of Albanian ethnicity) and 72 matched fertile Preimplantation genetic haplotyping (PGH) involves amplification of the controls (37 of Macedonian and 35 of Albanian ethnicity) . Genotype whole genome from a single blastomere followed by haplotyping. PGH and allele frequencies of the studied mutations were not statistically requires sufficient fully-informative STR markers in close proximity to different between patients and controls and between the two ethnic the gene of interest for any given couple. groups. However, we found higher percentage of thrombophilic Sickle cell anaemia (SCA) is caused by specific mutations in the mutations in patients than in controls although statistically not HBB gene (mainly HbS or HbC). Our experience with PGH for SCA significant (≥3 mutations: 92.6% vs. 84.7%, ≥4 mutations: 74.7% vs using STR markers indicates that recombination hot spots close to 69.4%, ≥5 mutations: 52.6% vs 43.1%, ≥6 mutations: 25.3% vs 18.1%, the gene reduce the number of transferable embryos available, due ≥7 mutations: 13.7 vs 8.3%, respectively). These results indicate that to recombinant haplotypes, which may or may not carry the mutation. thrombophilia might contribute to etiology of spontaneous abortions. The distance between the recombination hotspot and the common mutation is ~30kb; informative markers within this region are therefore P04.58 necessary in order to diagnose mutation status in all recombinant chromosome 21 copy Number Analysis in sperm embryos. Alternatively, identification of a common haplotype E. Iwarsson1,2, U. Kvist3, M. A. Hultén1,4; harbouring the mutation could be informative for diagnosis. 1Dept of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Novel STRs and SNPs were identified across the region; however, Sweden, 2Dept of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, none were found within the 30kb region of interest. Following testing Sweden, 3Centre for Andrology and Sexual Medicine, Karolinska University of DNA from 36 members of SCA families and 28 MDA products of Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Warwick Medical School, University of Warwick, single cells from embryos using these SNPs and STRs, a common Coventry, Sweden. mutation-carrying HbS haplotype was observed in 9/10 cases. The The mechanism(s) underlying the low paternal origin of trisomy single exception found means that this approach is unsuitable for 21 Down syndrome (less than 10%) is/are still unknown. We have definitive PGH diagnosis. An ARMS test was therefore designed for previously suggested that the common maternal origin of trisomy 21 unique identification of HbA, HbS and HbC alleles; this test is now Down syndrome is due to foetal ovarian mosaicism (Hultén et al 2008). used when a recombination event is observed, for direct determination In contrast, foetal testicular mosaicism does not seem a likely reason of the mutation status of the embryo. for the rare cases of paternal origin (Hultén et al 2010a; review in Hultén et al 2010b). In order to get to grips with the paternal origin we have P04.56 now initiated FISH studies to record the copy number of chromosome spontaneous abortions: “split’s protocol” for successful next 21 at various stages of spermatogenesis. We here present the pregnancy initial data on the chromosome 21 copy number by FISH analysis of V. Culic1, J. Pavelic2, S. Miskovic1; spermatozoa from a sample of 5 men with normal spermiograms. It 1Pediatric Clinic, Departement for Medical Genetics, 21 000 Split, Croatia, is well known that both false positive and false negative results may 2Institute Rudjer Boskovic, Zagreb, 10 000 Zagreb, Croatia. be common, when applying a single chromosome-specific probe. During the last 17 years 534 couples attended Genetic Counseling We have therefore in this study (as in the previous) applied two 21q Unit, Split, Croatia asking for genetic counseling due to the repeated probes (Vysis 21q22 and Cytocell 21qtel) and a control chromosome spontaneous abortions (RSA). The couples expect the information 18 probe for the identification of the copy number of chromosome 21. about the risk for having a live-born child with potentially serious The disomy frequency was found to be on average 0, 11%, with a anomalies, as well as the risk for future miscarriage. Therefore, range of variation at 0,00 - 0,25% by analysis of 2000 spermatozoa the objectives of this retrospective case-control study were to find per case. To our knowledge this is the first FISH study using two the possible reason(s) for RSA in chromosomally normal parents. rather than a single probe for the estimation of the copy number of Our hypothesis is that the RSA is caused by two hits. The first one chromosome 21 in spermatozoa from a control population of men with is familiar predisposition, while the second is chronic infections. To normal spermatogenesis. validate this hypothesis we analyzed the data obtained from couple’s medical history and pedigree analysis such as a) personal life-style P04.59 and habits, b) existence of former urinary and/or genital infections in the choice of spouse and social homogamy in the Region of both partners and their relatives in a first, second and third generation; sidi El Kamel (West of morocco) c) earlier spontaneous abortions (SA), stillborns, other illnesses of M. Latifi, L. Sbii, H. Hami, R. Hmimou, A. Soulaymani, A. Mokhtari; both parents and their family members d) SA among the siblings Laboratoire de Génétique et Biométrie, Kenitra, Morocco. of second generation, e) serological results for EBV, CMV, HSV1/2 Genes circulate throughout society according to the dynamics and for other viral or protozoa infections, as well as reactivation of established by the types of encounters and associations between latent EBV infection, as well as f) pathohystological status of aborted individuals who carry these genes.The choice of spouse influences material, g) former or present urinary and/or genital infection in both the genetic structure of the family and guides the evolution of the gene partners, h) iron and feritine values. The data confirmed the proposed pool of the population. “two hits” theory for RSA. Based on this “Split protocol” for successful The objective of this work is to study two modes of assortative mating: next pregnancy is suggested. educational homogamy and homogamy social and professional. Our study is a prospective study, between January and June 2008, P04.57 included 490 families in the region of Sidi El Kamel. thrombophilic mutations among woman with spontaneous The results of this study show quite marked homogamous behavior. abortions The frequency of consanguineous marriages decreased over the S. Madjunkova, G. D. Efremov, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska; generations, but the decline in the practice marriage is still very low. Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. J04.01 Inherited thrombophilia as a genetic risk factor for thrombosis has been chromosomal abnormalities in couples with recurrent abortions implicated in etiology of spontaneous abortions and may contribute and stillborn malformed child to adverse pregnancy outcomes. Maternal thrombophilia augment A. Mitroi1, I. Dimofte2, M. Aschie2; thrombotic tendency of pregnancy leading to impaired implantation 1Clinical Emergency County Hospital, Constanta, Romania, 2Ovidius University, and placentation of the embryo. To determine the association of Constanta, Romania. specific inherited thrombophilias and spontaneous abortions, 10 Cytogenetics studies have an important role in the evaluation of gene mutations (Factor V Leiden G1691A, Factor V A1299G, Factor couples with history of recurrent abortions and stillborn malformed II G20210A, Factor XIII G34C, PAI-I -675 4G/5G, FG-ß -455G/A, child. In order to estimate the frequency of chromosomal abnormalities Reproductive genetics 173 in the couples with this kind of reproductive failure we performed a caused not only by chromosomal mutations, but also polymorphism study on 81 couples (162 patients) whose kariotype was established of some genes. These genes can be divided into several functional on GTG-banding metaphases from peripheral blood lymphocytes groups. The purpose of this study was to investigate the polymorphism cultures using standard methods. frequency of some genes (coagulation factors genes and folate cycle The frequency of chromosomal abnormalities on our studied patients protein genes) in women of two groups: a control group and women was 4.32%. The affected partner was female in 4.93% of cases with the pregnancy loss (8 - 12 week of pregnancy). Placentas were and male in 2.47% of cases. All of the chromosomal abnormalities obtained from women with informed consent. The frequencies of gene observed were translocations: four were reciprocal translocations polymorphisms (C807T ITGA2, -675 5G/4G PAI1, Ala222Val MTHFR, and three were Robertsonian translocations. In addition 6 patients Ile22Met MTRR, Asp919Gly MTR) in control group and among women presented structural variants referred as heteromorphic. with pregnancy loss are identical. The combined analysis of genotypes Chromosomal analyses are necessary for establishing the etiology and also did not show difference among two groups of women. an appropriate recurrence risk in the couples with recurrent abortions and stillborn malformed child. J04.05 Polymorphic variants on chromosomes in infertile couples. J04.02 V. Radoi; carrier woman with a duplication of mEcP2 gene - case report Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. F. M. NEDELEA1, D. Iancu2, B. C. Iancu2, E. Neagu2, V. Plaiasu3, L. Turculet1, Cytogenetic heteromorphisms are described as heritable variations at specific G. Tona1, M. Bari1, A. Stana1, L. Barbarii2, G. Peltecu1; chromosomal regions without a proven impact on phenotype.Reproductive failure 1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania, 2INML Mina Minovici, represent a problem for many couples.We have studied the heterochromatic region Bucharest, Romania, 3IOMC Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania. polymorphism and pericentric inversions in infertile couple (recurrent abortions or Mutations in the MECP2 (Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2) gene are primary infertility). responsible for neurodevelopmental disorders like Rett syndrome, Cytogenetic heteromorphisms are described as heritable variations at specific mental retardation or severe neonatal encephalopathy. Whole gene chromosomal regions without a proven impact on phenotype.Reproductive failure duplication along with several other neighbour genes can cause Lubs represent a problem for many couples.We have studied the heterochromatic region X-linked mental retardation syndrome (MIM ID #300260) in males. polymorphism and pericentric inversions in infertile couple (recurrent abortions or Carrier females may be asymptomatic due to a skewd X inactivation or primary infertility). may have related clinical findings. Heteromorphisms of chromosome 9 are among the most common variations in the We report a case of a woman with mild dysmorphic features as short human karyotype(1-3%). The pericentromeric polymorphisms of chromosome 9 stature and brachicephaly and negative family history who delivered include variations in the size of q-arm heterochromatin, pericentric inversions, and a Down syndrome afected child, who died few hours after birth. The rarely, additional C-band-negative, G-band-positive material. Heteromorphism of karyotype performed in order to exclude a chromosomal translocation heterochromatic regions of chromosome 1,9,16 is also frequent polymorphic variant. in the mother, was normal. MLPA testing for the presence of a In this study we compared the presence of chromosome heteromorphisms in microdeletion syndrome showed duplication of the MECP2 gene. the karyotypes of two patient groups. The first group of patients consisted of 248 Further tests are currently performed in order to better characterize the individuals of 124 infertile couples attending an our IVF department with primary limits of the genetic defect and to check for its presence in other family infertility or recurrent miscariages. The second group, consisted of 530 amniocentesis members. Prenatal diagnosis is recomanded in a future pregnancy. samples (for abnormal serum screening). This group was considered to be a sample of the fertile population (spontaneous pregnancy). J04.03 Results: 21 individuals (8,46%) and 11 fetuses (2.07%) were found to have Evaluation of Abnormal Recombinant Frequency between chromosome heteromorphisms. chromosomes X and Y in sperm Nuclei of Patients with Conclusions: It is suggested that variants should not be ignored by cytogeneticists. structural chromosome Aberrations Screening prospective gamete donors for chromosome variants may help enhance H. Acar1, Z. B. Bulut1, M. Kılınç2; the success of IVF. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Selçuklu Medical Faculty,, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Urology, Selcuk University, Meram Medical J04.06 Faculty,, Konya, Turkey. Y chromosome evaluation in spontaneous abortion cases Meiosis reduces the chromosome complement by half to generate G. Koc1, K. Ulucan1, D. Kirac2, D. Ergec3, T. Tarcan4, A. I. Guney1; haploid gametes to allow for genome doubling at fertilization in sexually 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, reproducing organisms. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of undergo pairing, synapsis, recombination, and faithful segregation. In Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Yeni Yuzyil University, Faculty of Art and male, sex chromosome recombination behaviors are fundamentally Science, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, different from female meiosis. Recombination between chromosomes 4Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, Istanbul, X and Y is normally restricted to the pseudoautosomal regions located Turkey. at both ends of the sex chromosomes. An obligate crossover in the introduction: In gestation before the 22nd week of duration, pseudoautosomal region (PAR1) during male meiosis seems to be spontaneous abortion (SAB) is the expulsion of an embryo or fetus due necessary for male fertility. Defects in meiosis are a leading cause of to accidental trauma or natural causes. It is one of the most common both infertility and birth defects (trisomy and monosomy) in humans. adverse pregnancy outcomes, affecting up to 15% clinically recognized In the present study, abnormal recombination frequency between pregnancies. Etiology of SAB has been tried to be explained by lots of chromosome X and chromosome Y was estimated in sperm nuclei of studies however the results are still controversial. In these researches, patients with structural chromosome aberrations such as reciprocal, chromosomal anomalies and Y-micro deletions are considered to Robertsonian translocations and other structural changes by using be the main reason of SAB, except the advanced maternal age and FISH technique. We report herein our results on the incidence of teratogenic factors. Primarily, cytogenetic evaluation was performed abnormal recombinant products in sperm nuclei as related to structural from peripheral blood samples of the couples in spontaneous abortion chromosome aberrations. cases. Additionally, the frequency of Y-micro deletions of these patients This study was supported by Selcuk University Research Fund and the same control group was examined. (No:09102001). material-methods: 30 women who had at least two spontaneous abortions and their husbands were karyotyped to detect the J04.04 chromosome anomalies. Conventional karyotyping from peripheral Polymorphism of genes and pregnancy loss blood samples with Giemsa staining was applied. Deletion Detection E. Mashkina1, K. Kovalenko1, N. Fomina1, A. Rimashevsky2, T. Shkurat1; Kit (Promega- USA) was used for Y-microdeletion analyses. 1Research Institute of Biology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Results: All the women were 46, XX and the men were 46, XY. No Russian Federation, 2Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. Y-microdeletion was detected in AZFa, AZFb and AZFc regions. The genetic factors are leading to pregnancy loss, especially in conclusion: Environmental and genetic factors seem to play the early stages. It is established that the syndrome of fetal loss is combinational roles in the etiology of SAB. In our study we couldn’t Prenatal and perinatal genetics 174 detect any causative results in patients. More studies including the for the same mutation (IVS14 + 1G → A). teratogenic and genetic factors with high sample number need to be The (PCR-RFLP) assay is an easy technique to detect and descry carried out to have an informative knowledge in the etiology of SAB. healthy heterozygote, healthy homozygote and affected homozygote. The sequencing method is used to check and valid the mutation in each family. As the mutation in maghrebin Allgrove’s patients seems to be unique P05 Prenatal and perinatal genetics and the PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism assay allows a rapid molecular diagnosis, the genetic counselling became easier. Neonatal molecular diagnosis allows an early optimized follow-up, while prenatal diagnosis raises ethical queries’. P05.01 Genetics staffs role at maternity ward P05.03 Y. GOTO1,2, A. KONDO1,2, Y. ONUKI2, H. MORIYA2, K. TSUJI2, H. YOKOYAMA2, A case of mosaic karyotype 45, XO/46, XY - [75%]/ [25%] T. MATSUMOTO1,2, M. MIZOGUCHI2, S. IZUMI1,2; detected by QF-PCR and confirmed with cytogenetic analysis 1Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University Hospital, Kanagawa, R. Raynova1, I. Bradinova2, R. Vazharova2, Z. Emilova3, A. Savov2, I. Japan, 2Dept. of Genetics, Tokai University Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan. Kremensky2; [Introduction] 1National Genetic Laboratory,University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology,, As for prenatal service, genetic counseling is basically offered before Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Neonatology and after genetic test in Japan. It sometimes makes difficult us to follow Clinic, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria. up patients continuously. However, at our hospital, genetic staffs have Rapid diagnosis by Quantitative Fluorescent PCR analysis (QF-PCR) opportunities to see patients at maternity visits and also at the delivery. has proved its cost-efficiency, speed and efficacy for detection of the In this report, we reconfirm our role for the patients and for midwives most common autosome aneuploidies - trisomy 21, trisomy 18, trisomy at maternity ward. 13 and some of sex chromosomes aneuploidies. Besides of its wide [Case 1] 39 y/o. Para 0 Gravida 0. At 29 weeks, congenital heart application in prenatal diagnosis, QF-PCR is very useful for rapid sex defect and single umbilical cord were detected at the growth scan. At determination of neonates when needed. 31 weeks, the fetus was diagnosed as 18 trisomy by amniocentesis. We report a case of mosaic karyotype 45, XO/46, XY - [75%]/ [25%] [Case 2] 33 y/o. Para 0 Gravida 0. At 12 weeks, she was referred to detected by QF-PCR and confirmed with cytogenetic analysis. A our hospital because of NT thickness. After genetic counseling, she neonate, born of second normal pregnancy of young healthy parents declined any prenatal test and had been followed by former clinic. was referred to the National Genetic Laboratory for genetic counseling At 27 weeks, she was referred to our hospital again because of and sex determination. The baby had ambiguous genitalia (severe polyhydramnios. She decided to have chromosome test at that stage hypospadic micropenis and bilateral crytorchism) and mild facial and diagnosed as 18 trisomy. dismorphism. [Case 3] 36 y/o. Para 1 Gravida 1. At 31 weeks, she was referred to our QF-PCR and cytogenetic analysis were performed on peripheral blood. hospital because of intrauterine growth retardation, omphalocele and DNA was amplified with commercial QF-PCR kit Aneufast (Molgentix congenital heart defect. She declined further prenatal test after genetic SL, Barcelona, Spain) and analyzed on ABI 3110 XL. Cytogenetic counseling. At 35 weeks, we had to remove amniotic fluid because of analysis was performed on G-banded metaphases from cultured polyhydramnios, and then she desired to have chromosome test and lymphocytes at resolution 400 bands. diagnosed as 18 trisomy. QF-PCR showed results consistent with an aneuploidy, SRY was [Conclusions] present. Pseudoautosomal marker AMEL (Xp22.31-22.32/ Yp11) The diagnosis of chromosomal anomaly could be physical and mental showed a ratio 4:1. Markers on chromosome X - HPRT, DXS6803, stress for patients. We consider that the continuous support both SMBA, DXS6809, DXS8377 were in hemizygous pattern. A week later genetics staffs and maternity ward is very important. cytogenetic analysis revealed 45, XO/46, XY - [75%]/ [25%] karyotype. Our 10-years experience shows that DNA analysis is informative P05.02 in cases of mosaics but cytogenetic analysis should be held for a Evidence of unique mutation in maghrebin Allgrove‘s patients complete diagnosis. allows rapid molecular diagnosis and easy genetic counseling F. Kallabi1, G. Ben Salah1, N. Belghith1,2, H. Aloulou3, S. Ghorbel4, S. Hajji5, P05.04 D. Sellami6, A. Amouri7, N. Tahri7, J. Feki6, S. Ben Becher5, M. Hachicha3, F. Detection of hard palate abnormalities using 3D ultrasound Fakhfakh1, H. Kamoun1,2; D. V. Deva1, C. C. Albu2, D. F. Albu2, E. Severin3, M. C. Dumitrescu4; 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine – Faculté de médecine de 1Alco San Clinic, Bucharest, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service de Génétique Médicale – Hôpital Hédi Chaker, Carol Davila; Alco San Clinic, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Sfax, Tunisia, 3Service de Pédiatrie – Hôpital Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 4Marius Nasta Hospital; Alco San 4Service de Chirurgie Pédiatrique – Hôpital d’enfants, Sfax, Tunisia, 5Service Clinic, Bucharest, Romania. de Pédiatrie Urgence Réanimation– Hôpital d’enfants, Sfax, Tunisia, 6Service Objective: The aim of this study was to asess the three-dimensional d’Ophtalmologie – Hôpital Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia, 7Service de Gastro- ultrasound technique in prenatal detection of hard palate abnormalities. entérologie – Hôpital Hédi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia. Methods: 82 cases of suspected cleft palate, diagnosed by routine Allgrove syndrome or Triple A syndrome is an autosomal recessive 2D ultrasound scan, were referred to us for a detailed assesment of disease including a clinical triad; Alacrima, Achalasia, and Addisonism. the lips and palate, using 3D ultrasound. A G.E.Voluson 730 Expert Progressive neurological impairment could be associated. was used by two experienced operators,one of them scaned using The defective gene AAAS, located in 12q13, encodes a WD-repeat 3D reverse-face view technique,and the other scaned using angled protein, ALADIN. Tullio pellet suggested that this disease in Maghreb insonation and anterior axial techniques,all of which seek to maximize is associated to an ancestral founder mutation, the same in six Algerian visualizationof the palate without shadowing. and three Tunisian families). Results: Of 82 pacients, in 8, 3D views were not obtained, leaving The classical triad was not required to enclose patients in our study. 74 cases for asessment. The sensitivity for the diagnosis was 86,3%, Alacrima associated to achalasia and/or adrenocortical insufficiency false positive rate was 12% and false negative rate was 9%. was sufficient criteria. In our study, we include twenty two patients Conclusion: The data reported suggest that 3D ultrasound is a very belonging to fourteen Maghrebin families, twelve from Tunisia and two usefull method of prenatal evaluation of the fetus, and can give parents from Libya. The molecular analysis targets the major mutation in AAAS a more detalied asessment of the nature and extent of facial and hard gene. In our study, we used the (PCR-RFLP) assay with sequencing palate clefts; the most important advantage of 3D volume scanning is method to valid the mutation IVS14 + 1G → A. the ease and rapidity with which the different planes can be accessed. Clinical analysis showed variable expressivity but constant alacrima and also consanguinity in all families. The molecular analysis showed that all patients were homozygote and all parents were heterozygote Prenatal and perinatal genetics 175 P05.05 P05.07 clinical use of array comparative genomic hybridization (acGH) multicenter validation of reverse-hybridization teststrips for the for prenatal diagnosis in 1000 cases detection of common cYP21A2 mutations in dried blood spots. F. FIORENTINO, S. Napolitano, F. Caiazzo, L. Spizzichino, S. Bono, M. Sessa, S. Nemeth1, G. Kriegshäuser1, S. Baumgartner-Parzer2, P. Concolino3, V. A. Nuccitelli, A. Biricik, M. Baldi; Neocleous4, L. A. Phylactou4, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz5, H. Onay6, A. Tukun7, S. “GENOMA”- Molecular Genetics Laboratory, ROME, Italy. Riedl8, C. Oberkanins1; Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) allows for fast 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Internal and accurate detection of chromosomal aneuploidies, submicroscopic Medicine III, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical University deletions or duplications and other unbalanced chromosomal of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of abnormalities. While experience with diagnostic aCGH in the genetic Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, evaluation of pediatric patients is extensive, experience with its use for 4Department of Molecular Genetics, Function & Therapy, The Cyprus Institute clinical prenatal diagnosis is still limited. of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5Department of Medical Genetics, To assess the feasibility of offering CGH microarray for prenatal The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department diagnosis as a first-line test, a blind study was conducted comparing of Medical Genetics, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, the results obtained from array CGH with those obtained from a 7Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara University Faculty of Medicine, standard karyotype. Ankara, Turkey, 8Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Women undergoing amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS) Vienna, Austria. for karyotype were offered aCGH analysis using whole-genome BAC Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) comprises a group of inborn arrays with an average resolution of 0.5-1 Mb. A total of 1000 prenatal errors in the synthesis of adrenal corticoid hormones. More than 90% samples were processed in parallel using both aCGH, performed on of cases arise from mutations in the CYP21A2 gene encoding steroid DNA isolated from uncultured AF (83%) or CVS (17%), and G-banded 21-hydroxylase. The average incidence of classical CAH is about 1 for standard karyotyping. in 15,000 births worldwide. Newborn screening programs based on Chromosomal abnormalities were identified in 34 (3.4%) samples; in 10 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) levels have been introduced in of which (29.4%) aCGH detected pathogenic copy number variations various countries, but due to the considerable false positive recall rate (CNVs) that would not have been found if only a standard karyotype a concurrent genetic testing would be desireable. had been performed.This study demonstrates that aCGH represents We have developed a reverse-hybridization teststrip-based assay an improved diagnostic tool for prenatal detection of chromosomal for the rapid and simultaneous analysis of the following 11 common abnormalities. Although larger studies are needed, the above results CYP21A2 mutations from dried blood spots: P30L, I2 splice (655A/ provide a further evidence on the feasibility of using aCGH as first- C>G), Del 8bp E3, I172N, I236N/V237E/M239K (Cluster E6), V281L, line diagnostic test to detect chromosomal abnormalities in prenatal L307Frameshift, Q318Stop, R356W, P453S and R483P. Automated samples. instrumentation and use of a scanner-based software tool for recording and interpreting results can make the StripAssay a useful tool in CAH P05.06 newborn screening programs. Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis (PGD) for cartilage Hair The new CAH StripAssay was validated in a series of 243 DNA Hypoplasia combined with Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) samples of known CYP21A2 genotype. By using the StripAssay in matching combination with a real-time quantitative PCR approach (Parajes M. De Rycke1, D. Van Boxstael1, W. Verpoest2, P. Verdyck1, P. De Becker1, H. et al., 2007), all 11 mutations covered plus CYP21A2 copy number Van de Velde2, I. Liebaers1, M. Bonduelle1; variations and chimeric genes were unambiguously identified. Our 1Centre for Medical Genetics UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Centre for results have been confirmed by DNA sequencing and MLPA. In 19 Reproductive Medecine UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. (7.8%) probands of our heterogeneous European cohort we found at Cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, least one rare CYP21A2 mutation that was not represented on the characterised by dwarfism, hypoplastic hair and immunodeficiency. teststrip; however, as several of these represented members of the Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) has been same family the prevalence of rare mutations is expected to be lower. shown to be an effective treatment for CHH patients. We present a (oberkanins@viennalab.co.at) couple, both carriers of different ribonuclease mitochondrial RNA- processing (RMRP) mutations underlying CHH, which relied on In Vitro P05.08 Fertilisation (IVF) and PGD to select unaffected embryos that were Array-cGH in fetuses with ultrasound anomalies and normal HLA compatible with an affected compound heterozygous sibling. karyotype Preclinical workup involved confirmation of the maternal g.126C>T M. Mori1,2,3, E. Vallespin1,2,3, R. Rodriguez4, J. Nevado1,2,3, F. Garcia1,2,3, E. and paternal g.40G>A mutations in genomic DNA of the couple and Mansilla1,2,3, M. de Torres1,2,3, P. Lapunzina1,2,3; affected child, together with informativity and segregation testing of 1INGEMM-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas en RMRP polymorphic markers (STR16GT at 248 kb 5’ and STR16AAT Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3IdiPAZ, Madrid, at 34 kb 3’) and markers in the HLA locus of 4 Mb (MOG3, D6S2700, Spain, 4Fetal Medicine Unit-HULP, Madrid, Spain. D6S2670, D6S2443, D6S1560 and D6S1618). (Half)-informative HLA Background: congenital malformations are the main cause of infant and RMRP markers were selected and combined with the amplicon of morbidity and mortality during the first year of life. Approximately 18- the mutations in a single-cell multiplex PCR protocol. The mutations 30% of fetuses with congenital malformations have chromosomal were detected using post-PCR minisequencing reactions. The RMRP imbalances. However the causes of defects remain unknown in almost markers ensured an accurate diagnosis of the mutations whereas the 50% of cases. HLA markers provided indirect preimplantation HLA haplotyping. methods: a retrospective study in 40 fetuses with isolated or multiple The couple achieved an ongoing singleton pregnancy in their third IVF/ malformations , and/ or Intrauterine Growth Restriction detected by PGD cycle and the PGD results were confirmed in prenatal testing. At ultrasound, were done using a 8x60K Agilent-based custom oligo birth, hematopoietic stem cells will be collected from the cord blood genome-wide array(KaryoArray®). The average density of the probe and used to transplant the affected sibling. coverage is 43 kb, comprising specific probes covering microdeletion This report shows that PGD with HLA matching is an alternative and microduplication syndromes, telomeres and peri-centromeric therapeutic option for couples of reproductive age with children regions, including more than 350 clinically relevant regions. affected by CHH requiring a non-urgent HSCT and lacking suitable Samples were from CVS, AF, fetal blood and tissues (fibroblasts and donors. others). Parents’ studies by array-CGH were done when genomic imbalances were found. Results: 6/40 genomic imbalances with pathological significant were identified: one Complex Chromosomal Rearrangement (CCR), one 8p terminal deletion resulting from malsegregation of a criptic maternal balance translocation, two cases of mosaicism (1q duplication and a trisomy 8, both detected in tissues), one 9q interstitial deletion, and one 17q12 Prenatal and perinatal genetics 176 microdeletion syndrome (RCAD: renal cyst and diabetes). Additionally DS. Women need to be informed about the spectrum of chromosome several polymorphic variants were detected, some of them inherited. disorders currently detected by karyotyping that will no longer be conclusions: array-CGH improved overall detection rates of clinically detected by NIPD for DS. significant chromosomal abnormalities in fetuses with sonographic anomalies and normal karyotype. The use of this technology will have P05.11 an important impact on genetic counseling in pregnancies with fetal the effectiveness of prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis of Down anomalies. The possibility of having an accurate genetic diagnosis will syndrome in the Republic of moldova. decrease the anxiety of couples facing a future pregnant. N. I. Barbova, M. Sprincean, E. A. Halabudenco, M. S. Stratila, T. Samoilenco, This study was granted by FIS-08/1207 A. N. Mishina, V. P. Secrieru, V. Nour; State Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, P05.09 Republic of. DFNB1 markers associated with nonsyndromic hearing loss in Prevention of chromosomal pathology and, in particular, Down Romanian children syndrome (DS) is the main task of the medical genetic services. The C. Dragomir1, A. M. Stan1, D. T. Stefanescu1, L. Savu1, E. Severin2; average frequency of trisomy 21 or SD in the EUROCAT is 9,5 / 10 1Genetic Lab, Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, 000 births. Romania. The aim of the study was to evaluate the effectiveness of prenatal Background: The DFNB1 locus has been linked to a nonsyndromic cytogenetic diagnosis of DS in Moldova. “invisible handicap” called congenital sensorineural hearing loss To obtain the epidemiological characteristics of Down syndrome were (HL) and deafness. Mutations of the GJB2 and GJB6 genes are used monitoring data DS for the period from 2005 to 2009; the total both associated with deafness at the DFNB1 locus. The diagnosis of number of births during this period was 193076. DS was diagnosed in DFNB1 is made with molecular genetic testing. 209 children. DS in fetus were carried out in 16-18 weeks of pregnancy Here we report the first study of D13S1830 and D13S1854 markers by amniocentesis and cytogenetic diagnosis in 232 women, 23 performed in Romania. pregnancies were terminated. Objective: Our goal was to use molecular testing of children at risk for The indications for karyotyping were: age 35 and older, the presence identifying the contribution of the DFNB1 markers to prelingual HL; of ultrasound markers of fetal chromosomal pathology, family history, these markers are known to be of high prevalence in other European balanced chromosomal translocations in relatives, the deviations of populations. maternal serum markers and the combination of these factors. Patients and Methods: This study was carried out on 253 children The average frequency of DS in Moldova in 2005-2009 was 12.02 / 10 with prelingual HL, originating from various regions of Romania. Blood 000 (1:924). In 21% of DS cases the age of mothers was 35 years and samples were obtained and DNA was isolated by standard protocols. older, as well as age younger than 18 years. The frequency of DS in The 35delG GJB2 mutation was detected by ARMS-PCR. We 2005-2009 in the population of the Republic of Moldova was 1 for 924 included beta-actin sequence detection as internal control. Analysis births. Excluding the data of prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis of DS in of del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6-D13S1854) was performed by the frequency of Moldova would be 1:832 newborns. The effectiveness multiplex-PCR. of prenatal cytogenetic diagnosis of DS during II trimester of pregnancy Results: GJB2 mutations were detected in 33% of patients, all of them for the analyzed period was 10%. having 35delG homozygous mutation. Only 3% of children presented 35delG mutation in a heterozygous form. None of them was found P05.12 to have the GJB6 mutations. Physical examination revealed no other Application of multiplex real-time PcR assay using taqman mGB abnormal findings. probes on cVs and amniocyte samples for prenatal diagnosis of Conclusions: The identification of the most frequent causal mutation of trisomy 21 prelingual HL in Romanian population will contribute to develop both M. Hashemi1, M. Behroozaghdam2, R. Mahdian3, A. kamyab4; prenatal and postnatal molecular diagnosis protocols well suited for 1Scientific Society of Cellular and Molecular, Centeral Commission of Scientific, our population. Literary and Artistic .Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad P05.10 University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biotechnology Research Center, Residual risk of other chromosome abnormalities following Molecular Medicine Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic NiPD for Down syndrome Republic of Iran, 4Islamic Azad University,Sceince and Reseach Branch, M. Susman1,2, J. L. Halliday1,2, E. Muggli1, D. Amor1,3; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 2University of DOWN syndrome (DS), the most common fetal aneuploidy, is caused Melbourne, Dept Paediatrics, Parkville, Australia, 3Genetic Health Services by an extra copy of chromosome 21 (trisomy 21) affecting 1 in 700- Victoria, Parkville, Australia. 1000 live births Therefore diagnosis and prevention of live-born Background:Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) using next affected fetus is a health care priority. generation sequencing is impending. Reports to date suggest that We have successfully used a novel MGB TaqMan probe-based real initially NIPD will test for Down Syndrome (DS) only. One essential time PCR assay for rapid diagnosis of trisomy 21. piece of information that needs to be considered will be women’s Chorionic Villus Samples (CVS) and amniocyte samples was obtained residual risk for the chromosome abnormalities that NIPD won’t detect. from 59 pregnant women who had the high risk criteria of having fetus Aim: To calculate the residual risk of fetal chromosome abnormalities with trisomy 21. Quality and quantity of DNA was measured by the in women at increased risk of DS if they had NIPD for (1) DS only (2) optical absorbance. DYRK1A and DSCAM genes (target genes) and DS, plus Trisomy 18 and Trisomy 13 (3) DS, plus Trisomy 18, Trisomy PMP22 (reference gene) were selected and specific primers and probs 13, and sex chromosome aneuploidies. for these genes and were designed. After determining of standard Method: A population based data set of all prenatal diagnostic tests in curve and PCR efficiencies for each gene, the target/reference genes Victoria, Australia, for 2008 (70,000 births) was used. Frequencies of ratio was calculated using comparative cycle threshold method . abnormal fetal karyotypes amongst women referred for an increased The results of gene dosage analysis showed the target/reference risk of DS were extracted. genes ratio of 1.56±0.09 and 1.02±0.11 in trisomy 21 and normal Results: There were 2954 amniocenteses or CVS for increased risk of samples for Chorionic Villus Samples and 1.61 ± 0.09 and 1.03 ± DS, and 287 chromosome abnormalities detected (1 in 10). Of these, 0.05 for amniocyte samples respectively that showed statistically 129 were DS i.e. 1 in 23 overall. significant difference between two groups. This means that 1 in 19 pregnancies had some other chromosome The conventional cytogenetic analysis needs live cultured cells and abnormality (residual risk). Inclusion of T18 and T13 in the detection is too time-consuming for clinical application. In contrast, molecular panel reduces residual risk to 1 in 30, and if sex aneuploidies are methods such as FISH, QF-PCR, MLPA and quantitative Real-time added, to 1 in 42. PCR are rapid assays with results in 24h.Therefore, Real-Time PCR Conclusion: In a population of women at increased risk of DS, the technique can be used as an accurate, rapid and sensitive method for risk of non-DS chromosome abnormalities is higher than the risk of prenatal diagnosis of trisomy 21.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 177 P05.13 We offered all of them prenatal diagnosis for future pregnancies. A novel digital PCR platform accurately detects and quantifies We collected data from couples with chromosomal rearrangement fetal DNA in maternal plasma investigated for karyotyping after two or more miscarriages. Twentyfour B. Hindson1, S. Saxonov1, C. Hindson1, S. Hodges1, G. Karlin-Neumann1, H. couples were identified with chromosomal inversions and 13 of them White2; had prenatal diagnosis performed, as following: 1 case with inv(7), 1 1QuantaLife, Inc, Pleasanton, CA, United States, 2National Genetics Reference case with inv(10) and 11 cases with inv(9). In all cases amniocentesis Laboratory (Wessex), Salisbury, United Kingdom. showed fetuses carriers of invesions and pregnancies continued. We Determination of fetal load in maternal plasma is a pre-requisite for a encountered 7 couples with Robertsonian translocations: 4 cases with number of non-invasive approaches to detecting fetal abnormalities. trob(13;22) and 3 cases with trob(13;14). At one case of each category, Existing techniques are faced with difficulties when trying to quantify prenatal diagnosis was performed and pregnancy evolved normaly. the minute amounts of fetal DNA in maternal plasma, particularly for One of these fetuses was normal and one was a carrier with balanced female fetuses. A new droplet digital™ PCR (ddPCR™) system was translocation trob(13;22), just like the mother. We found 26 couples with developed to address these challenges. a balanced translocations. Seven of these couples performed prenatal The ddPCR system partitions the sample into 20,000 droplets, each diagnosis. Parental karyotype showed the following translocations: one nanoliter in volume, such that some contain the target of interest 46,XY,t(1;5)(q23;p12), 46,XX,t(3;15)(q12;q13), 46,XX,t(4;10) and some do not. The emulsion is thermocycled to end-point, then (q22.2;q22.2-ter), 46,XX,t(7;9)(p14q24), 46,XX,t(7;10)(p22;p12.1), every droplet is read with a two-color fluorescence detector. The 46,XX,t(17;20)(q12;q11), 46,XY,t(15p;19p). Fetal karyotype showed 3 number of positive and negative droplets is used to compute an normal fetuses, 4 carriers of a balanced translocation and one carrier absolute concentration of the target with high precision and accuracy. of non-balanced translocation 46,XY,dup(10q22.2-ter), consequently The simple workflow uses standard 96-well plate processing enabling this last pregnancy was terminated. One couple performed twice the system to generate data for millions of PCR replicates within a amniocentesis and fetal karyotype showed in both cases carriers of matter of hours. the balanced translocation t(7;10)(p22;p12.1), as was their mother. The assay uses a SRY Y-chromosome marker for male fetuses and Detection of a structural chromosome abnormality in couples with methyl-sensitive restriction enzyme digestion of a RASSF1A marker recurrent miscarriage has a striking influence on their decision to as a gender-independent test. We applied this method to the analysis undergo prenatal diagnosis. Genetic counseling helps these couples of more than one hundred maternal plasma samples to obtain a to understand the recurrence risk and consequently to evaluate their distribution of total DNA and fetal load. options. P05.14 P05.16 Different application of Y-specific sequence detection using cell improvement of the recovery of fetal nucleated red blood cells free fetal DNA from maternal plasma (NRBcs) and its application to the prenatal genetic diagnosis. I. Hudecova1,2, M. Hasko1, I. Svecova1, J. Visnovsky1, J. Danko1, Z. Lasabova2; K. Kwon1,2, S. Hwang2, N. Song1, Y. Kim3, H. Chung4, S. Moon1, S. Oh1; 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Comenius University Bratislava, 1Institute of Reproductive Medicine and Population, Medical Research Center, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Martin, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Seoul National Universit, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2GenDix, Inc., Seoul, Biology, Comenius University Bratislava, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Vrutky, Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Slovakia. Ewha Womans University, Seoul, Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 4School of Noninvasive prenatal identification of fetal gender is currently feasible Public Health and Institute of Health & Environment, Seoul National University, through analysis of cell free fetal DNA from maternal plasma. Two Seoul, Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. approaches to fetal sex prediction, testing DYS14 and SRY sequence, Fetal nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) have emerged as the best were compared with respect to precision, sensitivity, specificity and candidates for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis. But fetal NRBCs are reproducibility of the test. Quantification of the fetal single-copy SRY rare in the maternal circulation. To assess the detection efficiency of sequence was evaluated as a precondition for the investigation of the isolation of fetal NRBCs using the different density gradients and quantitative abnormalities in cell free fetal DNA concentration for different osmolality of percoll, we counted number of NRBCs in the pregnancy-associated pathologic conditions such as preeclampsia or blood of pregnant women at different gestational ages. intrauterine growth retardation. Fetal NRBCs were isolated from 10ml of maternal in 179 cases using Thirty-seven plasma samples from pregnant women taken between double percoll gradient with optimal osmolality (280 mOs/kgH0, 1.077 2 the 15th and 18th week of gestation were analysed. Real-time PCR g/ml and 520 mOs/kgH0, 1.119 g/ml). Magnetic activated cell sorting 2 analysis employing TaqMan technology was used for amplification was used to enrich isolated NRBCs, and morphological differentiation of fetal Y-specific sequences DYS14 and SRY. A blind test for final was performed with Kleihauer-Betke stain. Fluorescence in situ validation used anonymized plasma samples, and the fetal genders of hybridization (FISH) analysis was used to detect of chromosomes 13, all analyzed samples were confirmed after birth. 18, 21, X and Y. The results confirmed that both protocols are reliable methods for The mean number of NRBCs were 8.73 (6 to 14 week of gestation), fetal gender determination, with sensitivity, specificity and accuracy 15.24 (15 to 20 week of gestation), 17.52 (21 to 28 week of gestation) rates of 100% having been observed for both approaches. Higher and significantly increased during the period from 6 to 28 weeks of reproducibility with a lower coefficient of variation for multi-copy DYS14 pregnancy (p=0.043, p=0.036). The frequencies of fetal NRBCs protocol was observed in comparison with SRY. A distinct shift of nearly were 71.35% (6 to 14 week of gestation), 60.78% (15 to 20 week 4 Ct values was detected between both protocols. The detection limit of gestation), 55.83% (21 to 28 week of gestation). There was a for SRY assay reached 3 GE/ml and the mean concentration value for significant increase in the frequency of fetal NRBCs in a first trimester single-copy SRY sequence was 15 GE/ml . compared to a second and third trimester (p=0.005). Our study confirmed DYS14 protocol as a precise method for The NRBC enrichment method using optimal osmolality in first trimester assessment of fetal gender whereas SRY assay as an appropriate can be a more useful prenatal diagnostic tool for fetal aneuploidy than precondition for monitoring of pathologic states in pregnancy. in second trimester.This research was supported by grant SC1150 . P05.15 P05.17 Amniocentesis after established carrier status of balanced Detection of genetic abnormalities by array comparative structural chromosome abnormality genomic hybridization for fetal tissues C. GUG1,2, G. Budau1, N. Hrubaru1, D. Chiriac1, D. Grigoras1, G. Furau3, V. S. Eren, N. Cine, D. Sunnetci, N. Uzulmez, E. Gumuslu, B. Enguzel, R. Gorduza4; Akkoyunlu, Z. Ilkay, D. Yavuz, B. Dal, H. Savli; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, 2Genetics Medical Center, Timişoara, Romania, 3West University “Vasile Turkey. Goldis”, Arad, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. introduction: Array-CGH is a microarray-based technology which can About 6% of couples investigated in our laboratory for recurrent be used to perfoming molecular karyotyping. The use of array CGH in miscarriage are carriers of a structural chromosome abnormality. genetic diagnosis has originated a new perspective in methodology of Prenatal and perinatal genetics 178 fetal tissue diagnosis. Whole genome analysis with high resolution can P05.19 be performed efficiently through this technology. Our aim is to detect Facilitating the Fragile X post- and prenatal genetic diagnostic genetic aberations in fetal tissues by array CGH method. testing workflow by use of the Abbott FMR1 TP-PCR and FMR1 materials And method: Materials included nine fetal tissues which are sizing PcR products. from terminated pregnancies that are diagnosed in Gynecology and S. J. Van Dooren, S. Seneca, K. Endels, K. Keymolen, M. De Rademaeker, K. Pathology departments of Kocaeli Medical Faculty. Whole genome Van Berkel, W. Lissens, M. Bonduelle; analysis was performed in Medical Genetic Department of Kocaeli Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel and VUB, Brussels, Belgium. Medical Faculty. gDNAs of patients were hybridized with array CGH Molecular testing of FMR1 (CGG)n expanded repeats remains hard platforms using syndrome Plus ISCA Microarray 4X44K format (Oxford to tackle given the limitations of sizing PCR in detecting large and Gene Technology Oxford, UK). Hybridized microchips were scanned uninformative alleles, resulting in a significant number of samples that with Agilent Microarray scanner. The data were pooled in Agilent require confirmation through laborious southern blot analysis. Abbott Feature Extraction software and normalized using CytoSure Analysis Molecular recently developed a TP-PCR to be used in combination Software v.2.0.8 with their sizing PCR to facilitate the Fragile X diagnostic testing Results: We found dup(7)(q31.1-q36.3) and del(18)(p11.23-11.32) workflow. in fetal tissues. We confirmed the abnormalities of fetal tissues with This study aimed at comparing Abbott Molecular FMR1 Sizing PCR parental chromosome analysis. Maternal karyotype was t(8;17)(q31.1) and TP-PCR versus in-house sizing PCR and southern blot in order (p11.2). This balanced translocation carrier mother had imbalanced to evaluate the sizing accuracy and detection sensitivity of normal, fetus with partial trisomy and partial monosomy. intermediate, premutation and full mutation alleles. Over 100 samples conclusion: Our findings indicate that array CGH has been a useful of different sources (approximately 50% whole blood, 40% chorion tool in discovering microscobic and submicroscobic genetic changes villi and 10% amniocytes) and a panel of artificially mimicked mosaic in fetal tissues. samples were evaluated. Signal intensity and sizing accuracy met expectations in the normal P05.18 to small premutation range. The sizing ‘long run’ greatly improved FGFR-3 Related skeletal Dysplasias Diagnosed Prenatally by the detection capacity and sizing accuracy of longer range (large Ultrasonography and molecular Analysis: Presentation of 17 premutation to full mutation) fragments, although inspection of raw cases data is recommended. TP-PCR allowed discrimination between A. Hatzaki1, S. Sifakis2, D. Apostolopoulou1,3, D. Bouzarelou1, A. normal/intermediate and premutation/full mutation alleles. However, Konstantinidou4, D. Kappou2, A. Sideris5, E. Tzortzis5, A. Athanassiadis6, L. premutation and full mutation TP-PCR signal patterns were very Florentin7, P. Theodoropoulos8, C. Makatsoris1, C. Karadimas1, V. Velissariou1; similar, therefore requiring the Abbott FMR1 Sizing PCR to distinguish 1Department of Genetics & Molecular Biology, “MITERA” General, Maternity them. & Children’s Hospital, Marousi, Attiki, Greece, 2Department of Obstetrics & Mosaic detection in Sizing- or TP-PCR ranged from 20% down to 10%, Gynaecology, University of Crete, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, 3Department depending on the repeat range mixture used. of Genetics and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, School of Physical Our results corroborate the workflow proposed by Abbott Molecular of Sciences, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece, using FMR1 TP-PCR as a first line screening platform in combination 41st Department of Pathology, National Kapodistrian University of Athens, with the FMR1 Sizing PCR as second line test. Athens, Greece, 5Fetal Medicine Department, “MITERA” General, Maternity & Children’s Hospital, Marousi, Attiki, Greece, 62nd Department of Obstetrics P05.20 & Gynaecology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, Evaluation of a cGG Repeat Primed PcR system, designed 7“Alpha Lab” Molecular Biology and Cytogenetics Center, Athens, Greece, for detection of Fragile X expanded alleles, in clinical prenatal 8“Embryodiagnosis” Center, Athens, Greece. samples. Fibroblast Growth Factor Receptor-3 (FGFR-3) related skeletal S. Seneca1,2, S. Van Dooren1, W. Lissens1,2, K. Keymolen1, M. De dysplasias are caused by mutations in the FGFR-3 gene that Rademaeker1, M. Bonduelle1,2; result in increased activation of the receptors alterations in the 1UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. process of endochondral ossification in all long bones, and include Abnormal expansion of the (CGG) repeat in the 5’untranslated region n achondroplasia, hypochondroplasia, thanatophoric dysplasia and (UTR) of the FMR1 gene is known to generate Fragile X syndrome severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis (FXS), the most common form of cognitive impairment, and several nigricans (SADDAN). Reports of prenatal diagnosis of FGFR-3 related other diseases in patients. The expansion reduces the expression of skeletal dysplasias are not rare, however, the correlation between 2nd the FMR1 by promoting DNA hypermethylation of this region when trimester ultrasonographic (U/S) findings and underlying molecular exceeding ≈ 200 repeats. Molecular diagnosis relies on determination defect in these cases is relatively poor. There is a need for specific U/S of the number of allele repeats in the DNA template, and assessment predictors than can distinguish lethal from non-lethal cases and aid an of the methylation state of the FMR1 locus. Current conventional PCR earlier prenatal diagnosis. Here we present sixteen (16) sporadic and amplification is only successful for normal and small permutation one (1) familial cases with FGFR-3 related skeletal dysplasia and a alleles, and is not informative for homozygous repeat alleles. Expanded normal karyotype. We evaluate biometric parameters and U/S findings alleles too large to amplify efficiently and female homozygous samples consistent with the molecular diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia. U/S scan require additional Southern Blot (SB) analysis for categorization and performed even at the 18th week of gestation can indicate a decreased sizing. Although regarded as gold standard, this technique is laborious, rate of development of the femora (femur length<5th centile), while time consuming and involves (not always available) large amounts of the mean gestational age at diagnosis is still around the 26th week. DNA. However, accurate and efficient quantification of the number of The utility of other biometric parameters and ratios is discussed (foot repeats in the 5’ UTR of FMR1 gene is essential as premutation alleles length, BPD, HC, FL/foot and FL/AC). In two cases of discontinued are common in the general population. pregnancy, fetal autopsy led to a phenotypic diagnosis and confirmed We evaluated a commercially available assay (Asuragen) using a the prenatal prediction of lethality. We conclude that the combination large set of blinded archived prenatal samples that were previously of U/S and molecular genetic approach is helpful for establishing an analyzed for FXS with conventional PCR and SB analysis in our Center. accurate diagnosis of FGFR-3 related skeletal dysplasias in utero The PCR reagentia were able to identify accurately and quickly FMR1 and subsequently for appropriate genetic counselling and perinatal genotypes, ranging from normal over premutation to full mutation management. alleles, in patient and control samples. Exact sizing was possible for a spectrum of permutation alleles. The assay is also sensitive to size mosaicism and AGG interruptions.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 179 P05.21 investigations revealed that the mother also had this mutation, as well isolation of fetal free nucleic acids from maternal plasma and as her son. detection of fetal gender The detailed fetal ultrasound of the ongoing pregnancy evoked the N. Kehler, L. Lázár, J. Rigó Jr, B. Nagy; diagnosis of achondroplasia rather than hypochondroplasia. Initial 1st Dept of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, molecular testing on amniotic cells failed to detect the p.N540K mutation. Hungary. Because of the suspicion on fetal ultrasounds of achondroplasia The detection of fetal cells and free fetal DNA opened new horizonts in further molecular analysis was performed, and revealed the presence the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis. We aimed to try out two types of of the classic achondroplasia mutation p.G380R (c1138G>C), hereby isolation kits and to compare the effect of the quantity of the maternal confirming the diagnosis of achondroplasia in this foetus. plasma ont he concentration of the obtained DNA. In conclusion: this baby with a prenatal diagnosis of achondroplasia, We collected EDTA blood samples from 40 pregnant women. Samples was born in a family with a mother and 2 sibs affected with were centrifuged and the supernatants were stored on -85 ºC until hypochondroplasia. The age of the father at conception was 33 years. use. We used two kits for DNA isolation from the maternal plasmas, Since this is an unusual finding, further molecular studies to High Pure PCR Template Preparation kit (Roche, Germany) and determine the parental origin of the p.G380R mutation using flanking NucleoSpin Plasma XS kit (Macharey Nagel GmbH, Germany). In the polymorphisms, are performed and the results will be discussed. If case of the NucleoSpin we increased the quantity of the initial plasma the mutation is located on the maternal chromosome there might be to get correct comparison. DNA concentrations were measured by a mechanism that can explain that the FGFR3 gene in the mother is Qubit Fluorometer (Invitrogen, USA). SRY primers and probes were more prone to mutations. If the achondroplasia mutation is located on used by quantitative real-time PCR for determination of fetal gender. the paternal allele, this remarkable situation is just coincidence. The concentration of the free DNA were almost the same by using equal quantity of the initial plasma (2.96±1.04 ng/ml and 3.09±1.76 ng/ P05.24 ml), while it was significantly lower when we used smaller quantity as Low Apgar scores linked with idiopathic congenital cataract: a recommended with Nucleospin. We were able to detect the fetal sex long-term follow-up study in a Romanian primary care centre in all samples correctly. V. Dumitrascu1, A. Matusz2, D. Vlad3, A. Cimporescu3, C. Gug4; According to our results it seems that the concentration of the isolated 1Pharmacology Department, Victor Babes University of Medicine and free nucleic acids depends on the initial maternal serum quantity. Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2General Private Office, Timisoara, Romania, 3Emergency County Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 4Medical Genetics P05.22 Department, Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Relationship of high pregnancy associated plasma protein-A Romania. (PAPP-A) levels to demographics and pregnancy outcomes Background: Several studies have shown that low Apgar scores bellow H. Kaymakçalan1,2, J. Härkönen3; 7 can be linked to different neurologic diseases, but few were related 1Bahçeşehir University, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Yale University, New Haven, CT, to ophthalmologic disorders. Congenital (or infantile) cataract is a United States, 3Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. frequent cause of blindness among children. There are many studies on the adverse effects of low pregnancy Methods: In a ten years longitudinal study, between 1 January 1998 associated plasma protein-A (PAPP-A), but very few studies on high and 31 December 2008, we prospectively enrolled and followed up PAPP-A levels which creates uncertanity and stress on pregnancy a population-based cohort study of 550 live newborns in a Romanian counselling. primary care setting by using medical data obtained after delivery. The We retrospectively analyzed the PAPP-A levels and demographics of Apgar scores at 1 or 5 minutes were recorded following standardized 12,428 pregnant women who were seen at Yale University Hospital procedures. We obtained information on idiopathic congenital cataract prenatal unit between November 2002 and November 2008. Among by linking the cohort with the Pediatric Ophthalmology Hospital these 12,428 pregnancies we first investigated the PAPP-A above Register. Cohort members were followed from birth until onset of the 5 MoM, then the values between 4 and 5 MoM. For both groups ophthalmologic disease or 31 December 2008, whichever came first. we excluded the twin pregnancies and other invalid data.Then we Results: The decreasing Apgar scores were linked with significant compared the results with the general population. (It is estimated that increased rate of idiopathic congenital cataract. The incidence rate of 2.5% of newborns have a recognizable malformation at birth.) idiopathic congenital cataract was 235 per 100,000 person-years for There were 47 pregnancies (0.38%) with PAPP-A above 5 MoM. After those with 5-minute Apgar scores of 1 to 3 and 75 per 100,000 person- exclusion, 23 pregnancies remained. 4 pregnancies (17.3%) ended years for those with a score of 10. This incidence remained particularly with complications which is too few to draw a statistical conclusion. high in early childhood. Bilateral isolated cataract cases were male There were 78 pregnancies (0.64%) with PAPP-A between 4 and dominated (68%), and associated with low birth weight (<2000 g). 5 MoM.After exclusion, 72 pregnancies remained. 8 pregnancies No significant associations were found with older age (≥40 years) of (11.1%) ended with complications.This is statistically significant. ( mothers at delivery or cesarean section. p< 0.01 ).However, we need more studies with bigger population Conclusions: Neonates with a suboptimal Apgar score have a higher numbers to suppose that the outcome of pregnancy will differ with high risk of idiopathic congenital cataract that lasts into early childhood. PAPP-A values. Our study also provides useful data for examining the relationship between certain demographic factors, such as race and P05.25 diabetes, and PAPP-A levels. Whites have higher PAPP-A (mean=1.19 Relatively high frequency of recurrent microdeletion syndromes ) than blacks ( mean=1.49). (p < 0.001) Diabetics have lower PAPP-A( and subtelomeric deletions/duplications uncovered through mean=1.04) than non diabetics (1.22). (p= 0.001) non-selective application of a mLPA based extended prenatal panel in routine prenatal diagnosis P05.23 C. G. Pangalos, B. Hagnefelt, S. Sevastidou, S. Karapanou, K. Pispili, A. When fate hits a family...! Markaki, C. Konialis; W. Courtens1, J. Biard2, G. Mortier3, P. Coucke4; InterGenetics - Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Greece. 1Center of Human Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Cliniques Numerous recurrent genomic disorders have been described, Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Obstetrics, Cliniques involving gain or loss of genetic material at a level not detectable by Universitaires St-Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 3Center of Medical Genetics, routine karyotype analysis, and are the underlying cause of various University Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Center of Medical Genetics, congenital abnormalities with or without mental retardation. Although University Hospital Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. individually rare, these genetic syndromes may occur collectively in We report on a family with hypochondroplasia, in whom the pregnant more than 1 in 1,200 live births, while prenatal ultrasound examination mother was referred for a detailed ultrasound examination at 33 weeks and karyotype analysis will typically fail to detect most, if not all, of because of the presence of polyhydramnios and shortening of bones. the above anomalies in the fetus. Since 2006 we have applied a Prior to this pregnancy, the diagnosis of hypochondroplasia was multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) based established in the daughter of the proband. Molecular studies showed screening approach in 1722 typical unselected prenatal cases, with a p.N540K (c.1659C>G) mutation in the FGFR3 gene. Subsequent (16.1%) or without (77.7%) ultrasound findings, for the simultaneous Prenatal and perinatal genetics 180 targeted detection of 23 recurrent microdeletion syndromes as well Pyrophosphorolysis-activated Polymerization (PAP) for the detection as subtelomeric copy number assessment for all chromosomes. of the Y chromosome. All fetal gender results were concordant with Following amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling, samples were gender confirmed at birth or after karyotyping in n=194 cases with processed for routine karyotype analysis while DNA was extracted in a sensitivity and specificity of both 100% (CI95% [98.5%-100%]). In parallel for MLPA analysis. When necessary, parental samples were n=15 cases results were inconclusive. analyzed to determine the inheritance of the detected aberrations. To confirm the presence of fetal DNA in plasma in cases with a negative We identified nine (9) fetuses with pathological genomic abnormalities result, we performed maternal discrimination tests. In this study 3 (approximately 1 in 191), five of which had as sole indication advanced different methods for maternal discrimination testing are compared. maternal age (1 in 240). In 2 cases an abnormality was suspected from This study shows that fetal gender could be determined from ffDNA karyotype analysis, while the remaining 7 cases would have otherwise in maternal plasma, using a combination of Real-Time PCR and remained totally undetected. Our data represent the largest published PAP. Although we can detect fetal sex reliably using only these two series involving this type of genomic analysis in routine prenatal methods, we do perform a maternal discrimination test for diagnostics diagnosis, without indication bias. The panel increases significantly the in cases with negative results. diagnostic yield of conventional prenatal chromosomal diagnosis and This validation study has been completed. As of March 1 2011, fetal does not pose major interpretation problems. Furthermore, our findings sexing is implemented for diagnostics in our department and can be raise some interesting points to consider and perhaps contribute requested. towards a careful reevaluation of traditional risk assessment and our strategy position, in terms of what we aim for in prenatal chromosomal P05.28 diagnosis. cOLD-PcR, a new tool for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of genetic diseases. P05.26 S. Galbiati1, A. Brisci1, F. Lalatta2, M. Seia3, M. G. Makrigiorgos4, M. Ferrari1,5,6, targeted inhibitory PcR, an attractive laboratory assay for L. Cremonesi1; quantitative detection of fetal DNA isolated from maternal 1San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Genomic Unit for the Diagnosis of Human plasma. Pathologies, Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, Milan, A. O. H. Nygren1, J. Dean1, D. van den Boom2, M. Ehrich2; Italy, 2UO Dipartimentale di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda 1Sequenom CMM, San Diego, CA, United States, 2Sequenom, San Diego, CA, Ospedale Maggiore, Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, United States. Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore, Policlinico, Milan, Italy, Several methods have been developed for non-invasive prenatal 4Dana-Farber/Brigham and Women’s Cancer Center, Brigham and Women’s diagnosis (NIPD) based on circulating cell-free fetal DNA isolated from Hospital, Radiation Therapy, Boston, MA, United States, 5Vita-Salute San maternal plasma. In particular massive parallel shotgun sequencing Raffaele University, Milan, Italy, 6Diagnostica e Ricerca San Raffaele SpA, (MPSS) is capable to identify fetal trisomies. The accuracy of this Milan, Italy. approach is dependent on the number of fetal DNA molecules present Following the discovery of fetal DNA in maternal plasma different and the overall fetal fraction. A control reaction that is able to assess strategies have been reported for noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of the fetal contribution to the DNA sample is therefore highly beneficial. genetic diseases. Despite the advances in improving the analytical We have previously developed a multiplex assay that utilized DNA sensitivity of methods it is still very challenging to distinguish between methylation as a basis for discrimination of fetal derived DNA from fetal and maternal sequences and noninvasive prenatal diagnosis of maternal DNA. First, methylation-sensitive restriction is used to isolate genetic diseases has not yet attained a clinical routine application. the methylated fetal DNA markers and amplified using competitive Fetal DNA in maternal plasma is in the presence of a large majority of PCR in one multiplex reaction. Finally the amplicons are quantified wild-type sequences of maternal origin which hamper the identification using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. This setup allowed us to obtain of fetal paternally inherited mutated alleles. To make widely both fetal and total copy numbers and the overall fetal fraction. accessible noninvasive prenatal diagnosis we developed conditions To minimize the complexity of the MPSS workflow, we have modified for the enrichment of fetal alleles based on co-amplification at lower this fetal quantifier assay to integrate with standard laboratory denaturation temperature-PCR (COLD-PCR). equipment already used in the MPSS process. We have developed We designed assays for the identification of two beta-thalassemia a novel PCR strategy where the amplification of the abundant total mutations, based on full COLD-PCR. In this protocol, heteroduplexes DNA markers is modulated using target specific PCR primer inhibitors. generated between mutant and wild-type sequences were selectively Finally the amplicons are quantified using standard electrophoresis denatured at a critical temperature and amplified allowing the instrumentation. Using this setup we have screened 200 DNA samples enrichment of fetal mutated alleles which could then be simply detected obtained from pregnant women and non-pregnant women. Our results by direct sequencing. Full COLD-PCR enabled correct identification of show that this rapid and high-throughput assay can reliably detect and fetal paternally inherited alleles in 35 couples. quantify the small fraction of fetal DNA isolated in maternal plasma. We provide the first evidence that the application of COLD-PCR enables straightforward and reliable identification of inherited mutated P05.27 alleles without the need of sophisticated procedures or advanced A validation study for non-invasive fetal sexing and the and costly equipment. Full COLD-PCR can be successfully applied comparison of different maternal discrimination tests in to enrich DNA variants irrespective of the kind and position of the diagnostics. mutation thus providing a powerful tool for noninvasive prenatal J. M. E. van den Oever1, S. Balkassmi1, T. Segboer1, P. N. Adama van diagnosis of fetal alleles in a variety of genetic diseases or in general Scheltema2, D. Oepkes2, E. Bakker1, E. M. J. Boon1; for the identification of muted minority alleles. 1Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, LDGA, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Department of P05.29 Obstetrics, Leiden, Netherlands. microchip for determination of the syndromes tied to increased While prenatal diagnosis for fetal sex determination mainly relies on Nuchal translucency invasive procedures which carry a risk of fetal loss, there is a growing K. Joost1,2,3, K. Sak3, M. Mällo3, M. Vahter3, C. Alamillo4, M. Fiddler4, E. need to explore more alternative tests for non-invasive prenatal Pergament4; diagnosis early in gestation. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, We have explored the application of free fetal DNA (ffDNA) from 2Department of Biochemistry, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Asper Biotech maternal plasma for non-invasive fetal sexing and maternal Ltd, Tartu, Estonia, 4Northwestern Reproductive Genetics, Inc., Chicago, IL, discrimination tests. United States. In 2008, we started a large validation and implementation study for Increased foetal nuchal translucency (NT) between 11 and 14 weeks’ non-invasive fetal sexing from maternal plasma in diagnostics. In this gestation is a common phenotypic expression of chromosomal study 209 pregnant women were included (n=112 male and n=97 abnormalities. In the absence of aneuploidy it is associated with adverse female pregnancies). perinatal outcome due to foetal malformations and genetic syndromes, As described earlier we used a combination of Real-Time PCR and including some monogenic disorders. Arrayed primer extension Prenatal and perinatal genetics 181 (APEX) microarray assay was developed to analyse conditions which P05.31 are related to increased NT in case aneuploidy is excluded. The test Confirmation of genetic outcomes in preimplantation genetic includes 3 monogenic disorders (21-hydroxylase deficiency, Smith- haplotyping (PGH). Lemli-Opitz syndrome, spinal muscular atrophy), mutations in 5 genes E. Ronaldson, C. Ogilvie, H. Patel, Y. Khalaf, P. Renwick; associated with Noonan syndrome and polymorphisms in 22q11.2 Centre for PGD, Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. region for detection of del22q11.2 syndrome. At our PGD centre, 3-day embryos at risk of familial single gene Objective: to evaluate the informativeness of the prenatal diagnostic disorders are diagnosed by preimplantation genetic haplotyping (PGH) test in case of increased NT in the foetuses with normal karyotype. following whole genome amplification and testing with a panel of STR Methods: 267 variations in 16 different genes were tested with APEX markers linked to the disease gene. Meiotic microsatellite mutation array in 220 DNA samples isolated from the foetal chorionic cells or or PCR “slippage” may compromise diagnosis using such linkage amniocytes. approaches. Confirmation of diagnosis (COD) was therefore carried Results: Genetic changes were detected in 24 DNA. In 9 foetuses out on a cohort of embryos following PGH. mutations in gene related to 21-hydroxylase deficiency was detected. Over a one-year period, 49 CODs were carried out using material Mutations associated with Noonan syndrome were present in 10 collected from embryos 1 to 4 days post-biopsy; 9 (18%) were foetuses and with Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in 1 foetus. In one discordant with biopsy diagnosis. One discordance was due to biopsy foetus homozygosity of the signals in locus 22q11.2 was observed and of a binucleate cell. Of the remaining 8, two were DMD cases with deletion in this region was suspected. Detailed genotypes and their mosaicism for the X chromosome; three CF cases were diagnosed as phenotypic consequences are discussed. affected at biopsy, but had a third (low-risk) haplotype at COD; two SMA Conclusion: according to our preliminary data the informativeness of cases gave aneuploid results with affected haplotypes at biopsy, whilst our diagnostic test is 9,1% in cohort of the foetuses with NT> 3mm COD indicated euploid carrier status; one HD case appeared to have and normal karyotype. This test provides valuable information for the monosomy 4 at biopsy, but a normal status at COD. Therefore, these antenatal genetic management of foetuses with increased NT. discordances were all likely to be due to mosaicism in the cleavage stage embryos. In only one case (DMD) did COD detect a mutant P05.30 haplotype not found at biopsy; in this case, the sex chromosome Ultrasound and molecular prenatal diagnosis of Ophthalmo- complement was abnormal, and this embryo would therefore not have Acromelic syndrome: bowing of the tibia might be an early been considered for transfer. No novel alleles were found in any of recognizable feature these embryos. A. Wischmeijer1,2, F. Buscherini2, G. Comitini3, L. Brondelli4, E. Della Giustina5, These data indicate that neither meiotic mutation nor PCR slippage is L. Garavelli1, C. Rossi2, M. Seri2, H. van Bokhoven6, A. Superti-Furga7, D. R. likely to compromise PGH diagnosis. Fitzpatrick8; 1SSD Genetica Clinica, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 2UO P05.32 Genetica Medica, Università di Bologna, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, New strategy of routine 250K sNP array analysis instead of Italy, 3UO Ostetricia e Ginecologia, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, karyotyping for prenatally diagnosing fetuses with structural Italy, 4UO Ostetricia e Medicina dell’Età Prenatale, Università di Bologna, ultrasound anomalies Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 5UO Neuropsichiatria Infantile, B. H. W. Faas, I. Feenstra, A. J. A. Kooper, R. Pfundt, A. Eggink, N. de Leeuw; Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 6Department of Human Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Genetics, Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disorders and Nijmegen Centre In October 2010, we implemented a new strategy for routine prenatal for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, diagnosing fetuses with structural ultrasound fetal anomalies Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV) (including increased nuchal translucency). We either apply QF-PCR University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 8MRC Human Genetics and subsequent 250K SNP array (QF/array), after pre-test counseling Unit, Institute of Genetic and Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, and obtaining blood and informed consent from both parents, or QF- Edinburgh, United Kingdom. PCR and subsequent routine karyotyping (QF/karyo), when parents Ophthalmo-Acromelic Syndrome (OAS, MIM 206920) is an autosomal were not counseled or did not opt for array analysis. Abnormal QF- recessive condition mainly characterized by uni- or bilateral PCR results were always followed up by karyotyping. microphthalmia or anophthalmia and limb anomalies, especially We received 95 fetal samples. In 63/95 (66%), QF/array analysis was synostosis of fourth and fifth metacarpals and foot oligodactyly. requested: 18/63 (29%) were abnormal with QF-PCR, the remaining Recently, loss of function mutations in the SMOC1 gene have been samples were array analysed. Although this revealed no clinically shown to be responsible for the disorder. relevant abnormalities, we detected one paternally inherited gain We report on a consanguineous couple requesting a prenatal in 16p13.11 (susceptibility locus), six inherited CNVs and one large diagnosis of OAS; they have a son (6y) with bilateral anophthalmia, contiguous stretch of homozygosity. No incidental, possibly clinically ulnar and fibular reduction defects, bowed tibiae, abnormal Vth fingers, relevant, findings were detected in parental samples. Array analysis fused IVth and Vth metacarpals, absence of Vth toes and metatarsals, was mostly carried out on DNA from uncultured samples and results and syndactyly between IInd and IIIrd toes in whom we had diagnosed were often available within 10 days. In 32/95 (34%) fetuses, QF/karyo OAS. Molecular genetic analysis of the SMOC1 gene confirmed analysis was performed: 5/32 were abnormal with QF-PCR and 2/32 the diagnosis identifying the homozygous mutation c.395dupA (p. revealed an abnormal karyotype, not detectable with QF-PCR (but Tyr132fsX1) of which both parents are carriers. detectable with array analysis). At 12 weeks and 1 day of amenorrhea (ultrasound corresponding to In conclusion, the QF/array analysis strategy did not reveal additional 11+4) the mother underwent CVS for prenatal diagnosis of OAS and clinically relevant abnormalities, indicating that, to increase the karyotyping. At early morphologic ultrasonography, the lower limbs detection rate, fetuses with more specific fetal ultrasound abnormalities were bowed and shortened in length, raising the suspicion of distal might be selected. Alternatively, as results were mostly available within lower limb defects. Fetal karyotype resulted normal (46, XY), but 10 days and SNP array analysis involves a complete genome analysis mutation analysis of fetal DNA revealed the presence of the SMOC1 with no additional tests needed, one can also opt for implementing the mutation in homozygosity. Identification of SMOC1 as causative gene QF/array strategy for all fetuses with structural ultrasound anomalies. will help defining the clinical picture of OAS. This case suggests that a severe lower limb reduction defect with bowing of the tibia can be an P05.33 early recognizable feature of OAS. Evaluation of specific prenatal ultrasound abnormalities as chromosomal risk factors E. Jungwirth1, K. Orendi1, M. Häusler2, M. Speicher1, W. Emberger1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Graz, Austria. Various fetal abnormalities detected by prenatal ultrasound are well established markers for invasive prenatal diagnosis due to their association with fetal chromosomal aberrations. Aim of this study Prenatal and perinatal genetics 182 was to investigate the correlation of pathologic karyotypes with the P05.36 number of prenatal ultrasound abnormalities (PUA) and/or certain Dual testing with QF-PcR and karyotype analysis as standard affected organ systems. 469 pregnancies with suspect ultrasound approach of prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities. findings which subsequently underwent invasive prenatal diagnosis Evaluation of 13,500 cases in Greece. were karyotyped. We assigned PUAs to 8 organ specific categories I. D. Papoulidis1, E. Siomou1, E. Manolakos2, G. Efstathiou1, M. Kontodiou2, T. and the impact of quantitative and qualitative subgroup involvement Tsiligianni1, E. Anastasakis3, A. P. Athanasiadis4, M. B. Petersen2; was analyzed. 1Eurogenetica S.A., Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Eurogenetica S.A., Athens, A pathologic karyotype was found in 18.6% of these pregnancies. An Greece, 3Athens Navy Hospital, Athens, Greece, 4School of Medicine, Aristotle almost linear increase of chromosomal abnormalities with the number University, Thessaloniki, Greece. of PUAs was found with up to 56% chromosomal abnormality rate Last years, the need for rapid prenatal diagnosis of the most common when 5 or more PUAs were present. Multiple subgroup involvement fetal aneuploidies and improvement of pregnancy management showed even higher rates (62%). Single detected PUAs within the provoked the development of a reliable and cost-effective method subgroups were qualitatively analyzed and the highest incidence of known as Quantitative Fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR), to be used in a pathologic karyotypes was found amongst single detected hygromas dual test with conventional karyotype analysis. In this study, we report or hydrops (39%). Single detected PUAs in all other subgroups were our experience of dual prenatal testing with QF-PCR and karyotype only rarely associated with a chromosomal abnormality (2.4%). The analysis in 13,500 cases. The main aim of the study is to examine the most frequent, single reported PUAs were choroid plexus cysts and detection rate of clinically significant chromosomal abnormalities by ventriculomegaly with less than 1% chromosomal abnormality rate. QF-PCR compared to karyotype analysis and assess the necessity of Due to the high impact of the number of detected PUAs and the dual prenatal testing in all cases, regardless indications of referral. The number of affected organ systems on chromosomal abnormality rates rates of concordant results between the two methods were evaluated. any detection of PUAs should lead to an extensive screening for further Abnormal karyotype was found in 325 out of 13,500 cases (2.4%). From fetal anomalies. If certain abnormalities such as choroid plexus cysts these, QF-PCR did not detect the abnormality in 70 cases (21.5%), and ventriculomegaly are found solitarily, the risk for chromosomal while 34 (10.5%) had a high or unknown risk of adverse outcome. abnormalities remains low. By selectively applying dual testing only at cases with ultrasound findings and/or genetic history, 20 out of these 34 would have been P05.34 correctly diagnosed. Selective dual testing would lead to prenatal Prenatal detection of numerical chromosomal aberrations diagnosis of normal and high risk abnormal karyotypes in 13,483 out in institute for children and Youth Health care institute of of the 13,500 pregnancies (99.87%). Our study strengthens the shift Vojvodina in last 12 years towards selective dual testing in the presence of ultrasound findings J. Jovanovic Privrodski, I. I. Kavecan, M. Kolarski, J. Rudez, D. Radovanov, and/or genetic history, and QF-PCR as stand alone test for the rest of L. Gacina, S. Radnovic, T. Tarasenko; the cases. However, ethical issues still exist and further evaluation of Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. more studies would be needed for final conclusions. In this paper we present incidence of prenatally detected aneuploidies during last twelve years (1999-2010) in Medical Genetic Centre in P05.37 Novi Sad, Vojvodina, northern part of Serbia. We used conventional Prenatal diagnosis of chromosome abnormalities by quantitive cytogenetic analysis (G banding technique) for detection of fluorescent PCR in North-West Russia chromosomal abnormalities. Samples were obtained from women in T. Ivashchenko, O. Tarasenko, J. Nasykhova, A. Koroteev, O. Chiryaeva, O. risk for chromosomal abnormalities, who underwent amniocentesis Chiryaeva, L. Petrova, N. Sadik, V. Dudkina, T. Kuznetzova, V. Baranov; between 16th and 19th week of gestation or cordocentesis between Ott’s institute of obstetrics and gynecology, St.Petersdurg, Russian Federation. 20th and 22nd week of gestation. Prenatal diagnosis for the most common chromosome abnormalities, We performed retrospective study for aneuploidies on 22847 amniotic such as Down’s, Edwards’, Patau’s syndromes and also numerical fluid and fetal blood samples. We detected 376 cases of numerical sex chromosomes abnormalities has been carried out by quantitative aberrations at all. We detected autosomal trisomy in 243 cases; fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR). QF-PCR relieves anxiety of most parents gonosomal aneuploidies in 110 cases; polyploidies in 19 cases and within 24 hour from sampling and accelerates therapeutic interventions 4 monosomies. in the case of an abnormal result. The study summarizes our experience Amniocentesis and cordocentesis was recommended for pregnant of prenatal diagnosis for chromosome abnormalities by QF-PCR. 17 women over age 35, women who had an abnormal fetal ultrasound STR markers (D21S11, D21S1437 D21S1411, D21S226, D13S628, result, women who had an abnormal ,,double screen“ or “triple D13S634, D13S742, D18S380, D18S386, D18S391, D18S535, AMXY, screen” biochemical screening test during first or second trimester DXS981, DXS6854, X22, P39, XHPRT) were used.The heterozygosity of pregnancy, or women who had (or whose husbands had) a family value for each chromosome-specific marker was determined. The history of certain diseases, chromosomal abberations or birth defects. use of 3 to 4 markers for each chromosome increases heterozygosity Couples had opportunity to choose termination of pregnancy or and informative value of QF-PCR assay up to 99-100%. From all 763 continue the pregnancy after invasive prenatal diagnosis. samples of fetus tissue 32 trisomic cases, including 22 cases of trisomy 21, 8 case of trisomy 18, 2 case of 47 XXY, 2 case of 45X and 1case P05.35 of 69 XXY were identified. Submicroscopic polymorphic duplications Prenatal diagnosis of 48,XXX,+18 double trisomy of microsatellites were observed in 7 cases as clear trisomic triallelic I. Ouertani, M. Chaabouni, F. Maazoul, H. Chaabouni; or diallelic patterns for one chromosome-specific STRs. Results of department of congenital and hereditary disorders, tunis, Tunisia. molecular study were verified by conventional cytogenetic analysis. Double trisomy (DT) is a rare event. Commonly, pregnancy ends in QF-PCR can be suggested as a fast, simple and reliable method of miscarriage. Pregnancies that continue beyond the first trimester are prenatal diagnosis of common chromosome diseases. rare and have DT involving one sex chromosome in combination with potentially viable autosomal trisomies such as 21, 18 and 13. P05.38 We present a case of DT, 48,XXX,+18, diagnosed because of Detection of stR duplications in prenatal diagnosis of sonographic findings in the second trimester. chromosome abnormalities by quantitative fluorescent PCR FISH analysis was performed in the first time showing 3 chromosomes Y. A. Nasykhova, T. E. Ivashchenko, O. A. Tarasenko, A. L. Koroteev, V. S. 18 and 3 chromosomes X. karyotyping confirmed the DT. Baranov; Parents elected to terminate the pregnancy and fetal autopsy Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. confirmed the sonographic findings. The quantitative fluorescent PCR (QF-PCR) assay, introduced during DT is rare event. Only few pregnancies continue. Ultrasounds controls the last few years, allows prenatal diagnoses of common chromosome are important to discover fetal malformations and perform karyotype. aneuploidies within a few hours after sampling. In the past 2 years, we have tested 560 prenatal samples for trisomies 13, 18 and 21 using a quantitative fluorescence-PCR (QF-PCR) approach. Submicroscopic polymorphic duplications of microsatellites were observed in 7 cases Prenatal and perinatal genetics 183 as clear trisomic triallelic or diallelic patterns for one chromosome- a cell line with an additional small derivative Y-chromosome. specific STRs. Duplications were observed in one sample for one STR We report two cases of unexpected findings with QF-PCR in prenatal on chromosome 21(D21S1437), in five cases for one of the markers on diagnosis. We conclude that, when offering QF-PCR as a standalone chromosome 13 (3 cases for D13S634 and 2 cases for D13S742) as test, unexpected findings are not completely excluded and should be well as for D18S391 marker of chromosome 18. The maternal origin of discussed with the patient. In a minority of cases, full karyotyping will the duplication could be demonstrated in 6 cases by QF-PCR analysis still be necessary to enable appropriate prenatal counselling on the of the same marker in both parents; in all samples the polymorphism significance of the QF-PCR results. was found as inherited from the mother. In one sample the duplication was found to be de novo. P05.41 The finding of submicroscopic duplications in microsatellites should the development of a rapid assay for prenatal detection of also be a warning about the risk in reporting an autosomal trisomy common aneuploidies and microdeletion syndromes detected with a single informative STR. While the same result could J. B. Ravnan, J. Coppinger, S. A. Morton, S. Alliman, J. Burleson, R. Traylor, also be due to partial trisomies (i.e. unbalanced translocation), the C. Walker, S. Byerly, R. Schultz, C. D. Kashork, B. S. Torchia, S. Sulpizio, K. analysis of both parents with the same marker allowed us to distinguish Sundin, B. C. Ballif, L. G. Shaffer; the rare inherited polymorphism in 6 out of 7 cases. Signature Genomics, Spokane, WA, United States. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) testing on uncultured cells has P05.39 been widely used as a rapid test to identify the common aneuploidies “ A deletion in 18 chromosome with QF-PcR” in prenatal samples. We have developed a novel assay utilizing C. CURCIO, C. Lodrini, C. Melles, A. Biasi, M. Seia; Luminex xMAP® technology for the evaluation of 15 microdeletions in IRCCS FONDAZIONE OSP. MAGGIORE - MILANO, MILANO, Italy. addition to the common aneuploidies for use in low-risk pregnancies. The diagnosis of β-thalassemia relies on measuring red blood cell We selected microdeletion syndromes that are not easily detectable indices that reveal microcytic hypochromic anemia, nucleated red by karyotype analysis and that are not usually associated with an blood cells on peripheral blood smear, hemoglobin analysis that abnormal ultrasound. Our validation involved 430 samples including reveals decreased amounts of HbA and increased amounts of HbF both direct and cultured CVS and amniotic fluid samples, as well as after age 12 months, and the clinical severity of anemia. Molecular samples diluted with normal control DNA to simulate maternal cell genetic testing of the gene encoding the hemoglobin subunit beta contamination (MCC) and mosaicism. Four investigators reviewed the (HBB) is available in our laboratory and may be useful for predicting results and correctly identified all microdeletions and aneuploidies. The the clinical phenotype in some cases as well as presymptomatic only exceptions were a 69,XXX, which cannot be distinguished from diagnosis of at-risk family members and prenatal diagnosis. a normal female by this assay, and a normal male with ~20% MCC Prenatal diagnosis is possible when both parents are carriers. that was incorrectly interpreted as 69,XXY. In experiments simulating Our protocol consists in: Fetal DNA extraction from chorionic villi MCC, the admixture of normal female cells became apparent at a level sampling at 11-12 weeks’ gestation; detection of parental mutations of 20%-30% MCC, although abnormalities were still evident up to 45- with Reverse Dot Blot Analysis (RDB) and/or direct sequencing; the 50% MCC. Simulated mosaicism for trisomy 21 showed detection of potential presence of maternal cell contamination (MCC) in fetal the abnormal cell line down to a level of 30-35%. Below this level, the samples is detected by Quantitative Fluorescent-Polimerase Chain abnormal cell line was not consistently identified. We have developed Reaction (QF-PCR). an alternative to FISH aneuploidy screening and microarray analysis in Here we report a case of prenatal diagnosis in which both parents low-risk pregnancies undergoing invasive testing. This assay is likely were carriers of the nonsense mutation Codon39. The fetus resulted to be preferred by women who seek testing beyond routine karyotyping heterozygote Codon 39. QF-PCR showed no MCC but revealed a and aneuploidy FISH but are reluctant to consider microarray analysis. missing paternal correlation for the microsatellite D18S386. Fetal and parental samples underwent array Comparative Genomic P05.42 Hybridization (aCGH) to detect a possible microdeletion in that locus. Unbalanced reciprocal translocations identified at prenatal This analysis confirmed a 147 kb deletion at 18q22.3 in the propositus diagnosis inherited from the father, and so we can exclude any patological meaning. V. Cejnova, V. Harmas, M. Wilimska, M. Stara, M. Soukupova, J. Lastuvkova; The QF-PCR test could allow not only identification of MCC in the fetal Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department material but also detection of chromosome rearrangements (13,18, 21 of Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic. and sexual chromosome). Balanced reciprocal translocations, which are typically an exchange of two terminal segments from different chromosomes, occur in P05.40 approximately one in 500 live births, and are usually associated with a Unexpected findings using QF-PCR as a rapid test for normal phenotype. Reciprocal translocations may be associated with aneuploidy detection in prenatal diagnosis infertility in some carriers, while all carriers have reproductive risks due K. D. Lichtenbelt1,2, K. Kusters1,2, G. C. M. L. Page-Christiaens1,3, A. C. C. van to abnormal segregation of the translocation chromosomes at meiosis, Oppen1,3, G. H. Schuring-Blom1,2; resulting in sperm or eggs with chromosome imbalance. 1University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Dept. of Biomedical We present three types of unbalanced reciprocal translocations Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Dept. of Obstetrics, Wilhelmina Children’s detected prenatally using G-banding, fluorescent in situ hybridization Hospital, Utrecht, Netherlands. and spectral karyotyping. The first two cases represent partial Rapid aneuploidy testing in prenatal diagnosis using MLPA or QF-PCR monosomy 4q and partial trisomy 4q due to a balanced translocation with markers for the chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and XY is now being 4q;21p in the mother. Isolated 4q duplications result in variable widely used. Arguments for using these tests are the short reporting clinical features, often including growth and developmental delay and time, high throughput and low costs. Additionally, unexpected findings dysmorphic appearance. Patients with 4q terminal deletions share as seen in full karyotyping and leading to difficult counselling issues, enough similarities to represent an identifiable phenotype. Findings which cause anxiety for the parents, can be avoided. The tests may in these patients include craniofacial anomalies, congenital heart be used in combination with karyotyping or as a standalone test for and genitourinary defects, moderate to severe mental retardation, specific indications such as advanced maternal age or increased risk poor postnatal growth, and hypotonia. In third case we report an for Down syndrome. unbalanced segregation of a maternal translocation t(3;8)(p26;p22) In 2010 a total of 397 amniotic fluid samples were analysed in our causing partial trisomy 3p/partial monosomy 8p. It was the fifth laboratory with QF-PCR, using Aneufast kit S1/S2 and M13, M18, M21 pregnancy of the mother with four miscarriages and fetal ultrasound and MXY (Genomed Ltd, Kent, UK), followed by karyotyping. QF-PCR showed a hypoplastic left heart. There are described in the literature yielded unexpected findings in two cases: in one case the two most distal recurrent deletions of a region of 8p23.1 which are associated with markers on the long arm of chromosome 18 were trisomic. Additional congenital heart defects. karyotyping showed an unbalanced translocation (47,XX,+der(9) Couples carrying reciprocal translocations may request preimplantation t(9;18)). The second case showed a mosaic 46,XX/46,XY, but no peak genetic diagnosis in order to select embryos with no genetic imbalance was seen for the SRY-marker. Karyotyping showed a 45,X cell line and and hence increase their chances of a successful pregnancy.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 184 P05.43 P05.45 Identification of a novel common microdeletion within the RHD Presence of a partial RH1 by fetal genotyping RHD in maternal gene in 56 French patients: implication for prenatal diagnosis plasma: clinical and biological expression at birth. About a case Y. Fichou1, D. Jamet1, L. Bryckaert1, C. Guerry1, C. Bénech1, I. Dupont1, J. E. GUINCHARD1, C. FEREC2, P. BRICCA1; Chen1, C. Le Maréchal1,2,3, C. Férec1,2,3; 1EFS Rhône-Alpes site de Lyon-GHE, 69677 BRON Cedex, France, 2EFS 1Etablissement Français du Sang - Inserm, U613, Brest, France, 2CHRU Brest, Bretagne Site de brest, 29200 BREST, France. Hôpital Morvan, Brest, France, 3Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Introduction: mrs. B. Marie, caucasian, 5th pregnancy, presents a poly- Santé, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, France. alloimmunization already known during a previous pregnancy: a non In the field of blood transfusion, the accurate typing of RHD alleles evolutive anti-RH1 + an anti-RH2 is of major clinical relevance to prevent from alloimmunizing + an anti-JK1. RHD- recipients with blood from RHD+ donors. In ~1-2% of cases, fetal RHD genotyping in maternal plasma performed at 23 weeks and discrepancy in the phenotypical typing of rare D alleles may occur, and 33 weeks show an amplification of exon 10, but no amplification of a molecular analysis of the RHD genotype is therefore required. From exons 4 and 5. Maternal buffy coat showed no amplification. It may be January 2003 to July 2010 more than 2,000 blood samples presenting a partial D inherited his African father (RHD gene no analyzed) . ambiguity for D phenotype by routine serologic analyses were The birth takes place at 37 weeks: at birth, the child has no anemia, collected in laboratories from the French Blood Centre (Etablissement moderate hyperbilirubinemia quickly contained by phototherapy, no Français du Sang) in several French regions. Since the amplification transfusion was necessary. of RHD exon 10 could not be achieved by a conventional PCR method Results and hypothesis: the direct antiglobulin test is positive at in 56 blood samples, we designed a protocol to investigate the region birth. Elution test finds the presence of anti-RH2, anti-JK1 and anti- that was suspected to be deleted. We report the identification of a RH1 while the newborn is Rh: -1.2 and JK: 1. The sequencing of the 5.4-kb microdeletion in all samples, including the whole sequence RHD gene shows an aspect of partial D associated with a deletion of of exon 10, which contains the stop codon. Although the transcript some exons: how is the expression profile? It may be a nonfunctional that is generated is suspected to be aberrant and thus degraded, a gene and anti-RH1 found in the eluate is present in the free state, in the substantial amount of protein appears to be biosynthesized and some close environment of the erythrocyte (Matuhasi-Ogata phenomenon). antigens may be partly recognized by anti-D specific antibodies, then Conversely, in case of a gene with partial antigen expression, the potentially conferring a weak D phenotype. This finding raises the result of RH1 phenotype at birth may be due to saturation of antigenic question of noninvasive method for fetal RHD typing by amplification of sites by corresponding antibodies. exon 10, which is supposed to be negative while an aberrant, antigenic Conclusion: a new sample a few month after birth would confirm its protein is nonetheless produced. Subsequent molecular analyses are RH1 phenotype. currently in progress to investigate whether this haplotype derives from a common ancestor, or if the breakpoint is a mutation hotspot. P05.46 Fetal RHD genotyping in maternal plasma: Detection of P05.44 variantsforms the fetal RHD genotyping from cell-free fetal DNA circulating in S. MONNIER, E. GUINCHARD; maternal blood - The first non-invasive prenatal test in Romania EFS Rhône-Alpes site de Lyon-GHE, 69677 BRON Cedex, France. A. M. Stan1, C. Dragomir1, E. Severin2, L. Savu1; Background and aims: the prenatal determination of fetal RH1 1Genetic Lab S.R.L., Bucharest, Romania, 2Carol Davila Univ Med Pharm, represents an important tool to guide the management of pregnancy Bucharest, Romania. in severe maternal alloimmunization context or to indicate an Background: Detection of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal circulation, immunoprophylaxis during pregnancy of non anti-RH1 allo-immunized the new non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) approach, raised the women. challenge of finding safer methods for prenatal diagnosis. Normal and partial RH:1 phenotype can induce or re-activate an anti- We report the first study of non-invasive fetal RHD genotyping RH1 allo-immunization: It’s therefore important to detect wild and performed in Romania. variant forms of RHD gene, this capacity is determined by the choice Objective: The prenatal diagnosis procedures currently employed in of primers and probes. Romania are based exclusively on invasive sampling procedures of Methodology: exons 4, 5 and 10 of RHD gene are analysed on free fetal cells. Our aim was to develop a protocol for non-invasive fetal fetal DNA containing maternal plasma after 10 weeks of pregnancy by RHD genotyping in pregnancies at risk: the pregnant woman is RhD quantitative real-time PCR using TaqMan technology. negative and her partner is RhD positive. Variant forms are suspected if non homogeneous amplifications of Methods: We developed a three-step method for fetal RHD genotyping the three exons are observed, like the pseudogene Ψ by Africans. and we tested 56 pregnant RhD negative women with RhD positive Buffy-coat of one or the two parents are tested following the Ct values partners. The cell-free total DNA extraction was performed from obtained by fetal genotyping. Variant RHD gene can be sequenced to 1ml maternal plasma using the QIAamp® DSP Virus kit with some study its functionality. adjustments to the standard QIAGEN protocol. We performed the fetal Results: all variant forms of RHD gene found in our laboratory show RHD genotyping using a commercial 2x multiplex PCR master mix amplification of at least one but not the three tested exons. and specific primers for two sequences in the exon 5 and respectively Conclusions and prospects: buffy-coat amplification profile of a few exon 7 of the RHD gene. We also included the beta-globin sequence blood donnors in Rhône-Alpes with sequenced variant forms of RHD detection as internal control. The PCR products were automated gene are currently studied to verify the specificity of the method. analyzed by high resolution capillary electrophoresis. Results: We detected 39 fetuses with RHD positive genotype and 17 P05.47 fetuses with RHD negative genotype. All 56 cases were analyzed in Seckel syndrome diagnosed prenatally and confirmed postnatal triplicate and the results were confirmed by the invasive method. S. Farcas1, G. Olaru2, A. Ratiu3, N. Andreescu1, M. Stoian1, V. Belengeanu1; Conclusion: Our results confirm that this non-invasive approach is 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of Medical Genetics, feasible and accurate and improve the management of mother-fetus Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Department of RhD incompatibility and isoimmunization by eliminating the invasive Neonatology, Timisoara, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, procedure for fetal RHD genotyping. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Timisoara, Romania. Seckel syndrome is a rare form of primordial dwarfism, characterized by severe intrauterine and postnatal dwarfism, severe microcephaly with variable mental retardation, facial anomalies and skeletal abnormalities. We report a case of Seckel syndrome diagnosed prenatally by ultrasound and confirmed postnatal. Ultrasound examination at 20 weeks of gestation revealed the following parameters on the lower growth curve corresponding to fetus age: biparietal diameter, head Prenatal and perinatal genetics 185 circumference, abdomen circumference, occipitofrontal diameter, University, Montréal, QC, Canada, 5Pathology, Le Havre, France, 6INSERM femur length, estimated fetal weight. The examination at 26 weeks U676, Paris, France, 7Faculté de Médecine, Strasbourg, France. of gestation showed severe intrauterine growth retardation. The Sirenomelia is a rare fatal condition characterized by abnormal suspicion of Seckel syndrome was raised, corroborating the growth fusion of the lower extremities. Sirenomelia is usually sporadic, and parameter data with the typical facial signs: beak-like protrusion of monozygotic twins are usually discordant (Stocker, 1987). Familial nose and micrognathia. recurrence of sirenomelia is exceptional, with only one family reported, A male infant was delivered by caesarian section at 40 weeks of with two sirenomelic sibs, another with renal agenesis and the last with gestation, with weight of 1520 g; length of 39 cm; cranial circumference imperforate anus (Rudd and Klimek, 1990). In monozygotic twinning, of 26 cm. On examination we noticed characteristic narrow face, concordant twins have been described (Roberge, 1963), and semi- receding forehead, large eyes, prominent beaked nose, micrognathia, concordants (Martinelli et al., 1982; Akbiyik et al., 2000). Sirenomelia low-set ears. Other manifestations were: closed anterior and posterior with renal and anal anomalies in other siblings has been described fontanelles, clinodactyly of fifth finger, supernumerary nipple on the once (Selig et al., 1993). We report two additional families. In the left side and criptorchidism. Thoracic X-ray showed only 11 ribs, while first family, the mother was operated of a short form of imperforate cranial X-ray revealed sinostosys of sagittal and metopic sutures. anus. Her first pregnancy was terminated because of presence of MRI revealed smaller cerebral hemisphere volume, enlarged lateral bilateral renal agenesis with anamnios. Her second pregnancy was ventricles, cerebellar hypoplasia. The diagnosis of Seckel syndrome interrupted because of sirenomelia. The second family was referred was set based on postnatal typical clinical and imagistic findings. The because of the occurrence of caudal malformation in their two children. patient will be followed up to asses the development of mental status Parents have normal X-rays of the spine. The first pregnancy gave for a correct management. birth to a girl with imperforate anus. X rays showed absent S3-S5 Seckel syndrome should be considered as possible diagnosis when and coccyx. CT-scan of the pelvis showed abnormal pelvic floor with prenatal ultrasound reveals severe microcephaly and intrauterine poor musculature, mostly fibrous fatty content without tendinous growth restriction. attachments. The bladder was very anterior and almost bifid inferiorly. A bifid uterus was present. The second pregnancy gave birth to a baby P05.48 girl with sirenomelia. No diabetes were present in the pregnancies. Fetal presentation of silver Russell syndrome Molecular studies are underway to better elucidate the genetic basis M. Ghanim1,2, I. Netchine3, S. Rossignol4, L. Devisme5, B. Delobel2, J. of sirenomelia in human. Andrieux6, V. Debarge7, J. Plennevaux8, S. Lucidarme-Rossi9, S. Manouvrier1, 1 C. Vincent-Delorme10; 1Centre de Référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes P05.50 Malformatifs Nord de France, CHRU Lille, France, 2Hôpital Saint Vincent, Lille, Prenatal diagnosis of tetrasomy 5p by cVs and amniocentesis France, 3Laboratoire d’explorations fonctionnelles endocriniennes: Hôpital V. Curtisova1, I. Dhaifalah1, P. Čapkova1, E. Popelinska2, L. Tuckova3, M. d’enfants Armand -Trousseau, APHP, UPMC, INSERM U-398, Paris, France, Holzerova4; 4Laboratoire d’explorations fonctionnelles endocriniennes: Hôpital d’enfants 1Institute of Human Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Teaching hospital Olomouc, Armand-Trousseau, APHP, UPMC, INSERM U-398, Paris, France, 5Service Olomouc, Czech Republic, 2Cytogeneticka laborator Brno, Brno, Czech d’Anatomie Pathologique, CHRU Lille, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Republic, 3Department of pathology, Teaching hospital Olomouc, Olomouc, Médicale, CHRU Lille, France, 7Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CHRU Czech Republic, 4Heamoto-oncological clinic, Teaching hospital Olomouc, Lille, France, 8Service de Gynécologie-Obstétrique, CH Arras, France, 9Service Olomouc, Czech Republic. de Néonatologie, CH Arras, France, 10Centre de Référence Anomalies du We report the prenatal diagnosis of a fetus with tetrasomy 5p Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs Nord de France, CH Arras-CHRU resulting from a supernumerary isochromosome for the short arm Lille, France. of chromosome 5 detected in all cells obtained from chorion villous Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is characterized by intrauterine sampling preformed for a positive combined first trimester screening (IUGR), postnatal growth restriction, relative macrocephaly and typical test with an increased nuchal translucency at a maternal age of 42 dysmorphic features. Two mechanisms account for 70% of SRS cases: years. An amniocentesis revealed the same finding in a mosaic with hypomethylation of 11p15.5 imprinting center region 1 (ICR1) and 7% aberrant cells by a standard karyotyping and 20% by FISH. The maternal uniparental disomy for chromosome 7 (matUPD7). Prenatal pregnancy was terminated. The fetus had some dysmorphic features- diagnosis is possible only for matUPD7. hypertelorism, a wide nasal bridge, microgantia, small earlobes, We report the antenatal and postnatal data of three unrelated cases a hypoplastic right upper lung lobe and a bicornate uterus. The of SRS. Pregnancy was marked by asymmetric IUGR sparing the examination of fibroblasts revealed the mosaic of isochromosome head at 22 weeks of gestation (WG) with normal prenatal karyotype. 5p in 13% of mitosis by karyotyping. Isochromosome 5p seems to be Cesarean section delivery was induced due to cessation of fetal present relatively frequently as a confined placental mosiacism, but growth at 32 WG (case 1) and at 30 WG (case 2) while case 3 was when an aberrant ultrasound finding is detected there is a higher risk stillbirth at 27 WG. Postnatal echocardiography detected blocked of true mosaicism, as was in our case. CVS findings need to be verified supracardiac total anomalous pulmonary venous return (TAPVR) in by amniocentesis. A parental age effect has been reported with the case 1 and hypoplastic aortic arch and cardiac TAPVR in case 2. Both formation of izochromosomes, which is also supported by our findings. died shortly after birth. Autopsy (refused in case 1) findings were: multivisceral hypoplasia (case 2), genital and extremity anomalies P05.51 (case 3). Hypomethylation of ICR1 11p15.5 was identified in the three A case of co-inheritance of alpha and beta thalassaemia with cases and confirmed the clinically suspected diagnosis of SRS. almost normal haematological indices: an alert for carrier SRS should be considered in cases with second trimester asymmetric screening IUGR sparing the head. Notably, the association of SRS and lethal E. Boutou, A. Balassopoulou, E. Voskaridou; cardiopathies is rarely reported. Either they represent two distinct Laiko Hospital, Athens, Greece. pathologies or SRS might be underdiagnosed when associated with Thalassaemias are a group of monogenic disorders characterized by lethal cardiopathies. Finally, IUGR, cardiopathies and prematurity led reduction of one or more globin chain synthesis. to death of cases (1 and 2). Should premature delivery in SRS be Prevention of haemoglobinopathies, mainly through prenatal diagnosis, avoided to improve prognosis? A reliable prenatal diagnosis for SRS is the major strategy against expansion of the disease. Prevention is would prove to be useful. based upon carrier identification based on red cell indices and HbA2 values. The high incidence of α- and β- thalassemia traits in Greece P05.49 often results in co-inheritance of both mutant aplotypes. In practically sirenomelia and caudal malformations in two families. all cases, the haematological phenotype of a double heterozygote M. GERARD1,2, V. LAYET3, T. COSTA4, P. CHENAL5, A. VERLOES1,6, B. for both α- and β-thalassemia is similar to the one of a β-thalassemia GERARD1,7; carrier except from an increase in MCV values. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Paris, France, 2Genetic Department, Caen, We present here a quite interesting rare case of an α- and β-thalassemia France, 3Cytogenetics and medical genetics, Le Havre, France, 4McGill carrier whose erythrocyte indices are far from characteristic of the Prenatal and perinatal genetics 186 underlying beta globin gene mutation. An adult pregnant female P05.54 was screened for thalassaemia and presented the following Role of prophylactic therapy in inherited thrombophilia - study values: Hb:11,7g/dL; HCT:34,6%; RBC:4,29x106/ml; MCV:80,7fL; on a group of patients in Oncomed medical center MCH:27,3pg and HbA:4,1%. Subsequent molecular genetic analysis, R. Mihaescu1,2, E. Sirbu2,3, A. Stoian4, A. Dan4, C. Gug1, A. Caraba1; 2 due to the increased HbA, revealed that the individual was a double 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Municipal Clinical 2 heterozygote for both α- and β-thalassemia (beta globin gene: IVS- Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 3West University, Department of Physiotherapy, 1-6 T->C substitution and alpha globin gene locus: -α3.7 deletion). Timisoara, Romania, 4Oncomed Medical Center, Timisoara, Romania. Occasionally, carriers of IVS-I-6 and IVS-I-110 with only mild reduction Thrombophilias are hereditary or acquired conditions that determine in MCV and MCH values have been observed. In such cases, co- a hypercoagulable state predisposing to thromboembolic events. The inheritance of a-thalassaemia, as in the herein reported case, might aim of our study was to prove the efficiency of thromboprophylaxis in further improve erythrocyte indices, near to normal, a fact which pregnant women with hereditary thrombophilia. increases the risk for misdiagnosis. In conclusion, we propose that in Methods: A total of 41 women with inherited thrombophilia were similar cases identification of the underlying mutations is mandatory in followed in the medical center ONCOMED Timisoara. 14 patients order to avoid misdiagnosis. had a MTHFR-PAI mutation, 3 women were homozygous for the C677T MTHFR mutation, 3 were homozygous for the A1298C P05.52 MTHFR mutation and 2 were heterozygous for this mutation. MTHFR National thalassemia Prevention Programs in the middle East heterozygous mutation combined with the factor V Leiden mutation muslim countries with emphasis on iranian experience was observed in 6 patients. The prevalence of protein C deficiency has S. Zeinali1, A. Samavat2, M. S. Fallah3, H. Bagherian3; been found in 5 patients, the protein S deficiency in 4 women and the 1Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute combined deficit for protein C and S, in 2 patients. 2 patients presented of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetics Office, Ministry of Health a heterozygous prothrombin mutation. All women with heterozygous and Medical Education, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kawsar Human mutations received aspirin 75 mg/day and folic acid 5 mg/day during Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. pregnancy whereas those with homozygous mutation, low molecular Thalassemia is associated with people in Iran, Pakistan, Arab countries weight heparins (dalteparin) 5000IU/day. around Persian Gulf (Oman, Bahrain, UAE and Saudi Arabia), Egypt, Results: We found no significant differences between the groups Syria and Turkey. Thalassemia has high burden on health resources related to the incidence of congenital malformations or abortions, and has raised the need to adopt community-based prevention intrauterine growth restriction or preterm deliveries. 2 women in program. This may include public awareness, population screening, dalteparin group gave birth to a child with patent ductus arteriosus. genetic counseling, and PND to reduce the incidence of thalassemia. 3 women in the same group had heparin induced thrombocytopenia. Establishment of a comprehensive screening and prevention program There were no cases of pregnancy related thrombosis in either group faces many problems when prenatal diagnosis and termination of and all women had a live birth. pregnancy is not permitted or financial resources are limited. In Iran, Conclusion: Thromboprophylaxis in pregnant women with hereditary National Program for the Prevention of Thalassemia was implemented thrombophilia has an important role in ensuring a normal pregnancy in 1997. This led to a sharp drop on the birth of affected children and a live birth for these women. with thalassemia and sickle cell disease during the past 13 years by providing help to those couples who were both carriers. After P05.55 this experience, Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain implemented Fetal Akinesia in metatropic Dysplasia: Overlap between similar programs for thalassemia and SCD in 2001, 2002 and 2004 chondrodysplasia and Neuropathy? respectively. UAE and Oman are taking similar measures. Program E. Lausch1, F. Stanzial2, G. Gillesen-Kaesbach3, C. Di Stefano4, E. Bertini5, C. in SA and Bahrain lacks prenatal diagnosis component, therefore one Dionisi-Vici6, B. Nilius7, B. Zabel1, A. Superti-Furga8, S. Unger9; does not expect sharp drop in the birth of affected children unless carrier 1Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg University Hospital, couples are guided to go to other countries for therapeutic abortions. In Freiburg, Germany, 2Servizio Multizonale di Consulenza Genetica, Bolsano, SA, in 1990, a Fatwa “allows termination of pregnancy in the first 120 Italy, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 4Ospedale Umberto I days after conception if the fetus is shown beyond doubt to be affected Nocera Inferiore, Salerno, Italy, 5Molecular Medicine, Institute from Hospital with severe malformation that is not amenable to treatment.” Bahraini Care to Science (IRCCS), Rome, Italy, 6Division of Metabolism, Bambino Gesù government also has stated that they have noticed sharp drop on the Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 7Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leuven, birth of SCD after the implementation of the program. Belgium, 8Department of Pediatrics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Lausanne, Switzerland. P05.53 Heterozygous mutations in the TRPV4 gene have been associated with two prenatal cases of 22q11 duplication detected by sNP array a family of skeletal dysplasias (metatropic dysplasia, Pseudomorquio V. Krutilkova, E. Hlavova, M. Trkova, V. Becvarova, D. Smetanova, D. Stejskal; type 2, SMD Kozlowski, and brachyolmia) as well as with dominantly Centre for Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine GENNET, Praque, inherited neuropathies (hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy 2C, Czech Republic. scapuloperoneal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), and congenital distal The 22q11 region is predisposed to rearrangements. The 22q11.2 SMA). While there is phenotypic overlap between the various members microdeletion syndrome is the most common. We report two prenatal of each group, the two groups were considered to be separate with cases of 22q11 duplication detected by Illumina SNP array using the former being strictly a structural skeletal condition and the latter HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1. Generated data were analysed by Illumina group being confined to the nervous system. We report here on fetal KaryoStudio 1.3 and GenomeStudio V2010.2. akinesia as the presenting feature of severe metatropic dysplasia, Case 1: In the foetus with ultrasound detection of agenesis of the corpus suggesting that certain TRPV4 mutations can cause both a skeletal callosum 22q11.2 duplication was found. The 22q11.2 duplication and a neuropathic phenotype. phenotype is extremely variable. According to our knowledge it is the Case 1 was diagnosed at week 20 with short limbs, absence of limb first report of a case 22q11.2 duplication associated with such type of movements, elbow pterygia, and finger contractures. Cases 2 and 3 the abnormality of central nervous system. (twins) were observed to have short limbs with arthrogryposis and Case 2: In the foetus with abnormal ultrasound findings including high akinesia at week 20. Both pregnancies were interrupted and fetal probably rectal atresia and agenesis of one umbilical artery marker radiographs suggested metatropic dysplasia. Case 4 presented with chromosome was detected. Using SNP array the marker chromosome joint contractures and absent limb movements at birth; skeletal survey was identified as 22q11.1 duplication overlapping the critical region for showed typical features of metatropic dysplasia. The baby died of cat-eye syndrome (CES). respiratory complications at age 4 months. Sequencing of the TRPV4 The SNP array together with other molecular cytogenetic techniques is gene confirmed the presence of de novo heterozygous mutations very useful in identifying of the small structural abnormalities of foetal predicting G78W (case 1), T740I (cases 2 and 3), and K276E (case 4). chromosomes. This is important to specify prognosis of an affected Although some degree of restriction of movements is not uncommon in foetus. fetuses with skeletal dysplasia, akinesia as leading sign is unusual and may indicate that certain TRPV4 mutations produce a severe “overlap” phenotype.Prenatal and perinatal genetics 187 P05.56 We present a case of triploidy discovered by amniocentesis which was Congenital diaphragmatic hernia associated with a bifid tongue carried out at 16 weeks gestation in a 25-year-old woman, following and cleft palate: a case report. an abnormal maternal serum screening test at the first trimester of E. Pompilii1, A. Elmakky1, E. Contro2, S. Miccoli1, G. Pilù2, M. Seri1; gestation and fetal nuchal translucency (NT) thickness was significantly 1Medical Genetics Unit, St Orsola Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, increased (1.97 MoM).The maternal serum markers used were free BOLOGNA, Italy, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St Orsola human chorionic gonadotrophin (freehCG), and pregnancy associated Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, BOLOGNA, Italy. plasma protein A. The fetus was identified as screen-positive for Objective: We describe a female infant, in whom a left congenital Edward’s syndrome (trisomy 18), with very low level PAPP A (MoM diaphragmatic hernia, a bifid tongue, cleft palate and other congenital = 0,15), and normal hCG levels. Ultrasound findings showed at 16 anomalies coexisted. week of gestation early intrauterine growth retardation and severe Case report: A 39-years-old female, G5P2, had undergone regular oligohydramnios. To identify any possible chromosomal abnormality, prenatal care. She underwent amniocentesis at 16+6 weeks of gestation. cytogenetic investigation was carried out on the amniotic fluid sample. The result showed normal female karyotype (46, XX). Fetal growth was The fetus’s karyotype showed triploidy with 69, XXY chromosome appropriate throughout the pregnancy. At 20 weeks, ultrasound scan complement in all the metaphase spreads obtained from two different revealed a bifid tongue and a left congenital diaphragmatic hernia; cultures, using GTG banding technique. no other abnormalities were evidenced. A genetic consultation was Triploidy could be identified in the first trimester using NT, maternal obtained after these findings. At birth, the baby showed respiratory serum free beta-hCG and PAPP-A. distress and poor respiratory functions, for that she was immediately intubated by the pediatrician and sent to the intensive care unit for J05.03 further evaluation. After few days, the baby underwent surgical Prevalence of RFc - 1 A80G polymorphism in romanian mothers intervention for the diaphragmatic hernia. Clinical evaluation has having children with Down syndrome demonstrated the presence of pedunculated lingual mass, soft mass D. Neagos, R. Cretu, L. C. Bohiltea; arising from the palate and cleft palate. Histological examination of the Genetic Department, UMF Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. excised tissues from the revealed masses is ongoing. A blood sample The RFC1 (reduced folate carrier protein) gene is located on was withdrawn from the baby to perform CGH-array in our laboratory. chromosome 21 and likely overexpressed in trisomy 21 individuals. This analysis is still ongoing. The polymorphisms of the genes involved in folate metabolism may be Conclusion: These conditions, independently, may be isolated associated with higher risk of Down syndrome (DS) pregnancy. or associated with other congenital anomalies; however, to our Our study included 26 women who gave birth to DS babies and 46 knowledge, their coexistence in the same patient is not described control mothers of healthy children. All women in our study reside in the before. same geographic area and have a similar social background. The DS mothers were younger than 40 years old and 7 of them had a history of J05.01 spontaneous miscarriages (26.92%). Genomic DNA was isolated from Prenatal diagnosis for hemophilia A using inverse-shifting PcR whole peripheral blood collected on EDTA, using peqGOLD blood DNA in an iranian family mini kit (ATP Biotech). The RFC1 A80G mutations were investigated L. Kokabee, M. kokabee, S. Zeinali, M. Karimipoor; by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment length Molecular Medicine Dep., Biotechnology Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, polymorphism (RFLP) analysis.The results show that there was no Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. significant difference in heterozygous genotype frequencies between Hemophilia A (HA) is an X -linked coagulation disorder with a world- the two groups. Moreover, while AA homozygous genotype frequency wide incidence of approximately 1 in every 5000 males. Almost half of was higher among control mothers than among DS mothers (10.87% the patients with severe HA have large inversions that disrupt either versus 3.85%), the overall combination of GA heterozygous and intron 22 (Inv22) or intron 1 (Inv1) of the factor VIII (F8) gene. The AA homozygous RFC1 variant genotypes did not show significant identification of carriers and the prenatal diagnosis of Inv22 and Inv1 difference between the case and control groups (OR 0.59 [0.21-1.70] have greatly improved with new strategies. Recently, inverse shifting- P 0.33). This is the first study that has analyzed the RFC1 A80G PCR (IS-PCR) has been developed as a new diagnostic test. Here we polymorphism as a maternal risk factor for DS, in a cohort of Romanian report the reproducibility of the modified method in prenatal diagnosis mothers of DS children, in comparison with control mothers. of Inv22 in an obligate carrier with a male fetus at 13 weeks of gestation. After determination the carrier status of the mother, genomic J05.04 DNA of chorionic villus sample (CVS) was dissected and extracted mtHFR gene polymorphism as a maternal risk factor of Down according to standard protocols. Genomic DNA was digested by BclI, syndrome in romanian population followed by self-ligation to create BclI circles. PCR was performed on R. Cretu, D. Neagos, L. C. Bohiltea; circular genomic DNA. Our results confirmed Inv 22 is responsible for Genetic Department, UMF, Bucharest, Romania. the disease in the family and fetus was normal. Prenatal diagnosis Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) is an important offers an option, namely to restrict abortions to hemophilic fetuses only, enzyme involved in folate metabolism; it catalyzes the and thus retain the chance of bearing normal sons. It seems IS-PCR conversion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate (5,10-MTHF) in technique have proven to be a rapid, robust and reliable technique 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MeTHF), the latter representing the active for genotyping of inv22 in HA patients, carrier detection and prenatal form of folate that is involved in remethylation of homocysteine to diagnosis. methyonine. MTHFR polymorphism involves an adenosyne to cytosine substitution J05.02 at base pair 1298 (A1298C), causing a glutamate to alanine substitution Prenatal screening for triploidy using nuchal translucency and in the MTHFR protein. The polymorphism is located in exon 7, within maternal serum pregnancy associated plasma protein A in first the presumptive regulatory domain. The present study includes 72 trimester of gestation. women (ages 20-42 years old): 26 of them, that gave birth to DS D. Mierla1, V. Radoi1,2; children, citogenetically confirmed as regular trisomy 21, including 7 1Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 2UMF Carol Davila, Bucharest, women with a history of spontaneous miscarriages, and 46 control Romania. mothers that gave birth only to healthy children, without any history Triploidy has been estimated to occur in 1-2% of all clinically recognized of miscarriages or abnormal pregnancies. All genotype analyses were conceptions. It has been assessed that only 1/3 of triploid conceptuses performed using PCR-RFLP.CC homozygous genotype frequency survive post 15 weeks gestation. at position 1298 was higher in DS mothers than in controls (19.2 % There are two types of triploidy. In type I, where the additional versus 6.5% respectively, with an odds ratio of 4.167 (95% CI 0,80 chromosome set is of paternal origin, the placenta is partially molar and to 21.68, P value 0.08). AC heterozygous genotype did not show any the fetus is relatively well-grown. Type II, where the extra chromosome difference between the two groups. MTHFR A1298C polymorphism set is of maternal origin, is characterized by a small normal looking does not associate with a higher risk, at a statistically significant level. placenta and severe asymmetrical fetal growth restriction.Cancer genetics 188 J05.05 on chromosome 16p13 and transports a wide range of compounds Umbilical cord stem cells a boon to man-kind but karyotyping a including glutathione conjugates and cyclic nucleotides out of cells necessity In this study we attempted to investigate the possible correlation R. S. Patil1,2, C. Vaidya3, S. Gaitonde3; between MRP1 and clinical response in patients with colorectal cancer 1Gebetics, Genectics center, Navi Mumbai, india., mumbai, India, 2D.Y.Patil (CRC). college of biotechnology and bioinformatics, India, Mumbai, India, 3Gebetics, Materials and Methods: Tumor and adjacent normal tissues from Genectics center, Navi Mumbai, india., Mumbai, India. 60 Iranian patients with colorectal cancer were assessed for the The isolation of umbilical cord stem cells is of great value for treatment expression level of MRP1 by Real Time RT-PCR. of several disease/disorders. These cells are unique because they can Sixty CRC patients were enrolled in this study. The project was be expanded to therapeutically relevant numbers and cryopreserved approved by the local ethical committee of National Institute for for different uses. Cord blood collections from full-term and babies Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB) and written informed range from 70-130 mL. Umbilical cord blood stem cells have now been consent was obtained from all cases. Tissue specimens (tumor and used in more than 10,000 transplants as an alternative to hematopoietic normal tissue adjacent to tumor) were collected from Hazrat Rasool stem cells. The parent’s blood is tested for infectious diseases. The hospital between 2008and September 2010, Histological diagnosis cord blood unit is delivered to the cord blood bank. Once stored, it is was confirmed for all samples. available for a transplant for the child or donated to a patient if he is a Results: No statistically significant increase in MRP1 expression match. But many genetic disorders such as balanced translocation are level was observed when tumor tissues were compared with normal not observed in the beginning or even in the whole life span. This type tissues. Furthermore, The MRP1 expression was also independent of of umbilical cord stem cells if used in transplant can result in a severe the age and sex of the patients, localization and size of the primary and hazardous effects on the patient. Karyotyping is a test to examine tumor, tumor infiltration of the lymph nodes, distant metastases and chromosomes in a sample of cells, which can help identify genetic histological grading. problems. So this type of abnormalities can be prevented from being Conclusion: Our results suggest that MRP1 unlikely have an affect the transferred, by making karyotyping mandatory. Many parents do not clinical response to treatment in CRC patients. consider prenatal karyotyping as it is dangerous for child so at lest it should be made mandatory during blood banking or after birth. P06.002 Association between tumor necrosis factor α -308 gene J05.06 polymorphism and risk of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in Prenatal diagnosis of Klinefelter‘s syndrome by QF-PcR serbian children O. A. Tarasenko, L. I. Petrova, O. E. Talantova, A. L. Koroteev, O. G. R. Milicevic1, B. Popovic2, L. Brankovic1, H. Stamenkovic1, J. Milasin2; Chiryaeva, T. E. Ivashchenko; 1Pediatric Clinic, Nis, Serbia, 2Institute of Human Genetics, School of Dentistry, Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. The 26 years old Patient has been directed for prenatal diagnosis Tumor necrosis factor TNF plays a major role in growth regulation, cell of the most frequent chromosome aberrations Indication was the differentiation, response to viral, bacterial and other infections. TNF results of biochemical screening in the second trimester. We used can be produced by tumor-infiltrating macrophages and by several QF-PCR to detection the most frequent chromosome aberrations. types of animal and human cancers (e.g. ovarian and colorectal The analysis of STR markers for autosomes 13, 18, 21 (markers cancers, melanoma and hematological malignancies). Since TNF D13S628, D13S634, D13S742, D18S3801, D18S386, D18S391, are potent controllers of cell functions, it would be of interest to D18S535, D21S11, D21S1437 D21S1411, D21S226,) revealed the demonstrate that deregulation of TNF-α production in ALL patients in normal parity of peaks for all analyzed loci. The analysis of molecular genetically determined and therefore might be a contributing factor in markers on sex chromosomes demonstrated the parity of peaks for the pathophysiology of lymphoproliferative disease. marker AMXY - 2:1 and X22-1:2, while other markers of chromosome A common genetic polymorphism in the TNF gene- G308A is associated X (DXS981, DXS6854, P39, XHPRT) were presented by single peaks. with greater susceptibility to various carcinomas. Guanine to adenine This parity of peaks for the markers localized both on X, and on Y transition at the -308 site in the TNF promoter region (TNF A allele) chromosomes (AMXY - 2:1 and X22 - 1:2) testifies for either the non- and LTα +250 have both been associated with variable TNFα secretion disjuncted X chromosomes in the second division of meiosis, or for after different stimulations, with increased levels associated with the the mosaic karyotype 45, X/46, XY at least in 50 % of cells. After this allele A, at both sites. We investigated a possible association of TNF the Patient was recommended cordocentesis for karyotyping fetal cord polymorphisms G308A, and increased risk for acute lymphoblastic blood lymphocytes. The Klinfelter’s syndrome in the fetus (47,XXY) leukemia (ALL). PCR-RFLP analysis of the TNF gene was performed has been revealed. on DNA obtaind from 89 ALL patients and 124 healthy individuals.The To detect whether the origin of Klinfelter’s syndrome in this case following genotype frequencies were found: 56% (GG), 41% (GA) was due to X chromosome non-disjunction in the second division of and 3% (AA) in ALL patients. Genotypes in controls were: 71% (GG), maternal meiosis, we analyzed STR markers of X chromosome in the 29% (GA) and 0% (AA). A statistically significant difference (p<0.05) parental DNA samples. QF-PCR showed that extra X chromosome was found in the genotype frequencies between ALL patients and the has maternal origin. Thus, on the basis of this case we developed control pointing to the association between TNF α -308 polymorphism the algorithm for prenatal detection of numerical sex chromosome and ALL risk in the Serbian population. aberrations P06.003 the frequency and association of c609t and c465t polymorphisms of NAD (P) H: quinone oxidoreductase gene in P06 cancer genetics adult acute myeloid leukemia a. safaei1, z. farhad2, m. hashemi3, p. yaghmaei1; 1science and reaserch branch Islamic Azad University Tehran Ir, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2- Department of Hematology Cellular & Molecular Research P06.001 Center Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic investigation of expression level of mRP1 in iranian colorectal Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, tehran, cancer ( cRc) patients Islamic Republic of Iran. S. Samanian1, F. Mahjoubi1, B. Mahjoubi2, R. Mirzaee2; Objective: Genetic variations and mutations are the etiological factors 1Dept. of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering of leukemia. NAD (P) H: quinone oxidoreductase (NQO1) plays an and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Hazrat Rasool important role in detoxification of quinones. C609T and C465T are hospital,Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. two common polymorphisms in NQO1 that result in a lower NQO1 Background: Drug resistance is still a great obstacle to the success activity compared with wild type. We assessed the frequency of C609T treatment of breast cancer. The Multi Drug Resistance Related (NQO1*2) and C465T (NQO1*3) polymorphisms of NQO1 gene among Protein1 (MRP1) is a member of the ABC-transporter that located Iranian population to judge about the association between these Cancer genetics 189 polymorphisms and susceptibility to adult acute myeloid leukemia polyposis patients was used for genome-wide SNP genotyping with (AML). the HumanOmni1-Quad BeadArray (Illumina). Putative CNVs were Methods: Frequencies of NQO1 gene polymorphisms were determined identified by the QuantiSNP v2.2 algorithm, filtered according to in 140 and 124 AML patients for NQO1*2 and NQO1*3, respectively. various criteria by use of the CartageniaBench software, by in-silico- In addition, 80 age-sex matched controls for NQO1*2 and NQO1*3 analysis, and by comparison with 531 healthy controls, and validated were participated in this study. Genotyping was done using PCR- by qPCR. RFLP. We calculated Odd ratio (OR) and confidence interval (CI) of Results: 35 unique heterozygous deletion CNVs containing 38 genes NQO1 genotypes to examine if these polymorphisms are associated could be identified in 33 of 134 patients but not in healthy controls. All with AML. CNVs are present only once in the whole cohort; all except two patients Results: No significant association was observed between these two harbour just one CNV. 25 genes are partly or completely deleted, in 13 polymorphisms of NQO1 and the risk of AML. Odds ratio for C609T more the deletion affects intronic regions only. Candidate adenoma and C465T were 0.913 (95%CI= 0.511-1.632) and 2.009 (95%CI= genes include protein kinases, transcription factors, and potential 0.572-7.657), respectively. Men showed a higher incidence of C609T tumour suppressors. and C465T NQO1 than women. The majority of patients with mutant conclusions: By applying stringent filter criteria we identified a group allele were diagnosed as M3 sub type of FAB classification. of rare deletions which might contain predisposing genes for adenoma Conclusions: Our findings suggest that the NQO1 C609T and C465T formation. The further work-up will prioritize genes according to gene gene variants do not have a major influence on the susceptibility to function and pathway. Promising candidates will be sequenced in all adult AML. Interestingly, we found a higher incidence of T allele in patients to look for germline point mutations. The study was supported NQO1*2 than NQO1*3 in both control and patient groups. by the German Cancer Aid (Deutsche Krebshilfe). P06.004 P06.006 the effect of arsenic trioxide treatment on mitochondrial Genetic Polymorphism of Alpha 1 Antytrypsin and Glutathione s apoptotic gene expression in acute promyelocytic leukemia cell transferase and Lung cancer Risk line A. Catana1, R. A. Popp1, M. Pop2, M. G. Porojan3, A. P. Trifa1, F. M. Petrisor1, M. M. Sharifizadeh1, M. Hashemi2, M. Momeny3, K. Alimoghaddam3, A. Farcas1, I. V. Pop1; Ghavamzadeh3, H. Ghaffari3; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, 1Islamic Azad University,Sceince and Reseach Branch, Tehran, Islamic Cluj Napoca, Romania, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 2Leon Daniello Pneumology Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Hospital, Cluj Napoca, Romania, Cluj Napoca, Romania, 3Medical Clinic II, Cluj Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Oncology and Stem Cell Research Center of Shariati Emergency Clinical County Hospital, Romania, Cluj Napoca, Romania, Cluj Hospital, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Napoca, Romania. Iran. Background. Polymorphisms for genes encoding alpha 1 antitrypsin Background and Objectives: Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is (A1AT) and glutathione S-transferase (GSTM1/GSTT1) might one of the most malignant forms of acute leukemia with a fatal course of contribute to the variability in individual susceptibility to lung cancer. only weeks which represents 10-15% of AML in adults. Arsenic trioxide Objectives. This is a cross-sectional, randomized, case control as a single agent factor (without chemotherapy) is the treatment of study for the evaluation of the frequency of A1AT (MS, MZ) and GST choice for APL patients; it induces cell death through apoptosis but (GSTM1/GSTT1 null) alleles among patients with lung cancer. the mechanism by which arsenic targets apoptosis and dramatically The study included 56 cases of lung cancer diagnosed patients affects gene expression remains poorly understood. Since arsenic is (histopathological examination), recruted from the Pneumology used as first line treatment in Iran, it is worth investigating its effect on Hospital Leon Daniello Cluj and 125 healthy unrelated controls, expression of genes involved in APL. selected among patients observed in the Internal Medicine Department. Materials and Methods: In this descriptive study, to understand methods. A1AT genotyping was carried out using PCR amplification of the underlying mechanisms of cell death induction by arsenic, we relevant gene segment was followed by restriction enzyme digestion treated NB4 cell line in a dose and time dependent manner. Extracting Taq1. Detection of A1AT gene S and Z alleles was determined through RNA and synthesis of cDNA, gene expression of apoptotic genes analysis of resulting restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP). in mitochondrial pathway including caspase3, Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 was For GSTM and GSTT genotyping we used Multiplex PCR, followed by analyzed through Real-Time PCR. gel electrophoresis analysis. Results: Our findings showed that AsO-induced cell death was Results. The molecular analysis identified the MS genotype in 3 2 3 paralleled by reduced expression of the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2 but (5,4%) patients with lung cancer and 1 (0,8%) of the controls. The the expression of Caspase3 and Mcl-1 did not change after arsenic heterozigous MZ state was detected neither among cases nor in treatment. controls. The prevalence of GSTM null genotype in lung cancer patients Conclusions: These results suggest that changes in Bcl-2 gene was 49,4% compared to 42,8% of controls, also the prevalence of expression may be one of the mechanisms of action of arsenic in GSTT null genotype in lung cancer patients was 24,5% compared to induction of apoptosis, while Caspase3 and Mcl-1 gene expression 18,2% of controls. are not affected by arsenic at the transcriptional level. conclusions. The results of our study reached statistical significance, our findings suggest that heritable A1AT and GST status may influence P06.005 the risk of lung cancer developement. copy number variation analysis in 134 unrelated patients with mutation negative adenomatous polyposis P06.007 S. Horpaopan1, S. Vogt1, I. Spier1, A. M. Zink1, K. Woellen1, S. Herms1, M. Expression analysis of two testis specific genes OIP5 and TAF7L Draaken1, A. Kaufmann1, D. Stienen1, S. Uhlhaas1, E. Holinski-Feder2,3, M. M. in peripheral blood of Acute myeloid Leukemia patients Noethen1, P. Hoffmann1, S. Aretz1; F. Yazarlou1, R. Shirkoohi2, A. H. Emami2, M. H. Modarressi1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2University 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital of the Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 3MGZ - Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Background: In up to 50% of patients with colorectal adenomatous Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) has been known as a highly polyposis no germline mutation in the currently known genes - APC heterogeneous hematological disorder which arises from a variety and MUTYH - can be identified. Copy number variants (CNVs) have of alterations. Expression of testis specific genes (TSG) has been recently been recognised as important forms of structural variation reported in various tumor types and makes a specific group of genes, which also predispose to human disease. It can be hypothesised that named Cancer Testis Antigens (CTAs). The present study aimed to in particular heterozygous microdeletions contribute to the underlying determine the expression levels of two TSG’s, OIP5 and TAF7L in cause in yet unidentified genes responsible for adenomatous polyposis Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) of AML patients and syndromes. healthy subjects. methods: Genomic DNA from 134 unrelated mutation negative 44 AML patients (subtypes: M1, M2, M3, M4, M5, M7) and 33 healthy Cancer genetics 190 subjects were enrolled. Specimens were collected and PBMCs were Step 1: Analysis of 65% of exon 15 in three amplicons (which harbors isolated followed by total RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis. Real- the majority of mutations); Step 2: Analysis of 12 amplicons with RSA time QPCR was carried out and data was analyzed by LinReg 11 and primers in a 96 well plate; Step 3: Analysis of the remaining sequence REST 2009. (8 amplicons). All sequencing reactions were run in a 3730XL Genetic Unexpectedly, our results showed dimorphic expression of these genes Analyzer. We have studied 32 individuals; 8 with classical and 24 with between affected males and females. In affected females compared an attenuated phenotype. Six germline variants were detected in FAP to healthy females, OIP5 showed overexpression by a factor 3.079 individuals and 8 in the AFAP families. Of these 7 were pathogenic (p<0.001) in contrast to no significant change in expression in affected and the remaining 7 were classified as USV. Ten of the 32 cases were males compared to healthy males. TAF7L was lower-expressed by a reanalyzed on the newest 3500 Genetic Analyzer showing a perfect factor 0.162 (p<0.03) in affected males compared to healthy males concordance regarding mutation detection when compared to the versus no significant change in affected females compared to healthy 3730XL analyses. Conclusion: Simple workflow adapted to distinct females. Genetic Analyzer Instruments is a cost-effective approach to analyze Overexpression of OIP5 in females could have an added advantage large genes such as APC. The 3730XL and 3500 Genetic Analyzer are of analyzing its expression for MRD (Minimal Residual Disease) for research use only, not for use in diagnostic procedures monitoring and also applying in immunotherapy. These findings may shed light on the different susceptibility of developing leukemia in a P06.010 gender specific manner that needs to be investigated and confirmed the Effects of Kaempherol and silymarin on cell cycle in future. and Apoptosis signal transduction Pathways at chronic myelogenous Leukemia cell Line K562 P06.008 Z. O. Dogan Sigva, S. Yilmaz, C. Biray Avci, M. Yucebas, T. Balci, C. Gunduz; Androgen Receptor is a target gene for mutations in colorectal Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology, İzmir, Turkey. tumors with microsatellite instability and the mutated alleles Silymarin, an active component of Silybum marianum L., has been undergo hypermethylation. shown as a powerful antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anticancer E. Hernández-Illán1, A. Martínez-Cantó1, E. Irles1, M. I. Castillejo1, C. Egoavil1, agent.Kaempferol, an active component of Epilobium parviflorum, is V. M. Barberá1, C. Guarinos2, L. Pérez-Carbonell2, C. Alenda3, A. Payá3, R. a flavonoid with anti- oxidant activity and protective against various Jover4, J. L. Soto1, A. Castillejo1; cancers. 1Cancer Genetics. Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 2Research We aimed to evaluate the effects of kaempherol and silymarin in gene Unit. Hospital Universitario Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 3Pathology Department. expression of apoptosis pathway and the expression changes of cell Hospital Universitario Alicante, Alicante, Spain, 4Gastroenterology Department. cycle genes in K562 cell line. Hospital Universitario Alicante, Alicante, Spain. Cytotoxicity analysis was performed for silymarin and kaempherol Microsatellite instability (MSI) is a consequence of a functional between 4.69-300.00µM and 10.6-30.25µM doses, respectively, at 24 deficiency of the mismatch repair genes, and is a feature of the majority hours intervals for three days using XTT assay.Total RNA was isolated of Lynch syndrome tumors, and of a minority of sporadic colorectal from the cells exposed to IC doses of silymarin and kaempherol and 50 (CRC), gastric and endometrial cancers. Several genes have been the expressions of 45 genes each from apoptotic pathway and cell described to be target for mutations of the MSI condition. Androgen cycle controls were studied by real time online RT-PCR.Results were Receptor (AR) gene has been involved in colorectal carcinogenesis. compared with silymarin or kaempherol-free cells. We aimed to assess the implication of AR gene in the carcinogenic Silymarin, used at IC dose (29.02µM) significantly increased the 50 process of CRC with MSI. expression of genes responsible for cell cycle pathway (CDK2,CDK6, We tested 343 sporadic CRC for MSI using five monomorphic CDK7,CDK8,CDKN1A,CDKN1B,CDKN2C,CDKN3,CDC25A, CDC34, mononucleotide markers. Polymorphic CAG repeat at exon 1 of the CHEK1 and CHEK2) and the genes which induces apoptosis (APAF1, AR gene was analyzed from the normal and tumoral DNA. HpaII BCL2, BCLAF1, CASP2, CASP3, CASP4, CASP7 and CASP9).No methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme, was used to analyze the difference was found in none of the genes following the treatment with methylation status of the CAG repeat pattern. Capillary electrophoresis IC doses of kaempherol (9.84µM). 50 and GeneScan analysis was used for all these experiments. In conclusion, 29.02µM of silymarin induced apoptosis and arrested MSI was present in 31 of the 311 CRC analyzed (10%). Insertion- cell cycle at G2/M transition in K562 cell line.These results lead to deletion mutations at CAG repeat were detected in 25 out of 31 MSI the idea that, this extract seemed to be effective in the treatment tumors (80.6%) and in one of the 40 analyzed microsatellite stable of leukemia, however further studies are needed to elucidate the tumors (2.5%) indicating that AR might be a new target gene for MSI molecular mechanism of these genes expressions at protein levels. tumors (p<0.001). Interestingly, methylation analysis of MSI tumors *The research was supported by Scientific and Technical Research with AR mutations showed 17 tumors with hypermethylation of the Council of Turkey. mutated alleles and two tumors without methylation (p=0.023). The remaining six cases were considered as non-informative. P06.011 Our results suggests that AR gene is specifically mutated in tumors with towards tRAiL to silencing of smURF and NEDD4: FLiP is MSI and those mutated alleles might be silenced by hypermethylation. flopped The consequences of these observations need to be explored. A. A. Farooqi, S. Fayyaz, S. Bhatti; IMBB, The University of Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan. P06.009 Objective: Heterogeneity of the prostate cancer offers stumbling Development of a workflow to detect sequence variants in the blocks in standardization of therapeutic interventions. TRAIL and APc Gene cFLIP are two diametrically opposed key mediators that antagonize S. Gonzalez1, E. Segura1, C. Goméz1, C. Garcia1, R. Petraroli2, B. Cabot2, N. each others function. In this particular study we hypothesized whether Koch2, C. Davidson2, G. Munar1; abrogation of negative regulators of TGF signaling potentiates and 1Molecular Diagnostics Unit, Hereditary Cancer Programme, Catalan Institute abolishes the expression of TRAIL and cFLIP respectively or not. of Oncology, Barcelona, Spain, 2Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, materials and methods: we have used androgen sensitive prostate United States. cancer cell line (LNCaP) and treated it with TGF. TGF treatment was Germline mutations within the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) also given to LNCaP cell line. RNA interference technique was used to gene are responsible for up to 80% of classical familial adenomatous unfold the correlation betweeen TGF signaling and TRAIL and cFLIP polyposis (FAP). To date, more than 800 different APC germline expression in the LNCaP cell line. The results were analyzed by RT mutations have been characterized. The high number and distinct PCR and western blot. spectrum of variations together with gene length make the automated Results: We have treated the TGF treated cell line with siRNA of capillary electrophoresis DNA sequencing the gold standard method NEDD4 and SMURF. There was a successful blockade of both genes to develop an efficient and robust analysis of this gene. We have set at transcriptional level as evidenced by RT PCR study. Simultaneously up a 3-step workflow to detect mutations in the APC gene in a rapid there was remarkable upregulation in the expression of TRAIL. Another manner aimed to homogenize and facilitate the experimental work. interesting observation was that TGF treatment triggered expression Cancer genetics 191 of TRAIL and ablated cFLIP and this activity was pronounced after P53 codon 248 (exon7) and P73 G4C14>A4T14 polymorphisms were abrogation of negative regulators of TGF signal transduction. associated with higher risk of BC in North Indians. Also the frequency conclusion: In this study, we show that TRAIL expression is of homozygous p21 Arg/Arg genotype was too few to be meaningfully upregulated and cFLIP is downregulated upon exposure of LNCaP cell evaluated for its association with risk of BC, which warrants larger lines to TGF-β and etoposide and that TRAIL is a major contributor to studies for further validation of our findings. apoptosis mediated by TGF-β. it is obvious that NEDD4 and SMURF are the major proteins involved in the deviation of core biological P06.014 systems and their inhibition might offer exciting avenues in translational beta2-microglobulin mutations in melanoma oncology D. S. Polyakov1,2, M. V. Kupriianova3, M. K. Kozhemyakina3; 1Institute of Experimental Medicine Nord-West Branch of Russian Academy of P06.012 Medical Sciences, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg Aven blocks DNA damage-indused apoptosis by stabilizing Bcl- State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, Xl 3Saint-Petersburg State Institute of Technology (Technical University), Saint- O. Kutuk1, S. G. Temel2, S. Tolunay3, H. Basaga4; Petersburg, Russian Federation. 1Sabanci University, Biological Sciences and Bioengineering Program, Cytotoxic CD8+ T lymphocytes can eliminate malignant cells by Faculty of Natural Sciences and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey, 2University of recognizing peptide epitopes from tumor antigens in the complex with Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, human MHC class I molecules. One mechanism allowing tumors to 3University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pathology, Bursa, escape from that control is the downregulation or complete loss of Turkey, 41. University of Sabanci, Biological Sciences and Bioengineering MHC class I molecules. Total loss of MHC I expression can be due to Program, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Engineering, Istanbul, Turkey. mutations in beta2-microglobulin (b2m) gene located on chromosome Induction of apoptosis by DNA damaging agents involves the activation 15q21. The b2m protein is noncovalently associated with alpha chain of mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Aven has been identified as an of the MHC I for antigen presentation. When b2m protein is corrupted, antiapoptotic protein and has been shown to activate ATM in response or b2m expression is lost, stable antigen-MHC I complexes cannot be to DNA damage. In this study, we demonstrated that enforced formed. expression of Aven blocks UV-irradiation-, SN-38- or cisplatin-induced We analyzed tissue specimens of 50 primary melanomas. The tissue apoptosis upstream of mitochondria by stabilizing Bcl-xL protein levels microdissection technique was applied to obtain DNA from the tumors. in breast cancer cells. Aven silencing by RNA interference markedly DNA from microdissected tumor tissues was obtained using phenol- enhanced apoptotic response following treatment with DNA-damaging chloroform method. The technique of single-strand conformation agents. Aven is complexed with Bcl-xL in untreated breast cancer polymorphism (SSCP) was used to screen 50 melanoma samples, cells and treatment with DNA damaging agents led to decreased and 172 normal DNA samples for mutations in the b2m. The leader Aven/Bcl-xL interaction. Importantly, Bcl-xL was necessary for the peptide sequence/exon 1 and exon 2 PCR products were analyzed. prosurvival activity of Aven and depletion of Bcl-xL abrogated Aven- Our results exclude any homozygotic/heterozygotic nucleotide change mediated protection against DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Analysis in exons 1 and 2 of b2m in 172 healthy controls. In the context of high of breast cancer tissue microarrays revealed decreased Aven nuclear frequency of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human genome, expression in breast b2m coding sequence is remarkably stable. To date the known cancer tissues compared with non-neoplastic breast tissues. In exceptions are b2m mutations observed in some types of neoplastic particular, we detected reduced nuclear expression of Aven in cells. In our work, SSCP of DNA of 50 melanomas showed eight infiltrating ductal carcinoma and papillary carcinoma breast cancer mutations in exon 1 and four mutations in exon 2. Double-stranded subtypes compared with non-neoplastic breast tissues and infiltrating direct sequencing of PCR products is required to confirm these results. lobular breast cancer tissues. Our resultssuggest that Aven is an important mediator in DNA damage-induced apoptotic signaling in P06.015 breast Homozygote variant genotype of AKR1c3 rs12529 cancer cells and its nuclear expression is altered in breast cancer polymorphism confers protection against bladder cancer tissues, which may contribute to genomic instability in breast cancer N. Ersoy Tunali1, O. Tiryakioglu1, O. Cakir2; tumors. 1Halic University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2T.R. Ministry of Health, Bagcılar Training and Research Hospital, P06.013 Istanbul, Turkey. Association of p53 gene variants, p21 ser31Arg and P73 exon 2 Occupational exposure to carcinogens and cigarette smoking are among genetic polymorphisms with the risk of bladder cancer in North the most significant risk factors for bladder cancer. Polymorphisms in indian cohort genes coding for the xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes may affect the P. K. Jaiswal, P. Srivastava, R. Kapoor, A. Mandhani, R. D. Mittal; relevant enzyme activity and therefore cause inter-individual metabolic Sanjay Gandhi Postgradute Institute of Medical Sciences Lucknow, India. differences. Aldo-keto reductases (AKR) are highly polymorphic Objective: TP53 is the most frequently mutated gene in all forms of phase-I drug metabolizing enzymes, which are involved in tobacco human cancers. In addition to mutations, other genetic events, such as carcinogenesis. AKR 1C family member 3 (AKR1C3) is one of the four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TP53 gene, have been known human AKR1C enzymes. The polymorphisms in the AKR1C3 shown to contribute to the development of various cancers. Hence we gene may lead to changes in its expression or enzyme activity. When hypothesize those polymorphic sites in p53 gene variants at codon 11, considered together with certain demographic and environmental Pro47Ser, codon 248 (exon 7), codon 31 of P21 and P73 exon 2 (GC/ factors, AKR1C3 genetic polymorphisms possibly define the levels of AT) may modulate risk for Bladder cancer (BC) progression in North individual susceptibility to bladder cancer. Indians. In this study, the effect of the rs12529, a non-synonymous polymorphism Materials and Method: Genotyping for these polymorphisms were of the AKR1C3 gene, on the susceptibility to bladder cancer was done in a group of 200 BC and 200 age matched, similar ethnicity investigated in conjunction with cigarette smoking and sex. Using unrelated healthy controls using PCR-based methods. genotype data of 101 bladder cancer cases and 101 healthy controls, Results: In P53 codon248 polymorphism, heterozygous genotype we demonstrated that men (OR=9,032; %95 CI=4,308-18,938) and showed high risk with BC (p<0.001; OR=1.58). Whereas in case of cigarette smokers (OR=4,89; %95 CI =2,617-8,963) are under high risk P73 exon2, variant genotype demonstrated significant risk (p=0.014, for developing bladder cancer and that rs12529 homozygote variant OR=3.80), the tumorigenic effect of which was observed to be more (GG) has a protective effect (OR=0,255; %95 CI= 0,101-0,644) when enhanced in case of smoking exposure. Haplotype Glu-Pro-Trp/ compared with the wild type homozygote (CC). The protective effect Gln was associated with two-fold risk (OR, 1.91; p=0.002). Variant of the GG genotype becomes more apparent when the odds ratio is genotype of P73 G4C14>A4T14 was associated with higher risk of adjusted for cigarette smoking and sex (OR=0,243; %95 CI=0,743- recurrence (HR=3.04, P=0.039) in superficial BC patients receiving 0,8). These results indicate a strong relationship between AKR1C3 BCG treatment thus showing least survival (log rank= 0.029). rs12529 polymorphism and bladder cancer susceptibility. Conclusion: Our study provided evidence, for the first time, that the Cancer genetics 192 P06.016 Republic. AKR1c3-35 A/G polymorphism in bladder cancer susceptibility Several studies have shown that breast tumours arising in women Ö. Kurnaz1, N. O. Tiryakioglu1, O. Cakır2, N. Ersoy Tunali1; carrying germline mutations of the BRCA1 tumour-suppressor gene 1Haliç University, Faculty of Arts and Sciences, Department of Molecular are often triple negative (negative for estrogen-receptor, progesterone- Biology and Genetics, İSTANBUL, Turkey, 2T.R. Ministry of Health, Bağcılar receptor and HER2 expression). In our study, we estimated the Training and Research Hospital, İSTANBUL, Turkey. proportion of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carriers among women The ten known human aldo-keto reductase (AKR) enzymes play central with triple negative breast cancer. roles in the metabolisms of drugs, carcinogens and reactive aldehydes, BRCA1 screening of 109 patients who were diagnosed with triple which result in their activation or detoxification. They are especially negative breast cancer was performed in our laboratory. These involved in tobacco-related cancers, since they both activate polycyclic patients were divided into 4 groups: aromatic trans-dihydrodiols and catalyze the detoxication of nicotine- I. Patients with family history of breast/ovarian cancer or bilateral derived nitrosamino ketones. AKR1C3 is one of the four human breast/ovarian cancer patients AKR1C enzymes that are. highly polymorphic, and single nucleotide II. Early-onset sporadic unilateral breast cancer patients diagnosed polymorphisms may confer variations in their metabolizing activities. before 40 years of age This implies that inter-individual variations of the xenobiotic metabolism III. Patients with medullary type of breast cancer diagnosed after 40 are associated with differential susceptibility for carcinogenesis. In the years of age framework of this study, we investigated the role of the AKR1C3-35 IV. Sporadic breast cancer patients diagnosed after 40 years of age A/G (rs1937920) polymorphism in bladder cancer formation. The There were identified 43 mutations (68.3%) in the first group, 6 genotypes of 145 cases and 81 controls were determined by PCR- mutations (23.1%) in the second group, one mutation (25%) in the third RFLP method and analyzed in conjunction with their sex and cigarette group and 5 mutations (15.2%) in the fourth group (overall 50,5%). smoking status, using logistic regression. A significant increase in the In addition there was performed BRCA2 screening of 93 patients out of risk of bladder cancer was observed for the AG (OR=1,50; %95CI= group I-III with the result: four mutations (6.4%) were identified in the 0,995-2,261) and GG (OR=1,773; %95CI=1,225-2,565) genotypes, first group, two mutations (7.7%) in the second group and no mutation when compared with the wild type genotype (AA). Upon adjustments in the third group. for sex and smoking, the risks for both the AG and GG geotypes were Our results confirm that women with triple-negative breast cancer are further increased (OR=2,750; %95 CI=1,39-5,43 and OR=2.12; %95 candidates for genetic testing of BRCA1 gene, especially those with CI= 1,125-4.00, respectively). According to these results, AKR1C3-35 family history. BRCA2 mutations were detectable in 6.5% of cases. A/G variation can be regarded as a risk factor for bladder cancer. Supported by the Internal Grant Agency of the Ministry of Health of the Czech Republic, contract grant number: NS/10357-3 P06.017 Potential usage of Helix lucorum and Rapana venosa P06.019 hemocyanins in bladder cancer therapy Evaluation of 53 sequence variants of unknown significance O. S. Boyanova1, P. Dolashka-Angelova2, L. Yosifova3, S. Zaharieva3, L. of the BRcA genes using bioinformatics predictions of RNA Velkova2, B. Rukova1, I. Dimova1, D. Toncheva1; splicing and functional splicing assays 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, J. C. Théry1, S. Krieger2, P. Gaildrat1, F. Révillon3, M. P. Buisine4, A. Killian1, C. Bulgaria, 2Institute of Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phitochemistry, Duponchel1, A. Rousselin2, D. Vaur2, J. P. Peyrat3, P. Berthet5, T. Frébourg1,6, A. BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Institute of Experimental Pathology and Parasitology - Martins1, A. Hardouin2, M. Tosi1; Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Biomedical Research and Urinary bladder cancer is a socially significant healthcare problem. Innovation, Rouen, France, 2Molecular Genetics, CRLCC François Baclesse, Risk factors such as: smoking, infections, diet and aging of the world Caen, France, 3Molecular Genetics, CRLCC Oscar Lambret, Lille, France, population are responsible for its growing incidence. One therapeutic 4Molecular Genetics, University Hospital, Lille, France, 5Cancer Genetics, approach is the usage of a nonspecific immunostimulant Keyhole CRLCC François Baclesse, Caen, France, 6Departement of Genetics, limpet hemocyanin (KLH). Our laboratory investigates in vitro effect of University Hospital, Rouen, France. hemocyanins derived from species Helix lucorum (HlH) and Rapana A large fraction of sequence variants of unknown significance (VUS) venosa (RvH), and their potential clinical use in comparison to KLH. of the breast and ovarian cancer susceptibility genes BRCA1 and Three structural subunits were isolated from HlH and two from RvH. BRCA2 may induce splicing defects. We analyzed 53 VUS of BRCA1 Each subunit contains 8 functional units with mass ~50 kDa. or BRCA2, detected in consecutive molecular screenings, by using 5 The anti-tumor effect was investigated on 647-V bladder tumor cell line splicing prediction programs and we classified them into two groups and results suggest a direct cytotoxicity mainly from functional units. according to the strength of the predictions. In parallel, we tested them Gene expression profiling of the two pathways: Human Inflammatory by using splicing minigene assays. Ten VUS were predicted by two or cytokines (PAHS011) and Signal transduction pathway (PAHS014) more programs to induce a significant reduction of splice site strength, on the tumor cells before and after hemocyanins treatment was or activation of cryptic splice sites, or generation of new splice sites. performed. Minigene-based splicing assays confirmed 4 of these predictions. Five Results suggest upregulation of genes for IL1A, IL1B, IL8 and C3 additional VUS, all at internal exon positions, were not predicted to in Group1-G1 (cell line treated with Hlh Fu-7). IL1A and IL1B were induce alterations of splice sites, but revealed variable levels of exon significantly overexpressed compared to Group G2 (cell line treated skipping, most likely induced by the modification of exonic splicing with RvH-II-6). Only gene for C3 showed slightly expression in G2 regulatory elements. We provide new data in favor of the pathogenic compared to G1. nature of the variants BRCA1 c.212+3A>G and BRCA1 c.5194- Ten genes from the PAHS014 were highly upregulated in G1 - CSF2, 12G>A, which induced aberrant out-of-frame mRNA forms. Moreover, CDKN1A, IL1A, VEGFA, IL8, GADD45A, ODC1, BCL2L1, FASN, and the novel variant BRCA2 c.7977-7C>G induced in frame inclusion of BAX. Among them: CSF2, CDKN1A, FASN and BAX had more than 6 nt from the 3’ end of intron 17. The novel variants BRCA2 c.520C>T 10 times higher expression in group G1 versus genes in group G2. and BRCA2 c7992T>A induced incomplete but strong skipping of Our result shows which genes behavior differs vastly after treatment with exons 7 and 18, respectively. We confirm the sensitivity of current HIH Fu-7. They indicate the potential biological mechanism of its action. algorithms for detecting VUS that induce changes of splice site strength or generate/activate new splice sites. However, an important P06.018 fraction of internal exonic variants escape bioinformatics detection, the prevalence of BRcA mutations in czech patients with triple highlighting the need of more accurate bioinformatics predictions for negative breast cancer internal exonic variants. M. Mikova, E. Machackova, J. Hazova, M. Navratilova, L. Foretova, M. Svoboda; Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Cancer genetics 193 P06.020 P06.022 Using heteroduplex analysis by mismatch-specific Development of an easy and robust workflow to Detect endonuclease for the detection of BRCA mutations and sNPs sequence Variants in the BRcA1 and BRcA2 Genes A. NEGURA1, L. NEGURA2, A. CONEAC3, D. PEPTANARIU2, N. M. Wenz1, J. Theelen1, P. Ma1, H. Ouchene2, M. Nelen2, S. Berosik1, S. Hung1, UHRHAMMER4, Y. BIGNON4; S. Schneider1, S. Lim1, R. Petraroli1; 1Alexandru Ioan Cuza University, IASI, Romania, 2University of Medicine and 1Life Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Universitair Pharmacy Gr. T. Popa, IASI, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy Medisch Centrum St Radboud, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Iuliu Hatieganu, CLUJ-NAPOCA, Romania, 4Centre Jean Perrin, CLERMONT- One of the major responsibilities of a clinical genetics research FERRAND, France. laboratory is mutation scanning in one or more genes related to an BRCA1 and BRCA2 are major cancer predisposition genes, inherited disease. There are many different techniques for mutation responsible for a large percentage of hereditary breast and ovarian scanning: (1) a prescreen that detects but does not characterize cancer (HBOC) families. Screening for mutations in these genes is variants, and (2) the industry-standard technique: direct sequence now standard practice for HBOC cases in Europe, and permits medical analysis of the DNA by Sanger sequencing. Here we describe the follow-up and genetic counselling adapted to the needs of individuals development and verification of a direct resequencing workflow for in such families. mutation screening of BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes on the 3500 Genetic Currently, most laboratories performing diagnostic analysis of the Analyzer .This workflow contains all steps, from purified DNA to BRCA genes use PCR of exons and intron-exon boundaries coupled to data analysis covering both genes, PCR cleanup, cycle sequencing, a pre-screening step to identify anomalous amplicons. The techniques electrophoresis and data analysis. To simplify workflows and decrease employed for the detection of mutations and polymorphisms have time to result, we focused on a robust assay based on a “one individual evolved over time and vary in sensitivity, specificity and cost- - one test” approach. Key to the success of this workflow was the 96- effectiveness. well plate design, which contained pre spotted PCR primers covering Recognising that direct sequencing is too expensive for us to apply both genes and also included multiplex non template controls. Finally systematically to all HBOC families for the foreseeable future, we the use of the new developed BigDye® Direct Cycle Sequencing turned to the recently developed SurveyorTM heteroduplex cleavage chemistry eliminates the need for a separate PCR clean-up step. This method as a sensitive and specific technique to reveal anomalous simplified process without a separate PCR clean-up step reduced amplicons of the BRCA genes, using only basic laboratory equipment the overall workflow time by 40%. This verified workflow permits to and agarose gel electrophoresis. accelerated analysis, reduced labor time, and simplified laboratory set We managed to detect by this technique 3 BRCA deleterious up enabling to skip pre screening methods. The 3500 Genetic Analyzer mutations, as well as 2 unclassified sequence variants (UVs) and 3 and BigDye® products are for research use only, and not intended for common SNPs. All variants were confirmed by forward and reverse any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use dideoxy sequencing. We recommend therefore heteroduplex analysis (HA) by mismatch-specific endonuclease as a sensitive pre-screening P06.023 method to precede systematic sequencing. Together with other BRcA1 haplotype analysis in patients with familial and non- alternative techniques, HA allows us now to save about 30% of BRCA familial breast cancer from castilla y León (spain) sequencing costs, and certainly can do even better. D. Fernández1, E. Sánchez1, E. Castro1, T. Martín2, J. Cruz-Hernández1,2, R. This study was possible with partial financial support from the Gonzalez-Sarmiento1,3; Romanian Ministry for Education and Research, by the CNCSIS 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de research grant PN-II-ID-PCE-2008, code 1990/2008. Oncología. Hospital Clínico Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Departamento de Medicina. Facultad de Medicina. Universidad de Salamanca, P06.021 Salamanca, Spain. Breast cancer genetics: Her2/neu overexpression may be a Pathogenic mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are highly penetrating. negative predictor of BRcA mutations The carriers of these mutations have a high risk, between 40 and A. Rahman1, C. J. Curry1,2, C. D. DeLozier2,3,1; 80%, to develop breast cancer. However, the number of women in the 1University of California San Francisco-Fresno, Fresno, CA, United States, general population with breast cancer attributable to these mutations 2Genetic Medicine Central California, Fresno, CA, United States, 3Saint Agnes is very small (<5%), which is raising the possibility that there may Medical Center, Fresno, CA, United States. be low-penetrance mutations in these genes that could change the BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 are the genes most frequently implicated in susceptibility to breast cancer. “monogenic” predisposition to breast cancer. Soon after clinical There are several mutations in BRCA1 gene that appear frequently testing for BRCA mutations became available, a flurry of publications in the population (polymorphisms). We showed more attention to compared the histological characteristics and prognostic marker status the group of missense mutations in exon 11 (including c.2731 C> T of breast cancers in patients with BRCA-1 vs. BRCA-2 vs. BRCA-X [rs799917], c. 3232 A> G [rs16941] and c. 3667 A> G [rs16942] that (negative) patients. Invasive ductal cancer with medullary features cause changes amino acid (p. 871 P> L, p. 1038 E> G and p. 1183 and “triple negative” (for ER, PR and Her2/neu expression) prognostic E> G). marker status are considered suggestive of BRCA-associated breast In this study, we hypothesized that clustering of mutations in exon 11 cancer. The next wave of publications was epidemiological, whereas of BRCA1 gene may modify the risk of developing breast cancer in our the current focus is molecular profiling of breast cancers for somatic population. mutations. In the interim, histology and prognostic markers have The analysis of the distribution of these polymorphisms in patients been displaced as major determinates in genetic risk assessment. diagnosed We recently suggested that lobular histology is rarely, if at all, linked with breast cancer, carrying mutations in one of the BRCA genes, to BRCA mutations (DeLozier et. al., 2010). Our experience also showed that the TGG alleles are inherited together as a haplotype. suggests that her2/neu overexpression at initial diagnosis may be an Statistical analysis of results shows that there is a statistically significant important negative predictor of BRCA status. relationship between the group of patients with familial breast cancer We have counseled and tested 185 patients with invasive breast cancer carriers of BRCA gene mutations and the presence of the haplotype at significant risk of carrying a BRCA mutation, for whom histology and TGG. prognostic marker information were available/adequate and for whom BRCA results were unequivocal. Of these 185 patients, 35 (19%) had P06.024 Her2/neu overexpression as diagnosed by immunohistochemistry Identification of novel intronic BRCA1 variants of uncertain (IHC) and/or FISH assays. Twenty five patients (13.5%) were BRCA- significance in a Thai hereditary breast cancer family positive, but none of the Her2/neu-positive patients had BRCA A. Ratanaphan1, P. Panomwan1, B. Canyuk1, T. Maipang2; mutations, in spite of an average age at diagnosis of <40. If confirmed 1Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Prince of Songkla University, Hat-Yai, in larger studies, Her2/neu positivity might constitute a cost-effective Songkhla, Thailand, 2Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Hat-Yai, means of screening prior to the offering of BRCA testing.Cancer genetics 194 Songkhla, Thailand. BRCA2 mutations in Spanish BC/OC families. 2) To assess the We have screened for mutation in the entire coding sequence of association between mutation status and individual and family the BRCA1 gene in 50 Thai breast cancer patients. Screening for characteristics. 3) To estimate the probability of BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations was carried out using the polymerase chain reaction-based mutation detection. on single-stranded conformational polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and Patients and Methods: index cases of 2.908 BC/OC families were direct DNA sequencing. The genetic alterations were not found in analyzed for BRCA1/BRCA2 germ-line mutations, and results were patients without a family history of breast cancer. One patient with correlated with individual and familiar history. A multivariate logistic a family history of five breast cancer cases harbored a germ-line regression model was fitted for either BRCA1 or BRCA2. Model mutation in the BRCA1 gene, that was a novel intronic BRCA1 mutation discrimination and calibration was measured with the area under the (IVS7+34_47delTTCTTTTCTTTTTT). In addition, two unclassified ROC curve and the Hosmer-Lemeshow statistic. intronic BRCA1 variations (IVS7+34_47delAAGAAAAGAAAAAA in the Results: We identified mutations in 702 families (24.5%), 355 antisense strand and IVS7+50_63delTTCTTTTTTTTTTT in the sense BRCA1 (119 different) and 347 in BRCA2 (138 different). Proband strand) and one unclassified intronic point mutation (IVS7+38T>C) characteristics related to mutation were: a) BRCA1: OC+BC (OR=7.7 were also identified in the patient’s healthy daughter at the age of 25. and 9.6 for uni or bilatBC), OC (OR=2.8) and bilatBC (OR=2.2). Family RNA analysis of variants of unknown significance revealed a normally characteristics were: OC (OR=3.5 for 1 member, OR=7.3 for > 2 occurring splicing process. These alterations were not found in family members) and bilatBC (OR=1.54 for > 1 members). b) BRCA2: bilatBC members or unrelated healthy volunteers. Of further interest, was that and OC (OR=8.5) and male BC (OR=3.1). Family characteristics were the deletion site was in close proximity to the triplet repeat sequence male BC (OR=6.9 for > 1 members), BC (OR=1.9 for > 2), OC (OR=1.6 of TTC·GAA. The deletion of a set of TTC repeats was identified both for > 1 members). Ages at diagnosis were inversely associated with in the patient and the patient’s healthy daughter. It is implied that risk of BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations. Areas under the ROC curve were such genetic alterations could cause genomic rearrangement or an 0.77 for BRCA1 and 0.71 for BRCA2. alteration to the DNA structures, possibly through a slipped strand Conclusions: Knowledge of individual and familiar variables associated mispairing mechanism during DNA replication. to the presence of a mutation will allow a more effective detection strategy. P06.025 BRcA1 and BRcA2 germline mutations in 100 high risk iranian P06.027 breast cancer families Brca2 heterozygosity promotes Kras(G12D)-driven F. Keshavarzi1, S. Zeinali2; carcinogenesis in a murine model of familial pancreatic cancer 1Department of Biology, Islamic Azad University, Sanandaj branch, Kurdistan, F. Skoulidis1, L. D. Cassidy1, V. Pisupati1, J. G. Jonasson2, H. Bjarnason3, J. Sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, E. Eyfjord3, F. A. Karreth4, M. L. Lim1, L. M. Barber1, S. A. Clatworthy1, S. E. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Davies5, K. P. Olive6, D. Tuveson4, A. R. Venkitaraman1; Objective: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in Iranian women. 1Department of Oncology and the Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Genetic predisposition accounts for 5-10% of all breast cancers and Unit, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of germline mutations in breast cancer susceptibility genes, BRCA1 and Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Landspitalinn-University Hospital, University of BRCA2 are responsible for a substantial proportion of high-risk breast Iceland and the Iceland Cancer Registry, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Cancer Research and breast/ovarian cancer families. Therefore, the aim of this study Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, was to investigate mutations of BRCA1/2 in high risk Iranian families. 4Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge Research Institute, Cancer Research UK, Methods: We screened 100 families who met our minimal criteria. The Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United entire coding sequences and each intron/exon boundaries of BRCA1/2 Kingdom, 6Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Centre and Department of genes were screened by direct sequencing and MLPA. Medicine and Pathology, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States. Results: In the present study, we could detect the novel following Inherited heterozygous BRCA2 mutations predispose carriers to mutations: tissue-specific cancers, but somatic deletion of the wild-type allele p.Gly1140Ser, p.Ile26Val, p.Leu1418X, p.Glu23Gln, p.Leu3X, is considered essential for carcinogenesis. Using a murine model of p.Asn1403His, p.Asn1403Asp, p.Lys581X, p.Pro938Arg, p.Thr77Arg, familial pancreatic cancer that accurately recapitulates the clinical, p.Leu6Val, p.Arg7Cys, p.Leu15Ile, p.Ser177Thr, IVS7+83(-TT), IVS8 histological and molecular features of the human disease, we find -70(-CATT), IVS2+9(G>C), IVS1-20(G>A), IVS1-8(A>G), p.Met1Ile, that germline heterozygosity for a pathogenic Brca2 mutation suffices IVS2+24(A>G), IVS5-8 (A>G ), IVS2(35-39)TTcctatGAT, IVS13+9 to promote pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDACs) driven by G>C in BRCA1 and p.Glu1391Gly, p. Val1852Ile, IVS6-70(T>G), 1994- Kras(G12D), irrespective of Trp53 status. Unexpectedly, tumour 1995 (InsA) in BRCA2. cells retain a functional Brca2 allele. Correspondingly, three out of The missense substitutions p.Leu3Stop codon, Leu1418Stop four PDACs from patients inheriting the founder 999del5 mutation in codon, p.Lys581Stop, CD26SmallINSGTCCC^ATCTG BRCA2 did not exhibit loss of heterozygosity (LOH). On the other hand, E212catctgGTAAGTCAGC,p. Ile21Val, p. Gly1738Glu, IVS2-1(G>C) three tumours from these patients with confirmed LOH were acinar in BRCA1 and p. Leu1522Phe and 1994insA 1995 in BRCA2 are carcinomas, normally a rare pancreatic neoplasm. Acinar carcinomas pathogenic (%7). were also observed solely in mice bi-allelic Brca2 inactivation in the Based on our preliminary results two haplotypes may have a context of mutant Trp53(R270H) expression. Based on these findings pathogenic role in breast cancer development: we suggest a revised model for tumour suppression by BRCA2 with 1. Glu23Gln, Ile26Ieu, Ile15Ieu, Arg7Cys implications for the therapeutic strategy targeting BRCA2-mutant Gly1140Ser Leu871Pro, GLu1038Gly, Ser1613Gly, 2. cancer cells. Conclusion: In agreement with findings in other populations, we found that family history is a good predictor of being a mutation carrier. P06.028 Further studies are required to confirm the hypothesis that genetic Predicted deleterious BRcA2 missense variants detected in polymorphisms are associated with breast cancer. czech high-risk hereditary breast cancer families: segregation analysis and clinical data. P06.026 E. Machackova1, M. Mikova1, T. Hucl2, L. Foretova1; Description of BRCA1/2 mutations in 2.908 spanish breast/ 1Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, BRNO, Czech Republic, 2Institute for ovarian cancer families and development of a probability model Clinical and Experimental Medicine, PRAHA, Czech Republic. for mutation prediction In the analysis of genes associated with the cancer predisposition Description of BRCA1/2 mutations in 2.908 Spanish breast/ovarian cancer the deleterious mutations can be relatively easily distinguished if it is families and development of a probability model for mutation prediction obvious that there is disruption in the coding sequence. However, rare Introduction: BRCA1 (MIM# 113705) and BRCA2 (MIM# 600185I) missense and non-truncating variants found in cancer predisposing germ-line mutations cause inherited susceptibility to breast/ovarian genes often create difficulties in clinical interpretation of laboratory cancer (BC/OC). mutation screening results. Objectives: 1) To know the variety and prevalence of BRCA1 and Here we present available segregation data and clinical information Cancer genetics 195 of four predicted deleterious BRCA2 missense variants located in (2010) detected six monoallelic pathogenic mutations in RAD51C C-terminal DNA bindings domain (exons 17 and 18) detected in by screening 1.100 unrelated German women with gynaecologic Czech high-risk hereditary breast cancer families: p.His2623Arg, malignancies (breast and/or ovarian tumors). Strikingly, all six p.Trp2626Cys; p.Glu2663Val; Asp2723Gly; as well as two not deleterious mutations were exclusively found within 480 BRCA1/2 yet described novel variants: p.Lys2630Gln and in-frame deletion negative breast and ovarian cancer families and not in breast cancer p.Ala2633_Glu2635del. Other rare missense variants detected only families. in Czech families in this region that were previously predicted or With this study we aim to determine the prevalence of germline determined by functional assays as likely neutral were: p.Arg2666Thr; RAD51C mutations in Belgian/Dutch breast and ovarian cancer p.Ser2704Phe, p.Ala2717Ser; p.Val2728Ile and p.Lys2729Asn. None families, previously found to be negative for BRCA1&2 mutations. of all these BRCA2 variants was detected in 100 unrelated elderly We performed mutational analysis in 350 index patients. Mutation (>60 years of age) healthy Czech women without any personal history detection was performed with High resolution melting curve analysis of cancer and without family history of breast, ovarian, pancreas or (HRMCA), followed by Sanger sequencing of the aberrant melting colorectal cancers. curves. Segregation analysis in hereditary breast cancer families provides Besides frequent single nucleotide polymorphisms and some novel, information to distinguish between deleterious and neutral missense rare variants of which the clinical significance is currently under alterations identified in BRCA2 gene, but most mutations are very rare evaluation, we did not identify any deleterious mutation. To increase and familial data are often insufficient. There is an enormous need the number of probands to a similar number as in the initial report, we to have a reliable functional assay. A novel functional assay using a screened 100 additional families with HRMCA. Sequencing analysis syngeneic knock-in cancer cell line model is going to be applied to of the fragments with aberrant melting curves is currently ongoing. some of these variants. We are the first group to investigate a cohort of breast and ovarian Supported by grant: IGA MZCR NS10536-3/2009 cancer families of comparable size as Meindl et al., and based on their findings, we had expected to detect at least three deleterious P06.029 mutations. As other studies on (male) breast cancer families also did search for novel germ-line mutations in familial BRcA1/2- not identify deleterious germline RAD51C mutations, these may be negative breast cancers less frequent than initially reported. A. Sokolenko1,2, E. Suspitsin1,2, A. Iyevleva1,2, E. Chekmariova1, N. Mitiushkina1, S. Abysheva1, E. Imyanitov1,2; P06.031 1N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, Germ-line mutations and sequence variants of breast cancer 2St.-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian susceptibility genes BRcA-1 and BRcA-2 in a sri Lankan cohort Federation. of breast cancer patients Major breast cancer (BC) genes, BRCA1 and BRCA2, contribute to no K. H. Tennekoon1, E. H. Karunanayake1, S. Silva1, W. Silva1, I. Amarasinghe2, more than 20-25% familial BC clustering; therefore the majority of BC- P. Angunawela3; predisposing mutations remain to be identified. We have selected 95 1Institute of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, University of BC cases, which showed accumulation of clinical signs of the genetic Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka, 2National Cancer Institute, Maharagama, Sri disease (e.g., occurrence of BC among multiple relatives and/or Lanka, 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Colombo, bilaterality and/or young age), but could not be explained by BRCA1/ Colombo, Sri Lanka. BRCA2 alterations or recurrent mutations in CHEK2 (c.1100delC, A cohort of familial (N=66 for BRCA-1; N=55 for BRCA-2) and sporadic c.444+1G>A, del5395) or NBN (c.657_661delACAAA) genes. (N=64 for BRCA-1 and N=54 for BRCA-2) breast cancer patients and The analysis of coding regions was performed using HRM (high at risk individuals (those with a positive family history of breast cancer resolution melting) followed by DNA sequencing. First, we considered but not yet affected by the disease; N=70 for BRCA-1 and N=20 for the extended study for the CHEK2 and NBN: these genes are well BRCA-2) were studied to identify possible mutations and sequence known for the founder BC-predisposing mutations, but, surprisingly, variants in the breast cancer susceptibility gene BRCA-1 and BRCA-2 they have not been subjected to a systematic full-length screen. . DNA extracted from peripheral venous blood samples was amplified However, no novel mutations in CHEK2 or NBN have been detected by polymerase chain reaction using target specific primers and the in our series. Next, we investigated the PALB2, BRIP1, BARD1, and PCR products were analysed using single strand conformation RAD51C. These genes were shown to cause familial BC in selected polymorphism and DNA sequencing. publications, but their global-wide relevance remains to be evaluated. Nineteen sequence variants including six previously unreported We have identified 2 instances of the PALB2 mutation (p.R414X, variants were identified in the BRCA1 gene and twenty three sequence p.Q921X) in bilateral BC cases. We then continued the analysis of variants including ten previously unreported variants were identified other genes involved in double-strand break DNA repair; by the time in the BRCA2 gene. Novel BRCA-1 sequence variants included two of abstract submission, the CHEK1, PARP1, PARP2, ERCC1, XPE, deleterious frame-shift insertion mutations, c.3086delT/exon11 and BLM, BRD7, RNF8, RAD51A, and FANCG have been investigated. c.5404delG/exon21. Novel BRCA-2 sequence variants included two One BC case contained insertion/deletion mutation in the FANCG deleterious frame-shift mutations, 2403 insA / exon 11 and 2667 insT / gene (c.520_524delTCTAinsC). We suggest that HRM/sequencing exon 11, two possibly pathogenic mutations, 1191 A>C /exon 10, 5695 analysis of candidate genes in BRCA1/2-negative familial BC cases A>C /exon 10 and one unclassified intronic variant IVS15-21 insTT. is a realistic approach to pinpoint new hereditary cancer mutations. Prevalence rate of pathogenic and possibly pathogenic mutations in familial breast cancer was 6.25% for BRCA-1 and 12.73% for BRCA-2. P06.030 Of these, one pathogenic mutation (c.2403insA in exon 11) was seen Evaluation of RAD51C as a new breast cancer susceptibility in four unrelated breast cancer patients. Thus screening for BRCA-2 gene in the Belgian/Dutch population mutations, in particular for 2403 insA / exon 11 is likely to be useful in K. De Leeneer1, M. Van Bockstael1, N. Swietek1, J. Van den Ende2, K. Storm2, Sri Lankan clinical practice. B. Blaumeiser2, K. Leunen3, C. J. van Asperen4, J. T. Wijnen4, E. Legius5, Supported by Sida/Secretariat for Research Cooperation G. Michils5, G. Matthijs5, M. J. Blok6, E. B. Gomez-Garcia6, A. De Paepe1, B. Poppe1, K. Claes1; P06.032 1Center of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Large genomic aberrations in BRcA1 and BRcA2 genes in 2Center of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, Bulgarian breast cancer patients 3Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Catholic University of Leuven, R. I. Dodova1,2, D. Dacheva1, A. Vlahova3, T. Dikov3, S. Hristova3, S. Valev4, C. Leuven, Belgium, 4Dep. of clinical genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Timcheva4, V. Mitev1,2, R. Kaneva1,2, A. Mitkova1,2; Leiden, Netherlands, 5Department of Human Genetics, Catholic University 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University -Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht 2Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University – University Medical, Maastricht, Netherlands. Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Central Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, UMHAT Recently, germline mutations in RAD51C were found to be associated “Aleksandrovska”, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Chemotherapy with an increased risk for breast and ovarian cancer. Meindl et al. Cancer genetics 196 Clinic, NSHATO, Sofia, NSHATO - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. practice. Background: Studies on different population worldwide have shown PATIENTS AND METHODS: 7,494 BRCA1-mutation negative breast that the large-fragment aberration in BRCA cancer susceptible genes cancer patients and 7,217 controls were genotyped for four founder account for the large amount of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer mutations in CHEK2 (del5395, IVS2+1G>A, 1100delC, I157T). Odds cases. ratios were constructed for the cases, subdivided by the number of Material and methods: In the present study we performed MLPA breast cancer cases reported in first-and second-degree relatives. analysis of the large genomic BRCA1 and BRCA2 alterations in 100 RESULTS: A truncating mutation (IVS2+1G>A or 1100delC or del5395) Bulgarian breast cancer patients fulfilling the BCLC criteria. MLPA was was present in 227 (3.0%) cases and in 70 (1.0%) controls (OR = 3.0; carried out by SALSA MLPA KIT P002 -C1 BRCA2 and SALSA MLPA 95% CI = 2.4 to 4.2). The OR was higher for women with a first- or KIT P090 BRCA2 (MRC-Holland). The results analyzed by Coffalyser second-degree relative with breast cancer (OR = 4.4; 95% CI = 3.1 data analysis software. - 6.2) than for women with no family history (OR = 2.9; 95%CI = 2.2 Results and discussion: The frequency of the large genomic - 3.8). If both a first- and second-degree relative was affected with BRCA1/2 alterations found in the present study was 8%, which was in breast cancer, the odds ratio was 6.4 (95% CI 2.9 - 14.3). Based on consistency with previous studies in other populations. Four genomic the observed odds ratios, and assuming a baseline risk of 6%, we alterations were found in the BRCA1 gene (4%): del BRCA1 ex 11A estimate the lifetime risks for carriers of CHEK2 truncating mutations in patient with both breast and ovarian cancer; del BRCA1 ex 13 in to be 25% for a woman with one second-degree-relative affected, 30% a women with early onset and family history of breast cancer; dup for a woman with one first-degree relative affected, and 38% for a BRCA1 ex 14-15 and dup BRCA1 ex 20 in two patients with family woman with both first- and one-second degree relative affected. history of breast cancer. The observed BRCA2 mutations were also CONCLUSION: CHEK2 mutation screening detects a clinically four (4%): del BRCA2 ex 3 in a patient with family history of breast meaningful risk of breast cancer. cancer; del BRCA2 ex 25-27 in a young women with early onset and family history; dup BRCA2 ex 9 and dup BRCA2 ex 27, respectively, in P06.035 two women with early onset and family history of breast cancer. Development of a new method in BRcA1 and BRcA2 genetic Conclusion: Combination of MLPA with the conventional methods for analysis based in csGE mutation screening will assist the discovery of all spectra of mutations s. rezaee1, n. Khazamipour1, h. Shabanloo1, s. Mohamadi Fateh1, M. in Bulgarian breast cancer patients. Noruzinia2; 1Sarem Cell Research Center and Sarem women hospital, Tehran, Islamic P06.033 Republic of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2. Department of Medical mutation screening of BRCA2 exons 11 in Bulgarian breast Genetic and Hematology, faculty of medical sciences, Tarbiat Modares cancer patients University, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. D. R. Dacheva1, R. Dodova1,2, A. Vlahova3, T. Dikov3, S. Christova3, S. Valev4, Breast cancer is the most frequent cause of cancer in women. Inherited C. Timcheva4, V. Mitev1,2, R. Kaneva1,2, A. Mitkova1,2; breast cancer tend to occur earlier in life than sporadic cases and are 1Molecular medicine centre, MU- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical more likely to involve both breasts. The BRCA1 protein acting as a Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, gatekeeper in maintaining genome integrity. Therefore, any loss of 3Central Laboratory of Clinical Pathology, UMHAT “Aleksandrovska”, Medical function in BRCA1 protein will result in accumulation of genetic defects University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Chemotherapy Clinic, NSHATO, Sofia, leading to cancer. Mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are inherited in Sofia, Bulgaria. an autosomal dominant pattern. Each offspring of an individual with a Background: Studies on different populations worldwide demonstrate BRCA1 or BRCA2 cancer-predisposing mutation has a 50% chance that germ line mutations in BRCA genes account for the majority of of inheriting the mutation. Mutation detection is thus important to hereditary breast and ovarian cancers. detect anu susceptibility in family members. Molecular genetic testing Materials and methods: We have screened 130 breast cancer patients, of asymptomatic family members at risk of inheriting either a BRCA1 fulfilling the BCLC criteria, for germ-line mutations in BRCA2 exon 11. or BRCA2 cancer-predisposing mutation is possible once the family- Mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing using 17 primer specific mutation has been identified. pairs. In this paper we present two families with new mutation in BRCA1 and Results: The founder mutation described in Ashkenazi Jews: 6174delT BRCA2, both of them have family history of breast cancer. was observed in one patient with bilateral breast and ovarian cancer. To detect mutations in all exons we developed a new method based The mutation was also found in the healthy daughter of the patient. on CSGE(conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis) this new method Another deleterious mutation 5854delAGTT was detected in two permitted us to examine all exons and important intronic regions patients with family history of breast cancer. In addition we found one of BRCA1&2 will minimum of expense and with high sensitivity. rare missense alteration in codon 1915(C>T) leading to replacement PCR products that show heteroduplex pattern on CSGE gel, were of Thr with Met in three patients - one with early onset and two with subjected to direct DNA sequencing to identify the causative mutation. strong family history of the disease. Conclusions: Protein-truncating This molecular genetic test have shown mutation in BRCA2 gene mutations of BRCA2 are usually deleterious and increase the risk of (IVS 10+12 delT) in the first proband. The other one has a transition breast cancer up to 80% over a lifetime. The mutations discovered in mutation (C to T) that results in a stop codon in codon 934. the studied Bulgarian breast cancer patients were previously observed in other European populations. It has been known that 6174delT P06.036 founder mutation occurs very frequently (1.5%) among Ashkenazi Aberrant promoter hypermethylation of Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) gene Jews, but also appears in non-Jewish individuals from Europe, in tumor and adjacent normal tissue in breast cancer patients. Canada etc. The Thr1915Met polymorphism (European population M. Acar1, T. Cora1, H. Toy2, H. Acar1; diversity C/T 6.4%) is a common variant in Poland that increases the 1Department of Genetic, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Pathology, Konya, risk of DCIS with micro-invasion. Further analysis of the other BRCA2 Turkey. exons is necessary in order to ascertain the full spectra of the BRCA2 Breast cancer is the most common malignancy in women worldwide. mutations in the Bulgarian breast cancer patients. Dickkopf-1 (DKK1) gene product is a potent inhibitor of Wnt pathway. In this study, DKK1 methylation status and its protein expression were P06.034 examined in normal and cancer tissues of same patients. the Risk of Breast cancer in Women with a cHEK2 mutation DKK1 promoter methylation was assessed by bisulfite-converted-MSP with and without a Family History of Breast cancer technique in breast cancer patients. We examined methylation changes C. Cybulski, D. Wokołorczyk, A. Jakubowska, T. Huzarski, T. Byrski, J. in 83 tumors and adjacent normal tissues and also in 6 out of 9 normal Gronwald, T. Dębniak, B. Górski, S. A. Narod, J. Lubiński; breast tissues from unaffected women (no breast cancer history) as Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. controls. Immunohistochemical staining was used to investigate DKK1 PURPOSE: To estimate the risk of breast cancer in a woman who has protein expression in 9 controls and 70 out of 83 tumors as well as a CHEK2 mutation depending on her family history of breast cancer. adjacent normal tissues. Immunohistochemical result was categorized To evaluate whether CHEK2 mutation testing may be useful in clinical as positive or negative for DKK1.Cancer genetics 197 DKK1 gene methylation was detected in normal breast tissue from control group (p=0,018). unaffected women (33%). DKK1 gene was highly methylated in tumors According to the literature scan it seems that our study is the first study (70%) and adjacent normal tissues (61%). Immunohistochemically, results evaluating FGFR2 and B7-H4 gene polymorphisms together in 67% normal breast tissue from unaffected women, 69% tumors and breast cancer, frequency of these polymorphisms and their relations 83% adjacent normal tissues were DKK1 negative. DKK1 promoter with breast cancer should be revealed with studies including large methylation and protein expression were not associated with age, case numbers. tumor size, lymph node status, histological grade, and oestrogen receptor or progesteron receptor or CERB2 positivity. Our results P06.039 showed that there is a positive correlation between hypermethylation The influence of MDR1 gene C3435T, T1236C, G2677T/A, A2956G pattern and lower expression level. However, there were no differences polymorphisms on breast cancer development risk DKK1 promotor methylation and protein expression levels between F. Mutlu İçduygu1, H. Şamlı2, T. Evrensel3, A. Özgöz1, K. Hekimler1, M. tumor and adjacent tissues. This result indicates that there is no Canhoroz3, N. İmirzalıoğlu1; different methylation pattern in either breast tumor or normal breast 1Afyon Kocatepe University School of Medicine Department of Medical tissue, indicating that DKK1 is not specific for breast tumor. Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Uludağ University School of Veterinary Medicine Department of Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 3Uludağ University School of P06.037 Medicine Department of Medical Oncology, Bursa, Turkey. Differential allelic expression of BRcA1 and BRcA2 in normal The P- glycoprotein (P-gp), encoded by the MDR1 (ABCB1) gene, cells does not drive specificity of allelic imbalance in tumors of is a member of the family of ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter breast cancer patients proteins. P-gp, which needs ATP energy to be functional, prevents M. Vreeswijk, F. Blanken, P. Van der Bent, C. Meijers, E. Van Zwet, C. the accumulation of potentially toxic substances and metabolites by Cornelisse, R. Tollenaar, V. Smit, P. Devilee; extruding them out of the cell. The single nucleotide polymorphisms Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. (SNPs) of the MDR1 gene can cause differences in P-gp expression Differential allelic expression (DAE) is a phenomenon in which the two levels and this is associated with predisposition to some diseases alleles of a gene are not expressed at equal levels. DAE affects a including breast cancer. In the current study MDR1 gene polymorphisms substantial fraction of the human genome, and has been suggested [C3435T (rs1045642), T1236C (rs1128503), G2677T/A (rs2032582), to be an important cause for human phenotypic variability, including A2956G] were identified by Polymerase Chain Reaction - Restriction complex traits and diseases. We have explored the hypothesis that Fragment Length Polymorphism Method (PCR - RFLP) in 30 cases DAE at BRCA1 or BRCA2 may play a role in the pathogenesis of with breast cancer and 20 women control. When the patient group and breast cancer. Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 are tumor suppressor genes; healthy controls were compared, the only significant difference was breast tumors developing in women who have inherited an inactivating observed in the C3435T polymorphism. TT genotype frequency was mutation in either of these genes have virtually always lost the wild higher in the patient group compared to the healthy controls (p= 0.047) type allele at the gene locus. In a series of 130 breast cancer cases, and CT genotype frequency was higher in the control group compared we determined allele-specific expression levels of BRCA1 and BRCA2 to the patient group ( p= 0.08). According to our results TT carriers in normal skin fibroblasts cultured from mastectomy tissue. DAE was may have an increased risk for developing breast cancer. However detected in 23% of patients at BRCA1, and 38% of patients at BRCA2. more studies with large case numbers must be carried out in order to We then analyzed the allelic status of both genes in genomic DNA determine the role of MDR1 gene SNPs in the risk of breast cancer isolated from matching tumor samples. Allelic imbalance was detected development. in 73% and 52% of tumors at BRCA1 and BRCA2, respectively. DAE at BRCA1 in normal fibroblasts was not correlated with allelic P06.040 imbalance at the BRCA1 gene locus in the tumor, nor did we observe Exome sequencing of 12 familial breast cancer cases without a a preferential loss in the tumor of the allele that was expressed at mutation in BRCA1 or BRCA2 highest level in corresponding normal tissue. A similar finding was F. S. M. Hilbers1, P. M. Nederlof2, N. Hoogerbrugge3, J. C. Oosterwijk4, A. M. made for BRCA2. We conclude that DAE at BRCA1 and BRCA2 W. van den Ouweland5, J. T. den Dunnen1, C. J. van Asperen1, P. Devilee1; does not operate in conjunction with allelic imbalance to contribute to 1Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 2The Netherlands tumorigenesis in the breast. Cancer Institute NKI/AvL, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center P06.038 Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, investigating FGFR2 and B7-H4 gene polymorphisms and their Netherlands. effects in breast cancer The large majority of families with multiple cases of breast cancer A. Özgöz1, H. Şamlı2, K. Hekimler1, B. Orhan3, F. Mutlu İçduygu1, F. Aktepe4, N. can not be linked to mutations in BRCA1 or BRCA2. In this study, İmirzalıoğlu1; we investigate the possibility that a proportion of the non-BRCA1/2 1Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical families is due to rare high-risk genes. Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Uludağ University, Faculty of Veterinary To reduce the genetic heterogeneity, we selected six non-BRCA1/2 Medicine, Department of Genetics, Bursa, Turkey, 3Acıbadem University, families in which the breast cancers of most patients shared a particular School of Medicine, Department of Medical Oncology, İstanbul, Turkey, array CGH profile. By means of next generation sequencing, we 4Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, performed exome sequencing on germline DNA of two family members Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. affected with breast cancer per family. Only variants that were shared FGFR2 is amplified and overexpressed in breast cancer. In between the family members were considered. Intergenic, intronic or recent years, some publications have reported the role of FGFR2 synonymous coding variants, together with homozygous variants were polymorphisms in breast cancer risk. B7-H4 is reported to be highly excluded. Variants present in dbSNP or 1000 genomes were excluded expressed in almost all breast ductal and lobular carcinomas. B7- if the allele frequency in any population was higher than 1%. H4 overexpression seems to occur early in breast carcinogenesis. The selected families collectively showed a linkage peak on In a study performed, an association was detected between B7-H4 chromosome 4 with a homogeneity LOD score of 2,49. When focusing polymorphisms and breast cancer risk. on this region, there were no genes in which breast cancer patients of In our study, FGFR2 gene rs1219648, rs2981582 SNPs were studied all six families had a variant. by sequence analysis and B7-H4 gene rs10754339, rs10801935, At the moment of abstract submission, we are following up on genes rs3738414 SNPs were studied by PCR-RFLP method in 31 cases with having variants in two or more families and are extending the data breast cancer and in 30 women control. analysis to genes outside the chromosome 4 region. Although statistically not important, the frequency of FGFR2 rs1219648, rs2981582 heterozygous polymorphisms and B7-H4 rs10801935 polymorphism AA, AG genotypes were found to be higher in breast cancer cases. In contrast to the previously found, B7-H4 rs3738414 polymorphism GG genotype frequency was found to be higher in the Cancer genetics 198 P06.041 P06.043 Silencing of a ubiquitin specific protease; USP32 in HeLa and the expression of multiple cancer-testis antigens in cancerous mcF7 cancer cell lines cell lines H. B. Akman Tuncer, A. E. Erson Bensan; S. Yousef amoli1,2, L. Kokabee1, H. Rahimi1, M. Karimipour1; Middle East Technical University, Ankara, Turkey. 1Molecular Medicine Department of Pasteur Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic Previous studies identified chromosomal band 17q23 as a frequent of Iran, 2Faculty of Science, Science and Research Campus, Islamic Azad site of gene amplification in breast cancer. USP32 is one of the University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. oncogene candidates in this region. Ubiquitination changes activity, Cancer-testis antigens (CTAs) are a gene family which only express in localization, half-life, conformation, and stability of proteins. Hence, testis tissue, but some of them are randomly expressed in some types ubiquitination and deubiquitination may have important consequences of cancers. Since testis is an immune privileged site, if these genes in cells. Previously, USP32 was shown to be an active deubiquitinating are expressed in tumors, they can be immunogenic. Therefore, these enzyme by an in vivo deubiquitination assay in our laboratory. We antigens are promising targets for cancer-specific immunotherapy. We hypothesized that amplification of USP32 may contribute to breast studied the expression of NY-ESO-1 1a, NY-ESO-1 1b, SCP-1, SSX-2 tumorigenesis by its deubiquitinating activity. Real time RT-PCR was and MAGE-3 in different cell lines (A375 , U373MG , 1321N1 , RPMI , performed to detect USP32 overexpression in breast cancer cell lines MCF , MDAM13 453 and PC3 ) by Multiplex RT-PCR method. and primary tumors. Our results showed that USP32 was expressed Total RNA was extracted from the cell lines and cDNA synthesized, more than 5-folds in 30% of human breast cancer cell lines and 2-folds after wards Multiplex PCR performed by using primers of each CTA in 22% of human primary breast tumors. gene and GAPDH as internal control. The expression of these genes RNAi silencing of USP32 was achieved by pSUPER shRNA and was detected with gel electrophoresis and staining with ethidium confirmed by real time RT-PCR. Proliferation rate of USP32 silenced bromide (the results are presented in Table-1). cells was determined by the MTT Assay. Transwell migration assay was This preliminary study is in agreement with previous data on expression used to compare migration abilities of USP32 silenced cells. Stable of CTAs in tumors and the potential use in immunotherapy of cancers. silencing of USP32 in HeLa and MCF7 cells caused a decrease in the Table 1; The results of expression of CTAs in seven diferent cell proliferation rate up to 35%. Migration abilities of HeLa and MCF7 cells lines. N.D=Not Determind were decreased after USP32 silencing as tested by transwell migration NcBi NY- NY- assay. In short, we detected that USP32 had roles in cell proliferation mAGE- scP- ssX- cell Line code of EsO-1 EsO-1 GAPDH and migration which may be important for understanding the complex 3 1 2 cell Line 1a 1b mechanisms of breast tumorigenesis. We are conducting expression A-375 C136 + + + - - + experiments in non-tumorigenic breast cell line MCF10A to further delineate its function in cells and contribution to tumorigenesis. U-373 C455 - - + - - + mG P06.042 1321N1 C118 N.D + N.D + - + iDH1, iDH2 and tP53 mutations in Bulgarian patients with glial RPmi C210 N.D - N.D - - + tumours 8866 G. Stancheva1,2, T. Goranova2, M. Laleva3, M. Kamenova4, A. Mitkova1,2, N. mcF-7 C135 - - - - - + Velinov3, R. Kaneva1,2, G. Poptodorov3, V. Mitev1,2, N. Gabrovsky3; mDA- 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, C214 - - - - - + mB-453 2Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department Pc-3 C427 N.D - N.D - - + of Neurosurgery, University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment and Emergency Medicine “N.I.Pirogov”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, P06.044 University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment and Emergency Medicine canine mammary tumours are excellent models for human “N.I.Pirogov”, Sofia, Bulgaria. breast cancer Glioma is the most common primary brain cancer and it is characterized M. Melin1, P. Rivera1, M. Arendt2, T. Fall1, T. Biagi3, S. Westberg1, K. Borge4, J. with high mortality. A recent analysis of gliomas has revealed somatic Häggström1, F. Lingaas4, M. Starkey5, H. von Euler1, K. Lindblad-Toh2,3; mutations in the IDH1 and IDH2 genes, which encode cytosolic 1Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science and mitochondrial NADPH-dependent isocitrate dehydrogenase, for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Broad Institute, respectively. Genetic aberrations in IDH1 or IDH2 genes have been Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Norwegian School of Veterinary Science, Oslo, commonly found together with mutated TP53 gene and associated Norway, 5Animal Health Trust, Newmarket, United Kingdom. with good prognosis for the patients. Breast cancer is a major contributor to overall morbidity and mortality Materials and methods: in women and the genetic causes underlying the disease are unclear To validate prognostic significance of genes IDH1, IDH2 and TP53 in the majority of the cases. Canine mammary tumours (CMT) are in Bulgarian patients, we screened 50 primary intracranial tumours, suitable naturally occurring tumour models for human breast cancer including astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas. All samples were and share many similarities, including epidemiological, clinical, examined by direct sequencing of exon 4 of IDH1 and IDH2 genes, morphological and prognostic features. The knowledge about the and exon 5-8 of TP53 gene. inherited risk factors underlying CMT is limited, but clear breed Results: predispositions exist, with 36% of English Springer Spaniels (ESS) in IDH1 mutations were detected in 12 (24%) gliomas, all were G>A Sweden being affected. changes within the isocitrate binding site (R132) at position 395. No We have collected a large material of ESS samples with in-depth clinical mutation was found in IDH2. Aberrations in TP53 were detected in 12 information about each dog. Ten human breast cancer genes (BRCA1, (24%) tumours. Five (42%) of them carried also an IDH1 mutation. BRCA2, CHEK2, ERBB2, FGFR2, LSP1, MAP3K1, RCAS1, TOX3 Patients with mutations in both IDH1 and TP53 were younger (median and TP53; 4-9 SNPs per gene) have been evaluated for association age 35) then those with an aberration only in one gene (49.5) or non- with canine mammary tumours ESS female dogs, 212 CMT cases and mutated cases (55; p=0.016). Median survival of patients harbouring 143 controls. The two tumour suppressor genes BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in two genes was 44.3 months compared to those with were significantly associated with CMT (p =0.005, and p =0.0001 Bonf Bonf mutation in one of the genes and non-mutated cases - 11.9 and 7.3 respectively). Both BRCA1 and BRCA2 confer a ~4 fold increased months, respectively (p=0.04). risk for CMT. Preliminary genome-wide association results from the Conclusions: ESS cohort suggest that at least ten loci contribute to the disease and IDH1 and TP53 mutations are common in gliomas with good survival several associated regions contain plausible candidate genes. Further and may be used as specific prognostic biomarkers in Bulgarian work includes targeted resequencing of candidate loci as well as DNA patients with brain tumours. and RNA tumour/normal comparisons. Our results suggest that CMT is an excellent model for human breast cancer, indicating that both humans and dogs can benefit from further comparative studies. This could provide a unique opportunity to Cancer genetics 199 improve prevention, diagnosis and treatment of both CMT and human P06.047 breast cancer. the analysis of NPm1, FLt3 and c-Kit gene mutations in childhood acute myeloid leukemia in Russia. P06.045 Y. Yatsenko1, O. Kalennik1, M. Maschan2, I. Kalinina2, T. Nasedkina1; Analysis of cD38 and ZAP70 mRNA expression within 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, cytogenetic subgroups of chronic lymphocytic leukemia in 2Federal Research Center for Pediatric Hematology, Oncology, and iranians Immunology, Moscow, Russian Federation. H. Teimori1, M. Akbari2; Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients without chromosomal 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of abnormalities are classified into intermediate risk group; however Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat they have various prognosis and clinical outcome. To estimate new Modares University,, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. prognostic and diagnostic markers we studied the frequencies of Chromosomal abnormalities, CD38 and ZAP70 expression profile are NPM1, FLT3 and c-KIT genes mutations in childhood AML in Russian major independent prognostic markers in B-cell chronic lymphocytic population. 188 de novo AML paediatric patients with the median age leukemia (B-CLL). The present study was designed to investigate of 8 have been studied. In parallel, samples were analyzed for most possible correlation between these three markers. CD38 was common AML chromosomal aberrations using diagnostic biochip, and determined using flowcytometery in 65 patients’ blood and ZAP70 the aberrations were found in 76 (40.4%) of 188 AML patients. The expression using Real Time RT-PCR was examined in 20 B-CLL NPM1 mutations appeared in patients without cytogenetic aberrations patients with del13q14, 13 patients with del11q22, 15 patients only. The frequency was 3.7% (7/188) of total AML patients group and with trisomy 12 and 16 patients with undetected chromosomal 6.2% (7/112) of patients without cytogenetic aberrations. The FLT3 abnormalities. CD38 shows weak prognostic value and also weak mutation appeared in 10.5% (21/188) of all AML patients, in 11.6% correlation with ZAP70 expression. Molecular analysis revealed (13/112) of patients without cytogenetic aberrations and in 10.5% that ZAP70 expression in del13q subgroup was the same as control (8/76) of patients with aberrations. The FLT3/ITD and FLT3/TKD group whilst it increased 2.7838 fold in del11q subgroup and 2.9547 were found in 7.9% (15/188) and in 3.2% (6/188) of all AML patients, fold in trisomy 12 subgroups compared to 15 cases of control group. correspondingly. The c-KIT mutations were found in 2.7% (5/188) of all Comparison of the mean and Standard Deviation of the ZAP70 AML patients. The mutation in c-KIT exon 17 was found in 0.5% (1/188) expression profile within the subgroups showed that its value between of all AML patients. Different mutations in c-KIT exon 8 were found in the individuals of the del11q and trisomy 12 subgroups were highly 2.1% (4/188) of AML cases. Since the mutations in NPM1 gene are variable, as against tight clustering for del13q subgroup. Therefore, significantly associated with normal karyotype (P<0.05) it makes them there is a correlation between del13q aberration which has good convenient diagnostic markers for MRD monitoring. The biochip for prognosis with normal level of ZAP70 expression, whereas due to wide the analysis of mutations mentioned may be useful for clinical practice. variation, no conformity is seen for del11q and trisomy 12 subgroups The work was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research as poor prognostic discriminators. (project no. 08-04-01480). It could be concluded that CD38 could not be regarded as a reliable prognostic factor, and has a poor concordance with ZAP70 expression P06.048 profile whereas ZAP70 shows a good concordance with cytogenetic comparison between two molecular methods for the monitoring abnormalities and simultaneous analyzing of these two markers of post-transplant chimerism produce better prognosis. A. Lari, G. Iaquinta, S. Iozzi, B. Minuti, I. Giotti, F. Torricelli; SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy. P06.046 Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is the gold standard cHEK2 contributes to hereditary susceptibility to breast cancer treatment in a multitude of malignant and non-malignant disorders, like in non-BRcA families severe aplastic anemia, acute and chronic leukaemia and lymphomas. A. Desrichard1,2, Y. Bidet2, N. Uhrhammer1, Y. Bignon1,2; In the early post-transplant period after allogeneic HSCT, coexistence 1Centre Jean Perrin, Clermont Ferrand, France, 2Université d’Auvergne, of the host and donor lympho- and hematopoietic systems will develop. Clermont Ferrand, France. This period, which is temporary in the majority of successful stem cell Mutations in the BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes are responsible for only transplants, is referred to as mixed chimerism, whereas complete a part of hereditary breast cancer (HBC). The origins of “non BRCA” chimerism denotes the situation when all cell lineages are reconstituted HBC families may be attributed in part to mutations in genes giving by donor-derived cells. Successful engraftment correlates with the moderate risk, such as CHEK2. We investigated the contribution of engraftment of donor cells and relapse is thought to evolve from occult CHEK2 mutations to non-BRCA HBC by direct sequencing of its entire autologous malignant cells that survive to the pretransplant marrow- coding sequence. Fifteen mutations were discovered among 507 non- ablative conditioning regimen and escape surveillance by allogeneic BRCA HBC cases and four among 513 controls. The frequency of immune effector cells. Early analysis of donor and recipient chimerism CHEK2 variants was significantly higher among cases (p= 0.0076), and patterns after HSCT gains importance in predicting engraftment gave an OR for breast cancer of 4.72 for deleterious mutation carriers. and rejection as well as in persistent and recurrent disease. It is We then used both in silico tools and in vitro kinase activity to evaluate also helpful in guiding risk-adapted immunotherapy for prophylaxis recombinant mutant proteins. Tumor characteristics and tumor grade and interventional therapy of graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) or of paraffin-embedded tissue blocks from 8 CHEK2 mutated patients imminent relapse. were evaluated by histology. To further caraterize those tumors, Several techniques have been reported for this purpose. The intent breast cancer immunohistochemical markers such as hormone of the present study is to test a novel approach for the quantification receptors, HER2 and P53 were assessed. Because the mechanisms of mixed chimerism using a Indel- marker RT-PCR methode and to of tumorigenesis in association with CHEK2 variants are still unclear, compare this technique to the gold standard one, i.e. STR-PCR, to we performed genetic and epigenetic analysis of those tumors. assess the sensibility of RT-PCR in the analysis of chimerism and its Three revelant SNPs spanning the CHEK2 gene locus were used ability to predict relapse. to determine loss of hetherozygosity (LOH). Also, the proximal CpG islands of the CHEK2 gene were investigated for hypermethylation. P06.049 Our results suggests a contribution of CHEK2 mutations to non-BRCA Dysregulation of apoptotic pathways in chordoma involving FAs HBC, though the usefulness of moderate penetrance genes for genetic and FASL: implications on notochord regression in zebrafish counseling remains controversial. model L. Ferrari1, A. Pistocchi2, N. Boari3, M. Venturin1, F. Gagliardi3, P. Mortini3, F. Cotelli2, P. Riva1; 1Dip. di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 2Dip. di Biologia, University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 3Dip. di Neurochirurgia, Cancer genetics 200 San Raffaele Scientific Institute - Vita-Salute University, Milano, Italy. Islamic Republic of Iran. Chordoma is a rare malignant bone tumor arising from notochord Cancer cell apoptosis can be induced by Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum remnants, characterized by local invasiveness and variable tendency II (cisplatin), an efficient anticancer agent. Bcl-2 and Bax are members for recurrency. Given the implication of apoptosis in notochord of the Bcl-2 family that play key roles in the regulation of apoptosis. regression, we studied the expression of 8 proapoptotic genes The ratio between Bax and Bcl-2 often determines whether a cell mapping in 1p36 region by RT-PCR in 32 tumours showing loss of will live or die. In this study, MCF-7 and T47D cells were treated with heterozigosity (LOH) in 83% of cases. None of the analyzed tumour various concentrations of cisplatin for different times (24, 48 and expression profiles overlaps with that of the control and the absence of 72h). Then, cell viability was assessed using MTT assay and IC50 1p36 LOH has been correlated to a better prognosis. As the apoptotic was determined. RNA was extracted and cDNA was synthesized. pathway mediated by FAS-FASL was found to be involved in notochord Quantity of bcl-2 and bax genes expression compare to actb gene regression, we studied their expression in 34 chordomas and observed were analyzed using very sensitive quantitative Real-time PCR. bcl-2 that most of them express FAS, but not FASL. To verify a possible gene expression was decreased and bax gene was increased in a implication of FAS/FASL pathway dysfunction during tumorigenesis, dose- and time-dependent manner by cisplatin, that was statistically we started in vivo studies on zebrafish. We investigated zfas/zfasl significant (P<0.05). The results showed that cisplatin exerted a dose- expression in embryos’ total RNA during different developmental and time-dependent inhibitory effect on the viability, via up regulation stages and observed that, while zfas has maternal and ubiquitous of bax and down regulation of bcl-2 gene, in MCF-7 and T47D cells. zygotic expression, zfasl has maternal and specific developmental stages expression. Notochordal cells were then sorted by FACS, P06.052 following the injection of a GFP construct activated by a specific Nurse-like cells support cLL lymphocytes survival in vitro via physaliphorous cell promoter, to study zfas/zfasl expression. While induction of sURViViN and BcL2 family genes. zfas expression was detected at both 24hpf and 48hpf, zfasl was A. A. Filip1, D. Koczkodaj1, B. Ciseł2, E. Wąsik-Szczepanek3; not found expressed; further developmental stages will be studied 1Department of Cancer Genetics, Medical University, Lublin, Poland, to define the zfas/zfasl expression profiles. Further analyses are in 2Department of Oncologic Surgery, Medical University, Lublin, Poland, progress to address functional studies aimed at opportunely silencing 3Department of Hematooncology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Medical zfas/zfasl. Aberrant phenotypes during development will be analyzed University, Lublin, Poland. verifying whether the reactivation of zfas/zfasl pathway might rescue B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL), the most common normal phenotype. leukemia in Europe and North America, is characterized by progressive accumulation of mature lymphocytes in peripheral blood, bone marrow P06.050 and secondary lymphatic organs. This accumulation is due both to the effect of silymarin and kaempferol on the expression levels decreased apoptosis and increased proliferation. Altered mechanisms of microRNAs of programmed cell death and proliferation are not the intrinsic features S. Yilmaz1, Z. O. Dogan Sigva1, C. Biray Avci1, M. Yucebas1, T. Balci1, G. of leukemic cells, but result from specific microenvironmental effect. Saydam2, C. Gunduz1; Histological markers of CLL are pseudofollicles (proliferation centers), 1Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, dispersed in involved tissues. Pseudofollicles are made up from 2Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Hematology, Izmir, Turkey. stromal cells, T lymphocytes, follicular dendritic cells, endothelial cells MicroRNAs (miRNA), single strand, non-coding RNA molecules with the as well as others. These create protective microenvironment for CLL length of 18-25 nucleotides, play a major role in the regulation of gene lymphocytes. Nurse-like cells (NLCs), first found in CLL mononuclear expression. Mature miRNA molecules are partially complementary to cells cultures, are also the part of this microenvironment. one or more tumor suppressor or oncogenic messenger RNAs (mRNA) Mechanisms that improve survival and increase proliferation of CLL and cause mRNA degradation or inhibition of the protein translation. cells are crucial in the context of effective therapy. The aim of the study Silymarin is an active component of Silybum marianum L. and was the analysis of proapoptotic genes expression on mRNA and has been shown as a powerful antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and protein level in CLL lymphocytes cultured with nurse-like cells. anticancer agent. Kaempferol, a flavonoid, is an active component of PBMCs of 65 CLL patients were cultured for 14 days. Cell viability, Epilobium parviflorum and presents anti- and pro-oxidant activity in apoptosis, proliferation, gene expression profile and selected proteins various cancers. expression were assessed at day 0 and 14. In this study, it is aimed to investigate miRNA expression differences in We found that NLCs support CLL lymphocytes survival in vitro, and the Chronic Myeloid Leukemia cell line, K562, following the treatment the effect depends on NLC number. Gene expression profiling and with Silymarin and Kaempferol compounds. RT-PCR showed the increase of proapoptotic genes BCL2, BCL-XL Cytotoxicity analysis was performed with several doses of silymarin and SURVIVIN expression, what was further confirmed by their protein (between 4.69 and 300 µM) and kaempherol (between 6 and 30µM) products analyses. However, no signs of CLL lymphocyte proliferation at 24 hours intervals for three days in K562 cell line, using XTT assay. (any mitotic figures or Ki-67 expression) were observed. miRNAs were isolated from cells exposed to IC50 doses of silymarin and kaempherol. Relative quantitation of 88 miRNAs was measured P06.053 by real time online RT-PCR. Alterations in the miRNA expression were Genome-wide detection of copy number alterations in non-small compared with kaempherol or silymarin- free K562 cells. cell lung cancer It is found that, IC50 doses of silymarin (29.02 µM) and kaempherol M. Solovjova1, K. Kirotar1, T. Vooder1,2, R. Roosipuu2, A. Metspalu1,3, N. (9.84 µM) inhibited oncogenic miR-21, miR-128 and miR-15b and Tõnisson1,2; increased the expression levels of miR-22, miR-29a and miR-29c, 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu/ Estonian Biocentre, which are reported to can function as tumor suppressors. Studies on Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Genome the effects of selected plant extracts on miRNA expression profiles are Centre, Tartu, Estonia. may bring new clinical approaches for therapy. A great number of chromosomal aberrations detected in association with lung cancer allows to suppose that just a small part of lung cancer P06.051 specific genes have been identified so far and there is still a lot to be cisplatin induces apoptosis in mcF-7 and t47D breast cancer examined and discovered in this field. cell lines via up regulation of bax gene and down regulation of The aim of the present study was to develop a technique for genetic bcl-2 gene and morphological detection of somatic copy number variations M. J. Mokhtari1, A. Akbarzadeh2, M. Hashemi1, G. Javadi1, R. Mahdian3, S. (CNVs) in heterogeneous tumour tissue. Ghasemi2, A. R. Kamyab1, Z. Hosseinian1, M. R. Mehrabi2; Whole-genome genotyping with HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChips 1Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, (Illumina Inc.) was applied to analyze non-small cell lung cancer Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pilot Biotechnology department, Pasteur (NSCLC) samples from 12 patients, which were then compared with Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Molecular 12 matching blood control samples screened for germline CNVs Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, using Illumina HumanHap300 BeadChips. Four different algorithms (QuantiSNP, PennCNV, SOMATICs, BAFsegmentation) were used for Cancer genetics 201 genotype analysis and the results were compared by applying Java Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research and Innovation, Rouen, France. programming language. CNV areas were plotted to the same graphics An allelic expression imbalance of the TGFβR1 gene was reported for visualisation of the results detected by four programs. That allowed to be a strong risk factor for colorectal cancer (CRC) with an odds choosing different analysing programs for different purposes and ratio (OR) at 8.7 (Valle et al, Science 2008) but several reports have comparing in detail cancer tissue and germline copy number. reported contradictory results. We therefore conducted a prospective About 140 CNVs per patient were detected, most of which were case-control study on carefully selected patients and controls. Patients amplifications. Some were found in more than one patient: 3q25-q27, were selected according to criteria suggestive of an increased genetic 5p12-p14, 12p13, 9p13, 8p22. The results were further compared with risk for CRC: (i) CRC before 61 years of age (or high-risk adenoma gene expression data obtained from the same patients, and 30 genes before 51) with a first degree relative presenting with CRC; or (ii) with altered copy number showed expected changes in expression. A CRC before 51 years of age (or high-risk adenoma before 41); or (iii) subset of the found CNVs was further confirmed by qPCR analysis. multiple primitive colorectal tumors in the same case, the first one The experiments demonstrated that these technique approaches for diagnosed before 61 years of age if cancer or before 51 if high-risk somatic CNVs detection in heterogeneous tumour tissue can be used adenoma. The controls, aged from 45 to 60 years, were CRC-free for further researches. and had no familial history of CRC. Allelic expression of TGFβR1 was then measured, using SNaPshot and 4 SNPs (rs334348, rs334349, P06.054 rs1590 and rs7871490), by normalizing the ratio of the allelic peaks the PABPC4L gene, a candidate gene for colon cancer? obtained on RT-PCR with the ratio of the peaks obtained on genomic R. C. Niessen, M. Viel, L. F. Johansson, T. Dijkhuizen, M. J. W. Olderode- DNA. Allelic expression ratios ranged between 0.82 and 1.41 in 98 Berends; informative controls and between 0.77 and 1.45 in 69 informative University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, patients. No significant difference between patients and controls was Netherlands. observed. We concluded that allelic imbalance of the TGFβR1 is not In a large proportion of familial colon cancer cases, the underlying a major contributor to the genetic predisposition to CRC. Therefore, genetic cause for cancer predisposition remains unidentified. measurement of TGFβR1 allelic imbalance has no clinical utility to Recently, a 237 kb deletion on chromosome 4q28 was identified with identify patients with high CRC genetic risk. array CGH in three individuals with microsatellite stable colon cancer from one family. Only one gene is present in this region: PABPC4L, a P06.057 gene of which the function is unknown. To investigate the hypothesis Verification of the Three Step Model in Assessing the that PABPC4L is a candidate gene for colon cancer, we investigated Pathogenicity of mismatch Repair Gene Variants a group of patients with microsatellite stable colon cancer for germline M. Kansikas, R. Kariola, M. Nyström; mutations in PABPC4L. Ninety-three patients with colon cancer before University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. the age of 50 were included in this study. Their tumours showed no To evaluate whether DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene variations microsatellite instability and normal mismatch repair protein stainings. predispose to Lynch syndrome (LS), a three step assessment model In DNA isolated from lymphocytes, mutation scanning of the PABPC4L has been proposed. Where LS is suspected, STEP1 is dedicated to the gene was performed with high-resolution melting analysis and direct identification of the causative MMR gene and the variation. In STEP2, sequencing. No pathogenic PABPC4L mutations were detected in the the functional effect of the variation is assessed in an in vitro MMR 93 patients. Therefore, our data do not support the hypothesis that and in silico assays. Where LS cannot be confirmed or ruled out, more PABPC4L is a candidate gene for colon cancer. Currently, analysis specific biochemical assays are required in STEP3. Here we verified for large deletions is performed in 39 patients who did not have the proposed model and its ability to distinguish pathogenic MMR heterozygous polymorphisms. variations from variants of uncertain significance by utilizing clinical, laboratory and in silico data of 37 MLH1, 26 MSH2 and 11 MSH6 P06.055 variations. The proposed model was shown to be appropriate and Analysis of different apoptosis ways by gene expression proceed logically in assessing the pathogenicity of MMR variations. analysis and siRNAi silencing in colorectal cancer cells. In fact, for MMR deficient MLH1 and MSH2 variations STEP3 is not A. S. Bavykin, A. A. Korotaeva, E. A. Goncharova, E. G. Zenit-Zhuravleva, A. required. STEP3 is important in assessing MMR proficient variations V. Syrtsev, A. V. Karpukhin; showing discrepant in silico results after STEP2. MSH6 variations Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. require appropriate selection in terms of ruling out MLH1 and MSH2 Overexpression of apoptosis inhibitors is considered to be one of the variations and MLH1 promoter hypermethylation. Overall, taking into main causative factor of apoptosis reduction and drug resistance of consideration the susceptibility gene, the three step model can be colorectal cancers. We set up a profile analysis of a number of genes utilized in an efficient manner to determine the pathogenicity of MMR related to apoptosis inhibition and cell proliferation in the colon cancer gene variations. line HT-29: c-IAP-2, cIAP-3, XIAP, Survivin, Livin, FLIP, HspA5, Gstp- 1, Bcl2, c-myc, caspase 8, TRAP-1, Bcl2L, Kras. The analysis has P06.058 revealed at high level the expression of TRAP-1, Survivin, XIAP and smAD7 rs4939827 risk variant is associated with poor outcome FLIP. The oncogene Kras was found to be expressed even stronger in colorectal cancer patients from R. macedonia compared with TRAP-1 or Survivin. Most of tumors contain mutant allele A. Kapedanovska Nestorovska1, Z. Sterjev1, Z. Serafimoska1, N. Matevska1, Kras in the 2-nd exon. However no Kras mutation was found, arising a T. Josifovski2, N. Jankulovski2, M. Panovski2, N. Petrusevska3, L. Suturkova1, A. question of gene’s hyperactivation in these cells. As far as cancer cell J. Dimovski1; proliferation is dependent on Kras expression, we performed silencing 1Center for Biomolecular Pharmaceutical Analyses, Faculty of Pharmacy, by means of anti-Kras-siRNA. 38% of cell apoptosis was a result of this University “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav inhibition. The double decrease of cell viability (63%) was observed Republic of, 2Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University “Ss when used a combination of anti-Kras, Survivin, FLIP siRNAs. It is Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, interesting that additive effect of three siRNA action was observed. 3Institute of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University “Ss This effect may serve for a good treatment strategy to induce apoptosis Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. of colon tumor cells. Several independent GWAS of colorectal cancer (CRC) have identified numerous disease loci that were not previously suspected to influence P06.056 the risk of developing the disease. We performed a population based Allelic imbalance of the TGFβR1 is not a major contributor to the case-control association study on DNA samples from 350 CRC genetic predisposition to colorectal cancer patients and 180 controls of 5 low-penetrant variants [rs10505477 C. Abadie1, A. Killian1, J. Tinat1,2, M. Bougeard1, D. Medhaoui1, A. Cailleux3, S. (8q24.21), rs3802842 (1q23.1), rs4779584 (15q13.3), rs1800566 Baert-Desurmont1,2, T. Frebourg1,2; (16q22.1) and rs4939827 (18q21.1)]. Genotype-phenotype correlation 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen University, Institute for Biomedical of each variant with various clinico-pathological parameters (gender, Research and Innovation, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, University age of onset, tumor location and TNM stage) was also analyzed. Hospital, Rouen, France, 3Clinical Investigation Center, CIC 0204, University Only two SNPs, rs10505477 (8q24.21) (p=0,042, OR=1,372; Cancer genetics 202 95%CI=1,010-1,862) and rs4939827 (18q21.1) (p=0.027; OR=1.831; mainly consisted of 1) an increased frequency of genetic lesions of 95% CI=1.066-3.144), confirmed population susceptibility to CRC in chromosomes that have been associated with metastatic CRC (1p, our population, whereas the other 3 showed trend towards, but did 7p, 8q, 13q, 17p, 18q, 20q) and, more interestingly, 2) acquisition of not reach statistically significant association. Phenotype/genotype new chromosomal abnormalities (e.g. losses of chromosomes 4 and correlation showed significant association of the 18q21.1 (rs4939827) 10q and gains of chromosomes 5p and 6p). These genetic changes T allele with age >60 (p=1.662e-06; OR = 2.665; 95% CI = 1.82-4.07) acquired by metastatic tumours may be associated with either the and advanced disease at diagnosis (p=0.0216; OR = 1.499; 95% metastatic process and/or adaption of metastatic cells to the liver CI = 1.058-2.092). RT/PCR analysis of paired blood/tumor samples microenvironment. Further studies in larger series of patients are showed that half of the patients had allelic imbalance at the 18q21.1 necessary to dissect the specific role of each of the altered genes and locus, with preferential selection of the risk allele in 2/3 of the patients. chromosomal regions in the metastatic spread of CRC tumours. Our data add evidence that 8q24.21 and 18q21.1 genetic variants are markers predisposing to CRC in our population. We also demonstrate P06.061 for the first time that enrichment of the risk T- allele of rs4939827 at Effects of curcumin on global gene expression profile in the 18q21.1 in tumors is associated with advanced disease at diagnosis, highly invasive human breast carcinoma cell line mDA-mB 231 which further supports the notion that genes mapping in the vicinity to N. Cine1, D. Sunnetci1, P. Limtrakul2, H. Savli1; this locus are important regulators of colorectal cancerogenesis. 1Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Biochemistry Department, Chiang Mai University, Chiang Mai, P06.059 Thailand. constitutional mono-allelic BUB1 deletion in a patient with non- introduction classical mosaic variegated aneuploidy syndrome and early Curcumin, or diferuloylmethane, is a major chemical component of onset colorectal cancer turmeric (Curcuma longa Linn) that has been consumed as a dietary R. M. de Voer, A. Geurts van Kessel, M. Ligtenberg, D. Smeets, N. spice for ages. This yellow colored polyphenol has a surprisingly wide Hoogerbrugge, R. Kuiper; range of beneficial properties, including anti-inflammatory, antioxidant, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. antitumoral, anti-invasive and antimetastatic activity. Mosaic variegated aneuploidy (MVA) syndrome is a rare recessive materials and methods disorder marked by growth retardation, microcephaly, childhood In this study, microarray gene expression analysis was applied to cancer and constitutive aneuploidy. Some cases of MVA have been identify the curcumin-regulated genes in a highly invasive human associated with homozygous mutations in the BUB1B gene, a breast-carcinoma cell line (MDA-MB-231). Cells were cultured (20µM) component of the spindle assembly checkpoint (SAC). with curcumin for 24 hours; total RNA was isolated and hybridized We have applied high-resolution SNP array profiling as an approach to Agilent Whole Human Genome microarray slides. Gene Set to identify novel cancer predisposing genes in patients with early Enrichment Analyses on our whole genome expression data revealed onset mismatch repair proficient colorectal cancer. We encountered the downregulation of the EGF pathway elements followed by curcumin a constitutional mono-allelic deletion encompassing another important treatment. SAC gene, BUB1, in a patient who developed a colon carcinoma at age Results 37. Clinical examination revealed microcephaly and brachydactyly, two Furthermore, gene network analysis identified a significantly relevant characteristic features of MVA syndrome. No mutations were found network among the differentially expressed genes centered on the in the remaining BUB1 allele. In addition, no germline mutations in EGR-1 and FOS genes. The members of these pathway and network the APC gene were found. Since defects in the SAC are known to be play an essential role in the regulation of cancer cell growth and associated with aneuploidy, metaphases of the patient’s lymphocytes development, most of them showed decreased expression level after were analyzed and, by doing so, an increased level of constitutive the treatment of curcumin. aneuploidy (32%) was observed. conclusion Regulation of the SAC has been shown to be dependent on gene We have demonstrated the decreased expression of pathway dosage. Bub1 hypomorphic mice revealed reduced checkpoint activity elements of the EGF signaling cascade and the decreased expression and increased aneuploidy in a dose-dependent manner with increased of EGR-1 gene on mRNA level in MDA-MB 231 human invasive breast spontaneous tumorigenesis. Furthermore, in a patient, who presented carcinoma cell line. According to our knowledge we were the first who with early onset gastrointestinal cancer, a homozygous mutation in applied comprehensive GSEA and network analysis to analyze the BUB1B leading to a reduced BUBR1 expression was recently reported. gene expression profile of curcumin treatment on breast carcinoma These data imply that, next to recessively inherited syndromes like cell line.These observations suggest that the use of curcumin may be MVA, haploinsufficiency of BUB1 or other SAC components may an excellent candidate for prevention and treatment of breast cancer. result in non-classical forms of MVA with a predisposition to develop gastrointestinal malignancies. P06.062 High throughput validation of novel single nucleotide P06.060 polymorphism associated with cytogenetically normal acute Genetic profile of sporadic colorectal cancer liver metastasis vs. myeloid leukemia samples primary tumours by sNP-arrays. K. C. Lo1, M. Rossi2, J. Patel1, S. Sunay2, H. Khoury2, M. Watt1, X. Zhang1, T. J. Sayagués1, C. Fontanillo1, M. Gonzalez-Gonzalez1, E. Garcia1, M. Iglesias2, Albert1, R. Selzer1; C. Esteban2, M. Abad2, E. Fonseca2, O. Bengoechea2, J. De las Rivas1, L. 1Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States, 2Emory University, Atlanta, Muñoz-Bellvis2, A. Orfao1; GA, United States. 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (IBMCC-CSIC/USAL), Universidad Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by an arrest of de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, maturation of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Patient prognosis varies Salamanca, Spain. widely and is currently stratified based on the presence or absence Most genetic studies in colorectal carcinomas (CRC) have focused on of specific cytogenetic abnormalities. Currently, cytogenetically normal those abnormalities that are acquired by primary tumours, particularly AML is classified as intermediate risk, with a 5-year overall survival in the transition from adenoma to carcinoma, while few studies have (OS) at 38. The overall 5-year survival rate is less than 50% in adults compared the genetic abnormalities of primary vs. paired metastatic and significantly lower in the elderly (defined as > 65 years). samples. In this study we used high-density 500K SNP arrays to Here we describe a study with 4 cytogenetically normal AML patients map the overall genetic changes present in liver metastases (n=20) - 2 of old age (defined as >65 years) and 2 young (< 45 years). from untreated CRC patients studied at diagnosis versus their paired Whole exome sequencing of these 4 samples was performed using primary tumours (n=20). Overall, metastatic tumours systematically Roche NimbleGen’s SeqCap EZ exome capture and analyzed using contained those genetic abnormalities observed in the primary tumour Illumina’s HiSeq platform. Novel discoveries were distinguished from sample from the same subject. However, liver metastases from most constitutional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) by comparing cases (n=8/20) showed acquisition of genetic aberrations that were not each AML sample to match normal DNA from the same patient. found in their paired primary tumors. These new metastatic aberrations Novel discoveries of the four patients, as well as SNPs that are Cancer genetics 203 known to be associated with AML (i.e. FLT3, NPM1, IDH1, IDH2 and thyroid cancer and 320 individuals (144 females and 176 males) from DNMT3A) served as input to a 13,500 custom SNP panel using Roche population were examined. Sequence variants were determined by NimbleGen’s AccuSNP custom genotyping platform. The custom SNP pyrosequencing. array serves as downstream validation of the whole exome sequencing We didn’t observed significant differences in allele frequencies in discoveries and a tool to extent these findings to profile an additional patient with thyroid cancer and population group. In DTC patient group 96 AML samples. This serves to demonstrate the power of a multi- allele C was present with frequency 0,012 and allele G with frequency tiered approach of combining targeting sequencing and flexibility of the 0,988. In population frequency for allele C was 0,025 and for allele G AccuSNP platform to provide an accurate and high-throughput tool for 0,975 identifying novel polymorphisms associated with AML. The differences were observed when considerate men and women separately. Allele C in males was observed with smaller frequency P06.063 (0,011) comparing with females (0,042). In patient group we did not Analysis of frequency ccND1 gene polymorphism (rs3862792) regard frequencies in these groups, because of much higher frequency in Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer of occuring differentiated thyroid cancer in woman. Project supported J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, A. Barańska1, M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, S. T. by Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education grant N N402 2874 Hryhorowicz2, L. Jakubowska-Burek3, K. Ziemnicka4, J. Sowiński4, R. Słomski1,5; 36. 1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2The Nanobiomedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, P06.065 3Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, Analysis of frequency tNFa gene polymorphism (rs361525) in University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 4Department of Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, S. T. Hryhorowicz1, J. Kapiński2, M. Kaczmarek-Ryś2, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska2, Poznań, Poland, 5Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of L. Jakubowska-Burek3, K. Ziemnicka4, J. Sowiński4, R. Słomski2,5; Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland. 1The Nanobiomedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, The product of CCND1 gene belongs to the highly conserved cyclin 2Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, family. Cyclins function as regulators of CDK kinases. Cyclin D1 3Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, forms a complex with CDK4 or CDK6, whose activity is required for University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 4Department of cell cycle G1/S transition. This protein interact with tumor suppressor Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, protein Rb and the expression of CCND1 gene is regulated positively Poznań, Poland, 5Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of by Rb. Mutations, amplification and overexpression of this gene, which Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland. influences on cell cycle progression, are observed frequently in a TNFA gene encodes a multifunctional proinflammatory cytokine that variety of tumors and may contribute to tumorigenesis. belongs to the tumor necrosis factor superfamily. This cytokine is Thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of endocrine involved in the regulation of a wide spectrum of biological processes as system. Most often occurs papillary and follicular thyroid cancer: cell proliferation, differentiation or apoptosis and has been implicated in tumors with well prognosis, low benignity and slow progress but a variety of diseases including cancer. The role of TNFalpha in cancer often giving recurrences and regional or remote metastasis and as is complex with pro-tumourigenic and anti-tumourigenic role proposed. well progression from well differentiated thyroid cancer to malignant Differentiated thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of anaplastic carcinoma. endocrine system with growing up frequency. In most cases occurs We analyzed synonimic substitution c.669C>T (rs3862792) in papillary and follicular thyroid cancer and more often it is present in CCND1 gene. Group of 628 patients (560 females and 68 males) with women. differentiated thyroid cancer and 378 individuals (185 females and We analyzed polymorphism g.4752G>A (rs361525) in TNFA gene. 193 males) from population group were examined. Sequence variants Group of 607 patients 539 females and 68 males) with differentiated were determined by pyrosequencing. thyroid cancer and 482 individuals (282 females and 200 males) from No significant differences in allele frequencies in patient with population group were examined. Sequence variants were determined differentiated thyroid cancer and population group were observed. In by pyrosequencing. DTC patient group allele T was present with frequency 0,024 and allele We didn’t observed significant differences in allele frequencies in C with frequency 0,976. In population frequency for allele T was 0,037 patient with differentiated thyroid cancer and population group. In DTC and 0,963 for allele C. Project was supported by Polish Ministry of patient group allele A was present with frequency 0,055 and allele G Science and Higher Education grant N N402 2874 36. with frequency 0,945. In population frequency for allele A was 0,04 and for allele G 0,96. P06.064 In this focus, very important seems to be searching for molecular Analysis of frequency ERcc2 gene polymorphism (rs3916891) in markers of disease course, good or poor prognosis and response Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer on medical treatment as well. It is expected that SNP polymorphisms M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, S. T. Hryhorowicz2, K. research in genes demonstrating association with neoplastic diseases Ziemnicka3, L. Jakubowska-Burek4, M. Szalata1,5, J. Sowiński3, R. Słomski1,5; will be helpful in understanding of molecular mechanisms of tumors 1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, development and allow to better diagnosing. Project supported by 2The Nanobiomedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, Polish Ministry of Science and Higher Education grant N N402 2874 3Department of Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of 36. Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 4Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, P06.066 Poznań, Poland, 5Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Dna damage in cultured human mesenchymal stem cells at Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland. various passages Thyroid carcinomas are the most often carcinomas of endocrine A. Chausheva, V. Nikitina, N. Bochkov; system with still growing up frequency. Papillary and follicular thyroid Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. cancer are the most frequent and belong to tumors with well prognosis, The cell therapy with multipotent mesenchymal stromal stem cells slow progress and low benignity but with tendency to recurrences and (MSCs) is promising treatment for various diseases. According to regional or remote metastasis. methodology the stem cells requires to cultivation before therapeutic In this focus, searching for molecular markers of disease course, good use. It is known, spontaneous malignant transformation of MSCs in or poor prognosis and response on medical treatment is fundamental. It long-term culture is possible. is expected that SNP polymorphisms research in genes demonstrating The DNA-damage can be plausible cause of chromosomal association with neoplastic diseases will be helpful in understanding of abnormalities and gene mutations. We studied the levels of DNA molecular mechanisms of thyroid gland tumors development and allow damage in MSC from human bone marrow at various passages of to better diagnosing. cultivation using single cell gel electrophoresis (comet assay). We analyzed polymorphism c.*171G>C (rs3916891) in ERCC2 gene. Twenty eight samples of MSC’s cultures from bone marrow of healthy Group of 455 patients (400 females and 55 males) with differentiated donors have been analyzed. DNA damage was assessed as percent Cancer genetics 204 of DNA in comet tail. The level of DNA damage and the frequency of associated with two polymorphisms in ERCC1 gene but in Yakuts it apoptotic comets in cultures of MSCs studied at 3-4 passages and was correlated with ERCC2 Lys751Gln polymorphism. 10-11 passages. Conclusions: The marked ethnic differences in relevant The levels of DNA damage in MSC didn’t change during culturing pharmacogenetics may be a potential explanation for discordant (3,5±0,9% on 3-4 passages and 4,4±1,2% on 10-11 passages ). The platinum efficacy and toxicity in Asians and Caucasians, and are frequencies of apoptotic comets in MSC cultures were 2,8±0,9% on the worthy of future studies. early passages and 3,6±1,8% on the late ones. In one of the cultures of MSCs we have observed a high level of DNA-damage (16,5% DNA P06.069 in comet tail) and high rate of apoptotic comets (18,3%). Polymorphisms of the DNA repair genes XRcc1 in acute leukemia P06.067 C. Banescu1, M. Dobreanu2, C. Duicu2, I. Benedek2, I. Pascanu2, K. Csep2; DNA microarray Analysis in Bulgarian Patients with Newly 1Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Diagnosed Glioblastoma multiforme Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania. E. Naydenov1, I. Dimova2, B. Rukova2, S. Hadjidekova2, D. Nesheva2, K. In several DNA repair genes, polymorphisms may result in reduced Minkin1, V. Bussarsky1, C. Tzekov1, S. Nachev3, D. Toncheva2; repair capacity, which has been implicated as a risk factor for 1Department of Neurosurgery, University Hospital “St. Ivan Rilski”, Sofia, various types of cancer. The aim of the study was to investigate Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, the association between genetic polymorphisms of XRCC1 and 3Laboratory of Neuropathology, University Hospital “St. Iv. Rilski”, Sofia, susceptibility to acute leukemia. We performed a case-control study Bulgaria. involving 26 patients with acute leukemia (21 with myeloid leukemia INTRODUCTION: Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most and 5 with acute lymphoblastic leukemia) and 20 healthy controls for common and malignant primary brain tumor which is characterized by polymorphisms of codons 194 and 399 of the XRCC1 base excision a number of different genetic alterations. repair pathway gene. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by AIMS: We aimed to analyze the DNA profiles in an unselected group of enzymatic digestion of the PCR products was used for the genotyping Bulgarian patients with newly diagnosed GBM. of the two polymorphisms. The restricted products were analyzed on MATERIAL AND METHODS: Nine fresh-frozen tumor samples from 2% agarose gel. The risk of development of acute leukemia was found patients with histologically confirmed primary GBM have been studied to be significantly increased when variant XRCC1-399 (Arg/Gln) and using a high-throughput DNA microarray analysis. XRCC1-194 (Arg/Trp) were present (p<0.05). These results suggest RESULTS: The most common numerical chromosomal aberrations that the polymorphism of XRCC1 gene may contribute to the higher were monosomy 10, 13, 14, 22, and trisomy 7 and 20. The most risk of acute leukemia. frequently detected copy number changes were deletions at 10p12, Acknowledgement: This paper is partly supported by the Sectorial 10q23, 1p36, and 14q32; and gains at 7q36, 1q44, and 20q11-13. We operational programme human resources development (SOP HRD), identified a number of candidate tumor suppressor genes (KCNMA1, financed from the European social Fund and by the Romanian FGFR2, GFRA1, BNIP3, BACH, KLF12, VRK1, NF2, and OSM) and Government under the contract number POSDRU 60782. oncogenes (GNAI1, HGF, PCLO, SEMA3D, GRM3, RGS7, OPN3, CDK5, DNAJB6, ZNF658B, CDK5RAP1, and PTPN1), which are P06.070 probably involved in the development of GBM. comparisons of mDR1 and mRP1 expression at RNA and protein CONCLUSIONS: GBMs are genetically heterogeneous group of levels using quantitative Rt-PcR and Flow cytometry in breast tumors with unpredicted therapeutic response. The clinical significance cancer tumors of the DNA-microarray findings needs to be further established. M. Taheri1, F. Mahjoubi2, R. Omranipour3; 1Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran, P06.068 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Pharmacogenomics of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in ovarian Republic of Iran, 3Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic cancer patients of different ethnic origin Republic of Iran. A. V. Khrunin1, F. G. Ivanova2, A. A. Moisseev3, D. V. Khokhrin1, Y. S. One of the limitations in the treatment of cancer patients with Sleptsova4, V. A. Gorbunova3, S. A. Limborska1; chemotherapy is the development of multidrug resistance (MDR). 1Institute of Molecular Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Yakutsk This means that tumor cells become insensitive to a wide range of Republic Cancer Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3N.N.Blokhin Cancer chemotoxic drugs which are structurally and functionally different. Research Centre RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Russian State Medical A well-known mechanism responsible for drug resistance is over- University, Moscow, Russian Federation. expression of ABC-transporter genes.The aim of the present study Background: Interethnic differences are becoming increasingly was to investigate the expression level of MDR1and MRP1 in breast recognized as important factors accounting for interindividual cancer tumors and adjacent normal tissues of breast cancer patients variations in tolerability and efficacy of anticancer drugs. Although the at levels of RNA as well as protein levels and examine whether the reasons underlying ethnic diversity in drug responsiveness are likely expression of either or combination of these genes in breast cancer multifactorial, inherited ethnic differences in drug-related genes may correlates with response to chemotherapy. be, at least in part, the cause of the diversity. Fifty four patients with breast cancer who had undergone breast Methods: 18 polymorphisms in 10 genes, the protein activities of which cancer surgery were enrolled in the study.Expression levels of MDR1 may be addressed in different aspects of cisplatin metabolism, were and MRP1in normal and tumoral breast tissues were evaluated by tested for correlations with efficacy and toxicity of cisplatin-based quantitative Real time PCR and flowcytometry. regimen (combination with cyclophosphamide) in Russian (n=104) and Results showed that the expression levels of MDR1 and MRP1 in Yakut (n=87) women with epithelial ovarian cancer. tumoral breast tissue were increased significantly than those of normal Results: There were significant (p<0.05) differences between samples. Russian and Yakut patients in genotype distribution for GSTP1 Our findings showed that evaluation of the expression at RNA or protein Ile105Val, GSTP1 Ala114Val, GSTA1 −69C>T, ERCC2 Asp312Asn, levels using Real time RT-PCR or flowcytometry are compareable but ERCC2 Lys751Gln, ERCC1 19007T>C, CYP2E1 96bp and CYP2E1 Real time RT-PCR is faster and cost benefit . −1053C>T. GSTP1 Ile105Val polymorphism was associated with progression-free survival (p=0.004) and overall survival (p=0.02) in P06.071 Russian patients. In Yakuts correlation with progression-free survival A novel cDH1 transcript increases gastric cancer cell invasion were observed for CYP2E1 7632T>A polymorphism (p=0.05). The and angiogenic potential associations between genotypes and treatment toxicities were also H. Pinheiro1, D. Ferreira1, J. Carvalho1, P. Oliveira1, M. T. Pinto1, D. Licastro2, different between ethnic groups. Russian patients with GSTM1-null R. Bordeira-Carriço1, D. Lazarevic2, R. Sanges3, R. Seruca1,4, E. Stupka5, D. and GSTM3 intron 6 AGG/AGG genotypes had a lower risk of anemia. Huntsman6, C. Oliveira1,4; In contrast, in Yakut group anemia was less frequent among patients 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2CBM S.c.r.l., Trieste, Italy, 3Stazione Zoologica with GSTA1 −69C/C genotype. Nephrotoxicity in Russians was Anton Dohrn, Napoli, Italy, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Cancer genetics 205 Portugal, 5UCL Cancer Institute, London, United Kingdom, 6British Columbia breast cancer. Cancer Agency (BCCA), Vancouver, BC, Canada. The present study initially assessed the effective dosage of DAC Cell-cell adhesion plays a crucial role in epithelial tissue polarity and for breast cancer therapy based on the cell viability, cytotoxicity, structural integrity and E-cadherin is a key player is this process. apoptosis and methylation quantification assays for different breast Reduced cell-cell adhesiveness results in destruction of the histological cancer cell lines. Then two breast cancer subtypes including highly structure and increase invasion, the morphological hallmark of aggressive and non-aggressive cell lines were investigated at various malignant tumors. Despite the strong correlation between E-cadherin time points passages using multi-dimensional omics approaches impairment and malignancy, the cause underlying its impairment (gene expression, microRNA expression and proteomics analysis). remains unknown in most epithelial cancers.In the present work, we Complete molecular profile of the studied subtypes was identified. identified a novel E-cad transcript, characterized its tissue specific Additionally, the biological interactions and possible early and late expression and its functional role in a cancer context.A new E-cad systematic stable or transient effects of the methylation inhibition were exon was identified within intron 2 splicing with exon 3 at its canonical determined in details. splice-site. 5’-RACE and CAGE analysis pinpointed two potential The present study allows improving the effective optimal DAC dose transcription start sites (TSS) and an ORF. This transcript includes cycles to establish intervals for epigenetic treatment of patients and all downstream canonical exons of E-cad gene, is expected to be also new DAC targets (including genes, miRNAs and proteins) and translated and was named CDH1a. CDH1a is specifically expressed new involved pathways were identified. Furthermore, the results of the in spleen, a non-epithelial tissue and is absent from the stomach study give new therapeutic clues based on modification of pathological epithelia. In stomach cancer cell lines, it becomes overexpressed. methylation patterns for management of cancer patients. Forced overexpression of CDH1a in cell lines expressing the canonical E-cad promotes cell invasion and angiogenesis and modifies their P06.074 expression pattern as proved by microarray analysis. We identified New biomarkers detected for esophageal squamous cell a novel E-cadherin protein isoform cis-regulating the function of the carcinoma using chemiluminescent cDNA microarray gene canonical form. This finding may enclose a previously unrecognized expression profiling mechanism leading to E-cadherin impairment in cancer. E. Dadkhah1, H. Naseh2, M. Farshchian1, B. Memar2, M. Sankian3, R. Bagheri4, M. Forghani Fard1, M. Abbaszadegan1; P06.072 1Human Genetics Division, Immunology Research Center, BU-Ali Research Frequency of EGFR mutations in Bulgarian patients with NscLc Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic S. Bichev1, D. M. Marinova2, Y. G. Slavova2, R. Kaneva3, A. Savov1, I. Republic of Iran, 2Department of Pathology, Omid Hospital, MUMS, Mashhad, Kremensky1; Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Division of Immunobiochemistry, Immunology 1National Genetic Labortaory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Univesity hospital for pulmonary Research Center, Bu-Ali Research Institute, MUMS, Mashhad, Islamic Republic diseases “St. Sofia”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia, of Iran, 4Department of Surgery, Quaem Hospital, MUMS, Mashhad, Islamic Bulgaria. Republic of Iran. Background: Lung cancer is the leading cause for death among many Esophageal cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer related deaths other cancer types. Non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC) comprises in Iran. Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is most often approximately 80- 85% of all cases with lung cancer. According to diagnosed in the advanced stages with a very low survival rates. No publications in the last 5 years, some epidermal growth factor receptor standard early diagnostic guideline has been proposed to date. Gene (EGFR) mutations, correlate with positive response to treatment with expression profiling using cDNA microarray can be an effective method tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) such as genfitinib and erlotinib. While in finding new molecular markers in ESCC. Ten samples including five EGFR mutation profiles have been reported for certain Asian and tumors and five corresponding adjacent normal tissues of patients with Caucasian population there is no such report for Bulgarian population. ESCC were used for microarray analysis using Chemiluminescent It is established that 30- 40% of Asian and 10- 15% of Caucasian Human Cancer GEArrays. Fifteen genes were detected with equal patients with NSCLC are carriers of EGFR positive mutations. to or more than 1.5-folds significant overexpression compared to Aim: Establishing the frequency of EGFR mutations in Bulgarians with the normal tissue RNA. Thirty three genes showed equal to or more NSCLC. than 1.5-folds underexpression significantly (P<0.05). Overexpressed Materials and methods: A group of 341 patients with NSCLC were genes included AP2M1, CDC25B, FTL, HLA-C, HLA-G, HSPA8, analyzed so far. DNA was extracted from paraffin embedded tissues. ITGB4, MCM2, MMP2, PCNA and UBEL2L6 with a significant p-value We used high resolution melting (HRM) technology and subsequent (P < 0.05). Significantly underexpressed genes were CD24, RAP1A, sequencing of aberrant profiles to screen 73 patients for mutations in RASGRF1, XRCC5 and TP53I3 (P < 0.05). AP2M1, FTL, UBE2L6, EGFR gene, the rest 268 patients were screened by qPCR based on HLA-C and HSPA8 from overexpressed genes and XRCC5, TP53I3 Scorpions technology. and RAP1A from underexpressed genes have not been reported to Results: We have detected TKI activating mutations only in 3% among date in gene expression profiling of ESCC. Validity Verification was the group of patients screened by HRM/Sequencing and in 11 % of performed using Real-time PCR for three randomly selected markers. patients, screened by qPCR. Deletions in 19th exon and two point MMP2 and HLA-G overexpression and XRCC5 underexpression were mutations (L858R; L861T) in 21st exon were observed. Overall 9% of confirmed in 94 tumor and matched normal tissue samples of forty our patients were mutation positive. seven Iranian patients with ESCC, showing two tailed significancy Conclusion: Our study is in concordance with previous reports. of 0.008, 0.003 and 0.000 respectively. These molecular biomarkers However appropriate method for analysis has to be used. may be suitable targets for further studies to find specific diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic biomarkers especially in the Iranian P06.073 population. complete transcriptomic, epigenomic and proteomic signature upon demethylation treatment of human breast cancer subtypes P06.075 approached by multi-platform ‘omics analyses is there any association between risk factors obesity and R. Radpour1, Z. Barekati1, C. Kohler1, I. Lefkovits1, F. Staedtler2, X. Zhong1; occupational airborne exposures with p14 & p15 aberrant DNA 1Department of Biomedicine / University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, methylation in esophageal cancer patients? 2Biomarker Development, Novartis Institutes of BioMedical Research, Novartis s. Mohammad Ganji1,2, F. Rastgar-Jazii1, A. Sahebghadam-Lotfi1, K. Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Sayehmiri3, F. Fereidooni4, A. Rezagholizadeh5, M. Yazdanbod6, M. Negrini7; Contribution of aberrant DNA methylation in tumorogenesis through 1Department of Biochemistry, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and silencing of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) and microRNAs has been Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dipartimento di Medicina investigated. Since these epigenetic alterations can be reversible, it Sperimentale e Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca sul provides impetus to study both early and late effects of the 5-aza-2’- Cancro,, Ferrara, Italy, 3Department of Epidemiology and social medicine, deoxycytidine (DAC) therapy in breast cancer using omics tools. Here Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, we investigated multi-dimensional models to predict effects of DAC 4Department of Pathology. Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospitals Complex, at the level of the genome, epigenome and proteome for subtypes of Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Surgery Department, Cancer genetics 206 Shariati Hospital, Medical University of Tehran,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of one of the mechanisms for gene silencing in breast tumors which are Iran, 6Surgery Department, Shariati Hospital, Medical University of Tehran, potentially reversible and so they are good targets for new therapeutic Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7. Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale e strategies. For analyzing the methylation status of ERα gene, ER3 Diagnostica e Centro Interdipartimentale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Università region were assessed with methylation specific polymerase chain di Ferrara,, Ferrara, Italy. reaction (MSP). ERα methylation was detected in 64 of 91(70%) breast It has shown that some risk factors for increasing of squamous cell tumors. A strong correlation was found between ERα methylation in carcinoma of esophagus such as obesity and occupational dust ER3 region and ER negativity in tumors as 88.9% of ER negative exposure could be affected on aberrant DNA methylation. For this versus 52.2% of ER positive cases were methylated (P< 0.00001). reason, we studied for methylation at the p14 and p15 gene promoters There were significant correlations between methylation in ER3 region by methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction assay (MSP) on and negative status of progesterone receptor in tumors (P< 0.01). DNAs extracted from 44 fresh tumor tissues and 19 non-tumor adjacent Presence of ERα methylation in a sizable fraction of ER+ cases, normal tissues, obtained from 44 patients affected by squamous cell maybe due to cellular heterogeneity in breast tumors. ER positivity in carcinoma of esophagus (SCCE) in Iran. Statistical analysis was used breast tumors is a dynamic phenotype and over the natural course of to assess association of promoter methylation with bio-pathological, cancer progression, ER can be lost and many ER+ tumors become clinical and personal information data, including obesity and airborne ER- in the course of the disease. Presence of ERα methylation in ER+ exposures. The results showed that Methylation at the p14 and p15 tumors is a manifestation of this heterogeneity and may contribute to gene promoters was detected in 9% and 41% of tumor samples endocrine therapy resistance or recurrence. respectively, but none of the non-tumor tissues exhibited the aberrant methylation. Moreover, we found the significantly associated with p14 P06.078 promoter methylation and obesity (P=0.02) as well as p15 promoter molecular sub typing of breast tumors in iranian breast cancer methylation and occupational exposure (P=0.025). This study provides patients and its association with estrogen alpha receptor (ERα) evidence that obesity and occupational exposure increase the risk of methylation developing esophageal cancer through an enhancement of p14 and P. Izadi1, M. Noruzinia1, M. Karimipoor2, M. Karbassian3, M. Akbari1; p15 promoter methylation. 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Medicine Department, P06.076 Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, the functioning of important for tumor development genes in Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Day Hospital, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic ovarian cancer tumor and its microenvironment. of Iran. V. P. Shubin1, A. N. Loginova1, A. U. Kashurnikov2, A. N. Gritsay2, A. V. Breast cancer is one of the most frequent malignancies among Iranian Karpukhin1; women and its age of onset seems to be about 10 years earlier in 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical comparison to European countries. This cancer is a heterogeneous Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian disease that includes many morphological and molecular entities. We Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. had shown that ERα promoter methylation is a frequent event in Iranian The estrogen receptor α (ESRα), osteopontin (OSTP) and BRCA1, patients. Therefore we investigated the association of this epigenetic BRCA2 gene expression in samples of ovarian cancer, in tumour event in different molecular subtypes of breast tumors. Although microenvironment and in distant from tumour regions were breast cancer subtypes were originally identified by gene expression investigated. In accordance with ESRα and OSTP role in cancer analysis using DNA microarrays, large-scale sub typing using gene development, their expression in tumor relatively normal ovarian expression profiling from formalin fixed, paraffin-embedded samples tissue was increased in 35-40% of cases. Important, that in tumour is not currently feasible. According to recent approaches about microenvironment these genes were activated higher than in tumor immunohistochemical (IHC) based classification of breast tumors to in 25-30% of cases, sometimes even if the expression in tumor was molecular subtypes, we used IHC surrogates to identify breast tumor near to normal. Possibly this reflects the postulated effect of tumor intrinsic subtypes in 91 breast tumors in Iranian patients. ER-/PR-/ instigation by microenvironment and should be taken into account in Her2- tumors were classified as triple negative (basal like) (25%), ER-/ practical diagnostics, especially ESR. The BRCA1 role in ESRα and PR-/her2+ tumors as her2+ group(24%), ER+/PR+/Her2- as luminal OSTP regulation as it was observed for breast cancer was not found A (34%) and ER+/PR+/Her2+ as luminal B tumors(17%). Methylation for ovarian cancer in our work. However we revealed a correlation of status of estrogen receptor promoter was investigated in these BRCA2 gene expression with both ESRα and OSTP expression in subtypes. There was a significant correlation between methylation in ovarian cancer tumor. In this aspect it is interesting inverse correlation ERα and triple negative subtype where 20/23 (86.7%) of them were of relations of expression levels in tumor and microenvironment for methylated. Also significant correlation were found in Her2+ subtype BRCA1 and BRCA2 revealed by us. The data for the first time highlight tumors with 20/22 (90.9%) methylation in ERα (P<0.002). These two the functional interrelation of important for tumor development genes non-luminal subtypes have poor prognosis and it has shown that they in the ovarian tumor and its microenvironment. are associated with significant decrease in survival. P06.077 P06.079 Methylation of estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) gene promoter is a APc germinal mosaicism in a patient with Familial Adenomatous frequent event in iranian women with sporadic breast cancer Polyposis carrying the c.4666del mutation P. Izadi1, m. noruzinia2, M. Karimipoor3, M. Karbassian4, M. Akbari5, F. C. Mongin1, C. Colas1, F. Coulet1, M. Eyries1, Y. Lahely1, J. H. Lefevre2, Y. Fereidooni6, Z. Mostakhdemin Hosseini6, F. Kamali6; Parc2, F. Soubrier1; 1department of medical genetics, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat 1Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique Moléculaire, GH Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, PARIS, Modares university, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2department of medical France, 2Chirurgie Digestive, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, AP-HP, PARIS, France. genetics, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Molecular Medicine Department, We report a case of germinal APC mosaicism in 36 years-old male Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur institute of Iran, tehran, Islamic patient diagnosed for Gardner syndrome with features of adenomatous Republic of Iran, 4Day Hospital, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department polyposis and without family history of polyposis. No mutation in APC of Medical Genetics, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares university, gene was initially found. The APC gene of his daughter was sequenced tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Pathology department, Cancer Institute, because of the occurence of osteomas at five and nine years old, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and the germline heterozygous mutation c.4666del was detected. Breast cancer affects Iranian women at least one decade earlier than This mutation was detectable in father’s lymphocytes DNA but in western patients with noticeably different clinical manifestation. Breast low proportion (9%), suggesting the presence of somatic mosaicism tumors are classified based on estrogen receptor alpha status to ER in the father. The detection of the mutation in other tissues (buccal negative (30-40%) and ER positive. Considering to the challenging swab, normal colon tissue) and in the offspring suggests that it may nature of ERα- tumors treatment, and its innate poor prognosis, have occurred early during embryogenesis, before the separation of clarification of the molecular mechanisms that control expression of the embryonic layers. As expected, the higher level of mutated allele ERα are essential. Aberrant methylation of gene promoter region is was detected in adenomas. Several dilutions of mutated DNA in wild Cancer genetics 207 type DNA show that the High Fusion Resolution (HRM) technique Mismatch Mutation Analysis). EMMA is, a new fast and cost-effective allows a 2.5% proportion of the mutated allele to be detected. Sanger method based on heteroduplex analysis by capillary electrophoresis. sequencing alone is not sensitive enough to detect low mosaicism The 13 coding exons and intron-exon junctions of PALB2 were levels and pre-screening methods like HRM could be used for APC amplified as 19 amplicons in 6 multiplex PCR using a single condition. analysis. Mosaicism is an important consequence of the high rate To validate the EMMA method we sequenced directly the exons for of de novo APC mutations and must be considered in the diagnosis all samples. We did not observe any discrepancy between the two of apparently de novo cases. Mutation screening of offspring with methods. We identified one truncating PALB2 mutation in a family with the disease could be preferred when possible because of the risk three breast cancer cases (mean age 53 years) and 1 ovarian cancer of mosaicism. When no mutation is detected it can be envisioned case. Four novel missense mutations were also identified. to sequence adenomas DNA as a first step toward identifying APC This study is the first report of PALB2 mutation screening on French mosaicism. breast-ovarian cancer families. Although PALB2 mutations seem rare, their contribution to hereditary breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility P06.080 needs further investigation. mutations of APc and mYH Genes in patients with Familial Adenomatous Polyposis in populations from central Western P06.082 spain and canary islands Familial Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma and Breast J. L. Buleje Sono1, L. Macías1, J. Pérez1, R. Caballero1, E. Sánchez1, T. cancer in several Pedigrees with BRcA2 mutations Martín2, A. Sánchez de Arriba3, E. Lastra4, A. Sánchez5, J. Cruz-Hernández1,2, M. R. Abbaszadegan1, R. saidi1, O. Moaven1, A. A’rabi1, F. homaei- Shandiz2, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; M. Montazer3, G. h. Noferesti4; 1Laboratorio 14, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (CIC). Universidad de 1Human Genetics Division, Immunology Research Center, BU-Ali Research Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología Médica, Hospital Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Complejo Hospitalario Republic of Iran, 2Cancer research Center- Ghaem& Omid hospital-Mahhad Universitario Insular- Materno Infantil, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Unidad de investigación, Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain, 5Servicio de 3Pathology Department- Mashhad University of Medical Sciences(MUMS), oncología médica, Hospital Puerta de Hierro, Madrid, Spain. Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Cancer Research Institute-Ghaem & Omid Introduction: Germline mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) Hospital-Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic are associated with the development of familial adenomatous polyposis Republic of Iran. (FAP), a hereditary colorectal cancer syndrome with autosomal Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) is the 6th most common dominant inheritance pattern. This syndrome is characterized by the fatal cancer in men and 9th in women in the world And the 5th leading presence of hundreds to thousands of adenomatous polyps in the cause of cancer in Iran. A high frequency of ESCC in northeastern colon and rectum. Attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP), Iran has been reported. BRCA2 may play an important role in ESCC is related to mutations in the end 5 ‘, in exon 9 and in the end 3’ of the carcinogenesis as indicated study from Iran, India and China suggested APC gene. Biallelic mutations in MYH gene have also been identified that. The incidence of multiple primary cancers is reported between in patients with multiple colorectal adenomas and in APC-negative 0.3% and 4.3%. Sequential primary ESCC followed by primary Breast patients with FAP. Cancer (BrCa) has not been reported previously. Mutational analysis Materials and Methods: We collected samples from peripheral blood to of BRCA2 in several familial ESCC/BrCa pedigrees with affected probands belonging to 55 families of high risk for familial adenomatous ESCC individuals who later contracted BrCa was performed. polyposis. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood cells. Individuals with ESCC were treated successfully by surgery and Amplified PCR products were analyzed by CSGE, dHPLC, restriction chemotherapy, however, after several years some of the pedigree enzymes, MLPA, In silico analysis and direct sequencing. members contracted invasive ductal carcinoma BrCa. We screened Results: Molecular analysis of APC gene, has allowed the identification patients for BRCA2 mutations in germline DNA by whole gene of pathogenic germline mutations in 75% of FAP families and 17% of sequencing. Some known BRCA2 mutations and a novel splice variant, AFAP families. We found 41 different mutations in the APC gene, which c.426-2A>G were detected. Novel mutation tracking ruled out SNP in have been cataloged in pathogenic mutations, variants of unknown 50 healthy individuals. The related family members, 60 sporadic and significance and neutral polymorphisms. In MYH gene, the analysis 12 familial ESCC were negative for this new mutation. The novel splice revealed 6 different pathogenic germline mutations in 7 unrelated variant mutation was found in two affected ESCC/BrCa sisters, 54 yrs families, including 6 families with biallelic and 1 with monoallelic and 48 yrs old, and their sons and daughters, two brothers and two variants. nephews. Sequencing of BRCA2 cDNA, exons 4 to 7, revealed that Conclusions: We described 14 pathogenic mutations in APC gene; c.426-2A>G mutation lead to exon 5 skipping in splicing process. eight of them are reported for the first time. Additionally, we confirm These results intrigued a possible link between ESCC and BrCa that germline mutations in MYH gene are responsible for a significant through BRCA2 tumorigenesis pathway. fraction of colorectal polyposis. P06.083 P06.081 Identification of a homozygous nonsense mutation of FANCM in mutation screening of PALB2 gene in breast/ovarian cancer a case with polycythemia vera carrying uniparental disomy 14q families by Enhanced mismatch mutation Analysis (EmmA). A. Harutyunyan1, T. Klampfl1, B. Gisslinger2, T. Berg1, D. Olcaydu1, H. I. Schultz1, D. Muller1, C. Cordier2, J. Abecassis1, J. Fricker2; Gisslinger2, R. Kralovics1,2; 1Regional Cancer Centre P. Strauss, Oncogenetic laboratory, Strasbourg, 1Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, France, 2Regional Cancer Centre P. Strauss, Clinical oncogenetic department, Austria, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and Blood Strasbourg, France. Coagulation, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. A family history of breast cancer is one prerequisite criterion for Polycythemia vera is a chronic myeloid neoplasm characterized testing for BRCA1 and BRCA2 germ-line mutations. However, germ- by elevated erythrocyte mass and susceptibility to acute myeloid line mutations in BRCA1-BRCA2 genes account for only 15-20% of leukemia (AML). Acquired uniparental disomies (UPD) are frequent breast cancer families. Recently, the PALB 2 gene, known as one of lesions in cancers that were shown to amplify heterozygous somatic the Fanconi anemia genes (FANCN), has been identified as a Partner mutations. UPDs of the long arm of chromosome 14 (14qUPD) are and Localizer of BRCA2 and was reported to contribute to breast and frequent defects in myeloid neoplasms, however, the mutant gene pancreatic cancer susceptibility. Monoallelic germ-line mutations in target remains unknown. In an attempt to find the target of 14qUPD PALB2 have been reported in 1% to 3% of early-onset and/or familial we performed exome sequencing on tumor DNA sample from a patient cancer cases and confer more than a two-fold increased risk to with polycythemia vera and carrying 14qUPD. We analyzed the exome develop breast cancer. sequencing data for point mutations and focused on the chromosomal In a series of patients previously analysed for BRCA1/BRCA2 with no region of 14qUPD. A homozygous nonsense mutation, R658X, was detectable point mutation or large rearrangement, we screened 94 found in gene FANCM. Germline mutations in FANCM cause Fanconi index patients for germ-line mutations in PALB2 by EMMA (Enhanced anemia and an increased susceptibility to AML. We confirmed the Cancer genetics 208 homozygous mutation in myeloid cells by Sanger sequencing, while The aim of our study was to analized the cytogenetical aberrations in the buccal mucosa control sample was heterozygous for the mutation. malignant follicular lymphomas, in order to identify the prognostic and Clinical data showed that the patient was initially diagnosed with predictive value of bcl2-2/IgH translocation in these malignancies. polycythemia vera and had high hemoglobin levels, while at sample Material and method: We conducted a study on 79 patients with the patient was anemic and later transformed to AML. It is unclear follicular lymphomas. The study was carried out on tissue samples whether the nonsense mutation in FANCM caused proliferative selected from the “Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology advantage in the patient or there is a second, somatic mutation that files. These samples were formalin-fixed paraffin embedded-tissues, drives the clonal outgrowth. In any case, acquired homozygosity for routinely processed for histology. the germline mutation changed the clinical course of the disease. The The t(14;18) translocation, realized by the bcl 2/IgH rearrangement, interplay of somatic genetic events and germline deleterious variants supposedly occurs in almost all follicular lymphomas (FL) can be provides another dimension in clonal evolution of cancers. detected by FISH methods We employed the PathVysion LSI IGH Spectrum Green/ LSI bcl2 P06.084 Spectrum Orange (VYSIS) kit. Novel mutation and polymorphism of the APc gene in patients Results: Asingnificant positive correlation was found between the IHC with FAP positivity for bcl 2 and the FISH detection of t (14;18) translocation Z. Akbari, M. Montazer Haghighi, M. Yaghoob Taleghani, A. Irani Shemirani, B. (p=0,04). Damavand, S. Fatemi, M. Zali; Twenty two cases were selected for FISH analysis, five cases were Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Taleghani Hospital, excluded because of the processing artifacts , ten of the 17 cases Shaheed Beheshti Medica, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. without artifacts (58.8 %) presented t(14:18) translocation: two cases Background: Colorectal cancer which has become specially prevalent of FL grade 1-2, two cases of FL grade 1, six cases of FL grade 3. in developed countries. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) In 66.6% of cases with t(14;18) translocation, the immunohistochemical is an autosomal dominant disease characterized by hundreds of reaction for bcl 2 protein was positive. adenomatous polyps in the colon and rectum and by a variety of Bcl2 t(14;18) translocation plays an important role in the pathogenesis extracolonic features.Mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli of follicular lymphoma, and is an important tool in the diagnosis and (APC) gene, a tumor suppressor , is though to be an early event in treatment. patients with FAP. Method: This study was conducted on 15 patient with FAP. Genomic P06.087 DNA was extracted according to standard salting out protocol. Whole FLT3 internal tandem duplication and FLT3-D835 mutation in 80 coding region of the gene was scanned using bidirectional sequencing AmL patients categorized into cytogenetic risk groups. analysis. D. Januszkiewicz1,2,3, E. Mały3, M. Przyborska3, J. Nowak1; Results: In the present study the screening of APC gene led to 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, the identification of two novel missense mutations and one novel 2Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology of the polymorphism. The mutations were including a A>G transition Medical University, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Medical Diagnostics, (AAG→AGG) at nucleotide 6226 in exon 15. This alteration substitute an Poznan, Poland. arginine to the normal lysine at residue 2057 (Lys 2057 Arg). The other Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a clonal disorder characterized by mutation, G>C transition (AGC→ ACC), was identified at nucleotide various genetic abnormalities and variable response to treatment. 6772 in exon 15. This alteration replaces serine with threonine at About 50% of patients with AML have no cytogenetic aberrations, residue 2239 (Ser 2239 Thr) in another proband. Moreover, 1novel presenting normal karyotype, and are categorized in the intermediate polymorphism determined in codon 15, C>G transition (ACT→ AGT) risk group. In this group detection of FLT3 mutations move a patient at nucleotide 6820. It causes replacement of threonine with serine at from the intermediate to the adverse risk group. Bone marrow from residue 2255 (Thr 2255 Ser). 80 AML patients was cultured to obtain chromosome slides and then Conclusions: Our findings showed that probably the mutations have karyotype. Simultaneously DNA was isolated from bone marrow and been located in these regions are responsible for some cases of FAP PCR reaction was conducted to test the FLT3 mutation status (ITD deficiency. Therefore, we could consider these types of mutations in and D835). For statistical analysis Chi squared test was used. From order to predict individuals at risk of FAP in our population. the group of 80 AML patients seven were classified as a favorable risk group and FLT3/ITD was found only in one of these patients P06.085 (14.28%), and FLT3/D835 in another one (14.28%). Fifteen patients the APc gene mutation analysis in Familial Adenomatous showed a complex karyotype with more than three aberrations or with Polyposis, a large cohort study from iran any aberration known as a poor prognosis. Among the adverse group T. Hamzehloei, A. Hoseini, A. Sarli; FLT3/ITD was detected in three patients (20%) and D835 mutation in Mashhad university of medical sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. two other patients (13.33%). Among 58 patients with normal karyotype Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) is a rare dominant disease in GTG banding FLT3/ITD occurred in six cases (10.34%) and D835 accounting for approximately 1% of all colorectal cancers. The gene mutation in two cases (3.45%). No significant difference was found responsible is APC mapped to chromosome 5q21-22 and isolated by among these three risk groups regarding presence or absence of positional cloning. APC is a tumour suppressor gene which is inactivated FLT3/ITD and FLT3/D835. Molecular characterization of mutations in as a gate keeper in either familial or sporadic FAP. In this study the several genes, such as FLT3, NPM1, MLL, CEBPA, in acute myeloid germline mutations in FAP patients determine possible genotype- leukemia, especially in normal karyotype cases, could be another phenotype correlations in these cases. The germline mutations were factor after cytogenetic analysis to stratify AML patients into different detected in 63% of patients using heteroduplex analysis on genomic prognostic categories. DNA and cDNA. This is the first report of molecular analysis of FAP in a large cohort study from Iran. P06.088 FOXE1 locus is a major genetic determinant for radiation- P06.086 induced papillary thyroid carcinoma Prognostic and predictive significance of the bcl -2/IgH F. Damiola1, A. Fillon1, M. Moissonnier2, V. Tenet2, S. McKay-Chopin1, F. Le translocation in malignant follicular lymphomas Calvez-Kelm1, I. Malakhova3, V. Masyakin4, E. Cardis5, A. Kesminiene2, F. M. Neagu1, C. M. Ardeleanu2, G. Butur2; Lesueur1; 1National Institute of Pathology Victor Babes, Bucharest, Romania, 2national 1GCS Group, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 2RAD institute of pathology victor babes, bucharest, Romania. Group, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, 3Republican In Europe, follicular lymphomas constitute up to 30% of non-Hodgkin Scientific-and Practical Center for Medical Technologies, Informatisation, lymphomas. Administration and Management of Health, Minsk, Belarus, 4Republican Prognostic markers, identified by 2 different working groups, Research Center of Radiation Medicine & Human Ecology, Gomel, Belarus, immunohistochemical (CD10, bcl 2 positivity) and molecular (the bcl 2/ IgH hybrid gene, the t(14;18)(q32:q21.Cancer genetics 209 5Center for Research in Environmental Epidemiology, Barcelona, Spain. University of Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal. After the Chernobyl nuclear power plant accident in April 1986 an Inactivation of E-cadherin (CDH1), by genetic and epigenetic increase in thyroid cancer incidence, essentially papillary thyroid mechanisms, is recognised as a pivotal step in gastric cancer carcinoma (PTC) in children, occurred in the contaminated areas. initiation and progression. Yet, a considerable proportion of gastric Previous studies demonstrate that children exposed to ionising cancers lack classical CDH1 inactivation mechanisms (CDH1 radiation show an increased risk of PTC, and carry it with them into mutation, loss of heterozygosity and/or DNA methylation), but adult life. Given the inter-individual variation in response to radiation nevertheless loss or mislocalisation of E-cadherin expression is still dose and familial aggregation of thyroid cancer, it is likely that genetic frequently observed. To address this issue, we explored an indirect factors affect radiation-related thyroid cancer. pathway involving chromosomal abnormalities, a microRNA (miR- In 1999, the RAD group at IARC set up a population-based case- 101) and a histone methyltransferase (EZH2), which may contribute control study in Belarus and the Russian Federation to evaluate the to E-cadherin impairment in sporadic gastric cancer. We confirmed risk of thyroid cancer after radiation exposure in childhood. The study that, independently of the histological type, E-cadherin is frequently aimed to investigate how environmental and host factors interplay to impaired (95%) in our series of sporadic gastric cancer. However, modify this risk. In the current analyses, we included 413 subjects from only 30% of the cases harbour classical inactivation mechanisms. Belarus (83 PTC cases and 330 matched controls); all of them were We found that miR-101 expression is downregulated in most of aged 15 or younger at the time of the accident. We genotyped, in this these cases and proved, for the first time, that this occurs via (micro) unique series, 8 SNPs shown to be associated with sporadic PTC: deletions at one of the microRNA-101 loci in chromosome 9p24.1 rs965513 (nearby FOXE1 on 9q22.33), rs944289 (NKX2 on 14q13.3), (miR-101-2 locus). Moreover, 40% of cases showing decreased rs4704397 (PD8B), rs2252696 (TG), rs2910164 (Pre-miR-146a), levels of miR-101 displayed overexpression of EZH2 (a known target rs2145418 (1q12), rs4658973 (WDR3), rs4903957 (TSHR). gene of miR-101) which, in turn, associates with loss or aberrant Consistent with findings from the Genome Wide Association Studies E-cadherin expression. Conversely, we demonstrated that depletion of (GWAS), the SNP on 9q22.33 appears to double the risk of radio- EZH2, by short interference RNA, rescues E-cadherin cell-membrane induced PTC for carriers (OR=2.39 [1.22-4.68], p=0.026). By contrast, expression. Overall, we show that loss of miR-101 with parallel EZH2 the second GWAS SNP on 14q13.3 and the other candidate SNPs upregulation may constitute an additional mechanism that can either were not replicated in this series. directly impair E-cadherin expression or may co-exist with classical Further studies are underway to understand the role of FOXE1 in E-cadherin inactivating mechanisms seen mainly in advanced cancers thyroid carcinogenesis. with intestinal morphology. P06.089 P06.091 A novel pathogenomic mechanism in FPD/AmL by a the iL1-RN +2018t>c polymorphism is associated with constitutional t(16;21) involving 16p13 AtF7iP2 and 21q22 increased susceptibility to gastric adenocarcinoma RUNX1 loci F. Burada, C. Angelescu, M. Ioana, F. Mixich, P. Mitrut, S. Popa, E. Buteica, M. A. Buijs1, S. van der Crabben1, B. van der Zwaag1, E. van Binsbergen1, M. Cruce; Poot1, O. de Weerdt2, M. van Gijn1, K. Nieuwenhuis1; University of Medicine and Pharmacy from Craiova, Craiova, Romania. 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2St . Antonius Gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer and the second most Hospital, Nieuwegein, Netherlands. common cause of cancer deaths worldwide. Gastric carcinogenesis is a Familial platelet disorder with propensity to myeloid malignancy (FPD/ complex, multistep process, which may be influenced by many factors, AML) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by platelet including genetic variations. The aim of our study is to investigate the abnormalities and a predisposition to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). IL-1B -31T>C (rs1143627), IL-1B +3954C>T (rs1143634) and IL1-RN FPD/AML is caused by constitutional point mutations and copy number +2018T>C (rs419598) polymorphisms and gastric cancer susceptibility changes in 21q22 RUNX1. Given the clinical heterogeneity of FPD/ in Eastern Europe (Romanian population), a region in which the AML, the syndrome could be overlooked. In the past this has resulted association between gastric cancer and these polymorphisms has in stem cell transplantation (SCT) of patients from affected siblings not previously been studied. A total of 103 patients with gastric before detection of the inherited RUNX1 mutation. Therefore, adequate adenocarcinoma and 244 healthy controls were included. DNA was diagnostics are essential to exclude FPD/AML. The identification extracted from the blood specimen. These polymorphisms were of novel mutations is required to define clinical features and could genotyped by allelic discrimination TaqMan PCR. Allelic distributions contribute to risk stratification given the heterogeneous manifestation were examined for deviation from their corresponding Hardy-Weinberg of this rare disorder. Here we report novel p.Gly143Arg and p.Gln235X equilibrium. The effects of cytokine alleles on the risk of diseases (RUNX1b variant) mutations in two pedigrees. In a third pedigree were expressed as odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals no RUNX1 anomaly was detected by sequencing or copy number (CI). A significant association was observed for IL-1RN+2018T>C, analyses using array CGH. We hypothesized that FISH analysis could the subjects carrying CC genotype were at a 2.5 fold elevated risk reveal a balanced 21q22 RUNX1 translocation. A rearrangement of the for gastric cancer (OR 2.52, 95%CI:1.06-6.01). Separate comparisons RUNX1 locus by a constitutional t(16;21)(p13;q22) was identified as a between tumor site and controls, and between histology type cancer novel pathogenomic mechanism in FPD/AML. The 16p13 breakpoint and controls also showed that IL1-RN+2018T>C was associated with was confined to the proximity of the ATF7IP2 (MCAF1) locus, encoding an increased risk of gastric non-cardia adenocarcinoma (OR 2.77, a transcription factor involved in proliferation in human cancer by 95%CI:1.10-6.99) and intestinal type (OR 3.08, 95%CI:1.17-8.11). No epigenetic transcriptional control of Sp1-dependent maintenance significant difference was observed between all gastric cancer cases of telomerase activity. This is the first report on a constitutional and controls or in stratified analysis for both IL-1B polymorphisms. chromosome translocation with an oncogene rearrangement as a In conclusion, polymorphism IL1-RN+2018T>C may contribute to pathogenomic mechanism in a hematological malignancy. Our data gastric cancer risk, mainly for non-cardia and intestinal types of gastric indicate that FISH analysis of RUNX1 for structural aberrations has to adenocarcinoma in Eastern Europe. be included in the FPD/AML diagnostic sequel. P06.092 P06.090** mutations in gastrointestinal stromal tumors in the slovak microRNA-101 modulates E-cadherin expression and function population - a population based study. through EZH2 up-regulation in gastric cancer L. Plank1, Z. Lasabova2, G. Minárik3, T. Szemes3, T. Burjanivova2, P. Szepe1, J. J. Carvalho1, N. C. van Grieken2, S. Sousa1, M. Tijssen2, T. E. Buffart2, B. Sufliarsky4; Diosdado2, H. Grabsch3, G. Meijer2, R. Seruca1, B. Carvalho2, C. Oliveira1,4; 1Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Pathological 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia, 2Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 2Pathology Department, VU University Medical Medicine, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Martin, Slovakia, 3Geneton, s.r.o., Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Pathology Bratislava, Slovakia, 4National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. and Tumour Biology, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is the most common Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, Leeds, United Kingdom, 4Faculty of Medicine, mesenchymal tumor of the gastrointestinal tract, characterized by Cancer genetics 210 expression of CD117 and harboring activating mutations in KIT and 212 348 1.72 (1.02- Male P<0.05 PDGFRA protooncogenes. In this study, we analyzed the distribution (87.97) (71.02) 2.92) of 192 primary mutations identified in 192 patients with GIST in the Age Slovak population from April 2007 till June 2010. The exons 9, 11, 13 330 and 17 of KIT and exons 12, 14 and 18 of PDGFRA were examined < 48 years 36 (14.94) Reference Reference (67.35) using direct dideoxysequencing after PCR amplification. From these 205 160 8.60 (5.64- 192 mutations, the KIT mutations were present in 160 cases (83%) > 48 years P<0.05 (85.06) (32.65) 13.10) and PDGFRA in 32 cases (17%). The most common were exon 11 SHMT c1420t mutations in 137/160 cases with 84/137 deletions, 37/137 point genotypes mutations and 16/137 duplications/insertions. The deletions within exon 11 were divided into two groups, small deletions (<20 bp) and CC 124 260 Reference Reference large deletions (>20 bp) and the most affected codons were 558 and (51.45) (53.06) 570, respectively. Subsequently, twenty mutations were identified 183 0.87 (0.59- CT 98 (40.66) P=0.46 in exon 9, the most common p.A502_Y503dup in 18 cases. Within (37.35) 1.27) exons 13 and 17, we found two p.K4642E missense mutations and TT 19 (7.89) 45 (9.59) one p.N822K substitution, respectively. The most common mutation in PDGFRA was the p.V842D (18/32) in exon 18. The distribution of mutations in patients with GIST in Slovak population is similar to the P06.094 previous reports. Analysis of these mutations is important for indication Genistein-induced miR-23b expression via hyperthermia inhibits of the targeted therapy and is emerged as a paradigm for genotype- the growth of breast cancer cells driven therapy. C. Biray Avci, Z. O. Dogan Sigva, S. Yilmaz, M. Yucebas, T. Balci, C. Gunduz; Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey. P06.093 MicroRNAs (miRNA), non-coding RNA molecules, play a major role impact of SHMT c1420t polyorphism in head and neck cancer in the regulation of gene expression. Mature miRNAs cause mRNA L. M. R. B. Silva1, M. Succi2, L. S. Raposo1, J. V. Maniglia1, É. C. Pavarino1, E. degradation or inhibition of protein translation via complementary or M. Goloni-Bertollo1; partly binding to the mRNAs, so they act as oncogenes and tumor 1São José do Rio Preto Medical School (FAMERP), São José do Rio Preto - suppressor genes. SP, Brazil, 2Universidade Estadual Paulista Júlio de Mesquita Filho, São José Genistein, an isoflavonoid, is a prime anti-cancer component of do Rio Preto - SP, Brazil. soybean and plays roles in the inhibition of protein tyrosine kinase iNtRODUctiON: Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) phosphorylation, tumor progression, apoptosis, induction of cell is considered one of the most frequent tumors in developing countries differentiation and disruption of free radicals. Hyperthermia is the and the main risk factors are tobacco and alcohol. Alterations in exposure of cells to higher temperatures (41-44oC) than normal folate metabolism may contribute to the process of carcinogenesis by psychological degrees. influencing DNA methylation and genomic stability. Polymorphisms in This study aimed to induce oxidative stress by exposing MCF-7 genes encoding enzymes involved in this pathway may alter enzyme breast cancer cell line to hyperthermia and determine the IC dose 50 activity and consequently interfere in concentrations of homocysteine, of genistein and evaluate the combined effect of this isoflavone and S-adenosylmethionine and other metabolism products that are hyperthermia in terms of miRNA expression levels. important for DNA synthesis and cellular methylation reactions. The The IC dose of genistein was 175μM and hyperthermia caused 50 objective was to investigate SHMT C1420T polymorphism involved in 40% cytotoxicity in MCF-7 cell line. The combination of hyperthermia folate metabolism on head and neck cancer risk and the association and genistein showed highest cytotoxicity during the 72nd hour of the between this polymorphism with risk factors. PAtiENts AND experiment. mEtHODs: Polymorphism was investigated in 731 individuals (241 miRNA expression profilings of 88 miRNAs and 4 housekeeping patients and 490 controls) by Real Time-PCR. Chi-square and Multiple miRNAs were quantified using real-time online RT-PCR. miR-23b, logistic regression were used for the statistical analysis. REsULts: a miRNA which is reported to be down-regulated in human cancers, Multiple logistic regression showed that tobacco, male gender and age was found to be up-regulated 56.69, 739.29 and 918.10 folds following over 48 years were predictors for the disease (P<0.05). SHMT C1420T the treatment of genistein, hyperthermia and genistein-hyperthermia polymorphism associated to risk factors were not related to HNSCC combination respectively, compared to the control group of genistein- (Table 1). cONcLUsiON: The present study suggests that tobacco, free cells not exposed to hyperthermia. male gender and age over 48 years modulate HNSCC risk. However, In conclusion, up-regulation of miR-23b may offer an alternative further investigation of gene interactions in folate metabolism and miRNA-based therapeutic strategy, as an additional protocol for the studies in different populations are needed to investigate HNSCC risk. treatment of breast cancer. Table1. Distribution in OR of gender, age, polymorphism and risk factors between HNSCC patients. P06.095 investigation of the inhibitory Effect of soy-derived Genistein on Patients N Controls N Variables OR (95%CI) P value the metastasis Potential of A549 Lung cancer cell Line (%) (%) M. R. Noori-Daloii, M. Safari, O. Saydi Dinekaboodi, A. Ghazariyan; tobacco Departmetn of Medical Genetics,School of Medicine,Tehran Univ. of Medical consumption Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Non-smokers 41 (17.02) 295 Reference Reference The lung cancer is one of the most dangerous cancer in the world . (60.20) There are two main types of lung cancer: non-small cell lung cancer 200 195 3.82 (2.45- and small cell lung cancer. Smokers P<0.05 (82.98) (39.80) 5.97) The metastasis of lung cancer is highly dependent of expression of Alcohol matrix metalloproteinases, and correlated with phosphorylation of consumption ERK1/2 and PI3K/Akt pathways. Here, we showed that genistein Alcohol non- decreased the migration and invasion of human non-small cell lung 67 (27.80) 245 (50) Reference Reference consumers cancer cells (A549 cell line) in vitro, because the combination of anti- cancer drugs with nutritional factors is a potential strategy for altering 174 1.41 (0.92- Alcohol consumers 245 (50) P=0.11 to increase the efficacy and decreasing the toxicity of chemotherapy. (72.20) 2.18) This study examined the effects of genistein on the level expression Gender of mRNA and protein of MMP-2 in lung cancer A549 cell line by 142 Female 29 (12.03) Reference Reference qRT-PCR and Zymography.The cytotoxicity effects and proliferation (28.98) rates does-dependent of genistein in this cell line were determined by MTT and LDH assays. A549 cells were treated for 24, 48 and 72 Cancer genetics 211 hrs, with genistein concentrations of 0, 25, 50, 75 and 100 mmol/ml. and apoptosis, in glioblastoma tumor tissue, and select biomarkers These results have shown that the most effect of inhibition in growth significant in disease prognosis. Next, we investigate the relevance and proliferation of A549 cell line is 75 mmol/ml concentration. Also, of set of clinical (patient age, gender, relapse free survival (RFS) and these results indicate that genistein downregulates MMP-2 mRNA and overall survival (OS)) and tumor characteristics (diameter, location) protein expression in A549 cell line, and result of inhibition of ERK1/2 and epigenetic markers in glioblastoma patients prognosis. and PI3K/Akt pathways phosphorylation by ELISA indicated that All results we will present in a poster presentation. genistein inhibited phosphorylation rate of both pathways. Therefore This research are funded by a grant (No. LIG-17/2010) from the that it can decrease recurrence and metastatic rates in lung cancer. Research Council of Lithuania. This issue should be further examined for the clinical treatment. P06.098 P06.096** Analysis of mmR system in human gliomas Germline epigenetic silencing of the tumor suppressor gene I. Rodríguez-Hernández1,2, J. García2, J. González-Valero2, Á. Santos-Briz3, J. PTPRJ in early onset familial colorectal cancer Gómez-Moreta4, M. Sánchez-Martin1,5, R. González-Sarmiento1,2; R. Venkatachalam1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, N. Hoogerbrugge1, H. K. Schackert2, 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, H. Görgens2, M. Hahn1, E. J. Kamping1, L. Vreede1, E. Hoenselaar1, E. van Salamanca, Spain, 2IBMCC, Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (USAL/CSIC), der Looij1, M. Goossens1, M. Churchman3, L. Carvajal-Carmona3, I. P. M. Salamanca, Spain, 3Department of Dermatology, Hospital Universitario de Tomlinson3, D. R. H. de Bruijn1, A. Geurts van Kessel1, R. P. Kuiper1; Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Hospital Virgen 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Vega, Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 55Genetically Engineered Mouse Facility, 2Universitätsklinikum Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, SEA, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. Dresden, Germany, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system defects result in an accumulation United Kingdom. of mutations throughout the genome that can alter normal function of iNtRODUctiON: Recently we showed that 3’ deletion of the EPCAM proteins and trigger tumorigenesis. We examined the MMR system gene leads to allele-specific epigenetic silencing of the neighbouring in 27 low-grade astrocytomas, 19 anaplasic astrocytomas and 60 MSH2 gene in Lynch syndrome patients. The underlying mechanism glioblastomas. MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 protein expression was was found to involve MSH2 promoter hypermethylation mediated evaluated by immunohistochemical analysis, MMR genes methylation by transcriptional read-through, thus providing an explanation of status by MS-MLPA, and microsatellite instability (MSI) of the tumors how colorectal cancer (CRC) susceptibility in these families could with 8 marker sequences. High-MSI was evident in 4.7% of gliomas, be inherited. Here we have investigated whether similar copy low-MSI in 38.4%, whereas MSS was found in 57%. More instable number variation (CNV)-based silencing mechanisms may underlie markers were BAT 40, MYCL1 and BAT25, instead of the frequently unexplained familial CRC cases. BAT26 instable marker related to colorectal cancer. MLH1, MSH2 mEtHODs: A genome-wide SNP array-based screen for constitutional and MSH6 protein expression was scored negative in 19.4%, 23.8% CNVs was performed on a carefully selected cohort of microsatellite and 32.0% of cases. Furthermore, 9.3% of glial tumors showed loss stable CRC patients without polyposis. Epigenetic silencing of one of all of them and 43.3% had no expression of one or more MMR of the candidate genes showing CNV was established using allele- proteins. There was a correlation between MMR protein levels and specific transcription and bisulfate sequencing. grade of malignance. Tumors showed MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 REsULts: We identified a constitutional duplication encompassing methylation in 80.7%, 49.1% and 49.1% of cases. We have not found the 5’ end of the PTPRJ gene, which was absent in >2,650 non- fully association between methylation status, protein expression and affected individuals. The duplication showed a head-to-tail in-tandem microsatellite instability, suggesting that there could be other repair configuration. Transcriptional read-through and concomitant allele- system which compensates the loss of MMR expression in MSS tumors specific silencing of the downstream PTPRJ locus by promoter and promotes MSI in other cases. The study of MLH1 promoter SNP hypermethylation was demonstarted in patient-derived tissues, (rs1800734) showed an association between AA genotype and loss of but not in controls. Targeted screening of an independent cohort of MLH1 expression. Finally, we also analyzed p53 protein expression. unexplained familial CRC patients revealed a second case with again P53 overexpression was demonstrated in 46.5% of gliomas and it a partial, but not identical, PTPRJ duplication and a concomitant correlated with MLH1 gene methylation and MSH2 protein levels. promoter hypermethylation. PTPRJ is a tumor suppressor gene that was previously identified as a CRC susceptibility gene in mice. P06.099 cONcLUsiONs: Our data indicate that PTPRJ may predispose to Polymorphisms of the cYP1A1 and cYP2E1 genes in head and CRC through epigenetic gene silencing in humans, suggesting that neck squamous cell carcinoma risk. CNV-based epimutations may serve as a more general mechanism in A. L. S. Galbiatti, N. M. Cury, A. Russo, M. T. Ruiz, L. S. Raposo, J. V. Maniglia, CRC predisposition. E. C. Pavarino, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo; Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São José do Rio Preto, P06.097 Brazil. Research for new combinations of clinical and epigenetic introduction: Polymorphisms in genes that encode P450 cytochrome markers significant in glioblastoma survival enzymes may increase carcinogens activation or decrease their D. Skiriutė, V. Ašmonienė, A. Tamašauskas; inactivation ability and consequently, developing cancer. The aims Institute for Biomedical Research, Medical Academy, Lithuanian University of were identify the MspI-CYP1A1, PstI-CYP2E1 and DraI-CYP2E1 Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. polymorphisms in patients with head and neck cancer (HNSCC) and Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and malignant tumor of the compare with individuals without cancer; to evaluate the association Central Nervous System. GBM occur in 6.6 - 100 000 cases of Lithuania of these polymorphisms with clinical-histophatological parameters. population per year. Also, GBM is the main cause of patient`s morbidity Patients and mehtods: In the case group, were evaluated 313 and high mortality rates. Due to infiltrative growth of those tumors patients for CYP1A1, 217 for CYP2E1 (PstI) and 211 for CYP2E1 the radical surgical removal becomes impossible. The prognosis (DraI). In the control group were evaluated 417 individuals for for patients with diagnosed glioblastoma remains poor because of CYP1A1, 334 for CYP2E1 (PstI) and 374 CYP2E1 (DraI). Molecular morphological and biological heterogenity determining inefficient effect analysis was performed by PCR-RFLP technique and for statistical of other types of treatment - chemotherapy and radiotherapy. GBM analysis were used chi-square and multiple logistic regression tests. treatment results are still unsatisfactory. Therefore, the investigations Results: We confirmed that age, smoking and alcohol consumption of more precise and early diagnostic methods of these tumors become are risk factors for HNSCC. The Hardy-Weinberg analysis showed that a topical issue. genotypic frequencies are in equilibrium in the patients. For control Investigation on epigenetic alterations in glioblastomas is important for group, the CYP2E1 (PstI) is in equilibrium and the others genes there understanding of tumor biology as well as the disease pathogenesis were not in equilibrium. The result for CYP1A1 (MspI) showed that age for evaluation of early diagnostic possibilities and prognosis. In this (OR:8.15; CI 95% 5.57-11.92) and smoking (OR:5.37; CI 95% 3.52- study we investigate methylation of four epigenetic markers (MGMT, 8.21) were predictors for the disease; to the CYP2E1 (PstI and DraI), NDRG2, MLH, CASP8) involved in cell growth, DNA reparation there were an association of age (PstI-OR:9.10; CI 95% 5.86-14.14/ Cancer genetics 212 DraI-OR:8.07 ; CI 95% 5.12-12.72), smoking (PstI-OR:4.10; CI 95% Division for Bioinformatics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. 2.44-6.89/ DraI-OR:5.73; CI 95% 3.34-9.82), alcohol (PstI-OR:1.93; Diethylnitrosamine (DEN) is a hepatic procarcinogen which is frequently CI 95% 1.18-3.16/ DraI-OR:1.69; CI 95% 1.02-2.81), respectively with used as an inducer of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in mice. disease development. CYP2E1 (PstI) was less frequent in patients Although mice after DEN exposure are among the most widely used group (OR:0.48; CI 95% 0.23-0.98). conclusion: CYP2E1 PstI models for liver tumorigenesis, a detailed, mechanistic characterization polymorphism may have a protective role in the disease. of the longitudinal changes in the respective tumor genomes has never been performed. We established the chronological order of genetic P06.100 alterations during DEN carcinogenesis by examining mice at different Association between 11 genetic polymorphisms in folate points in time. Tumor samples were isolated by laser micro-dissection metabolizing genes and head and neck squamous cell and subjected to array-comparative genomic hybridization (array- carcinoma risk CGH) and sequencing analysis. Chromosomal gains and losses were A. L. S. Galbiatti, L. M. R. B. Silva, M. T. Ruiz, L. S. Raposo, J. V. Maniglia, E. already observed in tumors by week 32 and increased significantly C. Pavarino, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo; by week 56. Loss of distal chromosome 4q, including the tumor Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São José do Rio Preto - SP, suppressors Runx3 and Nr0b2/Shp, was a frequent early event and Brazil. persisted during all tumor stages. Surprisingly, sequencing revealed introduction, Objectives and methods: Polymorphisms in genes that β-catenin mutations occurred late and were clearly preceded by involved in metabolism folate may affect folate status due to their chromosomal instability. Thus, contrary to common belief, β-catenin involvement in DNA methylation and synthesis and, therefore, the mutations and activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway are not involved risk of head and neck cancer (HNSCC). We conducted a case-control in tumor initiation in this model of chemical hepatocarcinogenesis. study of 265 HNSCC cases and 466 non-cancer controls to investigate Conclusion: Our study suggests that the majority of the current associations of MTHFR C677T and A1298C, MTR A2756G, MTRR knowledge about genomic changes in HCC is based on advanced A66G, RFC1 A80G, MTHFD1 G1958A, CBS 844ins68, TC2 C776G tumor lesions and that systematic analyses of the chronologic order and A67G, SHMT C1420T and BHMT G742A folate metabolism including early lesions may reveal new, unexpected findings. polymorphisms with HNSCC risk. Gene-environment interactions between polymorphisms and survival time, tobacco and alcohol P06.103 habits, age and gender were evaluated by multiple logistic regression type ii mHc loci predispose hepatocellular carcinoma in a analysis. Results: We found that age ≥ 49 years (p<0.001), male genome-wide association study of Hong Kong chinese gender (p=0.03), tobacco habit (p<0.001), MTHFR 1298AC/CC N. L. Tang1, Y. Qiu1, C. Liao1, P. Tsai2, W. Yeo3, P. B. Lai4; (P=0.028), MTR 2756AG/GG (P=0.010) and RFC1 80AG/GG 1Department of Chemical Pathology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, (P=0.015) variant genotypes were associated with an increased risk Shatin, Hong Kong, 2Institute of Genome Sciences, Yang-Ming University, of HNSCC. There were interactions between lower survival and CBS Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Oncology, The Chinese University of Hong 844ins68 (P=0.005); age ≥ 49 years and MTR 2756 AG/GG (p=0.004) Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, 4Department of Surgery, The Chinese University of and RFC1 80AG/GG (p=0.006) genotypes; male gender and MTHFR Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong. 1298 AC/CC (p=0.030), MTR 2756 AG/GG (p=0.006) and RFC1 Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the world’s leading 80 AG/GG (p=0.009) genotypes; tobacco non- habit and MTHFD1 causes of cancer-related death, especially in East Asia countries. 1958GA/AA genotype (p=0.040); tobacco habit and MTHFR 1298 AC/ Environmental factors had been identified for the development of CC (p=0.054) and MTR 2756 AG/GG (p=0.010); alcohol non- consume HCC, such as chronic infection with heptatitis B virus (HBV) in Asian and RFC1 80 AG/GG (p=0.008) genotype with HNSCC increased populations. Although there is a high degree of familial segregation risk. conclusions: Our data provide evidence that folate metabolism of HCC cases, the genetic risk factors of HCC development are genetic polymorphisms associated with variables as advanced age, little understood. We are one of the first to perform a genome-wide male gender, tobacco and alcohol increase HNSCC development and association study (GWAS) of Chinese HCC patients in this study. The CBS 844ins68 polymorphism is associated with less survival time. study cohort consisted of 300 Hong Kong Chinese male patients who were all positive for HBV surface antigen (HBsAg). Using the allele P06.101 distribution of a Chinese population control sample, we detected four Genetic analysis of hematologic myeloid malignancies with most significant hits on chromosome 6 (P-value ≤ 5.0×10-6). These 4 acquired trisomy 21 as the sole cytogenetic change SNPs, located in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) region N. E. Larsson, H. Lilljebjörn, C. Lassen, B. Johansson, T. Fioretos; around the HLA-DQB2 and HLA-DPB2 gene loci, were significant even Lund University, Lund, Sweden. after correction for population structure. This result supported previous Although acquired trisomy 21 is one of the most common numerical findings that HLA loci have a putative role in the clearance of HBV abnormalities in acute myeloid leukemia (AML), myelodysplastic virus and the progression to chronic liver disease among HBV carriers. syndrome (MDS), and myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN), little is Haplotype analysis is being performed and suggests that certain type known about its pathogenic impact or accompanying submicroscopic II alleles are associated with HCC. changes. Furthermore, previous studies have mainly focused on cases in which +21 was part of a complex karyotype. We performed single P06.104 nucleotide polymorphism array and mutation analyses of the FGFR1, the BRcA1 variants c.692c>t and c.693G>A affect a putative FLT3, GATA1, JAK2, KIT, NPM1, NRAS, RUNX1, and TET2 genes EsE motif and increase exon 11 skipping on 11 myeloid malignancies with trisomy 21 as the sole cytogenetic R. D. Brandão1,2, K. van Roozendaal1, D. Tserpelis1, E. Gómez García1,2, M. J. aberration. Copy number alterations and uniparental disomies Blok1; were observed in six (55%) cases, with none of the changes being 1Maastricht University Hospital, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2GROW- School for recurrent. Mutations in RUNX1, TET2, and NPM1 were detected in Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht, Netherlands. 5 (45%) cases. These results show that trisomy 21-positive myeloid BRCA1 variants c.692C>T (p.T231M) and c.693G>A (p.=), of unknown malignancies are molecularly heterogeneous. clinical significance, were identified in two different patients from HBOC families. The variants lie in exon 11, within a region previously P06.102 described as “critical region”, which spans between codons 200-300. Evolution of genomic instability in diethylnitrosamine-induced Others suggested that this region was an important regulatory region hepatocarcinogenesis in mice and suggested the presence of two ESE motifs, one of these covering K. Aleksic1, C. Lackner2, J. B. Geigl1, M. Schwarz3, M. Auer1, P. Ulz1, M. positions c.690 to c.695. We assessed the putative effect of these Fischer4, Z. Trajanoski4, M. Otte3, M. R. Speicher1; variants on RNA splicing. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, For splicing analysis, lymphocytes from the carriers and healthy 2Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Oridis controls were cultured and a fraction of these was treated with Biomed, Forschungs- u. Entwicklungs GmbH, Graz, Austria, 4Biocenter, puromycin to prevent nonsense-mRNA mediated decay. The relative contribution of each allele to different transcripts was assessed based on allele specific cDNA analysis. In addition, an exon trapping vector Cancer genetics 213 including the putative ESE motif will be used to show its functionality in PCR-RFLP analysis. For Positive patients direct DNA sequencing was presence or absence of the variants. carried out. The alleles with either variant give rise to normal levels of the full-length Results: In 217 participants, 43 missense mutations were identified transcript, but also induce higher expression of in-frame BRCA1Δ11 in exons 10(6%, 13 of 217), 11(13%, 28 of 217) and 16(0.9%, 2 of isoform, which was found to be weakly expressed in controls. Results 217). Moreover, a novel germline mutation was detected at codon 686 of the ESE-dependent splicing assay will be reported. in exon 11(S686N). Also four different polymorphisms were found in We now provide experimental evidence for the presence of a functional intron 16 of the RET proto-oncogene in eight patients that most of ESE motif in exon 11. Both variants in this motif affect splicing by them carried another mutation in exons 10 or 11. increasing the expression of the BRCA1Δ11 transcript, besides Conclusion: The obtained data in this study showed the frequency expressing the full-length transcript. Currently, the clinical relevance profile of the RET proto-oncogene mutations in a sample of 217 of these variants remains elusive, as both the function and the critical Iranian individuals with MTC (19.8%). The most frequent mutation in expression level of the BRCA1Δ11 transcript are unknown. our population was C634G; whereas in most population it was C634R. Therefore the transforming activity and functional effect(s) of a new P06.105 RET mutants such as S686N and intronic polymorphisms remain to RAD51c - a novel predisposing gene for breast and ovarian be elucidated. Altogether, these results underline the importance of cancer: validation of other RAD51 paralogs and missense the genetic background of family members of any patient with MTC. mutations A. Meindl1, H. Hellebrand1, D. Endt2, K. Eirich2, A. Becker3, T. Kasparek1, H. P06.107 Hanenberg4, D. Schindler2, R. Schmutzler3; methylation of proximal mLH1 promoter region is a sensitive and 1Klinikum rechts der Isar der Technischen Universität München, Munich, specific molecular method to distinguish HNPCC from sporadic Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, cRcs Germany, 3Center for Familial Breast and Ovarian Cancer and Center for S. Y. Kang, M. J. Kwon, K. M. Kim; Integrated Oncology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. of Pediatric Hematology, Heinrich-Heine University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Hereditary Nonpolyposis Colorectal Cancer (HNPCC) is an inherited Germany. colorectal cancer syndrome and accounts for 5% of all colorectal Even high risk families for breast and ovarian cancer families can cancer (CRC). A significant breakthrough in the diagnosis of HNPCC only partially be explained by mutations in the known highly penetrant was made with the discovery of mismatch repair (MMR) genes that genes BRCA1 and BRCA2. Therefore, extreme genetic heterogeneity cause HNPCC. An alternative method for identifying HNPCC patients is serves as a model for inherited predis-position to breast cancer. In microsatellite instability (MSI). In sporadic CRCs, inactivation of MLH1 agreement with this hypothesis, we have recently identified a novel gene by promoter methylation causes MSI. Significant differences in high penetrant predisposing gene for breast and ovarian cancer. The the clinical phenotype between HNPCC families from South Korea and gene encoding RAD51C, one of five known RAD51 paralogs, has from the Netherlands were observed. been found mutated in six out of 480 breast- and ovarian cancer (BC/ To investigate methylation status in both distal and proximal regions of OC) families (1.3%). In addition, we have identified a more common MLH1 gene, we used methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and quantitative missense mutation (2%), exhibiting an OR of 3.44 in BC/OC families real-time PCR (MethyLight) using 14 HNPCC and 37 sporadic MSI-H only (c.790G->A; G264S). CRCs. Germline mutations for MMR genes were tested in HNPCC In order to test whether other RAD51 paralogs are mutated in BC/ patients, and BRAF V600E mutation and MLH1 protein expressions OC or BC families, we now screened the genes encoding RAD51B were analyzed in all CRCs. and XRCC3, respectively. Apart from one and two misense mutations, GermIine mutations of MLH1 (n=7) and MSH2 (n=3) were detected in respectively, no mutations were found in the RAD51B and XRCC3 10 of 14 HNPCC patients. BRAF mutations were detected in 2 (5.4%) genes. Although the application of several algorithms is indicating sporadic CRCs. pathogeneity of the identified missense aberrations, mutations in the In CRCs from HNPCC patients, proximal and distal promoter regions other RAD51 paralogs seem therefore to be rare. of MLH1 gene was methylated 0% and 28.6% of cases, respectively. To validate further missense mutations identified in the RAD51C In sporadic MSI-high CRCs, 62.2% and 67.6% were methylated in the gene, we employed different functional assays. E. g. the functional proximal and distal promoter regions of MLH1 gene. After combining characterization of novel missense mutations by a transfection assay both proximal and distal regions of MLH1 promoter, methylation found in the RAD51C gene led to the identification of at least five frequencies increased up to 82%. further pathogenic mutations in the RAD51C gene and will also be In MSI-H CRCs, methylation test using proximal MLH1 promoter reported. region is an important molecular method to distinguish HNPCC from In summary, our data confirm RAD51C as a novel predisposing gene sporadic CRCs with high sensitivity and specificity. for BC/OC, but might exclude other genes encoding RAD51 paralogs. P06.108 P06.106 Epidemiology of HPV infection and possible polymorphisms Predominant REt germline mutations in exons 10, 11, and 16 in associated with cervical cancer in Azores - Portugal. iranian patients with hereditary medullary thyroid carcinoma I. Dutra1,2, F. Rocha1,2, B. F. Bettencourt1,2, A. R. Couto1,2, A. Gonçalves3, M. M. Hedayati1, M. Zarif Yeganeh1, S. Sheikhol Eslam1, S. Rezghi Barez1, F. Ribeiro3, V. Carneiro4, J. Bruges-Armas1,2; Azizi2; 1Serviço Especializado de Epidemiologia e Biologia Molecular, Angra do 1Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Heroísmo, Portugal, 2Genetic and Arthritis Research Group, Institute for Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Molecular and Cell Biology (IBMC), University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, 3Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, Hospital de Santo Espírito de Angra Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of do Heroísmo E.P.E., Angra do Heroísmo, Portugal, 4Serviço de Anatomia Iran. Patológica, Hospital do Divino Espírito Santo E.P.E., São Miguel, Portugal. Introduction: Medullary thyroid carcinoma occurs in both sporadic Cervical cancer (CC) is the third most common cancer in women (75%) and hereditary (25%) forms. The missense gain-of-function worldwide, and the seventh overall, with an estimated 530 000 new mutations of the RET proto-oncogene in MTC development has been cases and 275 000 deaths in 2008. Human papillomavirus (HPV) is well demonstrated. mainly responsible for this disease and HPV16 and HPV18 are the The aim of this study was to investigate the spectrum of predominant most important oncogenic types. RET germline mutations in exons 10, 11, and 16 among Iranian The genetic factors that contribute to the development of CC have not hereditary MTC patients. yet been fully identified but numerous studies suggest that the immune Materials & Methods: In this study 217 participants (151 MTC patients response is preponderant in the success or failure of the HPV infection and 66 their first-degree relatives) were included. Genomic DNAs and subsequent progression to cancer. were extracted from the leukocytes according to the standard Salting In this study we sought to identify and genotype HPV in CC in the Out/Proteinase K method. Mutation detection was performed through Azorean population. We also tried to investigate the possible Cancer genetics 214 association between this disease and polymorphisms chosen from 5 Results: OLD and LO samples displayed a mean global methylation genes involved in the immune response to CC. level of 65.64% (SD=2.46) and 65.56% (SD=1.36) respectively. The A total of 78 paraffin sections, with tissue samples of CC were reduction of the methylation level in both groups was statistically retrospectively evaluated between 1992 and 2008. After viral and significant (p=0.002 and p=0.005) when compared to the control genomic DNA extraction we proceeded to HPV genotyping, and group. About 37.9% of OLD and 45.5% of LO samples were globally identification of six polymorphisms in the TP35 , MTHFR, IL23R, IL12A hypomethylated when evaluated against the minimum level of and IL12B genes. methylation in control samples. The most frequently detected HPV type was HPV16 followed by Conclusion: In oral malignant disorders the presence of global HPV58 and HPV31. The less frequent types were HPV18, HPV33, hypomethylation may indicate that carcinogenic processes could be HPV45, HPV35, HPV51 and HPV52. Regarding genetic susceptibility taking place and may favour the development additional alterations. factors, the most common variants identified in patients were, the †Grant supports: Carlos III Health Institute-FIS(PI081516) and variant GG in TP53, CC in MTHFR, CC in IL-23R Rs10889677 Government of the Basque Country (IT-435-10). A Acha-Sagredo is and GT in Rs7517847, GG in IL-12A and variant AA in IL-12B. No supported by a fellowship from UPV/EHU. statistically significant association was identified between the genetic polymorphisms and progression to CC. P06.111 Association of Inflammatory Pathway Genes Polymorphism in P06.109 Genetic Predisposition to Prostate cancer Risk: A Pilot study sEsN3-dependent regulation of 2-cys Prx by HsF1 from Northern india M. Zamkova, P. Kopnin, B. Kopnin; R. K. Mandal, A. Mandhani, R. Kapoor, R. D. Mittal; Institute of Carcinogenesis, Blokhin Russian Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Department of Urology and Renal Transplantation, Sanjay Gandhi Post Russian Federation. Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, India. Induction of heat shock response is accompanied by elevated Background: Prostate cancer (PCa) is the most frequently diagnosed transcription of Heat Shock Proteins, which are controlled by HSF1. cancer and one of the major causes of death in men. An understanding Under normal conditions HSF1 appears as a repressed monomer of factors associated with PCa mortality is increasingly important. shuttling between cytoplasm and nucleus. Upon stress HSF1 Accumulating evidence implicates inflammation in PCa. Genetic becomes activated which is associated with trimerization, nuclear variations within the sequence of candidate inflammatory genes like accumulation, hyperphosphorylation, acquisition of DNA-binding and TLRs 2, 3, 9 and COX-2 genes may lead to suboptimal inflammatory transactivation capacity. HSF1 protects cells from various stresses capacity and therefore increased PCa risk. and increases cellular viability. It can also promote tumor survival as material and methods: We genotyped 195 PCa and 250 healthy cancer cells depleted in HSF1 show significantly reduced growth and controls for TLR2 (−196 to −174 Del), TLR3 (c.1377C/T) [rs3775290], survival. Interestingly, HSF1 regulates up to 3% of genome beside TLR9 (G2848A) [rs352140], and COX-2 (-765 G>C) [rs20417], (+8473 HSPs and regulation mechanisms differ between tumor and normal T>C) [rs5275] promoter gene polymorphisms using PCR-RFLP. cells. HSF1 role in the regulation of genes beside HSPs and their link Results: Variant allele carrier of TLR2 (ID+DD) and COX-2 -765 to tumorigenesis has not been well studied. (GC+CC) demonstrated increased risk (p= 0.007; OR=2.00; p=0.016; We found that promoters of sestrin family genes contained heat shock OR=1.74) for PCa. Similarly (TC+CC) of COX-2 +8473 also exhibited elements. We assumed that HSF1 may influence peroxiredoxins’ borderline risk. Variant genotype CC of COX-2 +8473 was found to be activity and subsequently regulate the level of Reactive Oxygen significantly associated with the overall higher risk of PCa (p=0.045; Species via regulation of sestrins. OR=1.82). The diplotype C-C of COX-2 was observed to be associated Our results show that introduction of constitutively-active HSF1 into with a significant increased PCa risk (p=0.004; OR=4.26). Stratification carcinoma cells increases the level of ROS and decreases the level of of cases based on clinical pathological grade only combined genotype SESN3 mRNA. Surprisingly, introduction of active HSF1 into normal (CT+TT) of TLR3 demonstrated borderline significant (p=0.051; fibroblasts causes opposite effects. Active HSF1 slightly decreases OR=2.14) conferring a marginal increased risk with high Gleason tumor cell growth and increases cell growth of normal cells. According grade of PCa patients. to our study HSF1 influences the activity of 2-Cys-Prx and this effect conclusion: Our findings confirm that the TLR2, COX-2 polymorphism seems to be SESN3-dependent as it was proved by shRNA analysis. and diplotype of COX-2 could be a risk factor for susceptibility of PCa. We believe that our study will contribute to our better understanding Further validations in large population-based studies are needed to of HSF1 role in the regulation of pathways beside HSP induction and elucidate the role of these SNPs for PCa risk. subsequently in tumorigenesis. P06.112 P06.110 Association of -607 c/A polymorphism of interleukin-18 with Global methylation levels in oral potentially malignant disorders breast cancer in Zahedan southeast iran A. Acha-Sagredo1, N. G. Bediaga2, M. Martinez de Pancorbo2, M. A. M. Hashemi, E. Eskandari, A. Fazaeli, F. Arbabi, A. Moazeni-roodi, M. Taheri; Echebarria1, J. M. Aguirre1; Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Oral Medicine and Pathology Unit. Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry. OBJECTIVE: Interleukin-18 (IL-18) is a multifunctional cytokine that University of the Basque Country EHU, Leioa, Spain, 2BIOMICS Research induces the production of interferon-γ (IFN-γ) and play a key role in Group. CIEA-Lucio Lascaray Building. University of the Basque Country EHU, antitumor immunity. The aim of the present study was to determine Vitoria, Spain. whether the -607 C/A polymorphism of IL-18 is associated with breast Background: Epigenetic alterations are common events in human cancer susceptibility in a sample of Iranian women. cancer. Tumor cells show an aberrant reduction of global methylation MATERIAL AND METHODS: This case-control study was performed levels and aberrant increase of gene-specific methylation. In this on 74 women with breast cancer and 93 healthy women. Genomic regard, global hypomethylation seems to be a significant factor DNA from patients and control subjects were extracted from peripheral driving oncogenesis. However, so far, little is known about the global blood using salting out, and IL-18 gene promoter polymorphismat methylation levels in common potentially malignant disorders such position -607 C/A was determined by tetraprimer-ARMS PCR. as oral lichenoid disease (OLD) and oral leucoplakia (OL), which RESULTS: No significant difference was found regarding -607 C/A malignant potential is controversial. The aim of our study was to assess polymorphism of IL-18 among case and control groups (χ2=1.89, the degree of global genomic hypomethylation in oral scrapings of P=0.389). patients with oral potentially malignant disorders compared to normal CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that -607 C/A polymorphism of patients. IL-18 is not a risk factor for breast cancer in the southeastern Iranian Methods: We analyzed 205 cytological samples; 153 OLD patients, subjects. 22 OL patients and 30 controls. DNA was extracted from the oral scraping and the global methylation level was asses by analyzing the methylation of repetitive elements (LINE1) by pyrosequencing after bisulphite treatment.Cancer genetics 215 P06.113 Islamic Republic of Iran. the insulin receptor substrate 4 (IRS4) gene is mutated in Many different chromosome aberrations have been shown in cancers. paediatric t-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia For the first time, Dr. Janet Rowley, American geneticist, discovered a K. Karrman, K. Paulsson, M. Isaksson, B. Johansson; translocation of 22q to another chromosome, generally 9q, in the bone Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden. marrow cells of more than 90% of patients with chronic myelogenous We recently reported that the t(X;7)(q22;q34) in a paediatric T-cell leukemia (CML), which called the Philadelphia chromosome. On acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) results in overexpression the other hand, many malignancies exhibit multiple chromosome of the insulin receptor substrate 4 (IRS4) gene through illegitimate abnormalities. recombination with the T-cell receptor ß locus, and hypothesised that The aim of this study was to investigate chromosome aberrations IRS4 may be activated through other mechanisms in additional cases, among the CML patients. During the last four years a total of 94 akin to what has been shown for NOTCH1. The IRS4 gene consists of patients were referred to our Department from different hospitals only one exon, which was sequenced in 21 paediatric T-cell ALL cases. with the primary diagnosis of CML. These patients consisted of 46 Apart from three known polymorphisms in four cases, two (10%) were men(48.9%) and 48 women (51.1%). Specific technique for the bone shown to harbour a mutation - a 594 bp deletion and a missense marrow culture and also the G-banding technique for karyotyping were mutation, respectively. The former was an interstitial in-frame deletion applied for all the samples. depriving the protein of the pleckstrin homology domain, a well- Out of 94 cases, 44 patients (46.8%), consisted of 20 males (21.3%) conserved region important for the function of the IRS family, whereas and 24 females (25.5%), showed normal karyotypes. the latter was shown to be acquired and to replace a proline with a 50 patients (53.2%) showed abnormal karyotypes. 33 patients (35.1%) threonine. We conclude that IRS4 is mutated in a proportion of T-ALL. revealed Philadelphia positive, consisted of 17 males (18.1%) and 16 However, the pathogenetic impact and clinical ramification of such females (17%). mutations remain to be elucidated. We observed different numerical aberrations among 8 (8.5%) patients (5 males and 3 females). We also found structural aberrations among P06.114 7 (7.4%) patients (5 males and 2 females). The results were obtained the JAK2 V617F mutation incidence in patients with as follows: myeloproliferative neoplasms. t(2;5) (one male), inv(16) (one male), del5p (one male), t(1;3;13;18) D. Januszkiewicz1,2,3, E. Mały3, M. Przyborska3, J. Nowak1; (one male), t(2;3;14;17) (one male), t(8;21) (one female). t(1;12) (one 1Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, female). 2Department of Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Transplantology of the Medical University, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Medical Diagnostics, P06.116 Poznan, Poland. Genotyping KRAS and BRAF mutations in paraffin-embedded A point mutation V617F in the JAK2 gene occurs in nearly all patients cancer research samples with polycythaemia vera (PF) and in other myeloproliferative neoplasms R. Petraroli1, C. Lauricella2, S. Veronese2, E. Moragón3, L. Martínez-Avilés3, B. like essentail thrombocythemia (ET) and myelofibrosis (MF). The JAK2 Bellosillo3, T. Sepp1, J. Walker1; V617F mutation was study in 491 patients with diagnosis or suspect of 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Molecular Pathology Unit, myeloproliferative neoplasms. In nearly 80% of patients mutation was Niguarda -Ca’ Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy, 3Pathology Department of the detected. Althought discover of JAK2 V617F mutation has provided Hospital del Mar, Barcellona, Spain. important insight into the molecular etiology of PV, ET and MF there The epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) pathway is a complex is still frequent set of patients without this mutation. Further study of signalling cascade that is associated with the development and genetic events in pathogenesis in myeloproliferative neoplasms are progression of many cancer conditions. It has been shown that necessary to evaluate prognosis especially for patients without JAK2 approximately 35-45% of metastatic colorectal cancer tumors may V617F mutation. have a KRAS or BRAF mutation, which makes them less likely to Frequency of V617F JAK2 mutation in patients with respond to anti-EGFR therapies. The identification of these mutations myeloproliferative neoplasms. is therefore of great importance in clinical and pharmaceutical research. The Applied Biosystems® KRAS Mutation Analysis No of Reagents and BRAF Mutation Analysis Reagents were developed No of No of patients to facilitate research aimed at elucidating the role of these regulatory patients with patients with with No of proteins in oncology. The reagents offer a simple protocol for the Diagnosis homozygotic heterozygotic without patients detection of 12 mutations in the KRAS gene and 3 mutations in the JAK2 V617F JAK2 V617F JAK2 BRAF gene. In this collaborative research study, we made use of the mutation mutation V617F Applied Biosystems® KRAS and BRAF Mutation Analysis Reagents mutation and the Applied Biosystems 3500 Dx, 3100 and 310 Genetic Analyzers Essential 0 133 83 216 to genotype known variants on 35 cancer research samples. The thrombocythaemia (0%) (62%) (38%) KRAS and BRAF Mutation Analysis Reagents results were easy to Polycythaemia vera 132 20 86 26 (20%) interpret and equivalent between the Applied Biosystems® 3100 and (15%) (65%) 310 Genetic Analyzers. The 3500 Dx instrument technology may also Nonclassified ease the analysis and create standardization for genetics laboratories, 4 47 myeloproliferative 82 31 (38%) which will help alleviate the different quality of results that stem from (5%) (57%) disorders varying technologies and chemistries.The Applied Biosystems® KRAS Essential 2 6 8 and BRAF Mutation Analysis Reagents are For Research Use Only. 16 myelofibrosis (12%) (38%) (50%) Not for use in diagnostic procedures Chronic 1 2 myelogenous 15 12 (80%) P06.117 (7%) (13%) leukemia Accurate and sensitive Detection of KRAs mutations in Heterogeneous cancer specimens 27 274 160 together 461 (5,8%) (59%) (35,2%) R. Petraroli1, Y. Bao1, D. Merrill1, D. Le Corre2,3, S. Sproul1, B. Ching1, L. Sapinoso4, I. Casuga1, S. Desai1, D. Deng1, P. Brzoska1, H. Blons3,2,5, P. P06.115 Puig3,2,5, C. Chen1; chromosomal study among cmL patients 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Université Paris Descartes, F. Farzanfar1, C. Azimi1, Z. Safari2; Paris, France, 33UMR-S775, INSERM, Paris, France, 4Acrometrix, by Life 1Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, Technologies, Benicia, CA, United States, 5Hospital Européen Georges Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Young Pompidou, Paris, France. Researchers Club, Varamin-Pishva Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, The discovery of pivotal genetic alterations and the understanding of their role in cancer is leading to remarkable successes in therapeutics Cancer genetics 216 and patient care. Molecular diagnosis methods such as DNA contribution of K-ras gene mutations in codons 12, 13 in the incidence, sequencing and conventional genotyping of tumor biopsies have and its association with clinicopathologic information like age, sex, advanced research in this field, but are limited in sensitivity due to familial history, site of primary and histology in Iranian Colorectal stromal contamination and by genetic heterogeneity in cancer. We cancer patients. We have analyzed 59 tissue specimens of colorectal have developed competitive allele specific TaqMan® PCR (castPCR) cancer patients using PCR/sequencing method for codons 12, 13 of assays assays for detecting cancer-associated sequence variations. K-ras gene. 20.3% of patients (10 in codon 12 and 2 in codon 13) have CastPCR not only maintains the wide dynamic range, high sensitivity shown a point mutation. About 60% of mutations occur in rectum and and reproducibility of TaqMan® assays but also greatly improves the 41.7% in colon. More than 80% of mutations were in adenocarcinomas specificity. The technology enables detection, of as little as 1 mutant and less mutations in mucinous. Most mutations were found at the age allele molecule in 10,000,000 wild type molecules. We report here of 60 and more. Only two of patients had a familial history for cancer. sensitive and accurate detection of cancer-associated KRAS mutations Mutations in codons 12, 13 are not common in Iranian patients. The within formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) heterogeneous mutation pattern for Iranian patients differs from other nationalities. cancer specimens. Eight FFPE model cell lines were initially used Perhaps we can find point mutations in other exons, and we suggest to validate the assays. Mutant FFPE cell line DNAs were titrated in whole genome sequencing for our patients. the FFPE wild type cell line DNAs from 100% to 0.1%. Mutations were easily identified at the level of 0.1% with high reproducibility. P06.120 24 anonymous tumor tissues and 12 non-tumor tissues from FFPE spectrum of kras mutations in colorectal cancer: adenoma vs. specimens were also examined. No positive samples were found in adenocarcinoma non-tumor tissues. The results obtained by castPCR for the 24 tumor M. Montazer Haghighi1, A. Irani Shemirani2, M. Taleghani3, S. Milanizadeh3, Z. tissues were concordant to those previously reported by three different Akbari3, S. Fatemi3, B. Damavand2, M. Zali2; methods (Taqman® PCR, Taqman® PCR + PNA and Sequencing). Our 1Department of Biology, East Tehran Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, results demonstrate that castPCR as a new rare mutation detection Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver technology, has greater sensitivity, specificity and can thereby facilitate Diseases, Taleghani Hospital, Shaheed Beheshti Medical University, TEHRAN, accurate molecular diagnosis of heterogeneous cancer specimens. Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Taleghani Hospital, Shaheed Beheshti Medical University,, TEHRAN, P06.118 Islamic Republic of Iran. Detection of K-RAs point mutations in colon tumors by PcR- Introduction: The evolution of colorectal cancer from polyps was RFLP method approved. It was recognized that most colorectal cancers arise in a G. Cardos1, F. Cionca1, A. Grigore1, M. C. Stoicea1, C. M. Ardeleanu1,2; process progressing from adenomas to carcinomas. Kras, a small 1„Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2„Carol intracellular GTPase, is a central intermediary of the epidermal growth Davila” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. factor receptor (EGFR) pathways. Kras mutations can be detected in The prognosis of patients with metastatic colorectal carcinomas (CRC) approximately 30-60% of patients with colorectal cancer. The most hot was improved by the new anti-Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor spot of the gene is located in exons 2 and 3. The aim of the current (EGFR) therapy. KRAS mutation status is a crucial parameter for investigation was to examine profile of Kras mutations in adenomas selecting patients for anti-EGFR therapy, only patients without mutant and carcinoma in these exons. tumors benefit from the new therapy. Gain-of-function K-RAS point Methods: In this study exon 2 and 3 Kras gene in 48 tumors and 47 mutations, present in 25-45% CRC, maintain the active form of the polyps biopsy were analyzed. DNA of the specimens were scanned K-RAS protein, leading to EGFR-independent activation of intracellular using PCR sequencing. Ras/Raf/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways, Results: Six mutations in tumors including 5 mutations in codon 12 (3 making the anti-EGFR tumor therapy ineffective. Gly12Asp ,1 Gly12Ala and 1Gly12Gly) and 1 mutation in codon 13, The aim of our study was to detect K-RAS mutation status in codons Gly13 Asp, were detected. Moreover, 3 mutations determined in polyps 12 and 13 (about 99 % of all mutations in the K-RAS gene) in CRC including 2 in codon12, Gly12Asp, and one in codon 13 ,Gly13 Cys. patients in order to contribute to the selection of patients for applying Conclusion: Our findings showed that probably the profile of mutations the new therapy with Avastin (an anti-EGFR agent) in Romania. in adenocarcinoma is not entirely compatible with the pattern of DNA was isolated from fixed and paraffin embedded primary and/or mutations in adenomas. However, just one of the mutations,Gly12Asp, metastatic tumors from 169 CRC patients. K-RAS mutation status was similar in the both group. Therefore, it seems that scanning the was analyzed by the PCR-Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism mutation in young individuals with polyps will be helpful for early (RFLP) method optimized in our laboratory. diagnosis clinically and genetically and it would be useful for other Up to now, gain-of-function mutation was detected in 62 patients follow up. (36,69%), of which 58 in codon 12 and 4 in codon 13. Key words: Kras gene, Colorectal cancer, Mutation, adenoma , The international validation of our PCR-RFLP method by successfully adenocarcinoma. participating to the “Ring trial Molecular-Pathological KRAS Mutationtest of Colorectal Carcinoma” (organized by the German P06.121 Society of Pathology and the German Federal Association of Frequency and type of KRAs mutation in turkish colorectal Pathologists) and to the EQA testing has offered the opportunity to carcinoma population assess the K-RAS mutation status in our laboratory by the low cost S. Ainechi, S. Erdamar Cetin; and the European analysis standard. Istanbul University,Cerrahpasa Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. Molecular-targeted agents by blocking epidermal growth factor P06.119 receptor improve survival in patients with metastatic colorectal K-ras exon1mutations in colorectal cancer patients and its carcinoma (mCRC). But anti-EGFR therapy is only applicable to a association with clinicopathological information subset of patients. It has become clear that mutations in intracellular s. sobhani1, M. Ghaffarpour2, Z. Mostakhdemin Hosseini3, F. Kamali3, Z. Nour signaling pathway negatively predict success of anti-EGFR therapies. Mohammadi1, M. Houshmand4; In the intracellular signaling cascade, gain of function mutation in 1Islamic Azad University Science &Research Branch, Karaj, Islamic Republic KRAS gene is the most documented one. of Iran, 2Iranian Research Organization for Science and Technology, Tehran, We aimed to analyze the frequency and type of KRAS mutation and Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Imam Khomeyni Hospital, Cancer Institute, Tehran, its correlation with other clinicopathological parameters which was not Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of well documented so far in Turkish mCRC patients. Iran. A hundred and twenty three cases of mCRC were screened for KRAS Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the most gastrointestinal cancer in United mutational status of codon 12 and 13 of the KRAS by using Real- States and Europe. It is the third most common cancer in Iranian men, time based assay. The correlations with KRAS mutation status and and fourth in Iranian women. According to recent researches, somatic clinicopathological parameters were analyzed statistically. mutations in codons 12, 13 (exon1) of K-ras gene are discovered in Male/female was 75/48 and mean age was 60.64. KRAS mutation 20% - 50% human CRCs. The aim of this study was to estimate the was found in 53 (43.1%) cases. The most common mutation type was Cancer genetics 217 12 ASP (33.3%) and second was 12VAL (26.3%). 13ASP mutation Dntm3B). was approved in 17.5% of cases. The frequency of KRAS mutation The study was carried out on a homogenous group of 70 patients with in mucinous carcinomas was higher than in adenocarcinomas. Most laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. common mutation type was 13ASP in mucinous carcinomas. There Analysis of hypomethylation was performed using Ultra Performance was not significant correlation between KRAS mutation and tumor Liquid Chromatography (UPLC) method. To analyze expression of grade, Lymph node metastases and perineural invasion. panel genes, Real−Time PCR was used. We compare the results The frequency and type of KRAS mutation in Turkey showed similarity of the global level of DNA methylation and the activity of DNA with the other studies. Mucinous tumors have poor prognosis since methyltransferases with clinical and histopatological data as well they have tendency towards higher KRAS mutation. More detailed tobacco and alcohol consumption. studies questioning the association between KRAS mutation and histological subtypes are necessary. P06.124 investigation of mutations in ABL and BcR gene in BCR/ABL P06.122 transcript of patients with ALL and cmL Promoter hypermethylation of DNA repair genes in Bulgarian V. B. Kocabıyık1, H. Acar2, Ü. Çalışkan3; patients with laryngeal carcinoma 1Department of Medical Genetic, Selçuk University,Selçuklu Medical Faculty, R. Tzveova1, G. Stancheva1,2, S. Jordanov3, A. Mitkova1,2, I. Chalakov3, R. Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetic, Selçuk University, Selcuklu Kaneva1,2, V. Mitev1,2, T. E. Goranova1; Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Selçuk University, Department of Hematology, 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, Selcuk University, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey. 2Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University –Sofia, Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) is characterized as a presence Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of ENT, Clinic of ENT, UMHAT “Tsaritsa Yoanna – of the BCR/ABL gene fusion or Ph chromosome. The breakpoints can ISUL”, Sofia, Bulgaria. be changed on BCR and ABL genes and resulting in different molecular Background: Promoter hypermethylation is a central mechanism for weights of the fusion gene products. Different size deletions and epigenetic inactivation by which key genes are silenced in cancer mutations are seen in ABL and BCR genes along with the presence cells. Genes that are frequently methylated in laryngeal tumours are of the BCR/ABL fusion gene. These mutations are associated with involved in cell cycle control, DNA damage repair, apoptosis and patient’s prognosis and related to therapy. In the present study, F317L, tumour cell invasion. The aim of the current study was to examine F311I, M351T, T315I and F359V mutations was analized in ALL and promoter hypermethylation in two highly methylated in laryngeal CML patients with BCR/ABL fusion gene and control cell line K562 carcinoma genes - MGMT and MLH1. They are both involved in DNA having BCR/ABL fusion gene and Raji (Burkitt lymphoma) cell lines repair and are also associated with chemotherapeutic sensitivity. without BCR/ABL fusion gene on BCR/ABL transcript (cDNA), by Methods: DNA was extracted from fresh frozen tumour tissues of using PCR-RFLP technique. 50 patients with laryngeal cancer. After sodium bisulfite conversion, Fourteen out of 67 patients showed these five type mutations either promoter regions of MGMT and MLH1 were each amplified by PCR alone or along with others. These mutations include F317L in 7 using two sets of primers - specific for methylated and unmethylated patients, F311I in 3 patients, M351T in 2 patients, T315I in one patient DNA. and F359V mutations in 3 patients and also M351T and F317L in one Results: MGMT promoter was found to be methylated in 10 (20%) patient, T315I and F317L in the other patient. As a conclusion, in order patients, while hypermethylation in MLH1 was detected in 34 (68%) to determination of certain mutations in the BCR/ABL fusion gene is tumours. Epigenetic changes in MGMT were more frequent in older important for treatment and follow up treatment response. patients (p=0.02). No methylation of MGMT was observed in patients Key Words: Leukemia; BCR/ABL , PCR-RFLP with early stage (T1-T2) carcinoma of the larynx. Hypermethylation of This study was supported by Selçuk University Research Fund MLH1 was significantly increased in the group of active smokers with (No:10202019) excess alcohol consumption (p=0.04). Conclusion: Epigenetic inactivation of DNA repair genes MGMT and P06.125 MLH1 plays a significant role in laryngeal carcinogenesis of Bulgarian Micro RNA expression profiling in childhood acute leukemia by patients. microarray platform M. Duyu1, O. Cogulu1, B. Durmaz2, C. Gunduz3, A. Turedi Yildirim4, S. P06.123 Aksoylar1, D. Yilmaz Karapinar1, F. Ozkinay1, C. Vergin4, K. Kavakli1, G. Irken5, Global hypomethylation and expression level of the DNA N. Cetingul1; methyltransferses in patients with laryngeal cancres - 1Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey, preliminary results. 2Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, A. Stembalska1, P. Leszczynski1, J. Gil1, G. Pitala2, D. Ramsey3, M. Fraczek4; Turkey, 3Ege University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, 1Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 22Department of Clinical Izmir, Turkey, 4Behcet Uz Children’s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 5Dokuzeylul Otolaryngology, 4th Military Hospital, Wroclaw, Poland, 3Department of University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. Mathematics and Statistics, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland, The aim of this study is to evaluate the associations between 4Department of Otolaryngology, Wroclaw, Poland. miRNAs and childhood acute leukemias to find out their clinical and Laryngeal cancer is one of the most frequent head and neck cancers therapeutic implications. Sixty children with newly diagnosed acute (HNSCC, Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma). About childhood leukemia and 15 age-matched controls were included in 95% of laryngeal cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (LSCC). the study. Follow-up period was between 9 and 18 months. During The aetiology of LSCC is very complex, with both environmental this period, two patients relapsed and 7 patients died. MicroRNA (alcohol and tobacco use), genetic and epigenetic factors involved. expression profiling consisting of 1136 miRNAs from peripheral One of the common epigenetic events, which has been recognized blood (PB) and bone marrow (BM) samples of patients and control as a cause of carcinogenesis in a variety of tumors, is global DNA cases were analysed. Aberrant microRNA expressions associated hypomethylation, namely reduced level of methylation compared with with the diagnosis, differential diagnosis, outcome and prognosis of healthy tissue. Hypomethylation affects many repetitive sequences acute leukemia were prospectively evaluated. The effect of significant as well as a number of single-copy genes (e.g. growth regulatory miRNAs on overall and event free survival for ALL and AML separately genes, tissue specific genes) and may lead to chromosomal instability, were also presented. The results were confirmed by real time RT- loss of imprinting, retrotransposons and oncogene activation. DNA PCR. PB miRNA profile does not reflect BM miRNA profile. Significant hypomethylation may occur at least partly as a consequence of cell dysregulation according to the BM results compared to the control cycle deregulation disturbing the coordination between DNA replication group was found in ALL, AML, high risk ALL and AML, T-cell and and activity of DNA methyltransferases. B-cell ALL, and exitus groups . miR-548i, miR-640, miR-606, miR- The aim of study was 1) to assess the overall level of 3140, miR-3115, miR-369-3p, miR-574-3p, miR-613 and miR-140-3p 5-methyldeoxycytosine in dinucleotide CpG sites in the genome of are described for the first time in leukemia. miR-145 for ALL and miR primary LSCC compared to normal laryngeal tissue; and 2) to examine 140-3p for AML were associated with overall survival. Novel miRNAs of the expression level of the methyltransferases (Dntm1, Dntm3A, which are associated with childhood acute leukemia were identified. In Cancer genetics 218 conclusion, miRNA expression profiles may be a powerful tool for the using QMPSF, in 500 controls revealed that one CNV covering a diagnosis and differential diagnosis of acute leukemia and may have a miRNA was in fact polymorphic and that the 8 others were exclusive prognostic significance. of LFS. Remarkably, 3 of these CNVs alter genes involved in the p53 *The research was supported by Scientific and Technical Research pathway. Council of Turkey. P06.128 P06.126 Quantitative allelic imbalance(s) at the LNcR2 region (15q) in HtFA (High - throughput FisH Analysis): A new sensitive czech patients with nonsmall cell lung cancer (NscLc) approach to screen hematological malignancies E. Hirmerová1, A. Panczak1, E. Křepela2, P. Lněnička1, V. Kebrdlová1, J. N. Uzulmez, N. Cine, D. Sunnetci, E. Gumuslu, B. Enguzel, S. Eren, Z. Ilkay, Štekrová1, M. Kohoutová1; D. Yavuz, R. Akkoyunlu, H. Savli; 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, Praha, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Pneumology and Chest Surgery, Praha, Czech Republic. Turkey. Genes for nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are members of INTRODUCTION: Multiple probes developed by using bacterial region on chromosome 15q24-25.1 known as a lung cancer susceptibly artificial chromosome (BAC) for the diagnosis of hematologic locus 2 (LNCR2). We have introduced the SNaPshot analysis of four malignancies are new diagnostic tools facilitating the detection and SNPs in the vicinity of the CHRNA5 and CHRNA3 genes to look for mapping of genomic alterations in target genes. This method helps association between haplotypes in this region and the diagnosis of (or screening of several deletion-duplication regions unlike conventional even the predispositition to) lung cancer in Czech population. First, we techniques and it provides a hematologic approach. High-Throughput followed these four SNPs in genomic DNA samples of three groups FISH Analysis platforms contain 31 regions of somatic chromosomes of patients (with NSCLC, with non-neoplastic pulmonary diseases, related to hematologic malignancies. and anonymized individuals from routine laboratory, respectively). MATERIALS and METHOD: 20 cases diagnosed as leukemia from The highest difference in genotypic frequencies was seen between Kocaeli University Faculty of Medicine Hematology Policlinic were the groups of NSCLC patients and control subjets with non-neoplastic analysed in this study. DNA samples which labelled according to pulmonary diseases (P = 6.3 x 10-5 for rs1051730 and P = 7.9 x 10-5 the protocol were hybridized with High-Throughput FISH Analysis for rs8034191). Further, we applied this analysis to a set of 47 pairs platforms and they were screened and analysed with the help of of DNA samples from NSCLC tumor and normal lung tissue of the BlueFuse Multi v2.1 software. same patient. We observed quantitative allelic imbalance in tumor RESULTS: According to the data given, deletion was detected DNA in 4/19 (21%) of heterozygotes, where reduced signals of SNPs in one patient with the size of 55,414,419.5 bp between the bands alleles could be seen compared to signals of ancestral alleles, and 5(q21.2)-q33.3). 3 deletions were detected in another patient at the vice versa. This allelic imbalance was not found in any non-tumor following bands: between the bands 7(p22.3-q31.3) with the size of (normal) lung DNA sample. Finally, we evaluated this allelic imbalance 118,801,746.5 bp, between the bands 7(q31.3-q35) with the size of by quantitative Real-Time PCR of other loci in LNCR2 region by 17,543,770.0 bp, between the bands 7(q35-q36.3) with the size of measurement of cycle threshold (CT) value of tumor DNA compared 11,622,058.0 bp. 1 duplication was detected in one patient with the with CT value of DNA from normal lung tissue against to CT value for size of 558,808.5 bp on the band 3q11.2. TFCR, a housekeeping gene. CONCLUSION: The results of three cases were used in the differential Supported by the grant project of MSMT CR, MSM0021620808 diagnosis of AML-MDS by the Department of Clinical Hematology. Diagnosis and treatment of two patients were given according to the P06.129 results we provided. Preliminary findings showing that BAC based A BACH2-BCL2L1 fusion gene resulting from a t(6;20)(q15;q11.2) HTFA are effectively applicable in the diagnosis of hematological chromosomal translocation in the lymphoma cell line BLUE-1 malignancies. S. Türkmen1, M. Riehn1, E. Klopocki1, M. Molkentin2, T. Burmeister2; 1Charité Virchow-Klinikum Institute of Medical Genetics, Berlin, Germany, P06.127*** 2Medizinische Klinik für Hämatologie, Onkologie, Charité CBF, Berlin, Germany. Detection, using custom-designed cGH microarray, of rare cNVs Abnormalities of the long arm of chromosome 6 are a common feature in Li-Fraumeni patients without TP53 mutations in various B-cell malignancies. In most cases the genes involved have J. Aury-Landas1, G. Bougeard1, I. Tournier1, L. Brugières2, O. Caron3, B. not yet been clearly identified. We have molecularly characterized the Bressac-De Paillerets4, D. Leroux5, C. Lasset6, I. Coupier7, T. Frebourg1,8, J. recently established Burkitt lymphoma cell line BLUE-1 that carries Flaman1; a t(6;20)(q15;q11.2) rearrangement in addition to the typical t(8;14) 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen University, Institute for Biomedical with MYC-IgH fusion. To identify the gene loci involved on both Research and Innovation, Rouen, France, 2Department of Paediatrics, Institut chromosomes we applied a sequential BAC clone mapping strategy. Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 3Department of Medicine, Institut Gustave Using RT-PCR we were finally able to detect a fusion mRNA transcript Roussy, Villejuif, France, 4Department of Genetics, Institut Gustave Roussy, showing a fusion of the first (non-coding) exon of BACH2 (basic Villejuif, France, 5Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Grenoble, leucine zipper transcription factor 2) on 6q15 to the second exon of France, 6Cancer Genetics, CRLCC Leon Berard, Lyon, France, 7Department BCL2L1 (BCL-X) on 20q11. Various fusion transcripts were detected of Genetics, CRLCC Val d’Aurelle Paul Lamarque, Montpellier, France, for different BCL2L1 (BCL-XL) isoforms. The fusion ultimately results 8Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France. in strong expression of the Bcl2l1 (Bcl-xL) anti-apoptosis protein, as Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), resulting from mutations of the TP53 demonstrated by immunoblotting. This is the first report that shows tumor suppressor gene, is a devastating inherited form of cancers, involvement of both BCL2L1 and the transcription factor BACH2 in characterized by an early onset and a broad spectrum of tumors. We a chromosomal rearrangement. It points to BACH2 as a possibly have identified, thanks to a national recruitment of more than 1000 important target in lymphomas with 6q aberrations, although other families suggestive of LFS, TP53 alteration in 156 affected families. genes on 6q are probably also involved in these cases. Moreover, it To estimate the contribution of deleterious CNVs (Copy Number suggests that other members of the BCL2 anti-apoptosis gene family Variations) to LFS in families without detectable TP53 alteration, we other than BCL2 itself might also be involved in lymphoma. have developed a custom-designed CGH microarray. This microarray contains 24000 probes at a very high density covering 400 kb around P06.130 the TP53 locus and different genes belonging to the p53 pathway, and Role of EBNA-1 in carcinogenesis of line 59 transgenic mice 150000 probes covering the rest of the genome. The analysis with Y. A. Al-Sheikh; this microarray of 30 families strongly suggestive of LFS, without King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. detectable TP53 mutation, allowed us (i) to characterize for the first Generating EBNA-1 transgenic mice (line 59, which succumbed time an intragenic deleterious duplication of TP53, (ii) to show the monoclonal B cell lymphoma) was designed to explore the effects of absence of quantitative alterations affecting the 5’ and 3’ regulatory expressing EBNA-1 independent of the remaining viral components. regions of TP53, and (iii) to detect 9 singleton CNVs not recorded in Transgene was generated by placing the IgH intronic enhancer (Eµ) the Database of Genomic Variants. Targeted analysis of these CNVs, and the Polyoma virus early promoters (Py) upstream to EBNA-1 Cancer genetics 219 coding sequence of EBV strain B95-8. To characterize the transgene substitutions, were tested for expression, stability and sub cellular structural status, restriction enzyme and Southern blot analysis were localization in an MSH2/MSH6-proficient cell line (HEK293T). performed. Several aspects of the integration and expression of an Moreover, interaction of the MSH6 mutants with MSH2 was analyzed EBNA-1 transgene were also explored. The 3’ genomic sequence by yeast two-hybrid experiments. flanking the transgene were isolated by IPCR and aligned to mouse Protein expression of the MSH6 mutants p.Ser144Ile, p.Ala326Val, chromosome 4 band D2.3. This was achieved by Fluorescent in situ p.Gln522Arg, p.Ala1021Asp, and p.Thr1219Ile was comparable with hybridization (FISH) analysis. Genomic sequences surrounding the the expression of wild type MSH6 co-expressed with MSH2. Analysis transgene segment region was analysed by the in silico Ensemble and of MSH6 expression levels by real time PCR corroborated these NCBI online genomic database softwares. No cellular gene was found findings. These experiments showed a high similarity between the directly at the site of integration, however, genes in the proximity of this protein and the gene expression patterns. Furthermore, no effects site include Laptm5, syndcan 3, yamagushi sarcoma virus gene (Yes1) were observed on protein-protein interactions and all five MSH6 UVs oncogene and interleukin 6 (IL-6). These genes could have oncogenic showed a normal nuclear localization. Our different functional assays potential. The yamagushi sarcoma virus gene (Yes1) oncogene and yielded no evidence that the five MSH6 UVs tested are the cause of interleukin 6 (IL-6). These genes could have potential involvement Lynch syndrome in these patients. in the lymphoma process. In addition the potential cooperation of EBNA-1 with cellular oncogenes leading to lymphoma was explored P06.133 by differential gene expression analysis. Genes such as small GTPase somatic mutations in MLH1 and MSH2 are a frequent cause of ran, p53, Rap1GDS1 and RAG-2 were found to be differentially gene mismatch-repair deficiency in Lynch syndrome - like tumors. expressed. A. R. Mensenkamp1, W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams1, M. Goossens2, M. Kwint2, N. Hoogerbrugge1, M. J. Ligtenberg1,2; P06.131 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical integration of mutation scores in the diagnosis of Lynch Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Radboud University syndrome reduces the need for microsatellite instability testing Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. W. M. J. van Rijen1, R. Riedl1, C. Tops2, M. Weijenberg3, E. Blom1, S. Sallevelt1, Introduction - Lynch syndrome (previously called hereditary S. Sanduleanu1, F. Bot1, E. B. Gómez García1; nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC)) is caused by germline 1Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Leiden mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Maastricht University, and PMS2 and EPCAM, and accounts for ~3% of all colorectal Maastricht, Netherlands. cancers. Tumors associated with Lynch syndrome are characterized Tumor-based diagnostic techniques are currently the first diagnostic by microsatellite instability (MSI) and loss of expression of one or step for Lynch syndrome (LS). However, these techniques are more MMR proteins. In a considerable number of patients with tumors expensive, time-consuming and have low specificity. that fulfill these criteria a germline mutation cannot be identified. Our aim was to evaluate the current diagnosis of LS and to investigate To elucidate the cause of the MMR-deficiency in these tumors, we the role of clinically-based mutation probability methods (MMR-pro, analyzed whether somatic mutations in the suspected MMR gene Wijnen) to optimize it. We included 229 consecutive patients, counseled could explain the phenotype. between 2000 and 2008, who fulfilled the revised Bethesda criteria Methods - In total 13 unexplained MLH1-deficient tumors and 9 and underwent further diagnosis of LS. From them, 67 (29%) had an unexplained MSH2-deficient tumors were screened for somatic MSI tumor, 39 of them (17%) was due to LS. The average MMR-pro mutations in MLH1 and MSH2, respectively. score of LS patients was 0,73 (95% CI 0,63-0,82), significantly higher Results - In 10 out of 22 (45%) tumors one mutation could be identified than the average score of non-LS patients (p <0,001). A score of more that was not present in the surrounding normal tissue. In 4 MSH2- and than 0,9 was present in 12% of all cases, 55% of them were LS. An 3 MLH1-deficient tumors (32% in total), a second mutation or LOH MMR-pro score <0.2 was obtained in 93 (41%) of patients, including was identified. three with LS. All three patients fulfilled the Amsterdam II (AMS II) Conclusion - In 10 tumors, especially those that are MLH1-deficient, criteria compared to only one in the non-LS group. we could only identify one mutation, suggesting the presence of an as Based on these results a diagnostic flowchart was designed, as yet unidentified second mutation in either the tumor or the germline. In follows: MSI is not performed if MMR-Pro scores <0.20 (except for the 32% of cases with two tumor-specific mutations in MLH1 or MSH2 cases that are AMS II positive) or >0.90. In the high score group the presence of an additional germline MMR gene mutation is unlikely, detection of the four MMR proteins and/or direct DNA-sequencing of thereby reducing their familial risk for Lynch syndrome-related tumors the MMR-genes can be performed. This approach was validated in considerably. 67 additional patients: 49% could be excluded from tumor analysis without missing any LS. P06.134 Therefore, integrating mutation probability scores in diagnosis of cancer risks associated with germline mutations in MLH1, MSH2 LS, can reduce the number of tumors tested by half with the same and MSH6 genes in Lynch syndrome: results from the large sensitivity. nationwide French ERiscAm study V. Bonadona1,2, B. Bonaïti3,4, S. Olschwang5,6, S. Grandjouan7, L. Huiart5,8, M. P06.132 Longy9, R. Guimbaud10,11, B. Buecher12, Y. Bignon13, O. Caron14, C. Colas15,16,17, Functional analysis of Lynch syndrome-related missense C. Noguès18, S. Lejeune-Dumoulin19,20, L. Olivier-Faivre21, F. Polycarpe-Osaer22, mutations in msH6 T. Nguyen23, F. Desseigne2, J. Saurin24, P. Berthet25, D. Leroux26, J. Duffour27, S. H. Westers1, J. Osinga1, J. Ou1, R. C. Niessen1, S. D. Andersen2,3, K. K. Manouvrier19,20, T. Frebourg28,29, H. Sobol5,6,30, C. Bonaïti-Pellié3,31, C. Lasset1,32; Kooi1, P. O. Jager1, B. J. Eggen4, J. H. Kleibeuker1, R. H. Sijmons1, L. J. 1Université Lyon 1, CNRS UMR 5558, Lyon, France, 2Centre Léon Bérard, Rasmussen2,3, R. M. W. Hofstra1; Lyon, France, 3INSERM U669, Villejuif, France, 4INRA-GABI, Jouy-en-Josas, 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Roskilde France, 5Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 6INSERM U891, Marseille, University, Roskilde, Denmark, 3University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, France, 7APHP Cochin, Paris, France, 8INSERM UMR912, Marseille, France, Denmark, 4University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. 9Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France, 10Institut Claudius Regaud, Toulouse, Inherited pathogenic mutations in the mismatch repair (MMR) genes France, 11CHU, Toulouse, France, 12CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 13Centre MLH1, MSH2, and MSH6 predispose to Lynch syndrome. Major Jean Perrin, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 14Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, challenges in Lynch syndrome diagnostics are the DNA variants France, 15APHP Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 16INSERM with an unclear pathogenic nature (unclassified variants, UVs) such UMRS 938, Paris, France, 17Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, as single amino acid substitutions and small in-frame deletions. In 18Institut Curie, Hopital René Huguenin, Saint-Cloud, France, 19CHRU, Lille, particular, MSH6 UVs account for a substantial proportion of these France, 20Université Lille 2, Lille, France, 21Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, UVs. This study has been performed to evaluate the pathogenicity of 22Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, France, 23Institut Jean Godinot, Reims, five of such inherited MSH6 UVs found in patients suspected of Lynch France, 24Hopital Edouard Herriot, Lyon, France, 25Centre François Baclesse, syndrome. Caen, France, 26CHU de Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 27Centre Val d’Aurelle, The mutated MSH6 proteins, all containing single amino acid Montpellier, France, 28INSERM U614, Rouen, France, 29CHU, Rouen, France, Cancer genetics 220 30Université de la Méditerranée, Aix-Marseille II, Marseille, France, 31Université mutation in the MUTYH gene. Patients with MAP present with clinical Paris-Sud, Villejuif, France, 32Centre Léon bérard, Lyon, France. features similar to familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) or attenuated Providing accurate and unbiased estimates of cancer risks is a major polyposis (AFAP) but in the absence of a strong multigenerational challenge in the clinical management of Lynch syndrome. This study family history of polyposis. The MUTYH gene (NM_001048171.1) is aimed to determine the age- and gene-specific cumulative risks of localized on chromosome 1p. developing various tumors using the largest series to date of families We examined the whole MUTYH gene in 120 APC-mutation-negative with MLH1, MSH2 and MSH6 gene mutations. probands and thereto we screened for mutations in the exon 7 and Enrolled from forty French family cancer clinics, 537 families with 13 of MUTYH gene in 121 APC-mutation-negative probands. Mutation mutated genes (248 MLH1, 256 MSH2, 33 MSH6) were analyzed. screening was performed using denaturing high performance liquid Risks were estimated using the Genotype Restricted Likelihood chromatography (dHPLC) or high resolution melting (HRM) analysis. method accounting for ascertainment bias (Bonaïti et al. Eur J Hum Samples showing unique profiles were sequenced in both directions. Genet 2011; 19:173-9). We have detected 6 patients with biallelic mutation in MUTYH and 6 Significant differences were found between the three mutated genes (p patients with monoallelic MUTYH mutation. The “hot spots” mutations: < 0.01). The cumulative risks of colorectal cancer by age 70 were 41% c.494A>G (p.Y165C) and c.1145G>A (p.G382D) were found, as well (95% CI: 25-70) for MLH1 mutation carriers, 48% (30-77) for MSH2 as two already reported mutations c.891+3A>C (p.Gly250TrpfsX7) and 12% (8-22) for MSH6. For endometrial cancer, corresponding risks and c.1105delC (p.Ala371ProfsX23). were 54% (20-80), 21% (8-77) and 16% (8-32) and for ovarian cancer MUTYH and MSH6 proteins act in cooperation during the DNA repair they were 20% (1-65), 24% (3-52) and 1% (0-3). The cumulative process. Based on this interaction, it was hypothesized that the risks by age 40 did not exceed 2% for endometrial cancer and 1% for combination of heterozygote germline mutations in both genes could ovarian cancer, irrespective of the gene. The lifetime risks for other result in an increased CRC risk. Hence we have tested the presence tumor types did not exceed 3%. of MSH6 mutation in 6 carriers of monoallelic MUTYH mutation. We Compared with MLH1 or MSH2 mutations, MSH6 mutations were would like to confirm the association between MUTYH and MSH6 associated with markedly lower cancer risks of both colorectal and mutations. Unfortunately there is no evidence for this association. gynecologic cancers. Lifetime ovarian and endometrial cancer risks Supported by the Scientific Project No. MSM0021620808 of the associated with MLH1 or MSH2 mutations were high but increased Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic. only after age 40. Our findings should lead to adaptation of preventive strategies according to the mutated gene. P06.137 molecular analysis of the TP53 and NBN genes in pediatric P06.135 patients with medulloblastoma Grawitz tumour, paraganglioma, ovarian and colorectal cancer in M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, E. Ciara, W. an MSH6 mutation carrier Grajkowska, P. Kowalski, D. Jurkiewicz, S. Łuczak, A. Tańska, J. Trubicka, M. R. P. Stulp1, Y. J. Vos1, A. Karrenbeld2, J. C. Oosterwijk1, R. H. Sijmons1; Pelc, M. Krajewska-Walasek, K. Chrzanowska; 1department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Netherlands, 2department of Pathology, University Medical Center Groningen, Medulloblastoma (MB) is an invasive embryonic tumor of the Groningen, Netherlands. cerebellum and the most common malignant brain tumor in children. Lynch syndrome (HNPCC) is an autosomal dominant tumour The main cause of MB are chromosomal aberrations. Recently, we syndrome caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair identfied germ_line mutations in NBN gene as a predisposition factor (MMR) genes. Tumours are predominantly colorectal and endometrial, for MB development. The aim of this study was to investigate the but other types have been reported, typically associated with MSH2 involvement of germ line mutations in both TP53 and NBN genes mutations (1). Such diversity is very uncommon in patients with MSH6 in a group of 75 MB pediatric patients. Molecular analysis was mutations. We present a 58 year-old woman with a truncating mutation performed by PCR-SSCP and sequencing of the whole NBN gene in the MSH6 gene (c.651dupT), who has been diagnosed with two and TP53 gene exons 5 to 8. In 6 patients the TP53 mutations were recto-sigmoid adenomas (at age 26 and 30 years), ovarian carcinoma identified, including five missense substitutions: c.481G>A in exon 5 (51 yrs), a Grawitz tumour (52 yrs) and colorectal cancer (58 yrs). (p.Ala161Thr), c.638A>G in exon 6 (p.Arg213Arg), c.746G>C in exon The colorectal and ovarian tumours were microsatellite unstable, 7 (p.Arg249Ser), c.760A>G in exon 7(p.Ala254Val) , c.814G>A in exon the Grawitz tumour was not. All three tumours showed loss of the 8 (p.Val272Met) and one insertion in exon 8 (c.801_802insC) All TP53 MSH6 protein demonstrated by immunohistochemical expression. gene mutations identified in this study have not been described before. Recently, our patient developed a paraganglioma; MMR staining and No pathogenic mutation but polymorphic variants in NBN gene microsatellites will be tested after surgery. were found in our MB group: c.102G> (p.Leu34Leu), c.553G>C Grawitz tumours and paragangliomas have so far not been associated (p.Glu185Gln), c.1197C>T (p.Asp339Asp), c.1397+45delA, c.2016A>G with Lynch syndrome; analysis of the paraganglioma is pending. Our (p.Pro672Pro), c.1915-7A>G, c.2120-30A>T. Our study may suggest a case demonstrates that germline MSH6 mutations can be associated role of TP53 mutation in the pathogenesis of medulloblastoma. with a previously unreported diversity of tumours. In general, The study was supported by CMHI project S112/2009 immunohistochemistry for MMR proteins appears to be more sensitive in identifying underlying Lynch syndrome in tumours other than P06.138 colorectal cancer (2). clinical features of medulloblastoma in heterozygous carriers of 1. Thyroid cancer in a patient with a germline MSH2 mutation. Case the NBN gene germline mutations report and review of the Lynch syndrome expanding tumour spectrum. K. H. Chrzanowska, M. Perek-Polnik, B. Dembowska-Bagińska, E. Ciara, D. R.P. Stulp, J.C. Herkert,, et.al., Hered Cancer Clin Pract, 2008; 6(1) Piekutowska-Abramczuk, W. Grajkowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek, D. Perek; 15-21 The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. 2. Differential cancer predisposition in Lynch syndrome: insights from Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor molecular analysis of brain and urinary tract tumors. Gylling AH, in childhood. Epidemiological data indicate that the NBN gene can Nieminen TT, et.al. Carcinogenesis. 2008 Jul; 29(7):1351-9. be considered as a susceptibility factor for cancer development. We documented significantly higher frequency of two NBN germ-line P06.136 mutations in a cohort of Polish pediatric patients with MB (6.36%) than seven years of mUtYH genetic screening in unrelated czech in general Polish population (0.5%). Aim of our study was to compare APc-mutation-negative polyposis patients clinical features, toxicity profile and treatment outcome of MB in M. Florianová, J. Štekrová, L. Schwarzová, K. Hirschfeldová, Z. Kleibl, V. carriers and non-carriers of two NBN germline mutations, c.511A>G Kebrdlová, M. Kohoutová; and c.657_661del5. Patients and methods: 98 MB patients (including the First Faculty of Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech 7 carriers of NBN mutation) were analyzed for age at diagnosis, Republic. duration of symptoms, disease stage, extent of resection, treatment The MUTYH associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal recessive complications, chemotherapy compliance and survival. Results: syndrome associated with 5-100 colorectal adenomas and caused by Median age at diagnosis was 5.17 in heterozygotes and 8.83 years in Cancer genetics 221 others. There was no difference in symptoms duration. Dissemination genome-wide analysis, we identified 28 significantly enriched pathway and tumor residual were present in 43% of heterozygotes and in 29 % modules. Comparison with two large, independent melanoma SCNA and 30 % of others respectively. Chemotherapy doses were reduced datasets showed less than 10% overlap at the individual gene level, to 77 % and 86% respectively. Grade 3 and 4 toxicities were more but network-guided analysis revealed 66% shared pathways, including frequent in heterozygotes. Event free and overall survival were better all but three of the pathways identified in our data. Frequently altered in patients without NBN mutation. pathways included WNT, cadherin signalling, angiogenesis and Conclusions: Younger age and advanced disease at diagnosis, melanogenesis. Additionally, our results emphasize the potential of and unwanted considerable chemotherapy dose reductions in the EPHA3 and FRS2 gene products, involved in angiogenesis and heterozygous NBN mutation carriers suggest that molecular variants migration, as possible therapeutic targets in melanoma. Our study in this gene may have an impact on clinical course and outcome of demonstrates the utility of network-guided approaches, for both large childhood MB. To confirm our observations further investigations of and small datasets, to identify pathways recurrently perturbed in larger group of patients are necessary. cancer. This study was partially supported by CMHI, Warsaw, Poland (grant S112/09). P06.141 A new mEN1 mutation: report of a Belgian family P06.139 U. Ullmann1, V. Brigitte2, W. Wim3, B. Maryse1; Heterogeneity of familial medulloblastoma 1Center for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Internal I. Slade1, A. Murray1, S. Hanks1, A. Kumar2, L. Walker3, D. Hargrave4, J. Medicine, Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Douglas1, C. Stiller5, L. Izatt6, N. Rahman1; Hospital of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. 1Section of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant Hospital, Surrey, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Great cancer syndrome that is caused by a germ-line mutation in the MEN1 Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical gene encoding a tumor-suppressor protein, menin, on 11q13. MEN1 Genetics, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Section of Paediatrics, causes a combination of endocrine tumors such as parathyroid Institute of Cancer Research and Royal Marsden Hospital, Surrey, United adenomas, pituitary adenomas, glucagonomas, gastrinomas, Kingdom, 5Childhood Cancer Research Group, University of Oxford, Oxford, insulinomas, adrenocortical adenomas and non-endocrine tumors. United Kingdom, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy’s and St Thomas’ Primary hyperparathyroidism is the most frequent expression of MEN1 Hospital, London, United Kingdom. with a 100% penetrance at 50y. The prevalence of entero-pancreatic Medulloblastoma is the commonest malignant brain tumor in childhood islet tumors and pituitary tumors in MEN1 patients vary from 30 to 75% accounting for approximately 20% of all primary brain tumors between and from 20-65% respectively. 0 and 14 years of age. Familial medulloblastoma is rare and usually We here present a large MEN1 family where the carriers (n=8) demonstrates an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance with developed mild hyperparathyroidism (3/8), multiple well differentiated variable penetrance. PTCH1 and SUFU are both regulators of functionally active neuro-endocrine tumors of the pancreas (2/8) and the sonic hedgehog signalling pathway and germline inactivating adrenal adenoma (1/8). The age range of the first symptoms was from mutations in both genes are associated with multisystem phenotypes 29y to 54y. No affected family member developed a pituitary tumor. including medulloblastoma. Recently, SUFU mutations were reported The causal mutation is a new double substitution in the coding region in two unrelated families with multiple cases of medulloblastoma of exon 2 in the MEN1 gene at position 428 where a thymidine was (desmoplastic/MBEN subtype) without additional phenotypic features. exchanged for an adenosine and at position 429 where a cytosine was We recruited three familial medulloblastoma pedigrees within the exchanged for a thymidine (CTC>CAT), and consequently a leucine FACT study. Family 1 contains two second cousins with classical for histidine c.(428T>A; 429C>T)(p.Leu143His). medulloblastoma, family 2 contains four affected individuals in three This new mutation in the MEN1 gene is clinically relevant leading to a generations including one case of anaplastic medulloblastoma and milder spectrum of MEN1 compared to literature data. Genetic testing family 3 contains two affected second cousins, one with desmoplastic allowed identification of asymptomatic carriers, their early follow-up medulloblastoma. We performed full-gene mutational analysis of and will improve clinical outcome. Longer follow-up of carriers will both PTCH1 and SUFU in affected individuals from each family. allow further characterisation of this phenotype and contribute to the We identified no mutations in PTCH1 or SUFU in the three familial genotype-phenotype discussion. medulloblastoma pedigrees. These data indicate that familial medulloblastoma is a genetically heterogeneous disorder with at least P06.142 one further susceptibility gene to be discovered. monitoring of tumour cells redox state and real- time proliferation by novel biophysical techniques. P06.140 M. Hlavna1, J. Gumulec1, M. Sztalmachova1, P. Babula2, S. Krizkova3, M. Network-guided analysis of genes with altered somatic copy Masarik1, R. Kizek3; number and gene expression reveals pathways commonly 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk perturbed in metastatic melanoma University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Natural Drugs, Faculty of A. Valsesia1, D. Rimoldi1, D. Martinet2, M. Ibberson3, I. Xenarios3, S. E. Pharmacy, University of Veterinary and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Palackeho Antonarakis4, J. S. Beckmann2, C. V. Jongeneel1, C. Iseli1, B. J. Stevenson1; 1-3, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 1Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Service Mendel University in Brno, Zemedelska 1, Brno, Czech Republic. of Medical Genetics, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Lateral prostate lobes - zinc accumulating and citrate secreting prostate Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4Department of Genetic Medicine and parts, are the major sites of initiation of prostate cancer malignancy. Development, Geneva, Switzerland. Compared to healthy prostate cells, cancer cells are characteristic Cancer genomes frequently contain somatic copy number alterations by decreased ability to uptake and accumulate zinc ions, which have (SCNA) that can significantly perturb the expression level of affected serious impact for the cells. Zinc is in prostate implicated in important genes and thus disrupt pathways controlling normal growth. In processes - energy metabolism, proliferation, differentiation and melanoma, many studies have focussed on the copy number and apoptosis. Therefore, it is higly expectable that zinc plays an important gene expression levels of the BRAF, PTEN and MITF genes, but little role in prostate cancer pathogenesis. Intracellular zinc is buffered has been done to identify new genes using these parameters at the mostly by metallothioneins (MTs), low-molecular weight cysteine-rich genome-wide scale. Using karyotyping, SNP and CGH arrays, and proteins. MTs play a key role in metabolism, transport and storage of RNA-seq, we have identified SCNA affecting gene expression (‘SCNA- heavy metals and protect cells against oxidative stress. In our study we genes’) in seven human metastatic melanoma cell lines. We showed focused on zinc treatment effect on PC-3 prostate cancer cell line and that the combination of these techniques is useful to identify candidate PNT1A, healthy prostate cells. We’ve been concerned on monitoring genes potentially involved in tumorigenesis. Since few of these of redox status influenced by zinc ions, especially on gene expression alterations were recurrent across our samples, we used a protein of metallothionein 1A and 2A and then on protein and peptide level of network-guided approach to determine whether any pathways were metallothionein and reduced/oxidized glutathione. We also focused on enriched in SCNA-genes in one or more samples. From this unbiased cell quality and proliferation after zinc ions treatment. Conventionally, Cancer genetics 222 most of the standard methods for cell viability or proliferation subgroup of lung cancer patients, absence of at least one methylated determination like MTT, XTT are based on a time-consuming end-point gene (p=0.046) was more related to survival than metastasis (p=0.089). analysis not capable register very small and fast changes in cellular conclusion: The presence of methylation in at least one gene is morphology. This study for the first time describes application of new, related with a better prognosis in patients with MPE; this correlation is label free and noninvasive method based on impedance determination increased in patients with lung cancer. for real-time analysis of cell proliferation, adhesion and spreading FIS-FEDER PI081100, Consellería de Sanidade PS08/18, Actividad- as well as utilization of electrochemical methods in redox state Intensificación FIS. determination concering on tumour/non-tumour prostate cell lines. P06.145 P06.143 methylation analysis of microRNA-Associated cpG islands and methylation signature of metastasis and non-metastasis lymph LiNE-1 repeats in Hereditary and sporadic carcinomas by ms- nodes in breast cancer patients mLPA method. Z. Brekati, R. Radpour; W. H. Pavicic, S. Kaur, P. Peltomäki; Laboratory for Prenatal Medicine and Gynecologic Oncology., Basel, Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Switzerland. Helsinki, Finland. Present study investigated the contribution of aberrant methylation MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that contribute to tumorigenesis profile of cancer related genes, APC, BIN, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, by acting as oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes. Many miRNA ESR-b, GSTP1, P14, P16, P21, PTEN, and TIMP3, in paired genes have associated CpG islands, suggesting epigenetic regulation metastasis and non-metastasis axillary lymph nodes in comparison to of their expression. Compared to sporadic cancers, the role of the primary tumor tissue and the adjacent normal tissue from the same miRNAs in hereditary or familial cancer is poorly understood. A custom breast cancer patients. Methylation-Specific Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification The quantitative methylation analysis of the candidate genes showed (MS-MLPA) assay, developed for 11 miRNA loci, was used to study higher methylation proportion for the primary tumor tissue versus 96 CRC, 58 GC, and 41 EC, occurring as part of inherited DNA matched normal tissue and the differences were significant for APC, MMR deficiency (Lynch syndrome), familial CRC without MMR gene BIN, BMP6, BRCA1, CST6, ESR-b, P16, PTEN and TIMP3 promoter mutations, or sporadically. Compared with the respective normal regions (P<0.05). Among the significant methylated genes, APC, tissues, the predominant alteration in tumor tissues was increased BMP6 and BRCA1 represented high methylation proportion in paired methylation for the miRNAs 1-1, 124a-1,124a-2,124a-3, 148a, 152, metastasis and non-metastasis lymph nodes compared to the normal and 18b; decreased methylation for 200a and 208a; and no major tissue (P<0.05) whereas the P16 promoter was methylated only in change for 373 and let-7a-3. Interestingly, by linear correlation the metastasis lymph node (P<0.05). We identified even greater analysis, we found that miRNAs methylation was significantly hypermethylation proportion of BMP6 in the metastasis lymph node correlated with transcriptional repression, indicating the observed than the primary tumor tissue (P<0.05). Conversely, the promoter methylation changes are likely to be functionally important. Moreover, region of BIN1, GSTP1 and P14 significantly showed less methylation hypermethylation at miRNA loci correlated with hypermethylation at proportion in both the lymph node metastasis and non- metastasis classical TSG promoters in the same tumors. Furthermore, evaluation compared to the matched normal tissue (P<0.05). of global levels of DNA methylation using LINE-1 as a surrogate marker, Taken together present study showed methylation heterogeneity were assessed by developing a second MS-MLPA assay. Preliminary between primary tumors and metastatic lesion. Contribution of observations indicate that FCCX tumors, besides including high and aberrant methylation alterations of APC, BMP6, BRCA1 and P16 low methylator subgroups based on TSG and miRNA loci (studied by genes in metastasis lymph node suggests more investigation for the MS-MLPA), also showed evidence of global hypomethylation based pathways and networks related to these genes which might improve on LINE-1. Our results highlight the importance of epigenetic events knowledge of mechanism underlying metastasis and might improve in hereditary and sporadic cancers and suggest that MS-MLPA is an prognosis and therapeutic strategies for the breast cancer patients. excellent choice for quantitative analysis of methylation. P06.144 P06.146 methylation as a prognosis factor in patients with malignant microsatellite instability detection by high-resolution melting pleural effusion analysis L. De Chiara1, M. Botana Rial2, V. Leiro Fernández2, C. Represas Represas2, A. R. Janavicius, D. Matiukaitė, L. Griškevičius; Fernández-Villar2, D. Valverde Pérez1; Hematology, oncology and transfusion medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania. 1Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de BACKGROUND: Microsatellite instability (MSI) is an important Vigo. Servicio de Neumología, Vigo, Spain. marker for screening for hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer introduction: DNA methylation in the promoter region of tumor- (Lynch syndrome) as well as a prognostic and predictive marker for suppressor genes constitutes an important mechanism in cancer sporadic colorectal cancer (CRC). The mononucleotide microsatellite development. The aim of this study was to determine if methylation marker panel is a well-established and superior alternative to the analysis of p16/INK4a, BRCA1, RARβ and MGMT is a prognostic traditional Bethesda MSI analysis panel, and does not require testing factor in patients with malignant pleural effusion (MPE). for corresponding normal DNA. The most common MSI detection methods: Forty-nine patients with MPE were included. Methylation techniques-fluorescent capillary electrophoresis and denaturing status was achieved using methylation-specific-PCR. Patients were HPLC (DHPLC)-both have advantages and drawbacks. A new high- followed-up for at least 1 year. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression resolution melting (HRM) analysis method enables rapid identification analyses were done to study survival. of heteroduplexes in amplicons by their lower thermal stability, Results: According to diagnosis, patients were classified as a technique that overcomes the main shortcomings of capillary 37 lung cancers (75.5%), 5 breast cancers (10.2%) and 7 other electrophoresis and DHPLC. epithelial neoplasias (14.3%). p16, BRCA1, RARβ and MGMT METHODS: We investigated the straightforward application of HRM were found methylated in 20.4%, 57.1%, 36.7% and 30.6% patients, for the detection of MSI in 70 archival CRC samples. HRM analysis respectively; methylation of at least one gene was observed in 87.8% for 2 MSI markers (BAT25 and BAT26) was evaluated, and 2 different of the patients. HRM-enabled instruments were compared-the LightCycler® 480 According to Kaplan-meier analyses p16 (p=0.225), BRCA1 (Roche Diagnostics) and the LightScanner(TM) (Idaho Technology). (p=0.796), RARβ (p=0.824) and MGMT methylation (p=0.541) were We also determined the analytical sensitivity and specificity of the not related to survival; the absence of at least one methylated gene HRM assay on both instruments using 11 known MSI-positive and 54 (p=0.048) and metastasis (p=0.048) showed association with reduced microsatellite-stable CRC samples. survival. RESULTS: All MSI-positive samples were detected on both instruments Furthermore, Cox multivariate analysis also showed that absence of at (100% analytical sensitivity). The LightScanner performed better for least one methylated gene (p=0.063) and metastasis (p=0.049) were analytical specificity, giving a combined specificity value of 99.1% the covariates that better correlated with patients’ prognosis. In the compared with 92.3% on the LightCycler 480.Cancer genetics 223 CONCLUSIONS: We expanded the application of the HRM analysis 167 VUS (105 in MLH1 and 62 in MSH2), corresponding to 50 intronic method as an effective MSI detection technique for clinical samples, and 117 exonic variants, identified in the French national network which can be used to include additional markers. of oncogenetic laboratories. We found that 49 VUS (29%) have an effect on splicing. Among them, 32 VUS (19%) lead to a major splicing P06.147 defect by affecting intronic or exonic sequences close to a splice site somatic and constitutional MLH1 methylation analysis for Lynch or by creating a new splice site. In addition, 17 VUS are responsible syndrome screening and diagnosis. for incomplete effects on splicing. Using an ESE (enhancer splicing A. Castillejo1, C. Egoavil1, V. M. Barberá1, E. Martínez-Dueñas2, C. Alenda3, A. regulatory element)-dependent splicing assay, we showed that 4 Payá3, M. I. Castillejo1, A. Martínez-Cantó1, N. López-Riquelme1, E. Andrada4, VUS potentially affect splicing regulatory elements. Moreover, using A. Sánchez-Heras5, Á. Segura6, I. Chirivella7, I. Romero8, S. Navarro-Fos9, J. A. this assay, we identified ESE-containing sequences in eight different López-Guerrero10, Z. García-Casado10, M. Goicoechea11, D. Salas11, R. Jover12, exonic regions of the MLH1 gene and four exonic regions of the MSH2 J. L. Soto1; gene. Functional splicing minigene assays represent powerful tools 1Cancer Genetics. Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 2Genetic to assess the impact of variants on splicing and can be used as a Counseling in Cancer Unit. Hospital Provincial Castellón, Castellón, Spain, complementary approach to RT-PCR analyses of patient blood RNA, 3Department of Pathology. Hospital Universitario Alicante, Alicante, Spain, together with clinical and family data and tumor analyses. 4Department of Pathology. Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 5Genetic Counseling in Cancer Unit. Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 6Genetic P06.149 Counseling in Cancer Unit. Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, msH6 mutation carriers and selection criteria 7Genetic Counseling in Cancer Unit. Hospital Clínico Valencia, Valencia, M. Morak1,2, A. Laner3, C. Engel4, V. Steinke5, H. K. Schackert6, B. Royer- Spain, 8Genetic Counseling in Cancer Unit. Instituto Valenciano Oncología, Pokora7, K. Schulmann8, M. Kloor9, E. Holinski-Feder1,2; Valencia, Spain, 9Department of Pathology. Hospital Clínico Valencia, Valencia, 1University Hospital of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, Spain, 10Molecular Biology Laboratory. Instituto Valenciano Oncología, 2MGZ - Center of Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 3MGZ - Center of Valencia, Spain, 11Hereditary Cancer Program. Centro Superior Investigación Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Medical Salud Pública, Valencia, Spain, 12Department of Gastroenterology. Hospital Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, Universitario Alicante, Alicante, Spain. 5Institute of Human Genetics, University Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Department MLH1 somatic methylation in tumors has been considered as the main of Surgical Research, University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 7Institute of molecular feature of the sporadic microsatellite unstable cancers. Human Genetics, Heinrich-Heine University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, Constitutional MLH1 methylation, as causes of Lynch syndrome 8Medical Department, Ruhr-University Bochum, Knappschaftskrankenhaus, (LS), is a rare condition that might be underestimated because of an Bochum, Germany, 9Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, inadequate analysis strategy. Germany. A total of 61 index subjects from Spanish families suspected of having The phenotype of MSH6-related Lynch Syndrome (LS) patients differs LS and with immunohistochemical loss of expression of MLH1, were from MLH1/MSH2 patients and a Norwegian study showed that recruited from the Genetic Counseling in Cancer units from the selection criteria are not sensitive enough for 3,3% of MSH6 mutation Comunidad Valenciana. Somatic MLH1 methylation and germline carriers. We investigated the clinical characteristics of 177 MSH6 mutations were assessed by MS-MLPA and sequencing plus MLPA, mutation carriers from 95 families of the database of the German respectively. HNPCC-Consortium. 101 patients had a diagnosis of colorectal or LS- MLH1 somatic methylation was negative in 38 cases and MLH1 associated cancer between 19 and 75 years of age. 14 families fulfilled germline mutations were present in 12 of them (31.6%). The remaining the Amsterdam-criteria, however, 15 met none of the revised Bethesda 26 cases were triple negative for MLH1 expression, methylation criteria, but two families would have met the original B7 criterion, which and mutation. MLH1 somatic methylation was detected in 23 cases is no longer applied. Of the 16% of missed MSH6-related families, (37.7%). Sixteen of these patients were analyzed for constitutional all tumours analysed indicated LS by immunohistochemical (IHC) MLH1 methylation and we found one case with MLH1 methylation in loss of MSH6/MSH2 protein staining in all 13 tumours, and/or high peripheral blood, colorectal mucosa of normal appearance and oral microsatellite instability (MSI-H) in all 9 tumours analysed. mucosa epithelial. This subject was diagnosed of colorectal cancer at Considering tumours of all MSH6 mutation carriers, 64 were MSI-H, 4 age of 30, with no familial history of cancer and initially considered as MSI-L (all IHC loss of MSH6) and 5 MSS: one breast cancer, one initial a sporadic cancer with microsatellite instability. MSS tumour showed MSI-H after dilution and re-testing, and in three Our results show that 6.25% (1/16) of the tumors with loss of expression cases another tumour in the family was MSI-H. Immunohistochemistry of MLH1 and somatic methylation, had actually, a constitutional showed lack of MSH6 in 75 tumours -also including 4 of the 5 MSS silencing of MLH1 gene by methylation. The LS genetic/epigenetic tumours, whereas 3 tumours retained MSH6 staining but were MSI-H. diagnosis strategy should incorporate the constitutional methylation We conclude, that clinical selection of potential MSH6 mutation analysis in all cases where MLH1 tumor methylation is detected. carriers (sensitivity 84%) would be enhanced by re-inclusion of the “adenoma before age of 40 years” (original B7) and “family history with P06.148 adenomas” (original B2) criterion. Furthermore, combined analysis of Detection of splicing defects in the molecular diagnosis of the microsatellite instability and IHC is highly sensitive to identify MSH6 Lynch syndrome: evaluation of the effect of unclassified variants mutation carriers. in mmR genes using minigene assays P. Gaildrat1, A. Killian1, I. Tournier1, M. Vezain1, M. Buisine2, S. Olschwang3, S. P06.150 Baert-Desurmont4, J. Tinat5, T. Frébourg4, A. Martins1, M. Tosi1; Effects of common methylene tetrahydrofolate Reductase 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Biomedical Research and (mtHFR) Polymorfhisms on the Risk of Bladder cancer in Innovation, Rouen, France, 2Molecular Genetics, University Hospital, Lille, turkey. France, 3Inserm U891 Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Inserm M. Izmirli1, N. Inandiklioglu2, O. Demirhan2, D. Abat2, Y. Bayazit2, Z. Tansug2, U614, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Biomedical Research and Innovation D. Alptekin2; and Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France, Rouen, 1Bezmialem Vakif University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Cukurova University, Adana, France, 5Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Institute for Biomedical Research Turkey. and Innovation and Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, Bladder cancer is the fourth most common cancer in men and was France. estimated to be the eighth leading cause of cancer-related deaths A fraction of the variants of unknown significance (VUS) found in genetic in men in 2009. The different potential pathways for bladder cancer screenings may be deleterious by affecting RNA splicing. We have tumorigenesis have been shown in various studies. Many biomarkers added to our molecular diagnostic procedure a functional minigene have been used for the diagnosis, surveillance, and management of assay that assesses the impact on splicing of VUS identified in the bladder cancer. Here, we used methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase MLH1 and MSH2 genes, involved in the Lynch syndrome. The assay (MTHFR) biomarkers. MTHFR enzyme plays a keyrole in the folate relies on the use of patient genomic DNA, which is always available metabolism which is present in many bio-chemical pathways such as in the molecular diagnostic laboratory. We have so far tested a total of homocysteine methylation and nucleotide bio-synthesis. The purpose Cancer genetics 224 of this study is to examine relationship between MTHFR gene (677 for MUTYH-associated polyposis colorectal cancer patients than for C→T and 1298 A→C polymorphisms) and bladder cancer in Turkey. For control patients (hazard ratio of death = 0.48, 95% CI = 0.32 to 0.72). this purpose, regions where polymorphisms are located were amplified conclusions: In a European study cohort, we found statistically with Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) method. Polymorphisms were significantly better survival for patients with MUTYH-associated determined by using Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism polyposis colorectal cancer than for matched control patients with (RFLP) method with the suitable restriction enzymes which were HinfI colorectal cancer. and Fnu4HI. We found statistically significant relationship between 677 C→T polymorphism (OR=2.36; CI 95%, 1.16-4.78; p=0.015<0.05) P06.153 and bladder cancer. However, we found that there was no association NPM1 gene mutations in children with myelodysplastic between 1298 A→C polymorphism (OR=0.65; CI 95%, 0.36-1.17; syndromes p= 0.151>0.05) and bladder cancer. This is the first report that found B. Jekic1, V. Dobricic2, I. Novakovic1, L. Lukovic1, B. Popovic3, J. Milasin3, T. statistically significant correlation between MTHFR gene (677 C→T) Damnjanovic1, N. Maksimovic1, V. Bunjevacki1; polymorphism and bladder cancer in Turkey. 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinical Centre of Serbia, Institute of Neurology, Belgrade, P06.151 Serbia, 3Institute of Biology and Human Genetics, School of Dentistry, mUtYH gene mutations in Polish polyposis patients University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. M. Podralska1, E. Byzia1, T. Banasiewicz2, D. Lipinski1, R. Słomski1, A. Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a heterogeneous group of Plawski1; haematopoietic stem cell clonal disorders. MDS are rare in children 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University and there are few studies analyzing molecular mechanisms underlying of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. these diseases. The NPM1 gene encodes for nucleophosmin (NPM), Colorectal adenomatous polyposis, autosomal recessive MIM #608456 a protein which is, among its different functions, essential for the also called MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP), is an autosomal regulation of haematopoiesis. MDS are characterized by susceptibility recessive disorder predisposing to occurrence of colorectal cancer. to acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and findings obtained from AML MAP was described in 2002 by Al-Tassan. The number of polyps patients may serve as a clue for analyses in MDS. Mutations in exon observed in MAP patients not exceeds 1000. The colonic phenotype 12 of the NPM1 gene that cause the cytoplasmic dislocation of protein of disease is corresponded to attenuated form of FAP. Penetrance represent the most frequent genetic alterations in adult patients with of CRC in MAP patients is approximately 100% by age 65 years. karyotypically normal acute myeloid leukaemia. We used archival The colorectal cancer risk in MAP patients is 93 time higher then in bone marrow samples from 17 children with MDS in order to analyze general population. The MAP is caused by mutations of MUTYH gene mutations of NPM1 gene. PCR-SSCP and direct sequencing methods in homozygotic or compound heterozygotic state. The MUTYH gene revealed mutation in one among 17 analyzed MDS patients. The encoding protein with glicosylase activity, involved in repair of oxidative detected mutation was the transition C to T in the codon 293 that DNA damages. The MUTYH activity avoids the chances of pairs G:C changes serine to proline. To our knowledge, this is the first analysis to A:T accruing as results of oxidative DNA damages. In MUTYH gene of NPM1 mutations in childhood MDS and the very first missense the increased frequency Y165C and G382D was observed. Those two mutation of NPM1 gene reported so far. mutations in homozygotic or biallelic state are observed in most cases of MAP with diagnosed mutation. In our study we checked prevalence of Y165C and G382D in 338 polyposis probants with out APC gene P06.154 mutation. In group with one of above mentioned mutations detected, transcription factors are frequent targets of chromosomal the entire coding sequence of MUTYH gene was studied by mutations aberrations in myeloproliferative neoplasms screening and direct PCR product sequencing method. In our studies T. Klampfl1, A. Harutyunyan1, T. Berg1, B. Gisslinger2, M. Schalling1, K. we detect the MUTYH mutations in 19 probants. In one probant we Bagienski1, D. Olcaydu1, F. Passamonti3, E. Rumi4, D. Pietra4, R. Jäger1, observed homozygote of Y165C, five probants were compound L. Pieri5, P. Guglielmelli5, I. Iacobucci6, G. Martinelli6, M. Cazzola4, A. M. heterozygote and remaining 13 were heterozygotes. Vannucchi5, H. Gisslinger2, R. Kralovics1,2; 1Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, P06.152 Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, Division of Hematology and survival of mUtYH-associated polyposis Patients with colorectal Blood Coagulation, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 3Division of cancer and matched control colorectal cancer patients. Hematology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Fondazione Macchi, Varese, M. Nielsen1, L. van Steenbergen2, F. J. Hes1; Italy, 4Department of Hematology, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 1Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Eindhoven University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Section of Hematology, University of Florence, Cancer Registry, Comprehensive Cancer Centre South, Eindhoven, Florence, Italy, 6Department of Hematology and Oncological Sciences “L. and Netherlands. A. Seragnoli”, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. Background: MUTYH-associated polyposis is a recessively inherited Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPN) are clonal hematopoietic disorder characterized by a lifetime risk of colorectal cancer that is disorders with an increased production of terminally differentiated up to 100%. Because specific histological and molecular genetic cells. The disease course of MPN is generally chronic, however a features of MUTYH-associated polyposis colorectal cancers might proportion of the patients show disease progression to secondary influence tumor behavior and patient survival, we compared survival myelofibrosis, accelerated phase and/or secondary acute myeloid between patients with MUTYH-associated polyposis colorectal cancer leukemia, associated with a poor prognosis. We investigated and matched control patients with colorectal cancer from the general chromosomal aberrations in 408 MPN patients using high-resolution population. SNP microarrays to identify disease-associated somatic lesions. Of methods: In this retrospective multicenter cohort study from Europe, the 408 patients 37.5% had a wild type karyotype and 62.5% harbored 147 patients with MUTYH-associated polyposis colorectal cancer were between one and fifteen chromosomal aberrations. We identified 25 compared with 272 population-based control patients with colorectal chromosomal regions that were recurrently affected (in at least three cancer who were matched for country, age at diagnosis, year of patients). In 6 of these 25 regions, the aberrations mapped single diagnosis, stage, and subsite of colorectal cancer. Kaplan-Meier target genes including FOXP1 (chromosome 3p), TET2 (4q), IKZF1 survival and Cox regression analyses were used to compare survival (7p), CUX1 (7q), ETV6 (12p) and RUNX1 (21q). The aberrations of between patients with MUTYH-associated polyposis colorectal cancer chromosome 4q, 7p, 7q, 12p and 21q, which overlapped with TET2, and control patients with colorectal cancer. All statistical test were two- IKZF1, CUX1, ETV6 and RUNX1 respectively, were associated with sided. disease progression, whereas aberrations of 3p (overlapping FOXP1) Results: Five-year survival for patients with MUTYH-associated were equally distributed between disease progression stages and polyposis colorectal cancer was 78% (95% confidence interval [CI] = chronic-phase MPN. Five of these six genes (all, except TET2) are 70% to 84%) and for control patients was 63% (95% CI = 56% to 69%) known transcription factors. Our data confirm the association of TET2, (log rank test P<.001). After adjustment for differences in age, stage, RUNX1 and IKZF1 with MPN, as reported before. For the first time we sex, subsite, country, and year of diagnosis, survival remained better show that ETV6 is a target gene of chromosome 12p aberrations and Cancer genetics 225 with FOXP1 and CUX1 we introduce two new genes involved in the This comparative study demonstrates that analysis of genetic markers disease. As the majority of the here identified genes were transcription of cultured metastatic lymphadenopathy cells does not reflect the factors, our data indicate an important, so far unrecognized, role of status of these same markers in fresh metastatic tissue. Such results transcription factors in MPN pathogenesis. indicate that analysis of genetic markers even performed on fresh metastatic lymphadenopathy cells does not reflect the genetic status P06.155 of primitive NB. Therefore, tumor prognosis and therapeutic strategy An association of three tagged sNPs of JAK2 46/1 haplotype that flows from could not rely on metastatic cells analysis. with myeloproliferative neoplasms and non-splanchnic venous In fact, either a differentiation or a dedifferentiation of primitive tumor thrombosis cells once migrated in metastatic lymphadenopathy could occur. K. Zerjavic1, B. Zagradisnik1, L. Lokar2, M. Glaser Krasevac3, N. Kokalj Vokac1,4; P06.157 1Laboratory of medical genetics, University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, The development of the cutaneous neurofibromas Slovenia, 2Department of Transfusiology, University Medical Center Maribor, E. Jouhilahti1, S. Peltonen2, T. Callens3, E. Jokinen1, A. M. Heape4, L. Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Hematology and Hematological Oncology, Messiaen3, J. Peltonen1; University Medical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 4Medical Faculty Maribor, 1Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Institute of Biomedicine, University University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Department of Dermatology, University of Turku and Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are hematological malignancies Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 3Department of Genetics, Medical frequently associated with somatically acquired JAK2V617F mutation, Genomics Laboratory, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, also found in a portion of patients with splanchnic venous thrombosis AL, United States, 4Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Institute of (SVT). Additional, a putative association of particular JAK2 46/1 Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. haplotype with the development of JAK2V617F-positive MPNs and Cutaneous neurofibromas are the hallmarks of neurofibromatosis type SVT has been described. 1 (NF1), which is the most common cancer predisposition syndrome 288 patients with MPNs, 443 patients with non-SVT, and 458 controls caused by a mutation in NF1 gene. Cutaneous neurofibromas occur were genotyped for the JAK2V617F mutation and three tagged SNPs in virtually all adults with NF1 appearing at puberty and increasing of JAK2 46/1 haplotype. in number and size with age and pregnancy. They are composed We found that the CC+CG genotype and the C allele of rs12342421 of multiple cell types, and are traditionally believed to arise from were significantly more frequent in JAK2V617F-positive MPNs small nerve tributaries of the skin. Genetically, neurofibromas are in comparison with the controls (p=5.87x10-6 and p=8.05x10-7, lesions characterized by a bi-allelic inactivation of the NF1 gene in a respectively), as well as in JAK2V617F-positive MPNs in comparison subpopulation of Schwann cells, but the tumorigenesis can only occur with MPNs (p=0.026 and p=0.007, respectively) and JAK2V617F- in an NF1+/- background. The NF1-/- genotype obviously provides these negative MPNs (p=3.83x10-4 and p=7.47x10-6, respectively). cells with a growth advantage, but it is not known what proportion of The higher prevalence of the GG+CG genotype and the G allele the Schwann cells within a cutaneous neurofibroma carries an NF1- of rs10974944 in JAK2V617F-positive MPNs (p=9.76x10-5 and /- genotype and how much of the tumor growth can be explained by p=5.95x10-5, respectively), as well as in MPNs (p=5.87x10-4 the increase in the number of other cells with an NF1+/- genotype. In and p<0.001, respectively) was found. In non-SVT, no significant the present study, our aim was to further elucidate the pathogenesis differences in alleles or genotypes distribution of rs10974944 were of cutaneous neurofibromas. The histological analyses of apparently observed. Furthermore, the CC+CT and the C allele of rs12343867 normal skin from NF1 patients revealed minute neurofibromas, were significantly enriched in non-SVT in comparison with the presumably in the early stages of development, in the immediate controls (p=0.020 and p=0.013, respectively), MPNs (p=0.021 and vicinity of the hair follicular apparatus. Furthermore, we showed p=1.84x10-4, respectively), and JAK2V617F-negative MPNs (p<0.001 that human cutaneous neurofibromas contain multipotent NF1+/- and p=6.74x10-6, respectively). precursor cells capable of differentiating in vitro into cell types found In the present study, further evidence of the significant association of in neurofibromas, including Schwann cells, fibroblasts and epithelial rs12342421 and rs10974944 with MPNs is provided. More importantly, cells. Together these results suggest that the multipotent cells present the higher prevalence of rs12343867 in non-SVT indicates the related in the hair follicles may contribute to the development of cutaneous genetic background of SVT and non-SVT and reflects a feasible role of neurofibromas. the JAK2 signaling pathway in pathogenesis of non-SVT. P06.158 P06.156 Development of a probe-based qPcR assay to detect Neuroblastic tumor: Genetic profile Comparison Fresh versus constitutional and tumour NF1 deletions cultured tumor cells E. Terribas1, C. Garcia-Linares1, C. Lázaro2, E. Serra1; S. TRABELSI1, D. H’MIDA1, M. BEN BRAHIM2, S. SASSI1, T. YACOUBI3, A. 1Institut de Medicina Predictiva i Personalitzada del Càncer (IMPPC), ZAKHAMA4, A. SAAD1; Badalona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Programa de Diagnòstic Molecular de Càncer 1Unit of Cytogenetic, Biology of Reproduction and Molecular Genetic, Hereditari, Laboratori de Recerca Translacional, Institut Català d’Oncologia Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatric Surgery, Monastir, Tunisia, 3Unit of (ICO)-IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. Cytopathology, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Unit of Cytopathology, Monastir, Tunisia. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant genetic Neuroblastic tumors (NB) are the most common extra-cranial solid disorder caused by mutations in the NF1 gene. Approximately 5-10% neoplasm in childhood. The three histological stages of NB differ by of NF1 patients bear constitutional microdeletions encompassing NF1 cellular maturity and aggressiveness. In addition, NB are characterized and its neighboring genes. In addition, our group has recently shown that with genetic profile high heterogeneity. approximately 10% of dermal neurofibromas (dNFs) from NF1 patients The wide variability of maturity stage and chromosomal rearrangement carry somatic second hit NF1 deletions ranging in size from ~80kb in tumor cell interferes closely with Tumor evolution. Certainly during to ~8 Mb. To date, a wide range of techniques has been developed cell proliferation genetic profile of tumor cells changes. It is influenced to identify copy number losses, such as Southern blot, microsatellite by genetic abnormality background or tumors surrounding environment. analysis, FISH, array-CGH and MLPA. Although quantitative PCR This change is reflected in tumor behavior witch fluctuates from (qPCR) has not been frequently used for detecting DNA copy number regression to more aggressiveness. changes, it represents an alternative methodology due to its high The aim of this study is to compare genetic modifications between sensitivity and precision, relatively low screening cost and fast assay primitive and cultured neuroblastic tumor. Using MLPA, we followed development time. We have thoroughly designed a qPCR-based copy the evolution of chromosomal rearrangement before and after in vitro number assay using several hydrolysis probes from the Universal proliferation of neuroblastic metastatic lymphadenopathy cells. Probe Library (UPL) set, specifically distributed along a ~3Mb region Our results show that in vitro proliferation leads to the loss of initial including the NF1 gene. A set of DNA samples with constitutional or genetic abnormalities noticed in fresh metastatic tumor cells. Whereas somatic NF1 deletions (previously analyzed) and control samples with the primitive tumor seems to be of a very bad prognosis because of its a diploid status of NF1 have been used to determine the specificity localization, size, and patients’ age. and sensitivity of the assay. Our results indicate that qPCR assay Cancer genetics 226 has a high sensitivity, even in contexts of mosaicism or somatic NF1 expression showed association with patient survival (miR-374a). The deletion. The utilization of this technique may represent a useful quick combinatorial effect of most aberrantly expressed miRNAs is predicted first screening step or a validation technique for the detection of NF1 to affect pathways involved in cell migration, differentiation and growth, constitutional microdeletions and also a routine method to identify NF1 e.g. focal adhesion, cytoskeleton regulation and several signaling somatic mutations in dNFs. pathways. P06.159 P06.161 metagenes associated with survival in NscLc molecular-genetic analysis of EGFR gene in NsLc patients: E. Urgard1, T. Vooder1, U. Võsa1, K. Välk1, M. Liu2, C. Luo1, F. Hoti3, R. searching for the Gold standard approach? Roosipuu4, T. Annilo1, J. Laine5, C. M. Frenz6, L. Zhang2, A. Metspalu1,7; M. Konecny1, K. Zavodna1, I. Gloznekova1, J. Jozefakova1, M. Culagova2, K. 1Department of Biotechnology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of Computer Arpasova3, L. Sanislo1, J. Kausitz1, Z. Bartosova1; Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, United States, 3Department of 1St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Teaching Hospital, Trnava, Information and Computer Science, Aalto UNiversity School of Science and Slovakia, 3Policlinic Hospital, Nove Zamky, Slovakia. Technology, Espoo, Finland, 4Department of Pathology, Tartu University Non-small cell lung cancer (NSLC) is the leading cause of death Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Pathology, University of Turku, Turku, related to cancer worldwide. The epidermal growth factor receptor Finland, 6Department of Computer Engineering Technology, New York City (EGFR) is frequently overexpressed in the NSLC. Somatic mutations College of Tech., New York, NY, United States, 7Estonian Genome Center, of the EGFR are associated with the response of advanced NSLC to Tartu, Estonia. EGFR-specific tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The most significant of the NSCLC comprises about 80% of all lung cancer cases worldwide. reported EGFR mutations were several types of deletions in exon 19 Surgery is most effective treatment for patients with early-stage and missense mutation p.Leu858Arg in exon 21, which account for disease. However, 30 - 55% of these patients develop recurrence about 90% of all mutations. within 5 years. Therefore, markers that can be used to accurately In the presented study, we have analyzed EGFR mutations in NSLC classify early-stage NSCLC patients into different prognostic groups tumours from 141 patients. Samples were tested by direct sequencing may be helpful in selecting patients who should receive specific of exons 19 (deletions) and 20 (insertions) and by SNaPshot analysis therapies. of exons 18 (p.Gly719Ala/Ser/Cys), 20 (p.Ser768Ile, p.Thr790Met) Previously published dataset [1] was used to evaluate gene and 21 (p.Leu858Arg, p.Leu861Gln). Altogether 9 mutated samples expression profiles of NSCLC different subtypes. Moderated two- were identified, 6 of them carried mutation p.Leu858Arg in exon 21 sample t-test from R package LIMMA was used to find differentially and 3 harboured c.2235_2249del15 in exon 19. Mutation detection expressed genes between all tumor samples and adjacent controls, rate has been estimated at 6.4%. SCC samples and AC/BC samples. The gene expression microarray To achieve an optimal quality of material and higher percentage of results were validated using qRT-PCR . Bayesian regression analysis tumor cells, we used and compared different approaches. We have and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis were performed to determine isolated tumor DNA from bronchial swabs, FFPE biopsies and also metagenes associated with survival. peripheral blood. However, after comparation, acquisition of adequate We identified 599 genes which were down-regulated and 402 genes material for DNA analysis still remains a problem. More detailed results which were up-regulated in NSCLC compared to the normal lung of EGFR mutation and variant analyses and DNA isolation approaches tissue and 112 genes which were up-regulated and 101 genes which will be presented. were down-regulated in AC/BC compared to the SCC. Further, for stage Ib patients the metagenes potentially associated with survival P06.162 were identified. Effects of genetic variants of ccR5 chemokin receptors on oral Genes that expressed differently between normal lung tissue and squamose cell carcinoma cancer showed enrichment in gene ontology terms which were Z. B. Çinçin1, B. Ağaçhan Çakmakoğlu1, M. Ünür2, B. Gökçen Röhlig3; associated with mitosis and proliferation. Bayesian regression and 1Istanbul University Institute of Experimental Medicine Department of Molecular Kaplan-Meier analysis showed that gene-expression patterns and Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University Department of Oral Surgery and metagene profiles can be applied to predict the probability of different Medicine, Faculty of Dentistry, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University Faculty of survival outcomes in NSCLC patients. Dentistry Department of Maxillofacial Prosthodontics, Istanbul, Turkey. 1. Vooder, T., et al., Gene Expression-Based Approaches in Purpose: To evaluate the effect of genetic variants of CCR5 chemokin Differentation of Metastases and Second Primary Tumour. Case Rep receptors in the pathogenesis of OSCC Oncol.3 (2): p. 255 -261 Material & Methods: 127 patients, 104 healthy individuals requiring dental treatment followed-up in the Department of Oral Diseases were P06.160 included in the study. The control group had no history of cancer. MicroRNA expression profiling in Estonian patients with non- CCR5 59029 and CCR5-delta 32 genes polymorphism were assessed small cell lung cancer with PCR method in the peripheral blood samples of both groups. The U. Võsa1, T. Vooder2, R. Kolde3, K. Välk1, R. Roosipuu4, J. Vilo3, A. Metspalu1,5, standard SPSS 11.0 for windows was used in all statistical tests. To T. Annilo1; determinate of the genotype and allele frequency between the groups, 1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, chi-square and Fisher’s test were used. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Clinic of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Results: CCR5 59029 genotype and allele prevalence were higher in Surgery of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Computer study group. AA genotype and A allele were higher in control group, Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Pathology, Hospital where GG genotype and G allele frequency were higher in study group. of Tartu University, Tartu, Estonia, 5Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia. CCR5 59029 GG genotype was found higher in the later stages of Lung cancer is one of the most common types of cancer, showing poor cancer (P:0,025). The tumor diameter is greater than 4 cm increased survival and high relapse rate. MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small noncoding 2.18 times in patients with GG genotype (P:0,059) and 2.34 times in RNA molecules, are important gene regulators on transcriptional level patients with G allele (GG + AG genotypes) (P:0,083). Keratinization and involved in variety of cancers, including non-small cell lung cancer. presence was 3.52 times more in patients with CCR5 59029 G allele In the current study, we analyzed the expression levels of 858 miRNAs (P:0,010). Patients with AA genotypes demonstrated 3.57 times more in 38 Estonian non-small cell lung cancer samples (stages I and II) defence against keratinization (P:0,010). There was no statistically and 27 adjacent non-tumorous tissue samples using Illumina miRNA difference in the prevalence of CCR-5 delta 32 genotype between the array. We identified 47 up-regulated and 30 down-regulated miRNAs groups. CCR5-delta 32 II genotype was higher in patients with history in cancer samples compared with the normal lung tissue (P<0.01). of cancer in the families (P:0,029). CCR5-delta 32 D allele was higher Aberrantly were expressed several well-known tumorigenesis-related in the later stages of cancer (P:0,010). miRNAs (up-regulated miR-9, miR-182 and miR-205, down-regulated miR-101, miR-130a and miR-206), as well as some miRNAs with currently unknown function (up-regulated mir-708 and miR-941, down-regulated miR-1273). We also identified one miRNA, which Cancer genetics 227 P06.163 IVS2+1G>A, I157T, CHEK2(dele 9,10) in cases (n=220) and controls Genotyping Gstt1 and Gstm1 polymorphisms in patients with (n=363) from the Volga-Ural region of Russia. Protein-truncating oral squamous cell carcinoma mutation CHEK2*1100delC was not identified neither in cases nor B. Popovic1, M. Boskovic1, D. Jelovac2, J. Milasin1; controls. Splicing mutation IVS2+1G>A was absent in cases but was 1Institute of Human genetics, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Clinic for detected with minor frequency in control samples (0,6%). Missense Maxillofacial surgery, School of Dentistry, Belgrade, Serbia. substitution I157T was observed in cases and controls (4,6% and 5,5%) The glutathione S-transferase (GST) genes, GSTM1 and GSTT1, play (OR=0,82; 95% CI:0,35-1,9; p>0,05). CHEK2dele9,10(5kb) mutation an important role in detoxification of a broad range of carcinogens was seen in 0,9% of woman with ovarian cancer of slavic origin without contributing to development of oral squamous cell carcinomas a family history OC. At one of women observed a bilateral lesion of (OSSCs). One common genetic polymorphisms of the GSTM1 and ovarian. In addition, we investigated frequency CHEK2*1100delC, GSTT1 genes, resulting from a homozygous deletion (null genotype) IVS2+1G>A, I157T, CHEK2(dele 9,10) mutations of CHEK2 in three leads to the lack of enzyme activity. The absence of GSTs enzymes populations of the Volga-Ural region of Russia (Russians (n=192), involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics could lead to increased risk Bashkirs (n=192) and Tatars (n=153)). Missense substitution I157T for OSSCs. was observed in 8,34% in Russians, in 1,1% in Bashkir population and In a case-control study a possible association between GSTM1 and in 2% in Tatars. Significant differences among populations were found GSTT1 null polymorphisms and susceptibility to OSCCs was assessed between Russians and Bashkirs (p=0,01). CHEK2*1100delC mutation by simultaneous analysis of both genes in a single reaction using real- was observed in Tatar population (0,66%). Mutations IVS2+1G>A and time PCR. Genotype discrimination was determined by melting curve CHEK2(dele 9,10) were absent in three populations of the Volga-Ural analysis, using DNA extracted from 84 tumor and 175 control samples. region of Russia. After comparison of the melting peaks of the GSTM1 (215bp), GSTT1 (480bp) and control B-globin (110bp) genes, the following results were P06.166 obtained: 45% of tumor samples had the GSTM1 null genotype vs only Germline mutations in the PALB2 gene are population specific 33% of controls samples (p=0.04; Fisher’s exact test). The frequency and occur with low frequencies in familial breast cancer of GSTT1 null genotypes did not show statistical difference between E. Gross1, H. Hellebrand1, C. Sutter2, B. Wappenschmidt3, H. Deißler4, C. R. OSCCs and controls (p>0.05). Bartram2, R. Schmutzler3, D. Niederacher5, N. Arnold6, A. Meindl1; GSTM1 null genotype represents a risk factor for developing OSCC in 1Clinic of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Division of Tumor Genetics, Technische Serbian population. Universität München, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Department of Obstetrics and P06.164 Gynaecology, Division of Molecular Gynaeco-Oncology, University of Cologne, Genomic profiling of ovarian cancer for chromosome 8 by array Köln, Germany, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of cGH analysis Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 5Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Heinrich I. Dimova1, B. Orsetti2, R. Dimitrov3, N. Doganov3, C. Theillet2, D. Toncheva1; Heine Universität, Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6UKSH Campus Kiel, 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University of Montpellier, Montpellier, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. France, 3University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria. Screening of more than 7000 German breast and ovarian cancer We analyzed genomic imbalances affecting chromosome 8 by array- families by PCR based techniques revealed that in high risk groups, CGH in 28 primary ovarian cancers and 9 ovarian cancer cell lines, mutation frequencies in the two known BRCA genes reach between 20- using a home made BAC-array covering this chromosome at a mean 50%. In contrast, mutations in other predisposing genes like CHEK2 density of 1 BAC clone/0.8 Mb. We identified regions of highly frequent and ATM were detected with very low prevalence. As still a significant gains or losses, since they affected more than 40% of ovarian cancers proportion of our families are lacking mutations in these known genes, and determined sites showing alterations of elevated amplitude we decided to screen them for mutations in another recently detected (amplifications or homozygous deletions). Doing this we also identified predisposing gene for breast cancer, called PALB2/FANCN. at least two adjacent changed clones. Finally, we characterized the Using direct sequencing, dHPLC- and/or HRM-based technologies, smallest regions of overlap for gains. This allowed us to determine we performed a comprehensive mutation analysis of the entire PALB2 anomalies strongly associated to the disease such as: deletions at gene in 818 familial cases of breast cancer from Germany. All affected 8p23 and 8p21 or amplifications at 8q24.21 and 8q13.2 The resolution index patients had been screened for small nucleotide alterations in of array-CGH gives an almost direct link to the human genome BRCA1 and BRCA2 and tested negative for pathogenic mutations. We sequence and, hence, to a list of candidate genes. Certain regions found seven truncating PALB2 mutations (six of them novel) and two that we identified harbor genes that have known roles in ovarian novel, potentially pathogenic missense mutations. Only one mutation, carcinogenesis or are excellent candidates for such a role, in particular previously reported in another population, was identified in the German the oncogene c-myc at 8q24.12-q24.13, and the tumor suppressor population. Remarkably, also some cases of ovarian cancer were gene DLC1 (8p22-p21). reported for these PALB2 families, and breast tumor samples were Of particular note was gain of 8q13.2 occurring at a high frequency either hormone receptor positive or negative. in OC, especially in serous and late stage tumors. This region has Therefore, our observations indicate firstly, low prevalence of not been reported so far and it contains the zinc finger transcription deleterious PALB2 mutations, supporting the existence of individually factor PRD14 and the transcription coactivator for steroid receptors rare disease-causing mutations, and secondly, a specific mutation and nuclear receptors TIF2, which could be potential oncogenes. profile within the German population, requiring screening of each population separately. However, as PALB2-deficient tumors were P06.165 shown to be sensitive to Poly(ADP-ribose) Polymerase (PARP) contribution mutations of cHEK2 gene in ovarian cancer inhibitors, our study has implications for newly developed, favorable development in populations of the Volga-Ural region of Russia treatment options in familial breast cancer. D. Prokofyeva1, M. Bermisheva1, S. Gantsev2, V. Frolova2, V. Kononova1, O. Popov1, T. Dörk-Bousset3, E. Khusnutdinova1; P06.167 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Analysis of PALB2 gene in BRcA1/2 negative spanish Hereditary Academy of Sciences, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Clinical Oncological Breast Ovarian cancer Families with pancreatic cancer cases Center of the Republic Bashkortostan, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Department of A. Blanco1, O. Diez2, M. de la Hoya3, M. J. García4, M. D. Miramar5, M. Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Infante6, C. Martínez Bouzas7, A. Torres8, A. Lasa9, G. Llort10, J. Brunet11, N. The growth of cancer pathologies are observed in Russia. 12,000 Bosch12, P. Pérez Segura3, A. Osorio4, M. T. Calvo5, E. Velasco6, M. I. Tejada7, - 15,000 cases of ovarian cancer (OC) are diagnosed every year. T. Caldés3, J. Benitez13, A. Carracedo1, J. Balmaña12, A. Vega1; Special attention focused on genes that are involved in DNA repair, 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Grupo de including CHEK2. Germ-line mutations in the cell-cycle checkpoint Medicina Xenómica-USC, CIBER-ER., Santiago de Compostela, Spain, kinase CHEK2 have been associated with breast cancer. It is of interest 2Oncogenetics Laboratory,Vall d’Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO); whether CHEK2 is also relevant to ovarian cancer pathogenesis. University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Laboratorio de Oncología In this study, we analyzed CHEK2 mutations CHEK2*1100delC, Molecular, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 4Human Genetics Cancer genetics 228 Group, Human Cancer Genetics Programme, Spanish National Cancer P06.169 Research Centre, Madrid, Spain and Spanish Network on Rare Diseases Paraganglioma and pheochromocytoma upon maternal (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 5Sección de Genética. Servicio de Bioquímica transmission of sDHD mutations. Clínica. Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 6Cancer J. P. Bayley1, R. A. Oldenburg2, J. Nuk3, C. A. van der Meer2, E. Korpershoek2, Genetics. Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (UVa-CSIC), Valladolid, B. McGillivray3, A. H. T. J. Vriends1, E. P. M. Corssmit1, W. N. M. Dinjens2, R. R. Spain, 7Laboratorio de Genética Molecular-Servicio de Bioquímica, Hospital de Krijger2, J. C. Jansen1, P. Devilee1, F. J. Hes1; de Cruces, Bilbao, Spain, 8Unitat de Consell genètic. Hospital Universitari Sant 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus Medical Joan. IISPV, Reus, Spain, 9Servei de Genètica, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 10Unidad de consejo genético, Institut Oncologic It is now 21 years since van der Mey and colleagues first described del Valles, Sabadell/Terrassa, Spain, 11Hereditary Cancer Program, Catalan clear cases of hereditary, parent-of-origin related tumorigenesis. Institute of Oncology, Girona Biomedical Research Institute, Girona, Spain, They showed that development of the rare tumor, paraganglioma, 12Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, occurs exclusively upon transmission via the paternal line. The Spain, 13Human Genetics Group and Genotyping Unit, Human Cancer Genetics causative gene, SDHD, encodes a subunit of mitochondrial succinate Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain and dehydrogenase. The genomic mechanism behind this phenomenon Spanish Network on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain. was studied by Hensen and colleagues, who presented a model PALB2 (“Partner and Localizer of BRCA2”) is a breast cancer involving an imprinted modifier gene located on Ch11p15.5. susceptibility gene of moderate penetrance, accounting for about 1% Here we describe three cases of apparent maternal transmission of an of BRCA1/2 negative familial and early onset breast cancers. PALB2 SDHD mutation, leading to a paraganglioma or pheochromocytoma. encodes a protein that functions in genome maintenance. This protein We established the mode of inheritance of the mutations by analyzing interacts with BRCA2 and BRCA1, and it is required in the double- all available family members. We then carried out both genetic and strand break repair. Different recent analyses suggested that the functional analyses of the available tumors to confirm bone fide SDHD- frequency of PALB2 mutations could be increased in breast cancer related tumorigenesis. families with cases of pancreatic cancer. We found convincing genetic and functional evidence for the We aimed to evaluate the contribution of PALB2 mutations in 138 maternally-related occurrence of a case of pheochromocytoma, and BRCA1/2 negative families with pancreatic cancer cases, collected suggestive evidence in a pre-operative case with vagal and carotid from 11 centers throughout Spain. For this, direct sequencing and body paragangliomas. Haplotype analysis of tumor DNA from the MLPA analysis of PALB2 gene has been performed. first patient demonstrated somatic recombination, resulting in the We identified two novel truncating mutations, the nonsense c.1653T>A loss of the paternal region of chromosome 11 including the remaining (p.Tyr551Stop) located at exon 4 and the frameshift c.3362del functional copy of SDHD, and the maternal chromosome including the (p.Gly1121ValfsX3) in exon 13 together with one missense variant in centromere and the p arm. The third case appears to be sporadic, with the second base of exon 3 (c.110G>A, p.Arg37His), likely affecting the no functional or genetic evidence to support a causal link between the splicing process. None of these families had ovarian cancer. Moreover, mutation and the tumor. These data conform to the Hensen model and 11 common polymorphisms and 9 rare or unique variants of uncertain show that the transmission of SDHD mutations via the maternal line clinical significance, 7 not previously reported, have been detected. can, in rare cases, lead to tumorigenesis. Conclusion: In our series of breast ovarian cancer families with pancreatic cancer cases the frequency of PALB2 truncating mutations P06.170 was 1.45% (2/138). Further analysis of the putative splicing variant of comparison of mRP1 mRNA Expression between complete exon 3 as well as of the variants of uncertain clinical significance could Remission and Relapse cases among iranian Pediatric Acute increase this frequency. Leukemia Patients S. Nazari1, M. Sadeghi Koupaei2; P06.168 1Shahid Beheshti Medical University ,Mofid Pediatric Hospital,Hematology Detection of BRAF mutation status in papillary thyroid Oncology Section,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshti Medical carcinoma using sNaPshot analysis University ,Pharmacy School, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. K. Zavodna, Z. Bartosova, J. Podoba, S. Galbavy, M. Vallova, M. Konecny, J. Background and Aim: Leukemia is the most common cancer Kausitz; in childhood. Treatment for acute leukemia usually begins by St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. chemotherapy and sometime continues with radiation therapy and Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is a common endocrine malignancy that bone marrow transplantation. Patients with acute leukemia disorder frequently harbors the oncogenic V600E BRAF mutation. As a novel really suffer from frequent relapse after chemotherapy. Recent studies prognostic molecular marker, this mutation has received considerable show that one of the effective causes of failure in chemotrapeutic attention in recent years for its potential utility in the risk stratification treatment of malignant disorder such as acute leukemia is multiple and management of PTC. Many studies have reported that the BRAF drug resistance (MDR).In addition, one of the well - known gene mutation is a marker of poor prognosis. The presence of the BRAF responsible for MDR is MRP1 Gene. The aim of this study was to mutations in papillary thyroid cancer patients correlates with older The aim of this study was to determines the expression level of MRP1 age, extrathyroidal tumor invasion, distant metastases, higher tumor Gene in Pediatric Acute Leukemia patients who were in complete stage, and even higher rates of recurrent disease. Use of this unique remission compared to relapse patients and to explore the potential for molecular marker, in conjuction with conventional clinicopathological Prediction of relapse cases. risk factors, to assist the prognostication of PTC is likely to improve the material and methods: In this study, using RT-PCR technique, the efficiency of contemporary management of thyroid cancer. research team investigated MRP1 Gene expression in peripheral The aim of our study was to establish methods for rapid, sensitive blood lymphocyte cells (PBMC) of forty Acute Leukemia complete and cost efficient detection of BRAF mutation status in tumour tissues. remission patients and twenty relapse individuals. As we have a lot of experience with SNaPshot analysis for detection Results: The results showed that the MRP1 Gene expression was of somatic mutations, we have concentrated on this method. The significantly higher at relapse than Acute Leukemia patients who sensitivity of SNaPshot analysis (2-2.5%) is comparable to commercial complete remission after chemotherapy. DxS BRAF mutation test kit (1%). We used the optimized SNaPshot conclusion: In this research the association between expression level analysis to detect somatic mutations in BRAF gene in the set of 124 of MRP1 and response to chemotherapy was investigated present patient samples, and detected mutations in 54 tumours (43,5%). study and it was indicated that there is a MRP1 Gene over expression SNaPshot analysis proved to be highly sensitive and cheap method, in Pediatric Acute Leukemia patient at relapse stage. which also works with material of relatively low quality. Keywords: Pediatric acute leukemia, MRP1 Gene, Multidrug drug resistance,Cancer genetics 229 P06.171 mechanism in which MRP2 is over expressed in malignant colorectal Exome sequencing reveals candidate genes for t-cell acute tumor remains to be clarified. To the best of our knowledge this is first lymphoblastic leukemia predisposition in children. study to evaluate three protein, MDR1, MRP1 and MRP2 in Iranian E. Waanders1, V. H. J. Van der Velden2, T. Szczepański2,3, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, CRC patients C. Gilissen1, S. V. Van Reijmersdal1, P. M. Hoogerbrugge4,5, A. Geurts van Kessel1, J. J. M. Van Dongen2, R. P. Kuiper1; P06.173 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Association between UGt1A1 Polymorphism and Adverse Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Immunology, Erasmus Events in Gynecological Patients treated with Low-dose MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology and irinotecan Oncology, Medical University of Silesia, Zabrze, Poland, 4Department of A. Hirasawa1, T. Akahane1, T. Tsuruta1, H. Nomura1, N. Susumu1, Y. Pediatric Oncology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Tanigawara2, D. Aoki1; Netherlands, 5Dutch Childhood Oncology Group (DCOG), The Hague, 1Gyne/Obst, Sch. of Med, Keio Univ., Tokyo, Japan, 2Dept. Clin. PK/PD, Sch. of Netherlands. Med, Keio Univ., Tokyo, Japan. Approximately 20% of pediatric T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia Irinotecan is indicated for the treatment of ovarian and cervical cancers (T-ALL) patients relapse, mostly within 2.5 years after diagnosis. in the field of gynecologic oncology. The association between UGT1A1 Detailed characterization of diagnosis and relapse samples has shown polymorphism and adverse events associated with irinotecan therapy that both disease presentations are clonally related in most cases, but has conventionally been reported in relation to the dose of irinotecan, may also show distinct genomic features. In contrast, consecutive but no consensus has been reached on this issue. It is currently leukemic presentations of patients with a suspected predisposition thought that an association between gene polymorphism and adverse to leukemia are expected to be fully discordant at the genomic level. events is seen even at such low doses of irinotecan. Recently, we characterized diagnosis and presumed relapse samples The dose of irinotecan used as for gynecologic cancers is lower than of 22 patients with very late disease recurrence (>2.5 years), and that used for the treatment of other types of cancer. In addition, an identified eight patients with fully discordant leukemic presentations association with gene polymorphisms other than *28 also draws (Szczepanski et al., J.Clin.Oncol., in press). One patient showed a attention in east Asia. Thus, we investigated the association between germline deletion comprising the recombination activating genes RAG1 these UGT1A1 gene polymorphisms and onset of adverse events in and RAG2, and regulatory sequences of LMO2, genes frequently gynecological patients treated with irinotecan. affected somatically in T-ALL, suggesting genomic predisposition to The study involved 49 patients treated with irinotecan at our hospital for leukemia. gynecological cancers. UGT1A1*28, *6, *27 and *60 were analyzed. In the current study, we sequenced the exomes of remission and The association between each gene polymorphism and adverse both leukemic samples of two patients with late discordant T-ALL events was retrospectively examined. Adverse events associated recurrences. In one of the patients, the two leukemic samples harbored with anti-cancer drug therapy were evaluated in accordance with the 106 unique independent rare variants. Four genes were recurrently CTCAE v4.0. affected, suggesting an important role in leukemogenesis. In addition, The incidences of grade 3 or higher neutropenia and grade 3 or higher 215 rare variants were shared between the two leukemic samples diarrhea were significantly increased in heterozygotes for UGT1A1*28 and remission sample, of which 5 nonsense, 1 canonical splice site, and *6 and homozygotes for UGT1A1*6. Furthermore, the incidence 4 potential frameshift and 54 non-synonymous missense variants at of grade 3 or higher diarrhea was significantly increased in patients highly conserved positions. Filtering of these variants for known T-ALL having any of UGT1A1 polymorphism. associated genes resulted in several interesting novel candidate These findings revealed that an association between UGT1A1 predisposing genes. We conclude that a considerable proportion polymorphism and onset of adverse events also exists in patients of late T-ALL recurrences may in fact represent second leukemias, treated with irinotecan at low doses. caused by predisposing germline abnormalities. P06.174 P06.172 molecular genetic analysis of pheochromocytoma and increased expression of multidrug Resistance Protein 2, mRP2, paraganglioma in colorectal carcinomas tissues of iranian patients Z. Musil1, T. Zelinka2, A. Vícha3, A. Křepelová4, A. Puchmajerová5, M. M. Mirakhorli1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, N. Shayanfar3, S. Abdul Rahman2, R. Rozli4; Simandlová5, H. Turková2, Z. Fryšák6, J. Václavík6, J. Widimský2, M. 1Dept. of Medical Biotechnology,National Institute of Genetic Engineering and, Kohoutová4; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the First Faculty of Medicine, and Health Sciences, upm, Serdang, Malaysia, 3Pathology Department, Prague, Czech Republic, 23rd Medical Department - Clinical Department Hazrate Rasoul Akram hospital, Tehran university,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of of Endocrinology and Metabolism of the 1stFaculty of Medicine, Charles Iran, 4obstetric and Gynacology department, Medicine and Health faculty, upm, University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department of Paediatric Haematology serdang, Malaysia. and Oncology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech Objective Aim of the study was to analysis the expression level of Republic, 4Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics of the 1st Faculty of multidrug resistance related proteins, Pgp, MRP1 and MRP2 in human Medicine and General Teaching Hospital, Charles University, Prague, Czech colorectal carcinoma. Republic, 5Department of Biology and Medical Genetics of the Second Faculty Methods expression level of three protein was detected by of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic, 63rd Medical Department - Clinical immunohistochemistry method using monoclonal antibody against Department of Nephrology, Rheumatology and Endocrinology of the Faculty of each MRP1, MRP2 and MDR1 protein in 50 paraffin embedded tumor Medicine, Olomouc, Czech Republic. and adjacent normal tissue of CRC patients. Patients (30 male and Pheochromocytoma is sympathetic tumour of chromaffin cells in 20 female) were in stage II and III of cancer and had no received prior the adrenal medulla that may produce and secrete catecholamines. chemotherapy and radiotherapy. This endocrine disorder occurs in approximately 75 % as a sporadic Results 32/50, 36/24 and 24/50 of patients expressed Pgp, MRP1 disease, or as a hereditary disorder either as a component of cancer and MRP2 in their tumor region respectively, while 30/50, 38/50 syndromes: multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 ( germ-line mutations and 7/50 of patients expressed three protein in their normal regions. in the RET proto-oncogene located on 10q11.2), von Hippel-Lindau Interestingly, MRP2 was over expressed in tumor tissues of patients. syndrome ( germ-line mutations in the VHL tumour suppressor MRP1 and MDR1 were expressed in most tumor and normal tissue gene located on 3p26-p25) and, much lesser in neurofibromatosis with high intensity and extension. Also most of males expressed MRP1 type 1 (germ-line mutations in the NF1 gene) also known as von protein compared to females patients (P=0.052). In the contrary MRP2 Recklinghausen disease or nonsyndromic familial disease. Germline expression was observed in patients with low extension and intensity. mutations in genes SDHB (1p36.1-p35) and SDHD (11q23) that Conclusion Unlike MDR1 and MRP1, over expression of MRP2 was encode subunits of succinate dehydrogenase, which participate in frequently observed in cancerous region compare to normal. Therefore aerobic electron transport and the Crebs tricarboxylic acid cycle, have MRP2 is intrinsically not expressed in normal tissue of CRC patients. been identified to cause susceptibility to familial pheochromocytoma. But malignancy of tumor was leaded to over expression of it. The Head and neck paraganglioma is tumour of chromaffin cells, which Cancer genetics 230 arise from parasympathetic ganglia, most commonly at the bifurcation Medicine and Dentistry. University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, Leioa, of the carotid artery (carotid body tumour). The causes of the hereditary Bizkaia, Spain, 2BIOMICS Research Group. CIEA-Lucio Lascaray Building. paragangliomas are germline mutations in the SDHB, SDHC (1q23) University of the Basque Country EHU., Vitoria, Alava, Spain. and SDHD genes, which encode three of the four subunits of enzyme Background: Alcohol consumption is a risk factor in oral succinate dehydrogenase (SDH). Genomic imprinting might be a carcinogenesis. Alcohol metabolism primarily imply three groups of possible cause as mentioned in some recent studies. enzymes: alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH), cytochrome P-450 oxidase Among 205 sporadic pheochromocytoma patients 7 germline mutations (CYP) and acetaldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH). Several studies were found in the VHL gene. Further, 11 mutations in SDHB gene were have suggested that certain polymorphisms of those enzymes detected. In addition, in 4 examined patients with paraganglioma we could be carcinogenic susceptibility factors associated with alcohol detected mutation of the start codon in SDHD gene. consumption. Due to the high incidence of oral and larynx cancer in our region, the aim of this study was to analyze the ADH1B (rs1229984), P06.175 ADH1C (rs698 and rs1693482), CYP2E1 (rs2031920 and rs3813867) mutagenic and Antimutagenic Activities of Phoneix dactylifera and ALDH2 (rs440 and rs886205) polymorphisms in our region. pollen grain Using Ames test methods: We analyzed 326 samples: 46 patients with an oral G. Barzin1, M. Entezari2, M. Hashemi2, S. Hajiali2, M. Ghafoori2; carcinoma, 38 patients with a larynx carcinoma, and 242 controls. 1Islamic Azad University,Islamshahr Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, DNA was extracted from oral cytological samples using a phenol- 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of chloroform-isoamilalcohol method. The genotypes were determined Iran. by PCR using Taqman assays. Phoneix dactylifera pollen grain is a medicinal plant that has been Results: When comparing the distribution of alleles, we only found used traditionally to enhance energy Phoneix dactylifera pollen differences between the controls and HNSCC cases for ADH1B grain was screened for the potential of mutagenic and antimutagenic (p=0.014) and ADH1C rs1693482 (p=0.034). Significant differences activity using Ames Test. For Ames Test the particularity of the strain in relation to the risk of developing cancer were found only in 2 of salmonella typhimurium chosen TA100 resides in the fact that polymorphisms: ADH1B rs1229984 (His: OR 0.152, 95% CI 0.04- undergone a specific mutation in the Histidine operon,and for this 0.584) and CYP2E1 rs3813867 (T: OR: 0.157, 95% CI 0,024-1,029) same reason it requires histidine from a foreign supply to ensure its conclusion: The results suggest that ADH1B rs1229984 and CYP2E1 growth.The afore mentioned strain gives rise to reverted colonies rs3813867 polymorphisms could be associated with a higher risk of when expose to carcinogen substance (Sodium Azide). Ames Test oral and larynx cancer in our region. involved the pre-incubation assay against Salmonella typhimurium TA Grant support: BIO07/CA/025 EITB-Maratoia2006, 2008111018 100 bacterial strain in the presence and absence of metabolic activator Health Department, and IT-192-07 Research Groups (Government S9 system. Grain was evaluated using two-fold value of number of of the Basque Country). X. Marichalar and A. Acha-Sagredo are revertant’s colony in negative control plate as cut-off point to determine supported by fellowships from The University of the Basque Country the mutagenicity effects. (UPV/EHU). The reverted mutations and the hindrance percent of pollen grain was 46% in Antimutagenicity test and this value in anticancer test was 49% P06.178 respectively. studying colorectal polyposis to identify genes that predispose This is the first study that have revealed antimutagenicity and for colorectal cancer anticancer effect of Phoneix dactylifera pollen grain. D. Ruano1, R. van Eijk1, M. Nieuwenhuis1,2, H. Vasen1,2, C. Tops1, J. Oosting1, H. Morrreau1, F. Hes1, T. van Wezel1; P06.176 1LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Netherlands Foundation for the Detection of Association of Polymorphisms in the interleukin-22 and Hereditary Tumours, Leiden, Netherlands. interleukin-22 receptor alpha-1 Genes with colorectal cancer Colorectal polyps or adenomas are the precursor lesion for colorectal F. Rostami, S. Mohebbi, E. Arbabi Aval, P. Azimzadeh, B. Damavand, A. cancer (CRC). The GAMBA (Genomic Analysis of Multiple Bowel Sharifian, F. Derakhshan, M. Zali; Adenoma) study aims to identify CRC-predisposing genes in patients Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Tehran, Islamic with multiple polyps (polyposis) where the involvement of high-risk Republic of Iran. mutations in the APC and MUTYH CRC-predisposing genes were Background: IL-22 is recognized a key player in the chronic inflammatory excluded. Polyposis patients, particularly those diagnosed at a young disorders. IL-22 signals through a class II cytokine receptor composed age, are very likely to have a, yet unidentified, genetic predisposition of an IL-22-binding chain, IL-22Rα1and the IL-10Rβ subunit, which to CRC. is shared with the IL-10R. Chronic inflammation is a risk factor for In this study we aim to identify CRC-predisposing genes by a combined colorectal cancer and polymorphisms in the inflammatory genes could approach of homozygosity mapping and next-generation sequencing. modulate the levels of inflammation. We have investigated 4 single Homozygosity mapping can identify genomic regions that harbor nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in genes of the IL-22 (rs1179251 potential recessively inherited CRC-predisposing genes. Exome & rs1179246) and IL-22Rα (rs4648936 & rs10794665) in Iranian sequencing is performed on at least 50 polyposis cases with early population. onset, high polyp count and regions of homozygosity. The findings Methods: Genomic DNA is isolated from peripheral blood leukocytes by are validated using the second largest European cohort of familial salting out method. Two hundred eight patients with colorectal cancer polyposis patients (over 500 adenoma cases). and 253 healthy control subjects were genotyped using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism. PCR-RFLP P06.179 was confirmed using the sequencing. Influence of MLH1 -93G>A promoter polymorphism in hereditary Result: The rs1179246 G/T (3’ UTR) polymorphism of the IL-22 gene vs. sporadic colon cancer. was significantly associated with CRC (p=0.01). Nevertheless, the M. Durán1, N. Martínez2, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Infante1, E. Velasco1, A. others studied polymorphisms in IL-22 and IL-22 R α did not show any Acedo1, E. Lastra3, N. Martínez1, L. Hernández1, C. Miner1; significant associated with CRC risk. 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico Universitario, Valladolid, Spain, Conclusion: Our data suggest that IL-22 polymorphism in 3’-UTR 3Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain. region (rs1179246) may contribute to CRC susceptibility. The -93 SNP of MLH1 gene is associated with colorectal cancer. It has been reported to be associated with an increased risk of microsatellite P06.177 unstable. Polymorphisms in alcohol metabolizing enzymes in relation We genotyped 48 case patients and 93 control subjects from Genetic to develop oral and larynx cancer in patients from de Basque Counselling Surgery and the Hemotherapy Center of Castilla and country (spain) León (Spain). DNA from peripheral blood cells was extracted and DNA X. Marichalar-Mendia1, N. Rey-Barja1, M. Rodriguez-Tojo1, M. Hernando- extraction of tumour tissue and normal tissue from paraffin-embedded Rodriguez1, M. Martinez de Pancorbo2, J. Aguirre-Urizar1, A. Acha-Sagredo1; material was done by microdissection. 1Oral Medicine. Oral & Maxillofacial Pathology. Genetic Unit. Faculty of Tumor microsatellite instability (MSI), immunohistochemical staining Cancer genetics 231 (IHC) and -93 G>A genotype were determined. 183 controls were genotyped. Allele, genotype and haplotype analyses We genotyped the polymorphism -93G>A by heteroduplex analysis were performed for the polymorphic variants rs1016343, rs4871008, in capillary array (HA_CAE), three different patrons were founded: rs7841060, rs620861 on locus 8q24. -93GG, -93G>A and -93G>A plus -269 C>G. We not founded the Results: The variant rs620861 did not show association with genotype AA in cases and controls. increased PC risk. Nominally significant results were obtained for The relationship between the -93 G>A polymorphism, age, sex, MSI the genotypes C/T (OR=1.51, p=0.045) of rs1016343, C/T (OR=1.5, and IHQ in familial CRC group was not statistically significant; although p=0.048) of rs4871008, T/G (OR=1.52, p=0.042) of rs7841060 and the odds ratio for the GA genotype in individuals with unstable tumors the risk alleles were T, C and G respectively, although not reaching and a positive IHC was higher than we expect, thus GG genotype and significance. The association was stronger when PC cases with high negative IHC. Gleason score or metastasis were compared with controls. Haplotype In conclusión: we found similar frequency of -93G>A in our population analysis showed that the rs1016343, rs4871008 and rs7841060 are in than in literature, the exception is that genotype AA is not present. In a LD block. The haplotype T-C-G (rs1016343- rs4871008- rs7841060) addition, and in contrast to the previous study we found no relationship was more common for patients with Gleason score above 7 (p=0.034). with CRC MLH1 mutation carriers. Conclusions: The current study adds support to the new PC locus It not shows a correlation between GA genotype and IHC negative on 8q24. To evaluate the cumulative effect of risk loci on 8q24 and CRC in patients with family history. elucidate the mechanism of action related to aggressiveness of PC, This results shown that the -93G>A polymorphism exert a negative additional studies are warranted. effect in the MLH1 gene expression and thus we found negative IHC and MSI. P06.182 Angiotensin -i- converting enzyme (AcE) Polymorphism as P06.180 genetic risk factor in benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostate The expression profiles of genes important for prostate cancer cancer development. M. Sam Zadeh1, M. Hasanzad2, S. H. Jamaldini3, S. S. Sedighi4, N. Khodayari5, I. O. Kovnatsky1, V. A. Chernyaev2, V. B. Matveev2, A. V. Karpukhin1; L. Rejali2, S. A. M. Ziaei1; 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical 1Urology Department, Shaheed Labbafinejad Hospital, Shaheed Beheshti Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. University; Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Comparative investigation of gene expression profiles in samples Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitaion Sciences, of prostate cancer and distant from tumour regions was conducted. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4St. Matthew’s University; School of medicine, The gene expression (AR, CYP17, EGFR, HER2, m-TOR, PDGFR, Orlando, FL, United States, 5University of Florida,Medicine department, PI3K, PTEN, VEGF121, VEGF165) was determined comparative to Gainesville, FL, United States. expression of GAPDH gene by RT-PCR (Step One Plus, ABI). More introduction: Prostate tumors generally have a poor prognosis but frequently androgen receptor (AR) gene expression was increased the connections between tumor development and clinical outcomes relatively to expression in healthy tissue: in 90% of cases more than are still not well understood. These connections may be determined twice and in 40% - more than 5 times. The CYP17 was activated by genetic variation. The renin-angiotensin system has been shown only in 15% of cases. At least one of the angiogenic cascade genes to play a role in prostate cancer pathology. A change in the human was activated in 50% of cases but never all three genes investigated ACE gene occurs by an insertion (I) or a deletion (D) of a 287-bp Alu- (VEGF121, VEGF165, PDGFR ) simultaneously. All but one of PTEN repetitive sequence in intron 16, leading to a change in the plasma ACE decreasing cases (40%) were accompanied by PI3K and mTOR level. We investigated the association of ACE gene polymorphisms expression increasing. The mTOR expression was increased in 73% and prostate cancer risk. of cases. All activated HER2 cases (27%) coincided with increased materials and methods: DNA was extracted from 66 samples from mTOR. Likewise, EGFR was co-activated with PI3K and mTOR. It is individuals with a prostate cancer diagnosis and 80 samples from interesting that increased PTEN expression coincided with increased individuals with a benign prostatic hyperplasia diagnosis. The ACE I/D mTOR but not with PI3K (increased in 50% of cases). Possibly, the genotypes were determined by PCR- RFLP analysis. mTOR may be activated in these cases by another way than through Results& conclusion: The comparative analysis of the two groups PI3K/AKT. revealed no significant differences for any of the ACE genotypes. No In summary, we shown simultaneouse activation a number of genes association between variant genotypes and risk of developing prostate important for prostate cancer development. For this reason targeted cancer was observed with the ACE variant genotype , but it looks that monotherapy may not be effective and combined therapy aimed at further samples is needed to produce more significant results. several genes are required. The approach developed may be a base of diagnostics for individualized therapy. P06.183 Gene expression of Periostin and sHB in prostate cancer P06.181 J. Mares1, M. Schmidt1, M. Cerny2, T. Lunak1, M. Mares1, J. Soukup1, L. Association analysis in Bulgarian prostate cancer patients Jarolim1; adds support to a newly identified susceptibility locus on 12nd Medical Faculty, Prague 5, Czech Republic, 2JCU, Ceske Budejovice, chromosome 8q24 Czech Republic. D. L. Kachakova1,2, E. Popov3, A. Mitkova1,2, A. Vlahova4, T. Dikov4, S. SHB (adapter protein) is involved in receptor tyrosine kinase signaling Christova4, C. Slavov3, V. Mitev1,2, R. Kaneva1,2; and apoptosis regulation. Periostin is a 93 kDa N-glycoprotein, 1Molecular Medicine Centre, MU- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of involved in cell adhesion and extracellular matrix structure. Hepsin is Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University –Sofia, Sofia, a transmembrane serine protease. A detailed analysis of expression Bulgaria, 3Department of Urology, Medical University –Sofia, Clinic of Urology, of all three genes together has not been conducted in prostate cancer Alexandrovska University Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, so far. MU-Sofia, Central Pathology Laboratory, Alexandrovska University Hospital, We evaluated periostin, hepsin and SHB expression in prostate cancer Sofia, Bulgaria. samples by semiquantitative RT-PCR in two cohorts, including a Background: The molecular pathology of Prostate Cancer (PC) control cohort (n=21, benign hyperplasia of prostate) and tumor cohort is complex with more than 30 identified susceptibility loci. Linkage, (n=55). We analyzed 2 samples classified as T1, 33 samples as T2, admixture mapping and GWAS have found at least three distinct regions 17 as T3 and 3 samples with T4 TNM classification. Relative gene within 8q24, associated with PC risk. Recent studies have differentiated expression of the SHB was significantly higher in control samples (μ new PC susceptibility loci on 8q24, one of them overlapping a breast = 0.451±0.290) than in tumor samples (μ = 0.351±0.184; p<0.041). cancer associated region (Al Olama AA et al, 2009; Yeagers M et al, Relative gene expression of the periostin gene was higher at control 2009). In the current study we attempted to replicate these findings in samples (μ = 0.421±0.290) than at tumor samples (μ = 0.351±0.184). a case-control study of Bulgarian PC patients. Relative gene expression of the hepsin gene was higher at tumor Material and methods: Using TaqMan® method, 183 PC samples and samples (μ = 0.075±0.061) than at control samples (μ = 0.016±0.013). Cancer genetics 232 No correlation of the gene expression with the TNM classification, alterations among the colorectal cancer samples we had examind Gleason score, PSA level and age except the T(1+2) versus T(3+4) and thereby conclude that there is a lack of PTEN involvement expression by hepsin was observed. in the carcinogenesis of colorectal cancer in these patients. So we It is concluded that the SHB overexpression may be related to recommend to investigate that level of expression of PTEN gene, such decreased tumor growth in prostate cancer and conversely hepsin as transcriptom and protein or hyper metilation of PTEN. up-regulation may be related to increased tumor aggressiveness. Keywords: PTEN, Mutation, Colorectal carcinoma, CSGE These data are significant for therapeutic intervention in both early and metastatic prostate cancer. P06.186 Research was supported by MSM 0021620808 and GAUK 200090. mutation screening of RAD51c in Breast and Ovarian cancer families from castilla-León (spain). P06.184 M. Infante1, M. Durán1, B. Díez-Gómez1, Á. Curiel1, A. Acedo1, L. Pérez- Aberrant promoter methylation of GstP1, APc, cycD2 and Cabornero1, E. Lastra2, G. Marcos3, C. Miner1, E. A. Velasco1; RAssF1A as potential biomarkers of prostate cancer diagnosis 1Genética del Cáncer, Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (UVa-CSIC), and prognosis Valladolid, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología, Complejo Hospitalario de Burgos, N. Matevska1, A. Eftimov2, D. Petrovski3, V. Georgiev3, A. J. Dimovski2; Burgos, Spain, 3Servicio de Oncología, Hospital Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain. 1Center for Biomolecular Pharmaceutical Analyses, Faculty of Pharmacy, BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the two major genes involved in hereditary University “Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC). However, mutations in these Republic of, 2Center for Biomolecular Pharmaceutical Analyses, Faculty of genes explained only 20% of the familial cases, so the current Pharmacy, University “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The interest is search for alterations in other susceptibility genes and to Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3Clinic of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, University identify variants by genome-wide association studies that confer “Ss Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic small increases in risk. Meindl and co-workers provided evidence that of. monoallelic RAD51C mutations were responsible for only 1.3% of Substantial evidence supports the view that epigenetic changes have BOC German families, but the penetrance could be similar to BRCA’s. a role in prostate cancer (PC) development and prognosis. Analyses Screening in Canadian and Chicago population has been carried out of the patterns of promoter hypermethylation in different genes have without positive results. Therefore, we selected high-risk BOC families identified specific alterations that may serve as useful diagnostic and BRCA-negative to assess the incidence of RAD51C mutations in our prognostic biomarkers. In order to identify and characterize methylation region. markers in PC patients from Macedonia, we used QMSP to evaluate We received 89 families that fulfilled familial history of BOC, 32 of which a panel of 4 genes among 55 samples of benign (BPH) and malignant were carriers of a pathological mutation in BRCA1/BRCA2 genes. (PC) prostate lesions. The frequencies of methylation of all 4 genes Afterwards, we selected 27 families with three or more combined were significantly higher in PCs (GSTP1 57.14%, APC 82.86%, CycD2 breast and ovarian cases to perform RAD51C genetic testing. The 54.29% and RASSF1A 80%) compared to BPH (GSTP 1 5%, APC whole coding sequence and intron-exon boundaries were scanned 10%, CycD2 5% and RASSF1A 10%; P<0.001), which was not age by direct sequencing. Three previously reported variants (c.26C>T, related. The methylation index (MI), defined as ratio of methylated c.904+34T>C and c.859A>G) and a novel variant in three different genes to the total number of analyzed genes for each case, was families (c.838-37G>T) were identified, although Splice-site prediction significantly different in malignant compared to nonmalignant tissue programmes indicated this novel variant as benign. (P<0.0001). The combined analysis of selected genes allowed for The proportion of BOC families available in our population is only 8.5%, distinction of PC from BPH with sensitivity of 88.6% and specificity a third of which are BRCA1/BRCA2 mutation carriers. Preliminary of 90.0% (AUC=0.898). Furthermore, the methylation frequency data suggested a very low prevalence of RAD51C mutations, so of GSTP1 and the overall MI were higher in PCs with high Gleason its screening would not be recommended in the HBOC-prevention scores (≥7) than in those with low GS (≤6) (p=0.012 and p=0.015) strategy, although analysis of more families would be required to respectively, suggesting association with clinicopathological features confirm this point. of poor prognosis. No statistically significant correlations between MI and age or preoperative PSA levels were found. Our data suggest P06.187 that promoter hypermethylation is a frequent event, occurs early, and RAD51C mutations in familial breast and ovarian cancer accumulates during prostatic carcinogenesis. High MI might serve as C. Loveday, C. Turnbull, D. Hughes, E. Ruark, M. Warren-Perry, A. Renwick, a potential biological marker for aggressive PC. S. Seal, N. Rahman; Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom. P06.185 Germline mutations in a number of genes encoding components of the the Prevalence mutation of PtEN gene(7,8 exones) in colorectal homologous recombinational repair (HRR) pathway confer increased carsinoma(cRc)in iranian patient`s susceptibility to female malignancies. Recently mutations were M. Firoozi1, Z. Haj Ebrahimi2, M. Ghaffar Poor3, K. Bidoki1, M. Hooshmand3; identified in RAD51C, a key player in HRR, in families with both breast 1Payam-e-noor University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tarbiat Moddarres and ovarian cancer. It is suggested that RAD51C is a high penetrance University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institue Genetics cancer susceptibility gene comparable to BRCA1 and BRCA2, although engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. formal evaluation of the risks associated with RAD51C mutations has Colorectal cancer(CRC) is the third most common cancer, with yet to be undertaken. Follow-up studies by other groups have failed to a multiple process with tumours presenting various genetic and identify RAD51C mutations in additional series. epigenetic alterations inactivating tumour suppressor genes and/or We screened RAD51C by direct sequencing in 618 families with activating oncogene. PTEN/MMAC1/TEP1 is a tumour suppressor both breast and ovarian cancer and 622 controls. We identified four gene encoding a dual- specificity protein phospatase with homology deleterious mutations in cases and none in 622 controls (P=0.06). to the cytoskeleton protein, chiken tenssin and bovin auxilin. PTEN The mutations were not equally distributed within the series; three acts by inhibiting the activation of Akt/Protein kinase B and is therefore mutations were detected in the 166 families with two or more cases of involved in a major pathway controlling cell proliferation PTEN protein ovarian cancer (P=0.009). Testing for the family mutation in samples has been found to be important for its activity as a tumour suppressor. from 9 relatives revealed that one of two females affected with breast Alterations have been found to be common in sporadic colorectal or ovarian cancer had the mutation, whereas six of seven unaffected tumours. Recently, mutation at an (A) repeat of PTEN exons 7 and female relatives did not carry the family mutation. We are currently 6 8 in colorectal cancer(CRC) patients with microsatellite instability undertaking segregation analysis to refine the risks of breast and have been detected. Our subjective was to identify PTEN mutation ovarian cancer associated with mutations in RAD51C and this data in colorectal tumours and tissue samples from Iranian patients. The will be presented. These data confirm the original report of RAD51C entire coding region and flanking sites of the 7,8 exones of PTEN gene mutations in breast-ovarian cancer families but suggest that the was amplified and conformation sensitive gel electrophoresis(CSGE) contribution of RAD51C mutations to familial breast-ovarian cancer is and sequencing was done to identify alterations. We analysed very small. genomic DNA from 30 tumour tissue samples. We found no PTEN Cancer genetics 233 P06.188 lowest level of gene expression PDGFRα (500 times below normal) RB1 Gene mutations in iranian Patients with Retinoblastoma: corresponded to the smallest change in gene expression VEGFR1 Report of four novel mutations in tumor compared with healthy tissue. Conversely, the unchanged M. Akbari1,2, A. Ahani1,3, H. Khorram Khorshid3,4, B. Behnam5; level of gene expression PDGFRα correspond to an increase of 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical approximately 80 times the level of VEGFR1 gene expression in the Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Avicenna Research tumor. In half of the cases expression of the EGFR was increased. The Institute (ACECR), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4University of Social PTEN expression was observed as increased 4-fold in tumor and so Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Tehran reduced by 3 times compared to control tissue. (Iran) University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The findings provide information about the gene functional features in Mutations in RB1 gene lead to Retinoblastoma which is the most renal cancer and can be used in future for the development of optimal common intraocular tumor in the children under the age of six. schemes of effective individualized treatment of patients with renal cell In present survey, the mutations of eighteen unrelated Iranian carcinoma. retinoblastoma patients were characterized for the first time. Mutation analysis of RB1 gene was performed in patients by P06.191 sequencing of all coding regions and MLPA analysis. Clinical signs investigation of chromosomal Abnormalities on sporadic Renal and symptoms of the retinoblastoma patients appeared to be similar to cell cancer cells previously described patients with retinoblastoma. T. Cora1, H. Acar1, M. Kılınc2, A. Kalaycı1, M. Balasar3; Eight known mutations and four novel mutations in the patients 1Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, Selcuklu Medical Faculty, (c.832_833insT, c.1943delC, c.1206C>T and c.2029delG) were Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Urology, Selcuk University, Meram Medical determined. Structural analysis of the c.1206C>T variant showed that Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Selcuk University, exon 12 contains an SC-35 consensus sequence and this variation Meram Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey. disrupt the splicing enhancer element and causes skipping of exon12. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) represents 2- 4% of all human neoplasm. Molecular genetic testing of retinoblastoma patients has great impact Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (CRCC) is the most common type of on genetic counseling of the families involved, and management of the renal cell carcinoma, and papillary subtype (PRCC). CRCC are often disease in the patients and at risk relatives. characterized cytogenetically by structural chromosome aberration of different chromosome an especially short arm of chromosome P06.189 3, and PRCC are characterized by trisomy 7 or 17 and loss of the The microRNA profile of ccRCC-derived cell lines Y chromosome. FISH is a robust and highly accurate method for K. Kok, G. Duns, I. Van Duivenbode, N. Halsema, A. Van Den Berg, E. Van detecting losses, gains and translocations of genetic material . Numeric Den Berg - De Ruiter, R. M. W. Hofstra; change of chromosomes 3, 7, 9, 17, and deletion of 9p12 region were UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. analysed in 55 patients with renal cell carcinomas and normal tissue by Clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) is the most prevalent subtype using fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) technique. We report the of kidney cancer. ccRCC is thought to originate from the proximal incidence of chromosomes 3, 7, 9, 17 aneuploidies, and chromosome epithelial tubular cells (PTEC) of the kidney. It is now well established 9p12 region status and also correlate with clinical parameters. that noncoding RNAs, most notably the class of microRNAs, can play a important role in cancer development and progression. We P06.192 assessed the miRNA expression profile of a panel of 10 clear cell renal the analysis of somatic mutations of the VHL gene in clear cell cell carcinoma derived cell lines and compared this with the miRNA renal carcinoma patients from Bashkortostan Republic of Russia expression profile of two PTECs. Eight microRNAs were significantly L. R. Mingazova1, I. R. Gilyazova1, R. I. Khusainova1, V. N. Pavlov2, A. A. more abundant (p=0.05) in the ccRCC cell lines as compared to the Zagidullin2, A. A. Khaliullin2, A. A. Izmaylov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; PTEC cells. Fifteen microRNAs were significantly less abundant in the 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian ccRCC cell lines. The latter set includes all members of the miR-200 Federation, 2State educational institution of higher education Bashkir State family and miR-205 that are known to be involved in the epithelial- to Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. mesenchymal transition process by directly repressing transcription Kidney cancer is a heterogeneous group of malignant tumors, the vast factors ZEB1 and ZEB2. These transcription factors on their turn majority of which are renal cell carcinomas of various morphological strongly repress the expression of epithelial marker E-cadherin, what types. One of clear cell renal carcinoma (CC-RCC) features is the indeed is observed in nine out of ten of our ccRCC-derived cell lines. inactivation of tumour suppressor gene VHL (von Hippel-Lindau). As microRNAs bring about a posttranscriptional downregulation of The aim of investigation was to analyze somatic mutations in VHL their target genes, we compared the miRNA profiles with the gene gene in 72 CC-RCC patients from Bashkortostan Republic. SSCP expression profiles of this set of ccRCC derived cell lines. The set analysis followed by direct DNA sequencing was used to investigate of significantly upregulated genes appeared to be 4-fold enriched somatic VHL alterations. for genes that were validated targets of the miRNAs significantly Mutations of VHL have been identified in 10 of 72 samples (13.9%) downregulated in our panel of ccRCC cell lines. The expression levels with CC-RCC. All the identified mutations were somatic and found only of several genes showed an anticorrelation with the respective miR in tumor tissues that allowed us to exclude a hereditary von Hippel- levels. Lindau syndrome and consider all cases as sporadic forms. Eight types of mutations were detected in 10 CC-RCC patients: P06.190 2 insertions and 8 point mutations in the heterozygous state. The gene expression profiles by RT-PCR in renal cancer tumor. Insertions resulted in frameshifts. In the 2nd exon of the VHL gene N. V. Apanovich1, M. V. Peters2, V. B. Matveev2, A. V. Karpukhin1; we revealed: p.His115Tyr (in 1.4% of patients), p.Asp143Glu (1.4%) 1Research Centre For Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical and p.Pro154Leu (2.8%), which change the structure of the binding Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Cancer Research Centre, Russian of HIF-1α in β-domain. In the 3d exon of the VHL gene we revealed Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutations: p.Val170Phe at 1.4% of patients, p.Arg176Trp (1.4%), The expression of genes, mainly targets for renal cancer therapy p.179_Leu178dup (1.4%), p.Glu186_Asp187ins (2.8%), p.Glu186Lys (VEGFR1, VEGFR2, VEGF121, PDGFRα, PDGFRβ, PI3K, PTEN, (1.4%), which involve a violation of section interaction elongin C AXL, mTOR, EGFR) was investigated by RT-PCR. The most commonly α-domain. We also revealed somatic mutations p.Trp117Arg (1.4%), elevated expression in renal cancer relatively to expression in healthy p.Leu128Val (1.4%) and p.His110Pro (1.4%) that haven’t been renal tissue (distant from tumour regions) was observed in the genes described previously. Mutations of VHL gene result in stabilization of of VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and VEGF. Increased expression of at least two hypoxia-inducible factors, and may contribute to cancer progressions, of these genes was observed in most of cases, half of the cases have that allow to consider VHL gene as a prognostic marker of RCC. been activated all three of these gene. A frequent lowering PDGFRα expression was found. The level of expression is most pronounced (one to two orders of magnitude) differed in tumors relative to normal tissue in the genes of VEGFR1 and PDGFRα. Moreover, the Cancer genetics 234 P06.193 P06.195 A study of polymorphic xenobiotic-metabolizing enzyme genes the effect of caffeic acid Phenethyl ester and Resveratrol on the in sporadic renal cell carcinoma patients from Bashkortostan down-regulation of the in vitro growth of human breast cancer Republic (BR) of Russia cells I. Gilyazova1, L. Mingazova1, R. Khusainova1, A. Izmailov2, V. Khamzin2, V. T. Balci, C. Biray Avci, Z. O. Dogan Sigva, S. Yilmaz, M. Yucebas, C. Gunduz; Pavlov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; Medical School, Izmir, Turkey. 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian Several compounds are used in traditional and alternative medicine. Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Caffeic acid Phenethyl ester (CAPE) is a component of beehive Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) accounts for 80-85% of malignant renal propolis and because of its anti-inflammatory, antiviral and anticancer tumors in adults. The pathogenesis of RCC may be related to higher properties, it has been used for treatment of several diseases including levels of exposure to certain risk factors. Epidemiological studies the breast cancer. Resveratrol, a compound found primarily in red showed that environmental factors may be involved in sporadic RCC grapes, has been reported to inhibit cell growth and induce apoptosis development. in various solid and hematological cancer cell lines. This case-control study was designed to test for an association The purpose of our study is to determine the expression profiles of 48 between genetic polymorphism of xenobiotic metabolism enzymes and cell cycle control genes following the treatment of induced MCF-7 cell risk of sporadic RCC. Genomic DNA was obtained from 130 patients lines with the IC50 doses of resveratrol, CAPE and resveratrol-CAPE with RCC (Russians, Tatars, Bashkirs) and 117 controls matched for combination. age, gender, ethnic origin and area of residence. We used PCR-RFLP The IC50 values of resveratrol and CAPE for MCF-7 cells were found to investigate polymorphism for the most common alleles at GSTM1 as 150µM and 75µM respectively, by XTT assay. Total RNA was and CYP1A1.The null genotype frequency distribution of GSTM1 gene isolated from the cells exposed to IC50 doses of resveratrol, CAPE (0/0 GSTM1) in RCC patients didn’t differ statistically significanty from and resveratrol-CAPE combination, the expressions of 45 genes each that of the control group (P>0.05). There were interethnic distinctions from apoptotic pathway and cell cycle controls were studied by real between control groups of Turkic and Slavic origins. The frequency of time online RT-PCR. Results were compared with resveratrol or CAPE 0/0 GSTM1 genotype in Turkic group was 0,291, whereas in Slavic -free cells. -0,444 (χ2=5,133, P=0,023). The analysis of Ile462Val polymorphism The expression profiles of CCND2, RB1, ATM, CDC34, CDK5RAP1 between patients and controls didn’t reveal statistically significant genes showed a significant increase, compared to the control cells. differences (P>0.05). There was a higher risk of RCC for Turkic Up-regulation of these genes following the treatment with resveratrol group of patients with *Ile/*Ile of CYP1A1 combined with null GSTM1 and CAPE, provide evidence that these compounds may serve as genotype (χ2=3,933, P=0,047, OR=2,276, 95%Cl=1,002-5,169). The potentially effective chemoprevention agents. combination of non-null GSTM1 and *Ile/*Val CYP1A1 genotypes in Turkic group of patients also was a risk marker for RCC development P06.196 (OR=10,705, 95%Cl= 0,562-203,907). These findings suggest that A new germline mutation at codon 918 of the REt variation in the metabolic pathways involved in the functionalization protooncogene in a patient with concurrent lymph node and detoxification of specific xenobiotics is an important susceptibility metastases of medullary and papillary thyroid carcinoma factor for RCC in Bashkortostan Republic. F. A. Amosenko1, O. Shchagina1, V. Khvostovoy2, A. Polyakov1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, P06.194 2Regional Oncological Hospital, Kursk, Russian Federation. Karyotypic characterisation of childhood renal tumors We report a new germline RET mutation (c.2752 A>G; p.M918V) found E. STEJSKALOVÁ1, M. Jarošová2, J. Mališ1, H. Urbánková2, R. Kodet3; in a 62-year-old man with synchronous medullary thyroid carcinoma 1Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, University Hospital Motol, and papillary thyroid carcinoma in cervical lymph node metastases. In Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Hemato-oncology, Palacky University 2006 patient underwent total thyroidectomy based on the cytological Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Department of Pathology and Molecular diagnosis of PTC. Postoperative histopathologic examination of Medicine, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. the thyroid showed multifocal bilateral PTC (T3N0M0). In 2010 the The most common renal neoplasm in children is Wilms´ tumor (WT). patient presented with recurrent disease and underwent surgical Successful treatment of relapsing or nonresponding WT remains treatment including resection of neck lymph nodes. Histological and a challenge. Cytogenetic abnormalities of presumed prognostic immunohistochemical studies revealed the presence of concurrent significance include karyotype complexity and allelic losses from the MTC and PTC metastases in all resected nodes, with significant short arm of chromosome 1 and from the long arms of chromosomes predominance of MTC. Postoperative CT was 20 pg/ml (N=2-6 pg/ml). 11, 16 and 22 and 1q gain. Genetic alterations seem to be of Pheochromocytoma, hyperparathyroidism and MEN 2B associated importance for morphology and tumor growth in distinct subtypes of abnormalities were excluded. Familial history, clinical and biochemical renal cell carcinomas (RCC), thus distinct abnormalities may assist examination of first-degree relatives were negative for MEN 2A and histologic subtyping. Reports of chromosomal analysis of RCC in familial medullary thyroid carcinoma. Genetic screening showed that children are scarce. one of them was a carrier of new ATG>GTG transition at position We present a series of 27 WT, mostly without pre-operation c.2752 of the RET protooncogene (serum CT - 5.9 pg/ml). A 96-year- chemotherapy, 2 congenital mesoblastic nephromas (CMN) and 3 rare old mother of the patient has not this mutation. The father was not childhood renal tumors - RCC. We have detected numerical as well as available because he died of a stomach malignancy while 66. The structural changes in WT, which mostly involved chromosome 1, either mutation was not revealed in 50 unrelated normal individuals. presenting with a deletion of 1p or the formation of an isochromosome Conclusion: we detected a new germline mutation within the catalytic 1q. One WT presented with an i(7)(q10) as the sole cytogenetic core of the RET thyrosinkinase domain converting methionine 918 into change, an aberration characteristic for adult WT. One RCC patient valine in proband and his healthy sun (37-year-old). Apparently this displayed the t(X;1) as the sole cytogenetic abnormality, another one mutation is associated with late manifestation of MTC in the proband. showed numerical aberrations similar to those seen in adults. To gain But transfection studies with RET (M918V) mutant are needed to further insight into genetic events responsible for the pathogenesis, understand whether the discovered transition has oncogenic potential. arrayCGH was performed. This technique yielded results not seen by cytogenetics or in cytogenetically unsuccessful cases. Thus we P06.197 have found non-random losses of 16q12.1-16q24.3 and 17p. In our Abnormal splicing pattern caused by a novel samesense report, we have correlated these findings with histological and clinical mutation in an iranian retinoblastoma patient features, patient outcome and the results of previously published A. Ahani1, H. Khorram Khorshid2,3, B. Behnam4, M. Akbari1,5; studies. supported by grant VZ mZ 6715. 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Avicenna Research Institute (ACECR), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran (Iran) University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Islamic Republic Cancer genetics 235 of Iran, 5Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Patients Mutations in RB1 gene lead to Retinoblastoma which is the 105 pairs of consecutive patients (unselected except for exclusion of most common intraocular tumor in the children under age of six. BRCA1 carriers) and unaffected females matched for year of birth, Retinoblastoma is a malignant proliferation of immature retinal cells. To adnexectomy, cancer family history and smoking were included for date a wide spectrum of the mutations have been reported in RB1 gene; breast cancer studies. 81 pairs of unselected patients and unaffected in other hand, mutation analysis has great impact in the management men matched similarly were included for prostate cancer studies. of the disease in the affected families. Many of the reported mutations Genes in the human genes, affect splicing; some mutations target the main The most polymorphic four SNPs were identified among selenoprotein splicing sequences and some altered splicing regulatory elements. genes (GPX1, GPX4, TXNRD2, Sep15) by sequencing of In the present survey, mutation analysis was done in an Iranian patient representative cases. with sporadic unilateral retinoblastoma using direct sequencing and se plasma level was analyzed using spectroscopy (Analyst600). MLPA. As a result, a same sense nucleotide change (g.70320C>T) was statistics found near the 5’ end of exon 12. This alteration, disrupt the consensus Depending on Se level quartiles including at least 25 persons each sequence of an exonic splicing enhancer and changes the binding site were identified for all possible genotypes. of SC-35 protein. Structural analysis of cDNA in this patient showed Results disruption of normal splicing pattern and skipping of exon 12 from the The strongest associations have been detected for genotypes listed RB1 transcript. Based on our findings it is reasonable to mentioned the in table below. above nucleotide change as a pathogenic mutation. Also for the first se cases/controls Fisher’s Exact test time we report evidence for presence an exonic splicing enhancer in cancer Quartiles Genotype concentration in compared exon 12 of the RB1 gene. site compared p OR ci range (µg/l) groups TXNRD2 59.6-79.2 P06.198 II/III 21/35 (rs vs 0.12- Parent-of-origin effect in sDHD hereditary tumours explained by vs vs 0.0012* 0.27 1139793) 40.2-59.0 and 0.59 requirement for additional molecular steps. I/IV 38/17 GG 79.3-106.4 E. S. Tobias1, P. M. Yeap2, E. Mavraki3, A. Fletcher1, M. E. Freel4, N. Breast GPX1 Bradshaw5, V. A. Murday5, C. Perry4, R. S. Lindsay4; I/II 40.2-69.8 32/18 (rs 1.052- 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Yorkhill Hospital, University of Glasgow, vs vs vs 0.0465 2.34 1050450) 5.22 Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Department of Diabetes, Glasgow Royal Infirmary, III/IV 69.9-107.9 22/29 CC Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Human Genetics Unit, Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom, 4Department of Endocrinology, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, GPX4 I/II 22.0-71.4 33/17 1.34- Prostate (rs713041) vs vs vs 0.0096* 3.01 United Kingdom, 5Ferguson Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics, Yorkhill 6.77 nCC III/IV 71.6-136.8 20/31 Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom. In SDHD mutation families, paragangliomas and phaeochromocytomas usually occur only after paternal transmission of the mutation. This * significant after Bonferoni correction unexplained parent-of-origin effect is not due to imprinting of SDHD conclusion itself as SDHD is biallelically expressed in several tissues. In paternally Option of diet aimed to keep serum Se level associated with the lowest inherited SDHD there is loss of the entire maternal chromosome 11 in cancer risk may be considered by persons with increased risk of tumour DNA, implying that tumourigenesis requires loss of maternal breast/prostate cancers provided their genotype is determined. SDHD and a further, imprinted, tumour suppressor gene (TSG). We report the second case of an SDHD-related tumour (a P06.200 phaeochromocytoma in a 33 year old woman possessing the Molecular and clinical findings in Czech juvenile polyposis common pathogenic mutation, p.Pro81Leu) occurring after maternal families transmission. It is the first reported investigation of tumour DNA in V. Peter; this situation. Tumour DNA revealed loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of paternal 11q23 causing loss of the wild-type SDHD allele and LOH Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. affecting maternal 11p15, including H19. These two LOH regions Juvenile polyposis (JP) is an autosomal dominant syndrome were separated by a region exhibiting clearly retained heterozygosity, characterized by the occurrence of juvenile polyps and predisposition containing SDHAF2 (a recently reported paraganglioma TSG), which to cancer of the gastrointestinal tract (GIT). Characteristic feature therefore appears uninvolved here. of juvenile polyps are irregular cystic glands filled with mucus not This case provides molecular evidence that the tumourigenic observed in other colorectal cancer syndromes. Germline mutations requirement for maternal 11p15 loss (in addition to inactivation of both in the SMAD4 and BMPR1A genes are found in 40% of the JP SDHD alleles) drives the observed parent-of-origin effect. Paternal individuals. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) and higher inheritance of SDHD mutations is more commonly associated with frequency of gastric polyposis are associated mostly with SMAD4 tumour formation as the necessary loss of both the wild type SDHD mutations. We report here on clinical findings and molecular analysis allele and maternal 11p15 can occur by a single event (loss of of 12 individuals from 4 Czech families. Two probands were initially maternal chromosome 11). These findings have important implications analysed for the suspicion of familial adenomatous polyposis regarding the clinical management of carriers of maternally inherited (FAP) and hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) SDHD mutations - who we confirm can develop phaeochromocytomas syndromes. We analysed entire coding regions including the splice- - and the understanding of the parent-of-origin effect. site boundaries of the SMAD4 and BMPR1A genes in genomic DNA of the probands by sequencing analysis and multiplex ligation probe- P06.199 dependent amplification (MLPA) assay. By direct sequencing of the selenoprotein gene variants and selenium (se) plasma genes we have identified three pathogenic mutations (p.Gln442X, concentration are major risk factors for breast and prostate p.Pro198GlnfsX4, p.Arg445X) in SMAD4 gene only. Seven germline cancers mutation carriers from three families had various manifestation of the J. Lubinski, E. Jaworska, S. Gupta, M. Muszyńska, G. Sukiennicki, K. Durda, disease. No mutation was found in a sporadic patient with cutaneous T. Huzarski, O. Oszurek, A. Tołoczko, J. Gronwald, C. Cybulski, A. Gołąb, A. telangiectasias and GIT juvenile polyps. In summary, due to variable Sikorski, D. Wokołorczyk, J. Kładny, G. Wilk, A. Jakubowska; penetrance and expressivity of the disease it is extremely important to Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland. know family history and information related to the number, localization, Aim size and histology of the polyps predominantly to establish a correct Evaluation of associations between selected selenoprotein genomic diagnosis and further follow-up. variants, total Se plasma concentration and breast and prostate cancer risk. material and methodsCancer genetics 236 P06.201 however, they revealed no improvements. Low mutation rate in the mutation cluster region of the APC Aim: The goal of this work was to analyse the expression of genes gene in patients with sporadic colorectal cancer in southwest that make-up the EGFR activated signalling pathways and identify iran molecules that would be a better therapeutic target. M. Hasanpour1, H. Galehdari1, A. Masjedizadeh2, A. Froughmand1; methods: We characterize 100 high-grade gliomas by Chromosomal 1Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ahvaz Comparative Genomic Hybridization (cCGH) and determined the Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. incidence of EGFRvIII mutations and amplification, respectively, by introduction: Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common RT-PCR and FISH. In 20 tumours, gene expression analysis was cancer in men and the second in women worldwide. The majority of evaluated with GeneChip HuGene1.0ST arrays (Affymetrix) and data CRC cases are sporadic that occur in persons without a family history processed with Partek and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software. of CRC and are caused by somatic mutations. Adenomatous Polyposis Array validation was performed by immunohistochemistry with Coli (APC) is a tumor suppressor gene of Wnt pathway and is mutated pY705 STAT3 (Abcam) in 50 of the tumours. Results: Concomitant in 34-80% of sporadic CRC cases. About 60% of all mutations in APC gain of chromosome 7 and loss of 10q, a hallmark of glioblastomas, occur in the mutation cluster region (MCR) between codons 1286 and was found in 83% of the cases. EGFR amplification was observed 1513 in exon 15. Our objective was to identify mutations in APC gene in 58.3% of the tumours and EGFRvIII mutation detected in 30% of of sporadic CRC patients. the amplified cases. Gene expression analysis revealed that the most methods: Tumor and normal tissue samples were obtained from 29 over-expressed genes (FC>10) were genes related with cell cycle Iranian sporadic CRC patients. We designed four primer pairs due to control, angiogenesis and cellular invasion and those with the lowest amplifying four overlapping fragments (codons 654-885, 853-1242, levels (FC<10) were related with neuronal functions (e.g. GABRG2). 1213-1482 and 1404-1613) of exon 15. Direct sequencing was used Functional network analysis of EGFR pathway by IPA defined as for analyzing of four amplified fragments. hub-molecules: STAT3 and C-MYC. Immunohistochemistry revealed Results: We found four frameshift mutations c.2804dupA, c.4317delT, pY705-STAT3-positive tumor cells in all cases. c.4464_4471del and c.4468_4469dupCA, three missense mutations conclusion: Our data strongly supports STAT3 as a molecular target T1079S, P1176L and E1317Q and two nonsense mutations Q1367X in high-grade glioma therapy. and R1450X in eight patients. One of patients showed two mutations. conclusion: Mutations were detected in 8 (27.6%) of 29 CRC patients. P06.204 This mutation frequency is lower in comparison to the previous studies spectrum of stK11 gene mutations in Poland from other countries. The c.4468_4469dupCA and T1079S are novel M. Podralska1, K. Ilnicka-Borowczyk2, R. Slomski1, J. Limon3, P. Krokowicz2, mutations. The identified six frameshift and nonsense mutations are T. Banasiewicz2, J. Paszkowski2, D. Lipinski1, D. Nowakowska4, B. Kozak pathogenic and lead to truncated APC protein. The pathogenicity Kolonowska5, W. Cichy2, A. Plawski1; of the T1079S and P1176L missense mutations is unknown but the 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol Marcinkowski University E1317Q mutation is considered being a predisposing variant for the of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, CRC progression. Poland, 4Oncology Center, Warszawa, Poland, 5Regional Oncology Center, Kielce, Poland. P06.202 Peutz-Jeghersa syndrome (PJS; MIM 175200) an autosomal case-control association study of cOX-2 gene polymorphism dominant disorder associated with increased risk of malignances. The (-765G>c) with sporadic colorectal cancer (cRc) occurrence of PJS is estimated from 1/29,000 to 1/120,000 newborn. F. Khorshidi, M. Montazer Haghighi, S. Mohebbi, M. Yaghoob Taleghani, M. In most patient the hamartomatous polyps are observed during second Zali; or third decade of life. Polyps can be located throughout digestive tract. The Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, Tehran, Islamic Risk of colorectal cancer is lower then in FAP or HNPCC, but PJS can Republic of Iran. be reason of many gastrointestinal discomforts like bowel obstruction, Background : Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a common disease in both intussusception or bleeding. In Peutz-Jeghers syndrome high risk to men and women. CRC is ranked the third most common form of cancer development malignancies such as the pancreas, the breast, female worldwide in terms of incidence .Cyclooxygenase (COX) is a key and male reproductive organs is observed. Second manifestations enzyme in the formation of prostaglandins, and an inducible isoform of are mucocutaneous hypermelanocytic lesions. The pigmentations COX, COX-2, has been implicated in colorectal carcinogenesis. are usually brown, dark or blue spots developing on lips, hands and Aim: The aim of our study was to investigate associations of COX-2 feet, in the mucosa of the nose, conjunctiva or rectum appear in about polymorphism (-765G>C) with risk of colorectal cancer (CRC) in an 90% cases. Mutations in STK11 gene are detected in 70 % patients Iranian population. with familial form of PJS and in 30 to 70% sporadic cases of disease. Methods: The study subjects were 115 cases of colorectal cancer STK11 gene is located on chromosome 19p13.3. Protein coding by and 62 controls with no polyps who underwent total colonoscopy. STK11 gene is serine/threonine kinase. Loss of STK11 function Genotypes were determined using the polymerase chain reaction- causes many defects, since STK11 participates in very important cell restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method with signaling pathways. Here we present the study considering 30 Polish genomic DNA extracted from the buffy coat. families with PJS. The STK11 point mutations were detected 9 families Result: Our finding revealed that a significant difference between and large STK11 gene rearrangements were detected in 6 families. cases and controls (P=0.001).Therefore -765G>C polymorphism The study was financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, was associated with colorectal cancer development .Moreover, GG Poland, grant number N N402 481537 genotype was detected just in cases. Conclusion: These findings suggest a modulating role for the COX-2 P06.205 polymorphism (-765G→C) in the development of colorectal cancer in Levels of acetylated H3 histone in papillary and undifferentiated an Iranian population. thyroid carcinoma N. Passon1, C. Puppin1, A. Franzoni2, C. Di Loreto3, F. Frasca4, V. Vella4, R. P06.203 Vigneri4, G. Damante1,2; stAt3 a molecular target in High-Grade Gliomas. 1Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche, Università di Udine, Udine, L. Roque1, C. Martins1, M. Moedas1, S. Fragoso1, V. Moura-Nunes1, C. Faria2, Italy, 2Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria “S. Maria della Misericordia” Udine, J. Lobo Antunes2, M. Santos2, J. Pimentel3; Udine, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Ricerche Mediche e Morfologiche, Università di 1CIPM-Portuguese Cancer Institute, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Neurosurgery Udine, Udine, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Sezione di Patologia Department - Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Neuropathology Generale, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy. Department - Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal. Histone acetylation is a major mechanism to regulate gene Background: High-grade gliomas are the most common primary brain transcription. This post-translational modification is modified in neoplasms and are generally lethal. Disruption of EGFR was defined cancer cells. In various tumor types levels of acetylation at several as critical for gliomagenesis and anti-EGFR therapies were believed histone residues are associated to clinical aggressiveness. By using to be an attractive therapeutic approach to the classical regimens, immunohistochemistry we show that acetylated levels of lysines at Cancer genetics 237 positions 9, 14 and 18 (K9-K14 and K18) of H3 histone are higher P06.208 in papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) than in corresponding normal Detection of circulating tumour cells in the peripheral blood tissues. Differently, in thyroid undifferentiated carcinomas (UC), only lymphocytes of healthy individuals higher levels of K9-K14 acetylation is observed. By using rat thyroid S. N. Kokkinou, A. Lindou; cell lines stably transfected with doxycyclin-inducible oncogenes, we Cytogenetic Unit, Sismanoglion General Hospital, Halandri, Greece. show that the oncoproteins RET-PTC, RAS and BRAF increases iNtRODUctiON: The detection of circulating tumour cells(CTC)in the levels of acetylated K9-K14 and K18. All these oncogenes activate peripheral blood (PB)of cancer patients(pts)has a potential prognostic MAP kinase (MAPK) pathway. The involvement of this signal pathway value.But the early detection of CTC in healthy persons offers more. in the modulation of the H3 acetylation was confirmed by studying the Aim OF tHE stUDY: Our study analyse the presence and frequency effects of its inhibition. Human thyroid cell line WRO, treated with the of CTC in the PB of phenotypically healthy individuals(HI). MAPK inhibitor PD98059, reduces acetylated levels of these lysine PAtiENts: During the 2005,450 pts were transferred to Cytogenetic residues. In the non-tumorigenic rat thyroid cell line FRTL-5, TSH unit for various reasons.Among them there were27pts with breast increases levels of acetylated K18. However, this hormone decreases adenomas,15 with HPV,50with Hp infection,and 60 with anemia/ levels of acetylated K9-K14. In conclusion, our data indicate that the leukopenia. MAPK signalling pathway and TSH control levels of several acetylated All had a cancerous family history. lysines in the context of the H3 histone. With routine blood control,mammography,PAPtest,gastric endoscopy,bone marrow aspiration/biopsy,they had no obvious P06.206 malignant disease. contribution of constitutional TP53 mutations to Wilms tumour mEtHODs: PB lymphocytes were cultured using standard techniques. H. L. Hanson, S. Hanks, A. Murray, R. Linger, J. Douglas, .. FACT ThirtyGTG banded metaphases were analyzed(ISCN2005).Used Collaboration, N. Rahman; FISH probes were LSI TOP2A/HER-2/CEP17,EGFR/7,IGH/MALT1, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom. AP12/MALT1,CSF1R,EGR1,D7S486(VYSIS),Hterc/C-MYC/SE 7TC, Wilms tumour is the commonest renal tumour occurring in childhood p53/ATM(KREATECH) and has been reported to occur at increased frequency in Li-Fraumeni Two hundred interface nuclei were counted for any single probe in all syndrome (LFS), a cancer predisposition syndrome predominantly pts once in a year. associated with sarcoma, breast, brain and adrenocortical cancers. REsULts: From the beginning were CTC ranged 4-10%.Till the end Constitutional TP53 mutations are identified in up to three-quarters of 2010,we confirmed 5malt gastric lymphomas,4 cervical cancers,9 of families with clinically defined classic LFS. Mutations are typically MDS,and 3 breast cancers. missense changes at hotspot codons within the DNA-binding domain. cONcLUsiON: In the absence of manifest clinical disease CTC can We sought to investigate the contribution of constitutional TP53 persist over a 3-yr period in the PB of HI. mutations to Wilms tumour outside the context of LFS. We undertook Early detection and quantification may identify people at risk of a mutation analysis of TP53 in 489 individuals affected with Wilms malignant disease.It needs careful evaluation and analysis of findings tumour recruited from Paediatric Oncology centres in the UK. WT1 so as to speed up the clinicians on early detection of a forthcoming and 11p15 defects had been excluded in all cases. malignant disease. Overall no clearly pathogenic mutations were identified. Two non- synonymous missense variants were identified; V197A and T256A, P06.209 neither is reported on the IARC TP53 database and both are predicted A multifactorial approach to assess the pathogenicity of to retain at least partial function of transactivation capacity in a yeast unclassified sequence variants in hereditary colorectal cancer assay. Although both are located in the DNA-binding domain they are susceptibility genes not at recognised hotspots and we have also observed non-hotspot R. Tricarico1, C. Mareni1,2, F. Crucianelli1,3, L. Staderini1, S. Benoni1,3, G. variants in this domain in a control series (6/1334, p=1.0). Furthermore Giammusso1, C. Di Gregorio4, S. Civitelli3, M. Genuardi1; V197A was present in an unaffected parent and we have observed 1Section of Medical Genetics, Dept. Clinical Pathophysiology, University T256A in a clinical LFS family in which the variant does not segregate of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Istituto Toscano Tumori, Firenze, Italy, 3Dept. with cancer. These data suggest that constitutional TP53 mutations do Surgery, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 4Section of Pathology, Hospital of not make an appreciable contribution to Wilms tumour susceptibility, Modena, Modena, Italy. outside the context of a family history of LFS. Mutations in the mismatch-repair genes MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and MUTYH are responsible for Lynch syndrome (LS) and MUTYH- P06.207 associated polyposis (MAP), respectively. About 30% of MisMatch investigation of expression level and nucleotide variation of the Repair (MMR) and 20% of MUTYH known gene variants are Variants BAX gene in iranian patients with transitional cell carcinoma of of Uncertain Significance (VUS). Discriminating true pathogenic from the bladder cancer benign variants is becoming a major issue in the understanding of the B. Golestani-Imani; genetic bases of inherited CRC and in the clinical setting. National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic We undertook a study aimed at defining the significance of 31 VUS Republic of Iran. (19 missense, 2 silent, 8 intronic, and 2 5’-UTR variants) identified This is a case-control study within investigation of the BAX gene’s in a series of 188 unrelated probands, referred for either MMR gene expression and its nucleotide change in 36 men with transitional cell sequencing (n = 76) or a suspicion of MAP (n = 112). 6 VUS have been carcinoma (TCC) and control group (24 healthy men). identified in several cases: p.L260R (n = 2) and c.1039-8T>C (n = 2) material and method: BAX gene expression in tumoral, adjacent in MLH1, p.K579K (n = 2), p.L556L (n = 3), c.2005+24T>A (n = 3) and tissues of bladder and peripheral blood lymphocytes of 32 patients c.1511-9A>T (n = 7) in MSH2. and bladder tissue of control group (24 men) is measured by real time We evaluated multiple parameters to establish pathogenic PCR. Nucleotide change in promoter region and 6-coding exons is significance, including: phenotype of the patients/families in whom the determined by sequencing in 36 patients and control group. VUS were identified, co-segregation with phenotype, family history, Results: BAX gene expression level in tumoral tissue of 62.5% of co-occurrence of established pathogenic mutations, evaluation patients was higher than adjacent tissue, in 12,5% it was lower and of molecular markers of MMR and MUTYH deficiency in tumour in 25% was equal. In blood cells of 20,83% of patients the level was samples, immunohistochemistry analysis for MMR protein expression, higher than adjacent tissue’s one. SNP polymorphism was observed frequency in control alleles, in silico prediction of potential effects of at 3 locus of this gene. the VUS on mRNA and on the encoded protein function. The VUS conclusion: Bax gene sequence both in peripheral blood lymphocytes were classified, when possible obtaining values of posterior probability and in tumoral cells of patients was homogenous so it is possible to as recommended by the IARC Working Group on Unclassified Genetic detect nucleotide change only by peripheral blood lymphocytes and Variants recommendations (Plon et al., Hum Mutat. 2008 29:1282-91). to receive information about this gene expression since the significant relation between heterozygosity in promoter region and expression decrease has been clarified in this study.Cancer genetics 238 P06.210 glucose for cell growth. Instead, tumour cells show unusual metabolic Identification of clonal variations present in tumor through pathways with significant re-programming. Cancer cells need a lot of clustering metabolic energy for their rapid proliferation, so a non-oxidative energy S. Karmakar, A. K. Ghosh, A. Basu; source is used such as glucose. This re-programmed activity underlies Indian Statistical Institute,Kolkata, Kolkata, West Bengal, India. events in the physiology of tumour cells and sometimes generates Identification of driver mutations in cancer cells is a challenging harmful products such as reactive oxygen species or oxygen free endeavor. We hypothesize that these driver mutations arise early in the radicals, and sometimes results in unequal storage of nucleotides original cancer cells providing it a selective advantage to form distinct for DNA synthesis that increases the mutation rate. Cancer cells clones. Next generation sequencing data provides an opportunity to have high rates of glycolysis and NADH-oxidation that generate a lot construct the allele frequency spectrum for all somatic mutations in a of ROS. Re-programming of genes involved in metabolic pathways particular tumor. Partitioning the allele frequency spectrum in distinct is a sign of physiological changes in cancer cells. Expression of clusters hence can provide an idea of the number of clones present in some genes is altered dramatically in different stages of tumour the tumor cell mass. We here work with the output of tumor sequence growth that directly control metabolic pathways. These changes are data as generated on the 454 platform (Roche Sequencing) and characteristic of tumour cells. They help tumour cells to become more apply clustering algorithm. Initial clusters were obtained using linkage aggressive. The genes involved in oncogenesis include GLUT1, method.To decide upon no. of cluster we compare AIC and BIC and G6PD, TKTL1 and PGI/AMF in the glycolytic pathway, ACLY, FAS and also Gap Statistic.Davis-Bouldin index,Dunn index and some external ACC1 in lipogenesis and RRM1, RRM2, and TYMS for synthesizing quality criterion like rand measure, Jaccard matrix were calculated to nucleotides. Over expression of these genes in many cancer cells was compare clustering algorithms. Obtaining initial cluster,we propose observed. Taken together, down-regulation of these genes can inhibit a methodology to find out the number of clones as well as clonal tumorigenesis and tumour progression. proportions using EM algorithm. Same algorithm was repeated for normal blood data and tumor data in order to draw something J06.02 conclusive. Also in each type of data somatic cell vs germline cell new- Genetic basis of Rhabdomyosarcoma position mutation vs insertion deletion has been compared.Comparison M. Barath, P. Taskar, A. Kanugovi; between number of initial clusters ,clones and their proportions gave Padmashree Dr.D.Y.Patil University Department of Biotechnology and rise to some biologically significant inferences. Bioinformatics, Navi Mumbai, India. Rhabdomyosarcoma is a cancer of cells which normally develop into P06.211*** skeletal muscles, most common in children under the age of 10. A Exome sequencing of seven melanomas provides new insights specific chromosomal abnormality, t(2;13)(q35;q14), was reported in in cancer causation and progression, and identifies additional many cases of advanced rhabdomyosarcoma patients by RT-PCR, driver gene candidates FISH and spectral karyotyping. The other frequent abnormalities S. I. Nikolaev1, C. Iseli2,3, A. Valsesia2,3,4, D. Rimoldi2, C. Gehrig1, K. observed were rearrangements of chromosome 1p and trisomy of Harshman5, D. Robyr1, M. Guipponi1, I. Xenarios3, T. Halazonetis1, V. C. chromosome 8 using conventional cytogenetic techniques such as G Jongeneel2,3, B. J. Stevenson2,3, S. E. Antonarakis1; banding. The translocation between chromosome 2 and chromosome 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Ludwig Institute for Cancer 13 causes the movements of the gene called PAX3 (or PAX7 if it’s Research, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, chromosome 1) right next to a gene called FKHR. Paired box (Pax) Switzerland, 4University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Center for genes are a family of tissue specific transcription factors containing a Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland. paired domain and usually a partial or complete homeodomain. The Melanoma is the most dangerous form of skin cancer since it PAX genes play an important role in causing cells to grow while an frequently metastasizes. Although a few prevalent mutations have embryo’s muscle tissue is being formed, but these genes usually shut been identified with the sequencing of a single melanoma cell line, the down once they’re no longer needed. The normal function of the FKHR full spectrum of somatic driver mutations remains unknown. We have gene is to activate other genes. Moving them together likely activates performed exome sequencing to detect somatic mutations in protein- the PAX genes, which may lead to the formation of tumor. Complete coding regions of seven melanoma cell lines (five unrelated and two trisomy 8 is a leading cause of miscarriage in women while infants with derived from the same patient sampled 12 years apart) and their trisomy 8 mosaicism are likely to survive but with retarded psychomotor corresponding germline DNA. The number of coding non-synonymous development and moderate to severe mental retardation. About 3% of somatic mutations in the cell lines ranged from 158 to 709. The most all tumors are found to be rhabdomyosarcomas, with them being rare abundant class of somatic mutations in all melanomas is C>T, a in teenagers and adults but constituting more than 50% of embryonic hallmark of exposure to UV light. In the two melanomas derived from tumors making them detectable by chromosomal analysis during pre- the same patient two thirds of the somatic mutations were shared natal diagnosis. and showed signature of UV light; remaining mutations might have originated during the transition to the invasive phase. Six melanomas J06.03 had mutations in the BRAF gene around amino acid 600 and one had Breast cancer is the most common cancer in young iranian a mutation (Q61R) in the NRAS gene. In two melanomas we identified women novel mutations in genes that are key regulators of the MAPK pathway. M. Akouchekian; These mutations were also observed in two individuals in a larger Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sample collection. Remarkably, all cases have germline damaging Breast cancer is one of the multifactorial diseases in which both genetic rare variants in genes involved in the HR and NER pathways. The and environmental factors are involved in the aetiology. Various factors contribution of these variants to predisposition to melanoma is under have been identified as playing an important role in stimulating this investigation. Such results will shed light on the natural history of cancer. During the last decades the increasing incidence of breast tumour development. cancer has made it the most prevalent cancer among young Iranian women. The mean age of onset of breast cancer in Iranian women J06.01 is about 10 years lower than that of their counterparts in developed Role of metabolic pathways Genes in tumorigenesis and tumor countries. progression A new study of the prevalence of breast cancer in immigrants from F. Hashemi gorji1, M. Karimipoor1, R. Mirfakhraie2, G. Hararanipoor1, S. F. Asian countries to Sweden suggested that there are some biological Baniahmad1; factors that caused early onset of breast cancer in immigrants, including 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Iranian women, compared to native women of Sweden. Epidemiological Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. aspects of Iranian breast cancer are uncertain and unfortunately no Maintaining normal body status is controlled by at least three important study has specifically addressed breast cancer risk factors in young metabolic cycles that closely regulate synthesis of amino acids and Iranian women up to now. The purpose of this study was to investigate nucleotides. Normal cells use different sources of energy including the influence of polymorphic variants defined by single nucleotide glycogen, fatty acids and amino acids, but the key energy source is polymorphisms (SNPs) in the displacement loop (D-loop) region of Cancer cytogenetics 239 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) on the risk of developing breast cancer in Medical Sciences for the breast cancer research. young Iranian women. We used PCR and RFLP analysis in this study. Based on our results we detected a significantly greater incidence of J06.06 the mtDNA polymorphisms T239C and A263G in early onset of breast chromosomal abnormalities in follicular thyroid carcinoma cancer patients and we think this may be associated with an increased A. V. Kanugovi, M. Barath, P. A. Taskar; risk of breast cancer in young Iranian women. Padmashree Dr.D.Y.Patil University-Dept. Of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Navi Mumbai-400614, Maharashtra, India. J06.04 Follicular carcinomas are the second most common thyroid cancers; Gene mutations (K-ras) in pancreatic cancer and chronic the mortality being decided by the degree of invasion. A left pancreatitis patients in north indian population hemithyroidectomy specimen was observed and it was reported that S. K. Polipalli1, S. A. Husain2, R. Gondal3, A. K. Agarwal4, P. Kar5; the section showed a nodule composed of cells arranged in diffuse 1Department of Medicine, Maulana Azad Medical College,University of Delhi, microfollicular pattern and macrofollicles. The cells were cuboidal India, New Delhi, India, 2Department of Biosciences,Jamia Millia Islamia, India, with moderate cytoplasm and oval uniform vesicular nuclei. Nuclear New Delhi, India, 3Department of Pathology,G.B.Pant Hospital,Maulana Azad crowding was observed and the neoplasm showed molecular focal Medical College, India, New Delhi, India, 4Department of GI surgery,G.B.Pant capsular invasion. Deletion of a part of chromosome 22q was reported. Hospital,Maulana Azad Medical College,University of Delhi, India, New Delhi, Recent studies have mapped tumor suppressor loci associated India, 5Department of Medicine,Maulana Azad Medical College,University of with meningioma and neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) to 22q. The Delhi, India, New Delhi, India. deleted region reported has been expected to consist of the region Background/Aim: To understand the genetic alterations of corresponding to that of the tumor suppressor genes associated with K-ras gene in North Indian patients with pancreatic diseases, NF2 and meningiomas. In this case, t(2;3)(q13;p25) translocation and and the possible correlation between the presence of mutation, the PAX8-PPAR gamma1 fusion was also expected to be present. histopathological findings and other risk factors are assessed by Rap1, a member of Ras family, has been implicated in the regulation standard questionnaire. methods: A total of 65 pancreatic cancer of oncogenic pathways in thyroid and it has been found to regulate the patients, 50 chronic pancreatitis and 50 controls were inducted in the ERK cascade and it is specifically required for the RET/PTC-induced study. K-ras mutations were examined using the PCR RFLP, followed activation of BRAF-MEK-ERK. Rap1 functions as a molecular switch single-strand confirmation polymorphism (SSCP) and automated which cycles between inactive GDP-bound and active GTP-bound DNA sequencing. Results: K-ras mutational analysis in surgically forms. Rap1GAP, a GTPase activating protein, functions as negative resected tissue samples of the pancreatic carcinoma was 72.30 %( regulator of Rap1 activity. It was also reported that loss of Rap1GAP 47/65) which was significantly higher than the chronic pancreatitis function may be implicated in promotion of invasion in follicular thyroid 6% (3/50) (P<0.01). It was also found that K-ras mutation rate was carcinoma as the tumor was found to be minimally invasive. The study progressively increased from normal duct at the tumor free resection of extent of loss of Rap1GAP activity can be used to determine the margin to pancreatic carcinoma. The mutation pattern of Kras codon degree of invasiveness of the tumor. 12 observed in pancreatic carcinoma was GGT_GGA and this was identical in chronic pancreatitis also. In this study male showed more prevalence of K-ras mutations than female. The age > 40 yrs showed statistically higher incidence of pancreatic cancer than chronic P07 cancer cytogenetics pancreatitis (P<0.05*). Smoking was found to be one of the risk factor for pancreatic cancer compared to chronic pancreatitis (p<0.05*). Other possible associated risk factors like alcohol consumption, diabetes, tea, coffee, Milk products and dietary habits were found to be P07.01 statistically non-significant. conclusion: This study shows evidence Rabl’s Orientation today: implications for Diagnostic Genetics, of K-ras gene mutation to be statistically higher in pancreatic cancer Epigenetics and Aetiology of chromosome Aberrations compared to chronic pancreatitis and this suggests that K-ras gene J. P. Chaudhuri1, J. U. Walther2; represent a critical early step in the genesis of pancreatic cancer. 1LMU - Kinderklinik, Phoenix / Munich, Germany, 2LMU - Kinderklinik, Munich, Germany. J06.05 Rabl’s orientation of chromosomes - all centromeres polarized to the Similarity of DNA methylation profile in tissues with benign centrosome, while the telomeres flutter at the opposite pole - is a time- breast disorders and lymph nodes metastasis in patients with tested phenomenon. Moreover a wealth of observations in plants and breast cancer animals indicate that the chromosomes are probably distributed in two N. A. Skryabin1, I. N. Lebedev1, N. V. Cherdyntseva2; groups, each representing one of the two parental genomes (Kikuchi S 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of et al., Genes Genet Syst 82(5): 369, 2007; Chaudhuri et al., Anticancer Oncology, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Res. 28:3573, 2008). Despite many works examining the individual gene methylation Here we present our observations predominantly made on blood and in various malignancies, the question about the specificity of the bone marrow cells which match to the scheme of maternal and paternal methylation profiles of the large groups of genes in the carcinogenesis chromosomes forming two different groups, both in interphase and dynamics remains open. This study was aimed to assess the DNA metaphase. Cytologic findings about the centrioles in relation to their methylation profile in tissues with benign breast disorders (BBD), ploidy status and this order of chromosomes in two groups suggest a breast cancer (BC) and lymph nodes metastasis (LNM). We analyzed more detailed appearance of Rabl´s orientation. 6 samples with BBD, 19 samples with BC, 5 samples with LNM, and The polar distribution of the centromeres of all chromosomes towards 6 control histologically normal epithelium samples from women with the centrsome results obviously from each chromosome of one of the BC using Illumina GoldenGate Cancer Panel I (Illumina, USA). Cluster two sets being tethered to one of the two centrioles in the centrosome analysis identified a group of samples with a high similarity of DNA of a diploid cell. On the basis of this phenomenon genomic karyotyping methylation profile. This group included all tissues with BBD and LNM may be feasible which determines the parental origin of acquired (except one) and one sample from each of the BC and control groups chromosome abnormalities, contributes to understanding the origin (p<0.001). The t-test revealed 261 CpG sites responsible for the of the aberration itself by tracing the right ontogenetic development combined clustering of these samples (FDR<0.01). All other samples and genealogic lineage and may facilitate studies on epigenetics with BC and morphologically normal epithelium were not clustered (Chaudhuri et al., Cellular Oncology 27:327, 2005). and showed a high heterogeneity of the DNA methylation profile. The relatively common DNA methylation profile in the samples with BBD and LNM may indicate a significant impact of epigenetic modifications into early origin of cell clones with BBD and LNM phenotypes in breast cancer. This study was performed using biological samples from the Integration Project of the Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Cancer cytogenetics 240 P07.02 P07.04 HR-cGH and array cGH analysis of acute myeloid leukemia BAcs On Beads™ technology, an alternative to cGH array for patients with normal or complex aberrant karyotype by tumor analysis G-banding. E. Rouleau1, D. Molina Gomes2, F. Bru2, S. Tozlu-Kara1, A. Briaux1, R. D. Koczkodaj1, A. A. Filip1, S. Zmorzynski1, B. Pieńkowska-Grela2, B. Lidereau1, F. Vialard3; Grygalewicz3, W. Tomczak4; 1INSTITUT CURIE - HOPITAL RENE HUGUENIN, ST CLOUD, France, 1Medical University of Lublin, Department of Cancer Genetics, Lublin, Poland, 2HOPITAL DE POISSY-ST GERMAIN, POISSY, France, 3Hopital de Poissy-St. 2Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cencer Centre and Institute of Oncology, Germain, Poissy, France. Warsaw, Poland, 3Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cencer Centre and Objective : BACs On Beads™ (BoBs) (Perkin Elmer, Turku, Finland) Institite of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Hematooncology and has been recently validated by our team showing its robustness Bone Marrow Transplantation Medical University, Lublin, Poland. and versatility for evaluating chromosome abnormalities in pre-natal Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most common type of leukemia diagnostic. In BoBs technology the Bacterial Artificial Chromosomes among the elderly. Lymphocytes of approximately 55% of AML are immobilized onto encoded beads that are used to assay gains and patients show various chromosomal aberrations, including structural losses. We reported here our preliminary study on 12 breast tumor DNA and numerical alterations. Such changes may not only correlate with from frozen tissue. Methods : We evaluate here the Karyolite, a new kit morphological and clinical data, but also serve as prognostic factors. which could screen all abnormalities with 3 to 4 beads per chromosome. In our study we analyzed bone marrow samples of 40 AML patients 3 BACs are encoded per beads to increase the specificity. 12 breast with normal (10 patients) or complex (30 patients) karyotype by tumors DNA were extracted with phenol chloroform from frozen conventional cytogenetics. We then assessed the genomic changes tissue. Karyolite BoBs was performed at Poissy hospital using a L200 by the means of high resolution comparative genomic hybridization Luminex and 44k Agilent’s CGH array at Institut Curie-René Huguenin. (HR-CGH) and microarray CGH method. Genomic losses were found Results: Out of those 12 tumors DNA, no false positive result in BoB more frequently than gains. The most frequent losses affected 7q was found according to CGH array analysis. At the opposite, and (30%), 3p (20%) and 5q (18%), and the most frequent genomic gains as suppose by the beads design, small chromosome abnormalities included 11q (30%) and 21q (20%). as segmental duplications or deletions were not retrieved. All large In patients with initially normal karyotypes it was possible to determine chromosome abnormalities (one to half of a chromosome arm) were single or multiple aberrations with aCGH. In this group losses were identified without any ambiguity. Conclusions : For tumor analysis, also more frequent than gains. Changes detected using array CGH BoBs technology could open very interesting outlets as it is cheaper, were verified by the analysis performed with FISH technique in all less time consuming (100ng of DNA), low material consumption, and cases. rapid throughput. Position in diagnosis is still under discussion as only The number of aberrations found by means of aCGH was significantly low number of locus are explored. However, this could be proposed as higher as compared with GTG results, which indicates that aCGH an alternative to CGH array with dedicated specific beads design to enables more sensitive karyotype examination and may be used in the breast cancer chromosome abnormality. search for new prognostic and predictive factors in AML. P07.05 P07.03 investigation of Human Papillomavirus and Biomarkers of Balanced translocations in myelodysplastic syndromes. Disease Progression and therapy in cervical neoplasia D. Costa1, C. Muñoz1, A. Carrió1, D. Berneaga1, C. Gómez1, A. Arias1, M. P. L. Cummins, H. Lambkin, F. Ryan; Belkaid2, E. Campo1, B. Nomdedeu3; D.I.T, Dublin, Ireland. 1Hematopathology Section. Hospital Clínic., Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, Cervical cancer represents the fifth highest female cancer mortality 2Hematology Service.Hospital Clínic., Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, rate and second most common occouring malignancy worldwide. 3Hematology Service. Hospital Clínic., Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain. While curable in early stages, the prognosis for advanced stage INTRODUCTION: Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of disease is poor and mortality rates remain high. We aim to evaluate clonal haematopoietic stem cell diseases characterized by cytopenia(s), and compare the expression of various proteins/genes as markers dysplasia in one or more of the major myeloid cell lines, ineffective of progression, from early stage neoplasia right through to invasive haematopoiesis, and an increased risk of developing acute myeloid carcinoma. Primary investigations will involve the use of a wide leukaemia (AML). Chromosomal abnormalities are detected in half of range of biomarkers including diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic patients with the novo MDS, with losses and gains of genetic material markers, as well as identifying human papillomavirus status/type in being the most frequent cytogenetic findings. Balanced translocations correlation with abnormal expression patterns. Samples will include are not frequently associated with MDS. Recurrent translocations biopsy material from normal, low grade, high grade and invasive associated with MDS are the t(3;21)(q26.2;q22.1),t(5;12)(q33;p13), neoplasia. t(3;12)(q26;p13),t(11;16) (q23;p13.3),t(6;9)(p23; q34). In particular we will be investigating the epithelial growth factor OBJECTIVE: To identify the frequency of balanced translocations in receptor (EGFR), as its over expression/activation has been identified patients diagnosed with MDS in our centre. as a common feature of multiple cancer types and contributes to PATIENTS AND METHODS: Four hundred and twenty cytogenetic epithelial tumour growth. This will be evaluated through the use of studies were performed on bone marrow samples from patients specific antibodies directed against various domains of the receptor, diagnosed with MDS. as well as family dimerization partner human epidermal growth factor RESULTS: Twenty seven balanced translocations were diagnosed in receptor 2 (HER2) and downstream effector proteins (AKT, p-AKT 23 (5,4%) patients, who were classified according to the WHO (2008) and mTOR); involved in up regulation of mRNA translation, cellular criteria: refractory anaemia (AR) (n=1), refractory cytopenia with growth, proliferation and survival (anti-apoptosis). In addition to IHC, multilineage dysplasia (n=7), AR with excess of blasts-1 (n=8), AR fluorescent insitu probes directed against the EGFR gene will allow with excess of blasts-2 (n=5), and chronic myelomonocytic leukaemia for identification of increased gene copy number which contributes (n=1). Seventeen of the 27 (63%) translocations were found as a part to accelerated tumour growth. Analysis of these biomarkers may of a complex karyotype (>=3 chromosomal abnormalities). Two new yield information of use in predicting whether specific tyrosine kinase translocations (2;3)(p21;q26.2) and t(13;17)(q21;p13), were found in inhibitor (TKI) chemotherapies directed against EGFR, could prove to two patients. All chromosomes were involved in the translocations, be an effective future therapy for invasive cervical cancer patients. with the exception of chromosomes 8, 18, 21 and Y. REMARKS: The infrequency of balanced translocations in MDS P07.06 makes their identification and reporting imperative for the recognition indication for cDKN2A mutation analysis in familial pancreatic of the recurrent ones. This increases the likelihood of identifying which cancer-families without melanomas genes are possibly involved in the pathogenesis of the neoplasia. F. Harinck1, I. Kluijt2, N. van der Stoep3, R. Oldenburg4, A. Wagner4, C. M. Aalfs5, R. H. Sijmons6, E. J. Kuipers1, P. Fockens7, T. A. M. van Os5, M. J. Bruno1; 1Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC, University Cancer cytogenetics 241 Medical, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Familial Cancer Clinic, The Netherlands cervical carcinoma and worse prognosis. Furthermore we conclude Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Center for Human and Clinical that Vysis Cervical FISH Probe Kit can be used as effective diagnostic Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Department procedure to identity the patients carrying highly risking HPV infection of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, and chromosomal aberrations associated with this malignancy. Netherlands, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Supported by IGA NT11089-4/2010 University of, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 7Department P07.08 of gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical Center,, Amsterdam, Oligonucleotide microarrays uncover new aberrations in Netherlands. Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia not previously identified by Background: Carriers of a CDKN2A-gene mutation run a high risk of standard cytogenetic methods developing melanomas. In addition, they have an additional increased C. D. Kashork1, K. A. Kolquist1,2, R. Schultz1, M. L. Slovak1,3, V. Cawich1, C. risk of developing pancreatic cancer (PC). Familial pancreatic cancer Valentin1, S. Minier1, N. Neill1, S. Byerly1, A. Morton1, B. C. Ballif1, L. G. Shaffer1; (FPC) patients with a personal or family history of melanomas are 1Signature Genomics, Spokane, WA, United States, 2Sacred Heart Medical therefore offered CDKN2A-mutation analysis. On the other hand, Center, Spokane, WA, United States, 3Current affiliation: Quest Diagnostics CDKN2A testing is not generally recommended in the literature in FPC Nichols Institute, Chantilly, VA, United States. families without a history of melanomas. Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the most commonly Methods: FPC families were defined as families with clustering of PC diagnosed leukemia in the western world and is highly variable, and not meeting diagnostic criteria of specific other familial cancer with life expectancies ranging from months to decades. Traditional syndromes. Medical details of cancer diagnoses were retrieved and cytogenetic studies have provided genetic insight into the disease, reviewed. Blood samples were obtained for DNA isolation from PC- leading to prognostic significance and treatment for individual patients. patients or first degree relatives (FDR) and analyzed for mutations in Microarray technology has made significant impact in the assessment CDKN2A. of constitutional genetic disorders, and this same application has the Results: Among 40 FPC families, DNA analyses were carried out capacity to enrich the understanding of hematologic malignancies. in 28 families (70%), leading to identification of CDKN2A-mutations In this study we show the utility of an oligonucleotide array designed in six families (21.4%) None of the CDKN2A families fulfilled the for the detection of copy gains and losses found in leukemia and diagnostic criteria of familial atypical multiple mole melanoma lymphoma. We performed microarray assessment of 35 samples with (FAMMM) syndrome and in three CDKN2A families no melanomas a working diagnosis of CLL. Ten had previous chromosome analyses. and/or dysplastic nevi were observed. In these latter three families The average number of abnormalities revealed by banding was 4, two different CDKN2A-mutations were found; in two families the Dutch whereas the average number of abnormalities revealed by microarray founder mutation p16-Leiden (c.225_243del, p.Ala76fs) and in the analysis was 6.5. Additional information not seen by karyotype and third family the c.19_23dup, p.Ser8fs-mutation. After disclosure of the fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was uncovered in 31% of CDKN2A-mutation in one of the families, a curable melanoma was cases. Novel findings were identified, including losses and gains of diagnosed at subsequent dermatological surveillance in a 17-year old susceptibility loci on 11q24, 8p21, 4p16p15 and 5q35. Our results female family member. support microarray analysis as a diagnostic tool for identifying Conclusion: CDKN2A-mutation analysis should be included in genetic cytogenetic abnormalities that are associated with CLL. Further use of testing in FPC families, even in the absence of reported melanomas. microarrays in CLL will likely identify recurrent novel aberrations, which This strategy will enhance the recognition of individuals at risk for PC may prove to be new treatment targets. and facilitate the early detection of melanomas. P07.09 P07.07 molecular cytogenetic study of derivative chromosome 9 the initial experiences with detection of htERc and mYcc deletion in 336 tunisian chronic myeloid leukemia patients genes in HPV positive cells in cervical carcinoma and cervical A. Bennour1, I. Ouahchi1, Y. Ben Youssef2, M. Zaier2, A. Laatiri3, I. Harrabi4, B. intraepithelial dysplasia using Vysis cervical FisH Probe Kit Meddeb5, M. Elloumi6, A. Khelif2, A. Saad1, H. Sennana1; P. Kuglik1, V. Vranova1, L. Moukova2, M. Kissova1, I. Slamova3, H. Filkova3; 1Cytegenetics Department, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department 1Faculty of Science, Institute of Experimental Biology, Brno, Czech Republic, of Hematology, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of 2Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Hematology, CHU Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir, Tunisia, 4Department of Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, Brno, Czech Republic. 5Department of Hematology, CHU Aziza Othmana, Tunis, Tunisia, 6Department It is known that this cervical cancer develops from precancerous of Hematology, CHU Hedi Chaker, Sfax, Tunisia. intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) which are characterized by series The Philadelphia chromosome (Ph), produced by the t(9;22) of genetic abnormalities. The progression of cervical intraepithelial (q34;q11.2) is the cytogenetic hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia dysplasia to cervical carcinoma has been associated especially with (CML). Deletions on derivative chromosome 9 (der (9)) may occur with the genomic integration of oncogenic human papilloma virus (HPV) t(9; 22) and could influence the disease progression. and gain of the human telomerase genes hTERC (3q26) and c-MYC The aims of this study are to investigate the frequency of derivative der (8q24). (9) deletion in Tunisian patients with CML, and to assess the correlation Recently, Vysis Cervical FISH Probe Kit was designed to identified between this deletion and the cytogenetic response for patients HPV infected cells and determine copy number of the hTERC a treated with hydroxyurea (HU) or imatinib (IM). Karyotype analysis of c-MYC genes via fluorescence in situ hybridization in cervical cytology 336 patients with CML was performed with R-banding. Fluorescence specimens. in situ hybridization was carried using home brew probes 17L7 and In our work, we have studied genetic aberrations on a series 248J22 for detecting respectively adjacent 5’ABL and 3’BCR deletions of cytological specimens obtained from patients of Department on der(9). Gynaecological Oncology of Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute Brno Cytogenetic study demonstrated typical t(9;22)(q34;q11) translocation with cervical carcinoma or proven precarcinoma (CIN2/CIN3). The in 89,6% and variant translocation in 10,4% of patients. Interphase- patiens were divided into two groups. FISH studies showed deletion of der(9) in 59 (17,6%) of the 336 Using classical I-FISH gain of hTERC gene was found in 8 (42 %) patients, 23 (39%) of them had variant rearrangements. There are of 19 patiens with cervical carcinoma, all woman with hTERC gain 19 patients with solely 5’ABL deletion and 40 with concomitant 5’ABL were HPV positive and 63 % of them showed positive lymphovascular and 3’BCR deletions. Cytogenetic response was evaluated during 18 invasion. months with HU or IM therapy. In 15 patiens we tested gain of hTERC and MYCC genes in HPV Our results demonstrate that: (a) all patients with 3′BCR deletion have positive cells using new Vysis Cervical FISH Probe Kit and relationships 5′ABL deletion, (b) 5′ABL and 3′BCR deletions arise simultaneously between HPV infection, chromosomal alterations and diagnosis were with Philadelphia chromosome formation, (c) deletions on der(9) analysed. chromosome were frequently encountered in older patients and in Our work confirmed that gain of hTERC is significantly associated with patients presenting variant rearrangements, (d) both 5’ABL and 3’BCR Cancer cytogenetics 242 deletions were associated with cytogenetic response failure in patients P07.12 treated with HU , although patients treated with IM and carrying Fluorescence in situ Hybridization on peripheral blood for BcR/ deletions on der(9) presented better cytogenetic response. ABL fusion gene detection is a robust alternative method for evaluation of minimal residual disease in cmL. P07.10 C. Jardan, D. Jardan, R. Talmaci, D. Coriu, A. Colita; clonal evolution in chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia UMF “Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. C. Lopez1, D. Costa1, C. Gomez1, A. Arias1, N. Villamor1, D. Colomer1, M. CML is the first malignancy for which a specific chromosomal Rozman1, T. Baumann2, E. Montserrat2, E. Campo1, A. Carrio1; abnormality was described - Philadelphia chromosome. Monitoring 1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, of minimal residual disease in CML by detection of Philadelphia 2Hematology Unit. Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. chromosome is an important part of response evaluation of patients in iNtRODUctiON Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is characterised by treatment with tirozinkinase inhibitors, because it allows early detection variable clinical course. The most frequent chromosomal abnormalities of suboptimal response or resistance to treatment. are trisomy 12, deletion of 13q14.3, 11q22.3 and 17p13; each of these Materials and Methods: We analyzed 25 bone marrow specimens is a relevant prognostic factor. These abnormalities may appear at using interphase FISH and compared the results with those of diagnosis or during follow-up. conventional cytogenetics and with interphase FISH on peripheral- The goal of this study is to determine the frequency of clonal evolution blood specimens. in CLL patients. Clonal evolution (CE) is defined as newly acquired Results: in comparison to conventional cytogenetics - interphasic FISH aberration during the disease course. on peripheral blood did not generated any discrepancies in percent of mAtERiAL AND mEtHODs One hundred and twenty-five patients BCR/ABL positive nuclei. with CLL were analysed by conventional and/or molecular cytogenetics Conclusion: Fluorenscent in situ hybridisation is a molecular (FISH) at diagnosis and during follow-up. Two samples from the same cytogenetics technique which allows minimal residual disease patient were studied after a minimum follow-up time of 6 months after monitoring on interphase nuclei. MRD monitoring on peripheral blood the first genetic study. The median time between diagnosis and follow- has the advantage of generating results in short time (even in 24h) up was 38 months (range 6-116). and is less invasive than bone marrow biopsy. In comparison with REsULts 30% of the patients (21/71) showed CE using conventional bone marrow culture it has the advantage of being a direct method cytogenetics. 57% of the patients with normal karyotype at diagnosis which abolish artifacts introduced by the culture. On the over side - it showed chromosomal abnormalities during follow-up. Twenty-three of has disadvantage of being able to identify only specific chromosomal 53 patients (43%) had CE by FISH; in 17 of them, FISH abnormalities malformations - Philadelphia chromosome in this case, all other were observed at diagnosis and new chromosomal aberrations were important aberrations in disease progression being omitted. For the acquired during disease course. use of this method in MRD there is a need for large standardization cONcLUsiON Clonal evolution is a significant event in CLL patients. studies, present clinical standard being conventional cytogenetics. In The most frequent abnormality which appeared during disease course this study we analyzed FISH techniques as a rapid and uninvasive was del(13q). The median time to follow-up for CE was 10 months. alternative method for MRD monitoring in CML patents undergoing Conventional and molecular cytogenetics were necessary to detect tirozine-kinase inhibitor treatment. clonal evolution in CLL patients. We believe that CE could be a new prognostic factor and an indicator of change in clinical course of the P07.13 disease. Genome-wide analysis of recurrent copy number abnormalities and copy neutral-loss of heterozygosity in colorectal cancer P07.11 V. Barresi1, C. Capizzi1, N. Musso1, G. Privitera2, T. Luca2, S. Castorina1, D. F. Emergence of karyotypically unrelated clone during complete Condorelli1; remission of acute monocytic leukemia 1University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 2Fondazione GB Morgagni, Catania, Italy. I. Petkovic1, J. Konja2, R. Lasan3, G. Petkovic4, M. Aničić2; Two forms of genetic instability have been observed in colorectal cancer 1Clinical Hospital “Sestre molosrdnice”, Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Zagreb, (CRC): chromosomal instability, that is present in 85% cases and is Croatia, 2KBC Rebro, Zagreb, Croatia, 3KBC Rebro, Zagreb, Croatia, characterized by structural and numerical chromosomal abnormalities 4Children’s Hospital Srebrnjak, Zagreb, Croatia. (aneuploidy); and microsatellite instability (MSI), characterized AML is a heterogeneous group of disease. Besides morphological and by a deficiency of the mismatch repair system and associated to a cytogenetic heterogeneity, of interest are different types of remissions. normal or quasi-normal karyotype. Recent advances in molecular One form of remission is characterized by repopulation of the marrow cytogenetics techniques are likely to introduce a revolution in the field. by normal cells, and the other by clonal cell proliferation. The data on In the present study we analysed a series of 57 CRC samples and their clonal remission are limited, and some 40 cases have been reported related normal mucosae by high resolution genomic arrays (Affymetrix so far. The frequency of clonal remission is variable and range from 1% SNP 6.0 arrays) and set up a series of bioinformatics tools that allow to 12% of acute leukemia. Nature, mechanisms of origin and clinical the generation of a rapid report on broad (>25% of a chromosomal significance of clonal cell proliferation at remission are not elucidated arm) and small somatic copy number abnormalities (CNAs), somatic yet. We present the results of clinical and cytogenetic investigation in homozygous deletions, focal high level amplifications, and regions of a girl with AML and unrelated clonal chromosome aberration during loss of heterozygosity (LOH). MSI tumors represented 14% of our CRC remission and literature review of published data on clonal remission series and showed a median values of somatic broad CNAs of 3 (range in patient with acute leukemia. Our patient is 3½-old-girl referred to the 1-6), while microsatellite stable (MSS) tumors showed a median value hospital with hepatospenomegaly, hematomas and polymicroadenia. of 12 (range 0-24). Therefore all MSI tumors were below a threshold of Cytomorphologic analysis revealed AML-M5A. Chromosome study 6 CNAs, while 18% of MSS were below this threshold, representing a at diagnosis showed abnormal clone with 48,XX,+21,+mar and group of microsatellite and chromosomal stable tumors. No correlation at remission following induction therapy a normal karyotype was was observed between the number of tumor associated CNAs and the observed. Eleven months after diagnosis, while the patient was in number of somatic copy neutral-LOH regions, suggesting that different first complete remission an unrelated abnormal clone with t(1;18) was mechanisms underlie such chromosomal abnormalities. Analysis of observed. This report highlights the importance of cytogenetic study recurrent CNAs identified somatic homozygous deletions that cannot in patients follow up and detection of unrelated clonal rearrangement be ascribed to regions of inherent fragility. during remission of acute leukemia. P07.14 Genomic imbalances identified by array-CGH in endometrial cancers F. Schneider1,2, E. raimond1,3, E. Landais1,2, J. Andrieux4, P. Birembaut5,6, D. Gaillard1,2, O. Graesslin1,3, M. Doco-Fenzy1,2; 1CHU-REIMS, REIMS, France, 2Service de Génétique CHU-REIMS, Reims, France, 3service de gynécologie, Reims, France, 4Institut de Génétique Cancer cytogenetics 243 Médicale, Hopital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, LILLE, France, 5Laboratoire Pol of different chromosomes in HCC. The study included 45 patients Bouin, CHU-REIMS, REIMS, France, 6INSERM UMR-903, Reims, France. with HCC, who have been diagnosed and treated at National Cancer Background: Endometrial cancer is the third most common Institute, Cairo University, Egypt. female malignancy in Europe. While most patients with early stage Interphase cytogenetics by fluorescence in situ hybridization with the disease have a good prognosis, there are women who will recur as use of a panel of centromere-associated DNA probes for chromosomes endometrial carcinoma is the third cause of gynecologic cancer death. 1, 4, 8, 9, 13, 17, 20 and Y were performed on paraffin-embedded HCC But it is sometimes difficult to determine the clinical prognosis with specimens. classical histo-pathological factors. Previous studies on endometrioid The most common chromosomal aberrations detected were gain of adenocarcinomas using Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) chromosomes 8 in 12 cases (34.28%), 17 in 6 cases (17.14%). Loss showed large chromosomal alterations with gain in 1q, 19p, 19q, 8q, of chromosome Y was detected in 6 of male cases (30%). Monosomy 10q and 10p; and losses in 4q, 16q and 18q. 4 was also detected in 5 cases (14.28%). Negative correlation could material and method: The aim of this study was to investigate be detected only between chromosome 4 and 8. (r = -0.381, P < chromosomal alterations by array-CGH to identify discrepancies in two 0.05). Correlations between gain or loss of chromosomes and the different groups of tumors and hyperplasia, in relation to grade, stage different clinicopathologic parameters in the patients investigated, and clinical data. Tissue specimens were obtained from 37 patients (31 indicated negative correlation between: chromosome Y and age and neoplasms and 6 hyperplasia) and array-CGH analysis was performed chromosome 1 and cirrhosis. using genomic DNAs extracted from frozen specimens. Gains and losses of DNA found in this study probably involve Results: Copy number variations (CNV) were detected in 24 cases of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes that play a role in the puzzle neoplasm (77 %) but not in hyperplasia. On average, four CNV by case of hepatocarcinogenesis. were observed with a 1:1 ratio between amplification and deletion. The most frequent alterations were trisomy for chromosomes 7 and 8, P07.17 gains for segment 1q and losses in regions 9p, 11p,16q and 17p. We ERBB2 (Her-2/neu) Amplification Status Determination by Copy found two amplifications and two deletions for 10q and 11q regions. Number Variation Analysis conclusion: These preliminary data need to be confirmed by further A. Garuti1, R. Petraroli2, C. Zanchi2, I. Rocco1, G. Cirmena1, C. Palermo1, G. investigations in order to establish new significant prognostic factors Zoppoli1, L. Egry2, S. Blakely2, A. Ballestrero1, F. Patrone1; and the specific chromosomal regions affected by copy number 1Dipartimento di Medicina Interna - Università degli Studi, Genova, Italy, 2Life changes will be interesting to investigate in further genetic studies. Technologies Corporation, Foster City, CA, United States. Gene copy number variations by DNA amplification are a genetic P07.15 alteration that can lead to deregulation of gene expression, and Genomic instability at common fragile site FRA14B in cancer eventually contribute to neoplastic transformation. Amplification of D. Zheglo, L. Brueckner, A. Blumrich, M. Schwab, L. Savelyeva; the ERBB2 gene abnormality is known to influence breast cancer DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. (BC) prognosis and response to therapies. Currently, Her-2/Neu Common fragile sites (cFS) are chromosomal regions prone to protein product expression and/or gene amplification are usually breakage under conditions partially inhibiting DNA synthesis. detected by Immunostaining or by molecular techniques such as Approximately 90 cFSs have been cytogenetically identified, but few of fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Here, we determined Her- these have been completely characterized. Most characterized cFSs 2/Neu amplification status on 45 clinical research BC samples using coincide with extremely large genes and hotspots of chromosomal TaqMan® Copy Number Assays, and previously characterized with rearrangements in cancer. We localized an aphidicolin-inducible immunostaining and FISH methods. A side-by-side testing on the cFS, FRA14B, to an 800kb region of the 14q23 chromosome band Applied Biosystems® 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System and the using six-color FISH mapping with BAC probes on metaphase Applied Biosystems® 7500 Fast Dx Real-Time PCR Instrument was chromosomes of aphidicolin-treated lymphocytes. FRA14B overlaps performed to evaluate data reproducibility between the two systems. the large gene encoding gephyrin (GPHN, 670kb), a protein involved Our results demonstrate that the results obtained with the TaqMan® in synapse development and molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis. To Copy Number Assays were highly concordant with those previously assess the possible role of FRA14B in generating cancer-associated reported by FISH, on both the Applied Biosystems® 7900HT Fast rearrangements, we performed oligonucleotide array CGH on 150 cell Real-Time PCR System and the Applied Biosystems® 7500 Fast Dx lines and primary tumors. We detected multiple breakpoints within Real-Time PCR Instrument. Therefore, we demonstrate that the Copy this cFS in 13 cancer genomes of melanoma and glioma cell lines Number Real Time method can be an easy, robust, and economically and neuroblastoma, colon cancer and breast cancer cell lines and advantageous method for Her-2/Neu amplification status evaluation. primary tumors. The breakpoints clustered at the first intron of GPHN We conclude that the Applied Biosystems® 7500 Fast Real-Time Dx and extra-genic regions, but not within exons. Subsequent validation Instrument is an ideal instrument for clinical laboratories that require of CGH results using FISH revealed at least two apparently normal not only technically reliable and economically feasible methods, but copies of GPHN per genome in the majority of tumors and cell lines also routinely controlled instruments. TaqMan® Copy Number Assays bearing rearrangements. All deletions were limited to introns or located and 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System are for research use only, within additional ectopic copies of GPHN. GPHN transcripts were and not intended for any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic detectable by RT-PCR in all the cell lines. In summary, activation of use newly-mapped cFS, FRA14B, can cause the instability of GPHN, the role of which in cancer development remains to be investigated. P07.18 the assessment of ErbB2 gene over expression in respectable P07.16 gastric cancer and its Relationship with histopathology subtype, investigation of chromosomal aberrations in hepatocellular grading and stage of disease carcinoma patients as detected by fluorescence in situ M. Y. A. S. Soltani Delgosha1,2,3; hybridization 1Reza Oncology Center, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Omid hospital, M. S. Aly1,2, M. A. Alabbood1; Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Emam Reza Hospital, Mashhad, Islamic 1Faculty of Science, Jazan University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia, 2Faculty of Science, Republic of Iran. Beni Suef University, Beni Suef, Egypt. Background: ErbB2 gene, also called Her2, is located in chromosome Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a very common and highly malignant 17 (17q12-q21) and encodes a 185-kd transmembrane tyrosine kinase tumor, associated mainly with chronic viral hepatitis, cirrhosis of any receptor (p185), which is a member of the epidermal growth factor cause, aflatoxin exposure and ethanol consumption. Cytogenetic receptor family. Amplification of the ErbB2 gene and overexpression analysis on HCC has been limited because of poor hepatocyte growth of the ErbB2 protein have been observed in various solid tumors, in vitro. Conventional cytogenetic studies have demonstrated frequent including breast and gastric carcinomas. We aimed to evaluate the abnormalities of specific chromosomes in HCC. Molecular cytogenetic ErbB2 content in respectable gastric cancer in this country and its approaches have been applied only rarely in the characterization of relationship with clinicopathologic parameters of tumors. HCC. The main aim of this study was to evaluate genetic aberrations methods: This study was a prospective analysis of 100 specimens Cancer cytogenetics 244 from 100 patients with respectable gastric carcinoma which were Taking together, hyperdiploidy (defined in MM as extra copy of admitted in three hospitals in this country. Indirect immunostaining chromosomes 5, 9, or 15 together in karyotype) was found in 48% was used to evaluate the expression of this receptor in formalin-fixed (31/65 patients). Most common chromosomal changes involved paraffin-embedded tissue sample. trisomies of chromosomes 3,5,7,9,11,15,19,21 (incidence >50%). Result: ErbB2 amplification was present in 26(26%) of 100 gastric Gain(1q) was observed in 40% of H-MM cases (12/31). Most common carcinoma. ErbB2 was more common in the intestinal type of gastric loss was 13,6 MBp minimal deleted region (MDR) in 8pter-8p22 (25%, cancer (33%) than in the diffuse (5%) or the mixed type (0%) (p=0.001), 8/31), -13 (23%, 7/31) and del(16q) (20%, 6/30). In one case, we also ErbB2 was more common in well-differentiated gastric cancer observed biallelic deletion of TRAF3 involved in MM pathology through than other grade (p=0.001), but it was not associated with gender, age deregulation of NF-kappaB pathway and amplification of SALL1, at diagnosis or clinical stage. transcriptional repressor supposed to be a part HDAC complex. conclusion: ErbB2 amplification is common in intestinal type and well- Array-CGH provide us powerful tool for characterization of another differentiated gastric carcinoma but there was no correlation between genomic changes important for diagnosis and classification of the ErbB2 expression and tumor stage. The relatively high percentage development of this hematological malignancy. of ErbB2 expression positive tumors will provide a useful target for Supported by grants and projects MSM 0021622434; MSM0021622415, immunotherapy of these cancers. IGA NS10207-3/2009; 10406-3 and LC 06027. P07.19 P07.21 cytogenetic characterization of pediatric mixed phenotype acute case report of a rare karyotype in a patient with multiple leukemia with complex karyotype myeloma E. Tassano, E. Tavella, C. Micalizzi, C. Cuoco, C. Panarello, C. Morerio; M. Souto1, P. Botelho1, M. Cunha2, M. Guerra2, O. Osvaldo1, E. Ribeiro1, R. Laboratorio di Citogenetica Ematoncologica, IRCCS Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, Pinto Leite1; Italy. 1Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Mixed phenotype acute leukemias (MPALs), defined by the 2008 WHO Real, Portugal, 2Serviço de Hematologia, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e classification, are rare leukemias in which blasts express antigens Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. of both lymphoid and myeloid lineages. Furthermore MPALs are Multiple myeloma (MM) is a malignancy disorder characterized by the partitioned according to the two cytogenetic abnormalities reported proliferation of a single clone of plasma cells (PC) derived from B cells quite frequently in the affected patients, namely rearrangements in the bone marrow. In this tumors there is a high genetic instability leading to BCR-ABL1 fusion and translocations involving 11q23 and resulting in a wide variety of genetic and chromosomal abnormalities. MLL gene. Karyotype abnormalities have been documented in about Cytogenetics abnormalities are considered an important prognostic 80-90% of MPAL pediatric patients, with no uniquely associated specific indicator and are observed in 30-50% of the cases. The most frequent chromosomal aberration. Here we report on a case of childhood MPAL are monosomy or deletions of chromosome 13, translocations involving showing a complex karyotype, characterized by M-FISH and array- the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus (IGH) and ploidy status. CGH. The patient was a 5-year-old girl diagnosed with MPAL (T/ The authors present the results of a cytogenetic study in a seventy myeloid) based on the expression of T-lymphoid cyCD3 and myeloid three years old male patient with MM. MPO antigens. Cytogenetic analysis by Q-banding technique on Bone marrow cell culture and GTL banding was done according to peripheral blood and bone marrow blasts revealed a hypodiploid protocols in the laboratory. Cytogenetic analysis was performed karyotype with structural changes involving chromosomes 1, 9, 12, 13, following the standard cytogenetic guidelines. FISH painel (13q-, 17p-, 16. To characterize the rearranged chromosomes, M-FISH analysis t(4;14), t(11;14)) was applied. was performed. Further array-CGH using 5500 BAC clones (565 Kb The karyotype was: 47, XY, +8, t(6;19)(p21.3:p13.3), t(11;14)(q13;q32) median resolution) showed partial losses of 1p, 9, 13q, 16q. The gain [16] / 46, XY [3]. FISH was positive to t(11;14) (88%). of chromosome 12p was also evident. Overall, based on the combined In this patient we found a characteristic anomaly in MM, confirmed results of Q-banded mitoses, M-FISH and array-CGH, it was possible by FISH, a trisomy 8 that is a rare event in lymphoid neoplasia and a to define the karyotype as: 45,XX,der(1)t(1;12)(p36.12;p13.2) t(1;12) translocation not described in the literature. FISH is a sensitive method (q12;p13.2),-9,der(12)t(1;12)(q12;p13.2)t(12;13)(q24;q14.3), der(13) to investigate cytogenetics of MM but it should be performed always t(12;13)(q24;q14.2), der(16)t(9;16)(q31.1;q21). The combination of with conventional cytogenetics analysis. They are important to predict conventional cytogenetic techniques with M-FISH and array-CGH treatment responses and prognosis.rte superior do formulário has allowed a careful analysis of complex chromosome alterations. The authors compare the cytogenetic findings and the patient’s clinical The analysis of a larger series of MPAL patients could help to identify status with those described in the literature. diagnostic and/or prognostic markers of this rare type of leukemia. P07.22 P07.20 translocation (x;20)(q13;q13.3) in a patient with Genomic screening of hyperdiploid subgroup of multiple myeloproliferative disorder: case report and review of the myeloma patients using oligo-based arraycGH technique literature J. Smetana1,2, R. Zaoralová1,2, P. Kuglík2, H. Grešliková1,2, R. Kupská1, P. R. MEDDEB1, P. Frère2, G. Vanstraelen3, M. Jamar1, C. Herens1, V. Bours1; Němec1,2, A. Mikulášová1,2, K. Beránková2, R. Hájek1,3; 1Human Genetic center, CHU, University of Liège, LIEGE, Belgium, 2hemato- 1Babak Research Institute, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Of Science, oncologie , centre hospitalier Pelzer-la tourelle, verviers, Belgium, 3Hémato- Masaryk University Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Internal oncologie, Centre Hospitalier Peltzer-La Tourelle, verviers, Belgium. Medicine, Haemato-Oncology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. Rearrangements involving the X chromosome are rare in hematological Multiple myeloma (MM) is the second most common hematological malignancies. Only a few recurrent translocations involving the X malignancy. It is and different autosomes have been associated with hematological characterized by malignant transformation of clonal proliferation of malignancies. B-lymphocytes and their In contrast, structural alterations of the long arm of chromosome 20 are accumulation in bone marrow There are two major genetic subclasses non-random recurring abnormalities in patients with myelodysplastic of MM: a hypediploid variant associated with the incidence of syndromes (MDS), myeloproliferative disorder (MPD) and acute chromosome number changes, mainly trisomies of chromosomes myeloid leukemia (AML). This suggests the loss of function of tumor 3,5,7,9,11,15,19 and 21, and a non-hyperdiploid variant associated suppressor genes at this location. with high incidence IgH locus translocations. and thus with poor In this study, we describe an additional case of t(X;20)(q13;q13) in a disease prognosis. myeloproliferative disorder (MPD). To the our knowledge, this is the fith Main aim of this study was to perform genomic screening of hyperdiploid case of MPD associated with this rearrangement. subgroup of MM patients using oligo-arrayCGH technique focusing on The patient was an 75-year-old female presenting with a thrombocytosis finding new prognostic markers for MM diagnosis. at 1.600.000/mm³. The bone marrow evaluation suspected a MPD of We analyzed 67 bone marrow samples. DNA was obtained from type essential thrombocytemia. Cytogenetic studies performed on CD138+ cells separated by MACS or FACS techniques. bone marrows cells demonstrated a homogeneous karyotype with a Cancer cytogenetics 245 t(X; 20) (q13.q13.3) as the sole abnormality. CDKN2A/9p21 deletion and increased amplifications of MDM2/12q15 In total, the translocation t(X;20) has been reported in nine previous locus on a giant chromosome (pat2). No USP6 rearrangement was cases : 4 MPD, 3 MDS and 2 AML patients. It is invariably found in detected in both cases. old women (mean age of 69 years), which suggests a probable The detection of complex genomic alterations, specially tumor influence of epigenetic factors. We will discuss the possible implication suppressor loci deletions or MDM2 amplification gave strong arguments of the inactive X in the translocation, which may exercise a position in favor of a malignancy, confirmed on the surgical specimen. Genomic effect on 20q. The silencing of 20 q genes may be involved in the data, even in a very few proportion of cells, were useful to reach finally clinical presentation of myeloid disorders especially as deletions 20q the diagnosis of OS on limited specimens where no clear criteria were represent one of the most frequent chromosomal abnormalities seen present. in myeloid disorders. Our case further confirms the recurrent character of the t(X;20)(q13;q13) in myeloid malignancies. P07.26 A case of chronic myelogenous Leukaemia Ph+ and splenic P07.23 marginal Zone-B cell Lymphoma with t(6;14)(p21;q32) monitoring DNA damage in tunisian hospital staff using R. C. Narvaiza-Martínez, A. Bengoa-Alonso, B. Hernández-Charro, M. A. cytokinesis block micronucleus method and chromosomal Pérez-Juana-Del-Casal, A. Valiente-Martín, M. A. Ramos-Arroyo; aberration test Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. S. BOURAOUI1, A. DRIRA2, A. BRAHEM2, N. MRIZEK2, H. BEN KHELIFA1, N. Chromosomal translocation t(6;14)(p21.1;q32.3) appears mainly in BOUALI1, R. BERGUIGA1, I. BEN ABDALLAH1, S. BRAHEM1, A. BENNOUR1, Multiple Myeloma and Plasma Cell Leukaemia, but it has also been H. ELGHEZAL1, F. TABKA2, A. SAAD1; reported in Diffuse Large B-Cell Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma and Marginal 1Department of Cytogenetic and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached Zone B-Cell Lymphoma. University Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of Occupational We report a case of a 65-year-old patient who was diagnosed with and Environmental medicine, Farhat Hached University Teaching Hospital, possible Chronic Myelogenous Leukaemia, which was confirmed by Sousse, Tunisia. cytogenetic and molecular studies: 46,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11)[7], ratio introduction: Hospital staff is exposed to many compounds which are bcr-abl/abl p210 (84%). After being treated with Gleevec®, the study suspected to be genotoxic and carcinogenic. Micronucleus test (MNs) of his bone marrow showed a 55.7% of mature lymphoid cells, (54.1% and chromosomal aberrations test (CAs) are an excellent means to B-lymphocytes). Cytogenetic studies then showed two cellular lines: evaluate the genotoxicity and the risk associated with theses releases. 46,XY,t(9;22)(q34;q11)[14]/46,XY[2], and a decrease in the ratio bcr- Our study reports the finding of these genotoxicity tests for hospital staff abl/abl p210 (5.3%). Eleven months after the first analysis, the t(9;22) exposed to ionizing radiation (RI), anti-cancer drugs and formaldehyde could only be detected by molecular studies; however, an additional (FA) from Farhat Hached Hospital of Sousse (Tunisia). cellular line was present when lymphocytic line was stimulated: 45,X,- Patients and methods: Assessment of chromosomal damage was Y,t(6;14)(p21;q32)[13]/46,XY[21]. Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization carried out in peripheral lymphocytes of 20 nurses handling anti- (FISH) for RB1, TP53, ATM and centromere of chromosome 12 were cancer drugs, in 31 exposed to FA, and in 45 exposed (RI). We used normal. The patient was then diagnosed with a Chronic Myelogenous controls matched for age, gender and life style. Leukaemia + Splenic Marginal Zone B-Cell Lymphoma. Cytogenetic MNs frequency was evaluated after cytokinesis block. A total of 1000 follow-up analysis demonstrated an increase in the cellular line binucleated cells were scored for each subject. Mitomycin C was used with t(6;14). FISH studies using a LSI IgH dual color, break apart for detection of CAs. rearrangement probe, showed that 52% of the cells had the IgH Results: The frequency of binucleated micronucleated cells was translocation with loss of the telomeric part of the probe. A decrease significantly higher in all exposed groups when compared with controls in the t(6;14) line was observed after treatment with splenectomy and (p< 0.05). The frequency of CAs was also significantly higher in additional bcr-abl p210 studies indicated that the patient was in major exposed than in controls. For example, in nurses handling anti-cancer molecular response. drugs, the frequency of MNs was 9.4‰± 2.88 versus 4.36‰± 1.32 in Our report contributes to the clinical and cytogenetic description of the controls. In CA analysis, we detected in exposed group a significant rare association between Splenic Marginal Zone B-Cell Lymphoma increase (about 5.7 fold) of CAs. with t(6;14) and Chronic Myelogenous Leukaemia. conclusion: Based in the fact that exposure to MNs and CAs are an excepted markers of exposure to genotoxic substances, our finding P07.27 of higher frequency of CAs and MNs in peripheral lymphocytes of Derivative (6)t(1;6)(q21;p21): a recurrent cytogenetic abnormality exposed workers indicates that FA, anti-cancer drugs and (RI) are a in two cases of pediatric therapy-related myelodysplastic mutagenic agents in humans. syndrome . E. Tassano, E. Tavella, C. Cuoco, C. Panarello, C. Morerio; Laboratorio di Citogenetica Ematoncologica IRCCS Istituto G.Gaslini, Genova, P07.24 Italy. Usefulness of complex genomic profiles for the differential Childhood myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) are a rare group diagnosis of osteosarcomas mimicking aneurysmal bone cyst. of clonal hematopoietic stem cell disorders occurring de novo or C. Galant, P. Docquier, J. Malghem, H. A. Poirel; secondary to cytotoxic chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy for a previous Cliniques univ saint-Luc - UCL, Brussels, Belgium. malignancy. Cytogenetic aberrations have been detected in about Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is a rare primitive lytic bone lesion. 50% of de novo MDS and in almost all therapy-related MDS (t-MDS) Translocation of the USP6 locus occurs in over 60% cases leading patients. The most common abnormalities are complete or partial to its overexpression. Although classical forms are characteristics loss of chromosome 7 and trisomy 8. Unbalanced rearrangements on radiological & histological levels, some cases remain difficult to involving the long arm of chromosome 1 and leading to its trisomy, distinguish from a telangectatic osteosarcoma (OS). usually as t(1;7), are also recurrent. We report two cases of pediatric We report 2 cases of a lytic lesion of the proximal humeral epiphyso- t-MDS with der(6)t(1;6)(q21;p21). This unbalanced translocation metaphysis in a 16 yr-old boy (pat1) & in a 13 yr-old girl after a has been reported in the literature associated with adult chronic traumatism (pat2). On both, a first biopsy showed an aspect of ABC. myeloproliferative disorders. The first patient developed refractory The X-Ray confirmed the evolution of the lesion. A second surgical cytopenia 9 years after suspension of chemo- and radiotherapy for procedure consisted of curettage, phenolisation, allograft and plating. a medulloblastoma diagnosed at the age of 7 months. The second Additional curettages were performed in patient 2. However, 4 months patient, a 6-year-old boy, is slowly developing MDS features after & 5 years after the ABC discovery, respectively for pat1 and pat2, the a diagnosis of neuroblastoma 4S at age 1 month and of anaplastic histology was in favour of malignancy. lymphoma 10 months later. Cytogenetic analysis of peripheral Complex clonal chromosomal alterations were detected from the first blood and bone marrow blasts of both patients revealed der(6)t(1;6) specimens of both cases in 4-27% cells. Clonal evolution was further (q21;p21). FISH for the painting of chromosomes 1 and 6 confirmed observed: duplication of the initial clone in both cases associated with the rearrangement. Further array-CGH analysis performed on the the acquisition of CDKN2A/9p21 & TP53/17p13 deletions (pat1) & of bone marrow of the second patient, using 5500 BAC clones, showed Cancer cytogenetics 246 gain of material of chromosome 1 (q21.1->q44) and chromosome 6 J07.02 (p22.1->p12.1) and loss of material of chromosome 6 (p25.3->p22.1). the radiation-induced aberrations of chromosomes in Array-CGH analysis is being carried out in the other patient to verify lymphocytes of breast cancer patients whether the imbalance is identical. E. A. Domina; Institute of experimental pathology, oncology and radiobiology, Kiev, Ukraine. P07.28 Aim. To investigate cytogenetic effects in peripheral blood lymphocytes characterization of new rearrangements of cell line Ht1376. (PBL) of breast cancer patients exposed in vitro to γ-irradiation in the FisH contribution. low dose range with regards to individual radiation sensitivity. R. Pinto Leite1, R. Arantes2, A. Colaço2, L. Santos3,4, P. Oliveira2; Material and Methods. The irradiation of lymphocytes isolated from 1Centro Hospitalar de Tras-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, healthy donors was carried out on therapeutic apparatus “Rockus” 2CECAV, Department of Veterinary Sciences, University of Trás-os-Montes and (with 60Co source) in range of 0,1-1,0 Gy. The metaphase analysis of Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 3Department of Surgical Oncology, Portuguese chromosome aberrations had been carried out with group kariotyping Institute of Oncology, Porto, Portugal, 4Health Faculty, Fernando Pessoa including G2-radiation sensitivity assay. University, Porto, Portugal. Results. Background frequency of chromosome aberrations in PBL Tumor cell lines are valuable preclinical models in oncological of breast cancer patients was 7.2±0.95/100 cells and was 6-fold studies concerning human cancer, potential treatment modalities and higher than in the cjntrol group of healthy donors. The peculiarity pharmacologically studies. of spontaneous aberrations spectrum consist in the emergence of Human cancer urothelial cell lines represent important tools in the dicentric chromosomes (0.16/100 cells) in 55% of examined patients. study of bladder cancer, particularly in evaluating the chemoprevention When the PBL culture was irradiated in the low dose range (0.1-0.5 of different compounds and the therapeutic effect of anticancer drugs Gy), the dose curve had an abnormal shape with the formation of on apoptosis and cell proliferation. the plateau (dose-independent part). The boundaries of its location Although the karyotypic aspects of some cell lines have sometimes depends on the individual radiation sensitivity of patients, the second been taken into account, the cytogenetic studies are usually limited plateau could be formed with increase of individual radiation sensitivity. to classical methods. Documenting their chromosome composition Conclusions. For the first time, it was shown that individual radiation adds valuable genetic data and offers a reference to evaluate genomic sensitivity significantly affects the yield of radiation-induced changes that may occur in vitro. chromosome aberrations in PBL of breast cancer patients and this HT1376 is an invasive transitional carcinoma cell line used frequently effect was dependent on radiation dose. This dates are advisable by in bladder cancer research. Established in 1977 and diagnosed as radiation therapy of early forms of breast cancer. stage 2, grade 3 this cell line has a karyotype of high complexity and is not yet characterized cytogenetically. J07.03 In this work, we have attempted to cytogenetic characterize the Examination of Numerical chromosome Aberration in ALL by HT1736 bladder carcinoma cell line by a combination of classical FisH technique cytogenetics analysis (GTL, NOR and CBG banding) and fluorescence e. koçer, t. cora, h. acar; in situ hybridization (subtelomeric, painting, alpha satellite and unique Dept. of Medical Genetics, Selcuklu Medical Faculty, Selcuk Unıversity, Konya, sequence probes). We also evaluate the degree of DNA fragmentation Turkey. of the cell line and in normal urothelial cells as a control. Leukemia is a malignant disease characterized with uncontrolled Using this approach, we have identified several novel rearrangements proliferation by loosing the ability to differentiate of hemotopoietik that could reflect useful molecular markers involved with the cells. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) occurs with the abnormal development of bladder cancer. They can be important in improving uncontrolled and excessive proliferation of lymphoblast. ALL is prognostic on tumor diagnosis, and to develop new therapeutic responsible for approximately 80% of childhood leukemia and approaches. approximately 20% of adult leukemia. Many numerical and structural abnormalities play an important role in the risk assessment and the J07.01 diagnosis of ALL. Numerical anomalies are in the form of chromosomal investigation of FANCA mutations and their effects on the losses and gains. Losses and gains of some chromosomes are more expression of FANCA in iranian patients with Fanconi anemia common than the other chromosomes. In current study, numerical A. Saffar Moghadam, F. Mahjoubi; changes in chromosomes 8, 10, 11, 17, 18, X and Y were determined National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, in 30 ALL patients by using FISH technique. Chromosomal changes Islamic Republic of Iran. were observed in all patients as monosomy X in 12 patients (40%), Fanconi Anemia (FA) is an autosomal instability syndrome characterized disomy X in all 18 male patients (100%), trisomy X in 16 patients (53%), by progressive bone marrow failure (anemia),developmental anomalies tetrasomy X in 4 patients (13%), loss of Y in 2 patients (11%), disomy (various congenital malformations), high cancer susceptibility (acute Y in 14 patients (78%), monosomy 8 in 29 patients (97%), trisomy nonlympocytic leukaemia) and cellular hypersensitivity to cross linking 8 in 26 patients (87%), tetrasomy 8 in 3 patients (10%), monosomy agents such as diepoxybutane (DEB) and mitomycin C (MMC). The 10 in 22 patients (73%), trisomy 10 in 9 patients (30%), monosomy patients display lots of phenotypic variations. At least 13 genes and 11 in 27 patients (90%), trisomy 11 in 8 patients (27%), tetrasomy 11 corresponding complementation groups are underlying the disease. in 1 patient (3%), monosomy 17 in all patients (100%), trisomy 17 Eight of the FA proteins (FANCA, -B, -C, -E, -F, -G, -L and -M) and in 9 patients (30%) and monosomy 18 in 19 patients (63%). These other components assemble in a nuclear complex, the FA “core analyzes of numerical abnormalities in patients with ALL provide useful complex”.In this study we aimed to screen mutations in FANCA gene data for diagnosis and prognosis. in Iranian patients diagnosed with fanconi anemia. Chromosomal breakage analysis with MMC was performed to establish diagnosis of FA in 40 Iranian patients. RNA was extracted from the blood and consequently cDNA was synthesized. The cDNA of each patient amplified with 22 set PCR reaction. The size of the amplicons were between 200 and 250 bp. Each PCR product screened with SSCP (Single Strand Conformational Polymorphism) and HRM (High Resolution Temperature Melting Curve) for mutation detection. The aberrant SSCP band or HRM was sent for direct sequencing. In this presentation we will demonstrate our data regarding FANCA mutation frequency among Iranian FA patients. Furthermore, we will present some of the new mutations found in this group of FA patientsStatistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 247 P08 statistical genetics, includes mapping, linkage panel which could be applied for the rapid genotyping of patients and association methods treated with methotrexate, thiopurines, 5-FU, irinotecan or taxanes prior to treatment as well as in studies searching for new genotype- phenotype associations. We selected 97 variable positions in 36 genes which were previously associated or may be potentially involved P08.01 with altered drug response. Of these, 94 SNPs were genotyped by mmP-13 (-77A>G) gene polymorphism and susceptibility to APEX microarray method, which is a valuable tool for fast, reliable and abdominal aortic aneurysm or aortoiliac occlusive disease cost-effective typing. Variations of tandem repeats or gene deletions A. Korcz1, O. Zakerska1, K. Pawlaczyk2, M. Molińska-Glura2, G. Oszkinis2, R. were genotyped by capillary electrophoresis and PCR detection, Słomski1, M. Gabriel2; respectively. Direct sequencing served as reference method for 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, validation of APEX chip and control of observed results. 300 DNA 2Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. samples from unrelated healthy volunteers were tested to estimate Objective: Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and aortoiliac occlusive genotype frequencies for a Slovak population, which may be helpful disease (AIOD) are common vascular disorders considered to in estimation of central European frequencies. All data were checked be complex diseases with both genetic and environmental risk for H-W equilibrium and genetic linkage between loci and haplotype factors involved. Involvement of various matrix metalloproteinases analysis were also performed. is very important in the pathogenesis of these diseases. Matrix metalloproteinase-13 (MMP-13) was shown to be up-regulated P08.04 in AAAs and atherosclerotic lesions of aorta. A functional MMP- Autosomal recessive intellectual disability: homozygosity 13 promoter polymorphism (-77A>G) was found to be associated mapping identifies 27 single linkage intervals, at least 14 novel with functional status in rheumatoid arthritis. The aim of the present loci and several mutation hotspots study was to examine if MMP-13 (-77A>G) gene polymorphism is a M. Garshasbi1,2, A. W. Kuss1,3, K. Kahrizi2, A. Tzschach1, F. Behjati2, H. susceptibility factor of AAA or AIOD in Polish patients. Results: Based Darvish2, L. Abbasi-Moheb1,2, L. Puettmann1, A. Zecha1, R. Weißmann1, H. on a PCR-RFLP analysis the MMP-13 genotypes (A/A; A/G/; G/G) Hu1, M. Mohseni2, S. S. Abedini2, A. Rajab4, C. Hertzberg5, D. Wieczorek6, R. were determined in three selected groups: 300 patients with AAA Ullmann1, S. Ghasami-Firouzabadi2, S. Banihashemi2, S. Arzhangi2, V. Hadavi7, and 312 patients with AIOD who underwent surgery; 313 individuals G. Bahrami-Monajemi2, M. Kasiri8, M. Falah2, P. Nekoei9, A. Dehghan10, M. from control group. Genotypes were compared with demographic and Sobhani11, P. Jamali12, H. H. Ropers1, H. Najmabadi2; clinical data of subjects and analyzed in relation to risk factors. No 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Genetics significant differences in genotype distribution and allele frequencies of Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, MMP-13(-77A>G)gene polymorphism in the study groups were found. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Current address: Institute for Human Conclusion: This study found no evidence of association of MMP13 Genetics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Ernst (-77A>G)gene polymorphism with AAA or AIOD in Polish patients. Moritz Arndt University, Greifswald, Germany, 4Genetics Unit, Ministry of Health, Directorate General of Health Affairs, Royal Hospital, Muscat, Oman, P08.02 5Vivantes Klinikum Neukölln, Berlin, Germany, 6Institut für Humangenetik, A study role of the Alu-insertion of the gene AtP-binding Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 711Kariminejad-Najmabadi cassette transporter ABcA6 in lipid metabolism Pathology &Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 8Welfare I. Nikolaev, E. Vorobieva, V. Gorbunova; Organization, Shahre Kord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 9Welfare Organization, Bashkir State Pedagogical University it. M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. Bandar abbas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 10Welfare Organization, Yazd, Islamic INTRODUCTION: We studies gene, encoding ATP-binding cassette Republic of Iran, 11Welfare Organization, Talesh, Islamic Republic of Iran, transporter ABCA6 is located on the chromosome 17 (17q24.2-3) 12Welfare Organization, Shahroud, Islamic Republic of Iran. consist of 38 exons and 39 introns. Alu-element Ya5_435 localized in With a prevalence of around 2% intellectual disability (ID) is a frequent the 25 intron of the gene ABCA6. ABCA6 involved in ATP-dependent cause of severe disability. Significant excess of ID in the progeny of transport of various molecules through biological membranes, and consanguineous matings and functional considerations suggest that supports the lipid homeostasis of the body, localized on the surface autosomal recessive forms of ID (ARID) must be relatively common. of macrophages. To shed more light on the causes of ARID, we have set out in 2003 MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied samples DNA of 318 to perform systematic clinical studies and autozygosity mapping in individuals in the age of 18-65 years living in Republic Bashkortostan large consanguineous Iranian families with non-syndromic ARID and them parameters of lipid profile. The analysis genetic polymorphism (NS-ARID). Previously we have reported 12 novel ARID loci as well is realized by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Assessing the impact as 2 causative gene defects in this cohort. By tripling the size of our of Alu-insertion in a gene ABCA6 on lipid metabolism was performed cohort we were able to identify 27 additional unrelated families with by ANOVA. NS-ARID and single-linkage intervals; 14 of these define novel loci for RESULTS: We found that the genotype ABCA6 *I /*I leads to a NS-ARID. Altogether, 13 out of 39 single linkage intervals observed in decrease in the level of high density lipoproteins (HDL), and allele our cohort were found to cluster at 6 different loci on chromosomes ABCA6*D - an increase (F = 5.196; ρ = 0.023). Genotype ABCA6*D/*D 1p34, 4q27, 5p15, 9q34, 11p11-q13 and 19q13, respectively. Five of leads to an increase in triglyceride (TG) levels, and allele ABCA6*I - to these clusters consist of two significantly overlapping linkage intervals, decrease (F = 7.242; ρ = 0.008). Thus, the Alu-insertion into ABCA6 is and on chr 1p34, three single linkage intervals coincide. We showed associated with a low level HDL and TG of the person. by Monte-Carlo simulation that the probability for this distribution to be due to chance is only 1.14*10(-5). Thus, in contrast to our previous P08.03 conclusions, here we indicate that common molecular causes of APEX microarray method in personalized medicine of NS-ARID do exist, and in the Iranian population, the most frequent chemotherapeutic treatment ones may well account for several percent of the patients. Mutation A. Soltysova1, G. Minarik1, A. Dzurenkova2, S. Sufliarska2, L. Kadasi1, J. screening by next generation sequencing in order to find the underlying Turna1, B. Mladosievicova2; gene defects at these loci is ongoing. 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, dpt. of molecular biology, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia. P08.05 Drug response in patients who underwent chemotherapy is Linkage analysis in 147 iranian families with Autosomal accompanied by many adverse effects. The prediction of therapeutic recessive non-syndromic hearing loss effect may vary depending on individual gene variability. Many studies M. Babanejad1, N. Bazazzadegan1, Z. Fattahi1, N. Nikzat1, K. Jalalvand1, focus on the association between phenotype and DNA variations in P. Nikooei2, S. Arjangi1, M. Taghdiri3, P. Jamali4, R. Smith5, K. Kahrizi1, H. genes of interest. Comprehensive approach in genotyping of numerous Najmabadi1; variants is needed to achieve improvements in personalized medicine 1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation such as selection of appropriate drug for treatment. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Bandarabas Welfare Organization, This work focuses on the design of a pharmacogenetically relevant Bandarabas, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shiraz Welfare Organization, Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 248 Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Genetic counseling centre, Shahrood, TOKAT, Turkey, 2Second Dermatology Clinic, Ankara Numune Education Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, and Research Hospital,, ANKARA, Turkey, 3Ankara University, Brain Studies Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Application and Research Center, ANKARA, Turkey, 4Ankara University, Faculty Iowa City, IA, United States. of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, ANKARA, Turkey. Hearing impairment is the most common sensory disorder and affects Behcet’s disease (BD) is a chronic multisystem disorder. The cause about 1 of every 1000 newborns. In developed countries at least 50% of BD remains a mystery; infectious agents, immune mechanism, and of the cases are due to genetic defects most often resulting in non- genetic factors are implicated in the etiopathogenesis of the disease, syndromic deafness (70%), of which autosomal recessive inheritance which remains to be explained. predominates (80%). Although hearing loss is very heterogenous, The human MDR1 gene encodes a P-gp (P-glycoprotein) plays a mutations in GJB2 gene (at DFNB1 locus) are the major cause of key role in determining drug bioavailability, and drug response exist autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in many amongst different populations. populations. Our previous study showed that mutations of GJB2 gene In this study, we were investigated genotype and haplotype distribution do not contribute to the major genetic load of deafness in the Iranian of MDR1 gene polymorphisms in BD patients, and genetic differences population. from the control group. Three MDR-1 genetic markers (C1236T, To determine the other important loci in ARNSHL in our population, G2677T/A and C3435T) were analyzed in 97 BD patients and 107 147 deaf Iranian families with 2 or more affected members, who were unrelated Turkish subjects. The genotyping analysis was performed negative for GJB2 gene mutations, were subjected to linkage analysis by PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) methods. using flanking or intragenic STR markers for 34 loci. Statistically analysis of data was performed by using Arlequin 3.1.1 Until now, 59 families have been linked to 18 loci: 9 families to DFNB4, and SPSS 16.0 Softwares. 8 to DFNB3, 4 to DFNB24, 4 to DFNB21, 4 to DFNB7/11, 4 to DFNB2, Our result showed that, genotypic and allelic frequencies each three 3 to DFNB28, 3 to DFNB29, 3 to DFNB37, 3 to DFNB42, 2 to DFNB16, separated SNP in MDR1 gene is not associated with BD (p>0.05). 2 to DFNB30, 2 toDFNB31, 2 to DFNB49, 2 to DFNB59 and one In the haplotype study, we have found two haplotypes may have be family for each of 4 loci including: DFNB6, DFNB9, DFNB18, DFNB53. protective to BD. T-G-T haplotype were found 4.7 % in control but were Mutation analysis of the corresponding genes revealed several novel not found in BD patients (p=0.002). The other haplotype C-T-T was mutations. In conclusion, DFNB1, DFNB4, DFNB3 and DFNB2 are the detected 7.0 % in control and 2.2 % in BD patients (p =0.019; odds most prevalent loci in ARNSHL in Iranian population. Linkage study ratio, [OR], 0.28; 95% confidence interval [95% CI], 0.09-0.86). Our for remaining families and mutation screening for the rest of linked study was showed that MDR1 gene and their polymorphisms may be families, are underway. associated with BD in Turkish patients. P08.06 P08.08 DFNB93, a novel locus for autosomal recessive moderate-to- Next generation sequencing from raw data to mutation report severe hearing impairment B. Wolf1,2, D. Atlan1, P. Kuonen3; M. A. Tabatabaiefar1,2,3, F. Alasti3,4, L. Shariati2, E. Farrokhi2, E. Fransen3, M. R. 1Phenosystems SA, Blonay, Switzerland, 2Ecole d’ingenieurs et d’architectes Noori-Daloii5, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori2, G. Van Camp3; de Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland, 3Ecole d’ingénieurs et d’architectes de 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur Fribourg, Blonay, Switzerland. University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular Next Generation Sequencing is knocking on the door of diagnostics and Molecular Research Center, School of Medicine, Shahrekord University laboratories which are still reluctant to handle such a large amount of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of of data. Although various software packages have been developed, Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, 2610, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Natinal both open and closed source, for the research and bio-informatics Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic community, none of them really addresses all the specific needs of the Republic of Iran, 5Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran diagnostics community, namely: University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. User-friendliness: use-ability by non bioinformaticians introduction: Hearing impairment (HI) is the most common sensory Patient centric database system defect in humans. Autosomal recessive non-syndromic HI (ARNSHI) is Variant consequence prediction support linked to over 70 chromosomal loci, with about half of the corresponding Flexibility to analyze data from various equipments genes identified. Novel loci and their genes can increase our insight Connectivity to public and private databases into the mechanisms of HI. While the phenotype of the majority of We present here the first version of Gensearch®NGS, a framework families is severe to profound, DFNB21 (TECTA) has been described to analyze, visualize, interpret and manage NGS data in a patient to show a recognizable milder audiometric profile. Presented here is centric database. The framework integrates all steps from quality a novel locus in an Iranian family with moderate to severe ARNSHI, control to alignment, variant detection, visualization and interpretation localizing to a new locus on chromosome 11q12.3-13.2. methods: support (UMD Predictor, Human Splice Finder, dbSNP,¼) up to Linkage to DFNB21 (TECTA) as well as 14 other known loci was reporting, both internally and publicly to the Gen2Phen Café Rouge. ruled out. Illumina 6K SNP chips (Linkage IVb panel) were used for Gensearch®NGS is built around the concept of plug-ins, allowing use a genome scan, followed by fine mapping by microsatellite markers. of either proprietary tools for alignment and variant calling or any major Results: Genome wide linkage revealed a multipoint LOD score of public tool (e.g. BWA, Stampy, Bowtie, VarScan). The framework hides 3.51 on 11q12.3-13.2. The homozygous linkage interval is flanked the complexity of those tools. Also integrated is a tool to visualize the by the markers D11S1765 (60.68 Mb) and D11S1975 (70.30 Mb) alignments in a fast, efficient and user friendly way, it integrates data spanning a 9.62 Mb interval. The name DFNB93 was assigned to this from external databases, like Ensembl, as well as variants found on any locus by the Human Genome Organization (HUGO) Nomenclature other patient from the user database. The framework also integrates Committee. conclusion: The new DFNB93 locus partially overlaps the possibility to use Cloud Computing through POP-C++ and POP- with the DFNB63 locus. However, it does not include the responsible Java programming tools to distribute alignment tasks and, therefore LRTOMT gene. Furthermore, DFNB63, unlike DFNB93, accounts for to improve performances. Gensearch®NGS has been developed and severe to profound HI. DFNB93 is the second ARNSHI locus with a validated within the FP7 NMDchip project. distinctive audiometric profile. The sequencing of coding regions and exon-intron boundaries of several candidate genes including LRTOMT, P08.09 CFL1, KCNK4 and RELA revealed no disease causing variants. Association study between coronary Artery Disease and rs1333049 and rs10757274 polymorphisms in 9p21 locus in P08.07 Khuzestan province Analysis of mDR1 (ABcB1) gene polymorphisms in Behcet’s a. foroughmand1, E. Nikkhah1, M. Jadbabaee2, H. Galehdari1; Disease 1shahid chamran university, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2. Department of A. RÜSTEMOGLU1, Ü. GÜL2, G. GÜMÜS AKAY3, M. GÖNÜL2, A. KARADAG4, cardiology, Jondishapoor University of medical sciences, Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Islamic Ö. ATES1, E. PISKIN2, S. SAHIN1, A. SUNGUROGLU4; 1Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 249 Republic of Iran. Our systematic approach to isolate causal cis-rSNPs includes introduction: Coronary Artery Disease (CAD) is a Multifactorial and integrative analysis of AE-mapping data in CEU and YRI LCLs with the Heterogenic disease. In CAD atherosclerosis plaques have been intersection of common SNPs (1000 Genomes) and functional non- formed in internal wall of coronary artery. That reducing coronary blood coding elements (wgENCODE) catalogs, along with ChIP-seq assays flow may lead to Myocardial Infarction. Many genes and loci, such as and assessing promoters and enhancers at high coverage. the 9p21 locus are believed to be involved in the etiology of CAD. Fine-mapped cis-rSNPs are enriched in regulatory elements and Two polymorphisms of 9p21 locus, rs1333049 and rs10757274 have show predominant localization to 5’ transcription start site. Reporter shown remarkable association with CAD in several studies. gene assays validated 62% of promoter cis-rSNPs. Integrative methods: We collected blood samples from 170 CAD patients and genomic approaches can successfully isolate causal cis-rSNPs 100 healthy persons as control from Hospitals in Ahvaz. Association beyond promoters: rs909685 is strongly associated with differential AE of rs13333049(C/G) and rs10757274 (A/G) polymorphisms with CAD of SYNGR1, shows association by RNA-seq. in LCLs, is located in was evaluated using Tetra ARMS PCR technique. active chromatin (DNaseI HS), and shows an allelic H3K4me1 signal Results: In rs1333049 polymorphism frequencies of CC, CG and GG in our ChIP-seq. analysis. The allelic enhancer activity at this site genotypes in patients were respectively 18.2%, 65.3% and 16.5% and was verified by reporter gene assays, underscoring the capacity of in control cases were 25%, 67% and 8% respectively. GG Genotype population genomic approaches in revealing function and variation of in rs1333049 polymorphism was found in CAD patients more than non-coding sequence elements. Multiple other sites show converging control cases (OR: 0.354, 95%CI= 0.138-0.912, P=0.032). functional data suggesting specific mechanisms for common cis-rSNP In rs10757274 polymorphism frequencies of AA, AG and GG action. However, despite numerous functional genomic datasets, genotypes in patients were respectively 8.2%, 58.3% and 33.5% and only a subset of mapped cis-rSNPs yield straightforward hypotheses, in control cases were 35%, 63% and 2% respectively. GG Genotype suggesting the need for further tools for assessing non-coding DNA. in rs10757274 polymorphism was found in CAD patients more than Additional information can be derived from our comparisons of cis- control cases (OR: 0.014, 95% CI: 0.003 -0.065, P value: 0.0001). rSNPs observed in LCLs with those from other cell lineages and will conclusion: The rs1333049 polymorphism shows a weak association guide how to more comprehensively enumerate causal cis-rSNPs in with CAD but rs10757274 Polymorphism has significantly associated the human genome. with CAD. These variants may help in identification of patients with increased risk for coronary artery disease. P08.12 Genome Wide Association study of Left Ventricular Phenotypes P08.10 - AscOt-HAcVD genetic study CFHR5 mutation screening in sporadic patients with P. Surendran1,2, C. Vangjeli2, N. McCarthy2, S. Thom3, P. Sever3, E. O’Brien2, macroscopic hematuria or unknown etiology nephropathy N. Poulter3, A. Barron3, J. Mayet3, A. Hughes3, A. Stanton2, D. Shields1; H. Stefanou1, K. Voskarides1, Y. Athanasiou2, A. Pierides3, C. Deltas1; 1School of Medicine and Medical Science, University College Dublin, Dublin, 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, Ireland, 2Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College of Surgeons in Cyprus, 3Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 3International Centre for Circulatory Health, National Our team contributed to the molecular investigation of a new Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London, St. Mary’s Campus, autosomal dominant renal disease seeming to be endemic in Paddington, London, United Kingdom. Cyprus, which is characterized by microscopic and synpharyngitic Background: Alterations in left ventricular (LV) structure and function macroscopic hematuria, renal failure (especially in males) and C3 provide independent prediction of myocardial infarction and stroke. glomerulonephritis. Affected individuals were found to have an internal These echocardiographic traits are moderately heritable (~20-40%). duplication of exons 2-3, of the complement factor H-related protein The aim of this study was to identify genetic variants associated with 5 (CFHR5) gene. Results from 105 Cypriot patients carrying this these LV prognostic markers across the whole human genome. mutation show that 41% of male patients over 50-yo develop end methods: 885 hypertensive participants in the Hypertension stage of renal disease. Associated CardioVascular Disease (HACVD) sub-study of the Anglo- No other mutations have been reported in CFHR5 gene in relation to Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial underwent echocardiography C3 glomerulonephritis or other glomerulonephritis cases. We screened 1.5 and 3.5 years post randomization to BP and lipid lowering 20 sporadic cases with macroscopic hematuria or unknown cause therapies. The average value of four measures of LV structure and nephropathy, for mutations in the CFHR5 gene. We used SURVEYOR function were studied; LV hypertrophy (LVM/height2.7, LVMi), diastolic endonuclease digestion, which identifies and cleaves at mismatched dysfunction (e’), systolic function (ejection fraction) and LV filling base-pairs in heteroduplexes. The exons and flanking intronic regions pressure (E/e’). 318,000 Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) of CFHR5 were amplified with appropriate primers. If cleavage was were directly genotyped (Illumina HumanCNV 370 Duo BeadChip), evident at the digested PCR product (agarose electrophoresis), DNA and approximately 3.5 million loci were imputed using IMPUTE from re-sequencing was performed. Hapmap rel#24 reference. Poorly imputed SNPs were excluded from Four variants were identified (5UTR+249TC, P46S, IVS1+17TA, further analysis. GWAS was performed using linear regression analysis IVS5+33TG), but their frequencies found through 200 chromosomes under an additive model, adjusted for cardiovascular risk factors, and of the general population, did not differ from the patients cohort. P46S for principal components representing major genetic variation within and IVS5+33T>G (novel SNP) were also genotyped in additional 38 the study population. unknown glomerulonephritis and 39 unknown nephropathy patients Results and Discussion: None of the directly genotyped SNPs but again the SNPs frequencies were comparable with the ones of showed significant associations with any of the LV phenotypes. By the general population, therefore they cannot be associated with contrast a number of regions containing imputed SNPs with low minor a pathogenic effect. It is probable that some patients carry large allele frequencies (<2%) were significantly associated with LVMi. rearrangements or gross indels that cannot be easily identified with Permutation testing indicated that these SNPs were significant after the method we used. correction for multiple testing of both genotypes and phenotypes. It is difficult to distinguish whether these associations reflect unmeasured P08.11** genetic stratification in the population or direct causation by Human cis-regulatory sNPs (cis-sNPs) altering transcription chromosomal regions. Hence replication studies are underway. factors binding and gene expression V. Adoue1, T. Kwan1, B. Ge1, M. Ouimet2, V. Gagne2, K. Gunderson3, D. P08.13 Sinnett2, T. Pastinen1; Multivariate association analysis of arterial calcification in the 1McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Hôpital Ste-Justine, Université de Nelson study. Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Illumina Inc, San Diego, QC, United States. J. van Setten1, I. Isgum1, R. J. van Klaveren2, P. A. de Jong1, M. A. Viergever1, Up to 30% of RefSeq transcripts are regulated by cis-SNPs leading to C. Wijmenga3, W. P. Mali1, P. I. W. de Bakker1,4,5; phenotypic differences. These variants can be identified by mapping 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Erasmus MS, differences in allelic expression (AE) on Illumina1M/2.5M BeadChips. Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Mapped cis-rSNPs explain >50% of population variance in AE. Netherlands, 4Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 250 States, 5Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, P08.16 United States. timP2 polymorphism, left ventricular function and prognosis Atherosclerosis is a major cause of death in the industrialized world. after myocardial infarction with st elevation. Although the relation between calcium deposits and atherosclerotic J. Lipkova1, M. Pavkova Goldbergova1, J. Parenica2, M. Poloczek2, J. Spinar2, plaques is well known, little is known about the genetic basis of P. Kala2, A. Vasku1; calcification. We studied common genetic variation in the NELSON 1Department of pathological physiology, Faculty of medicine, Masaryk study for a role in aorta and coronary artery calcification. university, Brno, Czech Republic, 2(2) Internal Cardiology Department, Faculty The Nelson study is a prospective cohort for early detection screening Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. of lung cancer. We analyzed genome-wide SNP genotype data Objective: Genetic variations of tissue inhibitors of matrix collected in 3082 participants with multiple chest CT scans. We metalloproteinases (TIMP) are known to be involved in the process developed a novel image-processing algorithm to quantify levels of of development and progress of acute myocardial infarction. TIMPs calcification in the aorta and the coronary arteries. play important role in process of plaque formation, destabilization We compared three methods in order to find genetic loci associated and rupture within the myocard by regulation of extracellular matrix with coronary artery calcification and aorta calcification (R2=0.13): a proteins degradation. In this study, we investigated the possible role polygenic model, cross-trait meta-analysis, and multivariate regression. of polymorphism in TIMP2 in acute myocardial infarction with ST Although no single SNPs reach genome-wide significance (p<5E-08), elevations. polygenic analysis shows that coronary artery and aorta calcification Methods: 556 patients with STEMI and 141 stable patients >50 years share a substantial genetic background. The explained variance without MI in anamnesis and without LV systolic dysfunction were increases when more SNPs are included, reaching approximately 13% enrolled into the study. Levels of B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) and for both traits when SNPs with P-values of up to 0.05 are included in N-terminal pro B-type natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) were measured the model. at the time of hospital admission before primacy PCI and 24h, 3months These results demonstrate that large-scale genome-wide meta- and 12 months after MI onset. The TIMP2 intron polymorphism analyses of calcification may reveal important genes involved in rs8176329 located at 17 chromosome was detected by RT-genotyping. forming calcium deposits. Results: No significant differences in genotype distribution and/or allele frequencies were observed when comparing STEMI patients and P08.14 stable patients. Within the STEMI patient group lower prevalence of AA Genetic polymorphisms in cYP17 and AR genes and the risk of variant have been observed in subjects with acute heart failure (AHF) premature coronary artery disease in time of hospitalization (p=0.048). We have found the association K. Agiannitopoulos1, A. Kyparissi1, A. Mpakalgianni1, M. Georgoutsou1, A. among GG genotype and higher BNP levels (p=0.03), higher NT- Manginas2, S. Papamenzelopoulos2, K. Lamnissou1; proBNP levels respectively 1Dept of Genetics & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, (p=0.008). Athens, Greece, 21st Cardiology Dept, Onassis Cardiac Surgery Center, Conclusion: Taken together, our results provide evidence that GG Athens, Greece. variant correlate with higher levels of BNP and NT-proBNP, which Background: Gender differences and sex hormones are known to strongly correspond to association of GG genotype with acute heart influence the risk of developing Coronary Artery Disease (CAD). failure. Several genes are involved in the synthesis or function of sex hormones. Two of them which play a crusial role during the human P08.17 sex steroidogenesis or function are the cytochrome P450c17α gene inference of cross-level interaction between genes and (CYP17) and the androgen receptor gene (AR). The aim of this study contextual factors in a matched case-control metabolic was to investigate the effect of two single nucleotide polymorphisms syndrome study: a Bayesian approach (SNPs) of these genes in developing premature CAD. S. Wang1, W. Chen1, L. Chuang2, P. Hsiao1, P. Liu3, C. Hsiao1; Methods: A total of 370 Greek cohorts were investigated for the 1Institute of Epidemiology, College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, genetic variations T/C of the promoter of the CYP17 and G/A of the Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University AR. The patient group consisted of 230 CAD patients as documented Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Clinical Informatics and Medical Statistics Research by coronary angiography, aged less than 58 years, while 150 healthy Center, Chang Gung University, Taipei, Taiwan. individuals served as controls. All cohorts were genotyped by the PCR- Background: Genes, environment, and the interaction between them RFLP method. are each known to play an important role in the risk for developing Results: Statistical analysis indicated no significant differences in metabolic syndrome. Environmental influences can be measured at genotype or in allele frequencies between the patient and the control the individual level, such as by personal characteristics and lifestyle group, for both the studied polymorphisms. choices, or at the group-level (called contextual variables), such as by Conclusion: The genetic variations T/C CYP17 and G/A AR, could community factors and degree of local area development. To examine not be a useful genetic markers for premature CAD in our Caucasian the interaction between genes and contextual factors, traditional population. approaches usually adopt asymptotic tests to assess whether the interaction exists. Such tests are limited as they cannot evaluate or P08.15 quantify the strength of difference in genetic effects across different A Genome wide linkage analysis on large coronary Artery clusters or categories of the contextual variable. methods: In this study, Disease family suggests linkage to chromosome 19 we utilize a Bayesian hierarchical mixed-effects model to investigate K. Inanloo1, S. Davaran1, A. Zand Parsa1, J. Fan2, E. Elahi1; whether the genetic effect is modified by residential environment in 1Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Illumina Inc, San Diego, a matched case-control metabolic syndrome study. The group-level CA, United States. contextual covariate, availability of exercise facilities, contains four Coronary artery disease (CAD) is the most common type of heart categories, from low to high. Based on posterior samples from Markov disease and the leading cause of death worldwide in both men and chain Monte Carlo methods, the interaction between this group-level women. A positive family history is a recognized cardiovascular risk environmental condition and the individual-level genetic effect is factor. We identified a family with multiple siblings affected with early evaluated by differences in allelic effects under various contextual onset CAD and some CAD risk factors, suggesting a strong genetic categories. Results: The Bayesian analysis indicates that the effect component. A genome-wide linkage analysis was performed on this of rs1801282 on metabolic syndrome development is modified by family using Illumina 370K Gene Chips. Linkage with a lod score of 1.8 the contextual environmental factor such that, even with the same to chromosome 19q13.11-q13.33 was observed. The interval spans genotype, living in a residential area with low availability of exercise 14Mbp and contains 446 annotated genes. ApoE was a promising facility may result in higher risk. conclusions: In summary, the candidate gene within the locus, but mutation screening of coding Bayesian hierarchical mixed-effects model considered here provides a region of ApoE did not revealed a disease causing mutation. While quantitative assessment for the cross-level interaction between genes attempting to minimize the region by studying other families, a few and contextual variables. other promising candidate genes are being screened.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 251 P08.18 KCNJ11gene (E23K) and T2D has been reported in several but not Time trends in the incidence of cystic fibrosis over a 40-year all populations. We investigated whether E23K polymorphism in the period KCNJ11gene is associated with T2D in the Iranian population. In this V. Scotet1, I. Duguépéroux1,2, M. Audrézet1,2, G. Rault3, M. Roussey4, P. study, We performed a case-control association with 398 T2D patients Saliou1,2, C. Férec1,2; and 420 Iranian control subjects using TaqMan assay. The case and 1Inserm U613, Brest, France, 2CHRU Morvan, Laboratoire de génétique control subjects had similar frequencies of the allele K (35.9 vs. 35.7%, moléculaire, Brest, France, 3CRCM, Roscoff, France, 4CRCM, Rennes, France. P>0.05), then there was no significant difference between case and Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a recessive disorder whose incidence has, control subjects according to allele K frequency (OR =1.01, (95% CI) for a long time, been estimated to 1/2500 live births in Caucasians. 0.825-1.236, P=0.928).Also, by genotype frequency comparison, no Newborn screening (NBS) programs allows now a better appreciation difference were observed between frequency of various genotypes of the disease incidence that appears lower than in the past. Here we regarding to diverse genotype models( ressecive , dominant and reported time trends in CF incidence over a long period (40 years: codominant model) of KCNJ11 E23K variant in our population. In 1970-2009) in an area where CF is frequent (Brittany, France) and conclusion, the presented study demonstrated the absence of the where NBS is implemented since a long time (1989). key role of KCNJ11 E23K variant in the occurrence of type 2 diabetes The study enrolled the CF patients born in Brittany since 1970. The in a Iranian Population. Tis finding may conclusive due to limitation cases born before the set up of NBS were registered through active of sample size. A subsequent study with a larger sample size is enquiries and combination of data sources. Time trends in incidence recommended. rates were examined using Poisson regression and expressed by the average percent change (APC). P08.21 Over the 40-year period, 569 CF children born in Brittany were the lipid-associated GALNt2 gene variant rs4846914 confers a registered. The average number of cases born each year varied from highly elevated risk for type 2 diabetes 17.7 in the 1970’s (decade 1970-79) to 11.8 nowadays (decade 2000- N. Polgar1, P. Kisfali1, A. Maasz2, E. Baricza1, B. Duga1, M. Mohas3, I. 09). This corresponded to a decline in incidence rate of 29.0% (from Wittmann3, B. Melegh1; 1/2260 to 1/3183, p=0.0039). Poisson regression also showed that the 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, incidence rate decreased over the whole period (annual APC: -1.2%, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pecs, Pécs, Hungary, 32nd 95% CI: [-1.8; -0.5], p=0.0012), and especially since the availability of Department of Internal Medicine and Nephrology Center, University of Pécs, prenatal diagnosis in the 1980’s (annual APC: -2.0%, 95% CI: [-3.7; Pécs, Hungary. -0.3], p=0.0216). The UDP-N-acetyl-alpha-D-galactosamine:polypeptide This study highlights how the incidence of CF evolved in an area N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase 2 (GALNT2) has been recently where CF is frequent and where carrier screening is not underway. It implicated in the modulation of antgiopoietin-like protein - 3 (ANGPTL3) reports a clear decline in incidence that results from a complex mixture activity via O-glycosylation. GALNT2 is therefore indirectly contributing of factors. to plasma triglyceride level modifications as ANGPTL3 is an inhibitor of lipoprotein lipase, the enzyme responsible for triglyceride hydrolysis. P08.19 Besides, recent genome-wide association studies identified GALNT2 the alpha2 isoform of the catalytic subunit of AmP variants have variant rs4846914 in association with blood lipid level alterations. As a key role to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes the GWAS studies do not provide functional information, we studied F. Davoodi Salestani1, P. Keshavarz Kiasaraei1, R. Habibi2, M. Ghasemi3; and we supposed the possible association of this variant in type 2 1Azad University of Guilan-Rasht, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Guilan diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and metabolic syndrome (MS) patients. University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Oloom A total of 308 type 2 diabetic patients, 394 metabolic syndrome patients Tahghighat University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and 246 healthy controls were genotyped by PCR-RFLP method. AMP-activated protein is a key regulator of cellular metabolism, and We detected a significantly higher ratio of GG homozygotes among its activity is induced by both metformin and thiazolidinedione anti- both T2DM and MS patients than in controls. In addition, in multiple diabetic medications. It has therefore been proposed both as a putative regression analysis adjusted for body mass index, triglyceride and agent in the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes (T2D) and as a valid total cholesterol levels as well as age and sex, the GG genotype is target for therapeutic intervention. The gene encoding the alpha2 associated with the development of type 2 diabetes, with an unusually isoform of the catalytic subunit of AMPK (PRKAA2) is located at one high odds ratio of 5.218 (CI [95%] 2.811-9.683; p<0.001), while carriers of the Japanese T2D loci mapped previously. PRKAA2 is, therefore of the G allele demonstrate a lower risk of T2DM (OR 1.659; [CI95%] a good candidate gene for insulin resistance and T2D. We therefore 1.027-2.678, p=0.038). set out to test for the association of common variants and common The data presented here revealed a differentiated risk nature of the haplotype in the PRKAA2 gene with type 2 diabetes and related lipid profile modifying GALNT2 natural gene variant rs4846914, as the phenotypes. We undertook an extensive case-control association variant did not show an association with metabolic syndrome in our study using a total of 911 unrelated Japanese T2D patients and 876 cohort, but appears to confer a exceptionally risk for type 2 diabetes, control subjects at 6 single nucleotide polymorphism in the PRKAA2 which strong association that has not been reported in the literature gene. We observed association of nominal significance with two available. intronic SNP in the PRKAA2 (rs932447; OR=0.62; 95%CI=0.40-0.96; P=0.033, AND rs1418442; OR=0.62, 95% CI=0.40=0.96; P=0.030, P08.22 both under a dominant model). However, we were unable to observe comparative genetics of gestational diabetes mellitus in humans the association between the PRKAA2 haplotype and T2D. Our result and dogs. indicate that the PRKAA2 gene variant have an important impact on M. L. Arendt1, T. Fall2, A. Ratnakumar1, L. J. Kennedy3, A. D. Short3, B. T2D susceptibility in Japanese. Catchpole4, W. E. R. Ollier3, Å. Hedhammar2, G. Andersson2, K. Lindblad-Toh1,5, O. Kämpe1; P08.20 1Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Swedish Lack of association of the KcNJ11 E23K variant with risk of type University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 3University of 2 diabetes in a iranian population Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Royal Veterinary College, London, P. Keshavarz1, M. Ghasemi2, R. Habibi1, M. Hedayeti emami1, E. Kazemnejad1; United Kingdom, 5Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States. 1Guilan University of Medical Science, Rasht, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Oloom Gestational diabetes mellitus affects approximately 2-10% of human Tahghighat University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. pregnancies and has a major impact on both maternal and foetal The beta-cell ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel consists of health. Family history of diabetes and ethnic background are two of subunit of the inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir6.2 and subunit the known risk factors for development of disease, which suggest a of the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1).The gene KCNJ11 (Kir6.2) genetic background for the condition. has a key role in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and thus has In dogs, the pregnant or the non-pregnant dioestral bitch develops always been considered as excellent susceptibility candidate for type peripheral insulin resistance, which can progress to diabetes mellitus. 2 diabetes(T2D). An association between a common polymorphism in The dioestral phase of the canine sex hormone cycle mimics pregnancy Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 252 with regard to hormone levels and length. Elevated levels of growth combinations of 386,993 possible combinations were significant, hormone (GH) have been detected in diabetic dogs reflecting the of which 1,932 negatively and 1,683 positively (53.4% vs 46.6%). placental GH secretion in human pregnancies. The dog has hence Explained variance from the DNA methylation levels ranged from 1 proven to be a good naturally occurring model of gestational diabetes. to 52 percent. Overall the results show that DNA methylation levels Epidemiologic studies show that certain dog breeds have a higher and gene expression levels are both positive as well as negatively prevalence of diabetes suggesting a genetic predisposition as in correlated. Data on CpG properties, genetic regulation and trans humans. association provide further insight into the complex processes of gene We have performed genome-wide association studies in three high expression and DNA methylation. risk dog breeds: the Swedish Elkhound, the Norwegian Elkhound and the Border Collie, using the ~170k Illumina SNP array. Four preliminary P08.25 loci have been identified, although more dogs are currently being identifying genetic determinants of congenital heart defects in genotyped. Candidate loci will be resequenced to identify candidate Down syndrome mutation and the functional consequences will be evaluated in dogs M. Sailani1,2, P. Makrythanasis1, S. Deutsch1, E. Migliavacca1, A. Sharp1, J. and humans. Candidate genes will also be examined in humans. We Delabar3, L. Perez-Jurado4, C. Serra-Juhe4, G. Merla5, S. Vicari6, E. Kanavakis7, anticipate that our findings will progress the understanding of diabetes R. Rabionet8, X. Estivill8, S. Antonarakis1,2; development in humans and dogs. 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2NCCR Frontiers in Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland, 3University of Paris, Paris, France, 4Universitat Pompeu P08.23 Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 5IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 6Children’s A genome-wide association study in Doberman Pinschers Hospital Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 7Medical University of Athens, Athens, identifies a new locus for dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) Greece, 8Centre for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain. T. Mausberg1, G. Wess2, J. Simak2, L. Keller2, M. Drögemüller1, C. Congenital heart defect (CHD) occurs in ~40%, and AVSD (Atrio- Drögemüller1, M. T. Webster3, H. Stephenson4, J. Dukes-McEwan4, T. Leeb1; Ventricular Septal Defect) is observed in 16% of Down syndrome 1University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2University of Munich, Munich, Germany, (DS) cases. Here, we test the hypothesis that genomic variation in 3University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden, 4University of Liverpool, Liverpool, concert with the trisomy 21 determines the risk for CHD. This case- United Kingdom. control GWAS includes 156 DS without CHD and 192 DS with CHD Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a heterogeneous group of heart (AVSD=72, ASD=53, VSD=67). Trisomic and disomic SNPs were diseases with a strong genetic background. Currently, many human called separately. Trisomic single-locus association reveals 4 SNPs as DCM cases exist, where no causative mutation can be identified. CHD risk alleles (Bonferroni adjusted p-values < 0.05). One of these DCM also occurs with high prevalence in several large dog breeds. SNPs was also identified as a risk factor for AVSD+VSD combined In the Doberman Pinscher a specific DCM form characterized by (p=0.008), while a 5th SNP was identified as risk factor for ASD (p= arrhythmias and/or echocardiographic changes has been intensively 0.002) and AVSD+ASD combined (p=0.05). No significant signal was studied by veterinary cardiologists. We performed a genome-wide identified from the non-chr21 GWAS. We then performed a 2-locus association study in Doberman Pinschers in the frame of the EU-LUPA genomewide analysis. A significant interaction signal was observed project. Using 71 DCM cases and 70 controls collected in Germany between loci on chr5 and chr6 (p=0.002). Since DS is likely to be a we identified a genome-wide significant association to DCM on dog disorder of gene expression, we focused on 2-locus interactions using chromosome 5. We validated the association in an independent only eQTLs. Interestingly, 2-locus model analysis on chr21 eQTLs cohort collected in the United Kingdom. The raw p-value of the best reveals an interaction between eQTLs for PDE9A and WDR9 genes associated SNP in the combined cohorts is 7.04 x 10-10. There is no and eQTLs for C21orf56 and C21orf57 genes. known DCM candidate gene under the association signal. Therefore, Furthermore, the 2-locus analysis of non-chr21 eQTLs identifies an DCM in Doberman Pinschers offers the chance of identifying a novel interaction between eQTLs for CLCNKA on chr1 and USMG5 on chr10 DCM gene that might also be relevant for human health. (p=0.01). A search for chr21 risk CNVs for AVSD using tiling 135K chr21 array did not show any significant risk variation. We propose P08.24*** that the CHD risk of DS is determined by not only trisomy 21 but also Relation between DNA methylation and gene expression the genome-wide interaction of specific alleles. K. R. van Eijk1,2, S. de Jong1,2, T. Langeveld1, E. Strengman1, E. Janson1, J. H. Veldink3, L. H. van den Berg3, R. S. Kahn2, C. G. F. de Kovel1, S. Horvath4, M. P08.26 P. M. Boks2,5, R. A. Ophoff1,2,4; A novel locus for autosomal recessive dystonia with mental 1Department of Medical Genetics, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, retardation maps to chromosome 6 2Department of Psychiatry, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, UMC E. Jaberi1, M. Rohani2, M. Rezvani2, E. Elahi1; Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, Rudolf Magnus 1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Institute of Neuroscience, UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Center for Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Neurology, Tehran University of Neurobehavioral Genetics, Neuropsychiatric Institute, University of California, Medical Sciences, University of Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Los Angeles, CA, United States, 5Julius Center for Health Sciences and introduction: Dystonia is a clinical syndrome with sustained muscle Primary Care, Utrecht, Netherlands. contraction, twisting, and abnormal postures. Some cases are familial, Epigenetic mechanisms are important for regulating the cellular but most are sporadic and of uncertain cause. Presently, ten genes machinery including gene expression. DNA methylation is one form and seven additional loci have been reported to be associated with of epigenetic control that is most commonly studied. However, little is monogenic primary dystonias. We aimed to identify the genetic cause known about the complex relation between DNA methylation and gene of dystonia in an affected Iranian family. expression. This study is an effort to decipher how DNA methylation materials & methods: Whole genome homozygosity mapping was affects gene expression. performed in a consanguineous Iranian family with three dystonia For this study we used (Illumina) array-based genome-wide DNA affected children using high density single nucleotide polymorphism methylation and gene expression data obtained in whole blood of 150 chips. Affected individuals were DYT1 negative and exhibited healthy controls. After quality control and removal of batch effects we childhood-onset, segmental dystonia and mental retardation. performed regression analysis with DNA methylation as a predictor Results: Haplotype analysis showed that all the affected individuals of gene expression levels. Age and gender were used as covariates. shared a common haplotype expanding 13cM on chromosome 6. We tested association of every methylation probe with every gene Parametric linkage analyses resulted in a lod score of 1.6. More than expression probe, resulting in over 400 million tests. Significance 200 annotated genes exist within the linked region. Screening of four thresholds were adjusted for cis (region of 500 kb of both sides of candidate genes has not revealed a disease causing mutation. a gene) and trans (genome-wide). Available genome-wide SNP data Conclusions: These findings indicate that a novel dystonia gene was used to investigate the genetic control of DNA methylation and exists on chromosome 6. Mutation screening of other candidate genes gene expression at these loci. within the linked region is being performed. We observed both positively and negatively associations between gene expression probes and DNA methylation probes. For cis 3,615 Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 253 P08.27 possible impact of eNOS 4a/5b, MTHFR C677T, MTR A2756G, ACE- Genetic of EBA ID, ATR1 A1166C, HSPG2 BamH1 and TGFb C/T polymorphisms on H. Sadeghi, R. Ludwig, A. Recke, S. Mueller, S. Ibrahim; the ESRD development in diabetic and nondiabetic patients. UK-SH, Lubeck, Germany. materials and methods: Clinical information and blood samples Epidermolysis bullosa acquisita (EBA) is an autoimmune blistering were collected from 1350 unrelated Caucasians represented by disease, characterized by antibodies to type VII collagen (COL7). At dDM1 (type1 diabetes mellitus dialysed patients, n=225), DM1 (type1 the moment little is known about the genetic susceptibility for EBA. diabetes mellitus patients without renal disease, n=180), dDM2 (type To find key genetic factors (MHC and non-MHC EBA susceptibility 2 diabetes mellitus dialysed patients, n=225), DM2 (type 2 diabetes genes) that control inflammation at the effector phase of EBA, we mellitus patients without renal disease, n=180) and HC (healthy used a multi-step approach. First, different and 16 genetically well controls, n= 540). Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples characterized inbred strains were tested for their susceptibility for EBA with Wizard Genomic DNA purification Kit (Promega). Genotyping was in the passive model. This allowed the identification of 8 associated performed by PCR and RFLP techniques. loci indicating EBA severity to be regulated by loci on chromosomes Results: The frequencies for these genotypes are in Hardy-Weinberg 1, 6, 8, 9, 11, 12, 15 and 16. To confirm these, we used mice from an equilibrium. Our results are not in agreement with several earlier advanced 4-way intercross breeding of 4 different strains with different studies which have indicated a strong association between investigated major histocompatibility complex (MHC) haplotype (MRL, NZM, BXD2, polymorphisms and ESRD in some Caucasian populations. Only and Cast). For example on chromosome 8 and 9 that have already eNOS 4a/5b increases the risk for renal failure in DM1 and DM2 been tested, we could confirm the genes on chr 9. We demonstrated patients (OR=2.2). that low statistical significant of full Genome-Wide Association Study conclusion: Our study, performed in Romanian population, shows with characterized inbred mouse strains together with outbred family that eNOS 4a/5b polymorphism is associated with ESRD development of mice allows for individual gene discovery for classic genetic linkage in diabetic subjects. analysis. Aknowledgements: This work was supported by CNCSIS - UEFISCDI, project number PNII - IDEI 2150/2008 and by the Sectoral P08.28 Operational Programme Human Resources Development, financed Whole genome linkage analysis in a large consanguineous from the European Social Fund and Romanian Government under the turkish family with idiopathic generalized epilepsy contract number POSDRU/89/1.5/S/64109. F. N. Tuncer1, E. Yucesan1, O. Ozdemir1, I. Karacan1, S. A. Ugur Iseri1, N. Bebek2, B. Baykan2, U. Ozbek1; P08.30 1Istanbul University, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Genetics Department, EX-HOm: EXome HOmozygosity in small consanguineous Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Neurology pedigrees Department, Istanbul, Turkey. T. Pippucci1, M. Benelli2, A. Magi2, P. Martelli3, P. Magini1, F. Torricelli2, R. Epilepsy is a complex neurological disorder that affects 1% of the Casadio3, M. Seri1, G. Romeo1; world’s population. Among different forms of epilepsies, idiopathic 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Gynaecological, Obstetric and Paediatric generalized epilepsies (IGE) are characterized by bilateral and Sciences, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Diagnostic Genetic Unit, synchronous generalized seizures in the absence of detectable brain Careggi Hospital, AOUC, University of Florence, Bologna, Italy, 3Laboratory of lesions or metabolic abnormalities. Thus, the primary etiology for this Biocomputing, CIRB/Department of Biology, University of Bologna, Bologna, disorder is believed to be genetic. Italy. The proposed study includes a large highly inbred consanguineous Objective: We provide the proof of principle that exome sequencing family with multiple IGE affected individuals. The ultimate aim is of only two affected siblings born to first cousin parents is capable identifying a new epilepsy gene to help in delineating the molecular of directly identifying a single candidate gene for an autosomal mechanisms of this disease. Physical, neurological and EEG recessive disorder. This strategy, which we call EX-HOM (EXome- examinations were performed on the subjects recruited with HOMozygosity), combines in a single step the capacity of exome information on family history. These examinations revealed 5 affected sequencing to identify all the coding variants present in a genome with individuals, a mother with three children and their cousin, who exhibit the property of homozygosity mapping to limit the search for candidate varying types of seizures. Along with these individuals, 4 unaffected genes to specific chromosomal regions. individuals from this family were genotyped using Illumina Infinium methods: We sequenced the exomes of two siblings born to first HumanLinkage-12 Genotyping BeadChip (6090 SNPs). The genotype cousin parents affected with dysmyelinating leukodystrophy and data were delineated using easyLinkage software platform, where spastic paraparesis caused by a mutation in FA2H . We extracted Mendelian genotyping errors were determined using PedCheck, homozygosity information directly from exome sequencing data, two and multipoint lod scores were calculated under the assumption without performing previous SNP genotyping, and selected the of autosomal recessive inheritance via SuperLink and SimWalk, candidate variants contained in the homozygous regions shared by respectively, and haplotypes were constructed through GeneHunter. the two affected siblings. Analyses revealed a promising locus on chromosome 2p12, which was Results: We identified five regions of shared homozygosity, accounting further analyzed through fine-mapping with additional microsatellites for 94.2 Mb, and containing three candidate variants. Among these, spanning a region of 75.36Mb-78.52Mb. However, microsattellite the known FA2H mutation remained the only prominent one. alleles were heterozygous in the 3 affected sibs rejecting linkage under conclusion: In small consanguineous pedigrees, the EX-HOM autosomal recessive inheritance. approach is a direct way to identify the candidate genetic defect, Future objectives include acquisition of extensive clinical data and bypassing obstacles such as genetic heterogeneity and the need for dense SNP genotyping of the family members in an attempt to unravel large pedigrees. small regions that may have been overlooked. P08.31 P08.29 Determining R202Q allele frequency in FmF patients the eNOs 4a/5b polymorphism increases the risk for end-stage S. Yigit1, T. Tasliyurt2, S. Uzun Kaya2, N. Bozkurt1, B. Kisacik2, O. Ates1; renal disease in Romanian diabetic patients 1Department of Medical Biology, Gaziosmanpasa University, Tokat, Turkey, D. Cimponeriu1, P. Apostol1, I. Radu1, M. Stavarachi1, M. Toma1, A. Craciun2, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Gaziosmanpasa University, Tokat, Turkey. C. Serafinceanu2, N. M. Panduru3, D. A. Ion3; Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disease 1University of Bucharest, Department of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2N. C. characterized by recurrent attacks of serositis, abdominal pain, arthritis Paulescu Institute, Bucharest, Romania, 3Carol Davila University of Medicine and pleuritis. FMF frequenty affects populations around the eastern and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. Mediterranean origin, especially Sephardic Jews, Armenians, Turks, Background: Diabetic patients have a high risk of developing end- Arabs and Greeks. Disease is caused by mutations in MEFV gene, stage renal disease (ESRD). Some polymorphisms seem to increase which encodes a protein named Pyrin/Marenostrin. In the Infever the risk for renal failure in different populations. Database, more than 180 gene alterations polymorphisms/mutations Objectives: The aims of this case-control study were to estimate the located in the MEFV gene.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 254 In the present study, we used 100 FMF patients and 104 healthy P08.34 controls. We detected R202Q mutation (605 G>A) at exon 2 of the study of polymorphic variant of gene alleles of apolipoprotein MEFV gene in Turkish FMF patients and healthy controls. c-3 (APOc-3) in individuals with different levels of high density We tested the existence of the mutation by PvuII restriction enzyme lipoprotein digestion after PCR amplification of the exon-2. In patients group, we R. Kajumova, L. Kayumova, E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova; detected homozygous R202Q mutation (AA allele) in 9 people, and Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian heterozygous R202Q mutations in 49 subjects. However, in control Federation. group, we detected homozygous R202Q mutations in 3 subjects and Genetic factors, along with environmental play an important role in R202Q heterozygous mutations in 27 subjects. the determination of the lipid metabolism in humans. APOC-3 gene The present study demonstrats that R202Q allele could be a risk factor (11q23.1-q23.2) encodes a protein apolipoprotein C-3, which is one for FMF. Currently, we are testing a higher number of subjects in both of the main regulators of lipid metabolism in the human body and, patient and control groups. in particular, regulates intravascular triglyceride splitting. We studied polymorphic gene variant C3238G APOC-3 and analyzed associations P08.32 of the polymorphic variant with a level of high density lipoprotein (HDL) the effect of missing data on type i error rate of family-based of human serum. association tests in the presence of linkage and no association Material for the study included DNA samples from 339 individuals. T. S. Hiekkalinna1,2, M. Perola1,2, J. D. Terwilliger2,3; Determining the level of HDL cholesterol by standard enzymatic 1National Institute for Health and Welfare, Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute methods. Analysis of polymorphic variant APOC-3 (C3238G) was for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of performed by PCR-RFLP. Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States. Results: The group of persons with low levels of HDL cholesterol in the One common element in family-based association studies is incomplete blood serum revealed increase of genotype APOC-3 *G/*G (83,33% data, meaning missing phenotype and/or genotype information, vs. 74% in the group of individuals with indicators of HDL in normal, P especially on late onset diseases. There are several family-based = 0.0005). When comparing those with high levels of HDL (79.1%) and association analysis methods which claim that missing data is not an those with rates of HDL do not normally found statistically significant issue and proper type I error rates are holding. differences. In this study, we examined the type I error rates of several commonly Conclusions: The found that the polymorphic variant C3238G gene used family-based association tests in genetic epidemiology as to APOC-3 is associated with the level of high density lipoprotein (HDL), their performance under increasing proportion of missing data on and genotype APOC-3 *G/*G is a marker of low levels of HDL. parents and/or founders using mixtures of singletons and families. We assumed complete linkage, but no association between disease and P08.35 marker loci under a variety of inheritance models. Detecting gene effect by simultaneously testing many The results of our study showed enormous type I error rate with some minuscular gene-gene or gene-environment interactions popular methods when proportion of missing data was increasing. M. T. LO1,2, W. C. LEE1,2; This can lead to false conclusions of positive association and therefore 1Graduate Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of wasting of resources in follow up studies. Results from a simulation- Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center based study will be presented. for Genes, Environment and Human Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. P08.33 We proposed a new approach for detecting the gene effect by Lack of association between single nucleotide Polymorphism simultaneously testing many small gene-gene (GG) or gene- and BcL11A HBs1L-mYB situations with increased levels of fetal environment interactions. The presence of GG interactions indicated hemoglobin that the gene is susceptible to the outcome, in spite of the state of F. Hashemi gorji, M. Hamid, A. Arab, A. Amirian, S. Zeinali, M. Karimipoor; the marginal effect. The interaction effects between two genes were Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. determined by an interaction term in a logistic regression model. Test Variable levels of fetal hemoglobin may persist into adulthood, although statistic is summation of Wald chi-square values of GG interaction they have no clinical consequences in otherwise healthy people. High tests in the regression models. If each Wald test for interaction is HbF levels have a major impact on the hemoglobin disorder such as independent, under null hypothesis, the test statistic followed a chi- Beta- Thalassemia Major. Increased HbF production ameliorates the square distribution with m (number of GG interaction tests) degrees of severity of both diseases. The level of HbF in adults is inherited as a freedom. If Wald tests are not independent, significance for test statistic quantitative trait, and is largely genetically controlled with a heritability is evaluated by permutation. For this approach, power evaluation in of 89%. HBS1L-MYB intergenic regions on chromosome 6q23, four scenarios according to asymptotic power functions determined by BCL11A on chromosome 2p16 and γ-globin genes on chromosome sample size and number of genes interacting with the gene of interest. 11, account for up to 50% of the variation in HbF levels in patients Requirement for binary variables and being unfavorable for rare gene with sickle cell anemia or Beta- Thalassemia Major thalassemia and in are major limitations of this approach. healthy adults. Common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the BCL11A and HBS1L-MYB loci have been implicated previously in P08.36 HbF level variation. In this study, three common SNPs were genotyped A genome-wide genetic map based on the ERF study data for rs4895441, rs11886868 and rs28384513 using PCR-RFLP method N. M. Belonogova1, T. I. Axenovich1, C. M. van Duijn2; among 50 major β-thalassemia patients with high levels of HbF. 1Institute of Cytology & Genetics SD RAS, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, Digestion carried out by RsaI, MboII and BstxI respectively. Mutant 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. allelic frequencies were in healthy patient. P-value was higher than In multipoint linkage studies, the Lod-score values can depend much 0.05 at three SNPs. There was no association between the studied on the genetic map in use. It is desirable for a genetic map to reflect polymorphisms and the variation in HbF levels in patients. Other the true frequencies of recombination events in studied population, at variations may have a role in enhancing the fetal hemoglobin in our both overall scale and local level. population. Different populations have different variants modifying the In this study, a genome-wide genetic map was built using CRIMAP severity of a sickle cell anemia and Beta- Thalassemia Major in the software on a sample of 2834 members of a large pedigree from a word. young isolate in the Netherlands genotyped for 5549 SNP markers of Illumina 6k linkage panel as a part of the ERF study. The large pedigree was split into 391 smaller subpedigrees with no overlapping in meioses. The total sample included 1928 meioses with mean of 716.2 and 1287.8 informative meioses per SNP marker on autosomes and X chromosome, respectively. The total genetic length of sex-averaged, male and female ERF genetic map were 3288.5, 2325.1 and 4094.6 cM, respectively, which Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 255 is ~12.8% shorter than the sum of corresponding intervals of Rutgers 0.1% between genotypes of overlapping individuals among clusters, map v.2, the finest genetic map available to date for Caucasians. At and on average, 0.45% of genotypes differed from those called with the local level, 73 between-marker intervals showed the strongest the first strategy. Thus the second approach can be a valid alternative differences in genetic length between two maps (the Rutgers for conducting GC in large data sets. estimate fell out of 99.99% CI of the respective ERF map interval). Unexpectedly, 46 (63%) of these intervals were longer for ERF map P08.39 despite its shorter total genetic length. As all these differences can Rules for resolving mendelian inconsistencies in nuclear reflect the true features of local and global recombination rates in ERF pedigrees typed for two-allele markers population, the information obtained can be used to refine genetic S. Khan; maps for linkage analysis of ERF data. Department of Statistics, Islamia College University Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan. P08.37 Gene-mapping studies regularly rely on examination for Mendelian Dealing with stratification and cryptic relatedness in GWAS: a transmission of marker alleles in a pedigree, as a way of screening case study in a canine population. for genotyping errors and mutations. For analysis of family data sets, M. Kierczak1, K. Tengvall2, K. Lindblad-Toh2,3, Ö. Carlborg1; it is usually necessary to resolve or remove the genotyping errors prior 1Comp. Genetics Group, Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, to analysis. At the Center of Inherited Disease Research (CIDR), to Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for deal with their large-scale data flow, they formalized their data cleaning Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala approach in a set of rules based on PedCheck output. We examine University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, via carefully designed simulations that how well CIDR’s data cleaning MA, United States. rules work in practice. We found that genotype errors in siblings are Canine models are constantly gaining importance in biomedical studies detected more often than in parents for less polymorphic SNPs and and have been successfully used to increase our understanding of vice versa for more polymorphic SNPs. Through computer simulation, diseases in human. However, canine populations often show significant we conclude that some of the CIDR’s rules work poorly in some degree of stratification and cryptic relatedness. Several methods have situations and we suggest a set of modified data cleaning rules that been proposed to account for genetic structure: genomic control, may work better than CIDR’s rules. structured association, PCA-based and mixed models. The majority of the methods have been designed to be used primarily P08.40 for the analysis of human populations and to account for only some New glaucoma related locus on chromosome 20p13 aspects of genetic structure. Therefore, genome-wide association I. Zorkoltseva1, N. Belonogova1, L. van Koowijk2, A. Kirichenko1, T. Axenovich1, studies in canine populations often call for more specific solutions. C. van Duijn2; Here, we present a workflow that we successfully applied to analyze a 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, structured canine population with cryptic relatedness present. 2Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. We analyzed 184 German shepherds (91 cases and 93 controls) Morphologic characteristics of the optic disc are associated with primary using Illumina 170K canine SNP array. First, we used autosomal open angle glaucoma and can be considered as its endophenotypes. IBS matrix, MDS and K-means clustering to determine population To identify new genes related to glaucoma we analyzed the structure. We confirmed that apart from population stratification, endophenotypes in large pedigree from Dutch isolated population. We there is some degree of cryptic relatedness between the individuals. performed genome-wide linkage and association analyses of combined Next, we tested 4 different methods of dealing with genetic structure: quantitative traits obtained by principal component analysis of seven 1) structured association (SA), 2) PCA-based approach (PCA) 3), parameters of the optic disc (disc area, rim area, superotemporal and mixed model (MM) and 4) a combination between mixed model and inferotemporal rim areas, rim-to-disc area ratio, cup-to-disc ratio and structured association (MM-SA). We obtained the following values of cup shape measure) measured in 1,979 participants. Two independent the λ inflation factor (λ>1 indicates that the association test statistics principal components and two factors were generated. The first is inflated due to genetic structure): λ =1.93, λ =1.15, λ =1.07, principal component, PC1, explained about 52% of the total variance NO_GC SA PCA λ =1.00 and λ =1.02. and had the high loadings of four rim related traits and cup-to-disc MM MM-SA We found the MM and MM-SA approaches to be most suitable to ratio. In the factor score FAC1 obtained by rotation of PC1, the number account for both the population stratification and cryptic relatedness. of initial parameters with high loading was minimized to three rim related traits. We found the strongest linkage signal (LOD = 4.46) for P08.38 FAC1 on chromosome region 20p13. This signal has been confirmed comparison of two strategies for genotype calling by suggestive linkage peak for PC1 (LOD = 2.28) and association of M. Valentini1, I. Zara1, M. Muggiri1, M. Moro1, C. Podda1, L. Leoni1, C. Jones1, rs58532 in the linked region with PC1 (the lowest p-value = 8.2 × 10- S. Sanna2; 6, FDR q-value = 0.027). The associated region points to a cluster of 1CRS4 (Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia), genes encoding several members of signal-regulatory-protein (SIRP) Pula, Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica (ex INN), Consiglio family, the regulatory membrane proteins. The closest gene, SIRPA, is Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Monserrato, Italy. likely to be involved in IGF-1-mediated AKT-activation, which has an Sample size needed to perform Genome-wide Association scans is anti-apoptotic effect. The new locus suggests a link between growth drastically increasing. Recent studies have shown that batch effects are regulation and rim related parameters that are endophenotypes for not negligible when clustering algorithms are used to perform genotype glaucoma. calling (GC); thus calling becomes a challenging step in large data sets. To reduce the run time while minimizing batch effects we evaluated P08.41 two different strategies to call genotypes on a distributed computing Haplogrep as a tool for mitochondrial DNA analysis environment, using a cohort of > 6,000 individuals genotyped with the M. Álvarez-Cubero1, B. Sánchez Martín-Moreno1, L. Martínez-González2, M. Affymetrix 6.0 array, and the Birdseed-v2 calling algorithm included Saiz1, J. Álvarez1,2, J. Lorente1,2; on the Affymetrix Power Tools (APT) package. First, we divided the 1Legal Medicine and Toxicology Department, Faculty of Medicine, University probesets in batches of 50,000 probes with 5,000 overlapping and of Granada, Granada, Spain, 2GENYO (Pfizer - University of Granada & ran jobs in parallel. Since the same normalization matrix was used by Andalusian Government Centre for Genomics & Oncology), Granada, Spain. all jobs, the results are expected to be equivalent to those obtained In the last decades, the analysis of variations in mitochondrial DNA in in a unique run. GC was completed on 15 days, using 18 CPU with human populations has provided a lot of information about things like 16Gb RAM, but required large amount of disk space. To further reduce molecular anthropology, genealogy and some genetic diseases. Thanks the run time, we ran the APT on 7 clusters of 1,000 individuals with to web programs like HaploGrep, based on the data of Phylothree.org 100 overlapping, balancing the ratio of cases and controls to mimic and updated at the same time that Phylothree.org database, we could the proportion observed in the entire dataset, and maximizing plates manage a big amount of information about sequences of DNAmt. These representation within each group. GC was completed in 2 days, using kind of programs makes it easier and quicker the processing of all the only 6 CPU and significantly less disk space. Discordance rate was data and obtaining a classification of a hundred of samples into different Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 256 haplogroups. HaploGrep also informs us about the probability of each ve SPG7 (NIPA1) were screened in 42 families. Using the SSCP sample in the assigned haplogroup, the probability of the followed method and subsequent DNA sequencing one patient and his father haplogroups with a high value and the most representatives’ mutations were found to have an insertion mutation (c.310_311insA) leading to of each single haplogroup. The obtained results are represented in a a truncated Spastin protein. Another patient revealed a heterozygous graphic way like tables and phylogenetic threes. In this study we could c.1741C>T change (p.Arg581X) leading to a premature stop codon observe different applications of this web program. One is to see the in the same gene. Still one other patient was heterozygous for a genetic influence in the population flow of an ancient population (North missense mutation, c.941A>G (p.H258R) in Atlastin. All identified African) in the actual South Spanish population. Another is the analysis mutations were previously reported. of the crossbreeding in South American populations as a result of In the second part of the study, linkage to autosomal recessive loci for Spanish and Mayan admixture. The last one consists in the use of this which the genes have been identified (SPG5, SPG7, SPG11, SPG15, program analyzing the similarities and differences between patients SPG20 and SPG21 loci) was investigated in 15 families. Parents and controls in diseases like cancer. Whereas in crossbreeding and were consanguineous in 11 families with at least two affected siblings. population studies the utility of this program has been proved, we are Linkage was found to SPG11 in four families, to SPG15 in two families, testing how useful it could be in the analysis of cancer although some and to SPG21 in one family. Sequencing of the relevant genes is clinical significative differences have been marked. currently being performed to identify the causative mutation in these families. In two of the families, linkage to all tested loci was excluded P08.42** that should be further investigated for other known AR-HSP loci. A genome-wide association study in European isolated populations identifies new loci and pathways for hearing P08.44 function, thresholds and age-related loss the HiF1A Pro582ser polymorphism in Russian weightlifters G. Girotto1, N. Pirastu1, R. Sorice2, G. Biino3, H. Campbell4, A. P. d’Adamo1, N. R. Gabbasov1, A. Danilova1, A. Hakimullina2, I. Ahmetov1; D. Hastie5, T. Nutile2, O. Polasek6, L. Portas7, I. Rudan6, S. Ulivi1, T. Zemunik8, 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg A. F. Wright5, M. Ciullo2, K. Steel9, C. Hayward5, M. Pirastu3, P. Gasparini1; Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. 1Dep.Rep.Sciences,Dev.Pub.Health;IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo-Children Hospital- Power performance is determined by high anaerobic potential (high University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute of Genetics and Biophysics reserves of ATP, creatine phosphate, and glycogen; high concentration “A.Buzzati-Traverso”, CNR, Naples, Naples, Italy, 3Inst.Pop.Genetics,CNR- and activities of glycolysis and phosphagenic system enzymes; Sassari;Shardna life science Pula-Cagliari, Sassari-Cagliari, Italy, 4Centre for predominance of fast-twitch muscle fibers in skeletal muscles, etc.). Population Health Sciences.Univ.Edinburgh Med School-Edinburgh, Edinburgh, HIF-1 gene, expressed in all mammalian tissues, attends in organism’s United Kingdom, 5MRC Human Gentics Unit, Inst.Genetics and Molecular Med, response to hypoxia via controlling glucose metabolism and genes Western General Hospital-Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 6CGHR. involved in different cellular functions. HIF1A, the regulatory subunit Univ.Split Med School-Split; Centre for Pop.Health Sciences;Univ.Edinburgh of HIF-1 gene’s dimeric product, contains a missense polymorphism Med School-Edinburgh, Split, Croatia, 7Inst.Pop.Genetics,CNR-Sassari, Pro582Ser (C/T at bp 85; rs11549465). The rare T allele (proline to Sassari, Italy, 8CGHR.Univ.Split Med School-Split, Split, Croatia, 9Wellcome serine change) by increasing HIF-1A protein’s activity and stability Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton-Cambridge, may improve glucose metabolism. The study aimed to determine Cambridge, United Kingdom. the influence of the HIF1A Pro582Ser polymorphism on power Hearing is a complex trait but, until now, few genes are known to performance. One hundred and eight professional weightlifters of contribute to its variability and little is known about genetic factors regional and national standard were recruited for the study. Controls involved in age-related hearing loss (ARHL). To discover genes and were 434 healthy unrelated volunteers, citizens of Kazan, without any pathways underlying auditory function and ARHL we planned an competitive sport experience. Genotyping was performed on DNA integrated strategy characterized by three approaches. A) a GWAS samples obtained from buccal epithelium cells by DNA extraction meta-analyzing quantitative traits data from 6 isolated populations . kit. Genotyping for the HIF1A Pro582Ser variants (rs11549465) was Results led to the identification of eight suggestive significant loci (p<10- performed by PCR and restriction enzyme digestion. The number of 7) with a series of genes expressed within the inner ear. Additional carriers of the rare Ser allele (Pro/Ser or Ser/Ser) was significantly biological candidates (p<10−6) were identified. Some of these new higher in weightlifters than in controls (28.7% vs. 13.4; P=0.0001). loci map to already known hereditary hearing loss loci whose genes Thus, HIF1A gene Pro582Ser polymorphism is associated with elite still need to be identified. Data have also been used to construct a power athlete status, which suggests an important role for HIF-1a in highly significant “in silico” pathway for hearing function characterized skeletal muscle adaptation to power training. by a network of 49 genes, 34 of which are certainly expressed in the ear. B) a similar GWAS on qualitative traits from the same populations P08.45 leading to the identification of some loci on the following chromosomes Identification Of The Gene Responsible For The 4H Syndrome. 2,13,19,17,16,20 involving in some cases genes related with hearing E. CHOUERY1, V. Delague2, N. Jalkh1, D. Rodriguez3, B. Chabrol4, O. development and hearing function but also genes whose function Boespflug-Tanguy5, A. Mégarbané1; is still unknown. A replica phase is now in progress on a series of 1Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 2INSERM UMR_S 910, « Génétique case/controls coming from different European countries. C) whole Médicale et Génomique Fonctionnelle » Faculté de Médecine de la Timone,, exome sequencing of cases selected from large pedigrees showing Marseille, France, 3Service de neuro-pédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, segregation of ARHL and coming from the same isolated populations. France, 4Service de neurologie pédiatrique, CHU La-Timone, Marseille, France, Preliminary results provide new insights into the molecular basis of 55 Service de Neurologie Pédiatrique et des Maladies Métaboliques, Hôpital hearing function and ARHL and may suggest new targets for hearing Robert Debré, Paris, France. impairment treatment and prevention. Dentoleukoencephalopathies with autosomal recessive inheritance are very rare. In 2003, we reported, for the first time, a large inbred P08.43 Syrian pedigree with oligodontia associated with a degenerative Genetic Analysis of Autosomal Dominant and Recessive neurologic condition characterized by progressive ataxia, pyramidal Hereditary spastic Paraplegia syndrome, central white matter abnormalities and cortical atrophy B. Özeş1, Ç. Atay1, H. N. Ceylan2, Y. Parman2, E. Battaloğlu1; (AJMG, 2003,118A(1):76-81). 1Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. A SNP genomewide linkage analysis, in this family, led to the Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSPs) describe a heterogeneous identification of a candidate linkage region at chromosome 10q22, group of neurodegenerative disorders with progressive spasticity in the with a maximum multipoint lod score value of 5.66 (NPL score = lower limbs. HSPs can be inherited in autosomal dominant, recessive, 7.65). The candidate genomic interval contained 95 known genes or X-linked forms. To date, 41 spastic paraplegia loci and 17 genes including the Prosaposin gene (PSAP) responsible for metachromatic have been identified with diverse functions such as axonal transport, leukodystrophy, which was excluded. Sixteen additional candidate regulation of the cytoskeleton, and mitochondrial function. genes were screened by fluorescent sequencing and excluded. In the first part of the study, the most commonly mutated autosomal Sequencing of the seventeenth candidate gene revealed an intronic dominant genes, SPG4 (Spastin), SPG3A (Atlastin), SPG31 (REEP1), variation which segregates perfectly in the family and affects the Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 257 splicing of the corresponding transcript. ratios (OR’s) were used as risk estimates. Departure from additivity Screening of this gene was performed in 5 supplementary families indicated that two factors were jointly involved in disease susceptibility. affected with the 4H syndrome (Leukodystrophy Hypomyelinating We identified a total of 16 interactions. The strongest p-values were in with Hypodontia and Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism ), a condition the order of 10(-14) and represented interactions between markers in similar to the one we described in the Syrian family, but with additional GRIK4-NR3C2, ARHGAP10-GRIA2 and HTR2C-FKBP5 genes. hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Several different missense and A subsequent pFDR-test confirmed that the interaction effects were nonsense point mutations were detected in the gene, therefore robustly reported. However, using OR’s may have inflated the risk demonstrating the implication of this gene in both the 4H syndrome estimates. Therefore, these results are currently validated using a and the syndrome described by us in the Syrian family. permutation-analysis. Functional analyses are underway in order to understand the physiopathology of these syndromes. Results will be published soon. P08.48 A detailed view on model-Based multifactor Dimensionality P08.46 Reduction with quantitative traits for detecting gene-gene Fast Linkage calculation of Affymetrix sNP 6.0 genotype data interactions: different ways of adjusting for lower-order effects using a new program sNP6-LiNK J. M. Mahachie John1,2, T. Cattaert1,2, F. Van Lishout1,2, K. Van Steen1,2; H. Eiberg, L. Hansen; 1Systems and Modeling Unit, Montefiore Institute, University of Liege, Liege, ICMM; University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. Belgium, 2Bioinformatics and Modeling, GIGA-R, University of Liege, Liege, Ott 1976 (Am J Hum Genet 28, 528-529) introduced the program Belgium. LIPED for linkage analysis of large family pedigrees with or without Understanding the effects of genes on the development of complex loops and the program is ideal for two-point linkage analyses. We diseases and traits in humans is a major aim of genetic epidemiology. have previously constructed a helper program, LIPED.COM, that In particular, if there exist significant main effects unaccounted for automatically make an input file to LIPED, allowing LOD score during epistasis screening, false positives arise and therefore epistasis calculations for more than 800 markers and the results to be present results reported might not be genuine. In this study, we use simulation in a usable form. This program has been tested by mapping more than to assess the effect of implementing different corrective measures for 800 markers using families from the Copenhagen Family Bank (Eiberg lower-order effects in an MB-MDR context of two-locus detection, on et al. Clin Genet 1989; 36:415-418). both power and family-wise error rate. The development of SNP microarray chip technology (Affymetrix chip) The implemented MB-MDR strategy reduces the multi-locus genotype for testing >106 SNP alleles has made new demands for the linkage dimension to one with three possible outcomes, while pooling multi- analysis. We have therefore modified our linkage helper programs locus genotypes into three groups of risk (High, Low and No Evidence) to analyze genotype output files for > 106 loci. The materials can be based on the liberal p-value threshold 0.1. Adjusting for main effects is analyzed fast and the results shown graphically. This program, SNP6- performed in two categories: main effects screening prior to and during LINK, demands a simple FORTRAN programming for each new MB-MDR run. project and several families can be analyzed in one process and the Data are simulated according to two quantitative trait models (M27 program can use Illumina genotype output files. Several parameters and M170) of Evans et al. 2006 that incorporate varying degrees of can be adjusted before calculations as heterozygote mating for epistasis, and include a range of allele frequencies p: 0.1, 0.25, 0.5, recessive traits, which reduce the output graphical presentation at the predetermined functional SNPs. We consider 500 simulation to fewer but informative positive or negative LOD scores. Also bed replicates, involving 2000 unrelated individuals. MB-MDR screening is files for uploading of LOD scores to UCSC Genome Browser can be performed on 100 SNPs which are assumed to be in Hardy-Weinberg produced. The LOD score calculations for more than a million SNP’s in Equilibrium. No linkage disequilibrium exists between the SNPs. nuclear families takes less than half an hour, and can be run using low In conclusion, preliminary results showed that indeed uncorrected for RAM PC with Windows Excell and a FORTRAN 99 compiler. main effects results have false positives amounting to as high as 100%. Also, additive modeling, the mainly used first strategy in the context of P08.47 main effects GWAS may not be sufficient for epistasis screening. A candidate gene study for major Depressive Disorder in STAR*D and GAIN cohorts identifies potential statistical P08.49 interaction between several candidate genes. imputation-free meta-Analysis with YAmAs (Yet Another meta- M. Lekman1, H. Källberg2, D. Charney3, H. Manji4, J. Rush5, F. McMahon6, S. Analysis software) Paddock7, I. Kockum1; C. Meesters1,2, M. Leber2, C. Herold1, M. Mattheisen2,3, D. Drichel1, T. Becker1; 1Dept. of Clinical Neuroscience, Stockholm, Sweden, 2Institute of 1German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, Environmental Medicine, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Dept. of Psychiatry, Mount 2Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 4Dept. of Health & Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Department of Genomics, Human Services (DHHS), Bethesda, Bethesda, MD, United States, 5) Dept. Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. of Psychiatry, University of Texas South-western Medical Center, Dallas, TX, The success of GWAS is motivation enough to exchange and combine United States, 6Genetic Basis of Mood & Anxiety disorders, NIMH, NIH, Dept. available data resources to expediently discover genetic risk factors of Health & Human Services (DHHS), Bethesda, MD, United States, 7Dept. of for human traits. The primary tool is meta-analysis (MA) of imputed Neuroscience, Stockholm, Sweden. data. Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a severe lifelong psychiatric A main purpose of imputation prior to MA is to avoid loss of SNPs. With illness with a heterogeneous background likely caused by interaction YAMAS we present a software that avoids such loss without the need to of a multiple set of genetic and environmental influences. Despite impute. By using reference data from the HAPMAP and 1000 genomes decades of genetic studies no genetic risk factor has been successfully projects users are enabled to analyze all SNPs that are present in at validated for MDD. least one study. For each SNP that is missing in one study, the marker Most genetic studies have so far relied on single SNP association from the study with largest r², according to the reference data, with analyses. However, it is likely that in the susceptibility of multifactorial the missing marker is chosen as a “proxy SNP”. Furthermore, based diseases risk factors interact to increase disease susceptibility. In the on reference haplotype frequencies, “proxy alleles” of a SNP and its present study we have analyzed interactions of SNPs in the GAIN proxy-SNP are identified. For each SNP, MA of that SNP is done by MDD-study located in candidate genes selected from the STAR*D- combining the association results of the SNP or, if not available the cohort. proxy-SNP, across studies. Forty-seven markers that were found to be nominally associated in We present results from a power simulation study and compare the the GAIN MDD-study were included in the study. Each marker was performance of MA with imputation and imputation-free MA. Imputation- then tested for interaction with 2866 genotyped or imputed markers free MA in general is not quite as powerful as MA with imputation, since in the same set of genes. The interaction model assumed a dominant the marker panel is still smaller. However, in most scenarios, the power effect from one marker. Interaction was then defined as deviation loss is only very moderate. from additivity and measured using the attributable proportion. Odds In summary, MA with the YAMAS proxy-algorithm is a quick and easy Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 258 alternative, yielding ad hoc results and thereby giving an incentive to P08.52 follow-up analysis. Keeping in mind that collaborative MA efforts are Fast approximate test for genome-wide association studies frequently long-lasting, the time advantage becomes apparent. based on population data G. R. Svishcheva, T. I. Axenovich, Y. S. Aulchenko; P08.50 Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. microRNAs 340* AND 624* are upregulated in platelets in Genome-wide association (GWA) analysis is a powerful tool for patients with coronary artery disease identifying loci affecting complex traits. While standard association tests B. M. Sondermeijer1, A. Bakker1, A. Halliani1, S. Maiwald1, S. assume independence across samples, several approaches account Sivalapalaratnam1, T. A. Mulders1,2, M. W. J. de Ronde1, A. J. Tijsen1, A. A. for non-independence expected in presence of genetic substructure. Marquart1, P. A. Moerland1, M. D. Trip1, J. C. M. Meijers1, E. E. Creemers1, S. The mixed models are among the most powerful methods allowing to Pinto1; account for relationship structure of the sample. However, application 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University of Maastricht, of mixed models to GWA scans is computationally demanding, and Maastricht, Netherlands. as a rule the computational time shows quadratic dependency on Rationale Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a cause of mortality, the number of subjects, requiring application of high performance underscoring the need for innovative diagnostic strategies. Platelets computing when thousands of subjects and/or multiple traits are studied. play a role not only in acute thrombotic disease, but also in the process Previously, two approximate methods, FASTA/mmScore (Chen and of atherosclerotic plaque formation. This is exemplified by the beneficial Abecasis, 2007; Aulchenko et al., 2010) and GRAMMAR (Aulchenko use of anti-platelet therapy. MiRNAs are emerging as attractive et al., 2007), have been proposed. mmScore gives unbiased estimates biomarkers since they exhibit tissue- and cell-specific expression. of model parameters, but computational time is quadratic on number of We aim to identify novel biomarkers for diagnostic strategies. We subjects, while GRAMMAR shows linear dependency, though results hypothesized that platelet derived miRNA expression patterns differ in biased effect estimates and conservative test statistics. between patients with CAD and controls. Here we propose new approximate method, which leads to unbiased methods & Results We isolated RNA from platelets of 12 male patients effect estimates, has proper distribution of the test statistics, and is with premature CAD and 12 age- and sex-matched healthy controls as fast as GRAMMAR. Our method is based on transformation of a and performed miRNA array expression profiling (Illumina beadchips). vector of dependent phenotype residuals into a vector of independent We validated our findings in two independent cohorts by qPCR. ones by application of the matrix approximation allowing reduction Microarray profiling identified 214 of the 893 mature human miRNAs to of an effect of a covariance matrix to an effect of scalar factor. We be differentially expressed (p< 0.05). When corrected for background derived an analytical formula for this scalar factor, making possible to noise and corrected for multiple testing, miR340*, miR451, miR454*, apply simple linear regression method to estimate the effects and test miR545:9.1, miR615-5p, and miR624* and miR1280* were identified statistics. This scalar factor is an analytical correction to GRAMMAR with an expression level that was at least 1.5-fold different in patients approach, which eliminates its conservatism and bias. as compared to controls. The array and validation demonstrated that miR340* and miR624* had significantly higher expression levels in P08.53 patients as compared to controls (P< 0.05). Genome-wide association study to identify new genes/pathways conclusion Two platelet derived microRNAs are significantly conferring risk to OA susceptibility. upregulated in patients with CAD as compared to healthy controls Y. F. M. Ramos1, S. D. Bos1, U. Styrkarsdottir2, K. Panoutsopoulou3, C. clinical Relevance Platelet MiR340* and miR624* are upregulated in Keurentjes4, N. Lakenberg1, R. Nelissen5, M. Kloppenburg6, H. Kroon7, A. G. CAD, therefore they may be a potential biomarker in CAD. Uitterlinden8,9, J. Loughlin3,10, E. Zeggini3, I. Jonsdottir2, J. B. van Meurs8,9, E. Slagboom1, I. Meulenbelt1; P08.51 1Department of Molecular Epidemiology, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, Investigation of five loci (DFNB6, DFNB25, DFNB39, DFNB42, 2deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3arcOGEN Consortium, Cambridge, DFNB91) in 100 iranian families with Autosomal recessive non- United Kingdom, 4Department of Orthopaedics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, syndromic hearing loss by linkage analysis 5Department of Orthopedics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 6Department E. Sohrabi1, N. Bazazzadegan1, S. Arzhangi1, H. Azimi2, M. Kasiri3, R. Smith4, Rheumatology & Department of Clinical Epidemiology, LUMC, Leiden, K. Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1; Netherlands, 7Department of Radiology, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 1Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation 8Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic counseling centre, Netherlands, 9The Netherlands Genomics Initiative-Sponsored by the Arak, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetic counseling centre, Shahrekord, Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, 10Newcastle University, Musculoskeletal Research Group, Institute of Cellular Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, Medicine, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. Iowa, IA, United States. Osteoarthritis (OA), also referred to as degenerative disease of the Hearing loss in humans is the most genetically heterogeneous synovial joints, is caused by cartilage degradation going together with trait known. This impairment affects more than 270 million people osteophyte formation and subchondral sclerosis causing pain and worldwide. Genetic causes of hearing loss are estimated to account disability. To date, no cure is available and treatment is limited to pain for 68% of cases in newborns and 55% of cases by the age of four. relief. Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is the OA is considered a complex disease in which both genetic and most common type of inherited hearing impairment. Due to the wealthy environmental factors contribute to its development. The estimated gene pool, Iran is a valuable source to identify the genes involved in heritability differs per joint site and is estimated between 40 to different conditions. 65%. It has been proposed, however, that this genetic component To date, several genes have been studied in deaf Iranian population. is highly polygenic with multiple risk alleles conferring small effects. Here we are studying 5 genes (TMIE, GRXCR1, HGF, ILDR1, and Nevertheless, few consistent OA susceptibility genes emerged to SERPINB6) for mutations that result in ARNSHL. Mutations in these date. Deep phenotyping may help to stratify OA into genetically and genes have been identified in Iranian, Indian, Pakistani and Turkish environmentally homogeneous subsets, thereby enhancing power and families. allowing identification of variants with larger impact on specific disease The objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of mutations aspects. in these genes in the Iranian population. A total of 100 families with Here, we set out to identify OA susceptibility loci conferring risk ARNSHL are being investigated by screening for homozygosity to to generalized OA in the GARP study by genome wide association these five loci (DFNB6, DFNB25, DFNB39, DFNB42, and DFNB91). (GWAS). In the GARP study we have collected sibling pairs with After homozygosity mapping is completed, sequencing analysis will be symptomatic OA at multiple joint locations. We have identified 20 done to detect the gene mutation. To date, analysis of 100 families for putative OA susceptibility loci with p-values ≤1*10-5 that are now being DFNB6 locus has been completed and an Azeri family has been linked replicated both in silico (3 OA cohorts) and by de novo genotyping to TMIE gene. Further analysis and mutation detection is underway. (1 OA cohort). In addition to the identification of loci conferring risk Key words: Non-syndromic hearing loss, DFNB, Iran. to OA, data obtained in the GWAS will be used for the identification Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 259 of pathways or groups of genes involved in the development of OA. P08.56 Together, our results can contribute to a better understanding of OA Impact of polygenic profile to the performance of endurance and pathology as well as its treatment. strength/power athletes V. Ginevičienė1, A. Jakaitienė1, L. Tubelis2, V. Kučinskas1; P08.54 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian the Gln/Arg of human Paraoxonase polymorphisms (PON1 Olympic sports centre, Vilnius, Lithuania. Leu55met and Gln192Arg; PON2 ser311cys) is not related to We investigated five genetic polymorphisms that are candidates acute myocardial infarction in the tunisian population. explaining individual variations in human physical performance S. Mehri, S. Mahjoub, M. Hammami; phenotypic traits (ACE I/D (rs1799752); ACTN3 C/T (rs1815739); Laboratory of Biochemistry, UR “Human Nutrition and Metabolic Disorders” PPARGC1A G/A (rs8192678); PPARA G/C (rs4253778); PPARG Faculty of Medicine, Monastir, Tunisia. C/G (rs1801282)) in professional Lithuanian athletes (n=193) and Introduction: Paraoxonases (PONs) are closely related antioxidant in the general population of Lithuania (nonathletic controls, n=250). enzymes encoded by clustered genes on chromosome 7q. Two According to Williams and Folland (J Physiol 586:113-121, 2008) we particular polymorphisms, namely PON1-192 and PON2-311, in the calculated (1) the ‘total genotype score’ (TGS, the combination of five genes encoding the antioxidant enzymes paraoxonase-1 (PON1) and polymorphisms with the maximum value of ‘100’ for the theoretically paraoxonase-2 (PON2) have been associated with an increased risk optimal polygenic score) in the athlete groups and in the Lithuanian of acute myocardial infarction (AMI). However, previous findings have population; and (2) the probability for the occurrence of Lithuanian been contradictory. We evaluated three PON polymorphisms (PON1 individuals with the ‘perfect’ polygenic physical performance phenotype Leu55Met and Gln192Arg; PON2 Ser311Cys) in Tunisian patients with (power-oriented, endurance-oriented) profile. The TGS was calculated AMI. for the “power” and “endurance” groups of the Lithuanian athletes. We Methods: 168 AMI patients compared to 169 healthy volunteers. found the mean TGS significantly higher for the elite power-oriented Results: PONs allele and genotype frequencies did not differ between athletes (44.4±11.3) compared to controls (33.6±13.2) (p<0.05) patients and controls. indicating more favorable polygenic profile for power-oriented athletes. The PON polymorphisms (PON1 Leu55Met and Gln192Arg; PON2 No significant differences were found comparing the athletes in the Ser311Cys) were not significantly associated with AMI (p=1.11, endurance group (65.7±13.9) and controls (66.4±13.2). The obtained p=0.09, p=1.46 respectively). No significant differences in age, sex, probability of a Lithuanian individual possessing a theoretically optimal BMI, waist circumference, total Cholesterol, HDL-C and LDL-C were endurance-oriented polygenic profile for up to five candidate genetic detected among the three-genotype subgroups of PON1 Leu55Met, polymorphisms, equals to 1% (or 1 among 99 Lithuanian individuals); PON1 Gln192Arg and PON2 Ser311Cys in the AMI patients. the optimal power-oriented polygenic profile accordingly 0.0007% (or Conclusions: The PON1 Leu55Met, PON1 Gln192Arg and PON2 1 among 132650 Lithuanian individuals). The optimal combination Ser311Cys polymorphisms are not related to acute myocardial of genotypes may occur more frequently in a very large population. infarction in Tunisian population Although, if there was a larger number of polymorphisms included in the analysis, the probability of possessing the optimal polygenic profile P08.55 would diminish. Genome-wide association study of the Polycystic Ovary syndrome: distribution of promising gene variants associated P08.57 with testosterone in the LURic cohort Association of cOmt and mtHFR polymorphisms with cognition U. Lam1, E. Wehr1, N. Schweighofer1, O. Trummer1, B. Genser2, B. Boehm3, B. in schizophrenia Winkelmann4, W. März5,6, T. Pieber1, B. Obermayer-Pietsch1; D. Kontis1, C. Sofocleous2,3, E. Theoxari1, S. Kleisas1, E. Kanavakis4, H. 1Medical University of Graz, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Fryssira5; Endocrinology and Metabolism, Graz, Austria, 2BG Statistical Consulting, 11st Psychiatric Department, Psychiatric Hospital of Attica,, Athens, Greece, Graz, Austria, 3University of Ulm, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of 2Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Athens University. ”Aghia Endocrinology and Diabetes, Ulm, Germany, 4Department of Cardiology, Heart Sophia” Children’s Hospital,, Athens, Greece, 3Research Institute for the Study Center Ludwigshafen, Ludwigshafen, Germany, 5University of Heidelberg, of Genetic and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Department of Public Health, Social and Preventive Medicine, Mannheim, Hospital, Athens , Greece., Athens, Greece, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Germany, 6Synlab Center of Laboratory Diagnostics, Heidelberg, Germany. School of Medicine, Athens University. ”Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, PolyCystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) causes hormonal imbalances Athens, Greece, 5Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Athens affecting fertility, and metabolic diseases like obesity, type 2 diabetes, University. ”Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospial, Athens, Greece. cardiovascular problems and quality of life. A genetic background Objectives: The investigation of the effect of COMT (Val108/158Met) of the PCOS is supported by affected families. Aim of the study is and MTHFR (C677T) polymorphisms on cognitive function in the detection of new genetic pathways for potential diagnostic and schizophrenia. therapeutic targets in PCOS. Material and Methods: 92 patients with chronic schizophrenia PCOS phenotype definition was based on hormonal and metabolic and 61 controls were assessed on cognitive functioning using the variables in women in comparison to men. Our Genome-Wide Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-(WAIS-III) and the Cambridge Association Study (GWAS) focuses on genetic alterations of a special Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB). The CANTAB PCOS phenotype, regarding high testosterone levels in female and tests measured: speed of movement (MOT), pattern and spatial male LUdwigshafen RIsk and Cardiovascular (LURIC) patients. recognition memory (PRM, SRM respectively), spatial working In total, 908.398 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were memory (SWM), planning (SOC) and cognitive flexibility (IEDSS). generated as GWAS raw data. Those SNPs have been analyzed RFLP analysis was performed to allow characterization of COMT and following multiple steps and have been annotated with different criteria MTHFR polymorphisms. for autosomal and X chromosome-linked genes, separately, using Results: Participants were divided into four groups according to their WGAViewer Software. The significant associations between SNPs at genetic polymorphisms [VALC (Val-Val & CC), VALT (Val-Val & CT or 17 loci in LURIC female and 9 loci in the whole cohort with high levels TT), METC (Val-Met or Met-Met CC), METT (Val-Met or Met-Met & CT of testosterone were identified. or TT)]. Positive correlations of COMT and MTHFR polymorphisms to With the replication results of these candidate SNPs in our 669 cognition were recorded in both the group of patients with schizophrenia carefully phenotyped PCOS and 410 control subjects, we expect to and the control group. Patients with VALT polymorphisms presented identify genetic variants contributing to diagnosis and new therapeutic higher full scale and performance IQ than patients with VALC [F(1, aspects for PCOS prevention and treatment. 42)=5.803; p=0.020 and F(1,42)=4.339; p=0.043, respectively]. In all patients there was also a significant main effect of COMT in SOC, with those carrying VALC having a worse performance compared to the ones with METC [Kruskal-Wallis (df=2)=6.828, p=0.033]. Finally, in respect to PRM, SRM and SWM controls carrying VALT performed Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 260 better than those with VALC. P08.60 Conclusion: The above findings support the association of COMT and BAFF and FcGRiiiA polymorphisms are predictive factors of MTHFR genes with the cognitive performance in schizophrenia and response to rituximab in Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) are consistent with a possible epistatic nature of the polymorphisms A. RUYSSEN-WITRAND1, S. ROUANET2, B. Combe3, M. Dougados4, studied. G. VIVIER5, X. LE LOET6, J. SIBILIA7, J. TEBIB8, X. MARIETTE9, A. CONSTANTIN1; P08.58 1PURPAN Teaching Hospital, TOULOUSE, France, 2Roche, PARIS, France, molecular analysis of Prader-Willi and Angelman syndromes: A 3Lapeyronie Hospital, MONTPELLIER, France, 4COCHIN HOSPITAL, PARIS, study of twenty tunisian patients France, 5DOCS, PARIS, France, 6ROUEN HOSPITAL, ROUEN, France, R. Meddeb1, M. Trabelsi1, M. Chaabouni1, Y. Laaribi1, F. Maazoul1, I. Ouertani1, 7HAUTEPIERRE HOSPITAL, STRASBOURG, France, 8LYON-SUD HOSPITAL, L. Ben Jemaa1, N. Khouja2, F. Fdhila3, H. Bouhamed Chaabouni1, R. Mrad1; LYON, France, 9KREMLIN BICETRE HOSPITAL, KREMLIN BICETRE, France. 1Department of Congenital and Hereditary Disease Hospital Charles Nicolle, The presence of RF or ACPA was previously reported as predictive Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of Pediatric Neurology Institution of Neurology, factors of response to rituximab (RTX) in RA. SMART is a randomized Tunis, Tunisia, 3Hospital of Pediatrics, Tunis, Tunisia. open trial assessing 2 strategies of re-treatment in patients (pts) Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) and Angelman syndrome (AS) are responding to RTX after failure or intolerance to anti-TNF therapy. neurobehavioral disorders that result from the loss of expression The objective of this ancillary study was to identify genetic markers of imprinted genes in the paternal and maternal chromosome 15, predictive of response to a first course of RTX. The potential respectively. association between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in The aim of this work is to achieve a molecular study for 20 patients (7 10 candidate genes involved in B cell pathways and response to AS; 13 PWS) in order to determine the exact molecular mechanism RTX was investigated. Baseline clinical and biologic factors were involved. collected. Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to A positive methylation-specific PCR (MS-PCR) enabled the reliable identify predictive factors of good or moderate EULAR response in diagnosis of 13 PWS and 7 AS patients. For all these cases, we comparison with non response at week 24. Among the 115 pts (age = applied FISH technique. Thereafter, we have developed a linkage 56±11 years, 80% of women, 14±9 years of disease duration, baseline analysis method by testing 8 polymorphic genetic markers within the DAS28 = 5.7±0.9, 70%RF+, 82% ACPA+), 93 (81%) were responders. PWS/AS critical region 15q11q13. One non-synonymous coding SNP (rs396991) of FCGRIIIA (1q23) and FISH study allows us to classify our 20 subjects in two groups: 6 of 13 one SNP (rs9514828) in the 5’ regulatory region (-871 C/T) of BAFF PWS (46%) patients had microdeletion of paternal 15q11-q13 and 6 of (13q32-q34) were associated with response to RTX. For FCGRIIIA, 7 AS patients (85%) had microdeletions of maternal 15q11-q13. The G allele carriers had higher response rate (91% of responders versus genotype and linkage analyses of the 8 non deletional probands and 70%, OR=4.6 [95%CI: 1.5-13.6], p=0.006) in comparison to non their family disclosed that Angelman patient had inherited two paternal carriers. For BAFF, C allele carriers had higher response rate (85% of alleles of chromosome 15 and 5 of 7 non deletional PWS (38%) responders versus 64%, OR=3.2 [1.1-9.1], p=0.03) in comparison to subjects had a maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 15 (UPD non carriers. These results were confirmed in multivariate analysis. In 15). Among these PWS patients, 4 cases had a maternal heterodisomy RA pts failing to anti-TNF, two polymorphisms of FCGRIIIA and BAFF and one had a maternal isodiomy. Moreover, and despite the abnormal appear as additional factors associated with higher response rate after methylation patterns of the 15q11-q13 region, the 2 remaining PWS a first course of RTX. cases presented none of the alterations shown by the above groups. A combination of these methods is important for the identification P08.61 of genetic alterations involved in our PWS or AS patients and the PredictABEL: an R package for the assessment of risk assessment of the risk of recurrence. prediction models S. Kundu, Y. Aulchenko, C. van Duijn, C. Janssens; P08.59 Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. investigation of candidate loci for primary open angle glaucoma The rapid identification of genetic markers for multifactorial diseases in a Brazilian family through sNP array. from genome-wide association studies is fuelling interest in B. A. C. Santos, M. B. Melo, C. A. Braghini, R. Secolin, F. R. Torres, V. P. investigating the predictive ability and health care utility of genetic risk Costa, J. P. C. Vasconcellos; models. Various measures are available for the assessment of risk State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. prediction models, each addressing a different aspect of performance Glaucoma is one of the major causes of irreversible blindness and utility. Even though the assessment of risk prediction models is worldwide, characterized by progressive loss of optic nerve ganglion relatively standard, there is no single statistical package that would cells, associated with correspondent visual field damage. Among allow for the computation and production of all these measures and several forms of glaucoma, the most prevalent is the primary open plots. Therefore, we developed PredictABEL, an R package that angle glaucoma (POAG). The increase of intraocular pressure is the contains functions to obtain all descriptive tables, measures and most important risk factor for the development of POAG. There are at plots that are used in genetic risk prediction studies. The package least 14 loci (GLC1A - GLC1N) associated with POAG identified from contains functions for the various measures that are used in empirical genetic mapping studies, most of them involving families that follow studies, including univariate and multivariate odds ratios (OR) of a Mendelian inheritance pattern but only three genes were identified. the predictors, the c-statistic (or area under the receiver operating The first described gene was myocilin (MYOC - GLC1A), followed by characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC)), Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness of optineurin (OPTN or Optic Neuropathy Induced Protein - GLC1E) and fit test, reclassification table, net reclassification improvement (NRI) WD Repeat-Containing Protein 36 (WDR36 - GLC1G) genes. The and integrated discrimination improvement (IDI). Also included are purpose of this study was to evaluate regions in the genome associated functions to create plots, such as risk distributions, ROC curves, with glaucoma through linkage study in one POAG informative calibration plot, discrimination box plot and predictiveness curves. In family, through single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) microarray. addition to functions to assess the performance of risk models, the Comprehensive ophthalmic evaluation was performed and genomic package includes functions to obtain weighted and unweighted risk DNA obtained from one Brazilian family (19 individuals) with POAG. scores as well as predicted risks using logistic regression analysis. Genome-wide linkage analysis was conducted using the Affymetrix These logistic regression functions are specifically written for models 10K SNP array and analyzed by JINGLEFIX and MERLIN softwares. that include genetic variables, but they can also be applied to models The SNP array generated 8.962 valid SNPs. Three chromosomal that are based on non-genetic risk factors only. PredictABEL is freely regions (1p, 5q and 14q) with lod scores equal to 1.9, 2.1 and 1.8, available at the CRAN website (http://cran.r-project.org/). respectively were observed. Although the results do not show values of lod scores more than 3.00, these three regions are of great interest because they will be refined with microsatellites markers to identify potential susceptibility genes for POAG. Supported by FAPESP.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 261 P08.62 P08.64*** Identification of novel mutations in CRB1 and CERKL genes by Next-generation sequencing of known and putative genomewide homozygosity mapping in turkish families with susceptibility genes for schizophrenia and autism spectrum autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa disorders to detect rare high-penetrant risk variants D. Yücel1, R. K. Özgül2; D. W. Morris, S. Furlong, E. Kenny, P. Cormican, C. Fahey, R. Anney, G. 1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Donohoe, A. Corvin, L. Gallagher, M. Gill; Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health, Department of Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey. Schizophrenia (SZ) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), the most common form of inherited retinal complex neurodevelopmental disorders that share certain phenotypes dystrophies, shows extremely high clinical and genetic heterogeneity. including cognitive deficits and some behavioural characteristics. Such To date, more than 35 genes have been associated with this disease similarities suggest that these disorders may share an underlying in all modes of inheritance. Although the number of RP causative pathology and thus may share some genetic risk variants. This study genes is continuously expanding, more than 40% of the cases remain involves next-generation sequencing of the exonic regions of 215 undefined. All available mutation detection techniques of all known potential susceptibility genes in an Irish sample of 150 cases of ASD, RP genes remain labor intensive, time consuming, and expensive. 300 cases of SZ and 300 controls, in order to identify single nucleotide To overcome these challenges and to generate a high volume, polymorphisms, indels and structural variants contributing to one or cost-effective, and efficient screening tool, microarray which is high- both disorders. A multiplex target enrichment method is used whereby throughput molecular screening techniques has been prefered. DNA samples are multiplexed together using DNA indexes/barcodes Whole genome genotyping was performed by Affymetrix 250K SNP and enriched for the exonic regions of these genes using the Agilent array in two consanguineous Turkish families in which two children SureSelect target enrichment method. This is followed by 80bp paired- have RP. Homozygosity mapping have shown linkage to chromosome end sequencing in a single lane of an Illumina GAII. Gene selection 1 and chromosome 2 in these families respectively. RP causing comprised of five categories: 1) Interactors of NRXN1, 2) Interactors of CRB1 and CERKL genes located in these chromosomal region DISC1, 3) Genes within the Glutamate Receptor Complexes; NMDA, was selected as a first candidate gene for mutation screening. The mGluR5 and AMPA, 4) Cell adhesion molecules and 5) Functional and mutation screening in these genes revealed the presence of two novel Positional Candidates. Analysis of the pilot set of samples indicates mutations: 701dupACAGG(fs)¼.710X in CRB1 gene, IVS1+5G>C in that the approach undertaken is successful with an even spread of CERKL gene. sequence information for 24 indexed samples per lane, >8X coverage Mutation frequency survey of different populations for CERKL for 84% of target regions and overall SNP concordance with previous and CRB1 mutations showed that they account for 1% of all arRP GWAS data (Affymetrix 6.0) of 99.3%. In addition to description of this associated gene mutations. Genomewide genotyping approach is a novel sequencing method, data will be presented on the rare variant useful in selection of candidate genes among many disease causing analysis in the SZ and ASD samples. RP genes. This study was supported by Scientific Research Fund of Hacettepe University (BAP Project No: 0801601003). P08.65 Frequency of serotonin transporter promoter gene P08.63 polymorphism in opioid addiction Genome-wide association study of saliva flow rate and N. Ghasemi1, M. Shaikhha2, T. Nazari3; integration of protein-gene networks 1Research and Clinical Centre for Infertility,Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medical M. Lee1, K. T. Cuenco1, X. Wang1, J. R. Shaffer1, F. Begum1, E. Feingold1, D. E. Sciences University, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research and Clinical Weeks1, M. M. Barmada1, S. Wendell1, D. Crosslin2, C. Laurie2, K. F. Doheny3, Centre for Infertility, Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medical Sciences University, Yazd, E. Pugh3, R. J. Weyant1, R. J. Crout4, D. W. McNeil4, M. L. Marazita1; Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Yazd Shahid Sadoughi Medical Sciences University, 1University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 2University of Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Background: Association studies of polymorphism in the promoter MD, United States, 4West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, United States. region (5′-HTTP) of the gene encoding the serotonin transporter Background/Objective: Due to limited health care access and protein in addiction have shown conflicting results. The most frequently elevated oral disease, the Center for Oral Health Research in observed alleles of the 5′-HTTLPR polymorphism are the short Appalachia (COHRA) began evaluating risk factors for dental caries in and long variants, which the short variant is associated with lower families who were also included as part of the NIH Gene, Environment transcriptional activity than long variant. Aim of the present study was Association Studies Consortium (GENEVA) genome-wide association to evaluate the possible association between 5-HTT genotype and the study (GWAS) of dentalcaries. Dental caries is heritable (29%~40%) availability to experiment illegal drugs among adolescents. even after adjustments for shared environment. Saliva flow may impact methods: Thirty one opium dependent males, aged 20-50 years, caries risk and be under control by multiple genes. We integrate GWAS entered the study, after informed consent. They referred to the of saliva flow with existing protein databases to identify corresponding rehabilitation centre to give up addiction. Thirty one normal volunteer gene networks in the COHRA-GENEVA population. were chosen for control, which were matched in age, sex and methods: Caries status, demographics, and unstimulated saliva socioeconomic situation with cases. A whole blood sample (5 ml) from flow rates (ml/min) were obtained from COHRA-GENEVA subjects each participant was collected and stored for subsequent detection of (n = 1506; 647 males and 859 females). Subjects self-reported as DNA using phenol-chloroform method. DNA isolated from whole blood Caucasian, and were 5-75 years old. Heritability of saliva flow was was PCR-amplified. The PCR products were resolved in 2.5% agarose estimated at 49%. GWAS was conducted of unstimulated saliva gel containing 50 mg/ml ethidium bromide in TAE buffer (40 mM Tris- flow (mean=0.581(ml/min), sd=0.418). Illumina 610-Quad platform acetate, 1mMEDTA pH 8.0). genotypes were generated by the Center for Inherited Disease Results: Short allele frequency in cases and controls were 0.532 and Research. Genotype quality control was conducted by the GENEVA 0.387 respectively. Long allele frequency in cases and controls were Coordinating Center and U. Pittsburgh using standardized protocols. 0.468 and 0.613 respectively. Despite of OR=1.8 this study indicate Single-SNP GWAS results were integrated into dmGWAS software to no significant association between frequency of s allele and addiction identify genetic modules based on joint consideration of SNP results to opioid. and existing 63,995 gene pairs from the Protein Interaction Network conclusions: Although previous findings indicated association of Analysis (PINA) database. short allele with addiction, this study did not confirm these results. Results: Single SNP GWAS results suggest regions of chromosomes Several possibilities exist for these discrepant results, including 2, 8, 9, 10, 13 and 22 may be associated with a saliva flow rate. We small sample size, potential population stratification, and categorical are currently applying pathway-integration approaches to GWAS data phenotypes. to prioritize gene webs influencing saliva flow.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 262 P08.66 P08.68 tDt analysis used for searching new molecular markers tRiB1 genes polymorphism in type 2 diabetes mellitus and involved in smA disease metabolic syndrome patients M. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, N. Butoianu2, C. Burloiu2, D. Craiu2, N. P. Kisfali1, G. Szabó1, E. Baricza1, B. Duga1, K. Hetyésy2, B. Melegh1; M. Panduru3, D. Cimponeriu1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Central 1University of Bucharest, Department of Genetics, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Al. Laboratory, Aladar Petz County Hospital, Győr, Hungary. Obregia” Clinical Psychiatry Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 3”Carol Davila” Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and metabolic syndrome (MS) University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. have polygenic background. Characterized by gene-gene and gene- Clinical heterogeneity of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) disease environment interactions with onset in adulthood, usually at age suggests the involvement of some unidentified genetic factors, in 40 to 60 but occasionally in adolescence if a person is obese. The addition to those already known. Taking into account the role of penetrance is variable, possibly 10 to 40% vitamin D in neuronal and muscular cells physiopathology, we think The human tribbles-1 (TRIB1) gene is located at chromosome 8q24. that vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene might be a candidate gene for Hepatic-specific overexpression of TRIB1 reduces levels of plasma SMA heterogeneity. The aim of our study was to asses, through a TG and cholesterol by limiting VLDL production. The rs17321515 was transmission disequilibrium test (TDT), the relationship between four shown to be associated with severe HTG and HLP types 2B, 3, 4 and vitamin D receptor markers and this ruthless disease. 5. In Asian Malay population, this polymorphism located on the TRIB1 We included in our study 30 SMA subjects (clinically and molecular locus showed an association with elevated total- and LDL-cholesterol diagnosed) and their both parents. These nuclear families were and with increased risk of CHD and CVD and also, in a Japanese genotyped for VDR gene FokI, BsmI, ApaI and TaqI polymorphisms, cohort this variant was significantly associated with triglyceride by PCR-RFLP technique. TDT analysis realized with FBAT software levels and LDL-cholesterol concentrations. A total of 426 T2DM, showed that the “t” allele of TaqI polymorphism is transmitted from 489 MS patients and 253 controls were genotyped by PCR-RFLP. parents to affected offspring more often than statistically expected We observed relationships between triglycerides and any genotypes (p=0.04). For the other alleles, no statistically significant results were in T2DM and MS patients. Triglyceride levels where higher in minor noticed. Also, we didn’t identify the preferential transmission of any homozygotes than in two other genotype groups (T2DM: AA:2.12±0.28; estimated four-locus haplotype. This is the first report about using AG:1.79±0.12; GG:1.99±0.21; MS: AA:2.49±0.18; AG:2.10±0.09; TDT analysis in investigation of SMA disease. Even we analyzed a GG:2.15±0.16 and p<0.05). The total serum cholesterol and HDL- small number of nuclear families, we think that our preliminary results cholesterol level did not differ between groups of different genotypes. sustain the hypothesis of VDR gene involvement in this pathology, but Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that this genotype extended research is needed to be performed in order to assess our protect for the development of T2DM (OR=0.495; 95% CI:0.292-0.827; results. p=0.007). The analyzed TRIB1 (rs17321515) SNP is associated with This work was supported by CNCSIS - UEFISCDI, project number elevated triglyceride levels in AA homozygotes in T2DM and metabolic PNII - IDEI 2152/2008. syndrome groups and protect for development of T2DM. P08.67 P08.69 sNP array analysis in 4 patients in an attempt to identify the Associations of stAt3, JAK2 and ccR6 polymorphisms with mitochondrial pyruvate carrier ulcerative colitis and crohn’s disease. M. Brivet1, A. Boutron1, G. Touati2, L. Burglen3, C. Redin4, P. De Lonlay2, J. I. Janicsek1, N. Polgar1, V. Csongei2, M. Szabo3, V. Zambo1, B. Melegh1; Mandel4; 1University of Pécs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 1Laboratoire de Biochimie , AP-HP Hôpital de Bicêtre, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, 2University of Pécs, Department of Immunology and Biotechnology, Pécs, France, 2Centre de Référence Maladies Métaboliques, AP-HP Hôpital Necker- Hungary, 3Robert Koch Hospital, Edelény, Hungary. Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Génétique, AP-HP Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, Recent genome-wide association studies have identified many genetic France, 4IGBMC, Illkirch Graffenstaden, France. factors in association with the development of inflammatory bowel Transport of pyruvate into mitochondria is fundamental to glucose diseases ulcderative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD).In this oxidation and ATP production. However, the mammalian transporter study we investigated the possible association of the natural variants has of the following genes: signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 not yet been identified. (STAT3-rs744166), janus kinase 2 (JAK2-rs10758669) and chemokine We previously reported a patient with encephalopathy associated (C-C motif) receptor 6 (CCR-rs2301436) in patients with UC or CD. to persistant hyperlactatemia and normal lactate/pyruvate ratios, in DNA of 309 CD, 307 UC, and 496 control patients were genotyped by whom pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency was ruled out by enzymatic PCR/RFLP method. Although no significant differences were detected assays and mutation screening. A defect of pyruvate transport across between the patient groups and the controls regarding the STAT3 T the mitochondrial membrane was considered as an alternative risk allele frequencies, we found a significantly higher frequency of hypothesis. rs744166 TT homozygotes in UC patients than in controls, while no Parallel methods in disrupted and digitonin-permeabilized fibroblasts such association could be observed in patients with CD. For the JAK2 were designed to measure the oxidation of [14C] pyruvate : digitonin polymorphism rs10758669, we found an elevated overall frequency allows pyruvate to bypass the plasma membrane and directly reach of the C risk allele in CD patients but not in UC patients, while the the mitochondrial membrane. We established that [14C]-pyruvate frequecies of CC homozygotes did not differ significantly in the UC and oxidation was normal in disrupted fibroblasts and severely impaired in CD groups compared to controls. As for the CCR6 rs2301436 variant, permeabilized fibroblasts whose mitochondrial membrane was intact. we detected a statistically elevated ratio of risk AA homozygotes in Two other patients were further identified. All 3 families are of Algerian UC patients, but not in the CD group when compared to controls. descent and consanguineous. Regression analysis revealed a risk nature of STAT3 rs744166 In an attempt to identify the disease-causing gene, homozygosity TT genotype for ulcerative colitis (OR 1.498, 95% CI 1.121-2.000; mapping using the DNA of the first two families (3 affected members) p=0.006, adjusted 0.009). On the other hand, in our cohort we could was performed on a GeneChip 250K SNP array from Affymetrix. not detect such associations of JAK2 variant rs10758669 or CCR6 Several common regions covering more than 35 contiguous variant rs2301436 with UC or CD. homozygous SNPs were uncovered but neither corresponded to genes of the mitochondrial transporter family. DNA from the proband P08.70 from the recently identified third family is being similarly analysed, and Evidence of DLL1 as a susceptibility locus in indian Visceral should restrict the number of candidate regions, assuming genetic leishmaniasis homogeneity. This will also allow us to test, through haplotype analysis, S. Mehrotra1, A. Mishra1, M. Fakiola2, S. E. Jamieson3, D. Selvi Rani4, S. the hypothesis of a founder effect, and search for the mutated gene. Sundar1, J. M. Blackwell3; 1Institute of Medical Sciences, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India, 2Cambridge Institute for Medical Research and Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge, United Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 263 Kingdom, 3Telethon Institute for Child Health Research, Centre for Child Health variant site we use a Gibbs sampling phasing scheme to update each Research, The University of Western Australia, Subiaco, Western Australia, individuals haplotypes at that site and known SNPs in small flanking Australia, 4Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad, India. window. Rather than using an HMM in the phasing updates we use Previous genome wide linkage studies in Sudanese and Brazilian a simple, fast and novel method based on approximating a new populations identified chromosome 6q27 as a strong candidate region haplotype as a draw from an appropriately chosen multivariate normal containing a gene(s) regulating susceptibility to visceral leishmaniasis distribution. Since the haplotypes at the known sites are static many (VL). The region contains genes involved in the host immune response, of the calculations involved can be efficiently implemented so that the amongst which the most compelling candidate susceptibility gene for method is fast and scales well. The evidence for variation at the site VL is DLL1 (Delta Like Protein 1), a member of the notch signalling and estimates of individual genotypes can be obtained by summarizing pathway that directs naïve T helper differentiation towards Th1, Th2 or the MCMC samples. regulatory T cell lineages. We have applied our method to a set of CEU individuals from Pilot 1 This population-based study investigated the role of the 6q27 genes of the 1KGP and we compare our SNP and genotype calls with other (PHF10, C6orf70, DLL1, FAM120B, PSMB1, TBP) in Indian VL by existing methods. The number of SNP calls made and the genotype genotyping (Sequenom) twenty-one single nucleotide polymorphisms accuracy is comparable with other methods. in 941 VL cases and 992 ethnically-matched controls. Logistic regression analyses using additive and genotypic models show P08.73 significant associations with variants at DLL1 (rs1884190) and screening of 10 sNPs of LiNGO1 gene in patients with essential FAM120B (rs9366198, rs9460106, rs2103816). FAM120B_rs9460106 tremor in Latvian population (intronic) was the most associated SNP (OR=1.22; 95%CI=1.07-1.39; I. Radovica1, I. Inashkina1, E. Vitols2, L. Smeltere3, E. Jankevics1; P=0.0027), but the associated variants all fall within a strong linkage 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Paul Stradins disequilibrium block. Quantitative gene expression was analysed in University, Riga, Latvia, 3Paul Stradins University Clinical Hospital, Riga, Latvia. 19 paired pre- (Day 0), and post- (Day 30) treatment splenic aspirate Essential tremor (ET) is one of the most common neurological samples from VL patients receiving antileishmanial drug therapy. DLL1 disease, with a prevalence (age ≥ 40 years) estimated to be 4.0 % and was significantly (P<0.0001) higher expression in Day 0 samples prevalence in the oldest exceeding 20.0 %. An autosomal dominantly compared to Day 30. inherited form of ET is genetically linked to two loci on chromosomes These genetic and functional studies in an endemic Indian population 3q13 (ETM1) and 2p24.1 (ETM2) in families from different parts of the provide strong evidence for DLL1 acting as a susceptibility locus in world. Numerous of candidate genes, including hypothetical, - HS1- India. BP3, HCLS1, DRD3, LINGO1, LINGO2, C2orf43, LOC 100129278, FLJ 21820, LOC 645949 - have been suggested during last years, but P08.71 none of them was maintained up to now. tru9i polymorphism in vitamin D receptor gene and bone A marker within the LINGO1 gene, rs9652490, showing significant mineral density association in different menopausal situation: genome-wide association with ET, was recently reported in an Icelandic tehran lipid and glucose study and North American populations. To replicate this association in an F. Hosseinpanah, S. Poormohammadvali-Behnami, M. S. Daneshpour, N. independent population from Latvia, we sequenced regions of LINGO1 Ahmadi, F. Azizi; gene involving 10 markers (rs2137110, rs8030859, rs34476171, Research Institute for Endocrine Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. rs9652490, rs7177008, rs13313467, rs8028808, rs11856808, introduction: The vitamin D endocrine systems play a central role rs72744599 and one novel SNP) in 141 unrelated Latvian ET patients in control of bone and calcium homeostasis. Thus, alterations in (sporadic n = 64 and familial n = 77) and 130 normal controls, matched the vitamin D pathway lead to disturbances in mineral metabolism. by age and gender. Several genetic variations have been identified in the VDR. The aim of We observed significant association with A/G genotype of the marker this study was is to test whether there is an association between G/A rs96532490 in familial ET compared to controls (P = 0.0426, OR = polymorphism (Tru9I) in intron 8 and bone mineral density (BMD) and 1.92, 95 % CI: 1.06 - 3.46). No other significant association was found. menopausal statues. Our results suggest that the LINGO1 variants analyzed are not a major material and methods: In this study 137 healthy free-living post risk factor for developing ET in Latvian population, which propose the menopausal women and underwent BMD randomly selected. Serum existence of other unknown genetic risk factors responsible for ET 25(OH) D, calcium, phosphorus and bone mass were measured (81 phenotype. premenopausal; 56 postmenopausal). Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium analysis was used. To examine the selected polymorphism RFLP-PCR P08.74 were used with Tru9I. selection of endophenotypes in association mapping Result: The result showed that T allele frequency was 0.82. After Y. Chiu, H. Kao; adjustments for age, in premenopausal subjects mean BMD for National Health Research Institues, Zhunan, Taiwan. femoral neck T carriers were higher than t carriers (p < 0.05) but the Most common diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, asthma, opposite results in postmenopausal women have been seen. schizophrenia, heart diseases, etc. have a complex etiology involving conclusion: Our findings suggest that the VDR Tru9I polymorphism both genetic and environmental factors. This complexity challenges may be associated with BMD and age as a covariable play a significant investigators in finding the relationships between phenotypes and role. These results highlight the importance of the genetic factors in the genotypes. One option to dissolve the complexity is to select an bone mineral density of woman in different hormonal stage. “endophenotype” to signify quantitative measures that are more proximate to the biological etiology of a clinical disorder than its signs P08.72 and symptoms and thus less genetically complex than the disorder’s LD-based sNP genotype calling from next-generation underlying mechanism. Since the endophenotype is influenced by sequencing data fewer genetic and environmental risk factors than the disorder, its A. Menelaou, J. Marchini; use would result in greater statistical power to detect the effects of University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. individual genes. In practice, it is common for investigators to measure The 1000 Genomes project (1KGP) aims to construct a detailed numerous phenotypes on affected individuals, to achieve a substantial catalogue of human polymorphism using next-generation sequencing possibility of success in gene mapping, a systematic statistical technologies which consist of short reads of DNA mapped to a method on the selection of endophenotypes would be helpful on reference genome. These reads can be used for the detection of identification of disease genes. In this study, we applied a developed structural variation, indels and SNPs. However, it is costly to sequence statistical approach to select valid endophenotypes in linkage or many individuals at high depth. An alternative approach is to sequence association mapping. This approach allows investigators to assess the many samples at low coverage and then combine the information significance of an endophenotype on a pathway as incorporating a across samples to detect and genotype variant sites. proper endophenotype into gene mapping can enhance the efficiency Our method assumes that a scaffold of haplotypes at known SNPs of disease locus estimate. This approach is applicable to all kinds of is available, e.g. , from the HapMap project. At each potentially study designs in association mapping and linkage mapping.Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage and association methods 264 J08.01 with schizophrenia and affective disorders. DNA samples of 144 screening for MYOXVA gene mutations of DFNB3 locus in schizophrenia patients and 129 affective mood disorders patients Autosomal recessive non-syndromic, GJB2 negative iranian from Bashkortostan (Russia) have been used as the material for this Deaf population study. The control group comprised 165 volunteers of the same age Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1, E. Shearer2, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Almadani3, N. and ethnic background not registered in any mental health or drug Nikzat1, S. Arjangi1, K. Jalalvand1, R. Abtahi4, B. Azadeh5, K. Kahrizi1, R. Smith2, abuse clinics and denying psychiatrically burdened family history. H. Najmabadi1; Case-control comparisons were based on association analysis, 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation linkage disequilibrium and haplotype frequency estimations. The C Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology allele (rs3918342) associated with an increased risk of schizophrenia Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, (OR=1,49) and affective disorders (OR=1,46). Maximum likelihood University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 3Royan Institute, Reproductive analysis of haplotype distribution demonstrated the presence of Biomedicine & Stem Cell, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Saveh Welfare linkage disequilibrium between the two loci rs2391191 and rs1341402. Organization, Saveh, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Isfahan Welfare Organization, The case group with schizophrenia showed bigger CG haplotype Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. frequency compared to that in the controls, however, the difference Myo15A gene is located in DFNB3 locus on chromosome 17p11.2, has not reached the statistical significance (P=0,081). and encodes Myosin XVA, which is an unconventional myosin and is critical for the formation of stereocilia in hair cells of the inner ear. J08.04 Recessive mutations in this gene can lead to profound Autosomal VEGF gene polymorphism association with diabetic foot ulcer recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) in humans and M. M. Amoli1, M. Mehrab-Mohseni1, J. Tavakkoly Bazzaz2, S. Hasani-Ranjbar1, shaker2 (sh2) phenotype in mice. N. Roohipour1, P. Amiri1, F. A. Sayahpour1; Here, we performed a family study on 140 Iranian families in order 1EMRC, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, to determine mutations causing ARNSHL. The families, who were Faculty of Medicine, Tehran university of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic negative for GJB2 gene mutations, were subjected to linkage analysis. Republic of Iran. Eight of them were linked to DFNB3 locus using intragenic or flanking Objective: Functional polymorphisms within vascular endothelial growth STR markers. This data suggests that the frequency of Myo15A factor (VEGF) gene have shown association with various conditions mutation is about 5% in the Iranian deaf population. Sequencing of including diabetic neuropathy and retinopathy. In this study we have Myo15A in these families led to the identification of five unreported performed a candidate gene association study in order to examine mutations - 3 missense mutations, 1 nonsense mutation and 1 deletion VEGF gene polymorphism association with diabetic foot ulcer (DFU). which results in frame shift mutation followed by premature stop codon. methods: The study group comprised of type 2 diabetes patients with (N=247) and without (N=241) DFU. Healthy control subjects (N=98) J08.02 were also recruited from the same area. The ARMS-PCR technique G-2548A polymorphism of the human leptin gene (LEP) promoter was applied for genotyping of VEGF gene SNPs at positions -7*C/T region associated with the level of serum lipoprotein and -2578*C/A. L. Kayumova, E. Yakshembitova, E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova; Results: The frequency of genotype AA was significantly decreased Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian in patients with DFU compared with diabetic subjects without DFU Federation. (AA vs CA+CC, p=0.003, OR= 0.44, CI = 0.24-0.80.). Also there was Leptin - a peptide hormone that is secreted by fat cells and is involved a significant decrease in frequency of A allele in patients with DFU in the regulation of energy metabolism and body weight. It reduces compared to the controls (p=0.02, OR= 0.68, CI = 0.48-0.96). appetite, increases energy expenditure, changes the metabolism of conclusion: It seems that lower frequency of A allele in patients with fats and glucose, as well as neuroendocrine function or direct influence, DFU is conferring a protective effect which might be as a result of or activation of specific structures in the central nervous system. increased angiogenesis in patients carrying this allele. Gene LEP, encodes the protein leptin is localized on 7q31.3. Table . VEGF polymorphisms frequencies in Controls (C), T2DM (P) We have studied the polymorphic variant G-2548A promoter region of and diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) the gene LEP. VEGF c P DFU Material for the study included DNA samples from 350 individuals. -2578*c/A n (%) n (%) n (%) P Value Determining the level of low density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density DFU/c DFU/P P/c lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol by standard enzymatic methods. Analysis Genotype 22 63 68 of polymorphic loci LEP G-2548A was performed by PCR-RFLP. 0.003 0.1 0.1 (22.4) (29.0) (27.5) Results: The group of persons with indicators of LDL in the normal CC range was a statistically significant increase of homozygous genotype 47 108 140 CA LEP *G/*G (27.34% against 15.38% in the group of persons with high (48.0) (49.8) (56.6) levels of LDL, P= 0.0192). 29 46 39 AA Also in the group of persons with higher than normal rates of HDL (29.61) (21.2) (15.7) showed a significant increase of genotype LEP *G/*G (37.5% vs. Allele 24.03%, P=0.0407) and allele LEP *G (60.94% against, 49.65%) 91 234 276 C 0.02 0.5 0.08 against a group of individuals with indicators of HDL cholesterol within (46.0) (53.9) (56.0) normal limits. 105 200 218 A Conclusions: The findings suggest that the allelic variant G-2548A (54.0) (46.0) (44.0) contributes to the determination of lipid metabolism. In particular, the VEGF residents of the Republic of Bashkortostan, a favorable genetic marker -7*c/t serum levels of LDL and HDL may be LEP *G allele and genotype of Genotype 72 158 186 LEP *G/*G. 0.1 0.07 0.9 (75.8) (71.8) (77.8) CC J08.03 22 38 43 CT Association of the G72/G30 genes with psychiatric disorders (23.2) (17.3) (17.9) I. Akhmerova1, A. Zainullina2, R. Valinurov1, E. Khusnutdinova2; 1 2 10 TT 0.8 0.2 0.4 1Republican Mental Health Clinic â„–1, Ministry of Health of the Republic of (1.1) (0.9) (4.0) Bashkortostan, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Allele Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. 166 354 415 C 0.8 0.2 0.4 Earlier studies have shown the significant role of G72 and G30 genes (87.3) (89.3) (86.8) in the pathogenesis of many psychiatric disorders. The present 24 42 63 T study is aimed at the analysis of the association of the rs3918342, (12.6) (11.7) (13.1) rs2391191 and rs978714 of G72 gene and rs1341402 of G30 gene Complex traits and polygenic disorders 265 J08.05 J08.07 AGtR1 c.*86A>c and AGt c.620c>t polymorphism genotypes Association of LOc387715 gene polymorphism with both and the aerobic capacity of elite Lithuanian athletes forms of advanced age-related macular degeneration in turkish A. Pranculis1, V. Ginevičiene1,2, V. Kučinskas1; patients 1Departament of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius M. Yılmaz1, D. Yücel2, R. K. Özgül3; University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian Olympic Sports Centre, Vilnius, 1Hacettepe University Department of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe Lithuania. University Department of Pediatrics, Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey, Angiotensinogen (AGT) and angiotensin II type 1 receptor genes 3Hacettepe University, Institute of Child Health,Department of Pediatrics, (AGTR1) are important for the angiotensin- renin system which is Metabolism Unit, Ankara, Turkey. crucial for the function of the cardiovascular system and affects ones Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a clinically heterogeneous physical capacity. We analyzed AGTR1 c.*86A>C polymorphism disorder and the leading cause of irreversible central vision loss in which is located in the 3â€~UTR and has major impact on gene the elderly population. Although AMD etiology remains elusive, many transcription and mRNA stability. The angiotensinogen gene (AGT) environmental and genetic risk factors have been shown for AMD. regulates the expression of AGT (angiotensin II precursor) in the A69S polymorphism (rs10490924:G>T ) in LOC387715 gene on liver. The missense AGT c.620C>T polymorphism might have serious chromosome 10q26, is known to increase the risk of developing AMD. impact on the production of angiotensin and subsequently an athletes The purpose of this study is to investigate whether the one of the major physical capacity. risk allel in the LOC387715, were associated with advanced AMD in The statistical analysis of the polymorphisms and their association Turkish patients. with physical capacityâ€™s phenotypical index VO2max in a group of A total of 182 individuals, including 95 individuals with unrelated late 149 elite Lithuanian athletes showed their significant association. The AMD patients and 87 age-matched healthy individuals as a control athletes were stratified into three groups (speed/power, endurance group were genotyped by direct sequence analysis. Single SNP for and mixed sports groups) according to the sport propagated. 240 A69S genotyping results were analyzed for deviations from H-W unrelated subjects from the general Lithuanian population were used equilibrium and no significant deviations were detected (p<0.05; as a control group. controls, p=0.92 ; cases, p=0.23). Odds ratios and 95% confidence Statistical analysis revealed no significant VO2max differences intervals were calculated by logistic regression method. Findings between athletes with different AGT c.620C>T polymorphism showed that homozygote individuals with TT genotype have an genotypes. AGT C/C genotype was significantly more frequent in the increased risk (OR=4, 1.52-10.52%) for AMD when compared with endurance group compared to the speed/power group. The AGTR1 GG genotype in Turkish population. This study suggest that the A/A genotype athletes have statistically significantly higher VO2max LOC387715 polymorphism has significantly associated for both types index than the C/C genotype athletes. C allele of the AGTR1 A/C of end-stage AMD in Turkish populations. polymorphism was significantly more frequent in the speed/power group compared to other sports groups and the control group. We J08.08 conclude that while both AGTR1 and AGT polymorphism genotypes Bani/D13s141/D13s175 represents a novel informative haplotype indicate tendancy towards a certain sport type, but only AGTR1 A/C at the GJB2 gene region in iranian population polimorphism genotypes could be used for VO2max index value size H. Rezaei, S. Vallian; prediction. University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. Non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL) represents the most J08.06 cause of hearing loss in Iranian patients. In view of the large numbers Existence of association between P86L polymorphism in of mutations identified in GJB2, mutations analysis of the gene has CALHM1 gene and risk of developing late-onset Alzheimer’s been time-consuming and cost-effective. Alternatively, molecular disease in the iranian population markers which are highly linked to the GJB2 gene have proven to be m. jafari aqdam1, h. khorram khorshid1, k. kamali2, m. ohadi1; useful in carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis of NSHL families. 1university of social welfare and rehabilitation, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, These markers usually show a population dependent based haplotype 2Reproductive Biotechnology Research Centre, Avicenna Research Institute, frequency. However, to date, no information on the genotyping and ACECR, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. frequency of the markers is present for the Iranian population. In introduction: Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is a genetically heterogeneous the present study, genotyping and the haplotype frequency of three neurodegenerative disease and Late-Onset type (LOAD) is the markers including BanI, D13S141 and D13S175, at the GJB2 region most common form of dementia affecting people over 65 years old. were investigated. The haplotype frequency was estimated using AD is a complex disease with multifactorial etiology. This disease PHASE program. The input data contained two alleles (+ and -) is characterized by hippocampal atrophy and cerebral Aβ peptide for BanI, four alleles for D13S141 and seven alleles for D13S175. deposition. CALHM1 gene is located on 10q24.33 and encodes Among the 42 possible haplotypes estimated, four haplotypes showed a multipass transmembrane glycoprotein that controls cytosolic relatively high frequency (≥5%). Therefore, a combination of BanI/ Ca2+ concentrations and Aβ levels. CALHM1 P86L polymorphism D13S141/D13S175 could be suggested as an informative haplotype (rs2986017) is significantly associated with LOAD in independent for possible carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis of NSHL in Iranian case controls in a number of studies. This polymorphism increases Aβ population. levels by interfering with CALHM1 mediated Ca2+ permeability. Aims: This study was performed to determine whether this polymorphism contributes to the risk for LOAD in Iranian population. methods and materials: One hundred and forty one AD patients and P09 complex traits and polygenic disorders 141 healthy controls were recruited in this study. After extraction of genomic DNA, the genotype and allele frequencies were determined in case and control subjects using PCR/RFLP method. Results: The statistical analysis showed a significant difference in P09.001 the heterozygote genotype frequency in case and control groups and ActN3 R577X polymorphism in Russian power athletes polymorphic allele had a protective role between two groups. Also A. A. Danilova1, A. M. Druzhevskaya2, R. T. Gabbasov1, A. V. Borisova1, I. I. after stratifying the subjects by their APOE-ε4 status, no significant Ahmetov1; association was observed. 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Discussion: Our study suggests that P86L polymorphism could be a Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. risk and protective factor for late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) The alpha-actinin-3 (ACTN3) gene encodes a Z-disc structural in Iranian population. However, to confirm these results, further study protein which is found only in fast glycolytic muscle fibers. A common with a bigger sample size may be required. nonsense polymorphism in codon 577 of the ACTN3 gene (R577X) Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, Polymorphism, Association study, results in alpha-actinin-3 deficiency in XX homozygotes. Previous Population, CALHM1 gene. reports have shown a lower proportion of the ACTN3 XX genotype Complex traits and polygenic disorders 266 in power-oriented athletes compared to the general population. In the P09.004 present study we tested whether XX genotype was under-represented Protective effect of the polymorphic variant at the iL2 gene in in Russian power-oriented athletes. The study involved 142 Russian Polish patients with Addison’s disease weightlifters of regional or national competitive standard. ACTN3 M. Fichna1,2, M. Zurawek1, P. Fichna3, D. Januszkiewicz1,4, M. Gryczynska2, J. genotype and allele frequencies were compared to 974 controls. The Nowak1; frequency of the ACTN3 X allele (30.3% vs. 38.3%; P = 0.011) was 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, significantly different between weightlifters and controls. Although the 2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Poznan University of Medical frequency of the ACTN3 XX genotype (8.5% vs. 13.9%; P = 0.11) was Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Paediatric Diabetes and Obesity, not significantly lower in the whole group of weightlifters in comparison Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of with controls, it was significantly lower (0%; P = 0.039) in highly elite Paediatric Oncology, Haematology and Transplantology, Poznan University of athletes (n = 27), supporting the hypothesis that the presence of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. α-actinin-3 has a beneficial effect on the function of skeletal muscle in Autoimmune Addison’s disease (AAD) is a rare enocrinopathy generating forceful contractions at high velocity. In conclusion, ACTN3 with several susceptibility loci. Polymorphic variants of the IL2 R577X polymorphism was associated with elite power athlete status and IL2RA genes have recently been described to confer risk for in Russians. several autoimmune disorders. IL2 encodes interleukin-2, involved in maintaining peripheral T-cell immune tolerance, whereas IL2RA P09.002 encodes specific alpha subunit of its receptor. This study was aimed to tOmm40 polymorphisms are associated with cardiovascular investigate the associations of selected IL2 (rs6534349 A/G, rs2069762 phenotypes T/G, rs3136534 A/C) and IL2RA (rs11594656 T/A, rs2104286 A/G, R. Salakhov1,2, V. V. Kashtalap2, O. A. Makeeva1,2, O. L. Barbarash2; rs7093069 C/T) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with AAD in 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Complex a Polish cohort. The analysis comprised 124 AAD patients and 436 Problems of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation. healthy controls. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP or PCR- TOMM40 gene which encodes the channel-forming subunit of a SSCP. translocase of the mitochondrial outer membrane had been recently The IL2 rs3136534 C allele appeared significantly decreased in AAD proved to be involved in Alzheimer’s disease. In several GWA studies compared to the control group (29.4% vs. 39.1%, p=0.005), yielding of lipid profile multiple signals had been detected with TOMM40 SNPs, an OR of 0.65 (95%CI 0.48-0.88). The difference in distribution of although their independent role in cardiovascular pathology is still its genotypes also revealed statistical significance (p=0.009). By under discussion, mainly because of the strong linkage disequilibrium contrast, the allele and genotype frequencies of five other SNPs did between TOMM40 and APOE. not present significant differences between patients and controls In our study we genotyped several TOMM40 variants in a cohort (p>0.05). Linkage disequilibrium measures revealed moderate linkage with acute coronary syndrome (ACS, n=176) and healthy subjects between investigated SNPs (D’ 0.66-0.94, r2≤0.25 for IL2, and D’ 0.13- (n=184). Association with a number of cardiovascular phenotypes was 0.84, r2≤0.33 for IL2RA). Three locus A-T-C IL2 haplotype, including analyzed. In healthy women rs157580 was associated with the level of minor rs3136534 allele, was found significantly less frequently total cholesterol, very low-density lipoproteins cholesterol, low-density among affected subjects vs. controls (26.6% vs. 38.3%, p=0.0007). lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglycerides. In ACS group rs2075650 The analysis of inferred IL2RA haplotypes did not add any further was associated with blood pressure parameters and low-density information. lipoproteins cholesterol. TOMM40 rs741780 was associated with In conclusion, this study indicates plausible protective effect of the coronary artery stenosis more than 50% (p=0.048), and rs1160985 minor allele at rs3136534 in AAD. No association of AAD with other with extracoronary stenosis (p=0.038). The progression of heart failure investigated IL2 and IL2RA SNPs was found. Supported by grant in 1 year follow up was associated with rs157580 (p=0.006). N402359738. These results demonstrate that TOMM40 may be involved in cardiovascular diseases. P09.005 the genome-wide analysis of the ageing: the women only study. P09.003 R. Tamm1,2, K. Fischer2, E. Mihailov1,3, M. Alver1, T. Esko1,2, A. Metspalu1,2,3; Genome-wide association study of acute stroke in Russia 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, E. Bondarenko1, I. Shetova2, N. Shamalov2, P. Slominsky1, S. Limborska1, V. 2Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Skvortsova2; Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Background: As ageing is complex phenotype influenced by a Russian Federation, 2Scientific research institute of cerebrovascular pathology variety of genes and molecular pathways, environment and stochastic and stroke, Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. factors, different approaches are needed to determine the underlying A number of previous genome wide association studies (GWAS) cause of these phenomena. The Estonian Biobank provides a very recently identified some genome variants to be associated with stroke good opportunity to study frequency changes of the SNPs in different in local populations. The aim of our study was to assess the individual age groups. Whole genome SNP analysis using Illumina arrays (for risk of stroke development in Slavonic population. example HumanCNV370-Duo and HumanOmniExpress) and a data- We performed a case-control association study in 694 stroke patients driven model in identifying genetic variants is more promising than from Moscow Slavonic population and 715 controls from the same scrutinizing the candidate genes. Concentrating only on females population. Standard examinations including CT, MRI, duplex, Echo- minimizes confounding effects resulting from differences between CG, CTA, MRA were performed to identify the stroke cases. The stroke sexes. subtypes were diagnosed according to the TOAST criteria. Whole methods: The aim of the study was to examine allele frequency genome associative study was performed using DNA microarrays dependent discrepancies by conducting a genome-wide association HumanCyto12 v. 2 (“Illumina”, USA), allowing typed more than 300, study with >1.8 million HapMap2 Imputed and Quality Controlled SNP 000 SNP and CNV regions also. markers on 1500 Estonian women from different age groups (<40, 40- The resulting raw data were processed using software packages 60, 60-80 and >83). To test the age dependence, the allele frequencies Genome Studio, PLINK, Helix Tree and eventually found several SNPs in all 4 age groups were compared using the Cochran-Armitage test associated with the development of acute stroke. The most statistically for trend. Genome-wide significance was concluded for p-values less significant association with the rs4578424 DNA marker, located on than 10-8. gene TUB locus on chromosome 15. This gene encodes a protein that Results and conclusions: Results suggest association between participates in the system of signal transduction through G proteins, allele frequency differences in several loci, including 2p21, 2p16.3, and may be associated with violation of lipid metabolism. 5q12 and 7q36.2 of different age groups as studied. These findings Our data suggest the association of rs4578424 on chromosome 15 indicate to the loci, which include the alleles, which are increased and/ with total stroke risk formation. or decreased in the oldest.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 267 P09.006 Lisbon, Portugal. Genetic dissection of Age-Related macular Degeneration: Alcoholism is a heterogeneous disorder with a multiple genetic evaluation of the impact of novel and known variations in the background. Glutathione-S-transferases (GST) are polymorphic italian polulation enzymes that belong to phase II metabolism and are responsible F. Ricci1, T. Lepre2, C. De Felici1, F. Taglia2, F. Missiroli1, R. Cascella2, S. for detoxification of a large number of electrophiles compounds by Zampatti2, C. Eandi3, A. Cusumano1, G. Novelli2,4, E. Giardina2; conjugation with glutathione. The aim of this study is to investigate 1Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rome “Tor Vergata”, Rome, the clinical significance of GSTM1/T1 polymorphisms in alcohol Italy, 2Department of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk dependence and their importance in relation to Lesch’s typology. Assessment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, School of Medicine, Genotype distributions of GSTM1/T1 deletion polymorphisms were University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Eye examined in a sample of 96 patients with known history of alcohol Clinic, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 4Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, dependence and 324 healthy individuals. GSTM1 non null genotype Department of Medicine, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little frequency was significantly higher in patient group compared to Rock, AR 72205, AR, United States. controls (64.6% vs 47.2%) and may be considered a risk factor related Age-related macular degeneration is a common ocular disease to alcohol consumption (OR=2.038; 95%CI [1.272-3.267], p=0.004). affecting more than one million of Italian people. Here we show the No significantly results were obtained in relation to the GSTT1 results of a large, multicentric case-control study aimed to discover polymorphism. The conjugation of GSTM1/T1 non-null genotypes in new genetic variants associated with the disease and to confirm the same individual does not increase the risk for alcoholism. Although, the effect of the known susceptibility polymorphisms in the Italian the GSTM1 non null genotype appears to be a susceptibility factor population. A number of 1157 Italian subjects were recruited and to alcoholism, only patients classified as Type III and IV according to classified in three different categories: the first one includes patients Lesch’s Typology show higher risk for alcohol dependence. This study with diagnosis of AMD (n=367), the second is composed by subjects is the first report about the GSTM1 polymorphism as a risk factor for clinically evaluated, without any sign of disease (n=330) and the last alcoholism. Our results pointed to significantly differences in ethanol- one includes subjects not clinically evaluated (general population, preferring phenotype, as a human psychopathological state, and GST n=920). All subjects were genotyped for nine variants: del443ins54 and M1 polymorphism as a susceptibility gene for alcohol consumption, rs10490924 in ARMS2 gene, rs1061170 and rs1410996 in CFH gene, which probably indicated that this enzyme may increase tolerance to rs9332739, rs547154, rs4151667 and rs2230199 in genes coding for some alcohol metabolites involved in different biochemical pathways complement proteins and rs2227306 in IL8 gene. Our data disclose potentially linked to the risk for some additive behaviours. a new risk variant (rs2227306) located within IL8 gene (p=0.007), confirm the major role of ARMS2 (del443ins54, p=4.99*10-16) and CFH P09.009 (rs1061170, p=1.60*10-23) on the susceptibility to AMD and rule out a A sequence variation in the promoter of the placental alkaline major involvement of the other variations. phosphatase gene (ALPP) is associated with allele-specific expression in human term placenta. P09.007 L. BELLAZI1, S. Germond1, C. Dupont1, I. Brun-Heath1, A. Taillandier2, P. De mutational analysis in paediatric patients with X-linked and Mazancourt1, M. N. Dieudonné1, E. Mornet1,2; autosomal recessive forms of ocular albinism 1Unité de pathologie cellulaire et génétique UPRES-EA2493, Université K. Trebušak Podkrajšek1, B. Stirn Kranjc2, T. Hovnik1, J. Kovač1, T. Battelino1; de Versailles Saint Quentin, Poissy, France, 2Laboratoire SESEP, Centre 1University Children´s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Eye Hospital, Ljubljana, hospitalier de Versailles, Le Chesnay, France. Slovenia. Placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP), encoded by the ALPP gene, Ocular albinism (OA) is a group of inherited disorders with reduced is produced by the fetal side of the placenta. This enzyme displays pigmentation of the eyes and associated decreased visual acuity, strong genetic variability with three common alleles giving rise to six nystagmus, strabismus and photophobia. X-linked OA is caused by common electrophoretic phenotypes, and a number of rare variants. mutations of the GPR143 gene, encoding a pigment cell specific Some of these variants were reported to be associated with pathology receptor. Autosomal recessive ocular albinisms (AROA) represent of pregnancy. We show here that the two most common ALPP allelic clinically mild variants of the occulocutaneous forms of albinisms variants, Pl1 and Pl2, differ in mRNA expression level. The differential (OCA), where apart from ocular characteristics, hypopigmentation of expression was independent of the parental origin and probably results the skin and hair is usually present. AROA may result from mutations in from linkage disequilibrium with sequence variation rs2014683G>A in any of the genes responsible for OCA, namely TYR, OCA2 and rarely the ALPP gene promoter that was shown to have allele-specific binding TYRP1 or MATP. Ocular albinism is difficult to differentiate clinically patterns to placental nuclear proteins. Allele-specific expression in from other forms of albinism in young patients, especially in those with human term placenta may account for association of some variants light complexion. Therefore, genetic analysis presents a possibility for with pathology. an early definitive diagnosis. Direct sequencing of the coding regions of the GPR143, TYR and P09.010 OCA2 genes were performed in 17 patients with clinical signs of ocular Polyalanine repeat expansions in NiPA1 are associated with albinism aged 2 to 17 years. Four patients had X-linked OA due to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mutations in GPR143 gene (29%). Two detected mutations were novel H. M. Blauw1, W. van Rheenen1, P. W. J. van Vught1, M. Koppers1, F. P. (p.Gly296Arg, c.360+5G>A). Five patients had AROA due to mutations Diekstra1, E. J. N. Groen1, M. A. van Es1, E. A. J. Willemse1, E. Strengman2, A. on both alleles of the TYR gene (29%). One patient had TYR mutation C. Ludolph3, S. Waibel3, C. Schulte4,5, W. Robberecht6,7,8, P. van Damme6,7,8, J. on only one allele and therefore this is not completely explaining the H. Veldink1, L. H. van den Berg1; clinical characteristics. Three detected TYR mutations were novel 1Department of Neurology, Rudolph Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, (p.Tyr451Cys, p.Ala355Val, p.Asp197Asn). Surprisingly, none of the University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Complex patient had AROA due to mutations in OCA2 gene. Two patients had Genetics Section, Division of Biomedical Genetics, Department of Medical OCA2 mutations in only one allele. In five patients no pathological Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, mutations were detected (29%). 3Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 4Department for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, P09.008 Tübingen, Germany, 5German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Gst m1 and Gst t1 polymorphisms and their possible relation Tübingen, Germany, 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital Leuven, to alcohol dependence Leuven, Belgium, 7Laboratory of Neurobiology, University of Leuven, Leuven, P. Levy1, C. Marinho1, S. Pombo2, S. Ladeiro1, J. Ferreira1, J. Neves Cardoso2, Belgium, 8Vesalius Research Center, Flanders Institute for Biotechnology (VIB), M. Bicho1; Leuven, Belgium. 1Genetics Laboratory, Centre of Metabolism and Endocrinology, Medical School introduction: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Psychiatric Unit of Santa Maria General Hospital, neurodegenerative disease, which cause is still unknown. Genetic risk factors are thought to play a major role in its pathogenesis. Recent research has described deletions in NIPA1 increasing susceptibility for Complex traits and polygenic disorders 268 ALS. Mutations in this gene are known to cause hereditary spastic P. N. Leigh11, A. Al-Chalabi11, A. Chio12, The International Collaboration for paraparesis. In this study we investage whether missense mutations FrontotemporalLobar Degeneration, P. Heutink13, J. C. van Swieten14, L. H. van in NIPA1 and expansions its polyalanine repeat might play a role in den Berg*1, J. H. Veldink*1, * these authors contributed equally; ALS as well. 1Department of Neurology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University methods: DNA samples were collected from 2293 ALS patients and Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Epidemiology 2777 healthy controls, of three different populations (Dutch, Belgian, and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, German). All exons of NIPA1 were sequenced and fragment analysis Netherlands, 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital Leuven, University was performed to determine the polyalanine repeat length. Alleles of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå were grouped according to their length, with short alleles consisting of University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 5Department of Neuropediatrics, 13 alanines respectively. University of Paris, Bicetre Hospital, Paris, France, 6Department of Neurology, Results: Sequencing reveiled 7 missense mutations in patients and 6 Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France, in controls (p = 0.59). In all populations the long repeat occured more 7Department of Neurology, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 8Department frequently in patients, 2.82% compared to 1.80% in controls (OR = of Neurology, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, 9Department of Neurology, 1.63, p = 0.0007). Patients with these long alleles had a worse median University of Massachusetts School of Medicine, Worcester, MA, United survival (HR 1.58, p = 0.0001) and an earlier disease onset (HR 1.39, States, 10Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, p = 0.005). Charlestown, MA, United States, 11Medical Research Council Centre for conclusion: We found that missense mutations in NIPA1 do not play a Neurodegeneration Research, King’s College London, Department of Clinical major role in ALS. Instead, we found that short polyalanine expansions Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom, 12Department in NIPA1 are associated with ALS. In addition, these expansions are of Neuroscience, University of Turin, and Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria associated with an earlier disease onset and worse prognosis. These San Giovanni Batista, Turin, Italy, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, Section of results further underscore the role of NIPA1 in ALS pathogenesis. Medical Genomics, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 14Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. P09.011 Overlap exists for patients with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) cHRNA4 rare variants constitute a predisposing factor for and patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), both sporadic ALs: results of a replication study in an italian cohort clinically and pathologically as well as genetically. About 5-10% of ALS of 682 patients patients are diagnosed with FTLD, while FTLD patients can develop M. Zollino1, S. Lattante1, G. Marangi1, A. Conte2, M. Luigetti2, A. Del Grande2, motor neuron symptoms. Furthermore, TDP-43 inclusions have been A. Chiò3, M. Corbo4, G. Mora5, J. Mandrioli6, F. Giannini7, E. Capoluongo8, A. found in the majority of ALS patients and in cases of FTLD (FTLD- Bizzarro2, G. Neri1, M. Sabatelli2; TDP). Previously, linkage studies in families with both ALS and FTLD 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, have identified a locus on chromosome 9p13-21. We hypothesized Italy, 2Neurological Institute, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, that ALS and FTLD may be part of a spectrum of neurodegenerative 3Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Torino, Italy, 4NEuroMuscolar disease and we sought to identify a common genetic basis for this Omnicentre (NEMO), Milano, Italy, 5ALS Center, Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, neurodegenerative disease. We obtained genome-wide SNP genotype Milano, Italy, 6Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, S.Agostino-Estense Hospital and data from previously published studies on ALS and FTLD-TDP University of Modena, Modena, Italy, 7Department of Neuroscience, Neurology and performed genome-wide imputation based on the HapMap3r2 Section, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 8Laboratory of Clinical Molecular reference. After quality control, genome-wide data for ~1.2M SNPs Diagnostic, Institute of Biochemistry, and Clinical Biochemistry, Università were available for nearly 4,400 ALS patients and over 13,000 Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy. controls and for 440 (pathology-proven) FTLD-TDP cases and 1,400 Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder, independent unaffected controls. Joint analysis of ALS and FTLD sporadic (sALS) in 95% of cases. Currently, multiple genetic and identified SNPs in locus chromosome 9p21.1 and SNP rs12608932 in environmental factors are considered to contribute to disease liability. gene UNC13A as shared genetic variants contributing to susceptibility We previously observed that rare missense variants within the to both neurodegenerative disorders. Using a conservative rank- cytosolic loop of α3,α4,β4 subunits of neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine products analysis, weighing ALS and FTLD sample sizes equally, receptors (nAChRs) were over-represented in a group of 245 sALS the associations were found to be consistent. By analyzing a subset patients compared with 450 controls. of FTLD patients without motor neuron disease signs, we found that Tested functionally in vitro, the observed variants were found to disrupt individuals with ALS symptoms did not solely drive the signal for both the receptor properties, leading to the hypothesis that they are a loci. Our study narrows the previously identified shared genetic locus on predisposing factor for sALS. chromosome 9 and, additionally, implicates UNC13A as a shared risk We made a replication study in new independent cohorts of 682 locus further corroborating the role of UNC13A in neurodegeneration. Italian sALS patients and 1300 age- and ethnically-matched controls, respectively. Sequencing analysis of CHRNA4 gene, encoding for α4 P09.013 subunit of nAChRs, revealed six heterozygous missense variants and UNC13A modifies susceptibility and survival in amyotrophic a three-nucleotide insertion in 13 patients (1.9%). Four of the missense lateral sclerosis variants were detected in six controls, four were present in both groups F. P. Diekstra1, P. W. J. van Vught1, W. van Rheenen1, M. A. van Es1, W. (but were more numerous in patients), six were detected exclusively Robberecht2,3, P. M. Andersen4, L. H. van den Berg1, J. H. Veldink1; in controls. The three-nucleotide insertion has never been detected in 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of controls. Using SIFT and PolyPhen, almost all variants found both in Neurology, University Hospital Leuven, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, patients and controls or only in controls were predicted to be benign, 3Laboratory for Neurobiology, Vesalius Research Centre, Flanders Institute for while 50% of variants found exclusively in patients were predicted to Biotechnology (VIB), Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Clinical Neuroscience, be damaging. Combining present data with those reported previously, Umeå University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden. a total of 5 variants were detected only in patients but neither in 3500 A large genome-wide screen in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) chromosomes nor in dbSNP nor in 1000Genomes-Project data. showed that the common variant rs12608932 in gene UNC13A was These data confirm our previous results, suggesting a possible role for associated with disease susceptibility. UNC13A regulates the release CHRNA4 variants as predisposing factor for sALS. of neurotransmitters (including glutamate) by neuronal synaptic vesicles. Two attempts to replicate association with ALS susceptibility P09.012 in small samples have not been successful. As a discovery cohort, Combined genome-wide analysis identifies UNC13A and we used genotype data from individuals of Dutch, Belgian or Swedish chromosome 9p21.1 as shared loci for susceptibility to descent (1767 cases, 1817 controls) who had participated in a amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal lobar previously published genome-wide study of ALS and for whom survival degeneration. data were available. An independent replication cohort of 450 ALS F. Diekstra1, M. A. van Es1, K. Estrada2, F. Rivadeneira2, A. Hofman2, A. G. patients and 524 unaffected controls was recruited from a population- Uitterlinden2, W. Robberecht3, P. M. Andersen4, J. Melki5, V. Meininger6, O. based study of ALS in The Netherlands. Using capillary sequencing Hardiman7,8, J. E. Landers9,10, R. H. Brown, Jr.9,10, A. Shatunov11, C. E. Shaw11, we determined rs12608932 genotypes in the replication cohort. We Complex traits and polygenic disorders 269 present an independent replication of association with rs12608932 P09.016 (odds ratio 1.91, P = 0.01 for a recessive genetic model). Additionally, Runs of Homozygosity and we show association of the minor allele of rs12608932 with shorter susceptibility to Alzheimer’s disease survival of ALS patients (genome-wide cohort: hazard ratio 1.22, P = R. Sims1, S. Dwyer1, J. Chapman1, D. Harold1, A. Gerrish1, P. Hollingworth1, R. 0.01; replication cohort: hazard ratio 1.62, P = 0.005 using a recessive Abraham1, D. Ivanov1, V. Moskvina1, N. Jones1, C. Thomas1, A. Stretton1, S. model). ANOVA analyses showed that our data was best fitted with Lovestone2, J. Powell1, C. Brayne3, D. C. Rubinsztein3, M. Gill4, B. Lawlor4, A. a recessive model. In our study we found a higher minor allele Lynch4, K. Morgan5, K. Brown5, P. A. Passmore6, D. Craig6, B. McGuiness6, S. frequency in ALS cases compared to previous studies, while the minor Todd6, C. Holmes7, D. Mann8, A. D. Smith9, S. Love10, P. G. Kehoe10, J. Hardy11, allele frequency in controls was comparable. Our study shows the S. Mead11, N. Fox11, M. Rosser11, J. Collinge11, G. Livingston12, N. J. Bass12, importance of patient selection methods in replicating genetic variants H. Gurling12, A. McQuillin12, L. Jones1, P. A. Holmans1, M. O’Donovan1, M. J. that affect both susceptibility and survival, as these characteristics can Owen1, J. Williams1; vary greatly between population-based and referral-based cohorts. 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Institute of Psychiatry, London, United Kingdom, 3University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, P09.014 4Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, 5Nottingham University, Nottingham, United Functional failure of neuromuscular junctions in transgenic Kingdom, 6Queen’s University, Belfast, United Kingdom, 7University of drosophila melanogaster with human APP overexpression Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 8University of Manchester, G. Kislik, S. Sarantseva; Manchester, United Kingdom, 9OPTIMA, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10University Petersburg Institute of Nuclear Physics Russian Academy of Sciences, of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, 11Institute of Neurology, London, United Gatchina, Russian Federation. Kingdom, 12University College London, London, United Kingdom. Although abnormal processing of amyloid-β precursor protein (APP) Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia; it has been implicated in the pathogenic cascade leading to Alzheimer’s is genetically complex and shows heritability up to 79%. Extended disease (AD), the normal function of this protein and its role in synaptic runs of homozygosity (ROHs) have been shown to occur at a high dysfunction in AD is poorly understood. At the same time, deficits frequency in the human genome and may account for some of the in synaptic plasticity and cognitive functions were detected in APP unexplained genetic heritability of AD. Previous studies of ROHs in AD knockout or APP knockdown animal models. Moreover, independent have failed to identify an overall excess burden of ROHs in sporadic evidences indicated that abnormal metabolism of APP (mutant APP late-onset AD cases, but one study did identify a ROH on chromosome or APP overexpression) might contribute to synaptic dysfunction 8 which was significantly overrepresented in cases when compared to independently from Aβ. We show previously that overexpression of full controls. Using data generated from an AD genome-wide association length human APP but not its truncated forms are sufficient for abnormal study (GWAS) we describe here a statistical comparison of ROHs expression of synaptic proteins in the Drosophila melanogaster brain. greater than 1Mb in a UK and Ireland series genotyped on the Illumina To clarify APP function, we expressed wild-type APP and its mutant 610-quad array. form APP-Swedish in larval motoneurons. We showed that APPs There were 1,955 AD cases, 955 elderly screened controls and overexpression caused a dramatic functional disruption in the 529,205 autosomal markers which were suitable for use in this study. neuromuscular junction (NMJ). The NMJs exhibited abnormal endo/ ROHs analyses were performed using PLINK 1.07. exocytosis that was determined by incorporation of the styryl dye FM2- A total of 63,204 ROHs were identified. Burden analysis revealed 64. Analysis of mitochondria distribution showed that motor neurons no significant difference in the number of ROHs per person between overexpressing APP (APP-Swedish) had a significant reduction of cases and controls for ROHs greater than 1 Mb or when the data was functional mitochondria in the presynaptic terminal. We propose that stratified by size. APP regulates synaptic structure and functions and its overexpression No region was significantly associated with disease after correction for leads to synaptic pathology independently from neurotoxic effect of Aβ. multiple testing. The chromosome 8 region found to be associated with AD in a previous study did not show any association in this dataset. P09.015 In summary, ROHs are common in our outbred population, however Alzheimer‘s Disease: causes, New risk Factors statistically these ROHs are not a risk factor for late-onset AD in our J. Gharesouran1, M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, M. Rezazadeh1,2, T. Yeghaneh1; dataset. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Student Research P09.017 Committee, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Genetics of anal furunculosis in the German shepherd Dog: Islamic Republic of Iran. Genome-wide association, replication, fine-mapping and We still don’t fully understand what causes Alzheimer’s disease. What comparative genomics. is clear is that Alzheimer’s develops as a result of a complex cascade J. P. Massey1, A. D. Short1, X. Ke1, W. Newman2, C. A. Anderson3, W. E. R. of biological processes that take place over many years inside the Ollier1, L. J. Kennedy1; brain. But the majority of Alzheimer’s cases are late-onset, usually 1Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research (CIGMR), The University of developing after age 65, and this form of the disease shows no obvious Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Medical Genetics, inheritance pattern. However, in some families, clusters of cases are The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust seen. The deposition of amyloid in the form of plaques is thought by Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. many scientists to trigger the cascade of events leading to Alzheimer’s Anal furunculosis (AF) is characterised by ulceration and fistulation of pathology. Amyloid now is believed to be a critical target for eventual perianal tissue and particularly affects German Shepherd Dogs (GSD). treatment. The best evidence that amyloid causes the disease comes It has drawn parallels with perianal Crohn’s disease in humans. An from the genetic studies in which mutations of APP, PS1, PS2 and APOE immune-mediated aetiopathology has been suggested due to a strong e4 (the genes so far identified as causing some cases of Alzheimer’s) MHC association and clinical response to ciclosporin. A Genome-wide all facilitate amyloid accumulation. Some current research is focused association study (22,362 SNPs) was performed on 21 affected and on the association between these two forms of ApoE and Alzheimer’s 25 unaffected GSDs. Areas of potential interest were followed-up by disease. A growing body of research is also helping to identify various genotyping 91 SNPs in a further 54 cases and 110 controls. Three candidate genes. Several other genes also appear to influence the loci were significantly associated after multiple testing had been taken development of Alzheimer’s disease: inflammatory pathways genes into account. A good candidate gene region on chromosome 34 was (TNF-α, CCR2, CCR5), calcium homeostasis modulator 1 (CALHM1), discovered, in which there were five protective SNP associations (p = neuronal sortilinrelated receptor gene (SORL1). We examined a total 0.018 - 0.029, OR = 0.391 - 0.466). Additionally, we have identified a of 160 samples prepared from patients diagnosed as being affected region of extended homozygosity (selective sweep) on chromosome by Alzheimer’s disease and 163 healthy controls from west northern 3 associated with this disease. Targeted sequencing of these regions Iran (Eastern Azerbaijan) for variants of these genes and genotype is currently underway. As this canine disease is of comparative frequencies were statistically analyzed. interest to human medicine, an analysis was carried out using Crohn’s disease patients: 456 with perianal disease and 1197 without perianal complications. We selected 34 regions containing 42 SNPs showing Complex traits and polygenic disorders 270 some association with AF from the follow-up study which could be to AS in HLA-B27-positive patients. syntenically mapped to the human genome. When investigating 1Mb Two haplotypes showed a negative association with the disease: regions around these SNPs in the perianal Crohn’s disease cohort, 308G238A (p=0.04) and 857T238A (p=0.005). there were 25 SNP associations having a raw p value < 0.05, including Conclusion: These data indicate that haplotypic variations in the one upstream of the canine candidate gene (p = 0.023). This suggests TNFalpha gene influence disease susceptibility in HLA-B27 positive a possible common genetic component to both these canine and individuals in our population. The protective effect of these haplotypes human conditions. could be related to differences in TNFalpha production or could reflect the association of different HLA-B27 haplotypes with ankylosing P09.018** spondylitis. A long non-coding RNA accounts for Angelman syndrome-like neurodevelopmental disorder P09.020 S. Villatoro1, M. Banez-Coronel1, L. Armengol2, M. Viñas3, E. Gabau3, M. D. Replication study of genome-wide discovered loci associated Coll4, M. Guitart3, X. Estivill1; with anti-tumour necrosis factor treatment outcome in patients 1Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, with rheumatoid arthritis. Results from the DREAm registry. 2qGenomics SL, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, 3Corporacio Sanitaria Parc Tauli, M. Umicevic Mirkov1, H. Scheffer1, T. R. D. J. Radstake2, A. Lee3, P. M. Sabadell, Catalonia, Spain, 4Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Houtman4, H. L. M. Brus5, C. M. de Gendt6, M. A. F. J. van de Laar7, P. K. Catalonia, Spain. Gregersen3, P. L. C. M. van Riel2, B. Franke1, M. J. H. Coenen1; Angelman syndrome (AS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder 1Department of Human Genetics Radboud University Nijmegen Medical characterized by severe mental retardation and autistic-like features. Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Rheumatology Radboud AS is due to lack of UBE3A gene expression, but in 15% of the cases University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3The Feinstein the molecular cause still remains unknown. Long non-coding RNAs Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY, United States, 4Department (lncRNA) constitute a large portion of the human transcriptome, of Rheumatology Medical Centre Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden, Netherlands, which regulates gene expression by different mechanisms, including 5Department of Rheumatology Twee Steden Hospital, Tilburg, Netherlands, splicing, translational repression and epigenetic regulation. The spatial 6Department of Rheumatology Rijnstate Hospital, Arnhem, Netherlands, and temporal expression of lncRNA appears to be extremely important 7Department of Rheumatology University Twente & Medisch Spectrum Twente, for the development and function of the central nervous system. Our Enschede, Netherlands. study is focused on an AS-like patient with an unusual combination of Agents blocking tumour necrosis factor (anti-TNF) are widely used a deletion that involves lncRNA AK097590 inherited from one parent, for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Unfortunately, ~30% of and a rare SNP within AK097590 inherited from the other parent. the patients do not respond to this treatment. Although there is some Besides, this SNP leads to a change in the predicted secondary indication that genetic variants may influence the response to anti-TNF structure of AK097590 that may affect its normal function. We have none of these variants can reliably predict treatment outcome. We performed AK097590 knock down experiments in differentiated aimed to replicate findings from three published genome-wide studies. human neuroblastoma cells. qPCR assays have demonstrated that a RA patients treated with anti-TNF from the Dutch Rheumatoid Arthritis decrease of AK097590 levels is sufficient to modify the expression of Monitoring (DREAM) registry were included. Single Nucleotide UBE3A, PRKCG and PPP2R1A. Interestingly, these genes have a role Polymorphisms (SNPs) located within 50 kb of SNPs previously found in synaptic plasticity and long-term depression, which are reduced in associated with anti-TNF outcome were extracted from genome-wide AS murine models. Our results suggest that changes in the expression data (Illumina HumanHap550-Duo/Human660W-Quad BeadChips). levels of AK097590 may contribute to the clinical features associated Single-SNP and gene-based association analysis were performed in to AS, offering a novel molecular basis for the cases non associated PLINK using the percentage disease activity score (DAS28) change at with mutations in UBE3A. A better understanding of the regulatory 3 (n=503) and 6 months (n=386) as outcome. mechanism of AK097590 lncRNA and its target genes may help in the 16 of the 24 SNPs included were located near or within the genes development of therapeutic strategies for these neurodevelopmental GBP6, LASS6, AKO93144, PON1, MOBKL2B, C9orf72, TEC, PDZD2, disorders. EYA4, BC118985 and PTPRC. The other SNPs were located in gene- desserts on chromosome 1p22.3, 1q24.1, 4p15.1,11p14.2, 12p12.3 P09.019 and 20p11.21. Only the single SNP analysis at six months revealed tNFalpha gene polymorphisms in Romanian HLA-B27-positive significant findings. Three SNPs, located in GBP6 (p=0.016), which is patients with ankylosing spondylitis regulated by inflammatory cytokines, locus 20p11.21 (p=0.006) and O. Popa1, M. Bojinca1, V. Bojinca1, M. Dutescu2, M. Milicescu1, R. Caisan2, M. PDZD2 playing a role in insulin secretion related to disease severity in Meirosu3, R. Sfrent-Cornateanu1, C. Bara1, L. Popa4; early RA patients (p=0.045), were associated with treatment outcome. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, All associations lost significance after multiple-testing correction. 2National Hematology Institute Prof. Dr. C.T. Nicolau, Bucharest, Romania, 3ICA Three previously reported loci show suggestive association with anti- Research and Development, Bucharest, Romania, 4Grigore Antipa National TNF response in the Dutch population. Larger datasets are required to Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania. determine whether these genetic variants are indeed associated with Background: Ankylosing spondylitis (AS), the prototypic seronegative anti-TNF outcome. spondyloarthritis is a chronic inflammatory condition of the spine and sacroiliac joints. HLA-B27 is a genetic marker for AS. Moreover, P09.021 elucidating the role of tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha) in AS Association study between telomere length and Age-Related has important diagnostic and therapeutic significance, given the good Hearing impairment in 3527 caucasian individuals and 663 results obtained with anti-TNF therapy in these patients. Japanese individuals. Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate three TNFalpha S. Bonneux1, N. Suzuki2, E. Fransen1,3, S. Usami2, G. Van Camp1; gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in HLA-B27-positive 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, ankylosing spondylitis patients from Romania. 2Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Methods: 112 Romanian unrelated AS patients (97M/15F) and 76 Matsumoto, Japan, 3StatUa Center for Statistics, University of Antwerp, (40M/36F) ethnically match healthy controls were genotyped for Antwerp, Belgium. TNF-alpha -308G/A, -238G/A and -857C/T polymorphisms using It has been proposed that individuals with shorter telomere length are TaqMan SNP Genotyping Assays C-7514879-10, C-2215707-10 more susceptible to age-related disorders. In somatic cells, telomere and C- 11918223-10 (Applied Biosystems, USA). All subjects were length declines with age contributing to loss of cells with age when HLA-B27 positives. Association tests for each polymorphism and for telomeres reach a critical minimal length. Average telomere length was the estimated haplotypes were performed with the software package shown to be a heritable trait (Slagboom et al., 1994). PLINK v 1.07. Age-Related Hearing Impairment (ARHI) is the most common sensory Results: The minor allele TNF-857T was more frequent in AS patients disorder and the most important cause of hearing loss in the elderly, (24%) than in controls (19%), but not statistically significant (p=0.2). with a negative impact on the quality of life. It is a complex disease None of the three SNPs were individually associated with susceptibility influenced by genetic as well as environmental factors. Here we test Complex traits and polygenic disorders 271 whether a shorter average telomere length leads to increase of ARHI atopic asthmatics. Our results contribute to our understanding of the susceptibility. In 3527 European and 663 Japanese individuals, we asthma pathogenesis. Identification of polymorphisms associated with determined the telomere length in white blood cells using a monochrome asthma phenotypes and response to therapy may lead custom tailored multiplex quantitative PCR protocol (described by Cawthon, 2009). We and better management of asthma patients. performed association testing between the telomere length and the 3 Principal Components of the ARHI phenotype (Huyghe et al., 2008). In P09.024 addition, we tested this association adjusting for environmental factors Assessing the reproducibility of eight asthma candidate gene that were previously implicated in telomere shortening. The most associations in the spanish population important of these factors include smoking and BMI. M. Pino-Yanes1,2, T. Carrillo3, A. Sanchez-Palacios4, J. Villar5,2,6, R. Gonzalez7, I. Slagboom et al. (1994), Am J Hum Genet. 55:876-882. Sanchez-Machin7, J. Figueroa4, J. Cumplido3, M. Torres-Galvan8, A. Corrales1,2, Cawthon (2009), Nucleic Acids Rev. 37:e21. O. Acosta Fernandez9, J. Garcia-Robaina7, C. Flores1,2; Huyghe et al. (2008), Am J Hum Genet. 83:401-407. 1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 2CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Instituto de Salud P09.022 Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 3Allergy Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Las Association analysis of Dysbindin polymorphisms P1635 and Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 4Allergy Unit, Hospital Universitario Insular P1655 with schizophrenia de Gran Canaria, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 5Multidisciplinary F. Alizadeh1, M. Ghadiri2, M. S. Yekani Nejad3, N. Jalilian1, M. R. Noori-Daloii1; Organ Dysfunction Evaluation Research Network (MODERN), Research Unit, 1Departmetn of Medical Genetics,School of Medicine,Tehran Univ. of Medical Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 6Keenan Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran Psychiatric Hospital, Tehran, Research Center, St. Michael´s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada, 7Allergy Unit, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Univ. of Medical Sciences,Department of Hospital Universitario N.S. de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, Biostatics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 8Research Unit, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder that has a lifetime Spain, 9Neumology Unit, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, Santa Cruz de prevalence of ~1% in most of the population studied. Similar to many Tenerife, Spain. common complex disorders, schizophrenia is a multifactorial disorder Before the advent of genome-wide association studies (GWAS), a that is characterized by the contribution of multiple susceptibility massive number of independent candidate genes studies suggested genes that could act in conjunction with epigenetic processes that SNPs from ADAM33, ADRB2, CD14, MS4A2 (alias FCER1B), and environmental factors. There is quite impressive evidence IL13, IL4, IL4R, and LTA-TNF genes were among the most replicated supporting the association between genetic variants in dysbindin and associations with asthma. To date, except for the IL13-IL4 region, schizophrenia in populations. In the present study, we investigated the none of these genes was found in close proximity of GWAS hits in association between polymorphisms P1635 and P1655 in dysbindin asthma or related traits. Among studies with Spanish samples, most gene with schizophrenia. Subjects were 115 unrelated patients with have comprised direct associations of 1-2 SNPs/gene and limited case schizophrenia and 117 unrelated healthy volunteers. Genome-DNA numbers. To test the credibility of associations of these eight candidate was extracted from blood sample by using the standard salting out genes with asthma, we systematically evaluated previously associated method. Genotyping was done with the PCR-RFLP method. The allele SNPs as well as tagging SNPs (average r2=0.96) in a large study sample and genotype association were analyzed with χ2 test. As the result, of 606 asthmatic cases from the Genetics Of Asthma (GOA) study no significant difference was observed between patients and controls and 1259 population-based controls. After population stratification in allelic frequencies or genotypic distributions of the P1635 SNP adjustments based on 83 additional SNPs, we found nominal significant (p=0.809), but we could find a significant difference between case and associations with asthma for 14 SNPs in 4 genes (IL4R, ADAM33, controls for the P1655 SNP (p=0.009). ). Also we could find a significant MS4A2, and LTA-TNF; 0.004≤p-value≤0.047), including some of the association in A-C haplotype in patient with SCZ (p=0.004, OR= 1.7) previously associated SNPs (MS4A2: Gly237Glu; IL4R: Gln551Arg, and a protective effect in A-G haplotype (p= 0.003, OR=0.57). The Cys406Arg and Ser478Pro; LTA-TNF: -857C/T and -753G/A). Despite present study may provide further support for an association between no associations would remain significant after adjusting for the multiple P1655 SNP and schizophrenia in Iranian populations. Studies with comparisons performed, these findings suggest that IL4R, ADAM33, more markers and subjects for various populations will be necessary MS4A2, and LTA-TNF genes should be more exhaustively analyzed to understand the genetic contribution of Dysbindin gene for the for putative causal variants. development of schizophrenia. This work was supported by FUNCIS 23/07, and EMER07/001 and PI081383 from Spanish Ministry Fund for Health (Instituto de Salud P09.023 Carlos III, Spain). Association analysis of polymorphisms in selected genes in slovenian children with asthma P09.025 P. Perin1,2, U. Potočnik1,2; the association between 17q12-21 sNPs and asthma in the 1Faculty of chemistry and chemical engineering, University of Maribor, Maribor, Volga-Ural region of Russia. Slovenia, 2Medical faculty, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. A. S. Karunas1, B. B. Yunusbayev1, Y. Y. Fedorova1, N. N. Ramazanova2, S. Z. Many candidate genes initially associated with asthma or asthma Zagidullin2, E. I. Etkina2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; phenotypes were not confirmed as asthma genes in the follow up 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian independent studies in different populations. In the most association Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Medical State studies candidate genes were compared between controls and all University, Ufa, Russian Federation. asthma patients in one group. The aim of our study was the association Asthma is one of the most common multifactor diseases, in which many analysis of selected genes in Slovenian asthmatic children. We cells and cellular elements play a role. The first GWAS for asthma analyzed candidate genes in all asthmatics and separately in the group discovered a significant association between 17q12-21 SNPs and of atopic asthmatics and the group of non-atopic asthmatics. In addition, childhood asthma in Europeans. Consistently, its results have been we have analyzed the correlation among selected polymorphisms, successfully replicated in independent populations of European and clinical parameters and response to therapy with glucocorticoids. Asian ancestries. The aim of our investigation was to identify asthma Using bioinformatics tools nine single nucleotide polymorphisms susceptibility genes in the Volga-Ural region of Russia. The study (SNPs) in nine different candidate genes were selected. We have included 358 unrelated patients with physician-diagnosed asthma and genotyped 304 children with asthma and 195 healthy controls. We 369 disease-free control subjects of different ethnic origin (Russians, have performed genotyping by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Tatars and Bashkirs). The genotyping was carried out using the Illumina by the restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. We Human610 quad array at the CNG (France) as a part of GABRIEL have found significant association of genes CCR5, IL13 and RANTES (A Multidisciplinary Study to Identify the Genetic and Environmental and asthma. Our study was the first that associated IL12B and IL13 Causes of Asthma in the European Community). Statistical tests for gene with a nitrogen in the exhaled air of asthmatic patients. In association were carried out using PLINK 1.06 software package. In addition we were the first ones who associated IL13 and ORMDL3 order to control for population stratification, we performed Eigenstrat with response to asthma therapy with glucocorticoids in the group of analysis for cases and controls, removing outliers. After QC filters, Complex traits and polygenic disorders 272 550915 SNPs genotyped in 330 cases and 348 controls were used of the relatively homogenous genetic and environmental background for testing the association of SNPs to asthma. Some markers on of subjects. Atherosclerosis was assessed in 360 migraineurs (209 chromosome 17q12-21 within the ORMDL3/GSDMB locus showed had migraine without aura and 151 had migraine with aura) and 617 the most statistically significant association in this study (p≤5x10-7). subjects without migraine or severe headache. Atherosclerosis was The maximum association was at the SNP rs7216389 within 1 intron quantified by Intima Media Thickness (IMT), Pulse Wave Velocity of the GSDMB gene (p=1.013x10-7). In summary, we have found the (PWV) and Ankle-Brachial Index (ABI). A large number of putative association asthma in the Volga-Ural region of Russia with SNPs at the cardiovascular risk parameters and the Framingham risk scores for previously reported ORMDL3/GSDMB locus on 17q12-21. Supported coronary heart disease (CHD-score) and stroke (stroke-score) were by a contract from the EC (018996). evaluated and gene-based p-values were calculated for two genes implicated in cardiovascular disease (MTHFR and ACE). P09.026 Results: No difference was found in carotid IMT, mean PWV, or ABI Genotyping of ATG16L1 rs2241879 and iL23R rs1004819 between migraine patients and controls. Migraine patients had no polymorphisms among Polish patients with crohn’s disease and increased odds of having an elevated CHD-score or elevated stroke- localization of symptoms in gastrointestinal tract score (>10%). No association with MTHFR or ACE was found. L. Jakubowska-Burek1, J. Hoppe-Golebiewska2, S. Hryhorowicz3, M. conclusions: Migraineurs do not have increased risk for central Kaczmarek-Rys2, M. Kucharski1, K. Linke1, R. Slomski4, A. Dobrowolska- or peripheral atherosclerosis. Our data suggest that traditional Zachwieja1; cardiovascular risk factors and atherosclerosis are an unlikely 1Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, explanation for the previously observed association between migraine Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of Science, and cardiovascular disease. Poznan, Poland, 3The NanoBioMedical Centre, Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznan, Poznan, Poland, 4Institute of Human Genetics Polish Academy of P09.028 Science, Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology University of Natural common genetic variants in ITGA2, IL1B, ALOX5AP, OR13G1, Sciences in Poznan, Poznan, Poland. MMP9 genes that participate in oxidative stress and influence introduction: Crohn’s disease (CD), next to ulcerative colitis (UC), atherosclerosis phenotype formation belongs to Inflammatory Bowel Diseases (IBD). Genes ATG16L1 and I. Pepalytė1, K. Grigalionienė1, Ž. Petrulionienė2,3, L. Bagdonaitė4, Z. A. IL23R may predispose for the development of the disease. Kučinskienė4, V. Kučinskas1; Aim: of the research was the analysis of polymorphisms: ATG16L1 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius rs2241879 and IL23R rs1004819 among Polish CD patients. We also University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Clinic Of Cardiovascular Diseases, Faculty Of wanted to find out if any of these two polymorphisms is related to Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Centre Of Cardiology And localization of GIT symptoms. Angiology, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, materials and methods: 96 Polish patients with CD and 96 individuals 4Department of Physiology, Biochemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of from population group were qualified for research. Method used for Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. genotyping was pyrosequencing. Statistical analysis was performed. Atherosclerosis is complex multifactorial disorder where both Results: Analysis of ATGrs2241879 revealed that the most frequent genetic and environmental factors play an essential role in the was GA genotype (55,7% among CD patients, 48,7% in population etiopathogenesis of the disease. Formation and further progression group), next AA (27,1% and 31,2%, respectively) and GG (17,1% and of atherosclerosis is based on the intricate biological pathways. 20,1%). Analysis of IL23Rrs 1004819 revealed that TC genotyope was Our previous study (Linkoping-Vilnius coronary disease risk the most frequent among CD patients - 51,1% (35,4% in population assessment study) showed the higher mortality from coronary heart group), while in population group the most frequent was CC genotype disease (CHD) of Lithuanian men in comparison with Swedish men. (48,7%, and 44,7% among CD patients). TT genotype was observed Subsequent observations revealed that Lithuanian men had some in 4,3% of CD patients and 15,9% of population group. Alleles analysis differences in atherosclerosis phenotype, which may be influenced didn’t reveal any statisticaly significant differences in frequency of by complementary factors. It appears that one of these factors could genotypes and alleles. Statistical analysis revealed that the most be the oxidative stress. Thus the goal of this study was to evaluate frequent genotype in ATGrs2241879 among patients with intestinal the mainstream biological pathways inducing and maintaining the manifestation of the disease was GA, while in IL23R rs1004819 it was atherosclerotic process by analyzing genetic biomarkers particularly TT genotype(p=0.005). in inflammatory, metabolic pathways where the main focus is laid on conclusions: Although we did not find any statistically significant oxidation process. After bioinformatic analysis (Medline data mining) differences in genotypes frequency among CD patients and population there were 150 SNPs in 89 genes selected for the construction of group, we observed some tendencies related to intestinal localization microarray based on the APEX technology (Asper Biotech, Estonia). of symptoms and specific genotypes. Genotyping was carried out in 23 families and the TDT, S-TDT as well as combined analysis were performed. The following SNPs associated P09.027 with atherosclerosis phenotype were identified: rs1126643, rs1143627, No increased risk for atherosclerosis in migraine patients from rs9551963, rs1151640, rs3918242 in the candidate genes ITGA2, the ERF study IL1B, ALOX5AP, OR13G1, MMP9 respectively. These genes belong C. M. Weller1, A. H. Stam2, A. J. W. Janssens3, B. de Vries4, Y. S. Aulchenko5, to different biological pathways: trombocyte adhesion and vessel B. A. Oostra5, R. R. Frants1, A. M. J. M. van den Maagdenberg1,6, M. D. Ferrari6, damage (ITGA2, MMP9), inflammation response (IL1B), cholesterol C. M. van Duijn5, G. M. Terwindt6; and lypoxygenase metabolic pathway (ALOX5AP) and nutrition 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, (OR13G1). Generalized biochemical, bioinformatical and candidate Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, genes’ association results seem to support hypothesis that oxidation Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University process may be of key importance in atherosclerosis formation. Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands, 5Genetic P09.029 Epidemiology Unit, Departments of Epidemiology and Clinical Genetics, A comparative analysis of sNPs of ADRB1 gene in children with Erasmus University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of a bronchial asthma and in healthy children Neurology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. E. A. Isupova, M. B. Zdanova, A. N. Voitovich, G. N. Novik, V. I. Larionova; Background and Aim: Migraine, in particular migraine with aura, is Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian associated with an increased risk of ischemic stroke and coronary Federation. heart disease. It is unknown whether this is mediated by an Background: The majority of undesirable effects associated with unfavorable cardiovascular risk profile and associated atherosclerosis. regular use of β2-agonists in patients with the atopic bronchial asthma Therefore, we investigated functional, structural, and genetic markers (BA) are connected with their action on β1-adrenoretseptor. In modern of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease in migraine patients. pharmacogenetics, studies on SNPs of human β1-adrenoretseptor methods: Subjects were participants of the Erasmus Rucphen Family gene (ADRB1) become topical. (ERF) genetic isolate study, in which confounding is reduced because Study groups: The study group included 272 children with BA (47 girls Complex traits and polygenic disorders 273 and 225 boys) aged from 4 to 17 years old. The control group included (-590C>T), IL4RA (Ile50Val), IL13 (Arg130Gln) and CCL11 (−384A>G) 134 healthy children (64 girls and 70 boys) aged from 6 to 17 years old. genes in AD patients and control individuals. The AD group consisted Methods: The genetic polymorphism of ADRB1 gene was identified by of 214 AD patients with different ethnic origins (88 Russians, 44 Tatars PCR-RFLP standard method. and 82 individuals of mixed origins). The control group included 200 Results: The distributions of genotypes and alleles of the SNPs in the non-atopic individuals (55 Russians, 49 Tatars and 84 individuals of ADRB1 gene were not significantly different between studied groups. mixed origins). Genomic DNA was isolated by phenol-chloroform However, we have found a significant difference between patients extraction. The genotyping of SNPs was performed by PCR-RFLP. with various variants of BA. The patients with mild asthma had a Significant differences between AD patients and control individuals of combination of genotypes S49G/G389G [4,5% vs 0,0%] and G49G/ Tatar ethnic origin were found in the allelic frequencies for the Ile50Val R389R [4,5% vs 1,9%] more frequently compared to those suffered polymorphism of the IL4R gene. The frequency of the allele Val in AD from severe asthma in whom S49S/G389G [6,7% vs 3,0%] and S49G/ patients was significantly higher than in control group - 0.466 versus R389R [20,0% vs 9,1%] prevailed (p<0,05). 0.327, respectively (χ2=3.78, p=0.05). The estimated odds ratio for Conclusion: These results suggest that polymorphisms of the ADRB1 the allele Val at this SNP was 1,8 (CI95% 0,99-3,26), for the allele gene might play a role in severity of asthma manifestation, and Ile - 0.56 (95%CI 0.31-1.0). The analysis of -590C>T polymorphism of that ADRB1 polymorphisms is not associated with BA in Russian the IL4 gene, Arg130Gln polymorphism of the IL13 gene and −384A>G population. polymorphism of the CCL11 gene has detected that there are no significant differences between AD patients and healthy donors. P09.030 German shepherds as a canine model for Atopic dermatitis P09.032*** K. Tengvall1, K. Bergvall2, M. Kierczak3, M. Olsson1, L. Hammarström4, T. Association of the ciliary gene AHI1 with autism Leeb5, G. Andersson3, K. Lindblad-Toh1,6, Å. Hedhammar2; H. Y. Kroes, S. Kevelam, R. van ‘t Slot, C. G. De Kovel, M. Poot; 1Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Dept. of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands. Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Clinical Joubert syndrome (JBTS) is an autosomaal recessive disorder Sciences, Swedish University of Agricural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, characterized by hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis, the characteristic 3Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of neuroradiologic ‘molar tooth sign,’ and neurologic symptoms, Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Division of Clinical Immunology, including dysregulation of breathing and developmental delay. JBTS Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska also includes variable features such as retinal dystrophy and renal University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Institute of Genetics, anomalies. Up to 27% of JBTS patients show features of autism. Thus University of Berne, Berne, Switzerland, 6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, far, 10 genes for JBTS have been identified. The ciliary gene AHI1 Cambridge, MA, United States. has been found mutated in 7 to 16% of cases with JBTS. On the other Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD) is a genetically predisposed hand, of the 39 genes associated with autism, 29 (74%) encode ciliary inflammatory and pruritic allergic skin disease with characteristic genes. This association of ciliary genes with autism is highly significant clinical features. It is most commonly associated with IgE antibodies (P < 0.001; two sided Fischer exact test). Therefore, we tested the directed towards environmental allergens, often house dust mites. hypothesis that ciliary genes may be involved in autism, by performing Onset of clinical signs is usually between 6 months and 3 years of age. a candidate-gene association study with a cohort of 84 patients with Initial signs can be seasonal or non-seasonal depending on allergens autism vs. 145 healthy controls for the 10 known JBTS genes (AHI1, involved. In a similar pattern as in human atopic dermatitis typically NPHP1, CEP290, ARL13B, RPGRIP1L, MKS3, CC2D2A, OFD1, face, ears, paws, extremities, ventrum and flex-zones are affected. TMEM216, and INPP5E). For AHI1 we found nominal association The diagnosis is based on clinical signs and exclusion of differential with odds ratio’s from 3.077 to 9.174 and p values for association < diagnoses, such as flea allergy dermatitis, cutaneous adverse food 0.0001 for SNPs rs12179084, rs2327587 and rs7766656. Our data reactions, scabies or other pruritic ectoparasites, pruritic bacterial suggest that dysfunction of primary cilia may constitute an important folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis. A positive allergen-specific IgE neuropathological pathway in autism. test (serology or intradermal test) aids in defining offending allergens. Some breeds have markedly higher prevalence of CAD compared to P09.033 others. German shepherds have an exceptionally high susceptibility to acGH analysis of two families showing both autism and epilepsy many immune-related diseases, including CAD. R. Combi1, S. Redaelli2, V. Sansoni1, C. M. Cornaggia3, L. Dalprà2; We have performed a genome-wide association study of 91 German 1Dept of Biotechnology and Biosciences, University of Milano-Bicocca, Milano, shepherd CAD cases and 93 controls using the Illumina ~170 K canine Italy, 2Dept of Neurosciences and Biomedical Technologies, University of SNP array. In addition, IgA levels were measured in serum from the Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 3Clinical Psychiatry, University of Milano-Bicocca, same German shepherd dogs.. In concordance with other studies, the Monza, Italy. German shepherds showed lower IgA levels compared to other breeds. Autism is a genetic disorder, with an estimated heritability greater than Further, the IgA levels were significantly lower in German shepherd 90%. Over the past years, the convergence of genomic technologies CAD cases compared to controls (p=0.000008). Thus, IgA levels were has led to the identification of several susceptibility loci by means of included as a covariate in genome-wide association analysis using linkage studies. Autism is associated with epilepsy in early childhood GenABEL. Four regions with clear association are currently being and epilepsy occurs in 10-30% of autism patients. investigated further in both canine and human cases and controls. We analysed two families showing both autism and epilepsy. The first one is the family of a woman, showing a severe and progressive P09.031 epileptic disorder, who is married with an healthy man and has six Association analysis of cytokine gene polymorphisms and children: two girls are healthy, a girl and two boys are affected by atopic dermatitis in Volga-Ural region of Russia. autism, while a boy showed partial seizures only twice. The three G. F. Gimalova1, A. S. Karunas1, Y. Y. Fedorova1, E. R. Gumennaya2, S. V. children with autism show a moderate mental retardation and an EEG Levashova3, A. R. Biktasheva3, E. I. Etkina3, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; with no epileptic alterations. The second family is composed by an 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian epileptic woman married with a healthy man and their child affected by Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Dermatovenerologic autism.The genetic basis of autism and epilepsy were studied in these dispensary of Bashkortostan Republic, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir families. In particular, we performed an array-CGH analysis to search Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. for pathological CNVs which are common to all affected members of Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin disease associated the two families. with cutaneous hyperreactivity to environmental triggers and is often the The study detected a single common region on chromosome 15q11.2, first step in the atopic march. Cytokines play crucial role in all stages which has already been reported to be either deleted or duplicated of allergy and inflammation development and maintaining. Significant in about 1% of epileptic patients. Moreover, the same region was associations between single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in associated with ASDs (autism spectrum disorders). We found a loss of cytokines and cytokines receptors with AD have been replicated in 15q11.2 in all individuals belonging to the first family, while a gain of the more than one study. In this study we have screened SNPs in the IL4 region in the two affected members of the second family.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 274 P09.034 practice. Many rare Copy Number Variants (CNVs) that harbor Prevalence of fragile X syndrome in non-syndromic autistic small genomic deletions and insertions have been described in the children in western saudi arabia autism spectrum disorders (ASD). To identify these likely functional M. M. Alwasiyah1, C. Trujillo2; elements, we combined three previously published large cohorts 1Aziziah Maternity & Children Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Dr Erfan & of autistic patients with a large number of controls to analyze over Bagedo Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. 25K unrelated individuals. After stringent quality control measures, Prevalence of Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) in the general population is we compared 3K cases to over 19K ethnically matched controls in around 1 in 1000 males and 1 in 2500 females. It is widely reported in a two-stage genome-wide association design. In all, we uncovered the literature that FXS in the autistic populati5%, and that 30% of the 275 statistically significant distinct copy number variable regions. The FXS cases have full Autism. Among the remaining patients with FXS, 60 genes nearest these robust CNVRs are most enriched in gene of those who do not meet the criteria for an autism spectrum disorder networks impacting neurological disease, behavior and developmental (ASD) diagnosis, the majority have one or more autistic features, such disorder. A more focused analysis of a subset of 87 CNVRs that are as hand flapping, poor eye contact and tactile defensiveness. Also it is predicted to disrupt 26 genes highlights GABA receptor signaling, reported that FXS is the most common single gene cause of autism, and methionine/glutathione trans-sulfuration as the most significant responsible for 2% to 6% of all cases of autism. canonical pathways disrupted in ASD. Furthermore, we used available We studied 41 patients with non-syndromic Autism in Western Saudi family members to characterize CNVRs into inherited vs de-novo Arabia, we determined the trinucleotide repeat number (TRN) of CGG and used ethnicity information to characterize their effects in different in 5’ end for the untranslated region of the gene FMR1 using PCR ethnic populations. Taken together, the CNVRs we have identified technique as described by Chong et al, (AJMG 51:522-526, 1994). impact multiple novel genes and signaling pathways, including genes After performing gel electrophoresis for the PCR products using 2% involved in GABA receptor signaling, that may be important for new agarose gel, the results analysis demonstrated that all samples have a personalized therapeutic development. CGG trinucleotide repeat number less than 50 repeats. In conclusion even though our sample number is small, with the P09.037 percentage reported FMR1 gene mutation seems to not play a major Identification of four mutations affecting normal splicing role in the etiology of Autism in Western Saudi Arabia. There is a during the resequencing of X-chromosome synaptic genes in much lower prevalence of FXS. We may attribute this to a larger role individuals with autism or schizophrenia of recessive causes, especially if considering parental consanguinity, A. Piton1,2, L. Jouan3, J. Gauthier3, G. A. Rouleau3; though there may be other reasons as well. 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2CEntre d’Excellence en Neuromique de l’Université de Montréal, Centre de Recherche du Chum, Hôpital Notre-Dame, P09.035 Montréal, QC, Canada, 3Entre d’Excellence en Neuromique de l’Université de characterisation of putative autism susceptibility genes: Montréal, Centre de Recherche du Chum, Hôpital Notre-Dame, Montréal, QC, translating genome wide analysis to causation Canada. G. Kenny, R. Anney; Autism (AUT) and schizophrenia (SCZ) are two common Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland. neurodevelopmental disorders, which result from the combination of Introduction genetic and environmental factors. To explore the hypothesis that rare Genomewide Association studies (GWAS) have been used to identify highly penetrant mutations in different genes specific to single families genetic markers which have strong statistical association with a are involved in these diseases, we have resequenced X-linked synaptic disease. Establishing a functional consequence of association is genes in a cohort of 285 AUT and SCZ individuals and identified required to determine a causal link between marker and disease. truncating mutations in IL1RAPL1 and MAOB genes (Piton A, Mol. In a recent GWA of autism we identified a strong association within Psy., 2010). We wanted to evaluate if, besides these two mutations, the gene MACROD2 (1). Very little is known about the function of some of the rare variants could have such a drastic effect at the protein MACROD2. This project is structured to examine the biological role level by affecting the mRNA splicing. We used an in silico approach of MACROD2, with the hypothesis that disruption of MACROD2 will (using Human Splicing Finder, Nnsplice, SpliceView, ESEfinder, impact on the structure and/or function of the neuron. Rescue ESE) to detect which of the rare variants could create/disrupt Results an acceptor site, a donor site or an exonic splicing enhancer (ESE). MACROD2 is expressed almost ubiquitously across human tissues, Fourteen variants with the best prediction scores were tested in vitro including brain, kidney, placenta, skeletal muscle, testis and thyroid using a minigene system in the vector SPL3B. We showed that four gland. Promoter mapping constructs were examined in SHSY5Y of these variants (28%), in GABRQ, GABRA3, HDAC6 and NXF5 neuroblastoma cell lines. We observed differential expression of the genes, affect the normal splicing and are predicted to lead to truncated various promoter lengths. From this preliminary data it would appear proteins. Our results illustrate the importance of analyzing the effect that the promoter region of MACROD2 lies ~500bp upstream from of mutations at the mRNA level and have led to the identification of exon 1. new genes associated with AUT. Interestingly, although it has been Discussion considered since a long time that impairments in GABA pathways play GWA offer potential insight into the biology of disease. The biological a role in AUT etiology, it is the first time that truncating mutations in characterisation of observed candidate genes must follow GWA to best GABA receptors genes are identified in patients. take advantage of these data. This preliminary work is part of a wider comprehensive study of P09.038 MACROD2 which will include both in silico and in vitro techniques. Gene ontology enrichment analysis in two independent family- The authors acknowledge grant support from the HRB. based samples of over 2100 families highlights biologically References plausible processes for autism spectrum disorders 1. Anney R, et al. A genomewide scan for common alleles affecting risk R. J. L. Anney1, E. A. Heron1, R. Segurado1, M. Gill1, L. Gallagher1, A. G. P. for autism. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Jul 27. [Epub ahead of print]. Consortium2; 1Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2Autism Genome Project, Consortium, P09.036** United Kingdom. Large-scale genetic pathway analysis of copy number variants There is growing evidence to support the role of rare structural and highlights important rare genetic causes and gene networks for sequence variation in the aetiology of autism spectrum disorders autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). However, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of ASDs D. Hadley1, J. Glessner1, K. Wang2, F. Mentch1, D. Abrams1, C. Kim1, E. have yielded only modest evidence to support common variation in Frackelton1, C. Hou1, R. Chiavacci1, J. Connolly1, G. Lyon1, H. Hakonarson1; the aetiology of disorder. GWAS rely upon statistically robust genome- 1The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, wide-significant associations to identify genes and loci of risk. There 2University of Southern Califormia, Los Angeles, CA, United States. are considerable modest association signals that do not meet stringent The ability to quantify individual’s genomic risk for disease can genome-wide-significance thresholds. These signals may conceal facilitate the development of new interventions and improve medical underlying patterns that are important to understanding the aetiology Complex traits and polygenic disorders 275 of disease. We have developed a robust method, pedSNP-ratio-test 7Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Universitat Autònoma (pedSRT) to examine association enrichment in biologically-linked de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 8Department of Microbiology, Immunology, gene-sets for family-based association studies. Using a two-stage and Pathology, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO, United States, approach we explore association enrichment in GWA data from more 9FAS Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United than 2100 families from the Autism Genome Project. Based on estimates States, 10ANTAGENE Laboratory, Limonest, France, 11Linnaeus Centre for from study-sensitive simulation we identify excess of observed and Bioinformatics, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 12Department of Clinical replicated association enrichment. We highlight enrichment for sets Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, of genes involved in diverse biological processes including pyruvate 13Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Erlangen, University metabolism, transcription factor activation and cell-signalling. Many of Erlangen-Nurnburg, Erlangen, Germany, 14Internal Medicine 5, Division of the genes and processes that show enrichment have previously of Rheumatology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 15Medical been examined in autistic disorders and offer biologically plausibility Department III, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, to these findings. Moreover, our data supports the hypothesis, that in 16Wurtsburo Veterinary Clinic, Wurtsburo, NY, United States. part, common variation is important in the aetiology of ASDs. This work The dog provides us with a spontaneous mutational model for disease. By is presented on behalf of the Autism Genome Project Consortium. exploiting the unique genetic signatures underpinning domestication and breed formation we can use genome-wide association to identify disease P09.039** genes, which may also have roles in human disease. Autoinflammatory AKAPs integrate genome-wide association findings for autism diseases have no known pathogenic or autoimmune cause and are spectrum disorders into signalling networks regulating characterised by recurrent episodes of fever and inflammation. Several steroidogenesis, neurite outgrowth and synaptic function genes have been implicated in human disease, however the majority G. Poelmans1, B. Franke2, D. L. Pauls3, J. K. Buitelaar1; of cases remain unexplained. The Shar-Pei breed suffers a similar 1Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition autoinflammatory disease and has coincidently undergone selection and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, for a distinctive wrinkled skin. Using genome-wide SNP analyses, the Netherlands, 2Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Donders strongest signal of a breed-specific selective sweep co-localized with the Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen fever susceptibility locus on chromosome 13. Re-sequencing identified Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental two partially overlapping duplications, which were unique to Shar-Pei and Genetics Unit, Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General located upstream of Hyaluronic Acid Synthase 2 (HAS2). HAS2 encodes Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. the rate-limiting enzyme synthesizing hyaluronan (HA), a major component Background: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are highly heritable. of the skin. HAS2 is up-regulated and HA accumulates in the skin of Shar- In recent years, several genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of Pei. A high copy number of the 16.1kb duplication was associated with ASD were published. increased HAS2 expression and disease (p < 0.0001). Fragmented HA Methods: We have carried out a bioinformatics analysis using can act as a trigger of the innate immune system and stimulate sterile Ingenuity and a systematic literature analysis of 200 genes from five fever and inflammation. The strong selection for the skin phenotype published GWAS that yielded association with ASD through single appears to enrich for a pleiotropic mutation predisposing these dogs to nucleotide polymorphisms at P < 0.0001, and we used the results from disease. HAS2 was not previously associated with autoinflammation and a sixth published GWAS to validate our findings. We also searched for preliminary results indicate that this glycosaminoglycan may be involved overlap between the identified candidate genes and genes located in in human periodic fevers. Further inroads into the significance of this copy number variations (CNVs) in people with ASD and we identified pathway for disease will be discussed. microRNAs that downregulate gene expression of ASD candidate genes and are deregulated in ASD. P09.041 Results: A total of 120 of the 200 ASD candidate genes encode proteins Genetic and epigenetic alterations in patients with Balkan that fit into three signalling networks regulating steroidogenesis, endemic nephropathy neurite outgrowth and synaptic function, and we were able to place R. G. Staneva1, I. I. Dimova1, P. Dimitrov2, D. Toncheva1; 50 other ASD candidate genes in the identified networks. The proteins 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National encoded by 11 ASD-linked AKAP (A-kinase anchor protein) genes Center of Public Health Protection, Sofia, Bulgaria. functionally integrate signalling cascades within and between these BACKGROUND: Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) represents networks. Lastly, we found that 70 of the 200 ASD candidate genes a chronic progressive interstitial nephritis in striking correlation with were found in CNVs in people with ASD and 100 of these genes were uroepithelial tumors of the upper urinary tract. The disease has downregulated by ASD-implicated microRNAs. endemic distribution in the Danube river regions in several Balkan Conclusions countries. The so far conducted investigations of environmental factors We have identified three signalling networks for ASD that contribute to as an ethological factor proved to be futile. The family and genetic our understanding of the molecular basis of the disorder and that are studies were inconclusive. functionally integrated by the AKAPs, ‘druggable’ proteins that need to Epigenetic changes encompass an array of molecular modifications to be further investigated as possible targets for psychopharmacological both DNA and chromatin. Epigenetic tests can elucidate the intricate treatments of ASD. pathogenetic mechanisms of BEN and can prove to be the bridge between environmental factors and genetic background in BEN P09.040 development. A novel unstable duplication upstream of HAs2 in chinese MATERIALS AND METHODS: We’ve collected blood and tumor Shar-Pei dogs causes the breed defining skin phenotype and a samples. We’ve adopted genome-wide strategy (methylated DNA disease analogous to human periodic fever syndromes. immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) and whole-genome array analysis. We J. Meadows1, M. Olsson1, K. Truvé2, G. Rosengren Pielberg1, F. Puppo3, E. will perform pool analysis to identify significant methylation status Mauceli4, J. Quilez5, N. Tonomura4, G. Zanna6, M. Docampo7, A. Bassols7, A. differences by comparing four cohorts: (1) affected by BEN individuals Avery8, E. Karlsson9, A. Thomas10, D. L. Kastner3, E. Bongcam-Rudloff11, M. T. with at least one affected parent; (2) healthy individuals from endemic Webster1, A. Sanchez5, Å. Hedhammar12, M. Herrmann13, N. Blank14, J. Rech15, regions with at least one affected parent; (3) healthy controls form E. F. Remmers3, L. Andersson1,2, L. Ferrer6, L. Tintle16, K. Lindblad-Toh1,4; endemic regions with no BEN family history; (4) healthy controls from 1Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and non-endemic regions. Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Animal RESULTS: Our previous experiments showed that in BEN patients the Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, 3q25 band was most frequently involved in chromosomal aberrations. Sweden, 3National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, In superficial (pTa) BEN tumor the genome instability was extremely United States, 4Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute of high. Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) showed genetic Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, United States, 5Department of Animal gains at 1q, 3q, 7p, 7q, 15q, and 19q in BEN tumors analysed. and Food Science, Veterinary Molecular Genetics Service, Universitat CONCLUSIONS: The data gleaned from own experiments have Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 6Department of Animal Medicine disclosed a strong impact of genetic factors to the development of BEN and Surgery, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, and BEN-associated urothelial tumors.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 276 P09.042 ECG. Loss-of-function mutations in SCN5A cause 15-20% of BrS modifying effect of the FTO genetic variant on longitudinal cases. We aimed to investigate whether mutations in the four beta- association between adolescent emotional problems and adult subunits of sodium channel genes (SCN1B to SCN4B) are associated body mass index with abnormal cardiac excitation in BrS. D. Gaysina1,2, R. Hardy2; Direct Sanger sequencing was performed in 16 clinically diagnosed BrS 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2MRC Unit for patients, 11 asymptomatic individuals with positive family history for Lifelong Health and Ageing, London, United Kingdom. BrS or sudden cardiac death (SCD) and one asymptomatic individual Adolescent emotional problems have a long-tern effect on BMI with a positive ajmaline test, none of whom had SCN5A mutations. change and obesity. Variations of FTO gene contribute to common Genetic analysis revealed a novel intronic variant and 3 SNPs in forms of human obesity, and to BMI change across the life course. SCN1B, two intronic SNPs and one 3’UTR SNP in SCN2B, a novel No study has investigated the joint effect of the FTO risk variant and silent exonic variant and four 5’UTR, one silent exonic and two intronic emotional problems on BMI change across the life course. We aimed SNPs in SCN3B, and a novel 5’UTR variant and 2 exonic silent SNPs to investigate whether the effect of emotional problems on BMI change in SCN4B. through adulthood is modified by the polymorphism of FTO gene. In silico splicing analysis using Alamut (Interactive Biosoftware) We used data from a British 1946 birth cohort. We analyzed FTO predicted that the novel intronic variant in SCN1B and the exonic rs9939609 (1238 men and 1233 women), which was previously variant in SCN3B have no impact on splicing. The novel variant in the associated with BMI in this cohort, in those with adolescent emotional minimal promoter of SCN4B was detected in an asymptomatic young problems and in those without. We tested for the interaction effect individual with a family history of SCD and a father clinically diagnosed between FTO and affective status on BMI at ages 20, 26, 36, 43 and as BrS. Detection of the variant within the family and control population 53 years and on BMI change over a period of 33 years using multilevel is ongoing. models. In conclusion, these novel variants and polymorphisms in the beta- We showed that emotional problems were associated with lower BMI subunits of sodium channel genes may have a direct or modifier effect at age 20 (p=0.009), 26 (p=0.02) and 36 (p=0.005) years in FTO A on developing BrS, but these results need to be validated by further allele carriers, but not in TT homozygotes. A significant interaction large scale and functional studies. between FTO and affective status in relation to BMI was observed at age 20 (p=0.055) and 36 (p=0.008). Among A allele carriers, but not P09.045 among TT homozygotes, those with adolescent emotional problems testing Bst-2/tetherin gene as candidate host factor involved had faster rates of BMI increase across adulthood. on HiV-1 susceptibility and progression rate to AiDs The relationship between emotional problems and BMI varies by FTO M. Laplana1, T. Puig2, A. Caruz3, J. Fibla1; genotype. This finding has implications for predicting which people 1IRBLleida, University of Lleida, Lleida, Spain, 2IRBLleida, Hospital Universitari with emotional problems are at higher risk of weight gain. Arnau de Vilanova, Lleida, Spain, 3Unidad de Inmunogenética, Universidad de Jaén, Jaén, Spain. P09.043 BST-2/Tetherin/CD317/HM1.24 inhibits HIV-1 release from infected Genetic variation of glutamate-cysteine ligase modifier subunit cells by retaining virions on cell surface. HIV-1 Vpu protein counteracts and susceptibility to nonallergic bronchial asthma: an evidence BST-2/Tetherin action by sequestering and promoting its degradation. for gene-smoking interaction We have tested BST-2/Tetherin variants rs3217318 (promoter 20bp- Y. Kupriyanova, A. Polonikov, V. Ivanov, M. Solodilova, O. Vasiljeva, N. indel) and rs10415893 (3’UTR tagSNP) for association with HIV-1 Kononykhina, V. Antsupov, I. Bulgakova, O. Bushueva, A. Bogomazov, A. infection and disease progression. Genotypes were obtained for a Dedkov; cohort of 353 subjects exposed to HIV-1 infection by injection drug use; Kursk State Medical University, Kursk, Russian Federation. 185 infected (HIV+) and 171 non-infected (ENI). In addition a cohort It is recognized that the risk of bronchial asthma (BA) is conveyed by of 188 healthy subjects were used as controls. Disease progression a complex interaction of genetic and environmental factors. The focus of the 185 HIV+ subjects was recorded from the first HIV-1 positive of this study was to investigate whether genetic variation of antioxidant test to December 1999. A first drop on CD4 cell-count <200/!L was defense enzymes (ADE) genes plays a role in the development considered as outcome for progression. From HIV+ subjects, 75 were of BA depending on the exposure to tobacco smoking. A total 429 progressors and 110 non-progressors. No differences were observed DNA samples (214 asthmatics and 215 controls) from adult Russian in genotype and allele distribution between HIV+, ENI and controls; nor population (Central Russia) were genotyped for polymorphisms of ADE for rs3217318 neither for rs10415893 (Table-1). However, rs10415893 genes: catalase (-262C>T, CAT), superoxide dismutase (Ala16Val, allele distribution in non-progressors showed statistically significant SOD2) and glutamate cysteine ligase (-588C>T, GCLM) genes differences when compared with progressors (P=0.045) and controls through PCR-RFLP assays. It has been found that a genotype -588CT (P=0.008). In addition, prevalence of rs10415893-GG homozygotes was associated with increased risk of nonallergic asthma (odds ratio was higher in non-progressors when compared with both, progressors 2.03 95% CI 1.05-3.90). No associations with BA were found for either (P=0.036; OR=0.47; 95%CI:0.2-1) and controls (P=0.005; OR=0.45; the CAT or SOD2 polymorphisms. Association analysis stratified by 95%CI:0.25-0.79). Finally, mean time to progression for rs10415893- smoking status has revealed that a genotype -588CT of the GCLM GG was higher than for rs10415893-(GA+AA) subjects (150 vs. gene was significantly associated with increased risk of nonallergic BA 120 months; Log-Rank test P=0.031; unadjusted Hazard-Ratio=0.6; only in smokers (odds ratio 3.60 95%CI 1.42-9.10 p=0.01). The finding 95%CI:0.36-0.96, P=0.033). Our results do not support a role of provides an additional evidence for the trigger role of tobacco smoking BST-2/Tetherin in HIV-1 susceptibility but suggest its involvement in in the penetration of susceptibility to asthma determined by genes progression. encoding antioxidant defense enzymes. The study was supported by the Federal Targeted Programme “Scientific and Scientific-Pedagogical Personnel of the Innovative Russia in 2009-2013”. P09.044 Novel variants of beta-subunits of sodium channel genes in Brugada syndrome E. Komurcu-Bayrak1,2, K. Endels1, W. Lissens1, S. Seneca1, F. Bayrak3, A. Sarkozy3, P. Brugada3, M. Bonduelle1, S. J. Van Dooren1; 1Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel & Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medical Research, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Heart Rhythm Management Center, UZ Brussel & Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Brugada syndrome (BrS) is a genetic disorder characterized by lethal ventricular fibrillation and right precordial ST segment elevation on Complex traits and polygenic disorders 277 Table 1.- Genotype and allele distribution of BST-2/Tetherin polymorphic variants in cohorts P09.047 Prevalence in cohorts (n,%) screening of tcF2 and PAX2 genes for mutations associated HIV-1 positive with congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract in Bulgarian patients Non- Variants ($) Location Controls All Progressors (*) ENI V. Penchev1, O. Beltcheva1, A. Boueva2, P. Miteva2, R. Kaneva1, V. Mitev1; Progressors 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, rs3217318 promoter Genotype Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Paediatrics, Medical WtWt 129 (69) 134 51 (68) 83 (77.6) 117 University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. (73.6) (68.4) Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) affect 1 42 49 in 500 children worldwide and are a leading cause of childhood end- WtD20 52 (27.8) 22 (29.3) 20 (18.7) (23.1) (28.7) stage renal disease. The two most common CAKUT diagnoses are 5 the renal dysplasia and hypoplasia. The genetic background of these D20D20 6 (3.2) 6 (3.2) 2 (2.7) 4 (3.7) (2.9) anomalies is still largely unknown. Several genes involved in urinary Allele tract development have been implicated - HNF1b, PAX2, SIX2, etc. The molecular defects identified so far do not account for all the cases 310 283 Wt 310 (82.8) 124 (82.6) 186 (86.9) and cannot explain the great variability of phenotypes observed, which (85.2) (82.7) warrants further investigations. 54 59 D20 64 (17.2) 26 (17.4) 28 (13.1) In the present study we focused on two genes most commonly affected (14.8) (17.3) in CAKUT - TCF2 (HNF1b) and PAX2, which code for transcription rs10415893 3’’UTR Genotype factors with essential role for renal development. Defects in TCF2, 143 128 most commonly large deletions, are shown to cause renal cysts, GG 128 (68.1) 52 (69.3) 91 (82.7) (77.3) (75.3) kidney dysplasia and sometimes renal agenesis, often in combination 38 38 with diabetes mellitus. Point mutations in PAX2 cause renal hypoplasia GA 55 (29.3) 21 (28) 17 (15.5) (20.5) (22.4) and eye pathologies. 4 We report here on the introduction of TCF2 and PAX2 mutation AA 5 (2.7) 4 (2.2) 2 (2.7) 2 (1.8) (2.4) screening for CAKUT patients in Bulgaria. Altogether 15 families were Allele involved in the present study. Each of the affected individuals was tested for the presence of deletions or point mutations by means of 324 294 G 311 (82.7) 125 (83.3) 199 (90.4) MLPA analysis and sequencing of the coding sequences of TCF2 and (87.5) (86.5) PAX2. The identification of mutations in each of the affected families 46 46 A 65 (17.3) 25 (16.7) 21 (9.6) will facilitate the genetic counseling. Further screening for mutations (12.5) (13.5) in genes essential for genitourinary system development will be ($) Strong linkage disequilibrium between markers in all cohorts performed in those cases where no defects were found in TCF2 and (*) Progresors were those falling CD4 cell count <200/µL PAX2. ENI, HIV-1 exposed uninfected subjects P09.048 P09.046 Lack of the association between t1128c variant in the is cADPs2 involved in autism and intellectual disability? neuropeptide Y gene and cannabis users G. Tortora1, C. Graziano1, S. Miccoli1, E. Bacchelli2, F. Minopoli1, A. Battaglia3, F. Tusgul1, S. Oguzkan Balci1, M. Nacak2, A. Baransel Isir3, S. Kul4, S. L. Mazzone4, G. Romeo1, E. Maestrini2, E. Bonora1; Pehlivan1; 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Università di Bologna, 1University of Gaziantep Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Bologna, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia Evoluzionistica Sperimentale, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep Faculty of Medicine, Department Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Stella Maris Istituto Scientifico per la of Pharmacology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 33University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Neuropsichiatria dell’Infanzia e dell’Adolescenza, Calambrone (Pisa), Italy, Medicine, Department of Forensic Medicine, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 4University 4U.O. Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università di Catania, of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, GAZIANTEP, Catania, Italy. Turkey. We describe a family where brother and sister show mild intellectual Objectives of the study: Substance addiction is complex and disability, behavior abnormalities and epilepsy, with normal brain multifactorial disease that develops based on environmental and imaging and no major dysmorphic features. Karyotype is normal, genetic factors. Cannabis that is the most frequently used substance. as well FMR1 analysis in the male patient. Their mother, who died Several studies suggest that a possible involvement of neuropeptide of cancer at 48 years of age, and a maternal aunt are both reported Y (NPY) system in the physiological effects of abused substances to have behavioral abnormalities, mild intellectual disability, but no including alcohol and cocaine. The aim of this study was to examine seizures. Two maternal uncles are healthy. whether T1128C functional variant of the NPY gene are associated In both patients, array-CGH analysis revealed a 250 kb deletion of with cannabis dependence. chromosome 7q31.32 encompassing one single gene, CADPS2. The methods: In our study, 139 cannabis users and 100 healthy controls father does not carry the deletion, indicating likely maternal inheritance. were tested for T1128C variant of NPY gene. Genotyping were The deletion was excluded in one of the maternal uncles. performed by PCR-RFLP and the allele frequency of healthy people in CADPS2 is a calcium binding protein that regulates the exocytosis of Turkey was compared with the other country by two proportions z test. synaptic and dense-core vesicles in neurons and neuroendocrine cells. Results: The genotype distribution of T1128C of NPY gene was not CADPS2 is a candidate gene for autistic disorders, since it maps in the significantly different from that expected according to Hardy-Weinberg autism susceptibility region AUTS1 on chromosome 7q31.32, which equilibrium in any group. There was no significant difference in the alsocorresponds to a candidate region for mood disorders. Knock-out genotype distribution and allele frequency of T1128C variant between mice show an autistic-like phenotype and some ASD (Autism Spectrum cannabis users and controls (p>0.05). Disorders) patients show a possible defect in CADPS2 splicing. We When the 1128C rare allele frequency of healthy people is compared performed, therefore, a mutation screening in 46 individuals with ASD with other country; it has been determined that it is coherent with and in 34 patients with intellectual disability who did not carry any America, China, Germany, Brazil, Sweden, Netherlands and Finland genomic rearrangement as far as array-CGH analysis could detect. (p>0.05). On the contrary, the results obtained were different than the Two novel variants were identified in two unrelated ASD individuals, in Japan (p=0.022). exon 6 and exon 13 respectively. None of these changes was detected conclusion: This study is the first to search NPY gene in cannabinoid in 140 healthy individuals and functional analysis of these variants is users. NPY gene T1128C variant did not reveal any relationship with currently ongoing. Detailed results will be presented. the cannabis addiction. It may, therefore, be useful for considering to study NPY receptor genes for elucidating the genomic basis of addiction.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 278 P09.049 P09.051 Association study of cARD-8 (p.c10X) and NLRP3 (p.Q705K) PPARGC1Β is a Genetic Determinant of the Cardiovascular variants with Rheumatoid Arthritis in French population Risk Factor, thromboxane A - an Anglo-scandinavian cardiac 2 M. Ben Hamad1, F. Cornelis2, S. Marzouk3, Z. Bahloul3, F. Fakhfakh1, E. Petit- Outcomes trial (AscOt) sub-study Teixeira2, A. Maalej1; N. S. McCarthy1, C. Vangjeli1, P. Surendran2, A. Treumann1, C. Rooney2, E. 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, sfax, Tunisia, 2GenHotel-EA3886, Ho1, P. Sever3, S. Thom3, A. Hughes3, P. Munroe4, M. Caulfield4, D. Shields2, E. Evry-Paris VII Universities, AP-HP and CHSF Hospitals, Evry Genopole, O’Brien2, D. Fitzgerald2, A. Stanton1; France, 3Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Hedi Chaker, 1Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 2University College sfax, Tunisia. Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 3Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, Objective: NALP3, ASC, and TUCAN are components of the NALP3 4Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom. inflammasome, a crucial molecular platform that regulates activation introduction: Thromboxane A (TxA), activates platelets and causes 2 2 of caspase-1 and processing of interleukin (IL)-1 beta and IL-18. vasoconstriction. Raised urinary excretion of 11-dehydro-thromboxane We undertook this study to investigate the association of caspase B (TxM), an index of TxA2 formation, is an independent predictor of 2 activating and recruitment domain 8 (CARD-8) and NLR family, pyrin atherothrombotic events. The heritability of this trait is not known. This domain containing 3 (NLRP3) polymorphisms with rheumatoid arthritis is the first study to investigate the genetic determinants of thromboxane (RA) in French population. levels. Methods: CARD8 (c.30T>A, rs2043211) and NLRP3 (c.2113C>A, materials and methods: 544 participants in the Hypertension rs35829419) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were Associated Cardiovascular Disease Sub-study of ASCOT gave urine genotyped in 100 French RA trio families, with the 4 grandparents of samples at two separate time-points. TxM was measured using French Caucasian origin, using TaqMan 5’ allelic discrimination assay liquid chromatography/ tandem mass spectrometry, expressed as on an ABI 7500 real time PCR machine (assay: C__11708080_1_ and pg/mg creatinine to correct for urine concentration. All subjects were C__25648615_10; respectively). The genetic analyses for association genotyped on the CVD50K chip, a cardiovascular-specific chip with and linkage were performed using the comparison of allelic frequencies >50,000 SNPs. Usual quality control measures were applied. Linear (AFBAC), the genotype relative risk (GRR), and the transmission regression analysis was performed, assuming an additive genetic disequilibrium test (TDT). model, adjusting for the covariates; age, sex, smoking habit, diabetes, Results: Our results did not show any significant association either systolic blood pressure, BMI, HDL, LDL, aspirin and anti-hypertensive with CARD-8 [p = 0.894, odds ratio (OR) 1 (95% CI 0.41-2.43)] or regimen. NLRP3 [p = 0.879, odds ratio (OR) 0.87 (95% CI 0.3-2.48)] genes Results & Discussion: TxM levels were significantly lower in patients and RA. Moreover, stratifying patients according to the presence of taking aspirin versus aspirin naïve patients (median [interquartile rheumatoid factor (RF), anti-cyclic peptides antibodies (ACPA) and range] 324 [211,404] vs 716 [460,913] pg/mg, p<0.0001). 22 SNPs in erosion did not reveal any significant association neither with CARD-8 the PPARGC1Β gene were significantly associated with higher TxM nor with NLRP3 (p>0.05). (beta-values range; 123-223 pg/mg, p-values range; 0.001-0.009 Conclusion: Variations in the innate immunity genes CARD-8 (p.C10X) after permutation to correct for multiple testing). PPARGC1Β encodes and NLRP3 (p.Q705K) have no effect on RA susceptibility in the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1β, a French population. transcriptional co-activator previously reported to be associated with type 2 diabetes and obesity. These findings provide novel insight P09.050 into the molecular biology of TxA2 biosynthesis, and its role in the impact of selected sNPs from recent GWAs on plasma lipid causation of heart attacks and strokes. concentrations in a high cardiovascular risk mediterranean population. interaction with environmental factors P09.052 D. Corella1, R. Estruch2, O. Coltell3, M. Guillen1, P. Carrasco1, C. Ortega- in-depth assessment of cardiovascular parameters in three Azorin1, M. I. Covas4, J. V. Sorli1, J. M. Ordovas5; canine breeds as a preliminary step to unravel genetic 1University of Valencia and CIBEROBN, Valencia, Spain, 2Hospital Clinic, determinants of physiological blood pressure variation. Barcelona, Spain, 3University Jaume I, Castellon, Spain, 4IMIM, Barcelona, V. Gouni1, V. Chetboul2,3, E. Trehiou-Sechi2, C. Misbach2, A. Petit2, M. Canonne- Spain, 5USDA-Tufts University, Boston, MA, United States. Guibert2, J. Mary4, R. Tissier3, J. L. Pouchelon2,3, L. Tiret4; A recent meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 1Unité de Cardiologie d’Alfort, Ecole nationale vétérinaire d’Alfort, Maisons- has revealed new statistically significant association between dozens Alfort, France, 2Unité de cardiologie d’Alfort, Ecole nationale vétérinaire d’Alfort, of SNPs and plasma lipid concentrations including thousands of Maisons-Alfort, France, 3UMR INSERM ENVA U955, Maisons-Alfort, France, individuals from diverse populations. However, despite the great interest 4UMR955 INRA-ENVA de Génétique Fonctionnelle et Médicale, Ecole nationale of these newly discovered significant associations, one of the potential vétérinaire d’Alfort, Maisons-Alfort, France. limitations may be the low impact of these SNPs on a single population Chronic values of arterial blood pressure (ABP) outside normal ranges in terms of clinical relevance and not only in statistical significance. represent a risk factor associated with cardiovascular disorders, a main Therefore our aim was to analyze the clinical relevance (measured in cause of death in Europe. Deciphering and reversing complex morbidity terms of consistency and magnitude) of the association between some mechanisms will require identifying the genetic polymorphisms that of these GWAS-SNPs reported as significantly associated with lipid eventually contribute to systemic arterial hypertension. The genetic traits (total cholesterol, LDL-C, HDL-C or/and triglycerides) in a high basis of arterial stiffness in humans, for example, has been extensively cardiovascular risk Mediterranean population. We randomly selected investigated through genome-wide association studies (GWAS), 20 SNPs from the recent meta-analysis (Nature, 2010) and genotyped and this has helped identify groups of relevant genes unrelated to these SNPs in 1050 high cardiovascular risk subjects (aged 67+/-7 previously suspected mechanisms. years) participating in the PREDIMED-Valencia Study. We analyzed In parallel, comparative pathophysiology between humans and animal their associations with lipid traits as well as some gene-environment models has been proved relevant. In particular, the dog is unique to interactions. All the randomly selected SNPs (rs629301, rs1689800, map loci underlying complex traits. To improve the current knowledge rs2642442, rs514230, rs7570971, rs645040, rs13107325, rs1800562, on the functional network underlying variations in ABP, we decided to rs3177928, rs605066, rs2072183, rs4731702, rs9987289, rs2293889, focus on the molecular basis of physiological variations of this variable rs7941030, rs7134375, rs8017377, rs2412710, rs11649653 and in healthy dogs. Eighty-nine dogs (age: 3.4±1.2 years, range: 1.4- rs2925979) were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The replication rate 5.7) were prospectively recruited. Three breeds were represented in terms of statistical significance (P<0.05) of the association of each (Labrador, n=30; Doberman, n=31; Belgian Shepherd, n=28). Dogs SNP with the main trait, was low. However, we were able to detect were considered healthy on the basis of a complete clinical, biochemical some consistent associations (rs629301 in SORT1 and LDL-C; and echocardiographic and Doppler examination. Using high-definition rs2642442 in MOSC1 and total cholesterol, etc). In addition we found oscillometry, we showed that systolic, diastolic and mean ABP in various statistically significant interactions with tobacco, alcohol and Dobermans was significantly higher than in Belgian Shepherds and adherence to the Mediterranean diet that may contribute to explain the Labradors (P<0.0001). ABP was also significantly higher in Belgian heterogeneity. Shepherds than in Labradors (P<0.0001). DNA from these dogs was Complex traits and polygenic disorders 279 extracted and GWAS analyses to map blood pressure loci will be P09.055 conducted as part of the European LUPA project (www.eurolupa.org). copy number analysis of functional candidate genes on celiac In addition, heart rate and shortening fraction were similar between disease linkage regions breeds, providing clues to further select specific candidate genes. N. Fernandez-Jimenez, A. Castellanos-Rubio, L. Plaza-Izurieta, I. Irastorza, G. Gutierrez, L. Castaño, J. C. Vitoria, J. R. Bilbao; P09.053 Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain. the Human caveolin 1 Gene Upstream Purine complex and iNtRODUctiON: Celiac disease (CD) is a complex, immune- Neurodegenerative disorders - A common signature mediated intolerance to dietary gluten that develops in genetically A. Heidari, M. Ohadi, M. Behmanesh; susceptible individuals. Different strategies including candidate gene University of Social Welfare and rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic association, linkage and GWAS have been employed to identify Republic of Iran. common susceptibility variation. CNV affects approximately 12% of The caveolin 1 gene (CAV1) is over-expressed in experimental animal the genome and gene dosage variation within a CNV could influence models of multiple sclerosis (MS). Increased expression of this gene expression and disease susceptibility, but systematic studies in CD has also been reported in the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain. Loss are lacking. of this gene, on the other hand, has recently been reported to be mEtHODs: The chromosomal location of significantly altered genes associated with neruodegeneration. We have recently reported a from a previous expression microarray experiment (9 active CD polymorphic purine complex at the 1.5kb upstream sequence of the patients vs. 9 patients on gluten free diet) was crossed with the CD gene with GGAA and GAAA motifs. In this study we compared the linkage regions described in the literature. Genes located within copy homozygote haplotype compartment across the region in groups of number variable regions present in >5% of individuals (Database of late-onset AD (n=240), MS (n=246), and control (n=610) subjects. Genomic Variants, projects.tcag.ca/variation/) were selected for CNV Nineteen haplotypes were found to be homozygous in the patients, analysis by gene-specific real-time PCR in 450 CD patients and 443 and not in the control pool (p<0.000001). The homozygote haplotypes non-CD controls and assigned a predicted copy number for each ranged from 86-bp to 142-bp in the patients, whereas this range sample using the maximum likelyhood approach. was between 106-bp to 122-bp in the controls. Six overlapping REsULts AND cOmmENts: Our candidate gene identification homozygote haplotypes were observed between AD and MS patients, strategy allowed us to select 6 genes for CNV analysis: DAZAP1, strengthening the role of this region as a common etiological factor MBOAT7, PEX26, PRELID1, SYNPO and ZSCAN18. To date, in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative disorders, possibly our results indicate that PEX26 copy number does not vary in our through inflammatory mechanisms. The CAV1 purine complex GGAA population. Preliminary data suggest that ≥3 copy diplotype of and GAAA motifs contain binding sites for numerous inflammatory PRELID1 (overexpressed in active CD mucosa) is overrepresented in transcription factors including the Ets, STAT, and IRF family members. the patient group, indicating a possible association of PRELID1 high Further work on the functionality of this region will shed light on the copy number with CD risk. We are currently analyzing the rest of our downstream events to the linked haplotypes. candidate genes. P09.054 P09.056 Variants of the cD36 gene and metabolic syndrome in iranians Enrichment of rare coding variants in genes comprising the 39 A. Zadeh-Vakili; loci associated to celiac disease Research Institute for endocrine sciences, Shaheed Beheshti University of I. Ricaño-Ponce1, A. Szperl1, A. Kanterakis1, M. J. Bonder1, P. Deelen1, F. van Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Dijk1, J. Hanming2, S. Ying2, J. Xin2, Z. Hancheng2, L. Jiankang2, F. Huiling2, Y. Introduction: The CD36 gene encodes for a membrane receptor that Hu2, M. Swertz1, C. Wijmenga1; facilitates fatty-acid uptake and utilization. Genetic variants of CD36 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2BGI- gene have been associated with the metabolic syndrome (MetS). Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. We aimed to evaluate the association between the rs10499859 and Celiac disease (CD) is a complex disease triggered by dietary gluten, rs13246513 polymorphisms and MetS components. resulting in an inflammatory response in the small intestine. It is known Methods: For this case-control study, 140 MetS and 187 normal that human leukocyte antigen (HLA) DQ2/DQ8explains approximately subjects were randomly selected from Tehran lipid and Glucose 30% of CD heritability. Genome wide association studies (GWAS) Study participants. Biochemical and anthropometrical variables were identified 39 non-HLA CD loci explaining an additional 5% of the measured. Genotyping was performed by PCR-RFLP. missing heritability. These 39 non-HLA loci comprise113 genes that Results: Participants’ mean age was 69 years and 56.3% were male. could potentially also contain rare variants contributing to CD. GWAS Case and control groups were not different in allele and genotype arrays preclude the identification of these rare variants. In this study, frequencies for these SNPs. However, the presence of T allele in high-throughput exome sequencing was used to investigate significant rs13246513 C>T was significantly associated with increased levels enrichment of novel and rare coding variants in CD cases versus of HDL-C (p 0.016) using a dominant model; this association was controls. no longer statistically significant after adjustment for sex and age (p Genomic DNA of15 unrelated individuals with CD was enriched for the 0.751). The association of rs10499859 with diastolic blood pressure ~30Mb of coding DNA with NimbleGen 2.1M Human Exome Arrays was significant (p 0.021), but disappeared after adjustment for sex and and sequenced using Illumina technology. Sequence variants (SV) age, using recessive model (p 0.133). Association between this SNP with a quality score above 20 were annotated with our custom pipeline. and BMI was significant after adjustment for MetS under the dominant On average, 91% of the exome was covered at least ten-fold and on model (p 0.009, β2=0.68). With regard to other MetS parameters, no average18.468genetic variants were identified per individual. To find significant difference was observed between genotype groups. rare and novel variants in the regions of interest our analysis was Conclusion: We found no difference in allele frequencies of rs10499859 restricted to the 113 genes from the 39 CD loci. After removing common and rs13246513 polymorphisms between case and control groups, SV (>5%) based on HapMap and the 1000 Genome project and all indicating possibly no association between these polymorphisms and SV present within non-coding regions, we are left with 20 potential MetS. However, based on our results, these polymorphisms do affect variants. To perform statistical analysis in a case-control design we HDL-C level and BMI, although the effect may be slight and restricted are currently analyzing some 100exomes from Dutch controls with the specifically to an environment-genotype. same prioritization steps.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 280 P09.057 Non-Hispanic white American CDA&T1D vs Upregulation of KiR3DL1 gene expression in intestinal mucosa T1D only in active celiac disease Freq(T1D Freq(T1D N. Fernandez-Jimenez, I. Santin, I. Irastorza, L. Plaza-Izurieta, A. Castellanos- Loci SNP OR_GWAS A1# & CD) only) A2 P OR Rubio, J. C. Vitoria, J. R. Bilbao; N=260 N=1115 Hospital de Cruces, Cruces-Barakaldo, Spain. 2.10 iNtRODUctiON: Celiac disease (CD) is a complex, immune- HLA- rs2187668_CD 6.23 A 0.44 0.27 G 7.1E-[1.73- mediated intolerance to gluten that develops in genetically susceptible DQ2.5 and T1D 14 2.56] individuals and involves both innate and adaptive immune responses. 1.33 Killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIRs) modulate NK and T-cell 3.5E- LPP rs1464510_CD 1.29 A 0.51 0.44 C [1.10- function through HLA class I interaction and have been implicated in 03 1.61] CD. 1.24 mEtHODs: Qualitative expression of 14 KIR genes and 2 KIR 2.8E- CD80 rs11712165_CD 1.13 C 0.43 0.38 A [1.02- pseudogenes was determined by SSP-PCR in biopsy pairs from 22 02 1.51] CD patients (taken at diagnosis and after two years on gluten free diet-GFD). Quantitative expression analysis of KIR2DL4, KIR3DL1, rs917997_CD 7.5E-1.34 KIR3DL3 and KLRC2 (a marker of an NK-reprogrammed T-cell IL18RAP and T1D 1.19 A* 0.27 0.22 G 03 [1.08- subpopulation augmented in CD) was performed in 35 additional CD 1.67] biopsy pairs and 14 non-CD control biopsies by gene specific RT-PCR. 0.70 6.6E- Qualitative expression differences between groups were analyzed in CTLA4 rs3087243_T1D 0.82 A 0.32 0.41 G [0.58- 04 2x2 contingency tables, while expression levels were compared by 0.86] paired (diagnosis/GFD) and unpaired (CD/controls) T-tests. Non-Hispanic White American CDA&T1D vs REsULts: No particular KIR expression profile was observed for Dutch CD only the different CD stages. KIR3DL1 was more frequently expressed Freq(T1D Freq(CD in active CD compared to GFD (p=0.0312) and non-CD controls Loci SNP_Associated OR_GWAS A1 & CD) only) A2 P OR (p=0.0008) with slightly increased levels in active disease (p=0.0505). disease N=260 N=803 KLRC2 was overexpressed in active (p=0.0037) and GFD (p=0.0469) 0.63 patients compared to non-CD controls and coexpressed with KIR3DL1 HLA- rs2187668_CD 3.8E- 6.23 A 0.44 0.55 G [0.51- (r2=0.2917; p=0.001574). DQ2.5 and T1D 06 0.76] DiscUssiON: Results suggest an alternative activating role for 0.76 KIR3DL1 in CD mucosa, as seen in other autoimmune diseases such 2.6E- ETS1 rs11221332_CD 1.21 A 0.21 0.25 G [0.60- as type 1 diabetes. KIR3DL1 expression in CD could be explained 02 0.97] in part by the increase in NK-like T cell subpopulations, but other 0.62 mechanisms need to be involved. IL12A, 1.7E- rs17810546_CD 1.36 G 0.11 0.17 A [0.46- SCHIP1 03 0.84] P09.058 contrasting the genetic background of type 1 diabetes and 4.2E-0.81 celiac disease autoimmunity IL12A rs9811792_CD 1.21 G 0.45 0.50 A 02 [0.67- J. Romanos1, G. Trynka1, M. Rewers2, E. Liu2, C. Wijmenga1; 0.99] 1Genetics Department, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of 1.96 1.7E- Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Barbara Davis Center for Childhood PTPN22 rs2476601_T1D 2.05 A 0.18 0.10 G [1.49- 06 Diabetes, University of Colorado, School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, United 2.60] States. Freq = Frequency; N = number; A1# = same alleles reported by the GWAS; GWAS = Type 1 diabetes (T1D) and celiac disease (CD) cluster in families and genome-wide association studies co-occur in the same patients. The same genetic regions and even the same SNPs have been associated with both diseases. Our aim was P09.059** to test the genetic differences between individuals developing both searching for causative variants in a large family with celiac diseases and those having only T1D or only CD. disease Analysis1: We genotyped 32 established CD and/or T1D associated A. Szperl, I. Ricaño-Ponce, P. Deelen, A. Kanterakis, F. van Dijk, M. Swertz, C. SNPs in 1115 non-Hispanic white American (NHWA) T1D patients C. van Diemen, C. Wijmenga; and 260 NHWA T1D patients with also CD-autoimmunity (CDA&T1D) University Medical Center and Groningen University, Groningen, Netherlands. defined as persistent tissue-transglutaminase positivity on 2 Celiac disease (CD), caused by an immune response to gluten, consecutive visits. CD private risk variants in the LPP and CD80 loci is a common food intolerance. CD is strongly associated to human are associated with developing CDA&T1D when compared to T1D. leukocyte antigen (HLA) DQ2/DQ8. A genome-wide association study Interestingly, IL18RAP*A - which is a risk allele for CD and a protective identified 39 loci which together with HLA explain 35% of CD heritability. allele for T1D - was more frequently observed in the CDA&T1D group To identify additional CD genes we performed whole-genome linkage (Table). in a four-generation Dutch family with 17 CD patients. We identified Analysis2: Genotypes of 29 SNPs were available for 803 Dutch CD linkage to a 6Mb region on 9p21-13 (dominant model) and to a 14Mb patients biopsy confirmed and showed the same allele frequencies region on 6q25 (identity by descent sharing). We hypothesize that in NHWA and Dutch controls. We compared the NHWA CDA&T1D to these regions contain high risk mutations, playing a causal role in the Dutch CD patients. CDA&T1D individuals carried more frequently disease development in this family. the T1D PTPN22 risk variant and less the CD ETS1 and IL12A risk To identify potentially damaging mutations we sequenced the exomes variants when compared to CD individuals (Table). of two affected family members, separated by four meiotic steps. This pilot study shows that to develop both diseases, individuals Genomic DNA was enriched for coding regions using an Agilent accumulate private T1D and CD risk variants. To improve our study, SureSelect target kit and sequenced on a Genome Analyzer II (Illumina). we are currently increasing sample sizes and numbers of SNPs. On average 70% of the exomes were covered at least ten-fold and we observed ~15,000 sequence variants per individual. To reduce the number of variants we a) discarded common variants (MAF>5%) based on HapMap and the 1000Genomes Project, b) removed all non-coding variants, c) analyzed PolyPhen prediction and/or d) select on gene function. This left us with four variants (one on 9p21-13 and three on 6q25), that were validated by Sanger sequencing. The two variants that also segregated in the family are currently genotyped in a Complex traits and polygenic disorders 281 large case-control cohort to test the association to celiac disease. Both P09.062 variants map to genes involved in the transport of molecules. cHRNA4 exon 5 variant affects nicotinic receptor sensitivity and is associated with schizophrenia-related quantitative traits and P09.060 drug treatment-response Association of the iL33 gene region with childhood allergic G. Winterer; asthma Cologne Center for Genomics, Cologne, Germany. F. Belpinati1, G. Malerba1, E. Trabetti1, L. Xumerle1, R. Galavotti1, L. Background: Association of CHRNA4 exon5 SNP rs1044396 with Pescollderungg2, A. L. Boner1, P. F. Pignatti1; cognitive performance, associated brain function and nicotine 1Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, addiction has been reported. At present, it is unclear whether Italy, 2Institute of Pediatrics, Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy. rs1044396 is functional. Since patients with schizophrenia are Two recent indipendent large-scale GWAS of asthma reported the mostly strong smokers showing cognitive deficits and abnormal association of several markers comprising some on chromosome 9. brain function, CHRNA4 also might be a potential candidate gene. In this region, flanking IL33 gene, we have previously found linkage Methods: cDNAs (incl. rs1044396) carrying two complementary of marker D9S286 with elevated IgE and SPT in Italian asthmatic haplotypes (hap1, hap2) were injected into Xenopus Oocytes. The families. alpha4beta2 receptor channel was studied with voltage clamp applying Here we report a family transmission study with allergic asthma in 137 acetylcholine (Ach) concentrations in increasing order. Case-control trios from North-Eastern Italy ascertained through an allergic asthmatic and quantitative trait association study (N = 1.253 schizophrenia cases child. Association analyses was conducted by the transmission and N = 2.880). Pharmacogenetic study in two independent sample disequilibrium test (TDT). (total: N = 220 schizophrenia patients) testing for association with The phenotypes clinical asthma, total serum IgE levels, bronchial treatment-response. Population-based association study of cognitive hyper-responsiveness to methacoline (BHR+), skin prick test positivity performance and brain function (functional neuroimaging) during a to common aeroallergens (SPT+), to house dust mites (SPT-HDM), choice reaction task in N = 1.794 smoking and never-smoking healthy and to graminae (SPT-GMN) were investigated. subjects. Structural magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in N = 122 The SNPs rs1342326 and rs928413 analysed, were in Hardy- healthy subjects testing for association with cortical thickness. Results: Weinberg equilibrium and in LD with each other (D’=0.95; R2=0.59). 6% stronger current amplitudes in alpha4beta2 receptor channels in The observed minor allele frequency was 23% (minor allele:G, major response to low Ach doses depending on haplotype. The opposite allele:T) and 31% (minor allele:G, major allele:A) for rs1342326 and effect was seen with higher Ach doses. Schizophrenia, clinical rs928413. symptoms and clinical response to drug treatment were significantly TDT analysis showed a preferential transmission of the rs928413-G associated with genotype. Significant genotype association with verbal allele to individual with SPT (T:65, NT:43, p=0.034) and in particular memory interacting with age and sex as well as brain function, task- with SPT-GMN (T:54, NT:33, p=0.024). No other association was related reaction time and cortical thickness of the medial prefrontal found. lobe. Discussion: Experimental evidence is provided that rs1044396 Haplotype analyses showed that rs1342326-rs928413/T-G was affects nicotinic alpha4beta2 receptor sensitivity. The association preferentially transmitted to children affected by asthma (p=0.018), findings imply a role in schizophrenia pathophysiology and drug- BHR+ (p=0.006), IgE (p=0.022), or SPT (p=0.015) and in particular by treatment response. SPT-GMN (p=0.006). These results extend the association of 9p24 with allergic asthma traits P09.063 indicating the possible role of IL33 as an “alarmin” signal to immune FN1 and TIMP2 polymorphisms are associated with system. nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate T. Nikopensius1,2, L. Ambrozaitytė3, T. Jagomägi4, M. Saag4, A. Matulevičienė3, P09.061 V. Kučinskas3, A. Metspalu1,2,5; twelve common genetic variants explain a substantial part of 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, the variation in Bmi of obese children 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Human and Medical L. van den Berg, M. L. Wetzel, P. Henneman, E. Bakker, K. Willems van Dijk, Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, H. A. Delemarre- van de Waal; 4Department of Stomatology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tartu, Tartu, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. Estonia, 5Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Results of twin and family studies suggest that up to 80% of the Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCL/P) is a variation in body mass index (BMI) in children can be explained by common human birth defect with complex genetic etiology. The aim genetic factors. A recent study (Diabetes 59:2980-2988) investigated of this study was to investigate the contribution of 12 candidate genes 12 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are robustly (FGF1, FGF2, FGFR1, FN1, MMP2, MMP3, MMP9, MMP25, TIMP2, associated with adult BMI in a large pediatric population. Direction- TIMP3, WNT3, and WNT9B) in predisposition to orofacial clefting. consistent associations with BMI were found for all of these variants 209 tagSNPs were studied in 192 NSCL/P patients and 424 controls in children. However, the risk factors explained a disappointing 1% of from Estonian and Lithuanian population. The genetic relatedness of the population variation in BMI when taken together. We hypothesized Estonians and Lithuanians, sharing the same geographic origin, has that these 12 SNPs also explain variation in BMI in obese children. been recently confirmed using the principal component analysis. In We studied 64 patients from our pediatric obesity clinic to test this case-control comparisons, the minor allele of FN1 SNP rs4968282 was hypothesis (39% boys; mean age=13.2; age range: 6 to 19; all children associated with reduced risk of NSCL/P (OR=0.653; 95% CI 0.511- of North-West European descent). BMI-standard deviation scores 0.836; P=6.73×10-4), whereas the minor allele of TIMP2 rs7502916 (BMI-SDS) were used as a measure of body fat percentage of the was associated with increased risk of NSCL/P (OR=1.465; 95% CI children. BMI-SDS indicates how many standard deviations the child 1.150-1.867; P=0.0019). The minor allele of MMP9 SNP rs6073991 is away from the mean of a reference population of the same age was associated with reduced risk of NSCL/P (OR=0.648; 95% CI and sex. Mean BMI-SDS of the study group was +2.8 (range: +1.9 0.480-0.874; P=0.0043). Multiple yin-yang haplotypes in FN1 and to +3.8).The SNPs were genotyped using pre-designed TaqMan TIMP2 were associated with NSCL/P. The strongest associations were assays. We calculated a genetic predisposition score for each subject, found for TIMP2 haplotype CAA (P=8.06×10-4) and FN1 haplotype i.e. the number of BMI-increasing alleles (theoretical range: 0 to 24). GAA (P=9.08×10-4). Fibronectin is involved in cell adhesion and The genetic predisposition score significantly predicted BMI-SDS in migration processes during embryogenesis, and the present study is this group of obese children (p=.02). The score explained 8.4% of the the first to demonstrate an association between common SNPs and variation in BMI-SDS in the group. The largest effect size was found haplotypes in FN1 and NSCL/P. Our findings provide evidence that for the fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO, beta=+0.2). Future variation in FN1 and TIMP2 may contribute susceptibility to NSCL/P in plans include increasing the sample size. North-Eastern European populations.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 282 P09.064 P09.066 Genetic evidence supporting a role for mmP and timP genes in incidence of tAci mutation in common variable cleft Lip/Palate immunodeficiency A. Letra1, R. Silva1, J. M. Granjeiro2, A. R. Vieira1; S. Safaei1,2, m. houshmand1, z. pourpak3, m. moin3; 1University of Pittsburgh School of Dental Medicine, PIttsburgh, PA, United 1Special Medical Center. Genetic Laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of States, 2Fluminense Federal University, Niteroi, Brazil. Iran, 2Immunology, Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran University of The complex etiology of cleft lip/palate (CL/P) is acknowledged by the Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Immunology, number of genes and signaling pathways implicated during craniofacial Asthma & Allergy Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, development. Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and their inhibitors Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. TIMPs are responsible for degradation of the extracellular matrix and Background: Common variable immunodeficiency disorders (CVID) tissue remodeling during including embryonic development and may are heterogeneous immunodeficiency syndromes. Heterozygoute be implicated in CL/P. We have previously shown that a polymorphism mutations in TACI gene have previously been shown to cause in MMP3 is associated to CL/P. We genotyped 45 polymorphisms recessive CVID. The aim of this study was to determine the incidence spanning selected MMP and TIMP genes in 907 unrelated Caucasian of TACI defect in CVID patients. individuals. Statistical analyses were performed using PLINK software. method: 18 unrelated CVID patients were entered the study. PCR Genotype and allele frequencies of polymorphisms were compared amplification was performed using unpublished primers, to amplify between cases and controls under Bonferroni correction (α=0.0016). TACI. Odds-ratios and 95% confidence intervals were also calculated. Table1. Primers used in this study MMP3 rs522616 showed statistically significant association with all Forward primer Reverse primer clefts (P=0.000006), cleft lip with cleft palate (P=0.0003) and with 5’-AGCCCAAGCACTAATCAAATCTAA-3’ 5’-GGCCCAACCCTCCTCACAC5-3’ cleft palate (P=0.0002). TIMP2 rs8179096 showed association with all 5’-GCCGCCTGCCAGCTGCCCTCAC -3’ 5’-GCCGCCTGCCAGCTGCCCTCAC -3’ clefts (P=0.0007) and with cleft palate (P=0.001). Logistic regression analyses reinforced the individual associations. In silico analyses for 5’-CACCCAGCAGTATCATGAATTTCT-3’ 5’-AGGCCTCCCACGCTTTCTCAC -3’ both MMP3 and TIMP2 variants revealed several transcription factor 5’-GGGGGATGTGGATTGCTTGAG-3’ 5’- GGCGAGGACCCCAGTTTCATG-3’ binding sites relevant for craniofacial development. We also report for 5’-TGCCCACACCGTCACCCCTACC-3’ 5’-TCCCCTCCTCTCCATCTCTCTC -3’ the first time the expression pattern of MMPs not yet described during murine palatogenesis. In summary, we provide additional evidence Result: that MMP3 and also TIMP2 contribute to CL/P. Additional studies are Table2. Patient’s data and the result of TACI mutation screening under way to elucidate the involvement of these genes in the etiology Patient Affected igA levels igG levels igm levels of CL/P. number/ Age(year) tAci mutation tAci (mg/dl) (mg/dl) (mg/dl) sex domain (adults:71-308) (adults:658-1837) (adults:40-263) P09.065 R122W Extra-cellular independent rare and common variants underly association 1/male 48 7 755 15 (reported) domain signals for coeliac disease 38insA Extra-cellular G. Trynka1, K. A. Hunt2, V. Plagnol3,4, *. Coeliac Disease Genetics 2/male 28 238 216 233 Frameshift(new) domain Consortium1,2, R. H. Ruerr5, S. Onengut-Gumuscu6, S. S. Rich6, P. Deloukas7, D. A. Van Heel2, C. Wijmenga1; 3/male 17 38insA Extra-cellular 16 743 48 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Blizard frameshift(new) domain Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 3Genetics Institute, University College London, London, conclusion: In previous studies, the proportion of CVID patients United Kingdom, 4JDRF/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, carrying at least one TACI mutation was estimated at 10 to 20%. University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5University of Pittsburgh In the present study, we identified 3 patients with at least one School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 6Center for Public Health TACI allele mutated out of a small cohort of 18 antibody deficiency Genomics, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA, United States, 7Wellcome patients, yielding a more precise estimate of 16.6%. None of these Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, United mutations were present in 20 healthy subjects. This study suggests Kingdom. that additional genetic and environmental factors might have effective Coeliac disease is an autoimmune disease with 1% prevalence in the role in causing CVID. Analysis of a larger sample of patients will be general population and a complex genetic background. Our recent needed to determine if the novel mutation associated with a particular genome wide association scan (GWAS) on 15,283 case-control phenotype or predisposition to the common features of CVID. samples established association to 27 loci, including well known coeliac risk factor in the HLA region. Currently we genotyped 24,269 P09.067*** case-control samples (UK, Netherlands, Italy, Spain, Poland, India) on increased genomic copy number of ß-defensins on 8p23.1 and the Immunochip; a custom Illumina iSelect platform (196,548 variants) its influence on psoriasis designed with aim of using all 1000Genomes-pilot markers to fine-map U. D. Hüffmeier1, S. Uebe1, M. Apel1, P. Badorf1, R. Pala2, H. Traupe3, R. 189 risk loci reported at genome wide significance for over ten immune Mössner4, J. Armour2, H. Burkhardt5, A. Reis1; mediated diseases. 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of In the meta-analysis across all populations we observed associations Genetics, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 3Department (p<5x10e-8) at 14 additional loci, making a total of 41 coeliac disease of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Department risk loci. Moreover, we noted an excess of intermediate range p-values of Dermatology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 5Division of at the remaining 148 autoimmune loci, confirming the large genetic Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe overlap between immune-mediated diseases. Finally, to get better University, Frankfurt/ Main, Germany. insight into the genetic architecture underlying associations for Previously, we reported association of an increased genomic copy previously established coeliac disease loci, we performed a stepwise number of a ß-defensin cluster on 8p23.1 with psoriasis (Hollox conditional logistic regression on all 26 GWAS regions (20-50x more et al. Nat Genet 2008). In the meantime, our findings have neither variants per locus on Immunochip compared to GWAS chips). Nearly been replicated nor rejected by independent studies, probably due to half of the loci (12 of 26) showed evidence for multiple independent technical difficulties of differentiating copy number states of more than signals, due to both common (e.g. 3 signals at IL12A) and rare genetic four copies. variants (MAF< 0.05, e.g. at PTPN2). In order to check the relevance of the association finding for Identification of multiple independent SNPs at coeliac disease psoriasis, we performed extensive methodological comparisons and associated loci helps to better define the risk of each individual locus, an independent replication study. We observed satisfying correlation understand the causal mechanism behind the associated variants and coefficients between three methods used: R2 = 0.92 for MLPA and provides insights into the likely genetic architecture of other common classical PRT (n=159), R2 = 0.93 for classical and new PRT (n=68)). complex diseases. Furthermore, copy numbers obtained by a high resolution SNP array Complex traits and polygenic disorders 283 (Affymetrix 6.0) were compared with PRT copy numbers in 600 high in patients, who have hyperlipidemia and smoking habits. individuals. No correlation was observed indicating that the array conclusion: Many studies showed that the ID and DD polymorphism technique is not a suitable method to detect smaller copy number is strongly associated with the increased plasma or serum ACE levels. differences at loci with highly variable copy numbers. Thus the ID and DD polymorphism favors high ACE expression We then re-evaluated findings in the German case control cohort and activity, hence may predispose individuals to CAD and its as published in Hollox et al. (Nat Genet 2008) and confirmed the complications. Although it has been suggested that hyperlipidemia is association with a p = 1.22E-05 (Mann-Whitney-test for unrounded an independent risk factor for CAD, our findings showed a relationship copy number data). For the replication study we genotyped 1315 between ID genotype and hyperlipidemia therefore the severity of CAD psoriasis patients and 593 control individuals. Statistical analyses of may be associated with hyperlipidemia. Also according to our results unrounded copy number data replicated the association with higher we consider that the combination of ID polymorphism with smoking copy number in psoriasis (p = 3.46E-03). A combination of previous habit may increase the development of CAD. and replication datasets (obtained with purified DNAs only) resulted in a p-value of 9.94E-07. Overall, our study confirms association of P09.070 psoriasis with increased copy number of ß-defensin cluster on 8p23.1. Polymorphism +45t/G in ADiPOQ gene is not associated with ischemic heart disease in central-European population P09.068 P. Bienert1, J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, F. Zlamal1, J. Meluzin2, V. Kincl2, A. copy number variation analysis by high resolution sNP array in Vasku1; cleft lip and palate 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech M. Simioni, T. K. Araujo, T. P. Vieira, C. V. Maurer-Morelli, Í. Lopes-Cendes, V. Republic, 21st Department of Internal Medicine-Cardioangiology, St. Ann L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; Faculty Hospital, Masaryk University and International, Clinical Research Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Center, Brno, Czech Republic., Brno, Czech Republic. Campinas, Brazil. Adiponectin harbours strong cardioprotective properties and the +45 High resolution SNP array technology has provided insights into a type T/G polymorphism in ADIPOQ locus has been reported to play an of genomic variation known as copy number variation (CNV). CNVs important role in diabetes development. The aim of the study was have been detected in phenotypically normal individuals as well as to investigate possible relationships between the SNP and coronary associated with diseases and human malformations. Over the years artery disease (CAD) in a large cohort of Central-European subjects it has been shown that the etiology of cleft lip and/or palate (CL/P) with suspected CAD who underwent coronarography. may be related to sequence mutations in specific genes, but also to The 852 patients with suspected CAD referred for angiography were copy number abnormalities such as deletions or duplications. The enrolled in the study, out of whom the 669 subjects presented with purpose of this study was to determine the role of CNVs in a group more than 50% reduction of coronary artery diameter and were of CL/P patients (syndromic and nonsyndromic) composed by 23 classified as CADs (group 1) and 183 subjects were classified as the proband-parents trio. To screen the CNVs, we used the Genome- non-CADs (group 2). The healthy control subjects (n = 395) of the Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix). The analysis was performed same age and gender distribution were recruited to establish normal using the Affymetrix Genotyping Console software and 20 in-house population frequencies (group 3). control samples was the reference set. By focusing on large events There were no significant differences in genotype distributions (p (>100 kbp), we observed an excess of 325 CNVs in patients (CNV = 0.10) or in allele frequencies (p = 0.88) of +45T/G between the average number per patient was 14). Of these, 126 were de novo CADs and non-CADs (group 1 vs. group 2). However, there were CNVs. Duplications were more frequent than deletions. Approximately significant differences in genotype distributions between subjects with 150 CNVs involved known genes, including OMIM referenced genes. coronarography (group 1+2) and without coronarography (group 3) Among more interesting findings there are CNVs in regions known to (pg = 0.02, pa = 0.42). In multinomial regression modelling across the be associated to CL/P phenotype such as a deletion (560kb) within the CADs, the +45 T/G polymorphism showed no association with ejection 1p36.33 microdeletion syndrome region, a deletion (300kb) within the fraction (p = 0.87), number of affected vessels (p = 0.35) or number of 22q11.2 deletion syndrome critical region and a patient with syndromic stenotic lesions (p = 0.54) cleft palate with 8p23.1 duplication (3.8Mb) and 15q25-q26 duplication Based on our observations, the +45T/G in ADIPOQ gene doesn’t seem (17Mb). Further experiments, by a second method to validate these to be a major genetic determinant of CAD in the Central-European CNVs found are currently being performed. Financial support: population, which contradicts findings on other CAD populations with FAPEsP, cNPq. different ethnicity. P09.069 P09.071 Effects of AcE polymorphisms on severity of coronary artery A genetic variant associated with the cripto plasma levels in the diseases may be related with hyperlipidemia cilento isolated populations A. I. Guney1, D. Ergec2, D. Kirac3, H. S. Ozturhan4, M. Caner5, K. Ulucan1, G. D. Ruggiero, S. Nappo, R. Sorice, T. Nutile, G. Liguori, M. Ciullo; Koc1, M. Agirbasli4; IGB-CNR, Naples, Italy. 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Cripto, the founder member of the EGF-CFC genes, has a key role Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeni Yuzyil University, Faculty of Art and Science, Department for the Vertebrate embryo development, contributing to the formation of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Yeditepe University, of the embryonic mesoderm. Very little is known about the variability Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Marmara of plasma levels of Cripto in humans: only one study described University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Cardiology, Istanbul, Turkey, higher levels of Cripto in patients with colon and breast carcinomas. 5Maltepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Nevertheless the genetic contribution underlying this variability Istanbul, Turkey. remains still unknown. introduction: Coronary artery disease (CAD) is a multifactorial disease We measured the Cripto plasma levels in three isolated villages from which is influenced by genetic predisposition and environmental Cilento area in South Italy (N=2026). The estimated heritability was factors. Major risk factors of CAD are hypertension, diabetes mellitus, very high (0.90). To identify genetic variants influencing the levels hyperlipidemia, smoking, family history and obesity. Mutations in ACE of Cripto, we performed both linkage and genome-wide association gene can also cause CAD. Thus, the aim of this study was to investigate analyses. Through the linkage analysis a strong signal on chromosome the effects of major risk factors and ACE gene polymorphisms on CAD. 3p21.33 was detected (LOD=6.11). This locus exactly corresponds methods: 205 consecutive patients with angiographically proven early to the location of the Cripto gene. This result was supported by the onset CAD and also 140 control subjects with no significant coronary genome-wide association analysis: in fact, several SNPs in this region obstruction angiographically were recruited to the study. DNA was were strongly associated with Cripto. The most associated SNP, extracted from peripheral blood and ACE gene polymorphisms were located 1.5 kb upstream the Cripto gene has a p-value=6.9e-74; the investigated with PCR. C allele is associated with higher levels of Cripto (CC= 673.8±29.0 Results: The DD polymorphism was found statistically higher in pg/ml; CT= 310.5±6.9 pg/ml; TT= 46.7±4.4 pg/ml). A linkage analysis patients than controls. Also ID polymorphism was found statistically conditional on the most associated SNP resulted in a complete loss Complex traits and polygenic disorders 284 of the peak on the chromosome 3, showing that this SNP is able to P09.074 explain the entire signal. APOE and cYP2D6 in cNs Disorders Further studies are required to identify the causal variant for Cripto L. Fernandez-Novoa1, R. Cacabelos2; variability. 1EBIOTEC, Bergondo, Spain, 2EuroEspes Biomedical Research Center, Institute for CNS Disorders and Genomic Medicine, Bergondo, Spain. P09.072 The APOE and CYP2D6 genes cooperate in the pathogenesis Oxidative damage of mtDNA in patients with crohn’s disease and pharmacogenomics of some CNS disorders as well as in lipid D. Balakova1, M. Baldovic1, G. Minarik1,2, I. Cierna3, M. Batovsky4, T. Hlavaty4, metabolism. The distribution and frequency of polymorphic variants L. Kadasi1,5, P. Celec1,2; of APOE and CYP2D6 have been studied in the Spanish population, 1Department of Molecular Biology, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, including control subjects (N=315), and patients with anxiety (ANX, 2Institute of Molecular Biomedicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, N=285), depression (DEP, N=419), psychosis (PSY, N=162), stroke 3Children’s Hospital, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Faculty (STR, N=67), Alzheimer’s disease (AD, N=231), Parkinson’s disease Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak (PAR, N=73), attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHA, N=42), Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. migraine (MIG, N=217), epilepsy (EPI, N=71), vascular dementia (VD, Crohn’s disease (CD) is a nonspecific chronic inflammation of the N=198), vascular encephalopathy (VE, N=380), multiple sclerosis gastrointestinal tract with an onset in the second to fourth decade (MS, N=21), cerebrovascular insufficiency (CVI, N?238), brain tumors of life. It is together with ulcerative colitis (UC) one of the two main (BT, N=11), cranial nerve neuropathy (CNN, N=25), mental retardation inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). The highest incidence of CD is (MR, N=115), and post-traumatic brain injury (PTBS, N=59). In the in North America and Northern Europe. The etiology and molecular control population APOE variants were: APOE-2/2, 0.32%; APOE-2/3, pathogenesis of CD is unknown but causes include genetic and 7.3%; APOE-2/4, 1.27%; APOE-3/3, 71.11%; APOE-3/4, 18.41%; and environmental factors leading to defects in immunity and oxidative APOE-4/4, 1.59%. A clear accumulation of APOE-4/4 carriers was stress. Mitochondria produce large amounts of free radicals and have observed in AD (6.06%, p<0.001) and VD patients (6.57%, p<0.001). a low antioxidative status, therefore, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is at CYP2D6 extensive metabolizers (EM) accounted for 55.71% of the high risk of oxidative damage. Furthermore, mitochondria play a crucial control population; intermediate metabolizers (IM) were 34.7%; poor role in the autoimmune response, apoptosis and autophagy, all of metabolizers (PM), 2.28%; and ultrarapid metabolizers (UM), 7.31%. which are implicated in the pathogenesis of CD. The aim of the study is Significant differences in CYP2D6 genotypes were observed between to compare the common 4977bp deletion and fragmentation of mtDNA DEP vs controls (p<0.02), vs PSY (p<0.02), vs PAR (p<0.05), vs BT in CD patients and controls. We hypothesize that the frequency of the (p<0.01); STR vs BT (p<0.05); BT vs Controls (p<0.05); and CNN vs mtDNA deletion and fragmentation depends on patient’s genotype. controls (p<0.05). APOE-4 is a major risk factor for AD and VD. The Two polymorphisms in the candidate genes for CD associated with accumulation of CYP2D6-PMs and UMs in different CNS pathologies oxidative stress (NCF4) and autophagy (ATG16L1) were selected. may influence the therapeutic response to psychotropic drugs. Testing of this hypothesis could shed light on CD pathogenesis with (Supported by the International Agency for Brain Research and Aging, regard to the potential application of a supportive antioxidant therapy. and the EuroEspes Foundation). P09.073 P09.075 cYP2c19 polymorphism and antidepressant response to Role of cYP1A1 (t6235c) polymorphism and cigarette smoking citaloperam in iranian patients with major depression in the development of coronary heart disease in the tunisian M. Hasanzad1, K. Kahrizi2, S. Hemati2, H. Najafi1, S. S. Sedighi3, M. Sam population Zadeh4; R. Zemni, A. Achour, E. Chabchoub, F. Ben Hadj Slama; 1Islamic Azad University; Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Immunogenetics department, Faculty of Medicine “Ibn El Jazzar”, Sousse, Iran, 2Genetics Research Center,University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Tunisia. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3St. Matthew’s University; School of Aims: Cytochrome P450 1A1 (CYP1A1) plays an important role in medicine, Orlando, FL, United States, 4Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical maintaining the homeostasis of the cardiovascular system. This Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. enzyme catalyses the formation and/or metabolism of several introduction: Personalized drug therapy based on genotype analysis endogenous molecules such as arachidonic acid leading to the seems to be a promising approach to reduce adverse effects and formation of cardioprotective metabolites. Furthermore, CYP1A1 enhance drug efficacy. The polymorphic expression of cytochrome activates tobacco mutagens involved in carcinogenesis, atherogenesis, P4502C19 (CYP2C19) is known to be one of the determinants and teratogenesis through DNA adducts formation. This study aimed responsible for the pronounced interethnic and interindividual to evaluate the association between CYP1A1 (T6235C) polymorphism differences in response and disposition of clinically important drugs and the risk of developing coronary heart disease (CHD) in the such as citaloperam .On the basis of their ability to metabolize (S)- Tunisian population, and to assess the possible effect of the smoking mephenytoin or other CYP2C19 substrates, individuals can be habit on this association. classified as extensive metabolizers (EMs) or poor metabolizers methods: This case-control study consisted of 401 controls and 382 (PMs). CYP2C19*2 and CYP2C19*3 have been shown as the main patients with CHD including 264 subjects with myocardial infarction polymorphisms contributing to the PM phenotype. This study aimed (MI) and 118 with angina pectoris (AP). The genotyping of CYP1A1 evaluating the CYP2C19 polymorphism and antidepressant response (T6235C) polymorphism was carried out by polymerase chain reaction to Citaloperam in Iranian major depressive population (PCR) and restriction enzyme digestion. methods: 77 patients with major depression were selected according Results: No significant association was found between CYP1A1 to Hamilton test and then Citaloperam treatment was started. CYP2C19 (T6235C) polymorphism and CHD, MI or AP. However, the CC polymorphism analyses were performed using a Restriction fragment homozygous subjects may have a lower risk of developing CHD or length polymorphism (RFLP) method. MI (odds ratio (OR) 0.53; 95% confidence interval (CI) [0.16-1.79] and Results and conclusion: Eight individuals carried two mutated 0.20; 95% CI [0.02-1.57] respectively) when compared to TT carriers. alleles, being homozygous for CYP2C19*2, and thus could be This did not exceed the significance threshold. When considering the classified as poor metabolizers. Whereas twelve subjects carried one tobacco smoking status, the risk of CHD or MI decreased for the CC mutated allele (CYP2C19*1/*2) of CYP2C19*2. For CYP2C19*3, we genotype carriers even after adjustment for potential confounders but found three subjects with one mutated allele. The rest of subjects have without exceeding the significance threshold. the wild-type alleles that referred to as *1. It seems that there was conclusion : CYP1A1 (T6235C) polymorphism does not seem to no sginificant difference in the frequency of CYP2C19 allelic variants modify the risk of CHD, MI or AP in the Tunisian population even when between the present study and other studies evaluating this. considering the tobacco smoking habit.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 285 P09.076 P09.078 the functional polymorphism of (A-164c) of cYP1A2 gene GJB2 35delG and mitochondrial A1555G mutations and etiology increases the risk of angina pectoris but not the risk of of deafness at the Gelibolu school for the Deaf in turkey myocardial infarction in the tunisian population F. Silan1, O. Guclu2, L. E. Kadioglu3, C. Silan4, S. Atik5, A. Uludag5, A. Demiray6, A. Achour, R. Zemni, E. Chabchoub, F. Ben Hadj Slama; F. S. Derekoy2, O. Ozdemir5; Immunogenetics department, Faculty of Medicine “Ibn El Jazzar”, Sousse, 1Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of MedicineDepartment of Medical Tunisia. Genetics, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of Background: Cytochrome P450 1A2 (CYP1A2) enzyme plays an Medicine Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Canakkale, Turkey, 3Canakkale important role in the homeostasis of the cardiovascular system Onsekiz Mart University School of Medicine Department of Paediatrics, through the metabolism of endogenous molecules such as arachidonic Canakkale, Turkey, 4Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of Medicine acids which have cardioprotective effects and exogenous molecules Department of Pharmacology, Canakkale, Turkey, 5Canakkale Onsekiz Mart like tobacco chemicals that have atherogenic effects. The purpose of University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Canakkale, this study was to evaluate the association between CYP1A2 (A-164C) Turkey, 6Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University School of Medicine Audiometrist, polymorphism and coronary heart disease (CHD) in the Tunisian Canakkale, Turkey. population and to determine whether smoking habit modifies this Objective: 35delG mutation in GJB2 (gap junction protein beta 2, association. connexin 26) gene is the most frequent mutation in patients with non- methods: we recruited 400 controls and 379 coronary heart disease syndromic autosomal recessive deafness. The A155G mutation in the patients including 261 subjects with myocardial infarction (MI) and mitochondrial 12S rRNA is another important genetic alteration, which 118 with angina pectoris (AP). The genotyping of CYP1A2 (A-164C) is associated with aminoglycoside-induced deafness. The aim of this polymorphism was performed by polymerase chain reaction (PCR)- study was to explore the etiology of deafness and the prevalence of restriction fragment length polymorphism. both mutations in study cases. Results: The results did not show any significant association between Methods: We examined audiological and dysmorphological features of CYP1A2 (A-164C) polymorphism and CHD and MI. However, the all children at Gelibolu School for the deaf. A questionnaire investigating homozygous genotype CC of the single nucleotide polymorphism prenatal, perinatal and postnatal etiological causes of deafness was (SNP) A-164C was found to be significantly associated with AP (odds prepared, and pedigree analysis was performed for each individual. ratio (OR) 2.13; 95% confidence interval (CI) [1.20-3.77] p=0.01). We After ENT examination, audiological tests and mutation analysis with also, found that smokers carrying CC genotype have an increased risk RT PCR method were carried out. of AP (OR 3.82; 95% CI [1.55-9.39] p=0.004) in comparison to those Results: The GJB2 35delG and mitochondrial A1555G mutation carrying AA genotype. After adjustment for traditional risk factors, the was detected in 12% and was10% of all deaf school children, CC genotype was significantly associated with an increased risk of AP respectively. The percentages of genetic, acquired, both genetic and with or without considering the smoking status (OR 7.99; 95% CI [2.24- environmental and unknown etiologies were 62.5, 20.3, 15.6 and 28.43] p=0.001)/(OR 3.29; 95% CI [1.45-7.84] p=0.004) respectively. 1.6, respectively. One patient had both Waardenburg Syndrome and conclusion: Our findings suggest that the CC genotype of CYP1A2 mitochondrial A1555G mutation, and one patient carried both 35delG (A-164C) polymorphism was associated with AP in the Tunisian and mitochondrial A1555G mutations. Interestingly, one sporadic population This risk increased significantly among smokers. case, was who developed deafness after fever and aminoglycoside treatment found to have homozygous 35delG mutation. His parents P09.077 and healthy brother were heterozygous for the mutation. Genetic markers of inflammation in patients with cardiovascular Conclusion: Our results showed that dysmorphologic examination and disease mutation analysis are important for clarification of etiology, and thay Y. R. Timasheva1, T. R. Nasibullin2, O. E. Mustafina2; can be helpful for genetic counselling. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Science Centre RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. P09.079 Essential hypertension (EH) is a common disease with severe Genetic association of adipnectin with type 2 diabetes in cardiovascular complications (myocardial infarction and stroke), Jordanian Arab population the major cause of mortality and morbidity in the modern societies. A. Alkhateeb, D. Abuarqoub, S. Al-Azzam, R. Zyadine; Blood pressure is a complex trait with multiple genetic contributors. Jordan U of Science and Technology, Irbid, Jordan. Inflammation is the core process in pathophysiology of EH, and Adiponectin, a protein exclusively secreted by adipose tissue but cytokines are biomediators that are involved in each stage of its present at low levels in obese individuals, is now widely recognized development. as a key determinant of insulin sensitivity and of protection against Our study was aimed to investigate an association between cytokine obesity-associated metabolic syndrome. In Jordan, prevalence of genes variants and cardiovascular disease, and to study their diabetes increased from 13.0% to 17.1% over a period of 10 years, expression profile in leucocytes of patients with EH. which is twice the prevalence of Diabetes in the US 7.8%. In this DNA and RNA samples were obtained from 364 patients with study, we examined the contribution of the promoter variant rs266729 EH and 273 control subjects. 95 patients with EH had verified (-11377C>G) of ADIPOQ gene as a risk factor for diabetic patients myocardial infarction, 45 - ischaemic stroke, and 219 had EH without in Jordan. DNA was extracted from blood samples for patients and cardiovascular complications. In our experiment, 11 SNPs in 10 genes controls .Polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length analyzed, and an association study between EH patients and control polymorphism (RFLP) were used to genotype this variant. A total of 420 subjects was performed. 84 cytokines and cytokine receptors genes type 2 diabetic patients and 230 controls were successfully genotyped. were screened for their expression profile with the RT2ProfilerTM PCR The results showed a significant genotypic (p=0.00001) and allelic Array (SuperArray Bioscience Corporation, USA). (p=0.01) association with variant in the diabetic patients as compared An association was detected between IL1B T511C (P=0.029) and IL10 to controls. This suggests that ADIPOQ gene plays a role in increasing C627A (P=0.016) SNPs and EH. IL1B, IL6, IL10, IL12B and TNFA gene the risk of diabetes, at least in the Jordanian Arab population. variants were found to be associated with cardiovascular complications of EH. Evidence for association with stroke was observed for IL1B P09.080 T511C (P=0.022), IL-6 G572C (P=0.03), IL12B A1159C (P=0.017) and Gene expression analysis in type 1 diabetes prediction TNFA G308A. Patients with EH were demonstrated to have altered K. Stechova1, R. Blatny2, Z. Halbhuber2, J. Vcelakova1, T. Ulmannova1, S. transcriptional activity of 21 cytokine genes. Our findings suggest that Kolouskova1; alterations in the genes encoding inflammatory components may have 12nd Medical Faculty of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Central an input to the increased susceptibility to cardiovascular disease. European Biosystems, Prague, Czech Republic. Background: Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) is considered to be a Th(helper)-1 autoimmune disease but T1D pathogenesis is probably more complex. For the efficient T1D prediction we still lack the sufficient tool for the autoreactive T cell detection. In this study we analysed by gene Complex traits and polygenic disorders 286 expression array the effect of diabetes associated autoantigens on with an idiopathic DCM. peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMC) with the purpose to identify methods: genetic analysis was performed on DNA through promising (pre)diabetes cell biomarkers. CardioCHIP analysis, a CHIP-based high throughput resequencing Methods: Twelve recent onset T1D patients, 25 their first degree platform, simultaneously analysing 34 genes involved in inherited relatives (9/25 autoantibody positive) and 13 healthy controls were cardiomyopathies. The presence of cardiotrophic viruses and/or tested. Their PBMC were stimulated by the cocktail of diabetes inflammation was assessed on cardiac biopsies. associated autoantigens (proinsulin, IA2 and GAD65 derived peptides). Results: 16 of the 30 patients (52%) had genetic variations at After 72 hours the gene expression was evaluated by high density CardioCHIP analyses. Cardiac biopsy in these 30 patients revealed gene microarray and the data were analysed with the emphasis on ParvoB19 virus infection (>500 copies per mcg isolated DNA) in 7 search for differences in the cell cascades activation. patients, inflammation (>14 CD45-cells/mm2) in 4 patients and active Results: The highest number of differences was observed when myocarditis in 1 patient. Of these 12 patients with viral infection and/ relatives were compared to controls (69 pathways). Out of these or inflammation (12/30=40%), 6 patients also had genetic alterations 69 significant pathways 15% of them belong to “immune response (6/12=50%) on cardioCHIP analysis. Family history was positive for pathways”. The highest number of significant differences in immune sudden death in 3 of these 6 patients. We are currently performing response related pathways was observed when T1D patients were DNA-analysis combined with cardiac biopsies in additional patients. compared to healthy controls (24%). The important seems to be mainly conclusion: although based on small numbers, these data the activation of Th17 and TGF-beta related cell processes. demonstrate that viral or inflammatory components as a cause for Conclusions: The important differences were observed when the DCM do not exclude a genetic component and vice versa. These data activation of cell processes after the exposure to diabetes related are important for genetic counseling of individuals with DCM. autoantigens was compared within T1D patients, the first degree relatives and controls. Genes involved in Th17 and TGF-beta cascades P09.083 represent promising (pre)diabetes biomarkers. Supported by Czech identifying genes predisposing Great Danes and Newfoundland Ministry of Education (NPVII2B06019). dogs to dilated cardiomyopathy S. Björnerfeldt1, K. Höglund2, J. Meadows3, A. Tidholm4, J. Dukes-McEwan5, P09.081 H. Stephenson5, K. Meurs6, J. Kresken7, M. Oyama8, K. Lindblad-Toh3,9, G. Association of NOS3 with Diabetic Retinopathy in the Azorean Andersson1, J. Häggström10; population 1Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, SLU, Uppsala, Sweden, B. Parreira Amaro1,2, A. R. Couto1,2, B. F. Bettencourt1,2, P. Sousa1,2, J. P. 2Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Biochemistry, SLU, Uppsala, Pinheiro1,2, J. Bruges Armas1,2; Sweden, 3Science for Life Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry 1HSEAH/SEEBMO, Angra do Heroismo, Portugal, 2IBMC-Universidade do and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Djursjukhuset Porto, Porto, Portugal. Albano, Danderyd, Sweden, 5University of Liverpool, Neston, United Kingdom, Diabetic Retinopathy (DR) is an ocular manifestation which affects up 6Department of Veterinary Clinical Science, College of Veterinary Medicine, to 80% of all patients who have had diabetes mellitus (DM) for 10 or Pullman, WA, United States, 7Department of Cardiology Kaiserberg Small more years. It has been suggested that, in diabetes, the increased level Animal Clinic, Duisburg, Germany, 8School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Nitric Oxide in the retina, causes oxidative stress and subsequent of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 9Broad Institute of MIT and pathological changes resulting in DR. Two enzymes which can cause Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 10Department of Clinical Sciences, vascular oxidative stress - the ecNOS and ACE - may have important SLU, Uppsala, Sweden. roles in DR. Recent bottlenecks at breed creation have led to high levels of The objective of this study was to identify possible associations between inbreeding and linkage disequilibrium within dog breeds, making DR and NOS3 (T-786C and 4a/4b) and ACE (I/D) polymorphisms. dogs perfect models for genome-wide association (GWA) mapping of 137 DM patients from the Azores were investigated: 76 DM patients genetic risk factors for inherited diseases. with DR were compared with 61 DM controls without DR. ACE I/D Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) of non-ischemic origin is a heart muscle polymorphism was typed by PCR-RFLP. NOS3 polymorphisms 4a/4b disease characterized by reduced myocardial contractile function, and T786C were typed by PCR and PCR-RFLP, respectively. Linkage dilation of cardiac cavities and thinning of the cardiac walls, which may disequilibrium (LD) between NOS3 polymorphisms was analyzed lead to congestive heart failure, arrhythmias or sudden cardiac death. using Arlequin 3.1. The disease has been shown to be familial in dogs and phenotypically Allelic frequencies for the NOS3 and ACE polymorphisms did not differ identical to human DCM. between both groups. All polymorphisms were in Hardy-Weinberg Two dog breeds predisposed to DCM, Great Danes and Newfoundland, equilibrium with the exception of ACE I/D polymorphism in diabetic were used in this case-control study to identify genetic risk factors men (without DR). This HW disequilibrium suggests an association predisposing to DCM. Both healthy and affected dogs were thoroughly of I/D polymorphism to DM. One NOS3 haplotype (bbCC) was examined by veterinary cardiologists and characterized using statistically significant associated to DR (p=0,03;OR=3,625). These echocardiography. A proportion of dogs also underwent post-mortem polymorphisms were not in LD. histological examination, to confirm or refute the diagnosis of DCM. This study identified a clear association of NOS3 to DR. After testing GWA study identified different regions of significant association in this association, in a larger sample, this susceptibility haplotype can be each breed, indicating different genetic risk factors. Identifying DCM used as a molecular marker for DR in DM patients. The sex-specific genes in dogs will contribute to identification of causative genes for the association of ACE to DM needs to be further investigated. corresponding human disease, and lead to advantages for both canine and human health. P09.082 - 1 - Genes, viruses and inflammation in idiopathic (dilated) cardiomyopathy P09.084 I. P. C. Krapels, A. van den Wijngaard, R. J. E. Jongbloed, R. M. Dennert, C. New susceptibility loci for dilated cardiomyopathy in irish G. M. J. Eurlings, A. T. J. M. Helderman-van den Enden, Y. H. J. M. Arens, S. Wolfhounds R. H. Heymans; U. Philipp1, A. Vollmar2, J. Haggstom3, A. Thomas4, O. Distl1; Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands. 1Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine Background: dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by Hannover, Hannover, Germany, 2Veterinary Clinic for small animals, Wissen, impaired contractility and ventricular dilatation . Mutations in the Germany, 3Dept of Clinical Sciences Faculty of Veterinary Medicine and Animal currently known DCM-genes are only found in a small number of Science,The Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, DCM patients and the clinical phenotype in families with a known 4ANTAGENE, Animal Genetics Laboratory, Lyon, France. DCM mutation varies considerably. Cardiotrophic viruses and/or Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a progressive myocardial disease inflammation also play an important role in DCM and could explain in human and dogs. The disorder is associated with cardiac dilation interindivuals clinical variability. We assessed the presence of genetic and reduced systolic function. In human, more than 25 genes are variants and cardiac viruses/ inflammation in a group of 30 patients reported whose mutations are related to DCM but they still explain Complex traits and polygenic disorders 287 only a minor part of familial DCM in human. Moreover, many of theses methodological quality control. Target regions, including protein-coding genes were excluded being involved in pathogenesis of DCM in dog exons surrounded by at least 50bp intronic sequence, and UTRs were breeds. Therefore, identifying susceptibility loci in dogs might identify enriched using the Halo Genomics selector probe technology with new DCM causing genes in human. In addition, dogs are excellent average design coverage of 95.9% and amplicon size of 420kb for models for new therapy concepts e.g. gene therapy which already all regions. Each pool was indexed with a unique barcode whereas could be demonstrated. the HapMap samples were indexed individually before paired-end Irish Wolfhounds show a high prevalence for DCM. In this dog breed, sequencing on a SOLiD 4 platform, at Science for Life Laboratory, it is a familial adult-onset disease with a dominant major gene model Stockholm, Sweden. including a sex dependent allele effect. This approach allowed us to perform deep sequencing in order to Here, we present a whole genome linkage analysis using Illumina detect novel variants with an estimated theoretical coverage of 30- canine HD beadchip. The linkage data set included 71 dogs from 11 300X per base. Analysis of the preliminary data shows a 99% SNP families. Overall, 47 dogs were DCM affected und 24 DCM unaffected. concordance for the HapMap DNA used in this project. Presently, SNP Multipoint linkage and haplotype analysis for SNP sets with different calling using different software solutions is underway and a panel of SNP densities were performed as well as non-parametric quantitative SNPs will be verified using the Sequenom MassARRAY iPLEX Gold trait approaches with Merlin version 1.1.2. Consistent regions for genotyping methodology. Zmean and LOD score were identified on dog chromosomes 7, 8, 10 In summary, we describe a cost-effective approach for assessing and 13. For some regions we identified candidate genes. the frequencies of sequence variants in selected gene regions using pooled samples of DNA. P09.085 intron 3 VNtR polymorhism in XRcc4 DNA repair gene is P09.087 associated with rehumatoid arthritis in turkey Genetic overlap of airway obstruction and emphysema S. Pehlivan1, S. Oguzkan Balci1, A. Aydeniz2, M. Pehlivan3, T. Sever1, S. J. Smolonska1, P. Zanen2, H. J. M. Groen1, A. E. Dijkstra1, D. S. Postma1, Gursoy2; M. Oudkerk1, B. de Hoop2, B. van Ginneken2, W. Mali2, J. Lammers2, M. H. 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Boezen1, C. Wijmenga1; Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Gaziantep, Turkey. Airway obstruction and emphysema are two features of chronic Objectives of the study: DNA repair genes are involved in several obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). COPD patients can display disease such as cancers, autoimmune diseases etc. Rheumatoid one phenotype or both at one time. We used the Nelson cohort arthritis (RA) is a chronic, inflammatory disease that affects 0.5-1.0 comprising ~3000 individuals with lung function measurements and % of the adult population. It is estimated, that at least 50 % of the risk CT-scans to determine genes that contribute to both features. We of developing RA is determined by genetic factors. In this study, we performed genome-wide association studies on both sub-phenotypes. investigated whether four polymorphisms in DNA repair genes (XPD, Airway obstruction was investigated in a case-control design (1030 XRCC1 and XRCC4) are associated with RA. cases with FEV1/FVC<0.7, 953 controls with FEV1/FVC>0.7 and methods: Sixty-five patients with RA and 70 healthy controls were FEV1 >90%pred, both groups being heavy-smokers with >20 pack- examined for XPD (A-751G), XRCC1 (A399G) and XRCC4 (intron years, and 846 blood bank controls). Emphysema was investigated as 3 VNTR and G-1394T) polymorphisms. All polymorphisms were a quantitative trait. To account for center-derived differences in these genotyped by PCR and/or PCR-RFLP and analyzed statistically. measurements we used 15th percentile (p15) of density distribution Results: The intron3 VNTR polymorphism in XRCC4 showed an adjusted for air density in the trachea. p15 was analyzed using linear association with RA. The distribution of DD, DI and II genotypes for the regression adjusting for age and pack-years smoking in 3047 subjects. gene was 20%, 33.8% and 46.2% in RA patients compared with 14.3%, To find overlap between these two sub-phenotypes we selected all 60% and 25.7% in the controls. The DI genotype was found at lower SNPs with p<0.001 in each analysis, yielding a total of nine SNPs frequency in RA patients (χ2=8.227 p=0.0021), while the II genotype corresponding to four genes. When these genes were investigated was more frequent in RA patients (χ2=5.285 p=0.010). For both the in GeneMania they were enriched with an additional 9 genes directly intron 3 VNTR and G-1394T polymorphisms in the XRCC4 gene interacting or co-expressed/co-localized with query genes and two of region the observed genotype counts deviated from those expected them point to a drug resistance pathway (GATHER p<0.0001, Bayes under Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium ( p=0.02 and 0.004, respectively), factor 6). but there was no deviation for other gene polymorphisms. There is This is an interesting approach that can help identifying a shared no statistical difference between the RA patients and control groups etiology of two distinct sub-phenotypes of a single complex disease. for XPD (A-751G), XRCC1 (A399G), and XRCC4 (G-1394T) gene polymorphisms (p>0.05). P09.088 conclusion: Our results suggest that the intron 3 VNTR polymorphism HiF1A, PPARG and PPARGc1B gene variants and physical in the XRCC4 gene may be associated with RA ethiopathogenesis. performance in middle school-age children I. I. Ahmetov1,2, A. V. Malinin2, A. M. Hakimullina2, D. Gavrilov2; P09.086*** 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg targeted re-sequencing of candidate genes for developmental Research Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. dyslexia: towards the discovery of novel single nucleotide It has long been recognized that the interindividual variability of polymorphisms physical performance traits and the ability to become an elite athlete H. Matsson1, M. Peyrard-Janvid1, J. Nopola-Hemmi2, H. Lyytinen3, P. H. T. have a strong genetic basis. The genetic loci that influence these Leppanen3, J. Kere1,4,5; phenotypes are now being sought. At present, there are few studies 1Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, related to the search of the associations of gene polymorphisms 2Department of Child Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, with physical, physiological and skill parameters in children and Finland, 3Department of Psychology, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, adolescents. The aim of the study was to determine the association Finland, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, between HIF1A Pro582Ser, PPARG Pro12Ala, PPARGC1B Ala203Pro Finland, 5Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. gene polymorphisms and performance-related traits in 455 middle Current next-generation sequencing platforms are well adapted school-age children. The assessment of physical performance was for high-throughput analysis of sequence variants of many genes conducted with a number of physical and physiological tests. Gene in parallel. For this pilot project, we aimed to identify novel single variants were determined by PCR. The discovered correlations nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and to assess the frequencies of concerned primarily sprint performance traits, being in agreement with known SNPs in 11 candidate genes for dyslexia, a common childhood the generally accepted data: the HIF1A 582Ser, PPARG 12Ala and learning disability with a large genetic component. Using a pooling PPARGC1B 203Pro alleles were associated with the maximal values strategy, 100 dyslectics of Finnish origin were combined into 10 of standing long-jump and handgrip strength, whereas the HIF1A equal pools. In addition, we used three HapMap DNA samples for Pro582, and PPARGC1B 203Pro alleles correlated with the ability to Complex traits and polygenic disorders 288 perform endurance performance (1-min bench trunk-curl testing of We forecasted ERAP1 risk haplotype CCT abdominal muscular endurance). In conclusion, HIF1A Pro582Ser, (rs17482078/10050860/2287987) and demonstrated that its frequency PPARG Pro12Ala, PPARGC1B Ala203Pro gene variants are strongly detected within AS cohort reaches 88%. associated with several performance-related traits in physically active middle school-age children. P09.091 Polymorphisms in the factor Vii gene and the risk of myocardial P09.089 infarction in patients with coronary thrombosis: A hospital Association between polymorphisms of mannose-binding lectin based study and Epstein-Barr virus nuclear antigen 1 igG antibody level S. Dayakar1,2, K. Iravathy Goud3, T. Parvathi Kumara Reddy4, A. Lakshmi1, B. A. Szilagyi1, D. Csuka2, H. Farkas2, Z. Illés3, G. Füst2; Shyamala Sesikeran2, M. D Sadhnani1; 1Hungarian Academy of Sciences-Semmelweis University, Research Group of 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Institute of Genetics and Hospital for Inflammation Biology and Immungenomics, Budapest, Hungary, 2Semmelweis Genetic Diseases,Osmania university, Hyderabad, India, 2Apollo Hospital University, 3rd Department of Internal Medicine, Budapest, Hungary, 3University Educational And Research Foundation, Hyderabad, India, 3Department of Pécs, Department of Neurology, Pécs, Hungary. of Molecular biology and cytogenetics, Hyderabad, India, 4Instituto de Increasing data support that infection by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) Genetica,Dpto.de Biología Molecular Y Genomica, Centro Universitario de can be considered as a risk factor for multiple sclerosis (MS). Many Ciencias de la Salud, Universidad de Guadalajara, Mexico, Guadalajara, studies have suggested a correlation between elevated EBV nuclear Jalisco, Mexico. antigen 1 IgG (EBNA-1) level, MS and its disease activity. However, Factor VII (FVII) is one of the central proteins in the coagulation scarce data are available on the regulation of EBNA-1 level after EBV cascade. High plasma levels of coagulation FVII have been suggested infection. to be the predictors of death due to coronary artery disease. Since Hence, we decided to follow annual changes of EBNA-1 level in polymorphisms in the FVII gene contribute to variations in FVII levels hereditary angioedema patients (as annual control samples of these and such polymorphisms may be associated with the risk of myocardial patients were available for the last seven years). EBNA-1 level was infarction(MI), which is precipitated by thrombosis. We studied a also measured in healthy (N=182) and MS individuals (N=96) in order total of 319 patients, 152 of whom had severe angiographically to analyze its correlation with exon 1 polymorphisms of the mannose- documented for coronary atherosclerosis and no documentation of a binding lectin (MBL) gene. EBNA-1 level was determined by ELISA; previous MI. As a control group, 167 patients with normal coronary A/0 polymorphisms of MBL were genotyped by real-time PCR. arteriograms were also included as healthy controls. We measured the For the studied period EBNA-1 IgG levels were almost constant in each levels of activated FVII and assessed three polymorphisms in the FVII individual. Lower EBNA-1 IgG level was found in each studied group gene, one involving the promoter (A1and A2 alleles), one involving in carriers of a genotype (0/0) causing functional deficiency of MBL. the catalytic region (R353Q), and one involving intron 7. Each of By summing up data of all the 376 participants we found a significant the polymorphisms influenced the FVII levels. To emphasize the difference (p=0.043) in the level of EBNA-1 between carriers of the 0/0 contribution of genetic factors, we studied patients with a family history genotype (median 100.0 U/ml (IQ range 25.1-243.1)) and non-carriers of thrombosis. Patients with the A2A2 and QQ genotypes had the (192.0 (90.3-421.4), respectively). lowest levels of activated FVII (56% and 70 % lower, than the levels in Our data indicate that EBNA-1 IgG antibody titer is relatively stable patients with the wild-type genotypes). In the patient group, there were for years denoting a role of genetic factors in the regulation of this significantly more heterozygotes and homozygotes for the A2 and Q antibody. Polymorphisms of MBL may - at least partially - determine alleles among those who had not had a MI than among those who had EBNA-1 level both in healthy and MS patients. an infarction (P=0.007) for the presence of the promoter polymorphism This work was supported by OTKA-NKTH 80842. and P=0.01 for the presence of the R353Q polymorphism. Our findings suggest that, certain FVII genotypes have a role in protection against P09.090 MI. comprehensive study of genetic factors determining the development of rheumatic autoimmune diseases in humans. P09.092 V. Y. Dorodnykh, I. V. Zvyagin, A. V. Chkalina, I. Z. Mamedov, D. M. Chudakov, modeling Parkinson’s disease in rats S. A. Lukyanov, Y. B. Lebedev; M. Raisinghani; M.M. Shemyakin and Yu.A. Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry of the Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, United States. Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. SAGE Labs has created targeted, homozygous knockouts of Lrrk2, The purpose of our research was to find genetic factors of autoimmune Park2 (Parkin), Park6 (Pink1) and park7 (DJ-1) in rats. The Lrrk2 gene arthropathies. During this research comparative genotyping of two encodes the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2. Lrrk2 mutations account Russian cohorts was performed, both of which combine HLA-B27 for 5-6% of familial Parkinson’s dieases and 1-3% in sporadic PD. positive individuals. Collectively, these mutations result in the most common cause of PD. Among a large number of MHC genes it was the HLA-B27, which was The Park2 gene, Parkinson disease (autosomal recessive, juvenile) strongly associated with autoimmune arthropathies. Also few other 2, encodes the protein Parkin that localizes to the cytoplasm of candidate genes were involved in the development of pathogenesis. neurons and mediates the degradation of improperly folded proteins. Most of those genes take part in various immunological processes Roughly 20% of patients with Parkinson’s disease onset before age such as differentiation and antigen presentation. In this research 40 have mutations within Park2. Park7 (Parkinson disease [autosomal we study variability of candidate gene - ERAP1 specially in Russian recessive, early onset] 7) gene, synonym DJ-1, belongs to the Caucasian population. peptidase C56 family of proteins. In humans, loss of function of Park7 We analyzed an association of several most associated with AS leads to a form of early-onset Parkinson’s disease. Pink1 (PTEN- coding-region SNPs in the ERAP1 gene. Was genotyped 5 ERAP1 induced putative kinase 1) specifies a serine/threonine protein kinase. SNPs (rs2287987, rs30187, rs10050860, rs17482078, rs27044) in Mutations in Pink1 are implicated in early-onset Parkinson’s disease. 70 AS patients and 83 HLA-B27-positive healthy controls from the The Pink1 model is being developed in collaboration with the Michael Russian Caucasian population by SSP-PCR. J. Fox Foundation. Considerable differences in allele’s frequencies within patients vs The targeted genomic editing for all theses genes was performed control cohort were shown for 3 of 5 SNPs under investigation. Using the using the Zinc Finger Nuclease (ZFN) technology. The availability of EM-algorhitm we reconstructed 3-marker haplotypes that distinguish genetically modified rat models for Parkinson’s disease has opened up with high probability two cohorts due to differences in the haplotypes new avenues for researchers to better understand the pathophysiology frequencies. In such a way both the sensitive, CCT, haplotype and of the disease and explore novel therapeutic avenues for its treatment. the protective, TTC, one were predicted. To verify the calculation we determined genuine frequencies of 5-marker haplotypes in AS cohort by haplotyping of individual cDNA samples. As a result presumably risk CCT haplotypes of ERAP1 gene was detected in 65 of 69 examined AS patients’ genomes.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 289 P09.093 Romania, 4Coltea” Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 5Ana Aslan Institute for A polymorphic miR-155 binding site in AGtR1 is associated with Gerontology and Geriatrics, Bucharest, Romania, 6Inst of Food Bioresources, cardiac hypertrophy in patients with Friedreich ataxia Bucharest, Romania, 7University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, M. Kelly1,2, R. D. Bagnall1, R. E. Peverill3, L. Donelan3, L. A. Corben4, M. B. Romania. Delatycki4,5, C. Semsarian1,2,6; A correlative study of genetic and epigenetic factors associated with 1Agnes Ginges Centre for Molecular Cardiology, Centenary Institute, Sydney, cardiovascular pathology Australia, 2Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, This work is presenting the results of a correlative study of genetic, 3Monash Cardiovascular Research Centre, MonashHEART and Monash epigenetic and metabolic factors associated with cardiovascular University Department of Medicine (MMC), Victoria, Australia, 4Murdoch pathology diagnosed in 100 elderly vs 100 healthy (25 young, Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia, 25 adult and 50 aged) persons. HPLC estimation of methylome 5Clinical Genetics, Austin Health, Victoria, Australia, 6Department of Cardiology, metabolites and PCR assays of gene polymorphisms as well as Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Australia. methylation sensible restriction estimation of global DNA methylation Background: Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative level associated with the classical karyotyping in limphocyte cultures condition with a heterogeneous cardiac phenotype caused by an derived from periphereal blood have been performed. The results expanded GAA trinucleotide repeat in the FXN gene. The number showed interesting correlations between the modification of normal of GAA repeats on the smaller FXN allele (GAA1) only accounts S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) to S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH) ratio for a portion of the observed variability in cardiac phenotype. towards the increased level of SAH and decreased level of SAM, a Genetic modifying factors, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms pronounced hypomethylation of global DNA. These metabolites levels (SNPs) in the Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone system (RAAS), may and epigenetic factors were correlated with genetic aspects in terms contribute to phenotype variability. This study investigated variability of an altered karyotype, as well as high frequency of polymorphism in in the angiotensin-II type-1 receptor (AGTR1), angiotensin-converting genes controlling the methylome (methylenetetrahydrofolatereductase enzyme (ACE), and ACE2 genes as cardiac phenotype modifying gene, mthfr) and hypertension (angiotensin-catabolysing gene, ace). factors in FRDA. The study also included the investigation of the above parameters Methods: Review of the AGTR1, ACE and ACE2 genes identified variation when persons took a 3 months inulin containing diet. The twelve haplotype tagging SNPs. Correlation of these SNPs with left- results demonstrated that an altered metabolites level (increased SAH ventricular septal wall thickness (SWT), relative wall thickness, left- concomitant with a lowered SAM concentrations) determined a global ventricular end-diastolic volume index and left-ventricular mass index DNA hypomethylation and hypercholesterolaemia. The genetic and (LVMI) was examined in a large Australian FRDA cohort (n=79) with epigenetic factors are well correlated with a high frequency of abnormal adjustments performed for GAA1, sex and systolic blood pressure. allelic expression of the mthfr and ace genes.The metabolomic Results: The AGTR1 polymorphism rs5186 was more common in parameters showed an interesting variation towards the decrease of FRDA patients than in a control population (minor allele frequency: SAH and increase of SAM concentration after three months of the 0.35±0.04 versus 0.22±0.02; p=0.002). Using a recessive model of inulin enriched diet. inheritance, the C allele of rs5186 showed a significant trend with increased SWT (AA+AC=10.7±2.1mm, CC=11.7±2.8mm; p=0.005) P09.096 and LVMI (AA+AC=99.7±28.6g/m2, CC=119.6±34.0g/m2; p=0.001). Using genetic risk models to identify high-risk groups for the rs5186 increases expression of AGTR1 by altering the binding site for prevention of multifactorial diseases: will it work? miR-155, a regulatory microRNA. No associations were observed for R. Mihaescu1, R. Moonesinghe2, M. J. Khoury3, C. A. J. W. Janssens1; the remaining RAAS polymorphisms. 1Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Conclusions: rs5186 had an increased frequency in a large FRDA Netherlands, 2Office of Minority Health and Health Disparities, Centers for population and associated with increased SWT and LVMI. This study Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, United States, 3Office of Public supports the role of RAAS polymorphisms as modifiers of cardiac Health Genomics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, phenotype in FRDA. United States. Purpose: Genetic risk models could be useful in identifying high-risk P09.094 groups for the prevention of multifactorial diseases. We investigated the common polymorphism of FtO gene is associated with epidemiological parameters that may affect the performance of this overweight or obesity in Russians risk stratification strategy. R. R. Shagimardanova, A. A. Danilova, R. T. Gabbasov, I. I. Ahmetov; Methods: Using simulated data, we assessed sensitivity, specificity, Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. positive and negative predictive value for all possible thresholds of The common rs9939609 A/T polymorphism of the fat mass and obesity- the risk model and investigated how these measures depend on the associated gene (FTO) was identified as an obesity-susceptibility frequency of disease in the population, the frequency of the high-risk gene variant by several independent large-scale genome association group, and the discriminative accuracy of the risk model, assessed by studies. The aim of the study was to investigate FTO gene variant the area under the receiver-operating characteristic curve (AUC). We with overweight or obesity in Russian population. PCR-restriction modeled genetic risk scores of 50 genes with equal odds ratios and fragment length polymorphism was used to determine the rs9939609 genotype frequencies, which were varied across scenarios. polymorphism in 42 patients with overweight or obesity and 135 healthy Results: We show that when the frequency of the high-risk group was controls (BMI less than 25 kg/m2) (all Caucasians). The genotype lower than the disease frequency, positive predictive value increased distributions of both groups were in the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. with the AUC but sensitivity remained low. When the frequency of the The frequencies of AA, AT and TT were 0.381, 0.333 and 0.286 in high-risk group was higher than the disease frequency, sensitivity was the overweight or obesity group, and 0.192, 0.489 and 0.319 in the high but positive predictive value remained low. When both frequencies controls (Chi-square = 6.62, P = 0.037). The frequency of AA genotype were equal, both positive predictive value and sensitivity increased (with greatest risk for obesity) in case group was significantly higher with increasing AUC, but higher AUC was needed to maximize both than that in the controls (Chi-square = 6.28, P = 0.012). In conclusion, measures. the AA genotype of FTO gene might be a risk factor of overweight or Conclusion: The performance of risk stratification is strongly obesity in Russian population. determined by the frequency of the high-risk group relative to the frequency of disease in the population. The identification of high- P09.095 risk groups with appreciable combinations of sensitivity and positive A correlative study of genetic and epigenetic factors associated predictive value requires higher AUC. with cardiovascular pathology G. Anton1, L. Radu2, A. Botezatu1, C. Arsene3, F. Gatea2, M. Anton4, E. Lupeanu5, D. Duta6, M. Puiu7, N. Cucu3; 1National Institute of Virology - Stefan Nicolau, Bucharest, Romania, 2Natl Institute of Biological Sciences, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Department of genetics, Epigenetics Center, Bucharest, Complex traits and polygenic disorders 290 P09.097 of the intraocular pressure. Both primary and secondary glaucoma two novel loci, EmL4/cOX7A2L/KcNG3 and IRF4/EXOC2, were are diagnosed in both species, primary being considered a hereditary identified to be associated with Graves’ Disease in Han Chinese complex disease with multiple susceptibility genes combined with J. Wu1, F. Tsai2, C. Yang1, C. Chang2, R. Chen2, C. Chen2, T. Wang2, C. Chen1, environmental factors. No canine glaucoma genes have been identified Y. Chen1; although the disease affects several breeds including Dandie Dinmont 1Inst. of Biomedical Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Terrier (DDT). In DDT primary glaucoma develops slowly affecting Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. middle-aged dogs and presents abnormalities in the iridocorneal Graves’s disease (GD) is a common autoimmune thyroid disease and angle. To map the glaucoma locus, we genotyped 23 affected and 23 displays a strong female predominance. To identify new susceptibility control DDTs using canine SNP arrays. The average age of onset in genes that increase the risk of GD in a Han Chinese population, we affected dogs was 7 years. Control dogs had been confirmed healthy conducted a genome-wide association study for GD in 596 patients over the age of 10 years. Association analysis mapped a single locus and 804 controls. We found two loci associated with GD, EML4/ on CFA8 (P =1.6*10-7, P =0.001) spanning a region of ~10 Mb. raw genome COX7A2L/KCNG3 (P = 3.21 × 10−6; odds ratio [OR] = 1.59, 95% Fine-mapping with 146 additional samples and 111 additional SNPs on confidence interval [CI] =1.31-1.93) and IRF4/EXOC2 (P = 1.1 × 10−5; 100 kb average spacing narrowed the association to a 2 Mb haplotype allelic OR = 1.44, 95% CI = 1.22-1.69). Within these loci are biological with p-value of 1.63*10-10. The identified locus is syntenic with a region candidate genes that influence self tolerance and the response to associated with human glaucoma, although no genes within the estrogen, which may provide a partial explanation as to why women region have implicated. Targeted re-sequencing of the 2 Mb region are predisposed to GD. We also confirmed that HLA loci (P = 2.75 × revealed several possible candidate variants that are may be causal 10−11; OR = 2.02, 95% CI = 1.64-2.78) and TSHR (P = 1.77 × 10−6; OR = for glaucoma in DDTs. Further analysis of the re-sequencing data 1.48, 95% CI = 1.26-1.74) were associated with GD risk. In the present will likely identify a novel candidate gene for human glaucoma and study, the HLA-DQB1*0202, HLA-DRB1*0701, HLA-DRB1*1202, and establish an important late-onset glaucoma model in a large animal HLA-DRB1*1602 were associated with GD; these HLA alleles were model. not previously reported to be associated with GD in other Asian or Caucasian populations. Our results may lead to a better understanding P09.100 of the underlying mechanisms of GD pathogenesis and female-biased CYP1B1 as a modifier gene for two Brazilian families with autoimmunity. juvenile-onset open angle glaucoma harboring the c433R mutation in the mYOc gene. P09.098 C. A. Braghini, J. P. C. Vasconcellos, D. Stancato, M. J. Silva, A. Tavares, B. Characterization of the Genomic Risk Profile in Cerebrovascular A. C. Santos, V. P. Costa, M. B. Melo; Diseases State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. L. Fernandez-Novoa1, J. Carril1, S. Seoane1, R. Cacabelos2; Glaucoma comprises a heterogeneous group of optic neuropathies 1Department of Genomics, EBIOTEC, A Coruña, Spain, 2Institute for CNS characterized by accelerated loss of optic nerve ganglion cells, Disorders and Genomic Medicine, EuroEspes Biomedical Research Center, A clinically evaluated as increased cup to disc ratio and elevated Coruña, Spain. intraocular pressure (IOP), representing the world’s leading cause of The genomic cerebrovascular panel proposed here deals with the irreversible blindness. Mutations in the MYOC gene were associated study of genes involved in different events that trigger the atherogenic with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) and juvenile-onset open process, such as: lipid metabolism, endothelial function, immune angle glaucoma (JOAG). In the Brazilian population, the C433R is the response, and stability of atherosclerotic plaques (thrombosis). most common mutation related to POAG and JOAG. Some authors A total of 20 genetic variants in 15 different genes related to have suggested the participation of CYP1B1 gene as a modifier of atherogenesis have been determined in 457 individuals, 153 patients POAG phenotype in case/control studies. The objective of this study with vascular dementia (VaD), 148 with vascular encephalopathy was to evaluate the association between variants of the CYP1B1 gene (VaE), 46 stroke patients (ACV) and 110 control subjects without and C433R mutation in the MYOC gene in modulating glaucomatous ischemic or hemorrhagic stroke history, or other cerebral diseases, phenotype in a family based approach. The individuals of two Brazilian aged over 50 years. families with JOAG and POAG, harboring the C433R mutation in the Significant differences between controls and stroke patients were MYOC gene with incomplete penetrance were clinically assessed and found for APOE*2/3 (6.12% vs. 15.22%, p<0.05), APOE*4/4 the coding regions of the CYP1B1 gene were screened. The R48G, (14.29% vs. 10.87%, p<0.05) and IL6*-573GG (29.70% vs. 38.71%, A119S, V432L, D449D, and N453S polymorphisms were observed p<0.05). The most informative genotypes in vascular dementia were in members from both families. The genotype/phenotype correlation AGT*235TT (22.83% vs. 6.08%, p<0.001) that showed a protective was performed, but the relationship of these polymorphisms with age effect, IL6*-573GG (29.70% vs. 68.29%, p<0.001) and IL6R*1510AA of onset, IOP and cup to disc ratio was not considered statistically (25.74% vs. 45.12%, p<0.001). Relevant genotypes for VaE were IL6*- significant. This result may indicate that the CYP1B1 gene is not 573GG (29.70% vs. 51.67%, p<0.001) and IL6R*1510AA (25.74% vs. responsible for modulating the disease phenotype in these families. 45.00%, p<0.001). The results found in this preliminary study show the relationship P09.101 between the plasmatic levels of cytokines and the major incidence of Uniparental disomy and progressive clonal selection: a common cerebral vascular accidents. Increased levels of IL6 and his receptor mechanism causing late onset β-thalassemia major? IL6R increase the recruitment of monocytes and macrophages to the C. L. Harteveld1, C. Refaldi2, A. Giambona3, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, M. J. V. lesion-prone sites contributing to the formation of the plate of atheroma. Hoffer1, C. Borgnia-Pignatti4, A. Maggio3, M. Cappellini2, P. C. Giordano1; The potential of other related markers for increased risk to develop 1The Hemoglobinopathies Laboratory, dpt. of Human and Clinical Genetics, atherogenesis associated with lipid metabolism, hypertension or Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Fondazione Ospedale thrombosis, must to be reconsidered when are compared with the Maggiore Policlinico, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, high informative capacity showed by genes related with inflammation Università di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3U.O.C. Ematologia II con Talassemia, response. Azienda Ospedaliera Vincenzo Cervello, via Trabucco 180, 90146 Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 4Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine-Pediatrics, P09.099 University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. Identification of a novel glaucoma locus in dogs We present three cases of “severe late onset β-thalassemia” in S. J. Ahonen1,2, C. Mellersh3, L. Hansen4, G. Johnson4, H. Lohi1,2; three independent subjects, all presenting with the mild phenotype 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Folkhalsan Institute of Genetics, of beta thalassemia minor up to adult age and developing a severe Helsinki, Finland, 3Animal Health Trust, Suffolk, United Kingdom, 4University of transfusion dependent phenotype in the third and fourth decade of Missouri, Missouri, DC, United States. life when a presumed homozygosity for the β-thalassemia mutation is Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness and a common eye observed. In all three cases molecular analysis shows sequences in disease in both human and dogs. Glaucoma is characterized by loss which homozygosity for the beta-thalassemia mutation occurs in the of retinal ganglion cells, damage of the optic nerve and by elevation presence of a small but consistent wildtype signal in DNA extracted Complex traits and polygenic disorders 291 from peripheral blood, from buccal mucose and from erythroid States. cultures. Loss of heterozygosity due to a deletion of one allele was Autoimmune diseases are extremely common in Sardinians, with the excluded by MLPA analysis. Affymetrix SNP-array analysis reveals highest incidence worldwide observed for Multiple Sclerosis and Type homozygosity for a large number of SNP’s in a region on the short 1 Diabetes. To detect novel loci associated with both diseases, we arm of chromosome 11 containing the beta-globin gene with a low analyzed 1,922 controls, 2,280 Multiple Sclerosis (MS) and 1,377 background of wildtype SNP’s, indicating mosaicism for a partial Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) unrelated cases that were genotyped with the uniparental isodisomy of chromosome 11p. Affymetrix 6.0 array. We used Birdseed-v2 to perform genotype calling Clonal selection for hematopoietic stem cells containing the uniparental over a cluster containing all individuals and successively applied isodisomy for the mutant beta-globin gene during life may account for standard quality filters to each sample and marker. We then performed the progressive development of the disease. A similar observation three Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS): two for MS and T1D for a single case was made by Chang et al. (Haematologica 2008, respectively, and one for shared loci using all available cases. Quality 93(6):913-916), who found this in a single patient with late-onset filters were re-applied to each specific data set, leading to a minimum β-thalassemia Major. Our study demonstrates that uniparental of 471,016 markers available for association. For T1D, only the HLA isodisomy of chromosome 11p15 is apparently more frequently locus reached genome-wide significance (p=4x10-108), but other associated with late-onset transfusion dependent β-thalassemia in known genes were confirmed at lower p-values, including IL2RA and presumed carriers at birth, representing a novel mechanism leading CTLA4. For MS, we confirmed the association at HLA (p=4x10-31), to this special form of beta-thalassemia and in other late-onset genetic IL2RA, CLEC16A, CD58 and CBLB. SNPs with borderline significance diseases. (P<5x10-6) on chr2q13 and chr8q21.12 with nearby strongly functional candidate genes suggest novel potential loci that require further P09.102 analyses. Finally, the GWAS on shared autoimmunity confirmed the Greyhound meningoencephalitis: major Histocompatibility HLA locus and IL2RA gene, and revealed two possible candidates at complex association highlights a potential model for human borderline significance on chr9q21.33 and chr10q26.3. To increase neuroinflammatory disease. the number of tested variants and to refine the association at known R. E. Shiel1, C. M. Nolan1, L. J. Kennedy2, J. J. Callanan1; and potentially novel loci, we are performing imputation of un-typed 1University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2University of Manchester, markers using Sardinian and 1000 Genomes sequencing data, while Manchester, United Kingdom. the most associated markers are validated by de-novo genotyping in Neuroinflammation is common in humans and often has important the entire cohort. and devastating consequences. In recent years there has been increased focus on the fact that neuroinflammation may underlie P09.104 many neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease Genetic architecture of circulating lipid levels and Parkinson’s disease. Furthermore, the predisposition of certain Genetic architecture of circulating lipid levels families to neuroinflammatory disorders such as Viliuisk encephalitis, Serum concentrations of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C), Rasmussen’s encephalitis and multiple sclerosis, highlights the high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C), triglycerides (TG) and total potential of genetic predisposition to neuroinflammation. cholesterol (TC) are important heritable risk factors for cardiovascular We have recently identified a unique breed-associated encephalitis disease. Although genome-wide association studies (GWAS) of in young greyhounds. Although the underlying cause is unknown, circulating lipid levels have identified numerous loci, a substantial the early onset and high frequency of disease in siblings makes a portion of the heritability of these traits remains unexplained. Evidence genetic predisposition likely. This disorder is invariably fatal and the of unexplained genetic variance can be detected by combining unique pattern of distribution of inflammation within brain tissue made multiple independent markers into additive genetic risk scores. it possible to accurately phenotype this condition and allowed for the Such polygenic scores, constructed using results from the ENGAGE collection of diseased siblings, healthy siblings, parents and unrelated Consortium GWAS on serum lipids, were applied to predict lipid levels control tissues. in an independent population-based study, the Rotterdam Study-II In preliminary studies, Major Histocompatibility Complex (MHC) (RS-II). We additionally tested for evidence of a shared genetic basis Dog Leukocyte Antigen (DLA) three locus class II haplotypes were for different lipid phenotypes. Finally, the polygenic score approach determined in 39 diseased dogs with post mortem confirmed disease, was used to identify an alternative genome-wide significance threshold and 111 unrelated healthy controls. A significant association was prior to pathway analysis and those results were compared to those detected between the DLA-DRB1*01802/DQA1*00101/DQB1*00802 based on the classical genome-wide significance threshold. Our study haplotype and the development of disease, observed in 38.5% cases provides evidence suggesting that many loci influencing circulating in contrast to 11.7% controls (OR=4.7, Chi2=11.9, p<0.0006). lipid levels remain undiscovered. Cross-prediction models suggested A genome wide association study (GWAS) was performed using 25 a small overlap between the polygenic backgrounds involved in unrelated diseased animals and 24 unrelated controls. No regions determining LDL-C, HDL-C and TG levels. Pathway analysis utilizing achieved genome wide significance but results from a larger cohort the best polygenic score for TC uncovered extra information compared are pending. to using only genome-wide significant loci. These results suggest The absence of a strong association in the GWAS study suggests this that the genetic architecture of circulating lipids involves a number disease is not monogenic. The DLA association could reflect either an of undiscovered variants with very small effects, and that increasing autoimmune or infectious cause. GWAS sample sizes will enable the identification of novel variants that regulate lipid levels. P09.103 A genome-wide association study for two autoimmune diseases P09.105 in sardinia. A genome-wide association study of rheumatoid arthritis without I. Zara1, M. Pitzalis2, M. Zoledziewska2, E. Cocco3, F. Deidda2, J. Frau3, M. antibodies against citrullinated peptides Dei4, S. Lai4, F. Poddie2, R. Cusano2, M. Marcelli1, F. Reinier1, R. Berutti1,2, C. B. Koeleman1, R. van ‘t Slot1, A. Italiaander1, M. Coenen2, P. Tak3, M. Sidore2,5, M. Valentini1, G. Farina6, D. Schlessinger7, G. Rosati6, S. Sanna4, F. Posthumus4, C. Wijmenga4, T. Huizinga5, A. `van de Helm-van Mil5, G. Stoeken- Cucca2,4; Rijsbergen5, B. Franke2, I. `van der Horst-Bruinsma6, -. LifeLines Cohort Study4, 1CRS4 (Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia), B. Dijkmans6, G. Wolbink7, R. Ophoff1, M. Maehlen8, P. van Riel2, M. Merriman9, Pula, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, B. Lie8, J. Martin10, T. Merriman9, B. Crusius6, E. Brouwer4, T. Radstake2, N. de Sassari, Italy, 3Centro Sclerosi Multipla, Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche Vries3, R. Toes5, C. de Kovel1; e Cardiovascolari, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Istituto di Ricerca 1UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Genetica e Biomedica (ex INN), CNR, Monserrato, Italy, 5Department of Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3AMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4UMCG, Groningen, Biostatistics, Center for Statistical Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Netherlands, 5LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 6VUMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, MI, United States, 6Clinica Neurologica, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 7JBI, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 9University 7Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United of Otago, Christchurch, New Zealand, 10Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Complex traits and polygenic disorders 292 Científicas, Granada, Spain. Trabajadores del Estado (ISSSTE), Mexico City, Mexico. Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) comprises different subsets based on The non-synonymous R230C variant within the ATP-binding cassette the presence or absence of autoantibodies termed anti-citrullinated transporter A1 gene (ABCA1) has been associated with lower high- peptide antibodies (ACPA). This heterogeneity may reflect important density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) levels in several independent biological differences underlying the disease process. Previous studies. The aim of this project was to analyze whether gender, body genome-wide association studies mainly addressed ACPA positive mass index and dietary factors modulate the effect of R230C on HDL-C RA patients, and consequently detected genetic risk factors primarily levels. The study included 3630 adults (1173 men and 2457 women) associated with ACPA positive disease. The identified genetic factors from a nationwide survey conducted by the State’s Employees Social are typically related to the immune system, pointing to an (auto)- Security and Social Services Institute in Mexico (ISSSTE). Genotyping immune disease mechanism in these patients. For ACPA negative RA was perfoemd using Taqman probes. The overall risk allele frequency little is understood about the genetic risk factors, although a substantial was 9.2%, showing a north to south increasing gradient, consistent part of the disease risk is heritable in this group of patients. with the higher contribution of the Native American gene pool to the Our goal was to investigate the genetic risk factors in ACPA negative populations of Southern Mexico. As expected, the C variant showed a RA. Therefore, we performed a large scale genome wide association highly significant association with lower HDL-C levels (mean TT:45.5 study (GWAS) study in a Dutch cohort of 884 ACPA negative RA mg/dL; CT:41.9 mg/dL; CC:39.9 mg/dL; p=9.2x10-13). However, there patients and 4011 controls, and an additional cohort of 699 Caucasian were clear gender differences, as the effect of the C variant was greater patients and 1653 controls with different nationalities. All patients were and more significant in women (β= -3.6%; p=2.2x10-11) than in men (β= screened on the Illumina Human Cyto-12 chip. We will present results -2.8%; p=1.8x10-3). In male subjects, increased percentage of dietary of the first analysis of the Dutch cohorts that shows that genetic risk carbohydrates was significantly associated with lower HDL-C levels, factors for ACPA positive RA indeed differ from ACPA negative RA. but this effect was not observed in males with CT or CC genotypes (p= p=7.3x10-4). In contrast, in women higher percentage of dietary P09.106 carbohydrates was significantly associated with lower HDL-C only A canine model for Hashimoto´s disease in in CT or CC genotypes (p=0.027), particularly in premenopausal K. Sundberg1, K. M. Ahlgren2,3, A. Lobell2,3, O. Kämpe2,3, W. E. R. Ollier4, women (p=1.3x10-9). In conclusion, gender, menopausal status and L. J. Kennedy4, E. Strandberg1, Å. Hedhammar5,3, K. Lindblad-Toh6,3, G. percentage of carbohydrate intake modulate the effect of the ABCA1- Andersson1,3, G. Rosengren-Pielberg3; R230C variant on HDL-C levels. 1Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Medical Sciences, P09.108 Autoimmunity, University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Science for Life Allelic polymorphisms of thrombophilic genes in children with Laboratory, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala brain diseases from Russia. University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical O. E. Gromyko1, N. S. Aver’yanova1, N. V. Zhurkova1, N. L. Nechaeva1, L. M. Research, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Department Kuzenkova1, V. G. Pinelis1, A. Y. Asanov1,2; of Clinical Sciences, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, 1Scientific center of Children’s Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Sweden, 6Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MD, United States. Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, an autoimmune disease resulting in University, Moscow, Russian Federation. hypothyroidism, affects millions of people around the world. Even Inherited thrombophilia (IT) can be defined as a genetically determined though some familiar cases have been genetically explained, the predisposition to the development of thromboembolic complications. complete genetic basis of the disease remains largely unknown. However this problem is not fully clarified. The aim of our study The dog, with its unique genetic structure formed by domestication and was estimate allelic polymorphisms of different genes involved in recent breed creation, has been proven to be an excellent model for IT in children with acute disturbance of brain hemodynamics and mapping genes. Some breeds, such as the giant schnauzer, show an neurodegenerative diseases, and to estimate the impact of IT on the extraordinary high prevalence of naturally occurring hypothyroidism. risk of stroke in children. The frequencies of polymorphisms -455G>A We have carefully characterized the canine phenotype and believe of the FBG gene, 20210G>A of the FII gene, 1691G>A of the FV gene, there is a strong comparative value because of similar etiology, clinical 1565T>C of the GPIIIa gene, 4G>5G of the PAI-1gene and 677C>T signs and disease progression. of the MTHFR gene were investigated in 20 children with ischaemic By a candidate gene approach we have found a strong association stroke, 58 children with neurodegenerative diseases and 100 age- to DLA-DRB1*01201/DQA1*00101/DQB1*00201 (corresponding to matched controls, using hybridization with oligonucleotide biochips. HLA) in the Giant schnauzer breed (odds ratio of 6.5). We have also The frequency of the FV Leiden mutation was significantly higher performed genome-wide association in the same breed, using the in children with stroke (p=0.0001) compared with the control group. Illumina 174 K canine SNP array for 69 cases and 49 controls. Among The occurrence of polymorphisms MTHFR 677C>T with 4G/5G in the identified candidate regions, several harbour genes with known PAI-1 was higher in children with stroke (p=0.05) and children with immuno-regulatory function. Fine-mapping in multiple breeds has neurodegenerative diseases (p=0.003) compared with the control confirmed the associations and identified a shared haplotype. group. Thus our data have shown that the FV Leiden mutation can Currently we are performing functional analyses and targeted be considered as an important risk factor for ischaemic stroke. A resequencing of candidate regions and genes in both dogs and combination of the MTHFR 677C>T variant and 4G/5G in PAI-1 humans in order to identify risk factors. We hope that our knowledge increases the risk of ischemic stroke and neurodegenerative diseases. will lead to better diagnosis and treatment for both dogs and humans. Screening for inherited mutations may be helpful in the prevention of thrombophilic disorders. P09.107 Gender and dietary factors modulate the effect of the R230c/ P09.109 ABcA1 variant on HDL-cholesterol levels in mexican individuals HHEX is associated with t2D in a south Asian Population S. Romero-Hidalgo1,2, J. González-Barrios3, M. Villarreal-Molina1, S. L. K. Towns1, M. Attard2, A. J. Walley2, U. L. Fairbrother1; Canizales-Quinteros4,5, V. Acuña-Alonzo6, M. Rodríguez-Arellano2, L. Yañez 1London Metropolitan University, London, United Kingdom, 2Imperial College, Velazco7, D. Bernal-Alcantara7, A. Carnevale1; London, United Kingdom. 1Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica (INMEGEN), Mexico City, Mexico, The numbers of individuals worldwide developing T2D has increased 2Hospital Regional “Lic. Adolfo López Mateos” Instituto de Seguridad Social over the last 30 years, with specific ethnic populations being at a y Servicios de los Trabajadores del Estado (ISSSTE), Mexico City, Mexico, higher risk for developing this complex disease. South Asians are 3Hospital Regional “1 de Octubre” Instituto de Seguridad Social y Servicios de one such population, particularly within an obesogenic environment. los Trabajadores del Estado (ISSSTE), Mexico City, Mexico, 4Instituto Nacional A compounding factor for this increased risk is body fat distribution de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán (INCMNSZ), Mexico City, and South Asian (SA) individuals, they have a higher volume of Mexico, 5Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), Mexico City, subcutaneous and central visceral adipose tissue but relatively less Mexico, 6Escuela Nacional de Antropologı´a e Historia (ENAH), Mexico City, muscle mass. This contributes to them developing insulin resistance Mexico, 7Medical Division, Instituto de Seguridad Social y Servicios de los and T2D at a lower BMI, compared to Caucasians. Several genes have Complex traits and polygenic disorders 293 been identified as candidates for T2D through genome wide association were identified by dHPLC and direct sequencing whereas studies of scans, including HHEX. Our study was designed to ascertain whether CVs, including the main CV associated to HSCR, the enhancer variant variants in the HHEX locus of 663 SA women influenced the risk of of intron 1 (rs2435357), were performed by Taqman technology. Our developing T2D. Using the Sequenom iPLEX assay 11 SNPs spanning results confirm the strongest association to HSCR for the enhancer this region were genotyped. Logistic regression controlling for age and variant, and demonstrate a significantly higher impact of it in male BMI revealed two SNPs significantly associated with development of versus female patients. Integration of the RET RVs and CVs analysis T2D, rs2488073 (p=0.021, OR 0.181 (0.043 - 0.7710)) and rs4933236 showed that in 91.66% of cases with both kinds of mutational events, (p=0.004, OR 0.268 (0.109 - 0.66300)). In both cases the minor alleles the enhancer allele is in trans with the allele bearing the RET RV. Thus, show a protective effect towards T2D indicating that the risk alleles RET CVs and RVs seem to act in a synergistic way leading to HSCR are the major alleles. Thus we have found an association with SNPs phenotype. Furthermore, our results show the existence of a gender in the HHEX gene region and T2D that is specific to the South Asian effect on both the transmission and distribution of rare coding and population. common HSCR causing mutations. P09.110 P09.112 A new contribution of PHOX2B in the pathogenesis of isolated Novel identification of PROKR1 and PROKR2 genes implicated Hirschsprung disease in the pathogenesis of Hirschsprung´s disease R. Fernández1,2, Y. Mathieu3, R. Nuñez-Torres1,2, M. Acosta1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2, J. M. Ruiz-Ferrer1,2, A. Torroglosa1,2, R. Núñez-Torres1,2, J. C. de Agustín1, G. Amiel3, S. Borrego1,2; Antiñolo1,2, S. Borrego1,2; 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. 1Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla, Spain, 2Centro de Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Hospitales Universitarios Virgen del Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Sevilla, Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Spain. Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Sevilla, Spain, The enteric nervous system (ENS) is entirely derived from migrating 3INSERM U-781, AP-HP Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. neural crest cells and its development strongly depends on specific Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a congenital malformation of the molecular pathways. Disturbances appearing during theses processes hindgut produced by a disruption in neural crest cell migration during have been demonstrated to affect the proper formation and/or embryonic development. HSCR has a complex genetic aetiology with function of the ENS, leading to severe intestinal dysfunctions such as several genes involved in its pathogenesis. PHOX2B plays a key Hirschsprung´s disease (HSCR). Recently, the prokineticin receptor 1 function in the development of neural crest derivatives, which has (PROKR1) pathway has been identified to work co-ordinately with the made it an excellent candidate gene for human neurocristopathies. RET/GDNF pathway in the development of mice ENS. In this sense, In fact several mutations at this locus cause some syndromic forms human ENS progenitors were isolated and characterized from the of HSCR, as Congenital Central Hypoventilation Syndrome (CCHS) ganglionic gut obtained from childrens diagnosed with and without or neuroblastoma (NB). In contrast, to date no mutations had been HSCR, using full-thickness gut resection specimens or gut biopsy associated to isolated HSCR and only the common variant g.1364A>G samples, respectively. The expression of both prokineticin receptors, seems to have a predisposing effect in a Chinese series of patients. PROKR1 and PROKR2, was then examined. In addition, we also We sought to determine if PHOX2B plays any role in the pathogenesis performed a mutational analysis of PROKR1, PROKR2 and their of isolated HSCR, by both a mutational screening in our series, and ligands, PROK1 and PROK2, in a cohort of HSCR patients, evaluating the evaluation of its polymorphisms/haplotypes as modifier factors. No them for the first time as susceptibility genes for the disease. association was detected for the common variants tested, including Immunocytochemical analysis showed that the majority of the ENS g.1364A>G, which suggests that its association to HSCR is restricted progenitors isolated and grown like neurosphere were multipotent to Chinese population. Our most relevant finding was the identification and neural crest cells in origin. Furthermore, we demonstrated that of a de novo and novel deletion (c.393_411del18) in a HSCR patient not only PROKR1, but also PROKR2 might mediate a complementary without any feature of NB or CCHS. Absence of this variant in 150 signalling to the RET/GFRα1/GDNF pathway supporting proliferation/ normal controls and results of in silico and functional assays support survival and differentiation of precursor cells during ENS development. its pathogenic effect related to HSCR. This is the first time that a These results, together with the detection of sequence variants in PHOX2B mutation is detected in an isolated HSCR patient, which PROKR1, PROK1 and PROKR2 genes associated to HSCR and represents a new perspective of the PHOX2B role in the pathogenesis usually in combination with RET or GDNF mutations, provide the first of the disease. evidence to consider them as susceptibility genes for HSCR. P09.111 P09.113 Evidences of synergistic effect of RET common and rare HLA-B27 gene study in a paediatric cohort of variants in a series of spanish Hirschsprung patients spondyloarthropathies R. Nuñez-Torres1,2, R. M. Fernandez1,2, M. J. Acosta1,2, M. Enguix-Riego1,2, M. A. Militaru1,2, O. Belei1,2, C. Daescu1,2, O. Marginean3,2, M. Puiu1,2, I. Marba3, J. de Agustín4, L. Castaño5, G. Antiñolo1,2, S. Borrego1,2; Simedrea1,2, T. Marcovici1,2, A. Craciun1,2, D. Chiru1,2, R. Stroescu Giurescu1; 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del 2”Louis Turcanu” Paediatric Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Sevilla, Spain, Background 3Departamento de Genómica y Bioinformática. Centro de Investigación Príncipe The spondyloarthropathies (SpA) are a family of related disorders that Felipe (CIPF), Valencia, Spain, 4Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Cirugía Infantil, includes ankylosing spondylitis (AS), reactive arthritis (ReA), psoriatic Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío,, Seville, Spain, 5Grupo de investigación arthritis (PsA), spondyloarthropathy associated with a inflammatory en Endocrinología y Diabetes, Hospital de Cruces, Vizcaya, Spain. bowel disease (IBD), undifferentiated spondyloarthropathy (USpA). Hirschsprung disease (HSCR) is a congenital malformation of the The spondyloarthropaties are strongly associated with HLA-B27 gene. hindgut produced by a disruption in the neural crest cells migration Aims during embryonic development. This disorder results in an absence of The objective of our study was to observe the correlations between the intramural ganglion cells in the submucosal and myenteric plexuses positivity of HLA-B27 gene and the clinical, biological manifestations producing a functional intestinal obstruction. HSCR presents an of the patients, the response to the treatment and the course of the estimated incidence of 1/5000 live births with sex-dependent penetrance disease. and male predominance of 4:1. RET is the major gene associated to Material and methods HSCR with differential contributions of its rare and common, coding We tested for HLA-B27 gene a group of 19 pediatric patients linked by and noncoding mutations to the multifactorial nature of this pathology. common pathology, including inflammatory back pain and peripheral In the present study, we have performed a comprehensive study of enthesitis. The evaluation of the patients included complete clinical our HSCR series evaluating the involvement of both RET rare variants assessment, laboratory studies, radiological findings and genetic (RVs) and common variants (CVs) in the context of the disease. RVs study of HLA-B27.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 294 Results by ELISA (Prontodiagnostic), and total plasma Hcy was measured According to the European Spondyloarthropathy Study Group (ESSG) by ELISA (Axis-Shield). Significant increase of Hcy was detected criteria, we established the diagnoses from the tabel below and the in patients with IS (19,18+/-1,49 micromol/L) and AMI (15,59+/- presence of HLA-B27 gene. 1,76 micromol/L) compared to controls (10,01+/-0,86 micromol/L). Six B27-positive patients from the total 13 children with SpA responded The OD for IS in subjects with hyperhomocysteinemia was 16,7 inadequate to non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID), needing (95%CI=6,05-45,6, p=0.001) and for AMI was 8,3 (95%CI=2,9-24.1, forward treatment (Sulfasalazine, Mesalazine, biologic agents), p=0.01). Meantime, the elevation of Hcy level above 15 micromol/L comparing with the B27-negative children, who had excellent response was observed in 56% of cases with is and in 42% with Ami, while to NSAID. The course of the disease was more favorable in HLA-B27 only in 5% of controls. The plasma Hcy in patients with IS and AMI negative children. with MTHFR CC, CT and TT genotypes were 16,6±1,7, 21,20±1,7, Discussions 30,12±9,6 micromol/L and 13,11+/-1,24, 18,25+/-3,19, 16,27+/-2,57 HLA-B27 gene represents a diagnostic criteria in SpA, but could be micromol/L, respectively. Thus, we showed association of MTHFR used as a marker for the treatment response and disease outcome. polymorphysm in IS and AMI patients with high frequency of elevated HLA-B27 presence in SpA homocysteine level in comparison with control group. However, since homocysteine level in latter don’t depend on MTHFR polymorphism, HLA-B27 HLA-B27 Total exponentiation of homocysteine level by other risk factors are positive negative cases quite possible. USpA or Enthesitis-related 4 1 5 arthritis P09.116 IBD associated SpA 2 1 3 RET Mediated Gene Expression Profiling of ENS Precursors ReA 2 3 5 Y. Sribudiani1, R. S. N. Fehrmann1, E. Binder2, M. Metzger2, L. Franke1, A. J. Patients with cronic back pain, Burns2, N. Thapar2, G. J. te Meerman1, R. M. W. Hofstra1; 1 5 6 but without criteria for SpA 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Gastroenterology and Neural Development Units, Institute of Child Health, P09.114 University College London, London, United Kingdom. characterisation of HLA-DQB1 expression demonstrates highly Signaling of the RET-GDNF receptor triggers many important signal variable expression regulated by sNPs associated with Leprosy transduction routes crucial for the migration, proliferation, differentiation susceptibility and survival of the neural crest stem cells (NCSCs), cells that are K. Plant, B. P. Fairfax, S. Makino, J. C. Knight; responsible for the formation of the enteric nervous system (ENS). To Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. identify pathways and genes triggered by RET, we performed gene The HLA-DQ1 heterodimer is composed of DQA1 and DQB1 proteins expression profiling using Microarray Affymetrix GEneChip Mouse that together form an antigen presentation molecule expressed on Genome 430 2.0 platform on GDNF stimulated and non-stimulated most antigen presenting cells. DQA and DQB alleles are strongly NCSCs. For this we isolated YFP labeled-NCSCs out of embryonic associated with susceptibility to multiple diseases, most notably mouse guts E14.5 from Wnt1-Cre/LoxP/R26-YFP transgenic mice by autoimmune conditions including coeliac disease and rheumatoid FACs sorting and short term cultured in media with or without GDNF. arthritis. Much of the genetic variation between DQ alleles leads To identify NCSCs specific genes, we compare the microarray data of to coding changes resultant in varying abilities to bind and present NCSCs and embryonic gut E14.5. The data were analyzed by Gene certain peptides. In addition to structural variation between DQA1 and Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) and single-gene analysis methods. DQB1 alleles, it has become increasingly apparent that alleles vary Pathways that were up-regulated during GDNF stimulation were in terms of quantitative expression. The highly polymorphic nature of pathways important for Lipid metabolism, ATP and Steroid synthesis. these genes can confound microarray based expression quantitative Several important signaling pathways for ENS and embryonic trait (eQTL) analysis by interference with probe hybridization. development were found to be significantly down-regulated upon With this in mind we performed eQTL analysis of these genes in GDNF stimulation such as the Notch, TGFβ/Smad and Wnt signaling peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 288 healthy Caucasians pathways. Genes involved in the cell cycle arrest and apoptosis were using quantitative PCR. Subjects were genotyped at 731,442 markers down-regulated, pointing toward a model in which NCSC proliferate (Illumina HumanOmniExpress) with subsequent imputation analysis. and survival during ENS development. By single-gene analysis, we We identified a haplotype associated with a 5-fold increase in baseline identified 429 genes that were differentially expressed between HLA-DQB1 expression (rs9273440, p 3.2*10-66). Whilst this haplotype NCSCs treated with GDNF and untreated cells (Bonferoni, p < 0.05). does not appear to be associated with autoimmune disease, it includes In summary, here we provide a profile of pathways and genes that risk alleles for the mycobacterial disease Leprosy. Further analysis of are expressed in ENS precursors and regulated by the RET signaling. Leprosy associated SNPs demonstrate that in tandem with increased These data might helpful in identifying candidate HSCR genes. susceptibility noted with increased HLA-DQB1 expression, SNPs associated with reduced HLA-DQB1 expression are protective against P09.117 Leprosy. These associations were not seen with HLA-DQA1 or HLA- the role of functional HtR1B variants in alcohol dependence: DRB1 expression. This analysis advances our understanding of the evidences from haplotype analysis strong genetic association of Leprosy with the MHC class II region and V. Contini, G. Bertuzzi, E. Polina, E. Hendler, M. Hutz, C. Bau; provides functional insights into mechanisms of Leprosy susceptibility. Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. Alcohol dependence, a common and clinically heterogeneous disease, P09.115 is frequently comorbid with many other mental illnesses and influenced correlation of mtHFR c677t polymorphism with plasma by genetic and environmental factors. Animal and human studies have homocysteine concentration in Armenian patients with ishemic suggested that the serotonergic system plays an important role in stroke and acute myocardial infarction alcohol consumption and abuse, mainly due to the serotonin receptor L. Safaryan, T. Sarkisian; 1B (5-HT1B) function in the mesolimbic reward pathway. Association Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. studies between the HTR1B gene variants and alcoholism have found In view of the controversy of the role of MTHFR C677T mutation significant results. There is also evidence for a complex balancing in plasma homocysteine (Hcy) level elevation in patients with regulation of this gene by two functional variants in its promoter region cardiovascular diseases and paucity of studies from Armenia, (T-261G and A-161T), which are in linkage disequilibrium. The aim this study has been undertaken. The overall aim was to evaluate of this study is to investigate the role of the most relevant variants MTHFR C677T gene polymorphism in ischemic stroke (IS) and acute of the HTR1B gene (T-261G, A-161T, G861C and A1997G) in the myocardial infarction (AMI) patients and correlate these with Hcy level. susceptibility to alcohol dependence. The sample comprised 136 In a study group of 54 patients (43% male) with confirmed IS, 38 patients Brazilian alcoholics of European descendent and 237 controls. The with AMI (87% male) and 56 healthy volunteers (50% male), MTHFR results suggest an association between a functional variant of the gene polymorphism was detected by SNP-extention assay and determined (T-261G) and alcohol dependence (p=0.001). The haplotype analysis, Complex traits and polygenic disorders 295 comprising all studied HTR1B polymorphisms, has shown a different concentration were established in different combinations of C677T distribution pattern between patients and controls (p<0.0001), which is and A1298C gaplotypes of MTHFR gene, in cases of AA, AG, GG consistent with the role of the two functional variants of the promoter genotypes of A2756G polymorphic variant of MTR gene (9,45+2,97, region. In conclusion, our findings point to an association between 9,54+1,80 and 9,23+2,55, mkMol/l respectively, P>0,05), and also in functional variants in the promoter region of the HTR1B gene and cases of AA, AG, GG genotypes of A66G polymorphic variant of MTRR alcohol dependence, supporting previous neurobiological evidences gene (9,04+1,90, 9,25+0,47 and 9,81+3,26 mkMol/l, correspondingly of the involvement of HTR1B variations in alcohol-related phenotypes. P>0,05). In conclusion, significantly increased plasma homocysteine concentration was found in carriers of 677TT and 677CT genotypes P09.118 of MTHFR gene among Ukrainian patients with preeclampsia and Human SA gene polymorphisms are associated with coronary artery disease. hypertension in the chinese population: the sAPPHiRe study M. Lin1,2, C. Hwu3, P. Tsai1, C. A. Hsiung4, L. Chuang5, H. W. Sheu6, Y. Hung7, P09.120 L. Ho2; Association of prostaglandins receptors polymorphisms with 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, cutaneous hypersensitivity reactions induced by non steroidal 2Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General anti-inflammatory drugs. Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, J. A. Cornejo-Garcia1, L. R. Jagemann1, I. Doña2, N. Blanca-López3, M. C. Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Plaza-Serón1, J. J. Laguna4, J. Fernández5, A. Rosado6, S. Terrados7, M. 4Department of Bioinformatics and Biostatistics, National Health Research Gandolfo8, M. Blanca2, G. Canto3; Institutes, Zhunan, Taiwan, 5Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National 1Fundacion IMABIS-Hospital Carlos Haya, Malaga, Spain, 2Servicio de Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 6Department of Internal Alergología, Hospital Carlos Haya, Malaga, Spain, 3Servicio de Alergología, Medicine, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan, 7Division of Hospital Infanta Leonor, Madrid, Spain, 4Servicio de Alergología, Hospital Endocrinology and Metabolism, Tri-Service General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Central de la Cruz Roja, Madrid, Spain, 5Sevicio de Alergia, Hospital de Elche, Previous studies found significant association of hypertension and Alicante, Spain, 6Servicio de Alergia, Fundación Hospital de Alcorcón, Madrid, hypertension-related phenotypes with genetic variation in the SAH Spain, 7Servicio deAlergologia, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, (Spontaneously hypertensive rat-clone A - Hypertension-associated) 8Hospital de Fuenlabrada, Madrid, Spain. gene. This study aimed to examine whether common SAH genetic RAtiONALE: NSAIDs are actually the compounds most frequently variations are associated with hypertension in the Chinese population. involved in hypersensitivity drug reactions, and there are at least We genotyped three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs55810929, three different mechanisms involved: IgE- mediated, and T cell- rs11647477, rs5716) of the SAH gene in 894 subjects of Chinese mediated (immunological specific mechanisms) and cross-intolerance origin from the Stanford Asia-Pacific Program for Hypertension and (CI) (immunological non-specific). In the latter group skin is the Insulin Resistance (SAPPHIRe) family study. All three SNPs in the main affected organ. Associations between CI and different SNPs in SAH gene were significantly associated with risk of hypertension in the arachidonic acid pathway or prostaglandins receptors (PGsR)-related SAPPHIRe cohort (p= 0.026 for rs55810929, p=0.007 for rs11647477, genes had been described in patients with respiratory symptoms or p=0.009 for rs5716). The subjects carrying with the DI or II genotypes chronic urticaria, but up today the number of cases is rather limited and of the rs55810929 SNP was associated with hypertriglycerides (>=150 selected populations are heterogeneous. In this study, we analysed mg/dL) as compared with the DD genotype (p = 0.039). Moreover, both the association between CI and several SNPs in PGsR in a large rs11647477 and rs5716 SNPs were found to be associated with excess group of patients with acute urticaria/angioedema (AUA), defined as waist circumference (p=0.025 and p=0.015 from chi-square for trend skin episode in absence of airways involvement or coexistent chronic test). Furthermore, four haplotypes were constructed based on the urticaria. rs11647477 and rs5716 polymorphisms. Subjects carried haplotype mEtHODs: The population was obtained from several Allergy AC was associated with increased risk of hypertension (p=0.01 from Services integrated into the Spanish network RIRAAF. Cases included HBAT permutation test); while haplotype GG was conferred protective had to have at least two episodes of CI with cutaneous symptoms effect of hypertension (p=0.006 from HBAT permutation test). In after the intake of two or more NSAIDs from different chemical groups. conclusion, our results suggest the polymorphisms of the SAH gene We studied several SNPs in PTGER1, PTGER2, PTGER3, PTGER4, are significantly associated with hypertension, elevated levels of PTGDR, and PTGFR genes by using the TaqMan®OpenArray™ tryglycerides, and excess waist circumference. Our study validated System. the association between SAH gene polymorphisms and hypertension REsULts: We included 249 subjects with AUA, and 247 age- and in the Chinese population. sex-matched healthy controls. We found statistically significant associations between AUA and PTGDR rs8004654, PTGER1 P09.119 rs3810255, and PTGER2 rs1254598. Homocysteine level in Ukrainian patients regarding to cONcLUsiONs: Our results suggest the importance of genetic polymorphic variants of genes, involved in folate metabolism variants in PGsR in NSAIDs-induced AUA. Nevertheless further I. Nazarko, H. Akopyan, O. Yefimenko, L. Chorna, T. Pryzymirska; studies are required to analyze the role of other variations in PGsR Institute of Hereditary Pathology of National Academy of Medical Sciences, and related genes in this clinical entity. Lviv, Ukraine. Hyperhomocysteinemia is generally established etiological factor P09.121 for arterial and vein thrombosis, and several polymorphic variant’s combine effect of Factor V Leiden, mtHFR and Angiotensin of genes, involved in homocysteine remethylation (C677T and converting enzyme (insertion/deletion) gene mutations in A1298C of MTHFR gene, A2756G of MTR gene and A66G of MTRR hypertensive adult individuals: a population-based study from gene), are recommended for genetic testing in cases of increased sivas and canakkale, turkey risk of thrombophilia. Among 84 Ukrainian patients with high risk of A. Uludag1, Y. Demirel2, S. Gunes2, C. Silan3, S. Atik1, F. Silan1, O. Ozdemir1; thrombophilia complications (42 with preeclampsia and 42 with coronary 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz artery disease) the polymorphic variants of genes, involved in folate Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of metabolism, were analyzed regarding to plasma homocysteine level. Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Pharmacology, The homocysteine level was varied between 4,48 to 31,97 mkMol/l in Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey. examined cases and there was no significant difference in groups of Hypertension is one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity patients with preeclampsia and coronary artery disease: 9,08+3,06 and in the world which influenced by environmental and genetic factors. 9,88+2,12 mkMol/l respectively (P>0,05). 677TT genotype of MTHFR The MTHFR and Angiotensin converting enzymes (ACE) are possible gene was marked for highest plasma homocysteine concentration candidate genes that may influence both body fatness and blood and heterozygoes 677CT genotype was the following (11,54+2,76 pressure. The purpose of this study was to examine the carriage of mkMol/l and 9,92+0,53 mkMol/l respectively, P>0,05), whereas in gene combinations of the ACE (I/D), MTHFR 677T, 1298C and lipid 677CC carriers homocysteine level was significantly lower (8,57+0,36, profiles in patients with essential hypertension (EH) in Turkey. P<0,05). No significant differences in homocysteine plasma blood In a total of150 adult individuals (50 hypertensive, 50 first degree Complex traits and polygenic disorders 296 relatives and 50 healthy control) from Sivas/Turkey with the same This could explain why we were unable to confirm the associations age, gender assessed for body composition, lipid profiles, resting found in a Chinese and a Swedish study. Possibly, Chinese and blood pressure and gene profiles. Additionally, 149 individuals Swedish women experience higher exposures to phytoestrogens than (99 hypertensive, 50 controls) from Canakkale/Turkey had been Dutch mothers, because they consume more soy products, rye bread, investigated for ACE I/D polymorphism. Pheripheric blood samples and berries. The previously reported decreased risk for rs11119982 were genotyped using stripassay reverse hybridisation multiplex PCR could not be confirmed, as we found an increased risk of hypospadias tests for target genes. when the mother had an infection and/or inflammation and no effect Heterozygote mutation in FV Leiden was found to be higher in the when the mother did not. In conclusion, environmental factors can hypertensive and first degree relatives when compared to the control explain genetic non-replication between studies. group(p<0.05). Homozygous DD allels of ACE gene were also higher than the ACE I/D and control groups (p<0.05). The high rates of P09.124 cholesterol, LDL and low rates of HDL were found in patients with EH High-resolution melting curve analysis for high-throughput when compared with the control. genotyping of NOD2/cARD15 and iL23R sNPs and their Current results show that ACE with DD allels, mutated allels of FV distribution in Slovenian inflammatory bowel diseases patients Leiden and MTHFR genes were significantly different between M. Mitrovic1, U. Potocnik1,2; genotypes and have a combine effect on EH in Turkish population. 1University of Maribor, Medical faculty, Center for human molecular genetics Further studies are needed to investigate the genetics of fatness, EH and pharmacogenomics, Maribor, Slovenia, 2University of Maribor, Faculty of and BP phenotypes in the current adult population. Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Maribor, Slovenia. Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are usually classified into P09.122 Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis (UC). Previous studies in Polymorphism ile105Val of the GSTP1 gene is a predictor for Caucasians have shown that the most potent IBD associated single ischemic stroke in patients with essential hypertension in nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) reside in NOD2/CARD15 and Russian population IL23R genes (rs2066844, rs2066845, rs2066847 and rs7517847). I. Bulgakova, A. Polonikov, E. Vyalykh, V. Ivanov, M. Solodilova, O. Vasiljeva, High-resolution melting analysis (HRMA) was previously reported as a N. Kononykhina, V. Antsupov, O. Belaya, Y. Kupriyanova, D. Ushachev, A. simple, inexpensive, accurate and sensitive method for genotyping and/ Shestakov; or scanning of rare polymorphisms. Therefore, qPCR-HRMA was used Kursk State Medical University, Kursk, Russian Federation. for genotyping of NOD2/CARD15 and IL23R polymorphisms in 588 The present study was designed to test whether two common Slovenian IBD patients and 256 healthy controls. These results were polymorphisms Ile105Val and Ala114Val of glutathione S-transferase compared with genotyping results obtained by PCR-RFLP, which were (GSTP1) gene are associated with risk of ischemic stroke (IS) in used as a reference method. The optimization of an HRM experiment patients with essential hypertension (EH) in population of Central required careful design and adjustment of main parameters, such as Russia. A total 607 unrelated Russian subjects, including 300 EH primer concentration, MgCl2 concentration, probe design and template patients after MRI-diagnosed cerebral ischemic stroke (EH-IS group) DNA concentration and different HRMA approaches were tested and 307 EH patients having no cerebrovascular events (EH-group) develop reliable and low-cost SNP genotyping assays. Direct HRMA were recruited in the Kursk regional hospital for a period 2008-2010. was the fastest and cheapest approach for rs2066847, rs2066844 The polymorphisms were genotyped through PCR-RFLP assays. The and 7517847 polymorphisms, yet for rs2066845 polymorphism frequency of allele 105Val of GSTP1 gene was significantly higher in sufficient reliability was achieved after introduction of unlabeled probe. EH-IS group (0.418) versus EH one (0.336), odds ration 1.42 95%CI Association analysis revealed significant associations of rs2066847 (p 1.13-1.80 p=0.004. The frequency of genotype 105ValVal of GSTP1 = 0.001, OR = 3.011, CI95% = 1.494-6.071) and rs2066845 (p = 2.62 × gene was 19.0% and 9.8% in EH-IS and EH groups, respectively. The 10−4, OR = 14.117, CI95% = 1.884-105.799) polymorphisms with CD genotype 105ValVal of GSTP1 gene was associated with increased patients. The rs7517847 polymorphism was significantly associated risk of IS in EH patients (odds ration 2.15 95%CI 1.34-3.44, p=0.002). with both, CD (p<0.001, OR=0.588 CI95% = 1.346-4.797) and UC No difference in allele and genotype frequencies between the groups patients (p = 0.035, OR=1.599 CI95% = 1.048-2.439). Applied HRMA was found for the other genes. This is the first study reporting on the assays may contribute to the development of genetic profiles for risk association of polymorphism Ile105Val of the GSTP1 and ischemic prediction in IBD and for differential diagnosis of CD vs. UC. stroke in hypertensive patients. The study was supported by the Federal Targeted Programme “Scientific and Scientific-Pedagogical P09.125 Personnel of the Innovative Russia in 2009-2013”. the iL10 promoter polymorphisms is associated with both cD and Uc in tuscany population P09.123 A. L. Putignano1,2, S. Genise3, S. Bagnoli3, M. Milla3, A. Tedde4, D. Molinaro1, Gene-environment interactions as explanation for genetic non- R. Sestini1, M. Genuardi1,2, V. Annese3, L. Papi1; replication in the etiology of hypospadias 1Medical Genetics Unit, Department of Clinical Physiopathology, University L. F. M. van der Zanden, T. E. Galesloot, W. F. J. Feitz, B. Franke, N. V. A. M. of Florence, Florence, Italy, 2Fiorgen Farmacogenomic Foundation, Sesto Knoers, N. Roeleveld, I. A. L. M. van Rooij; Fiorentino, Florence, Italy, 3Gastroenterology Unit, University Hospital Careggi, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Florence, Italy, 4Neurogenetic Unit, Department of Neurological and Psychiatric Hypospadias is a common congenital malformation of the male Sciences, University of Florence, Florence, Italy. external genitalia. In previous studies, hypospadias was associated Pathological evidence supports a potential role of the pro-and anti- with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in SRD5A2, ESR1, inflammatory cytokine network in the pathogenesis of IBD. In this ESR2, and ATF3. However, we were unable to replicate these study, we evaluated the effect of the anti-inflammatory interleukin-10 associations in a Dutch study. Therefore, we examined whether this (IL10) gene on Ulcerative Colitis and Crohn’s Diseasae. Two SNPs in lack of replication could be due to dissimilar environmental exposures, the IL10 promoter, -1082G>A (rs1800896) and -819C>T (rs1800871), by exploring whether the associations differed when mothers were or were determined in 553 patients (315 UC and 238 CD) and 367 were not exposed to exogenous estrogens, suffering from placental healthy controls from Tuscany (Italy) by HRMA. Statistical analysis insufficiency, or having high estradiol levels. For ATF3, we also was performed using EpiInfo software to assess the risk and using included occurrence of an infection and/or inflammation and smoking Power Marker software for haplotype frequencies. The -1082G>A during pregnancy. We genotyped 712 hypospadias cases and their SNP followed the HW equilibrium in both UC and CD patients and parents, obtained environmental data from postal questionnaires, controls. The HW equilibrium for the -819C>T SNP was respected and tested the presence of gene-environment interactions using the only in the control group and not in the UC and CD cases. This may log-linear approach. Gene-environment interactions were identified be further evidence of the association of the locus with the disease. between rs523349 in SRD5A2 and maternal estrogen exposure and The IL10-819T allele was weakly associated in UC patients and more between rs11119982 in ATF3 and the occurrence of an infection significantly with CD patients, compared to controls. The frequency of and/or inflammation. The SNP in SRD5A2 only increased the risk of the IL10-1082A allele was significantly higher both in UC and in CD hypospadias when the mother was exposed to exogenous estrogens. patients than in controls. In addition, we observed an higher frequency Complex traits and polygenic disorders 297 of the IL10 A/T haplotype in both UC and CD patients, compared to binding category genes was observed (3200 genes, 72%). In addition, controls. Moreover, we found that -1082G>A SNP was in low LD with genes included in the GO categories synapse (120 genes, 2,7%) and -819C>T both in UC and CD cases and controls. In conclusion, the reproduction (315 genes, 7.1%) were detected with strong statistically -1082G>A and -819C>T SNPs in the IL10 promoter were significantly significance. The in depth characterization of results is in progress. associated with risk of UC and CD in a population of Tuscany, suggesting their role in IBD susceptibility at least in this population. P09.128 eQtL analysis of disease associated regions in slovenian P09.126 inflammatory bowel disease patients Interleukin-1 β and Interleukin-1 Receptor Antagonist Gene K. Repnik1, U. Potočnik1,2; polymorphisms in children not responding to Hepatitis B 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of vaccination Medicine, University of Maribor, Slovenia, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Laboratory for H. Onay1, D. Yilmaz Ciftdogan2, S. Tosun3, T. R. Ozdemir1, F. Vardar2, F. Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry and Ozkinay1; Chemical Engineering, University of Maribor, Slovenia, Maribor, Slovenia. 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, In many disease associated regions of complex diseases such as Turkey, 2Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) SNPs and haplotypes most Turkey, 3Manisa State Hospital, Section of Infectious Diseases, Manisa, Turkey. significantly associated with disease are located in non-coding Introduction: Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a major public health regions. The mechanism by which these SNPs contribute to the issue throughout the world and vaccination of those at risk is the disease pathogenesis and which genes and proteins they affect is not main method of containment. 5-10% of children are not responding yet clear. Using method of linking SNP genotype to the level of gene to hepatitis B vaccines and probably are not adequately protected expression (expression quantitative trait loci - eQTL) we wanted to against the (HBV) infection. We aimed to investigate the genetic explore the feasibility of eQTL analysis for linking non-coding disease polymorphisms of interleukin-1B (IL-1B) and interleukin-1 receptor associated SNPs to genes they regulate. Initially we analyzed locus antagonist gene (IL-1RN) in children not responding to hepatitis B from which non-coding SNP rs3087243 (CTLA4_CT60) showed vaccination, and to determine whether vaccine efficacy is influenced functional relevance and has been associated with the disease. We by these gene polymorphisms. further applied our approach to IBD5 region where SNPs are in high Material and Method: A total of 200 children whose anti-HBs antibody linkage disequilibrium and the main contributor from this region is still levels lower than 10 IU/L after vaccination against hepatitis B unknown. We measured expression of genes from selected regions in according to a standardized schedule were included in this study as peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL) and colon tissue biopsies of 632 non-responder group. One hundred healthy children who had anti-HBs Slovenian IBD patients and in PBL of 312 controls and genotyped all antibody levels higher than 10 IU/L after vaccination against hepatitis B patients and controls for selected SNPs. We showed that non-coding were included as responder group. IL-1B -511(C/T) and IL-1RN VNTR SNP rs3087243 affect expression of soluble isoform of CTLA4 gene. gene polymorphism were determined using PCR-RLFP and PCR- Our eQTL analysis of IBD5 region suggested SLC22A5 as a main gene agarose gel based techniques, respectively. in that region contributing to the IBD pathogenesis where decreased Results: Frequencies of the genotypes and alleles of IL-1B -511(C/T) expression of SLC22A5 gene for disease susceptible genotype of polymorphism were similar in both group. Genotype frequencies of SNPs rs1050152 and rs2631372 was detected. Our results suggest IL-1RN VNTR polymorphism were not significantly different between genotype/gene expression studies are good approach in linking most responders and non-responders group. The frequency of allele 2 of significantly disease associated SNPs in non-coding regions with IL-1RN VNTR polymorphism was higher in non-responders than genes they regulate. responders group (respectively; r= 0,17, r=0,09, p=0,029). The allele 1 and allele 3 frequencies were not different in both group (respectively; P09.129 p=0,86, p=0,48). Genome-wide screen for context-dependant associations Conclusion: Our results suggest that, allele 2 of IL-1RN gene VNTR reveals an interaction between a locus at 4p15 and waist-to-hip polymorphism might be associated with not responding to hepatitis B ratio on total cholesterol vaccination. A. Isaacs1,2, I. Surakka3,4, C. M. van Duijn1,2, Y. S. Aulchenko1, S. Ripatti3,4, on behalf of the ENGAGE Consortium; P09.127 1Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Dept. of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Analysis of copy number variants (cNV) distribution in high Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Centre for Medical Systems Biology, scoring impulsive-disinhibited subjects Leiden, Netherlands, 3Institute for Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, M. Laplana1, A. Aluja2, L. F. Garcia3, J. Fibla1; Helsinki, Finland, 4Public Health Genomics Unit, National Institute for Health 1Department of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Lleida, IRBLleida, and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland. Lleida, Spain, 2Department of Pedagogy and Psychology, University of Lleida, A large-scale (>100,000 individuals) genome-wide association study IRBLleida, Lleida, Spain, 3Department of Biological and Health Psychology, recently described numerous loci affecting lipid levels. These common Autonomous University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain. variants explain ~25% of the heritability of these phenotypes. A number Impulsivity/disinhibition trait has been defined as the predisposition to of hypotheses have been proposed speculating on the sources of respond to internal or external stimuli without regard to the potentially such “missing heritability”, including context-dependant genetic effects negative consequences to the individual or to others. The genetic of due to interactions. In the current analyses, the role of interactions personality traits has been evaluated in relation to microsatellites and influencing lipids was explored in meta-analysis of genome-wide SNPs. Nevertheless, the contribution of CNV is not known. CNVs data from 19 population-based cohorts (n>32,000). Studied lipids produces an increase or decrease in the number of copies of one were total (TC), high-density lipoprotein, and low-density lipoprotein or several genes, which can affect their expression and regulation. cholesterol and triglycerides. The interacting variables, chosen We hypothesize that CNV may be part of the genetic component for their prior associations with lipids, were alcohol consumption, of the impulsivity/disinhibition trait. To test this hypothesis we have smoking, sex, waist-to-hip ratio (WHR), and body-mass index. Eight in performed a comparative genome hybridization (CGH) analysis with silico replication cohorts (n>14,000) were available. Interactions were the Agilent 2X400K CGH array in a group of subjects whose scores tested using linear regression models including both main effects and in impulsivity/disinhibition questionnaires were the highest. DNA from a SNP*context interaction term. After meta-analyzing the discovery each high scoring subject was compared with a pool of DNA obtained and replication samples, rs6448771, near the protocadherin 7 gene from low scoring controls. We used the ADAM2 statistical algorithm to (PCDH7), showed genome-wide significant interaction with WHR on identify CNVs and CNV regions (CNVR) with statistical threshold of TC (P-value=9.08e-9). A 10% increase in WHR elevated TC by 0.14 6 and a minimum of 4 probes by using Agilent Genomic Workbench. mmol/L (95% CI:0.10-0.18) for the AA genotype, 0.20 mmol/L (CI:0.16- With these stringent conditions we detected 3310 CNVRs in a subset 0.24) for AG, and 0.22 mmol/L (CI:0.15-0.29) for GG. The SNP alone did of 16 subjects that passed array QC. CNVR were distributed according not affect either WHR (P-value=0.46) or TC (P-value=0.51). No other to chromosome size. A total of 4430 GO annotated genes were genome-wide associations were observed. Inclusion of suggestive mapped to 2825 (86%) CNVRs. An overrepresentation of GO:0005488 SNP*context interactions in polygenic models marginally improved Complex traits and polygenic disorders 298 the proportion of explained variance. In conclusion, rs6448771 conclusion: The L34 allele increases almost 4 times the risk of represents the first SNP identified by a genome-wide search for SNP* developing HG in patients with acute intracerebral haemorrhage. risk-factor interactions affecting lipids. It is unlikely that large effect- RED RECAVA RD06/0014/0016 size interactions between common variants and the tested interacting contexts explain a high proportion of “missing heritability”. P09.132** intracranial Aneurysm risk locus 5q23.2 is associated to P09.130 elevated systolic blood pressure in the Finns: A meta-analysis Using canine models in the study of human disease: Genome- E. I. Gaál1,2,3, P. Salo2, M. Niemelä3, M. Günel4, M. S. Nieminen5, J. Sinisalo5, M. wide association mapping identifies a major locus affecting Lokki6, A. Jula1, O. Raitakari7,8, T. Lehtimäki9, J. Eriksson1,10,11, E. Widen2, J. E. intervertebral disc calcification in Dachshund Jääskeläinen12, J. Hernesniemi3, A. Palotie13, V. Salomaa14, M. Perola1,2; M. Mogensen1, P. Karlskov-Mortensen1, H. Proschowsky1, F. Lingaas2, H. 1Public Health Genomics Unit, Dept. of Chronic Disease Prevention, the Lohi3, M. Fredholm1; National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute for 1Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Denmark, 2Department of Basic Sciences and Aquatic Medicine, Norwegian 3Department of Neurosurgery, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, School of Veterinary Science, Oslo, Norway, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Finland, 4Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, New Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Haven, CT, United States, 5Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, In humans, genetic studies of intervertebral disc degeneration have Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Transplantation mainly focused on candidate gene studies, but the etiology and Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, pathogenesis of disc degeneration is still poorly understood. Studies 7Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, of the equivalent disease in dogs offer a relevant animal model to University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 8Clinical Physiology, University of Turku and investigate the genetics underlying the phenotype. The predisposition Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 9Department of Clinical Chemistry, to intervertebral disc disease in Dachshund is caused by an early University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, degenerative process resulting in disc calcification. In Dachshund 10Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care, Institute of Clinical the number of calcified discs at two years of age determined by Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 11Vasa Central Hospital, a radiographic evaluation is a good indicator of the severity of disc Vasa, Finland, 12Neurosurgery of Kuopio University Hospital, NeuroCenter, degeneration and thus serves as a measure for the risk of developing Kuopio, Finland, 13The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, intervertebral disc herniation. Since the assessment of disc United Kingdom, 14Chronic Disease Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Dept. degeneration in humans often is performed by magnetic resonance of Chronic Disease Prevention, the National Institute for Health and Welfare, imaging where it is difficult to evaluate disc calcifications, it is not Helsinki, Finland. possible to make a direct comparison between the etiology of the Background and Purpose - Previous GWA studies have identified 5 loci disease in the two species. However, elucidation of the biological with strong association (posterior probability of association -PPA>0.5) processes involved in disc degeneration in dogs will undoubtedly also and further 14 loci with suggestive association (0.1<PPA<0.5) to shed light on the pathways relevant for the human condition. Based intracranial aneurysm (IA). However, the pathomechanism by which on stringent radiographic examinations 48 affected dogs with ≥6 disc these loci increase the risk of IA formation remains mostly unknown. calcifications or surgically treated for disc herniation and 46 unaffected Hypertension is one of the strongest traditional risk factors of IA known dogs with 0-1 disc calcifications were identified. Genome-wide to date. We hypothesized that some of the loci with strong or suggestive association using the Illumina CanineHD BeadChip identified a locus association to IA convey their effect through elevating blood pressure. on chromosome 12 from 36.8Mb-38.6Mb with 36 markers reaching We further hypothesized that this effect is more likely detectable in a genome-wide significance with p-values of 1.0x10-5-0.026 (p-values genetically more homogenous population. corrected for multiple testing). These results suggest that a major Methods - We performed a meta-analysis of four previously described locus affecting the development of intervertebral disc calcification is Finnish cohorts consisting of 12,152 individuals. We used a two tier present on chromosome 12. approach; one discovery cohort and three replication cohorts. Results - We found that the suggestive IA locus at 5q23.2 in PRDM6 is P09.131 strongly associated with systolic blood pressure (SBP) (p= 0.00016). Factor Xiii V34L polymorphism and their association with The risk allele of IA was associated to higher SBP. PRDM6 encodes a hematoma growth in patients with acute intracerebral protein playing a key role in vascular smooth muscle cell homeostasis. hemorrhage We hypothesize that common variants in PRDM6 may contribute to I. Tirado1, I. Coll1, B. Cuevas1, J. Mateo1, M. Borrell1, R. Delgado-Mederos2, I. altered vascular wall structure hence increasing SBP, and predispose Gich3, J. Martí-Fabregas2, J. Fontcuberta1; to IA. 1Hemostàsia i Trombosi. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neurologia. Conclusions - To our knowledge, this is the first study unambiguously Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 3Epidemiologia Clínica. Hospital Sant demonstrating replication of a complex disease locus (IA), with its Pau, Barcelona, Spain. common risk factor (SBP). Further validation is needed to show the We tested the hypothesis that the FXIIIV34L polymorphism is significance of this association in other populations. associated with hematoma growth (HG) in patients with acute intracerebral haemorrhage (ICH). P09.133 methods: We studied patients with spontaneous ICH within the first tNF and ccR5 gene polymorphisms are associated with 6 hours after the onset of symptoms. HG was defined as an increase response to anti-tNF treatment in patients with juvenile >33% in the volume of hematoma on the computed tomography (CT) idiopathic arthritis. obtained 24 to 72 hours after the onset of symptoms in comparison I. V. Pugacheva1, A. S. Glotov1, M. V. Aseev1, N. S. Averyanova2, A. A. with the CT at admission. We used Chi-Squared test to compare Grigorieva2, E. I. Alekseeva2, V. G. Pinelis2, A. A. Baranov2, V. S. Baranov1; frequencies and the risk of HG was assessed as an odds ratio (OR) 1D.O.Ott’s Research Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology of Russian with a 95 % CI using logistic regression (adjustments for: age, sex, Academy of Medical Sciences, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Scientific volume haemorrhage at baseline, onset to the first CT, blood glucose, Center of children’s Health of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, blood pressure, Glasgow score). The FXIIIV34L, Factor V Leiden and Russian Federation. F2G20210A were genotyped. Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is a group of chronic arthropathies in Results: We included 90 patients (mean age 71± 10.8y.), 61% were children, caused by aberrant immune reactions, with predominance men. HG was observed in 35 (39%) of the patients. The frequency of of Th1- over Th2-driven responses. It has been shown that Th1- HG was higher among patients who carried the L34 allele than patients chemokine receptor CCR5 is important in the recruitment of T-helper with the V34 allele (51.6% vs 31.6% p=0.072). If patient who carried cells of children with JIA to the synovium, where they secrete pro- Factor V Leiden or F2G20210A were not included, the difference was inflammatory cytokines and cause the inflammation. TNF-alpha is significant (53.3% vs 29.6 %, p= 0.039). Carriers of L34allele showed one of the major pro-inflammatory cytokines and it plays a key role a higher risk of HG (OR= 3.96; 95 % CI:1.4-11.2). Moreover, we found in pathogenesis of JIA. Anti-TNF therapy has proved to be highly that every year of age increased 5% the risk of HG (OR= 1.05). successful in controlling inflammation and is now widely used to Complex traits and polygenic disorders 299 treat JIA. However, large percentage of patients is refractory to anti- nominal significance threshold (P<0.05) and showed the expected TNF treatment. We investigated contribution of TNF-alpha -308 G/A direction of the effect (i.e. lower kidney volume for a SNP previously polymorphism (up-regulation of TNF-alpha production) and Th1- associated to lower glomerular filtration rate in adults). However, when chemokine receptor CCR5-delta32 polymorphism (non-functional taking into account multiple testing, none of the common variants were receptor) on response to infliximab (a monoclonal antibody against associated with kidney volume at the age of 6 years. TNF-alpha) in patients with JIA. We genotyped the two polymorphisms Our results suggest that the underlying mechanisms in which common in 75 Russian patients with JIA and found that TNFA G allele frequency variants affect kidney function and blood pressure do not include was significantly lower in infliximab responders versus non-responders altered kidney growth and development in early life. (83,3%; 96,7%, respectively, p=0,013). The proportion of minor A allele was significantly higher in responders vs. non-responders (33,3% P09.136 and 6,7%, respectively, p=0,008). Frequency of CCR5-delta32 was Role of KiR3D receptor functional variants in ankylosing significantly lower in infliximab responders (1,4% versus 10,0% in the spondylitis group of refractory patients; p=0,028). Our data might be useful for I. V. Zvyagin, I. Z. Mamedov, A. V. Chkalina, V. Y. Dorodnykh, D. M. Chudakov, determination of management strategy for children with JIA. This work S. A. Lukyanov, Y. B. Lebedev; was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research, grant No. M.M. Shemyakin–Yu.A. Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of RAS, 09-04-13849. Moscow, Russian Federation. Some contradictory results on association of activating and inhibitory P09.134** alleles of killer immunoglobulin-like receptor KIR3D gene with two novel genetic factors for cAKUt origin: results from the ankylosing spondylitis (AS) were reported. Only one of the studies AGORA project analyzed the association in the context of functionality of polymorphic K. Y. Renkema1,2, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, I. A. L. M. van Rooij1, L. F. M. van der KIR3DL1. In our study we analyzed both the frequencies of alleles Zanden1, N. Roeleveld1, W. F. J. Feitz1, Y. Neirijnck3, A. Reginensi3, A. Schedl3, encoding inhibitory and activating KIR3D receptors and alleles F. Schaefer4, H. McNeill5, B. Franke1, N. V. A. M. Knoers2; encoding functional (KIR3DL1*F) and non-functional (KIR3DL1*004) 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, inhibitory receptors in two Russian Caucasian cohorts which include 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Inserm U636, 83 AS patients and 107 HLA-B27-positive healthy donors. Presence Nice, France, 4Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Samuel of low expressed KIR3DL1*005 and KIR3DL1*007 alleles was also Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. detected. Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) occur The frequency of KIR3DS1 allele was found to be higher (30.7% vs frequently in man and comprise the most common cause of end- 18.7%, p < 0.01, OR = 1.93) and the frequency of KIR3DL1 allele stage renal disease in children. Structural disorders belonging to was found to be lower (69.3% vs 81.3%, p < 0.01, OR = 0.52) in the the spectrum of these anomalies include renal agenesis, multicystic AS cohort. Also it was found that the KIR3DL1*004 allele frequency kidney dysplasia, ureteropelvic junction obstruction, duplex collecting are near equal in both cohorts, and the decrease of KIR3DL1 system, and vesico-ureteral reflux. Not much is known about the origin allele frequency in the AS cohort is due to the KIR3DL1*F but not of CAKUT. Alterations in genes expressed during nephrogenesis KIR3DL1*004 frequencies. Likewise the frequencies of genotypes are considered to be important, with the final phenotypic outcome carrying KIR3DL1*004 was found to be near equal in both cohorts. 9 depending on additional modifying genetic and environmental factors. from 17 KIR3DL1*F/KIR3DL1*F AS patients carry at least one of low The aim of this study is to identify new genetic factors involved in expressed allele. CAKUT aetiology. From the AGORA biobank of the Radboud University These findings support the hypothesis that KIR3DL1 is not simply a Nijmegen Medical Centre over 700 well-documented CAKUT case- passive counterpart of the segregating KIR3DS1 allele product but parent triads and 10 families with multiple affected members were play a protective role, although the presence of activating KIR3DS1 recruited. Mutation analysis of two novel CAKUT candidate genes allele is more important for AS susceptibility. However individuals was performed and revealed interesting genetic variants that were carrying two high level expressed inhibitory KIR3DL1*F alleles can be functionally characterized in vitro. Genome-wide exome sequencing affected by AS. in CAKUT families identified variants possibly involved in CAKUT aetiology. In addition, linkage analysis of a large CAKUT family P09.137 demonstrated suggestive linkage for a locus on chromosome 4. Predicting development of canine leishmaniasis using genomic The identification of new genetic factors for CAKUT contributes to selection analysis from genome-wide sNP data the understanding of the pathogenesis and the design of genetic J. Quilez1, V. Martínez1, A. Sanchez1, J. A. Woolliams2, R. Pong-Wong2, L. J. diagnostic screening tests, facilitating early detection and recurrence Kennedy3, R. Quinnell4, W. Ollier3, X. Roura5, L. Ferrer5, L. Altet1, O. Francino1; risk estimations for CAKUT. 1Molecular Genetics Veterinary Service, Dep. of Animal and Food Science, Veterinary School, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain, 2The P09.135 Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Roslin, United Kingdom, common genetic variants associated with kidney function and 3Centre for Integrated Genomic Medical Research (CIGMR), Manchester, blood pressure are not associated with kidney volume in early United Kingdom, 4Institute of Integrative and Comparative Biology, University life. the Generation R study of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 5Hospital Clínic Veterinari, Universitat R. Taal, A. J. van der Heijden, A. Hofman, E. A. P. Steegers, C. M. van Duijn, V. Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain. W. V. Jaddoe; Leishmaniasis affecting humans and dogs constitute a public health Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. and veterinary problem. Leishmaniasis development upon infection It has been postulated that smaller kidneys with reduced number of from Leishmania depends partly on host genetic factors. Genetic- nephrons lead to impaired kidney function and risk for hypertension based diagnosis would be a useful tool and therefore we sought to and chronic kidney disease. These associations may be explained by predict affection status in dogs using genomic selection from genome- common genetic variants that cause lower nephron endowment and wide SNP data. smaller kidneys and subsequent increased blood pressure or impaired Affection status was defined as healthy infected (>4 years and prior kidney function. Therefore, the aim of our study was to assess the infection, n=115) or affected (diagnosed before 4 years, n=104). associations of common genetic variants which have previously shown Samples were from Boxer dogs, a breed with higher susceptibility to to be related to adult kidney function and disease (30 common variants, leishmaniasis. Samples were genotyped with the Illumina’s CanineHD P-value < 5.0*10-8), and blood pressure (23 common variants, P-value and 99,997 SNPs were left for analysis after data cleaning. A modified < 1.0*10-7), with kidney volume at the age of 6 years. This study was BayesB method was used under three different models varying on embedded in a population based prospective cohort study among whether covariates were fitted. This produced estimates of markers 1233 children aged 6 years. Genotyping was done using the Illumina and covariates effects which were used to calculate predictions for the Human 610 Quad Arrays. If needed, imputation was performed using affection status. MACH. First, the correlation (r) between predictions and actual phenotypes was Two of the common variants (in/near STC1, C18orf1) reached the used as measure of predictive power. It was higher in the unpermuted Complex traits and polygenic disorders 300 dataset than in any of 10 permuted sets regardless of the model. When transcriptomics, and lipidomics. predictions from five cross-validation sets were combined, the highest We have performed GWAS on 450 Finnish individuals with low or r was obtained for Model-3 and it was greater than for Models 1-2. high HDL-C (10th and 90th population percentiles). Out of subset of Second, the area under the ROC curve (AUC) was used to compare these individuals (n=54), we obtained subcutaneous fat biopsies for sensitivity and specificity, with Model-3 performing better than Models genome-wide expression analysis, and isolated plasma HDL particles 1-2. Finally, a threshold of 1.5 would produce the highest fraction of for lipidomics analysis with MS technology. correctly diagnosed patients. We first performed gene network analysis for genetic loci associated with low HDL-C observing that SNPs within four inflammatory model-1 model-2 model-3 pathways (e.g. antigen-presentation) were enriched among the low Genetic Genetic stratification covariates - HDL-cholesterol associated genes (p=10^-5). Also, these inflammatory stratification Lifestyle pathways were over-expressed in the adipose tissue of low-HDL- Unpermuted subjects. We then calculated genetic risk scores based on low HDL- r 0.98 0.98 0.98 cholesterol associating SNPs from these pathways, observing that high CI (0.98, 0.99) (0.98, 0.99) (0.97, 0.98) risk score resulted in not only decreased HDL-cholesterol-levels but P-value 2 · 10-16 2 · 10-16 2 · 10-16 also increased expression of these inflammatory pathways. Moreover, Permuted (10 sets) individual genes of these pathways (e.g. HLA-DRB1) exhibited allele specific expression, inversely correlating with HDL-C-levels. r 0.92 0.82 0.77 avg Consistent with enrichment of inflammatory processes in association sd 0.02 0.06 0.07 and expression analyses, the inflammatory nature of the HDL particle P-value 2 · 10-16 2 · 10-16 2 · 10-16 itself was evident in the lipidomics analysis. For instance, ceramides cross-validation (5 sets) with well-established pro-inflammatory function were elevated in HDL- r 0.18 0.20 0.51 particles from subjects with low HDL-C, and anti-oxidative ether-bond CI (0.05, 0.30) (0.07, 0.32) (0.41, 0.61) containing plasmalogens down-regulated. P-value < 0.01 < 0.01 < 10-15 Our findings imply that genetic variation influences the molecular alterations associated with low HDL-cholesterol on both expression AUC 0.62 0.63 0.80 and metabolite levels, suggesting a more inflammatory and less g 0.62 0.60 0.72 1.5 vasoprotective role for HDL particles in subjects with low HDL-C. P09.138 Association of multiple variants along 6p21.3 region with P09.140 leprosy susceptibility in two unrelated population groups of LRRK2 mutations in sporadic and familial Parkinson disease india L. Fernandez-Novoa1, S. Seoane1, J. C. Carril1, J. A. Garcia-Agundez2, R. S. Ali, S. Aggrawal, R. Chopra, R. Bamezai; Cacabelos3; JAWAHARLAL NEHRU UNIVERSITY, NEW DELHI, India. 1Genomics Department, EBIOTEC, A Coruna, Spain, 2Pharmacology Leprosy is a chronic infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium Department, School of Medicine, University of Extremadura, A Coruna, Spain, leprae which affects mainly skin and nerve of the host and results in 3EuroEspes Biomedical Research Center, Institute for CNS Disorders and characteristic deformity and disability. Host genetic factors strongly Genomic Medicine, Bergondo, Coruna, Spain. determine susceptibility to leprosy and its subtypes. We studied the Parkinson disease (PD) is a chronic and progressive neurodegenerative selected chromosomal region 6p21.3, which comprises of functionally disorder characterized by 4 cardinal signs: resting tremor, bradykinesia, important genes involved in immune response against M. leprae. rigidity and postural instability. Monogenic forms of PD account for only Status of 237 SNPs (111 SNPs with MassArray, 120 SNPs with Allele- a small percentage of the affected population (<10%). The majority of specific PCR Kit and 6 with Sequencing) within HLA class I, II and PD cases are considered to be caused by the interaction of genetic and III region in 2592 individuals, representing two unrelated population environmental factors, and susceptibility variants of genes involved in groups, was assessed. The disease associated SNPs were filtered monogenic forms of PD have been identified in sporadic PD in several in multiple steps of analysis, either on the whole sample size or a populations. Recently, mutations in the LRRK2 gene have been representative sample set, sufficient for statistical and LD analysis. implicated in familial dominant and sporadic cases of PD. The G2019S Eight SNPs within BAT1 promoter (rs2523504, p=2.5E-06); exon 3 of mutation in the LRRK2 gene has been identified in approximatelly NFKBIL1 (rs2230365, p=1.9E-08); LTA 13kb upstream (rs13192469, 5-6% of familial forms of PD and about 1-2.5% of sporadic cases, and p=7.2E-07); LTA promoter (rs36221459, p=1.7E-05); TNF intron1 constitutes the most frequent genetic cause of PD known to date. In (rs1800610, p=2.8E-4); TNF-LTB downstream (rs769178, p=5.8E-05) this study, 6 mutations in the LRRK2 gene were determined in 326 and BTNL2-DRA interval (rs3135365, p=4.6E-24 and rs7773756, patients with PD and 135 control subjects. The mutations analyzed p=3.3E-18) were significantly associated even after adjustment with were G2019S, R1441C/G/H, I2020T and Y1699C. Eleven of 326 sex and the boneferroni correction for multiple testing. In addition to patients with PD carrying the G2019S mutation (3.4%). None of the find the role of previously unidentified genes, BAT1 and BTNL2, we other LRRK2 mutations were found in the remaining patients. The also established the functional status of the SNPs in in-vitro reporter phenotype of the 11 G2019S mutation carriers were similar to those of assays. Further, an assessment of an interaction of multiple genes typical PD. The age of onset was variable, ranged from 37 to 80 years. in unison within the studied region provided a graded risk to leprosy In conclusion, the G2019S mutation frequency in PD patients was depending on the combination of genotypes for the significantly similar to that reported in other European countries, and this mutation associated functional SNPs. These observations dissect the role was not identified in controls. The R1441C/G/H, I2020T and Y1699C and help in better understanding of HLA loci involved in disease mutations were not found in any of the PD patients or controls. pathogenesis. P09.141 P09.139 can mutations in LtBP2 cause Pseudoexfoliation? High-throughput omics approach provides clues for novel R. Haji-Seyed-Javadi1, S. Jelodari-Mamaghani1, N. Nilforushan2, S. Yazdani3, pathways behind low HDL-cholesterol E. Elahi1; P. P. Laurila1, S. Ripatti2, J. Naukkarinen2, A. Sarin2, S. Söderlund1, M. Oresic3, 1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, M. Jauhiainen4, M. Taskinen1, L. Peltonen5; Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Iran University of 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Finnish Institute for Molecular Medical Sciences, Hazrat Rasool Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Medicine, Helsinki, Finland, 3VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, 3Ophthalmic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University MC, Tehran, Islamic Espoo, Finland, 4National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, Republic of Iran. 5The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Pseudoexfoliation (PEX) syndrome is a common age-related elastic Low HDL-cholesterol is a major risk factor for cardiovascular microfibrillopathy, characterized by deposition of fibrillar extracellular disease. To elucidate potential novel pathways behind low HDL-C, material (PEX material) in the eye, particularly in the anterior segment. we have employed 3 different high-throughput omics: genomics, PEX is sometimes accompanied by glaucoma, and is considered Complex traits and polygenic disorders 301 the most common cause of secondary glaucoma. Pseudoexfoliation development of MDD and indicates an extension of the phenotype glaucoma (PEXG) may be caused by hindrance of drainage of aqueous associated with CNVs in 16p11.2. humor caused by PEX material. PEX deposits consist of complex cross linked fibrils including components of elastic microfibrils such P09.143 as fibrillin1 and Latent TGFβ Binding Protein 2 (LTBP2). The genetic Relationship between iKBKE gene and depression and panic basis of PEX remains largely unknown. An association between disorder PEX and a few nucleotide variations in the LOXL1 gene coding lysyl K. Koido1, T. Traks1, R. Balotsev1, T. Eller1, S. Koks1, J. Shlik2, E. Maron1, E. oxidase-like 1 have been reported in some populations. However, the Vasar1, V. Vasar1; data on LOXL1 from different populations are not all consistent and the 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. role of the gene with respect to PEX is unclear. Major depressive disorder (MDD) and panic disorder (PD) belong LTBP2 was recently identified as a primary congenital glaucoma to the most prevalent mental diseases, affecting 10% and 3% of causing gene. The protein product of the gene may have structural general population, respectively. Alterations in immune system have and non-structural functions. As glaucoma often occurs along with been implicated in the onset and development of MDD and PD. We PEX, and as LTBP2 is a component of PEX deposits, we queried studied the relationship between single-nucleotide polymorphisms the possibility that mutations in LTBP2 may cause or predispose (SNPs) of IKBKE (inhibitor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer individuals to PEX. in B-cells, kinase epsilon) gene from chromosomal region 1q32 and Exonic regions of LTBP2 were sequenced in 47 PEX affected MDD and PD. The association study design was used: 17 SNPs individuals. In addition to several previously reported sequence covering the IKBKE gene were analyzed in 581 unrelated patients variations, five novel coding variations that cause amino acid changes and in 389 healthy control subjects. All subjects were individuals of were observed in the DNA of the patients. At least one of the variations Caucasian origin living in Estonia. Patients were divided into two that affects a proline residue is quite likely to be associated with the groups according to diagnosis: comparison of allelic and haplotypic PEXG phenotype. frequencies was performed between control group and MDD patients (n=391), PD patients (n=190), and the whole patient group (n=581). P09.142 Both MDD and PD groups included ‘pure’ phenotypes as well as copy number variation in 16p11.2 is associated with major phenotypes comorbid to other mood and anxiety disorders. SNPlex depressive disorder Genotyping System was applied for genotyping, following association L. Priebe1,2,3, F. A. Degenhardt1,2,3, S. Herms1,2, T. W. Mühleisen1,2, M. and haplotype analyses with Haploview program. Association analysis Mattheisen1,2,4, S. Meier5, H. Wichmann6,7, S. Schreiber8,9, S. Moebus10, J. revealed the most prominent relationship between MDD patient group Strohmaier5, S. Lucae11, F. Holsboer11, W. Maier12, A. Meyer-Lindenberg13, H. and SNPs rs1930437 and rs2274902 (allelic p values 0.0007, 0.0013, Walter14, M. Rietschel5, M. M. Nöthen1,2, S. Cichon1,2,15; respectively). Statistically significant differences occurred in the panic 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department and whole group as well. Haplotype analysis revealed five haplotype of Genomics at the Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, blocks in all tested groups of patients compared to healthy controls. Germany, 3authors contributed equally, ., Germany, 4Institute of Medical Significant haplotypic associations confirmed allelic associations Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, in MDD group. These results suggest that IKBKE gene from 1q32 5Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental chromosomal region may possibly be related to mood and anxiety Health, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany, 6Institute disorders. of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 7Klinikum Grosshadern, Munich, Germany, P09.144 8Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Variants associated with mammographic density are also Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany, 9Department of General associated with breast cancer Internal Medicine, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Christian-Albrechts J. S. Varghese; University, Kiel, Germany, 10Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Centre for Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Epidemiology, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Essen, Germany, 11Max Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Munich, Germany, 12Department introduction: Mammographic density (MD), is one of the strongest of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 13Department of breast cancer risk-factors. However, the mechanism by which this Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, risk is mediated is unclear. Recent genome-wide association studies Mannheim, Germany, 14Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, (GWAS) have demonstrated that a variant in ZNF365 is associated Charité Campus Mitte, Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 15Institute of Neuroscience with both breast cancer risk and MD1;2. We investigated if other SNPs and Medicine, Structural and Functional Organization of the Brain, Genomic showing evidence for association with MD in the meta-GWAS were Imaging, Research Centre, Jülich, Germany. associated, in aggregate, with breast cancer risk. Major depressive disorder (MDD) ranks among the top ten causes of method: The SNPs associated with MD were identified through meta- global burden of disease. To our knowledge, only one systematic CNV analysis of 5 GWAS(n=4877). For each SNP, Z-statistic for combined screening of patients with MDD has been carried out. We performed a effect over all studies was computed and converted into per-allele genome-wide analysis of CNVs in 575 German patients with a DSM-IV effect size estimate (β ). Effect of each SNP on breast cancer risk k diagnosis of MDD and 1,618 controls. We genotyped all individuals was then assessed using data from UK2-GWAS study (3628/5190). using either Illumina’s HumanHap550, Human610 or Human660W The combined effect of multiple SNPs was evaluated by multiplying arrays. To identify potential CNVs, we analyzed each individual’s signed MD beta value(β) for each of N SNPs over given significance k SNP-chip information with QuantiSNP and PennCNV. To minimize the threshold in MD meta-GWAS by their number of effect alleles at number of false-positive CNV calls, we developed a stringent quality that SNP, G (0, 1 or 2), and summing over all N SNPs to create the ik protocol, requiring CNVs to have a minimum of 30 consecutive SNPs individual’s score(Z). i and a confidence value of at least 30. The two datasets generated N by QuantiSNP and PennCNV were analyzed separately. Only those Z= ∑ β G regions for which both programs generated nominal significant i k ik k=1 P-values were included in further analyses. We discovered a significant overrepresentation of CNVs in four different Logistic regression was then used to examine if the individual’s score chromosomal regions (7p21, 15q26, 16p11.2, 18p11) in patients was predictive of breast case-control status. compared to controls. To our knowledge, CNVs in 7p21, 15q26, and Results: The top 5% of density SNPs significantly predicted breast 18p11 have not been described in MDD or other psychiatric disorders. cancer case-control status in the UK2-GWAS(P=0.005 & P=0.009 The finding on chromosome 16p11.2 is of particular interest as CNVs genotyped & imputed SNPs respectively). This predictive effect was in this region are associated with autism and schizophrenia. In our not seen when only top 1% of density SNPs were used(P=0.3 & P=0.5 sample we observed three rare CNVs in 16p11.2 (one microdeletion, using genotyped & imputed SNPs respectively). two microduplications) in patients and none in controls (P = 0.0178). conclusions: These results suggest that many SNPs associated with Our study provides evidence for an involvement of CNVs in the MD are also associated with breast cancer.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 302 P09.145 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica (ex INN), CNR, Monserrato, Italy, Association between the sNAP25 gene and the extremes in 2Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, intellectual performance. Netherlands, 3Division of Genetics and Cell biology, San Raffaele Scientific G. Beunders1, P. Rizzu1,2, E. Sistermans1, J. W. R. Twisk3, W. van Mechelen4, Institute, Milano, Italy, 4Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, J. B. Deijen5, P. Heutink1,2, H. Meijers-Heijboer1,2, D. Posthuma1,2; University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 1VU University Medical Center, department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, 5Institute of Genetic Medicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano (EURAC), Netherlands, 2Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Department of Clinical Bolzano, Italy, 6Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King’s Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3VU University Medical Center, College London, London, United Kingdom, 7Department of Endocrinology department of epidemiology and biostatistics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4VU and Diabetes, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Nedlands, Australia, 8School University Medical Center, department of Public and Occupational Health, of Medicine and Pharmacology, University of Western Australia, Nedlands, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5VU University Medical Center, department of Clinical Australia, 9Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University Neurolpsychology, Amsterdam, Netherlands. of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 10Geriatric Introduction: Intelligence in the normal and high range is shown to Research and Education Clinical Center, Veterans Administration Medical be highly heritable. Low intelligence, mental retardation, is thought Center, Baltimore, MD, United States, 11Clinical Research Branch, National to have a heritable cause in about 50%. Association studies have Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States, 12Dept of Endocrinology en identified some loci and genomic variants associated with variation Dept of Epidemiology, Biostatistics and HTA, Radboud University Nijmegen in intelligence in the normal range. High IQ is thought to be caused Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 13Section of Molecular Epidemiology by the additive effect of the same genomic variants, but experimental Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 14Netherlands evidence for this hypothesis is lacking. For mental retardation however, Consortium for Healthy Ageing, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, known genetic causes are rare and monogenetic. Netherlands. Aim: We set out to test whether the SNAP25-gene that was previously Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) and thyroxine (T4) are key regulators linked to intelligence in the normal range, is also linked to variation in of thyroid function, growth and metabolism. Their dysregulation leads to intelligence at both the lower (mental retardation) and the upper range common endocrine disorders. Despite being relatively highly heritable (high IQ). (65% and 40% respectively), genetic loci so far identified only account Methods: We genotyped two SNP’s in SNAP 25 (rs363039 and for a small proportion of the estimated genetic variation. To identify rs363050), previously linked to variation in normal intelligence (Gosso, additional associated regions, we carried out a meta-analysis of up to et.al. 2006), in a cohort of 644 children with mental retardation and a 12 GWAS using ~2.5 million directly genotyped or imputed autosomal cohort of 360 participants of the Amsterdam growth and health study, SNPs, corresponding to 18,538 and 13,590 euthyroid subjects of which all were following the highest level of education at the time of European ancestry for TSH and FT4, respectively. Standard quality recruitment. filters were applied to each study, and single marker association Results: We found a significant (p>0.05) lower allele frequency of estimates were combined using inverse-variance weights. For TSH, the allele associated with an higher IQ (gosso et. al. ) for both SNP’s we confirmed association at PDE8B (rs1382879 p=1.28x10-32) and (rs363039 and rs363050) in SNAP25 in the MR cohort compared to CAPZB (rs10799824, p=1.0x10-16), and observed 7 novel loci at the high IQ cohort. The minor alleles of both SNP’s are associated with chr6q27, chr2q35, chr4q31.23, chr9q34.2, chr16q23.2, chr6p21.1 mental retardation. and chr15q26.1 (p<5x10-8). For FT4 we confirmed association at Conclusion: Our results suggest that, at least for SNAP-25, the same DIO1, for which there was suggestive evidence from candidate gene genomic variants affect both variation in normal or high intelligence studies, and observed 2 additional signals at 9q34.3 and 4q33. At 6 and mental retardation. genes, including PDE8B, evidence for heterogeneity (p<0.05) was observed, and at 4 of which could be explained by different effects P09.146 between males and females (p<10-4). We also carried out gender- cOL1A1 association and otosclerosis: a meta-analysis specific association analyses, but no additional genes were identified. I. Schrauwen1, A. Khalfallah2, M. Ealy3, E. Fransen1, C. Claes1, A. Huber4, L. Preliminary analyses on individuals with extreme phenotypic values Rodriguez Murillo5, S. Masmoudi2, R. J. H. Smith3, G. Van Camp1; suggested that TSH associated variants may contribute to thyroid 1Department of Medical Genetics, wilrijk, Belgium, 2Centre de Biotechnologie pathologies. Overall, 10 and 3 independent SNPs for TSH and FT4 de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, respectively, explain 3.9% and 1.3% of the heritability, suggesting that University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 4Department of several additional loci, remain to be discovered. Otorhinolaryngology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York, USA, New York, P09.148 NY, United States. Genome-wide screen for metabolic syndrome loci Otosclerosis is a disease of abnormal bone remodeling in the K. Kristiansson1,2, M. Perola1,2,3, E. Tikkanen1,2, J. Kettunen1,2, I. Surakka1,2, human otic capsule that can lead to progressive hearing loss. Little A. S. Havulinna4, E. Widen2, E. Kajantie5,6, J. Eriksson5,7,8, J. Viikari9, M. of the underlying disease etiology has been elucidated thus far, Kähönen10, T. Lehtimäki11, O. T. Raitakari12, M. Järvelin13,14,15, A. Ruokonen16, although several studies have suggested that COL1A1 may play a A. Pouta15, A. Jula17, A. J. Kangas18, P. Soininen18,19, M. Ala-Korpela18,19,20, role based on its importance in bone metabolism and other diseases S. Männistö4, P. Jousilahti4,21, J. Kuusisto22, M. Laakso22, A. Palotie23, L. like osteoporosis and osteogenesis imperfecta. Genetic association Peltonen1,2,23, S. Ripatti1,2, V. Salomaa4; studies between COL1A1 and otosclerosis, however, have been 1Public Health Genomics Unit, Dept. of Chronic Disease Prevention, the contradictory. To resolve this issue, we studied a large Belgian-Dutch National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 2Institute for and a Swiss population for a genetic association between COL1A1 Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, and otosclerosis and additionally performed a meta-analysis to 3The Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Chronic investigate the overall genetic effect of COL1A1 on all otosclerosis Disease Epidemiology and Prevention Unit, Dept. of Chronic Disease populations studied to date. We found a significant association both in Prevention, the National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, the Belgian-Dutch population and in the meta-analysis. In aggregate, 5Diabetes Prevention Unit, Dept. of Chronic Disease Prevention, National our analysis supports evidence for an association between COL1A1 Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 6Hospital for Children and and otosclerosis, although effect sizes of the variants reported in the Adolescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital and University of Helsinki, initial studies are likely to be an overestimate of true effect sizes. Helsinki, Finland, 7Unit of General Practice, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 8Folkhalsan Research Centre, Helsinki, Finland, P09.147 9Department of Medicine, University of Turku and Turku University Hospital, A meta-analysis of thyroid-related traits reveals novel loci in Turku, Finland, 10Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Tampere the regulation of circulating thyroid stimulating hormone and and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 11Department of Clinical thyroxine circulating levels Chemistry, University of Tampere and Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, E. Porcu1, M. Medici2, G. Pistis3, A. Cappola4, C. Volpato5, S. J. Brown6,7, Finland, 12Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, M. Gögele5, S. Wilson6,8, J. O’Connell9,10, T. Tanaka11, M. den Heijer12, J. University of Turku and the Department of Clinical Physiology, Turku University Deelen13,14, D. Toniolo3, R. Peeters2, S. Sanna1, S. Naitza1; Hospital, Turku, Finland, 13Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Complex traits and polygenic disorders 303 School of Public Health, Imperial College, Faculty of Medicine, London, United appeared to have protective effect. Conclusion. It is evident from the Kingdom, 14Institute of Health Sciences, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, study that the normal triglyceride levels are protective against MS and 15Department of Children, Young People and Families, National Institute CVD in males. And the 19W-allele APOA5 that was previously shown for Health and Welfare, Oulu, Finland, 16Department of Clinical Chemistry, to associate with elevated triglyceride levels is the MS risk factor. University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 17Population Studies Unit, Dept. of Chronic Disease Prevention, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Turku, Finland, P09.150 18Computational Medicine Research Group, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Genetic variations in tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin 10 University of Oulu and Biocenter Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 19NMR Metabonomics genes and migraine susceptibility Laboratory, Laboratory of Chemistry, Department of Biosciences, University O. Ates1, J. Altınısık2, S. Kurt3, H. Karaer3, S. Sezer1; of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, 20Department of Internal Medicine and 1Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Biocenter Oulu, Clinical Research Center, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, Tokat, Turkey, 2Balıkesir University Medical Faculty, Department of Medical 21International Affairs Unit, the National Institute for Health and Welfare, Biology, Balikesir, Turkey, 3Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Helsinki, Finland, 22Department of Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, Department of Neurology, Tokat, Turkey. University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland, Migraine is a very common headache disorder and pathogenesis of 23The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. the disease is still unknown. Cytokine genes have been implicated Dyslipidemia, hypertension, insulin resistance, and measurements of in migraine susceptibility. The present study was designed to find obesity are key components in definition of the metabolic syndrome out whether polymorphisms in the tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), (MetS). Genome-wide association studies (GWASs) have identified interleukin-10 (IL-10) gene and interleukin-10 haplotypes are several susceptibility loci for these MetS component traits, but there associated with the risk of migraine. is little evidence for genes contributing to the syndrome as an entity We analyzed TNF-α -308G/A, IL10 -1082G/A, -819C/T, and -592C/A rather than to individual component traits. polymorphisms in 203 migraine patients and 202 healthy subjects We conducted a GWAS on MetS and its component traits in four by using amplification refractory mutation system-polymerase chain Finnish cohorts (2,637 MetS cases and 7,927controls), and followed reaction. the top loci in an independent sample with transcriptome and NMR- The -308G/A genotypic and -308A allelic frequency of TNF-α based metabolome data. Furthermore, we tested for loci associated polymorphism was higher in migraine patients than healthy controls with multiple MetS component traits using factor analysis and built a and significant association was found between migraine and TNF-α genetic risk score for MetS risk. -308G/A polymorphism (Pc: <0.000, OR: 2.16, 95% CI: 1.44-3.28). No A previously known lipid locus, APOA1/C3/A4/A5 gene cluster region, statistically significant association was found between IL10 -1082G/ was associated with MetS in all four study samples (meta-analysis A, -819C/T, and -592C/A polymorphisms and haplotypes containing P=7.23x10-9). Primary source of the association was the SNPs effect these alleles and migraine. on triglyceride (TG) (P=2.59x10-31) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL) Our results reflect that TNF-α -308G/A polymorphism may be one of the levels (P=5.83x10-8), which was further supported by serum metabolite many genetic factors for migraine susceptibility in Turkish population. analysis, where rs964184 associated with various VLDL, TG, and HDL metabolites (P=0.024-1.88x10-5). 22 previously identified loci P09.151 for individual MetS component traits were replicated in our GWAS mitochondrial DNA variants (7086 c/haplogroup H/D310 >7c) but none of these loci significantly associated with two or more increased the risk for new-onset diabetes after transplantation uncorrelated traits. A genetic risk score (GRS), calculating the number E. Coto1,2, B. Tavira3, B. Alonso3, C. Diaz-Corte3, B. Diaz-Molina3, J. L. of alleles in loci associated with individual MetS traits, was strongly Rodriguez-Lambert3, E. Suarez3, M. J. Bernardo3, M. Martin3, C. Moris3, F. associated with MetS status. Ortega3, V. Alvarez3; Our findings suggest that MetS does not have a common genetic 1Huca (Hospital Univ. Central Asturias), OVIEDO, Spain, 2REDINREN, SPAIN, background but is likely to result from complex interactions between Oviedo, Spain, 3HUCA, Oviedo, Spain. lifestyle and multiple genetic variants which in combination may Background: New-onset type 2 diabetes (DM2) is a frequent predispose to MetS. complitation among transplanted patients treated with the immunosuppressor tacrolimus (Tac). Several gene variants associated P09.149 with the risk DM2 in the general population would also increase the risk metabolic and genetic cardiovascular risk factors in of posttransplant DM2 (NODAT). Common mitochondrial DNA variants manifestation of metabolic syndrome in males. (haplogroups) were also associated with DM2. We investigated the A. N. Voitovich1, O. S. Romashkina1, M. A. Bogdanova1, B. I. Smirnov2, A. A. effect of nine mtDNA polymorphisms on NODAT among heart or Bystrova3, T. D. Glebovskaja4, E. I. Krasilnikova3, V. I. Larionova1; kidney transplanted patients treated with Tac. 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian methods: The nine mtDNA SNPs that define the common European Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Electrotechnical University, Saint-Petersburg, haplogroups, and the 310 polyC and T16189C SNPs were determined Russian Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint- in 120 NODAT and 200 patients who remained non diabetics (no- Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Federal heart, blood end endocrinology NODAT) from the same region (Asturias, Northern Spain). center n.a. V.A. Almazov, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Results: Mitochondrial haplogroup H (7028C) was significantly more Metabolic syndrome (MS) is a cluster of metabolic and genetic frequent in the NODAT group (56% vs. 35%; p=0.001; OR=2.38, entities closely associated with the development of cardiovascular 95%CI=1.48-3.72). The mtDNA 16189 SNP was not associated with disease (CVD) and diabetes mellitus type II (DM2). Male sex is an NODAT-risk. The NODAT group had a higher frequency of D310 >7 important factor in the pathogenesis, risk, and prognosis of many C repeats (70% vs. 60%; p=0.012). Haplotype 7028-C/D310- 7C known diseases. Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate would have a protective effect against the development of NODAT. the most significant cluster of cardiovascular risk factors specific to Sequencing of the mt HVI region from blood leukocytes showed males. Patients and methods. The MS patient group consisted of that this haplotype was linked to a lower D310 polyC heteroplasmy 176 males with abdominal obesity, having at least two of the CVD compared to the other haplotypes. risk factors (average age 61.7Â±1.0). Among them, 89 patients had conclusion: Common mtDNA variants were associated with the risk DM2, 20 patients had DM2 and survived after myocardial infarction, of NODAT. This effect could be due to the higher instability of mtDNA and 67 patients survived after myocardial infarction but did not have replication among individuals with at risk haplotypes, and this could DM2. The control group consisted of 115 males without CVD and DM2 affect mitochondrial function in beta-pancreatic cells in response to Tac (average age 40.0Â±0.5). Polymorphisms of genes APOA1 G-75A increasing the risk for DM2. and C+83T, APOC3 Sst1, APOE, APOA5 T-1131C and S19W, ADRB3 W64R, and ACE I/D were studied. Statistical analysis included logistic regression method. Results. We have found cardiovascular risk factors associated with manifestation of MS in males. Factors that increased the probability of MS in males were moderate and severe obesity, and the 19W-allele of the gene APOA5. The normal level of triglycerides Complex traits and polygenic disorders 304 P09.152 P09.154 A novel m.3395A > G missense mutation in the mitochondrial somatic copy Number detection in mZ twins discordant for ND1 gene associated with the new tRNAile m.4316A > G congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (cDH) or Esophageal Atresia mutation in a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and (EA) and in affected diaphragm or proximal pouch tissue profound hearing loss D. Veenma, E. Brosens, L. de Jong, C. van de Ven, C. Meeuwissen, T. Cohen- I. Chamkha1, E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, H. Aloulou2, C. Kifagi3, M. Hachicha2, F. Overbeek, M. Boter, B. Eussen, H. Douben, D. Tibboel, A. de Klein; Fakhfakh1; Erasmus-MC Sophia, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 1Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire Humaine. Faculté de Mèdecine de The occurrence of phenotypic differences between monozygotic (MZ) Sfax. Tunisie, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Service de Pédiatrie, C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba, twins is commonly attributed to environmental factors, assuming that Sfax, Tunisia, 3Unité Cible pour le Diagnostic et la Thérapie, Centre de MZ-twins have a 100% identical genetic make-up. Yet, recently several Biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia. lines of evidence showed that both genetic and epigenetic factors could Mitochondrial diseases are a clinically heterogeneous group of play a role in phenotypic discordance after all. One report suggested a disorders that arise in young and adult patients at any age, as a result high occurrence of low-mosaic CNVs within MZ-twin pairs discordant of dysfunction of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Mitochondrial for Parkinson disease, thereby stressing on the importance of post- dysfunction frequently affects the heart and may cause both zygotic mutations as disease-predisposing events. hypertrophic and dilated cardiomyopathy. The cardiomyopathy is In this study, we analyzed the prevalence of discrepant somatic CNVs usually a part of a multisystem involvement and may rarely be isolated. in discordant MZ-twins of the Esophageal Atresia and Congenital In fact, it can be associated with others disorders, such as hearing Diaphragmatic Hernia cohort in Rotterdam. We used high-resolution loss. The state may be stable for many years, but rapid deterioration SNP-arrays on blood- derived DNA from 11 (4 CDH and 7 EA) pairs may occur and often lead to congestive heart failure. of MZ-twins. Paired analysis was executed with specific attention to We described a newborn girl with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and isolated allelic imbalances as a marker for low-mosaic CNVs. In this profound hearing loss. The mtDNA mutational analysis revealed the way, we showed that somatic CNVs are not the cause of phenotypic presence of known polymorphisms associated to cardiomyopathy discordance in this cohort of MZ-twins. In addition, bead chip and/or hearing loss, and 2 novel heteroplasmic mutations: m.3395A genotyping showed no evidence for pathologic SNP differences within > G (Y30C) occurring in a highly conserved aminoacid of the ND1 each MZ-pair either. To exclude the possibility of somatic mutations gene and the m.4316A > G located in the residue A54 of the tRNAIle restricted to the affected tissues, we screened for CNVs in proximal gene. These 2 novel variations were absent in 150 controls. All these pouch- and diaphragm tissue of a separate group of patients as well. In variants may act synergistically and exert a cumulative negative effect line with the twin data, no target-tissue specific CNVs were revealed in on heart function to generate the cardiomyopathy. DNA from 12 pouch- and 13 diaphragm biopsies. Yet, recurrent, germ- line chromosome 22q11-13 were discovered. In conclusion, post- P09.153 zygotic structural mutations are not a common cause of OA and CDH. Genome-wide association study of myxomatous mitral valve disease in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels identifies two P09.155 candidate loci the investigation of tNF alpha 308G/A polymorphism in mood M. B. Madsen1, L. H. Olsen1, J. Häggström2, K. Höglund2, I. Ljungvall2, G. diseases Wess3, H. Copeland4, V. Chetboul5, H. F. Proschowsky1, S. Cirera1, P. Karlskov- O. Ates1, J. Altinisik2, B. Elbozan Cumurcu3, A. Rustemoglu1, R. Karlidag3, I. Mortensen1, M. Fredholm1; Gogcegoz Gul3, S. Unal3; 1Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg, Denmark, 1Gaziosmanpasa University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology, 2Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, The Swedish University of Agricultural Tokat, Turkey, 2Balıkesir University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Clinic of Animal Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians- Biology, Balıkesir, Turkey, 3Inonu University Medical Faculty Department of Universität, Munich, Germany, 4Small Animal Teaching Hospital, University of Psychiatry, Malatya, Turkey. Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 5Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d’Alfort, The pathogenesis of mood diseases is still unclear; However an Paris, France. increasing amount of evidence suggests that an imbalance of Myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD) is a degenerative heart inflammatory cytokine activity may be a contributing factor in etiology disease with a reported incidence in humans of 1-5%. The disease and pathophysiology of mood disorders. Tumor necrosis factor-alpha also has a high prevalence in dogs, especially in Cavalier King Charles (TNF-α) is a proinflammatory cytokine with functions in nerve cell growth, Spaniels (CKCS), of which, nearly all are affected at the age of 10 differentiation, synaptic scaling, and apoptosis in the central nervous years. In affected individuals the mitral valves become enlarged, lose system. Thus TNF-α is considered a plausible candidate gene for flexibility and eventually protrude into the left atrium, resulting in mitral mood diseases. The level of TNF-α production in under genetic control regurgitation (MR). Since dog breeds are much more homogeneous and is thought to be influenced by a -308G/A promoter polymorphism. than the human population it is more feasible to indentify genetic In this study we aimed to investigate the plausible association between components underlying complex diseases in dogs. Thus, dogs provide TNF-308G/A polymorphism and major depression (MD) and bipolar good models for human diseases. We performed a genome-wide disorder (BD). We analyzed TNF-308G/A polymorphism in 72 MD, 76 association study (GWAS) in CKCS to identify the genes underlying BD patients and 299 healthy subjects by using amplification refractory MMVD. Cases and controls were selected using stringent criteria: mutation system-polymerase chain reaction (ARMS-PCR). A significant cases were dogs with early onset of MMVD i.e. murmur ≥1 and MR association was found between TNF-308G/A polymorphism and BD jet >20% at <4.5 years, or with clinical signs of heart failure; controls but there are no correlation between MD and this polymorphism (Table were dogs with late onset i.e. murmur ≤2 and MR jet <50% at >8 years. 1). Our findings suggest that TNF-308G/A polymorphism may play an A total of 139 cases and 102 controls were genotyped with the 170k important role in susceptibility to BD in Turkish patients. CanineHD BeadChip (Illumina). Genome-wide association analysis table 1. Distribution of tNF-308G/A polymorphism in mood using PLINK was performed, and the resulting p-values were adjusted diseases and control for multiple testing. The GWAS revealed two statistically significant tNF locus BD mD control P OR: (95%CI) regions on canine chromosomes 13 and 14 (p-values: 4.0∙10-5 - 4.7∙10- n= (%) 76 72 299 2 and 7.9∙10-4 - 1.7∙10-2, respectively). Thus, we have identified two a 0.000 3.65 (2.15- 308G/A novel candidate regions, in which genetic components of importance 0 6.18) A/A 0 0 for MMVD are located. Studies are currently underway to identify the 67 (22%) b 0.117 G/A 39 (51%) 21 (29%) causative mutations within the two regions. 232 G/G 37 (49%) 51 (71%) (88%) Allelic 39 (26%) 21 (15%) 67 (11%) frequency 113 123 531 a 0.000 2.74 (1.70- A (74%) (85%) (89%) 4.35) G b 0.133 a : p value (BD vs controls), b: p value (mD vs controls) Complex traits and polygenic disorders 305 P09.156 determine the roles of related genes in Turkish population. somatic mosaicism for Fii G20210A and novel Fii t20061c polymorphisms in patient with reccurent pulmonary P09.158 thromboembolism Study of association of common haplogroup-defining mtDNA V. Djordjevic1, I. B. Pruner1, G. Mitic2, M. Kovac3, D. Radojkovic1; polymorphisms with different multifactorial diseases in Russian 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, population 2Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center of Vojvodina, Novi Sad, M. V. Golubenko1,2, T. V. Zheykova1, A. A. Cherednichenko1,3, O. A. Makeeva1,2, Serbia, 3Blood Transfusion Institute of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. I. V. Tsimbaliuk4, I. V. Saltykova4, E. Y. Bragina1, N. P. Babushkina1, A. A. Mosaicism implies the presence of more than one genetically distinct Rudko1, I. A. Goncharova1,2, E. V. Beloborodova4, V. P. Puzyrev1,4; cell line in a single organism. Although it is frequently masked, 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of somatic mosaicism has been implicated in more than 30 monogenetic Complex Problems of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian disorders. Possible role of mosacism in multifactorial diseases is still Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 4Siberian unknown. Thrombophilia is a multifactorial disorder, involving both State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. genetic and acquired risk factors that lead to increased tendency to Mitochondrial genes encode subunits of respiratory chain complexes thrombosis. The most frequent thrombophilic genetic risk factors are which are involved in fundamental cell function. Thus, mtDNA FV Leiden and FII G20201A gene variants. polymorphisms may contribute to susceptibility to common diseases, Here we describe a female patient (48 years) presented with recurrent and there is some evidence for this, mostly for neurodegenerative pulmonary thromboembolism and pulmonary artery hypertension. conditions. It should be noted that genome-wide association studies Routine thrombophilia screening was performed six months after omit mtDNA because of non-Mendelian inheritance. We have thromboembolic episode. Obtained results were within normal range studied patients with multifactorial diseases of different etiology: with exception of conflict results for FII G20210A gene variant. In order cardiovascular (coronary heart disease, N=175), allergic (asthma, to elucidate these results we performed sequencing of 715bp segment N=150), and infectious (hepatitis C, N=182; tuberculosis, N=214). of 3`end of prothrombin gene using Applied Biosystems 3130xL Population sample (N=424) has been studied for comparison. All Genetic Analyzer. Sequence analysis of DNA from buccal swab cells samples were collected in Tomsk (West Siberia) from individuals of confirmed presence of heterozygous G20210A gene variant, as well as Russian origin. Common haplogroup-defining SNPs in mtDNA were new C to T transition on 20061 nucleotide. No sequence abnormalities genotyped (C7028T for haplogroup H, A12308G for U, A15607G in this region of prothrombin gene were detected in blood and hair bulb for T, and G13708A for J). In the population, the SNPs frequencies cells DNA. corresponded to those known for most European populations, i.e. In conclusion, this is the first report of mosaicism for FII G20210A H: 38.68%, U: 24.76%, T: 9.91%, J: 7.31% . We have found higher polymorphism and its’ possible association with thrombophilia. frequency of haplogroup J in asthma (15.33% in the patients; χ2=7.45; Current knowledge of potential role of mosaicism in pathogenesis of P=0.0063; OR=2.3 with CI 1.24-4.23). The JT cluster also has shown multifactorial diseases other than cancer is very limited and this area association with asthma (26.67% vs 17.22% in the population; χ2=5.8; requires further studies. P=0.0160; OR=1.75 with CI 1.1-2.78). In addition, haplogroup T frequency was significantly lower in the hepatitis C group (3.43%; P09.157 χ2=6.2; P=0.0128; OR=0.35 with CI 0.15-080). In the samples with msX1 gene, as a candidate gene, is not a rik factor for non- coronary heart disease and tuberculosis, no associations have been syndromic cleft lip and palate formation in turkish population revealed. Our results suggest that mtDNA polymorphisms may play A. I. Guney1, T. Akcay2, D. Kırac3, D. Ergec4, B. Ersoy5, O. Celebiler5, G. Koc6, some role in susceptibility to allergic and infectious diseases, while K. Ulucan7; connections between their pathogenesis and mitochondrial functions 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, are not obvious. Istanbul, Turkey, 2Sisli Etfal, Education and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical P09.159 Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Yeni Yüzyıl University, Faculty of Arts and Science, c677t polymorphism of the methylenetetrahydrofolate Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Marmara reductase (mtHFR) gene, systolic blood pressure and University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and echocardiographic left ventricular parameters in children with Aesthetic Surgery, Istanbul, Turkey, 66Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, systolic arterial hypertension (AH) Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Marmara University, Faculty S. V. Kuzmina1, M. A. Bogdanova2, O. S. Romashkina2, A. N. Voitovich2, O. A. of Dentistry, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. Mutafyan1, V. I. Larionova2; Introduction: Nonsyndromic cleft lip with/without palate (NS-CL/P) 1St.Petersburg State Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint- affects about 1/1000 livebirths with wide variability concerning Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pediatric Medical geographic distribution, ethnic background and socioeconomic status. Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Gene-gene and gene-environmental interactions have been implicated Background. Hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for cardiovascular in NS-CL/P. Studies in mice and humans supported the MSX1 as a disease. C677T polymorphism of the MTHFR gene may account for strong candidate gene in recent years. But most of the results are increased plasma levels of homocysteine. contradictory including both case- control and parametric linkage Objectives: To investigate distribution of MTHFR genotypes frequency studies. In this study, we aimed to analyze the sequence variations of C677T polymorphism in children with systolic AH. To compare of MSX1 to determine MSX1 mutations that might be etiological to clinical systolic BP levels and values of left ventricular parameters patients with NSCL/P in Turkish population. between carriers of various genotypes. Patients: 85 children aged Material and Methods: 100 controls and 100 patients without any family 5-17 with systolic AH were studied. history of NS-CL/P were recruited to the study. Mutation analyses methods. C677T polymorphism of MTHFR gene was detected with of the MSX1 gene was carried out by PCR- SSCP- Sequencing PCR-RFLP. LV mass (LVM), LV mass index (LVMI), interventricular methodology. septum thickness in diastole (IVSd), LV posterior wall in diastole Results: According to the SSCP and sequencing analyses, we couldn’t (LVPWd), LV end diastolic diameter (LVEDD), and relative wall detect any sequence variations in patients and control groups. thickness (RWT) were assessed by echocardiography. Conclusion: Our study was based on population- based and case- Results. There were identified 21(25%) C/C homozygotes, 55(66%) control design, not case- parent design because of having no information C/T heterozygotes and 7(8%) TT homozygotes. We have found a about MSX1 gene alterations in Turkish population. MSX1 gene significant differences in systolic BP levels and RWT values between variants were linked to the NS-CL/P formation in some populations but carriers of different genotypes. Clinical systolic BP in patients with the same results couldn’t be obtained for other populations. In order to CC genotype was 135,24±8,7 mm Hg, CT genotype was 131,95 clarify the role of MSX1 gene, different population- based studies are ±10,4 mm Hg, and TT genotype was 131,85±3,3 mm Hg (p<0,05). needed. Due to our results, MSX1 gene seems not to have target role RWT in patients with CC genotype was 0,36±0,06, CT genotype was in NS-CL/P formation, at least alone. More studies including the same 0,34±0,05, and TT genotype was 0,32±0,04 (p<0,05). No significant and the other gene variation analyses should be carried out inorder to difference was observed in other echocardiographic LV parameters Complex traits and polygenic disorders 306 among subjects carrying the C/C, C/T, T/T genotypes. P09.162** conclusion. We suggested that the C677T polymorphism of MTHFR Do st-segment elevation and non-st-segment elevation gene may be involved in AH and the LV remodeling process. myocardial infarction have different genetic backgrounds? P. Salo1, J. Sinisalo2, T. Hiekkalinna1,3, J. Kettunen3, M. Lokki4, A. Havulinna1, S. P09.160 Ripatti1,3, V. Salomaa1, M. Nieminen2, M. Perola1,3; mtHFR c677t and A1298c polymorphism in iranian patients 1National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 2Division of with migraine Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, M. Ansari1, A. Owji2, M. S. Fallah3, S. Saeidi2, M. Moghadasi4, A. Ebrahimi3; Helsinki, Finland, 3Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 4Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biochemistry, Shiraz University Finland. of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, The most robustly replicated common risk allele for myocardial 3Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), Tehran, Islamic Republic infarction (MI) at 9p21.3 affects gene expression rather than the of Iran, 4Department of Neurology, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, structure of a protein. This is consistent with the idea that differences Islamic Republic of Iran. in gene expression might explain a significant part of the genetic risk Introduction: Migraine is a common neurologic disorder and familial for common diseases. It is also believed that the genetic background clustering raises the probability that genetic factor might play a role in differs for different subcategories of complex phenotypes. Taken migraine susceptibility. Methylene tetra hydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) together, this led us to test two hypotheses: First, many common is a key enzyme in folate metabolic pathway and is suggested to be expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) are collectively associated with related to migraine susceptibility. However there are conflicting data MI. Second, the effects of these loci are not equal for two subtypes of on the association between the MTHFR polymorphisms and disease. MI, namely ST-segment elevation MI (STEMI) and non-ST-segment This study performed to find the association between the MTHFR elevation MI (NSTEMI). 677C>T and A1298C polymorphism and migraine. We performed a GWAS in a sample consisting of acute coronary Material and Methods: Migrainous patient according to the international syndrome patients and healthy controls (n=3373). We selected 20,092 headache society criteria included in the study. Healthy people without SNP’s annotated as eQTL’s in a public database and compared them any positive history of periodic headache and no family history of with SNP’s randomly selected from the dataset by permutation. migrainous headache in the family recruited as control group. MTHFR The set of eQTL SNP’s is associated with MI (p<0.001). This effect is C677T and A1298C polymorphisms were investigated in cases and significantly stronger for NSTEMI (p<0.001) as it is not seen in STEMI controls using PCR-RFLP method. (p=0.616). The difference is driven by eQTL SNP’s at the HLA locus Results: Seventy-five migrainous patient (18 males and 57 females) on 6p21.3. Exclusion of this locus abolishes the difference between and 128 healthy controls (43 males and 85 females) were recruited in NSTEMI and STEMI but not the association of the remaining SNP’s the study. MTHFR 677TT was more frequent in migrainous patients with MI. (17.1% vs, 3.1%, P<0.05) and were associated with higher risk of Our results add to the notion that common differences in gene migraine (OR= 6.5, CI 95%; 2.03-20.76). expression influence the risk for developing MI. We show that the risk Conclusion: It seems MTHFR polymorphism may predict the conferred by eQTL’s is conditional on a clinically relevant classification susceptibility to migraine attach. More studies with more sample is of MI and identify a locus contributing to this difference. needed in Iranian population. P09.163 P09.161 Identification of two SNPs located upstream and intron of cytokine genes polymorphism and susceptibility to multiple cPt1B gene and HLA DQB1*0602 allele in turkish patients of sclerosis in the republic of Bashkortostan narcolepsy with and without cataplexy A. N. Khusainova1, T. R. Nasibullin1, I. A. Tuktarova1, A. M. Mikhailova1, O. V. S. Betinoglu1, B. Baklan2, I. Oztura2, D. Karadeniz3, H. Yılmaz4, A. Evlice2, S. Zaplakhova1, K. Z. Bakhtijarova2, R. V. Magzhanov2, O. E. Mustafina1; Cingoz1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Russian 1Dokuz Eylul University, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Izmir, Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkirian State Medical Turkey, 2Dokuz Eylül University, Department of Neurology, Sleep Disorders University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3University of Istanbul, Cerrahpasa Multiple sclerosis (MS; MIM 126200) is a demyelinating autoimmune Medical School, Sleep Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Istanbul, disease of the central nervous system caused by interplay of Turkey, 4Celal Bayar University School of Medicine, Department of Neurology, environmental and genetic factors. Cytokines play an important role in Manisa, Turkey. MS pathophysiology, and genes encoding various cytokines are logical Narcolepsy is a chronic neurologic disorder characterized by excessive candidates to assess possible associations with MS susceptibility and daytime sleepiness, cataplexy and clinical manifestations of abnormal disease course. The study was aimed to evaluate the associations of REM sleep. Narcoleptic pathogenesis is triggered by genetic and MS with polymorphisms of tumor necrosis factor alpha gene (TNFA, environmental factors and strongly associated with HLA-DQB1*0602. -308 G>A), lymphotoxin alpha gene (LTA, 252A>G), interleukin 6 gene In recent reports it was established that SNP rs5770917 is associated (IL6, -572G>C), interleukin 10 gene (IL10, -627C>A, interleukin 12 with susceptibility to narcolepsy and also in strong LD with rs5770911. gene (IL12B, -1159A>C) in Russians and Tatars by ethnic origin living This study aimed to investigate positivity of HLA-DQB1*0602 allele in Ufa of the Republic of Bashkortostan, Russia. and detect the differences in allele frequencies of two SNPs among DNA was amplified in polymerase chain reaction in 265 patients case-control groups. with MS and 633 controls. It has been revealed that genotype This study includes 31 narcolepsy with cataplexy (n=19) and without TNFA(-308)*G/*G (P=0.045, OR=0.047, CI 0.23-0.97), genotype cataplexy (n=12) patients of Neurology Departments in Turkey and 55 LTA(252)*A/*A (P<0.001, OR=0.31, CI 0.16-0.59) are associated with healty individuals as a control. Patients and controls were explored for a decreased risk of the disease development in female from ethnic presence of HLA-DQB1*0602 by PCR and screened by sequencing Tatar, but genotype LTA(252)*A/*G is associated with an increased risk whether the SNP rs5770917 and rs5770911 are associated with of MS (P=0.006, OR=2.62, CI 1.35-5.08). For Russian male genotype narcolepsy. Significance was assessed by chi-square and Fisher’s IL6(-572)*G/*G (P=0.001, OR=12.55, CI 1.68-93.7) is associated exact test. with an increased risk of MS, but genotype IL6(-572)*G/*C (P=0.003, The HLA-DQB1*0602 allele was identified in 13 (68.4%) of patients OR=0.09, CI 0.01-0.67), genotype IL12B(-1159)*C/*C (P=0.048, with cataplexy, in 3 (25%) of patients without cataplexy and in 7 OR=0.12, CI 0.02-0.89) can be considered as a marker of decreased (12,7%) of controls. It was significantly more frequent in narcolepsy risk for MS. The association of -627C/A polymorphism of IL10 gene patients than in controls (p<0.001) and narcolepsy with cataplexy with MS has not been detected in both ethnic groups. patients than in narcolepsy without cataplexy patients (p<0.05). The Our results suggest contribution of investigated cytokine genes comparison of allele frequencies of two SNPs between patient and polymorphism in susceptibility to MS in Russians and Tatars. control groups yielded any significant results. Recently, HLA-DQB1*0602 allele positivity was significantly high although the rates of the allele was lower in our narcolepsy with/out Complex traits and polygenic disorders 307 cataplexy patients than the results observed in different populations. role of PCP signaling in these malformations. For further studies, the interaction between SNPs and HLA-DQB1*0602 should be analyzed in a large Turkish patient group. P09.166 sex modulates the effect of DRD2/ANKK1 polymorphisms in P09.164 smoking study of the natriuretic peptide precursor gene (tttc) N. R. Mota, V. Contini, E. R. Polina, E. S. Vitola, F. A. Picon, E. H. Grevet, P. n microsatellite polymorphism and plasma BNP levels in pre- Belmonte-de-Abreu, C. H. D. Bau; eclampsia Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. G. Szabo, A. Molvarec, B. Stenczer, J. Rigo Jr., B. Nagy; Several publications, have addressed the relationship between Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. smoking behavior and the DRD2 gene, especially focusing on the Backgound: There is a variable tandem repeat (TTTC) polymorphism Taq1A polymorphism (which in fact, belongs to a DRD2 neighbor gene, of the natriuretic peptide precursor B gene (NPPB), which shows named ANKK1). However, strong heterogeneity among studies has association with essential hypertension. Our aim was to identify been reported by meta-analysis. Here we analyze the potential role of this polymorphism in samples of pre-eclamptic patients and Taq1A and other three neighbor polymorphisms (rs6277, rs2283265 healthy controls. We also compared the natriuretic peptide B (BNP) and rs2734849) in relation to smoking status. Our sample is composed concentrations. of 463 adult patients with ADHD and 608 non-ADHD adults, totalizing methods: Blood samples were collected from healthy pregnant 1071 subjects. Smoking is more common among patients with than normotensive women (n=235) and patients having pre-eclampsia without ADHD (43% vs. 18%, respectively; p<0001) but this is not (n=220). DNA was isolated and fluorescent PCR and DNA fragment influenced by sex. Logistic Regression analysis, controlling for ADHD analysis was performed for the detection of (TTTC) repeats. status and sex, showed a significant interaction between Taq1A X The plasma BNP concentration was measured by fluorescence gender on smoking status (p=0.016). A similar result was observed for immunoassay method. the SNP rs6277 in exon 7 of DRD2 (p=0.076 for interaction). Results Results: We detected 12 different repeats on the NPPB gene. The of both polymorphisms are suggestive of opposite effects in men and overall distribution of alleles and genotypes was significantly different women, with trends towards predisposition in men and protection in between the control and pre-eclamptic groups. The number of women. We did not observe any significant main effect or interaction 10-repeat genotype carriers showed significantly lower frequency in of the other two polymorphisms studied. Therefore, our results support pre-eclamptics than in the healthy pregnants (p=0.032). Adjusted odds the hypothesis that the association of the Taq1A and smoking may ratio: 0.19 (95% CI: 0.04-0.87). Similarly 12-repeat genotype carriers be modulated by sex, which would help explain the heterogeneity in (p=0.037), adjusted OR: 0.53 (95% CI: 0.29-0.96). Contrary, the findings on the Taq1A/smoking association of the last several years. 11-repeat genotype carrier frequency was significantly higher in the This also seems to be the case involving the rs6277 polymorphism, pre-eclamptic group (p<0.001, adjusted OR 2.91 (95% CI: 1.75-4.84)). although further studies are needed to sustain this hypothesis. The concentration of the BNP was 9.75 pg/mL in the healthy controls and 32.40 pg/mL in the pre-eclamptic group (p<0.0001). The 11/11 P09.167 genotype carriers had significantly higher BNP levels in the pre- Polymorphisms in FGF1 gene are associated with nonsyndromic clamptic group. cleft lip and palate conclusions: The NPPB gene (TTTC) microsatellite polymorphism I. Kempa1,2, L. Piekuse2, J. Klovins1, B. Barkane2, I. Akota2, A. Krumina1, B. showed significant difference in the distribution of alleles and genotypes Lace1; between healthy pregnants and pre-eclamptic patients in an ethnically 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins homogeneous population. The concentration of the BNP was higher in University, Riga, Latvia. pre-eclamptics, and it showed association with the genotypes. FGFs and their cell surface receptors (Fgfr) are a complex family of signalling molecules that play important roles in a variety of processes P09.165*** of embryogenesis and tissue homeostasis. The published data mutations of VANGL2 gene in human Neural tube Defects suggest that the FGF signalling pathway may contribute to as much as P. De Marco1, E. Merello1, S. Salem2, C. Bosoi3, G. Piatelli1, A. Cama1, Z. 3%-5% of non-syndromic CLP (NSCLP) and will be a consideration in Kibar3, V. Capra1; the clinical management of CLP. 1Neurosurgery Department, G. Gaslini Institute, Genova, Italy, 2Department of The aim of the study was to confirm the role of FGF1 gene in Biochemistry, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3CHU Sainte Justine development of NSCLP. Research Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Subjects and Methods: Thirty five SNPs in the FGF1 gene were Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. genotyped using APEX-2 technology for allelic association with Animal models were proven to be instrumental in deciphering the NSCLP. The data set consisted of 108 non-syndromic cleft lip and/ complex causation of Neural Tube Defects (NTDs). Particularly, these or cleft palate patients samples and 182 unrelated non-affected and models demonstrated an essential role for the planar cell polarity randomly selected individuals from Latvia as control population. Out of (PCP) pathway, also called the non-canonical Frizzled/Dishevelled the 108 cleft cases, 79 had CLP and 29 had CL. Association analyses pathway, in neurulation. PCP is the process by which cells become of cases and controls were performed using PLINK software version polarized within the plane of an epithelium. The Loop-tail (Lp) mouse, 1.07. that develops craniorachischisis, has been shown to carry missense Results: Genotype distributions among study groups were in a Hardy- mutations in the PCP core gene, Vangl2. In vertebrates, Vangl2 has Weinberg equilibrium. We found very strong evidence that the FGF1 another homolog called Vangl1 that has similar biochemical functions gene plays a significant role in the development of non-syndromic based on protein similarity and expression data. Recently, we identified orofacial clefts. Three markers in the FGF1 gene were strongly eight novel rare missense mutations in VANGL1 that were associated associated with non-syndromic cleft lip and/or cleft palate (rs33992, with human NTDs. To assess the role of the human ortholog VANGL2 p=0.001, OR=1.68, 95% CI=0.051-0.556; rs34010, p=0.0002, in the complex etiology of NTDs in humans, we resequenced this OR=0.48, 95% CI= 0.332-0.707; and rs2070715, p=0.025, OR=0.67, gene in a large multi-ethnic cohort of 673 NTD patients. We identified 95% CI= 0.465-0.951). six novel heterozygous missense mutations in seven patients, that Conclusions: The results show that FGF1 gene contains genetic could be pathogenic based on genetic and initial validation data. variations contributing to formation to clefts but additional studies should Four of these mutations, p.Arg135Trp, p.Arg177His, p. Leu242Val, be made to clarify the possible involvement of these polymorphisms in p.Arg270His, were predicted to be damaging to protein function using the etiology of NSCLP. bioinformatics’ tools, and two others, p.Thr247Met and p.Arg482His, affect highly conserved residues across evolution. Five mutations were identified in patients affected with closed spinal NTDs, suggesting that VANGL2 mutations may predispose to thys type of NTDs. Our findings strongly implicate VANGL2 in the genetic causation of spinal NTDs in a subset of patients and provide additional evidence for a pathogenic Complex traits and polygenic disorders 308 P09.168 Russian Federation. Association of NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 gene polymorphisms with The aim of the study was to estimate the frequency of genotypes hypertension. and rare alleles of gene polymorphisms 4a4b eNOS, I/D ACE, W64R I. Kalnina1, G. Latkovskis2, V. Pirags3, J. Klovins1; ADRB3,Q/E27 and G/R16 ADRB2,G-75A and C+83T ApoA1,S19W 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian and -1131T<C ApoA5,L162V PPARA in 132 children and adolescents Research Institute of Cardiology, University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 3Department aged 5 to 17. They were divided into 4 groups: (1) 72 individuals of Endocrinology, Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia. whose one or both of the parents suffered from abdominal obesity, NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 are receptors of neuropeptide B (NPB) (2) 19 individuals whose one or both parents had abdominal fat and neuropeptide W (NPW). This neuropeptide system is thought distribution without obesity, (3) 7 whose one or both parents had to have a role in regulating feeding behaviour, energy homeostasis, obesity but normal fat distribution, and (4) 34 whose parents did not neuroendocrine function, however its role in humans remains suffer from obesity and had normal fat distribution. The criterion of unknown. The aim of the study was to characterize the genetic obesity was body mass index > 27 kg/m2. Abdominal fat distribution variance of NPBWR1 and NPBWR2 and investigate the possible was assessed using waist/hip index, with upper limit of 0.9 for men correlation of identified polymorphisms with number of metabolic and and 0.85 for women. Gene polymorphism 4a4b eNOS, polymorphism cardiovascular traits and phenotypes. In total 6 polymorphisms were of I/D ACE were detected by PCR. Polymorphisms G-75A and C+83T indentified in both gene loci from direct sequencing of 100 individuals. ApoA1, S19W and -1131T<C Apo A5,W64R ADRB3, Q/E27, G/R16 Genotype based association was performed in 1500 individuals from ADRB2,L162V PPARA were determined by PCR-RFLP method. We Genome Database of Latvian Population. Among 10 different traits did not find any significant difference in frequency of genotypes and included in this analysis hypertension was significantly associated with rare alleles of investigated gene polymorphisms between all studied one missense SNPs from each coding part of NPBWR1 (rs33977775) groups. This might be explained by insufficient samples size. Further and NPBWR2 (rs4809401). These SNPs and two SNPs from NPW studies in larger samples using a different approach, namely a study of gene were genotyped in additional group of 500 hypertensives and combination of genotypes and rare alleles might bring more conclusive 500 validated controls. rs33977775 and rs4809401 were significantly results. associated with presence of hypertension (P=0.0018 and P=0.03 respectively). We have also identified significant epistasis between P09.171 these SNPs (P=0.005). We also present functional importance of A clinical and genetic study of childhood and adolescent obesity two identified NPBWR1 variants (Ile40Thr and Tyr135Phe) on cAMP M. A. El-Gammal1, I. Mazen1, A. El-Kotoury1, K. Amr1, M. Abdel-Hamid1, N. inhibition in HEK-293 cells. Kholoussi1, G. Anwar2, G. Ahmed2, S. Tantawy1; 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. P09.169 Obesity is determined by genetic, environmental and behavioral Genetic polymorphisms in PXR associated with alcohol factors acting through the physiological mediators of energy intake consumption and side effect of methadone maintenance and energy expenditure. The aim of this study was to define the most treatment characteristic clinical, genetic, anthropometric and laboratory findings H. Tsai, Y. Liu, J. Tian, O. Chang; in childhood obesity in an attempt to find the most efficient way to National Health Research Institutes, Miaoli County, Taiwan. diagnose a genetic cause of obesity. Subjects and Methods: All cases Objective: Methadone, a synthetic opioid, is well known as were subjected to full history taking, and full clinical examination a maintenance drug to prevent heroin-addicted patients from including dysmorphology and pubertal assessment. Endocrinal experiencing withdrawal symptoms. In addition, nuclear receptor causes were excluded. Serum leptin and insulin where estimated pregnane X receptor (PXR) is a xenobiotic nuclear receptor that binds whenever a monogenic cause of obesity was suspected. Conventional ligands with different structures and is implicated in diverse functions. and high resolution chromosomal analysis, FISH and molecular In this study, we tested whether PXR genetic polymorphisms are studies where done in selected cases. Results: This study included associated with alcohol consumption and side effect of methadone 30 obese children and adolescents. Among the 30 studied cases, 17 maintenance treatment. had syndromic obesity (56.67%), 7 had simple obesity (23.33%) and methods: A total of 366 heroin addicts undergoing methadone 6 had monogenic obesity (20%). Within the 6 diagnosed cases with maintenance treatment were recruited in this study. Data were collected monogenic obesity, we detect one novel missense mutation in the using interviewer-administered assessments, including Treatment leptin LEP gene (N103K) and another novel nonsense mutation in the Outcomes Profile (TOP), and Treatment Emergent Symptoms Scale leptin LEP gene (W121X) as well as missense mutation in the Leptin (TESS). Twenty-five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of PXR receptor gene LEPR (P316T). were genotyped. After adjusting covariates, regression analyses were Conclusion: Although genetic causes of obesity are rare autosomal performed to identify individual association of PXR with side effect of recessive disorders, high consanguinity rate in our society will lead to methadone maintenance treatment, and joint association of PXR and the discovery of a high number of monogenic and pleiotropic obesity. ALDH2 with alcohol consumption. Permutation-based approach was Early screening and regular follow up for obesity and its complications applied to correct for multiple testing. is particularly indicated for patients with syndromic forms of obesity, Results: We found that 11 PXR SNPs were significantly associated together with genetic counseling of the parents. with TESS, and 6 PXR SNPs were significantly associated with alcohol consumption after multiple testing correction (P < 0.05). In P09.172 corrected addition, haplotype combination of “rs1523130-rs6785049-rs6438550” Genotype x nutrient association of single-nucleotide was significantly associated with average of alcohol consumption after polymorphisms in obesity-related genes with native dietary multiple testing correction (P < 0.05). Furthermore, We found composition in the central-European population corrected rs6438550 of PXR was interacted with rs671 of ALDH2 on alcohol J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, P. Bienert2, J. Tomandl3, M. Forejt4, M. Vavrina2, J. use (P < 10-4). Kudelkova2, Z. Brazdova4, A. Vasku2; conclusion: PXR genetic polymorphisms may have impact on the 1Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pathological side effect of methadone treatment, moreover influence alcohol Physiology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of consumption through interacting with ALDH2 gene in heroin addicts. Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Department of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, P09.170 Brno, Czech Republic. Frequency of genotypes and rare alleles of genes implicated in As the personal food preferences can either enhance or suppress the lipid metabolism in children and adolescents according to family development of obesity, we investigated native dietary composition history of obesity. as a specific trait related to obesity and we determined whether A. Khmyrova1, A. Vasina2, A. Voitovich1, M. Didur2, V. Larionova1; genetic variations in leptin (LEP), LEP receptor (LEPR), adiponectin 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian (ADIPOQ), IL-6 and pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC) underlie specific Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, native dietary composition as well as obesity-related anthropometric traits. The total of 520 individuals of Czech Caucasian origin were Complex traits and polygenic disorders 309 enrolled into the present study and 7-d food records were obtained from 12 had isolated cleft palate (CP). The control group consisted of 290 the study subjects along with selected anthropometric measurements healthy newborns (147 males, 143 females). The results revealed and podometers records. Independently of the BMI of the individuals, significantly higher proportion of T allele in C677T polymorphism in common variations in LEP and LEPR genes were associated with the whole OFC patients´ group (p=0.043) as well as in the CLP group specific eating patterns, mainly with respect to timing of eating. The 0.037) compared to the controls. Genotype analysis, however, did LEP +19A/G polymorphism served as an independent predictor for not show significant prevalence of mutant genotypes (OFC p=0.398, BMI, percentage of body fat and skinfold thickness and significantly CLP p=0.697), only of heterozygotes (OFC p=0.014, CLP p=0.002). affected the time structure of the daily energy intake. The POMC Analysis of the groups according to sex revealed again significant Rsa I polymorphism was associated with percentage of body fat. The abundance of C677T heterozygotes, but not TT mutants in females. ADIPOQ +45T/G polymorphism was associated with the thickness The results in the male groups did not show any significant differences of the subscapular skinfold. The LEPR Gln223Arg polymorphism compared to the controls in C677T polymorphism. The analysis of was associated with multiple parameters, including diastolic blood the A1298C polymorphism did not reveal any significant differences pressure, meal sizes during the day and plasma ADIPOQ levels. In a between the patients and controls, in the whole OFC group as well separate sub-analysis, soluble leptin receptor (sObR) plasma levels as in the CLP group and according to the sex. We can conclude that and LEP:sObR ratio were significantly correlated with systolic blood the two common polymorphisms of MTHFR gene did not pose the risk pressure(beta = - 0.66, P = 0.002; beta = -1.23, P = 0.02). To conclude, of OFC in our patients´ group from Slovakia; anyhow, we are aware we report common allelic variants associated with specific feeding of a need of a larger patients` sample and continue in the patients´ behaviour, obesity-related anthropometric traits and time structure of recruitment. food intake. P09.175 P09.173 Genome-wide association study reveals new candidate loci for investigation of genome wide association signals for hand osteoarthritis obesity: synthetic association and haplotype analyses at the A. Näkki1,2,3, J. Eriksson4,5,6, E. Widen1, A. Palotie1,7, U. M. Kujala8,9, J. Saarela1; melanocortin 4 receptor gene locus 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Unit of A. Hinney1, A. Scherag2, I. Jarick3, J. Grothe4, H. Biebermann4, S. Scherag1, A. Public Health Genomics, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Volckmar1, C. I. G. Vogel1, B. Greene3, J. Hebebrand1; Finland, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, 1Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Finland, 4Department of General Practice and Primary Health Care, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 5Helsinki University Central Hospital, Unit of and Epidemiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Institute General Practice, Helsinki, Finland, 6Folkhalsan Research Centre, Helsinki, of Medical Biometry and Epidemiology, Philipps-University of Marburg, Finland, 7Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Marburg, Germany, 4Institute of Experimental Paediatric Endocrinology, Charité Kingdom, 8ORTON Orthopedic Hospital, Invalid Foundation, Helsinki, Finland, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 9Department of Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä, Jyväskylä, Finland. Background: Independent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) Objective. Osteoarthritis (OA) is a complex disease common in the showed an obesogenic effect of two single nucleotide polymorphisms elderly. Our aim was to study single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (SNPs) more than 150 kb downstream of the melanocortin 4 receptor using a genome-wide association (GWA) data in a setting of hand OA gene (MC4R). The SNPs might directly influence MC4R function/ cases versus healthy controls. expression, or they are on a haplotype that predisposes to obesity or Methods. The study subjects were over 56 years of age and were includes functionally relevant genetic variation (synthetic association). part of Finnish Helsinki Birth Cohort Study sample genotyped using MC4R is an ideal model to explore synthetic association. Illumina HumanHap 610 GWA chip. Hand joints of the study subjects Methodology/Principal Findings: We analyzed a genomic region were visually evaluated and individuals with Heberden’s nodes in (364.9 kb) encompassing the MC4R in GWAS data of 424 obesity trios at least one DIP joint were graded as affected (n=524). Individuals (extremely obese child/adolescent and both parents). SNP rs12970134 graded as healthy (n=970) had visually healthy symptomless finger showed the lowest p-value (p = 0.004); conditional analyses on this joints. Association with individual SNPs was monitored using the Plink SNP revealed that 7 of 78 analyzed SNPs provided independent program. Age, sex and two principal components differed between the signals. These 8 SNPs were used to derive two-marker haplotypes. cases and controls and were used as covariates. The confirmed (363 independent obesity trios) obesity effect haplotype Results. In our hand OA GWA analysis the most significant results comprises the MC4R. Including MC4R coding variants in a joint model were for SNP flanking the CD28 gene in 2q33 (p=4.37x10-6, OR=1.68, had almost no impact on the effect size estimators expected under 95% CI 1.35-2.10); SNP in the SUCLG2 gene in 3p14 (p=6.15x10-6, synthetic association. Haplotype analyses were also conducted for OR=0.62, 95% CI 0.50-0.76) and SNP in the SLC22A3 gene flanking the 31 additional GWAS-derived SNPs; 2 haplotypes revealed better lipoprotein genes LPAL2 and LPA in 6q25 (p=1.61x10-5, OR=1.41, results than the single SNPs, confirmation is ongoing. 95% CI 1.20-1.64). Conclusions/Significance: A haplotype reaching from 5’ of the MC4R Conclusion. Variants in regions harbouring CD28, SUCLG2, SLC22A3, to at least 150 kb from the 3’ end of the gene showed a stronger LPAL2 and LPA genes showed suggestive evidence for association association to obesity than single SNPs. Synthetic association with hand OA. CD28 has been shown to affect T-cell functions and analyses revealed that MC4R coding variants had almost no impact on IL2 production. CD28 and LPA genes have been shown to play role in the association signal. Our data underscore the problems underlying rheumatoid arthritis. Results did not reach genome-wide significance the identification of relevant mutations depicted by GWAS derived in the initial screening phase but replication effort in a large study set SNPs (Scherag et al., PLoS One 2010). is ongoing. Funding: NGFNplus 01GS0820, BMBF 01KU0903 P09.176 P09.174 Genome-wide association study identified TIMP2 genetic variant Orofacial clefts and mtHFR gene polymorphisms in slovak with susceptibility to osteoarthritis population B. Keam1, J. Hwang2, M. Go2, J. Heo2, M. Park2, N. Kim2, M. Park2, J. Oh2, D. J. Behunova1, M. Zabavnikova2, L. Klimcakova3, L. Podracka1; Kim3, J. Jeong3, J. Lee2, J. Lee2, B. Han2; 1I. Department of Pediatrics, Safarik University Children Hospital, Kosice, 1Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Slovakia, 2Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Safarik University Daehak-ro, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 2Korea Centers for Disease Control and Hospital of Louis Pasteur, Kosice, Slovakia, 3Department of Medical Biology, Prevention, Korea, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 3Dept. of Social and Preventive Safarik University Faculty of Medicine, Kosice, Slovakia. medicine, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Chuncheon, Korea, Republic Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts are multifactorial birth defects with folate of. deficiency suspected as one of the risk factors. We evaluated two Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most common degenerative joint disorder frequent polymorphisms of MTHFR gene C677T and A1298C in 65 in the elderly population. To identify OA-associated genetic variants Slovak patients with nonsyndromic orofacial clefts (OFC) (38 males, and candidate genes, we conducted a genome-wide association 27 females); 53 of all had cleft lip or cleft lip and palate (CLP) and study (GWAS). A total 3,793 samples from a community-based Complex traits and polygenic disorders 310 epidemiological study were genotyped using the Affymetrix SNP predictive role of serum OPN and Ala250 polymorphism in urolithiasis 5.0. An intronic SNP (rs4789934) in the TIMP2 (tissue inhibitor of patients. metalloproteinase-2) showed the most significance with OA (odd ration Urolithiasis Healthy [OR] = 2.06, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.52-2.81, p = 4.01×10- Patients Controls P value 6). Furthermore, a polymorphism (rs1352677) in the NKAIN2 (Na+/K+ n=106 n=88 transporting ATPase interacting 2) was suggestively associated with Age 43,3±13,3 38,4±14,9 0,147 OA (OR = 1.43, CI = 1.22-1.66, p = 7.01×10-6). The present study Sex (F/M) 31/75 34/54 0,197 provides new insights into the identification of genetic predisposing factors for the prevention of intractable pain from OA. CC (%) 51,9 76,1 CT (%) 32,1 8 0,000 P09.177** TT (%) 16 15,9 1,000 genomes based imputation discovers novel locus for CT+TT (%) 48,1 23,9 0,001 osteoarthritis Serum OPN level (ng/ A. G. Day-Williams1, L. Southam1, K. Panoutsopoulou1, S. Doherty2, W. ml) 4,4±1,2 9,5±2,2 0,000 Zhang2, R. Maciewicz3, K. R. Muir4, T. Esko5,6,7, A. Metspalu5,6,7, .. arcOGEN Consortium1, M. Doherty2, A. Valdes8, E. Zeggini1; P09.179 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Academic Lack of associations of cALcR and Lct gene polymorphisms Rheumatology, Nottingham City Hospital, Nottingham, United Kingdom, with bone mineral density and osteoporotic fractures in the 3Respiratory & Inflammation Research Area, AstraZeneca, Loughborough, Volga-Ural region of Russia United Kingdom, 4Health Sciences Research Institute, Warwick Medical School, R. Shakirova, R. Khusainova, A. Maltzev, E. Khusnutdinova; Warwick University, Coventry, United Kingdom, 5Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics USC RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Estonian Biocenter, Tartu, Estonia, 7Institute Determination of bone mineral density (BMD) and formation of of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 8Dept of Twin osteoporotic fractures are multifactorial and under complex genetic Research & Genetic Epidemiology, King’s College London, London, United and environmental regulation. Calcitonin receptors (CALCR) Kingdom. participate in calcium metabolism and polymorphisms CALCR gene The genetic architecture of osteoarthritis (OA) has not been well contribute to the variation of BMD and underlie osteoporotic fractures. characterized yet; to date only two loci have been reproducibly Polymorphisms of LCT gene can lead to indigestion disorders and as associated with knee OA in Europeans at genome-wide significance a consequence, to disturbance of calcium absorption and reduce of levels. As part of the arcOGEN consortium, we have carried out a BMD level. We examined associations of polymorphisms c.1377C>T genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 3,177 cases (knee and/ (rs1801197) in the CALCR gene and -13910C>T (rs4988235) in the or hip OA) and 4,894 UK controls. We performed genome-wide LCT gene with fractures and level of BMD in 251 Russian and Tatar imputation using the August 2009 release of the 1,000 genomes project women with postmenopausal osteoporosis and 100 Russian men and tested for association with OA. We identified 7 loci with p<7E-06 with osteoporotic fractures and matched control (n=399). In Tatar and and genotyped them in an independent set of 5,165 arcOGEN cases Russian women with postmenopausal osteoporosis CALCR*T allele and 6,155 UK controls. rs11842874 in intron 3 of MCF2L, the guanine frequency distribution was lower than in control groups (0.50 and nucleotide exchange factor DBS, on chr13 showed evidence for 0.704, respectively), in Russian men with osteoporosis CALCR*T allele replication (p=2.6E-03, MAF ~7%). Based on 8,066 Stage 1 individuals frequency was higher (0.655) compared with the control group (0.60). with imputation and directly typed data, there were 24 discordant The frequency of genotype LCT*C*C, determining hypolactasia, was alleles (overall allelic concordance 99.85%; minor allele concordance 51.61% in Russian women with fractures and 40% in control group. 97.93%). Replication was further sought in an independent set of In this case, LCT*C*C genotype frequency in Tatar women of control 1,686 knee and/or hip OA cases and 743 UK controls, and in 207 knee group (63%) was higher compared with group of patients (45.5%), and/or hip OA cases and 2,618 controls from Estonia. The fixed-effects suggesting the existence of other genetic variants determining the meta-analysis odds ratio of the discovery and replication datasets for synthesis of lactose in Tatars. Thus, the study of polymorphic loci the major allele A was 1.23 [95%CI 1.14-1.33], p=4.33E-08 (10,235 c.1377C>T in the CALCR and -13910C>T in the LCT gens revealed cases, 14,410 controls in total). no association of studied loci with fractures development and bone mineral density levels in women with postmenopausal osteoporosis P09.178 of Russian and Tatar ethnic origin, as well as in Russian men with the association between serum osteopontin levels and OPN osteoporosis. Ala250 polymorphism in urolithiasis T. Tarhan1, F. Atalar2, V. Tugcu3, A. Kural4, A. Bitkin3, T. Altug1; P09.180 1Istanbul Bilim University,Instituteof Health Sciences ,Medical Biology and Association of VDR, cOL1A1, cALcR and BGLAP Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University,Faculty of Medicine,Pediatric polymorphisms with susceptibility to steroid osteoporosis in Endocrinology Unit, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Bakirkoy Dr.Sadi Konuk Training and patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) Research Hospital Department of Urology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Acibadem Hospital A. S. Ulitina, D. V. Dzadzua, L. N. Novikova, J. M. Ilkovich, M. V. Dubina; Department of Robotical Surgery and Urology, Istanbul, Turkey. I.P.Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Background: Osteopontin (OPN) is one of the urinary proteins having Background. Osteoporosis, as complication of glucocorticosteroids an important role in stone formation.Recently,OPN Ala250 (rs1126616) (GCS) treatment, is a serious medical and economic problem. polymorphism along with other OPN SNPs have been investigated in Osteoporosis is a polygenic disorder. order to define their role in urolithiasis.The aim of our study was to Aim. To assess effectiveness of steroid osteoporosis prevention by investigate OPN rs1126616 polymorphism and serum OPN levels in antiresorptive agents (ARA - calcium, vitamin D, bisphosphonates, 106 urolithiasis patients together with 88 healthy controls. calcitonin) in patients with IPF with different genetic predisposition to material and methods:Stones were analyzed for their chemical osteoporosis. composition by using X-Ray diffraction method.The study groups were subjects. 84 Caucasian patients with IPF, 16 men and 68 women, age genotyped by PCR-RFLP and serum OPN levels were measured by 56.5±10.9 years, treated with GCS and ARA. ELISA. methods. Bone mineral density (BMD) measuring by DEXA, Results:OPN genotype frequencies in urolithiasis patients and control patients’ questionnaires and genotyping approaches were used. group were shown in Table1. In urolithiasis patients, OPN Ala250 We investigated 5 SNPs by PCR-RFLP analysis: 2 sites in vitamin heterozygote and homozygote carriers were almost 2 fold higher D receptor gene (VDR-BsmI and VDR-FokI), rs1801197 in calcitonin compared to controls (p=0.001). Serum OPN levels were higher in receptor gene, rs1800012 in collagen type1 alpha1 gene and HindIII- control group than urolithiasis patients (p=0.000) (Table1). polymorphism in osteocalcin gene. conclusion: Ala250 polymorphism was significantly higher in Results. Frequencies of minor alleles were 0.375 (VDR-BsmI), 0.411 Turkish urolithiasis patients by contrast their serum OPN levels were (VDR-FokI), 0.185 (COL1A1), 0.280 (CALCR), 0.179 (BGLAP). significantly lower.These results might be indicating the important Associations between VDR-FokI and BGLAP genotypes and BMD Complex traits and polygenic disorders 311 (p=0.02 and p=0.05, respectively), between GCS doses and bone from cardiovascular diseases - 38.16% (χ2=6.461, p=0.011; OR=1.69) fractures occurrence (p=0.01) were found. Multiple regression analysis compared with control men - 26.8%. Moreover, significantly higher showed significant influence of polymorphisms VDR-FokI, COL1A1, genotype TT frequency has been shown in patients with CAD and CALCR and BGLAP on BMD (p<0.01) but only minor fraction of myocardial infarction (MI) before age 50 - 19.44% compared with susceptibility can be explained by these polymorphisms (adjusted control group - 7.28% (χ2=9.55, p=0.002). The TT frequency in long- R2=0.238). Environmental factors, firstly ARA intake, seems to have livers (4.39%) was the lowest and significantly different from CAD stronger influence on BMD and bone fractures occurrence than group - 12.79% (χ2=8.07, p=0.0045) and from CAD subgroup with MI genetic predisposition. before 50 - 19.44% (χ2=14.49, p=0.0001). Thus our results indicate Conclusion. ARA administration is an essential way to prevent and that allele T (Leu) of GPX1 Leu198Pro polymorphism is unfavorable treat steroid osteoporosis in patients with IPF, including individuals with for successful ageing. It predisposes to coronary heart disease, earlier genotypes associated with increased risk of osteoporosis progression. myocardial infarction (before age 50) and earlier death (before age Genetic analysis is recommended to reveal subjects with increased 55). risk of osteoporosis. P09.183 P09.181 Paraoxonase 1 gene (PON1) polymorphisms are associated with Otitis media prone children: Association with cytokine gene abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) in Polish population polymorphisms and environmental risk factors E. Strauss1, K. Waliszewski2, W. Majewski2, A. L. Pawlak1; O. Miljanovic1, Z. Magic2, D. Vojvodic2, D. Likic3; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 1Centre for medical genetics and immunology, Clinical centre of Montenegro, 2Department of General and Vascular Surgery, University of Medical Sciences, Podgorica, Montenegro, 2Institute for medical research, Military medical Poznan, Poland. academy, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute for children diseases, Clinical center of Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is an age-related vascular disease Montenegro, Podgorica, Montenegro. and an important cause of morbidity and mortality in developed Otitis media (OM) prone status in children results from complex countries. The pathogenesis of AAA is multifactorial with a strong interactions between genetic factors of the host, exposure to pathogens genetic component. Previous studies show that polymorphisms in and environmental risk factors. Cytokine gene polymorphisms, genes involved in homocysteine metabolism may contribute to risk for determining the response to infection, may play an important role AAA developing. However up to now there are very few appropriately in multifactorial etiology of this frequent childhood disease. The powered association studies considered the role of specific genetic objective of this study was to investigate the role of specific cytokines variants. gene polymorphisms in OM prone children, as well as significance of We determined relationship between three functional polymorphisms association of cytokine gene polymorphisms and environmental risk in paraoxonase 1 (PON1) gene: -108C>T (rs705379), L55M (162T>A; factors (frequent respiratory infections, passive smoke exposure, day- rs854560), Q192R (575A>G, rs662) and AAA occurrence in Poland. care attendance and breast feeding practice) in children with recurrent PON1 is an antioxidant enzyme, which detoxify homocysteine episodes of otitis media. A total of 132 (OM prone and controls), both sex thiolactone in vascular vessels. The study was conducted in groups children were enrolled in the study. Single nucleotide polymorphism of of 525 AAA cases, 425 controls and in random population sample of IL2, IL6, IL10 and TNFα genes (TaqMan predesigned Genotyping SNP 220 subjects. Polymorphisms were studied by PCR-RFLP method. assay) and presence of environmental risk factors, were studied for Haploview was used for haplotype analysis. all children. Results: Explicit bimodal distribution of OM susceptibility Coding region polymorphisms L55M and Q192R were in strong linkage appearance, indicate that early childhood and preschool age plays disequilibrium (D’=0,76), which results in relatively low frequency of important role in development of OM prone status. Out of 5 examined 55M-192R haplotype in Polish population (0,023). The frequency gene polymorphisms involved in regulation of inflammatory response, of this rare haplotype in patients (0,008) was significantly lower as significant contribution to genetic predisposition to OM in Montenegro compared to that in controls (0,018, p=0,04). The 5,3-fold higher risk children was found for IL10 (G→A) gene. Conclusion: Our study of AAA was noted in homozygotes of 55L-192R haplotype (subjects -1082 has clearly pointed the significance of IL10 gene polymorphism with -108CT/55LL/192RR genotype; p=0,003). The distribution of 55- -1082 in complex multifactorial pathogenesis of OM susceptibility in 192 haplotypes in Polish cohort of AAA patients corresponds to that Montenegrin children, especially in interaction with environmental risk observed by Giusti et all (2008) in Italian population. factors. In conclusion, our results confirm observations that functional variants of PON1 gene influence AAA risk. P09.182 Supported by Polish Ministry of Sciences, grants no: PO5C03828, the glutathione peroxidase 1 (GPX1) single nucleotide NN403 250440. polymorphism Pro198Leu: association with life span and coronary artery disease in Russian population P09.184 T. V. Zheykova1, M. V. Golubenko1,2, O. A. Makeeva1,2, O. Y. Botkina1, O. G. Analysis of mitochondrial haplogroups in patients with Polovkova1, A. A. Lezhnev3, E. V. Kalyanov4, I. V. Tsimbaliuk5, V. M. Shipulin3, Parkinson´s disease in slovak republic V. P. Puzyrev1,5; M. Baldovic1, P. Majerová1, L. Kadasi1,2; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius Complex Problems of Cardiovascular Diseases, Kemerovo, Russian University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Federation, 3Institute of Cardiology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 4Bureau of Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. Forensic Medical Examination of Tomsk Region, Tomsk, Russian Federation, Parkinson disease is the second most often neurodegenerative 5Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. progressive dissease with prevalence 1 % in 65 years old persons. According to the free radical theory of aging, accumulation of oxidative It is caused by selective degradation of dopaminergic neurons in damages determines life span. Also it is suggested that oxidative substantia nigra pars compacta. Etiology of Parkinson disease can stress contribute to the development of various diseases including be explained by number of factors, including effect of nuclear genes coronary artery disease (CAD). Inactivation of reactive oxygen species and mitochondrial DNA variation. The first evidence that mitochondrial is performed by antioxidative enzymes. In this study we genotyped polymorphisms could be implicated in etiology of PD came from study 5 SNPs in 4 genes for antioxidative enzymes (CAT, SOD2, PON1, of T4366C associated with increased risk of Parkinson disease in GPX1) in four groups: patients with CAD (n=172), long-livers - above Europe. Abnormality of function of mitochondrial electron transfer chain 90 years (n=210), people with early death (before 55 years) from has been reported in many PD cases. Beside haplogroup determining cardiovascular diseases (n=94) and Russian population as control SNPs, may mitochondrial haplotypes and haplogroups share group (n=412). In particular, polymorphism in GPX1 Pro198Leu (rs polymorphisms modulating ,,coupling efficiency“ of mitochondrion with 1050450) has shown differences between the groups. The genotype protective or pathological effect in PD expression. Especially variation distribution in control group was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We in tRNA, 16S RNA and genes for cytochrome b in mtDNA have been have found significant higher allele T frequency in men with CAD - identified like possible modulation factors in pathogenesisof PD. 34.84% (χ2=5.228, p=0.022; OR=1.46) and in men with early death We genotyped 199 PD pacient and 382 control subject and detect Complex traits and polygenic disorders 312 decreased frequencies of haplogroup U ( OR= 0, 55; 95% CI: 0,39- P09.187 0,90 ), its subhaplogroup U4 ( OR= 0, 26; 95% CI: 0,07- 0,89 ) and Androgen levels and metabolic parameters are associated with a cluster UK ( OR= 0,60; 95 % CI: 0,39- 0,92 ). Decreased frequencies of genetic variant of F13A1 in women with PcOs UK, K + U5b + U4 + J and K + U5a + U4 + J we reported only between N. Schweighofer, E. Wehr, O. Trummer, U. Lam, T. R. Pieber, B. Obermayer- men.We also detected increased frequency of T1 ( OR= 8,00; 95% Pietsch; CI: 1, 68- 38, 04 ) in slovak PD pacients. Its protective or possible Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, pathogenic effect of this haplogroup has not been described so far. Medical University, Graz, Austria. Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects about 6-15 % of all women P09.185 and is therefore the most common hormonal disorder among women stable elevation of FAs mRNA level in peripheral blood of reproductive age. PCOS is associated with a variety of clinical lymphocytes of patients with LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s problems like infertility, obesity and insulin resistance. This study disease over time aimed to evaluate allelic F13A1 variants - a blood coagulation factor T. S. Usenko1,2, A. F. Yakimovsky2, A. K. Emelyanov1,2, N. A. Boganykova3, T. V. gene - for its influence in PCOS patients. Vavilova3, S. N. Pchelina1,2; We investigated the effect of an intronic SNP (A/G) in the F13A1 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, gene in 371 PCOS patients and 133 normal controls. Metabolic and 2St. Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian hormonal measurements, oral glucose tolerance tests (oGTT) and a Federation, 3St. Petersburg State State Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, specialised hirsutism score (modified Ferriman-Gallwey method) were Russian Federation. determined. Mutations in the Leucine Reach Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene Genotype frequencies of the F13A1 SNP did not deviate from Hardy are the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson’s disease (PD). Weinberg equilibrium and were equivalent in PCOS and controls. In Although the precise physiological and pathological role of LRRK2 is the dominant genotype model, in all PCOS patients and especially in unclear, direct link between mutant LRRK2 and apoptosis has been overweight/obese PCOS patients (BMI ≥ 25), the G allele of F13A1 suggested. Earlier we found the increased FAS mRNA level in patients was associated with significantly higher levels of free testosterone and with LRRK2-associated PD compared to controls (persons without DHEAS as well as decreased levels of SHBG in the overweight/obese neurological disorders). The aim of our present work was to examine group, which was only seen as a trend in all patients. The G allele was the same patients with LRRK2-associated PD over the three-year additionally associated with insulin metabolism in lean PCOS patients period and evaluate FAS mRNA level in peripheral blood lymphocytes (BMI < 25) since the AUC of insulin was significantly lower compared (PBL) after 1h, 24h, 48h of incubation (37°C, 5% CO2). FAS mRNA to the A allele. levels were estimated in PBL of four patients with LRRK2-associated We demonstrate an association of F13A1 gene variants with androgen PD (n=3 G2019S; n=1 V1613A, mean age 65±10) and of nine controls levels in PCOS patients with increased BMI as well as metabolic (mean age 61±7). At 1h, 24h, 48h PBLs were harvested, total mRNA parameters in lean patients. This might be of high importance for extracted and cDNA synthesized. FAS mRNA levels were estimated by diagnostic and therapeutic aspects in this frequent disease. means of quantitative real-time PCR with TagMan probes. The level of G protein (GNB2L1) mRNA was used as internal control. At 24h mRNA P09.188 levels were slightly increased compared to 1h in both groups but this Pharmacogenetic study of adalimumab treatment in crohn difference was not statistically significant. FAS mRNA level was higher disease patients in patients with LRRK2-associated PD compared to controls at 1h U. Potočnik1,2, K. Repnik1, S. Koder3; (p<0.03) and at 24h (p<0.05). Our results suggest LRRK2 mutations 1University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia, 2University of may lead to the activation of FAS expression in PBL of patients with Maribor, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Maribor, Slovenia, LRRK2-associated PD and this induction in stable over time. 3University Clinical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, Maribor, Slovenia. Crohn disease (CD) is one of the two major subtypes of Inflammatory P09.186 bowel diseases and is characterized with chronic inflammation in Analysis of exon rearrangements in PARK2, PiNK1 and sNcA whole gastrointestinal tract. Recently biological therapy using, himeric genes in patients with Parkinson‘s disease from Russia (infliximab (Remicade) or fully humanized (adalimumab (Humira) E. Semenova1, M. Shadrina1, E. Fedotova2, S. Illarioshkin2; monoclonal antibodies against TNF-α are used in CD patients not 1Institute of Molecular Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, responding to standard treatment or developing adverse drug effects. Russian Federation, 2Research Center of Neurology, Russian Academy of We have conducted prospective pharmacogenetic study in Slovenian Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. refractory CD patients enrolled in adalimumab treatment. We used To date, a number of genes involved in the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s IBDQ and CDAI index to monitor therapy response. We have collected disease (PD) have been identified. We analyzed rearrangements in blood samples for DNA, RNA and protein isolation and analysis of some exons 1-12 of the PARK2 gene in 170 sporadic early-onset (EOPD, age biochemical and immunological parameters (CRP) before treatment at onset < 45) and 183 sporadic late-onset (LOPD, age at onset > 45) and in 4, 12, 20 and 30 weeks after first treatment with adalimumab. We patients with PD. Exon 7 rearrangements in PINK1 gene were studied have genotyped single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in selected in a mixed group of 214 patients with familial and early-onset sporadic apoptotic genes (CASP9, FCGR3A, FAS in TIMP-1), previously PD. Rearrangements in exons 4-6 of the SNCA gene were studied in associated with response to infliximab. We found correlation between 61 patients with autosomal dominant PD. All the patients were from SNP in gene CASP-9 and response to treatment with adalimumab. Russia. The frequency of EOPD and LOPD patients carrying these Patients with C/C genotype had worse response after fourth weeks (p mutations in PARK2 gene was 12.4 and 3.8%, respectively. The most = 0,05) and 20 weeks (p = 0,031) of treatment compared to patients frequent rearrangements were detected in exons 3 and 4. The odds with C/T and T/T genotype. Results of our study are comparable ratio for EOPD in individuals carrying PARK2 gene exon deletions with previous study where patients were treated with infliximab and and duplications was 3.54 (0.95% CI, 1.465-8.569; P = 0.006). We patients with C/C genotype in CASP-9 gene had worse response to also found a correlation between exon rearrangements in PARK2 therapy. We also found correlation between polymorphisms in genes gene and some clinical features of PD. Exon 7 deletion in PINK1 gene CASP-9 (SNP rs4645983) and FCGR3A (SNP rs396991) in Slovenian was found in 5 patients. The analysis of the SNCA gene revealed no patients with CD involved in this study. Our results provide a step increase in the exon dosage. The results of our study let us conclude forward to identification of efficient pharmacogenomic biomarkers for that exon rearrangements in PARK2 gene have a significant role in the individualized therapy in CD patients. pathogenesis of sporadic PD in patients from Russia. The role of exon deletions in PINK1 gene remains to be elucidated and multiplications of the SNCA gene play insignificant part in the pathogenesis of autosomal dominant PD in Russia.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 313 P09.189 the confirmed risk factors for RA and the genes TIAM1 (p=2.79*10-6) Exome sequencing identifies a set of genes that may be and UBE2E2 (p=1.21*10-5), both play a role in cell death, one of the associated with escitalopram treatment response in major working mechanisms of anti-TNF therapy. depression. conclusions: The identified genes may serve as new biomarkers A. Tammiste1,2, K. Fischer3, T. Jiang4,5, L. Milani3, K. Pettai2,3, K. Krjutškov3, predicting anti-TNF response. However, significant findings need to be T. Esko1,2,3, R. Mägi1,2,6, Y. Li4, R. Uher7, P. McGuffin7, E. Maron8, J. Wang4, A. replicated in other patient cohorts. Confirmed biomarkers can be used Metspalu1,2,3; to personalize medication for the individual patient. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Estonian Genome Center, University of P09.191 Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 5Genome Research Assessment of a pharmacogenomic marker panel in a clinical Institute, Shenzhen University School of Medicine, Shenzhen, China, biorepository 6Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, M. T. Oetjens, J. C. Denny, A. R. Baker, H. H. Dilks, M. A. Basford, E. Bowton, United Kingdom, 7Institute of Psychiatry, King’s College London, London, N. A. Restrepo, V. M. Youngblood, J. M. Pulley, D. M. Roden, D. R. Masys, M. United Kingdom, 8Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. D. Ritchie, D. C. Crawford; Antidepressants are widely used in the treatment of major depression Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States. although their efficacy is unsatisfactory - approximately 30% of patients Genetic variants associated with adverse events or treatment efficacy do not fully recover even after several treatment trials. Interindividual are often rare (less than 5% minor allele frequency) or located in genetic differences may contribute to the variability in antidepressant difficult-to-assay regions of the genome. Genotyping arrays used response. Association studies applying the candidate-gene strategy for genome-wide association (GWA) studies, which are designed to to identify genetic markers influencing antidepressant response in capture most of the common variation in the human genome, may not major depression have produced some results, many of which are be adequate for pharmacogenomics studies. To address this, Illumina inconsistent or not transferable to other study samples. has designed the absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion We report on the first application of full exome sequencing to (ADME) Core Panel, a fixed content panel of 184 pharmacogenomic- antidepressant pharmacogenetics. From a sample of 126 individuals related markers in 34 genes. Because these variants are rare and diagnosed with major depression and treated with escitalopram over difficult to assay, there is a lack of reference data in the literature 12 weeks, we selected 5 extreme responders and 5 extreme non- or reference populations such as the International HapMap Project. responders based on their phenotype - responders were patients who There is also little data on how well the ADME Core Panel performs. showed good treatment response after 10 mg of escitalopram, non- As a pilot study, we genotyped 320 European Americans prescribed 5 or responders were resistant to treatment even after raising the dose more unique drugs from BioVU, a de-identified clinical population from to 20 mg daily. Complete exome sequencing of these patients was Vanderbilt University, to see if certain pharmacogenomic variants may performed at the Beijing Genomics Institute using Illumina Genome be unequally distributed in patients who received many medications. Analyzer IIx platform. We also genotyped HapMap samples as well. We abstracted allele By comparing the allele counts of previously known SNPs and novel frequencies from public repositories as well as the literature for polymorphisms in five responders and five non-responders, we markers targeted by ADME. Preliminary results suggest that 30% of identified a set of genes that may be associated with the difference ADME targeted markers do not have reference allele frequency data in response to escitalopram treatment. The most promising findings in HapMap or the literature. Of the 320 samples genotyped on ADME, have been replicated in the remaining 116 patient samples, and 98.8% of markers had call rates >95% and HWE p>0.0001. Allele and in the GENDEP sample which consists of 394 patients treated with genotype frequencies differed between reference data and the clinical escitalopram. population for 3 markers (p< 10-5), warranting a follow-up study to explain these results. P09.190 Genome wide association analysis of rheumatoid arthritis P09.192 patients treated with anti-tNF medication. Results of the DREAm Genetic and environmental factors influencing the Placental registry Growth Factor (PlGF) variation in two populations. M. J. H. Coenen1, M. Umićević-Mirkov1, S. H. Vermeulen1, E. J. M. Toonen1, R. Sorice1, D. Ruggiero1, T. Nutile1, M. Aversano1, L. Husemoen2, A. A. Lee2, F. Batliwalla2, W. Kievit1, H. Scheffer1, T. L. Jansen1, E. A. J. Knijff- Linneberg2, C. Bourgain3, A. L. Leutenegger4, M. Ciullo1; Dutmer3, T. R. D. J. Radstake1, M. A. F. J. van de Laar4, P. Barrera1, P. L. C. M. 1Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Naples, Italy, van Riel1, P. K. Gregersen2, B. Franke1; 2Research Centre for Prevention and Health, Glostrup, Denmark, 3Inserm / 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2The University Paris SUD U669, Villejuif F-94817, France, 4INSERM, U946, Paris Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, NY, United F-75010, France. States, 3Gelderse Vallei Hospital, Ede, Netherlands, 4University Twente & Placenta Growth Factor (PlGF), a member of the VEGF family, is a key Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, Netherlands. molecule in angiogenesis and endothelial cell growth and migration. Background: Treatment strategies blocking tumor necrosis factor Several studies have been performed to correlate PlGF plasma levels (anti-TNF) have proven very successful in patients with rheumatoid with different pathological conditions (i.e.: pre-eclampsia, inflammation, arthritis (RA). However, a significant subset of patients does not prognosis of various types of cancers) but, to date, no information is respond for reasons that are unknown, and there is currently no means available regarding the genetic basis of PlGF variability. Furthermore, of identifying these patients. even if the effect of environmental factors (i.e. cigarette smoking) on Objective: We aimed to identify genetic factors predicting anti-TNF angiogenesis has been explored, no data on the effect of smoking treatment outcome in patient with RA using a genome-wide association on the PlGF have been reported so far. We investigated the PlGF approach. variability in two cohorts: a study sample from two isolated villages methods: We selected RA patients treated with anti-TNF agents from in Cilento region, South Italy (n=1251) and a replication sample from the Dutch Rheumatoid Arthritis Monitoring (DREAM) registry. Disease general Danish population (n=2647). A significant difference in the activity scores (DAS28) at baseline and after 14 weeks was available PlGF mean levels was found between the two populations. However, of 508 patients. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) markers in both samples, we observed a strong correlation of PlGF levels with were genotyped using the Illumina HumanHap550-Duo BeadChip ageing and gender, men displaying PlGF levels significantly higher or the Human660W-Quad. Association analysis using the relative than women. Interestingly, smoking was also found to influence the trait DAS28 change as outcome was performed using the whole-genome in the two populations, although differently. The association between association analysis toolset PLINK. five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in the PlGF Results: 511.499 SNPs and 502 patients passed quality control. 75 gene and the levels of the protein in the plasma was investigated. We SNPs showed suggestive association (uncorrected p-value<10-4) with observed a significant association between two polymorphisms and relative DAS change. Candidate genes, among the top ten associated PlGF plasma levels (p<10-2) in the Cilento sample and this association SNPs, that can be linked to anti-TNF or RA are ASPH (p=1.36*10-6), a was replicated in the Danish sample (p<10-9). These results, for the gene involved in calcium homeostasis and regulated by STAT4, one of first time, support the hypothesis of the presence of genetic and Complex traits and polygenic disorders 314 environmental factors influencing PlGF plasma variability. Russian Federation. Vitamin D receptor gene (VDR) and the gene encoding alpha chain of P09.193 collagen type 1 (COL1A1) are candidate genes in the development of Association of genetic polymorphisms degradome pathway congenital malformations of the skeleton. genes with children chronic lung disease susceptibility OBJECTIVE: to study the distribution of alleles and genotypes of site O. Tselousova1,2, L. Akhmadishina1, G. Korytyna1, T. Victorova1,2; Sp1 polymorphism of the COL1A1 and of TaqI site polymorphism of 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir the VDR genes in children with congenital scoliosis. State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Patients and methods: the study group included 197 children aged Proteases a large group of enzymes involved in multiple physiological 6 mo to 16 yo with various types of malformations of the spine. and pathological processes in lung tissue. Through protein degradation Control group included 60 children aged 2 to 17 yo without orthopedic and turnover proteases play an essential role in lung tissue remodeling pathology. and repair during the inflammatory response and may be important in Molecular genetic study was carried out using PCR followed by the development of chronic lung disease. In our case-control study we restriction analysis. investigated role of genetic risk factors to susceptibility of chronic lung RESULTS: Alleles and genotypes frequencies of Sp1 site of COL1A1 disease in children. gene and TaqI of VDR gene in children with congenital scoliosis and in The genotypes of MMP1 (-1607G/GG), MMP2 (-735C/T), MMP9 controls are presented in Table. (-1562C/T), MMP12 (-82A/G) genes in 235 patients with chronic children with congenital the control P - respiratory diseases and 323 healthy children were detected by the Genotypes scoliosis group value PCR-RFLP method. N % N % We observed significantly increased susceptibility to chronic lung COL1A1 Sp1 disease in children for the MMP12 (-82A/G) gene compared with healthy children (x2=5.85, P=0.016). The allele A of was identified as a SS 131 66,5 51 86,0 risk allele for chronic lung disease in children (OR=1,93, 95%CI 1.10- Ss 59 30 8 13,4 0,022 3.40). Whereas the allele G was more frequent in healthy children, and ss 7 3,5 1 0,6 was identified as a protective allele (OR=0,52, 95%CI 0,29-0,91). The allele S 321 81,5 110 92,4 0,007 A(-82) MMP12 - GG(-1607) MMP1 haplotype was also significantly allele s 73 18,5 9 7,6 associated with increased susceptibility to chronic lung disease in TaqI both groups (OR=1,40, 95%CI 1,09-1,81). The genotype and allele TT 78 39,6 39 65,0 frequencies of MMP1 (-1607G/GG), MMP2 (-735C/T), MMP9 (-1562C/ TC 91 46,1 18 30,0 0,002 T) genes do not significantly differ in groups. CC 28 14,3 3 5,0 The results of the study suggest the genetic polymorphisms in allele T 247 62,6 96 78,3 degradome pathway genes may play a significant role in the <0,001 allele C 147 37,4 24 21,7 development of chronic lung disease in children. P09.194 cONcLUsiON: The frequency of the COL1A1 Ss genotype and s comparative study of allele frequencies of PAi-1, mtHFR and allele were significantly higher in patients with congenital scoliosis than FV gene polymorphisms in children with Henoch-schönlein in controls. purpura, schamberg Disease and in healthy children. There were significant increase in the CC genotype frequency and C N. V. Shirinbekova1, E. V. Voronina1, A. N. Voitovich1, A. M. Smirnov2, G. S. allele of VDR gene in children with congenital scoliosis compared with Demin2, V. I. Larionova1; control subjects. 1St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Gene Ltd., Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. P09.196 Objectives: Comparative analysis of alleles and genotypes distribution A coding variant in NLRP1 is associated with autoimmune of plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) -675 4G/5G insertion- Addison`s disease deletion polymorphism, methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase M. Zurawek1, M. Fichna1,2, D. Januszkiewicz3, P. Fichna4, M. Gryczynska2, J. (MTHFR)- 677C/T polymorphism and blood coagulation factor V (FV) Nowak1; 1691G/A polymorphism in (1) children with Henoch-Schönlein purpura 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, Poznan, Poland, (HSP), (2) in children with Schamberg Disease (SD) and (3) in healthy 2Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism Poznan University of Medical children. Patients and methods. HSP group consisted of 40 patients Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Paediatric Oncology, Haematology (20 boys and 20 girls), SD-group consisted of 32 patients (15 boys and Transplantology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, and 17 girls). Control group was composed of 31 apparently healthy 4Department of Paediatric Diabetes and Obesity, Poznan University of Medical children (20 boys and 11 girls). PAI-1-675 4G/5G insertion-deletion Sciences, Poznan, Poland. polymorphism was analysed by PCR method, MTHFR 677C/T and Variations in the NLRP1 (previously, NALP1) gene have recently FV 1691G/A polymorphisms were analysed by PCR-RFLP method. been reported to confer risk for vitiligo and associated autoimmune Statistical significance of differences between groups was assessed conditions. The NLRP1 gene encodes leucine- rich repeat using χ2 tests. Results. There was no statistically significant protein 1, a member of a group of cytoplasmic pattern recognition (p>0.05) difference in allele and genotype distribution of analysed receptors, which recognize microbial lipopolysaccharide, thereby polymorphisms between HSP group, SD group and control group. stimulating innate immunity. We hypothesized that polymorphisms in The genotype distribution was in accordance with Hardy-Weinberg this gene may affect susceptibility to Autoimmune Addison`s disease equilibrium for all variants. Genotype 5G/5G PAI-1-675 was not found and Type 1 Diabetes. The aim of this study was to analyse the in SD group. 1691A allele of the FV was not found in any group (all associations of six NLRP1 SNPs (Single- Nucleotide Polymorphisms) children has “normal” GG genotype FV 1691). Conclusion. In this with AAD and T1D within a Polish cohort. The study comprised 101 study we did not find PAI-1-675 5G/5G genotype in children with SD AAD, 221 T1D patients and 254 healthy control individuals. Genotyping and no A -allele FV 1691G/A in any of studied groups. was performed by PCR-RFLP and PCR-SSCP methods. The minor allele of the coding SNP rs12150220 appeared significantly more P09.195 frequently in AAD compared to healthy individuals (OR=1.5, 95% CI: Analysis of polymorphism of cOL1A1 and VDR genes in 1.08-2.08, p=0.015). The distribution of genotypes also demonstrated children with congenital scoliosis significant differences. The frequency of high-risk genotype AA of I. Kazarian1, S. Vissarionov1, G. Demin2, G. Stoyko2, V. Larionova3; rs12150220 SNP was significantly increased among AAD subjects vs. 1The Turner Scientific and Research Institute for Children’s Orthopedics, controls (P=0.006) yielding an OR of 2.96 (95%CI 1.34-6.55). Likewise, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Gene Ltd., Saint-Petersburg, Russian the heterozygous genotype TA was observed more frequently in the Federation, 3St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, patient group [OR 3.09 (95%CI 1.53-6.24), P=0.001]. The frequencies of alleles and genotypes of the six SNPs in the NLRP1 region did not Complex traits and polygenic disorders 315 present significant differences between patients with T1D and controls. cell and animal models. This region is therefore particularly interesting In conclusion, this study confirms an association between the coding for further research. Replication efforts in a population-based sample polymorphism in NLRP1 and AAD. are ongoing. . P09.197 Association genes for angiogenic factors and hereditary P09.199 thrombophilia with preeclampsia in Russian and Yakut Evaluation of APOE, mtHFR and LOXL1 polymorphisms in populations pseudoexfoliation syndrome and pseudoexfoliation glaucoma in E. Trifonova1, T. Gabidulina2, K. Pavlova3, V. Stepanov1; Epirus (Greece). 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical D. Chiras1,2, S. Oliveira3, M. Grigoriadou4, H. Kokotas4, Z. Petrou5, C. Kroupis3, Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute for Obstetrics and Gynecology, M. Stefaniotou2, G. Kitsos2, M. B. Petersen4; Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian 1Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital of << Ag. Savvas>>, Athens, Greece, Federation, 3Yakut Scientific Center of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian 2Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital of Ioannina, Ioannina, Branch of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. Greece, 3Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Attikon University Hospital, Several lines of evidence support the hypothesis that angiogenic factor Athens, Greece, 4Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, and markers of hereditary thrombophilia play an important role in the Greece, 5Department of Ophthalmology, General Hospital << G. Xatzikosta >>, pathogenesis of preeclampsia (PE). In the present study we examined Ioannina, Greece. 620 women (330 Yakut women [215 cases] and 290 Russian women Aim: The purpose of this study is to evaluate APOE, MTHFR and [140 cases]). Total DNA was extracted, and 8 tagging single nucleotide LOXL1 polymorphisms as genetic risk factors for pseudoexfoliation polymorphisms in 3 genes (VEGFA, ACVR2a and LEP) and allelic syndrome (PXFS) and pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (PXFG) in the variations C677T and A1298C in MTHFR gene, -675 4G/5G in PAI-1 Greek population of Epirus. gene and G1691A in FV gene were genotyped. We have detected material & methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from 82 PXFG, significant associations for PE with rs3025010 in VEGFA (OR=1,98; 69 PXFS and 96 control subjects from Epirus, Greece. APOE and 95% Cl: 1,20-2,36 for genotype TT), rs17742342 in ACVR2a (OR=1,68; MTHFR 677C>T genotyping was performed by polymerase chain 95% Cl: 1,02-2,76 for genotype AA), rs2167270 in LEP (OR=2,38; reaction (PCR), followed by HhaI /HinfI digestion, respectively, and 95% Cl: 1,14-4,97 for genotype AA), genotypes 677TT in MTHFR gel electrophoresis. A real-time PCR method with hybridization probes (OR 8,17, CI 2,37-28,17) and -675 4G/4G in PAI-1 (OR 2,36, CI 1,45- was developed for two LOXL1 polymorphisms in a single reaction in 3,84) in Russian population. In Yakut population, we have found that the LightCycler (Roche-TIB). only PAI-1 4G/4G genotype carriers have an increased risk of PE (OR Results: No significant differences were observed for the APOE and 2,02, CI 1,29-3,16). Allelic variations in the ACVR2a, LEP, MTHFR MTHFR polymorphisms between PXFS, PXFG and control subjects. and VEGFA genes are associated with PE only in Russian women, The APOE e3 allele was found to be the commonest in all groups while polymorphism 4G/4G in PAI-1 gene shows the association in (88.4%-90.2%-89.1% in PXFS-PXFG-controls). The prevalence of both ethnic groups. We suppose that these polymorphisms could play the MTHFR 677TT genotype was 13.1%-14.6%-19% in PXFS-PXFG- a role in the development of PE. Nevertheless, the clinical significance controls. The LOXL1 developed method was in 100% concordance with of these findings remains to be determined. DNA sequencing. The genotyping of the two LOXL1 polymorphisms is in progress. P09.198 conclusion: Our results suggest that the APOE and MTHFR Genome-wide linkage and association analyses in nondemented polymorphisms are not significant risk factors for the development hypertensive individuals suggest association of PSEN2 with of PXFS and PXFG. The results of the genotyping of the two LOXL1 plasma amyloid beta polymorphisms are expected. C. A. Ibrahim-Verbaas1,2, I. V. Zorkoltseva3, N. Amin2, M. Schuur1, Y. S. Aulchenko2,3, M. M. B. Breteler2, A. Van der Lugt4, M. A. Ikram2,4, T. I. P09.200 Axenovich3, M. M. Verbeek5, J. C. Van Swieten1, B. A. Oostra2, C. M. Van serotonin gene receptor (5Ht3a) expression in psoriatic patients Duijn2; S. Ghasemi1, G. Ahangari1, H. Mortazavi2, R. Torabi1, M. Mohammadian1; 1Department of Neurology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, 1Dept. of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute of Genetic Engineering Netherlands, 2Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC University Medical and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Russian Dermatology, Razi hospital, Tehran university of medical science, Tehran,Iran, Academy of Science, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 4Department of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Radiology, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Serotonin (5HT) plays roles as a neurotransmitter and a 5Departments of Neurology and Laboratory Medicine, Alzheimer Centre neuromodulator with functions in brain and peripheral tissues. Nijmegen, and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, Serotonin receptor subtypes are related to depression and also have Netherlands. been shown to be present in certain cells of the immune system. Plasma amyloid beta (Aβ) is an easily obtained marker for Aβ load in Psoriasis is a hyperprolifrative inflammatory disease. The aim of this brain. Aβ is highly correlated with hippocampal atrophy, a biomarker study is evaluation of 5HT3a gene expression in peripheral blood for early stages of late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The aim of this mononuclear cells (PBMC) of psoriatic patients in comparison with study was to find genetic variants associated with plasma Aβ levels. normal individuals By Real-time PCR. The study included 126 nondemented hypertensive subjects 55 to 75 The PBMC was separated from whole blood by Ficoll-hypaque. The years old from the Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) study. Multipoint total cellular RNA was extracted and the cDNA was synthesized. This variance-component linkage analysis was performed for non-fasting process was followed by real-time PCR using primer pairs specific for plasma Aβ levels (Aβ40, Aβ42, and truncated forms Aβn40 and Aβn42) 5HT(3a) serotonin receptor mRNA and beta-actin as internal control. in MERLIN. Regions with at least suggestive evidence of linkage were Results reveal that relative expression of 5HT(3a) has significant followed up with association analysis using FASTA approximation decrease in psoriasis. Considering these results the present study has to linear mixed model in GenABEL. All analyses were adjusted for shown that there is a change in serotonin receptor gene expression in age and sex. Two regions showed LOD scores >1.9, both for Aβ40: PBMC of psoriatic patients in comparison with healthy individuals. In 1q32.3-1q42.13 (LOD = 2.07 at 1q41) and 11q14-11q21 (LOD=2.97 at conclusion, 5HT3a significant decrease may be an important role of 11q14.3). At 1q42.13, strongest association was observed at a variant this receptor in pathogenesis of psoriasis. flanking the PSEN2 gene (p-value 2.5x10-4). Suggestive association was also observed at 11q14.3 (p-value=4.8x10-3) at a variant near the Melatonin Receptor 1B (MTNR1B) gene. Our data suggests an association between PSEN2, a known gene for familial AD, and plasma Aβ40. The 11q14.3 region for Aβ40 contains the MTNR1B gene associated with obesity - a trait linked with plasma Aβ42 levels. Melatonin has an anti-apoptotic effect in neurodegenerative disease in Complex traits and polygenic disorders 316 P09.201 individuals suggesting that altered brain structure is cause rather targeted resequencing of susceptibility genomic regions for than consequence of disease. In addition, healthy brain structure psoriasis seems a powerful intermediate phenotype for gene discovery in D. Trujillano, E. Riveira, C. Tornador, S. Ossowski, A. Puig, M. Gratacòs, X. neuropsychiatric disorders. Estivill; Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain. P09.203 Many recent publications have shown that DNA enrichment in support for the involvement of the calreticulin gene in the combination with high-throughput sequencing can be successfully evolution of cognition in humans applied for the identification of causative genetic variants underlying T. Farokhashtiani1, A. Mirabzadeh2, M. Ohadi1; both rare and common disorders. Psoriasis is a hyperproliferative 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation inflammatory disease that presents several clinical forms and Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Psychiatry, affects the skin, scalp, nails and joints. It is a life-long disease with University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic a prevalence of 2-3% in the general population. The importance of Republic of Iran. the genetic factors for the susceptibility to psoriasis is supported by Development-dependent, tissue-specific expression of calreticulin the high heritability of the disease, and also by several genome-wide (CALR) gene in the gray matter coincides with the expression linkage analyses and association studies that have identified multiple of psychoses phenotypes. We have recently reported instances loci associated to the susceptibility for psoriasis. However, not all the of mutations within the core promoter sequence of the gene in genetic variants of these regions have been analysed with the same schizoaffective disorder. In view of the mounting evidence on the detail. genetic overlap in the psychiatric spectrum, we investigated this gene Therefore, we have re-sequenced six psoriasis candidate genomic in a spectrum of patients afflicted with schizophrenia, schizoaffective regions on ten unrelated patients. The regions of interest were disorder and major affective disorder. We found that a unique captured with the SureSelect (Agilent) target enrichment technology mutation at nucleotide -220 from the transcription start site, located and sequenced using the Illumina GAII platform. The resulting reads at a conserved genomic block in the promoter region of the gene, were aligned to the reference sequence. After variant calling, we co-occurs with the spectrum of psychoses (p<0.005). This mutation applied a combination of filters based on frequency and function to reverts the human promoter sequence to the ancestral types observed discard any variation that is not linked to the disease, and to define a in chimpanzee, mouse, and several other species, implying that the set of candidate protein-altering variants to be associated to psoriasis. genomic block harboring nucleotide -220 may be involved in the This analysis has allowed us to detect more than 300 hundred SNPs evolution of human-specific higher-order functions of the brain (e.g. and InDels (both novel and known) in 78 different genes. The potential language, conceptual thinking, and judgment), that are ubiquitously involvement of these variants in psoriasis is currently being evaluated impaired in psychoses. We propose that CALR is not only a promising through association studies in additional patients. candidate in the spectrum of psychoses, but also, a gene that may be important in the human-unique brain processes. P09.202*** Imaging Genetics: tool for gene finding and characterization in P09.204 psychiatric disorders molecular characterization of 30 Pulmonary Arterial B. Franke1, A. Arias Vasquez1, J. Bralten2, J. Veltman3, P. Hagoort4, H. G. Hypertension idiopathic spanish patients Brunner3, M. Rijpkema5, G. Fernandez6; G. Pousada-Fernández1, M. Ojeda2, A. Baloira3, C. Vilariño4, D. Valverde1; 1Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Donders Institute for Brain, 1Facultad de Biología, Universidad de Vigo, Vigo, Spain, 2IVI Vigo, Vigo, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Spain, 3Servicio de Neumología del Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Departments of Cognitive Neurosciences and Human Vigo, Spain, 4Servicio de Neumología del Complejo Hospitalario de Ourense, Genetics, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud Ourense, Spain. University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by an increase Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, in PA pressure, increased pulmonary vascular resistance, vascular Netherlands, 4Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Centre remodeling, and right ventricle failure. Approximately 70% of patients for Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, with the familial form of PAH have a mutation in the gene encoding Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, bone morphogenetic protein receptor type II (BMPR-II). However, there Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, is variable phenotypic expression of PAH among carriers of mutated Netherlands, 6Department of Cognitive Neurosciences and Donders Centre for BMPR-II gene. Likely related to a second hit caused by environmental Cognitive Neuroimaging, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, and/or genetic modifiers. Studies have implicated serotonin, the Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. serotonin transporter, endothelin, nitric oxide sintase, and others. Alteration of regional brain structure is an inherent feature of Vasodilators such as nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin, along with neuropsychiatric disorders, but it remains unclear if this is causally prolonged overexpression of vasoconstrictors such as endothelin related to pathogenesis. If this were the case, alterations of brain (ET-1) or serotonin (5-HT), not only affect vascular tone but also structure should also be present in healthy individuals carrying genetic promote vascular remodelling. All of them have been implicated in the risk factors for such disorders. This, in turn, would imply that brain pathogenesis of PAH. structure in the healthy population can be used as an intermediate NO is an endothelial-derived relaxing factor that is synthesized from phenotype for gene finding in neuropsychiatric disorders. L-arginine by nitric oxide synthase. NOS2 is the major source of We enrolled >1700 young healthy adults in the Brain Imaging Genetics NO production and polymorphisms in the NOS2 gene promoter are (BIG) study. Structural MRI brain images are available from scans at thought to regulate its transcription activity. 1.5 or 3 Tesla. FSL-FIRST is used to assess volumes of specific brain The mitogenic and co-mitogenic effects of 5-HT require internalization structures. Genotyping of several candidate genes and genome-wide through the serotonin transporter 5-HTT (SERT). genotyping (Affymetrix 6.0, n=1000) was performed. The aim of this work was to investigate the association between Hypothesis-driven testing of candidates for neuropsychiatric disorders polymorphisms in the genes ET-1, NOS2, SERT and BMPR-II (by lead (among others) to the following findings: By gene-wide (set- PCR-Sequencing) and the susceptibility to PAH. based) testing of the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) gene SORL1 we found We found 15% of sequence variations in the BMPR-II gene in the a significant association with hippocampus volume, one of the first HAP patients. The data reveals that the shorter forms of the CCTTT structure affected by AD, in a discovery sample of 446 BIG-participants repeat in the NOS gene were associated with susceptibility to PAH. No (p=0.0432) and replication in 490 additional subjects (p=0.0093). relation has been found with ET-1 and SERT. Preliminary GWAS of amygdala volume in 600 samples resulted in association findings for several suspected psychiatric risk genes, such as CDH13, featuring among the GWAS top-findings for ADHD, addiction and schizophrenia.In conclusion, risk factors for neuropsychiatric disorders indeed affect brain structure in healthy Complex traits and polygenic disorders 317 P09.205 Here we report an allele of a copy number variant (CNV) which is Analysis of renin-angiotensin-bradykinin system genes protective against RA, with an odds ratio of 2.3. polymorphism in preeclampsia, hypertension and metabolic This CNV involves part of a large ancient tandem duplication, located syndrome in children of North-west Russia within an RA susceptibility region. We assessed copy number in a E. S. Vashukova1, A. S. Glotov1, O. S. Glotov1, I. A. Makchrova2, M. D. Swedish RA cohort (cases = 2403, control = 1269), and revealed that Kanaeva3, G. I. Obraztsova2; a 129 kb deletion within this region occurs at a significantly higher 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian frequency in control samples compared to cases (p = 0.001, OR = Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Academy, Saint-Petersburg, 2.3 (95% CI 1.4 - 3.9)), indicating a role protective against RA for this Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, variant. This was replicated in a UK cohort (p = 0.036, OR = 1.90 (95% Russian Federation. CI 0.93-3.82)). Renin-angiotensin-bradykinin system (RAS) is a pivotal regulator of Genes within this tandem duplication are involved in important biological arterial blood pressure and water-salt balance in human. It was shown processes including the immune response and embryogenesis. Altered gene polymorphisms of this system is associated with hypertension. expression of these genes has also been implicated in the progression The main aim of this study was the analysis RAS genes polymorphism of diseases such as cancer and Alzheimer’s Disease. Given the in patients with preeclampsia, hypertension, children with metabolic importance of genes within this region, it seems likely that this CNV syndrome. Population group (N=200), children (N=144), children with contributes towards susceptibility for other complex disorders. Indeed, metabolic syndrome (N=160), children with hypertension (N=179), our preliminary investigations have already suggested an association normal pregnant women (N=100), women with preeclampsia (N=100) with psoriasis in a Swedish cohort (p=0.013, OR=2.16 (95% CI 1.2- were studied by PCR-biochip method including polymorphism of 4.1)). AGT (Met235Thr), AGTR1 (1166A>C), AGTR2 (3123C>A), BDKRB2 (-58T>C), REN (-83G>A) genes. We compared the results in patients P09.208 groups with relevant data from controls. Only genotypes frequency Analysis of eNOs gene polymorphisms in serbian patients with of AGTR1 polymorphism (1166A>C) was different in children with rheumatoid arthritis hypertension from corresponding control group (x2=8.24; p<0.02). T. M. Damnjanovic1, B. Jekic1, V. Bunjevacki1, I. Novakovic1, V. Milic2, M. Further studies are needed to assess this finding. Krajinovic3, L. Lukovic1; The work is supported by grant of Russian Education and Science 1Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute Ministry - GK N P2387. of Rheumatology, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Centre de Recherche, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montréal, QC, Canada. P09.206 Nitric oxide (NO), synthesized from L-arginine by NO synthases Genome-wide association study reveals two novel susceptibility (NOS). To date, several functionally relevant genetic polymorphisms loci for restless legs syndrome in the eNOS gene have been associated with various vascular B. Schormair1,2, D. Czamara3, E. C. Schulte1,4, F. Knauf1, B. Müller-Myhsok3, T. and autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The Meitinger1,2, J. Winkelmann1,2,4, for the International RLS Study Consortium; objective of this study was to investigate the influence of the eNOS 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, gene polymorphisms (T-786C in the promoter, intron 4 a/b VNTR and Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, G894T in exon 7) on the susceptibility to RA in the Serbian population. Munich, Germany, 3Max Planck Insitute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, A group of 194 RA patients and 104 healthy subjects were included 4Department of Neurology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. in this study. The genotype was determined by PCR-RFLPs method. Restless legs syndrome (RLS) is a sleep-related sensorimotor Our results showed that T-786C genotype distributions in RA patients disorder with an age-dependent prevalence of up to 10% in the (TT 46,1%, CT 45,0% and CC 8,9%) were significantly different from general population (> 65 years). It is characterized by the presence healthy controls (TT 49,4%, CT 50,0% and CC 0,96%) (χ2=7,335, of uncomfortable sensations and an urge to move in the lower limbs, p<0.05). We have found a higher frequency of -786C allele in RA occurring in resting situations during the evening or at night. Relief of patients compared to the controls but without statistically significant the symptoms is provided by moving the legs. association (31, 4% versus 25, 9%) (χ2=2,142, p<0.05, OR=1, 28, Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified a total of and 95%: 0,858-1, 920). Group of patients with -786CC genotype four susceptibility loci: MEIS1, BTBD9, MAP2K5/SKOR1 and PTPRD. had statistically significant lower number of swollen and tender joints However, the number of samples in the GWA stage was small, enabling compared with patients with -786TT genotype (t=1,672 p=0,039). the discovery of large effect (OR ≥ 1.4) common variants only. We No significant difference in alleles or genotypes frequencies for the conducted an enlarged GWA for RLS in 922 cases and 1,526 controls, 4 a/b VNTR and the G894T polymorphisms was observed between followed by a replication of 76 candidate SNPs in 3,935 cases and RA patients and controls. Also, no significant differences in three 5,754 controls, all of European ancestry. eNOS allele frequencies between groups of patients according to Herein, we identified two novel susceptibility loci: an intergenic region immunological (RF, ANA) and other clinical data were observed. We on chromosome 2p14 (rs6747972, P =8.09 x 10-11, OR= 1.2) and a conclude that there is potential association of C-786T polymorphism nom locus on 16q12.1 (rs3104767, P =1.96x10-19, OR= 1.3) in a linkage with the susceptibility to RA. nom disequilibrium block of 140 kb containing the 5’-end of TOX3 and the adjacent non-coding RNA BC034767. TOX3 is involved in calcium- P09.209 dependent neuronal transcription, whereas for BC034767, a regulatory Association of rs10818488 sNP at tRAF1/c5 region with function can only be hypothesized at present. rheumatoid arthritis in iranian population In combination with the four known loci, all susceptibility variants M. Keramatipour1, S. Ahmadlou1, M. Akhyani2, A. Salimzadeh3; explain about 3.4% of the heritability for RLS, clearly pointing to many 1Tehran University of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Department of more variants remaining to be discovered, until one can sketch the Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Alborz Hospital, Karaj, underlying molecular pathways. Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Sina Hospital, Rheumatology Section, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P09.207 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease with a A copy number variant that provides a 2.3-fold protection complex etiology affecting 1% of the world population. Association against Rheumatoid Arthritis studies in various populations have reported a number of genetic K. Reekie1, L. Padyukov2, J. Worthington3, L. Klareskog2, J. Lorentzen2, C. variations affecting the individual susceptibility to RA. The strongest Veal1, A. Brookes1; association has been reported from genes within the HLA region, 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Karolinska Institute, particularly the HLA-DRB1 gene. Stockholm, Sweden, 3University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. The association of rs10818488 SNP located near TRAF1 gene, has The genetic component of Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) risk is estimated been recently picked up by genome wide association studies. Following at around 60%, a large proportion of which is currently unaccounted independent studies in different populations revealed inconsistent for. In part this is due to that fact that, aside from the MHC, RA results. To investigate the possible association of this SNP with RA susceptibility loci so far described have small effect sizes (OR ≤ 1.8). in Iranian population, a combined family-based (parents-affected child Complex traits and polygenic disorders 318 trios) and population-based case-control study was performed. but offer consensus guidelines to enhance the transparency of In family-based study, 115 trios were recruited. After obtaining their reporting, and thereby to improve the process of synthesizing their consent, blood samples were taken, and DNA was extracted. information from multiple studies with different strategies regarding Genotyping was done by PCR-RFLP and a set of genotypes were design, conduct or analysis. confirmed by sequencing. Analysis of data showed a significant over- transmission of A allele in trios (Transmission Disequilibrium Test, TDT P09.212 value ≈ 4.3, p-value ≈ 0.03). This resulted in a Haplotype Relative Risk ELP4 polymorphisms and rolandic epilepsy in a Greek cohort of 1.5. L. Fidani1, A. Gampeta2, T. Katopodi1, K. Kalinderi1, J. Clarimon3, E. Pavlou2; In case-control design, a total of 362 cases and 422 healthy controls, 1Department of Medical Biology-Genetics, Medical School, Aristotle University including samples from family-based study, were genotyped. Genotype of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Second Department of Pediatrics, and allele frequencies were compared between the two groups. Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, AHEPA Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece, Analysis showed a higher frequency of A allele in cases, although the 3Biomedical Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases Center (CIBERNED) difference was not significant statistically (Chi-square ≈ 2.8, p-value and Memory Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital Santa Creu i Sant Pau, ≈ 0.09). Comparison of genotype frequencies, revealed higher Madrid , Barcelona, Spain. frequencies of AA and AG genotypes in case group but statistically Rolandic epilepsy (RE) is the most common idiopathic focal epilepsy the difference was not significant (Chi-square ≈ 2.72, p-value ≈ 0.25). in childhood characterized by an EEG abnormality of centrotemporal sharp waves. Results from a recent genome-wide linkage analysis P09.210 have implicated the Elongator protein complex 4 (ELP4) gene, in the rs2476601 sNP of PtPN22 gene plays no role in the pathogenesis of this neurodevelopmental disorder. ELP4 is a susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis in iranian population component of the elongator complex which regulates the transcription S. Ahmadlou1, M. Akhyani2, A. Salimzadeh3, M. Keramatipour1; of several genes associated with nerve cell motility and migration 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of during development, however its role is not completely defined up to Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Alborz Hospital, Karaj, now. Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Rheumatology Section, Sina Hospital, Tehran In an attempt to investigate the previously reported association of ELP4 University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. polymorphisms, rs964112 and rs11031434, with RE, we collected 31 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a common autoimmune disease with a Greek patients (age range: 4-16 years old diagnosed in the AHEPA complex etiology affecting 1% of the world population. Association University Hospital of Thessaloniki, Greece and 47 healthy controls. studies in various populations have reported a number of genetic The polymorphisms were detected with a PCR-RFLP method, after variations affecting the individual susceptibility to RA. The strongest designation of specific primers. PCR amplification and enzyme digest association has been reported from genes within the HLA region, of the relevant fragment. particularly the HLA-DRB1 gene. Genotype and allelic frequencies were compared with the Chi-square The rs2476601 SNP of PTPN22 (protein tyrosine phosphatase test of independence. Genotype and allele distributions for the two nonreceptor 22) gene can be named as the second polymorphism studied polymorphisms were not significantly different between RE and that has been repeatedly reported to be associated with RA. Allelic control individuals (for genotypes: P=0.225 and P=0.828 respectively, frequency of 14 - 15% has been reported for A allele (the risk causing for alleles: P=0.852 and P=0.993, respectively). Haplotype frequency allele) in this SNP in Caucasian population. To investigate the possible comparisons did not show any significant difference between RE association of this SNP with RA in Iranian population, we designed a patients and controls (P=0.649), as well. family-based (parents-child trios) and a population-based case-control Our results do not substantiate ELP4 as a risk locus for Rolandic association studies. epilepsy, although an extension of this study to a larger sample is In total 872 blood samples were collected from 405 confirmed RA expected to delineate the effect of ELP4 genetic variations on the patients and 467 healthy controls. 115 trios were included in the susceptibility to seizures and neurodevelopmental disorders, such as total samples. DNA was extracted and genotyping was performed RE. by PCR-RFLP method using RsaI restriction enzyme. All samples were genotyped as homozygous GG. Genotyping was repeated for P09.213 30% of samples by using XcmI enzyme and for 10% of samples by rs1333040 genotypes on 9p21.3 influence CDKN2A/2B sequencing. Again all samples showed homozygous GG genotype. expression in human coronary plaques This study strongly suggest that there is no A allele in the gene pool of N. Marziliano, F. Orsini, V. Motta, A. Colosimo, F. Marra, E. Araldi, C. Iranian population. Therefore it does not play a role in susceptibility to Lauricella, S. Veronese, P. Merlini; RA and other autoimmune disorders in Iranian population. Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy. Coronary artery disease (CAD) is significantly influenced by genetic P09.211 background. Genome-wide association studies have shown that strengthening the Reporting of Genetic Risk Prediction studies: common genetic variants located in human chromosomal region the GRiPs statement 9p21.3 are associated with ischemic heart disease. They are not A. C. J. W. Janssens1, J. P. A. Ioannidis2, C. M. van Duijn1, J. Little3, M. J. associated with any established cardiovascular risk factors, and no Khoury4; known protein-coding genes reside within the region. Gene expression 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Stanford studies have shown that gene regulatory elements might be located University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 3University of within the risk interval. Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, The knock-out mice lacking the CAD locus interval in chromosome Atlanta, GA, United States. 4 shows that this region is critically required for the normal cardiac The rapid and continuing progress in gene discovery for complex expression of two neighbouring cyclin-dependent kinase inhibiting diseases is fuelling interest in the potential implications of this knowledge genes, Cdkn2a/b. for clinical and public health practice. An essential prerequisite for It is known that CDKN2A/B control cell proliferation by preventing many genome-based health care applications is the predictive ability of entry to the S-phase of the cell cycle. As the development of human the genetic risk model. The number of studies assessing the predictive atherosclerotic lesions is characterised by an increase in the rate performance of genetic risk models is steadily increasing, with widely of replication and death of all mitotic cells in response to injury, it is variable completeness of reporting and apparent quality. Transparent conceivable that the decreased expression of CDKN2A/B may be reporting of the strengths and weaknesses of empirical studies is associated with altered cell replication, and the start and progression important to facilitate the accumulation of evidence on genetic risk of atherosclerosis. prediction. A multidisciplinary panel developed a checklist of 25 We investigated the influence of the 9p21.3 variant rs1333040 on items recommended for strengthening the reporting of Genetic RIsk CDKN2A/B expression in 30 human coronary atherosclerotic plaques Prediction Studies (GRIPS), building on the STREGA, REMARK and obtained by means of coronary atherectomy from patients with STARD reporting guidelines. The recommendations do not prescribe ischemic heart disease. We validated our findings on 20 coronary or dictate how genetic risk prediction studies should be conducted, samples obtained at the heart transplant.Complex traits and polygenic disorders 319 Quantitative PCR showed a significant (p=0.00013) trend of P09.216 expression levels of both genes with the number of the risk allele (C), Expression QtL analysis of top loci from Psychiatric GWAs the expression in the CT plaques being in between that of CC and TT consortium meta analysis reveals additional schizophrenia plaques, for both genes. candidate genes S. de Jong1, D. Zeegers1, K. van Eijk1, E. Strengman1, E. Janson1, J. Veldink2, P09.214 L. van den Berg2, S. Psychiatric GWAS Consortium1, W. Cahn3, R. Kahn3, M. Proteome screening in sera of patients with schizophrenia at Boks3,4, R. Ophoff1,3,5; different stages and courses of drug therapy 1University Medical Center Utrecht, department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, B. Rukova1, S. Hadjidekova1, I. Dimova1, M. Stamenova2, S. Todinova3, L. Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Zagorchev4, M. Odjakova4, V. Krumova2, D. Toncheva1; Neuroscience, department of Neurology, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3University 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Medical Center Utrecht, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, department 2Department Of Psychiatry, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, of Psychiatry, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Utrecht, Julius 3Institute of Biophysics and Biomedical engineering, BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria, Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5University 4Faculty of Biology, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski”, Sofia, Bulgaria. of California Los Angeles, Center for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Los Angeles, Schizophrenia is a severe chronic mental disorder that affects most CA, United States. of the higher brain functions. Its prevalence is estimated on about Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder characterized by 1% worldwide. The classical symptoms also occur in several other delusions and hallucinations, in addition to negative and cognitive psychiatric disorders, which makes difficult the exact diagnostics. The symptoms. The disorder affects up to 1% of the population and the etiology of schizophrenia remains to be elucidated. It is thought to be genetic contribution is estimated to be around 80%. Thus far, genome- a result of a complex interaction between genetic and environmental wide association studies of schizophrenia have had limited success, factors. Schizophrenia is a serious social and economic burden to with the best finding at the HLA locus at chromosome 6p. While healthcare systems. Currently, there is no etiological treatment. Until only a very small number of loci yield genome-wide significance for now there isn’t any proven molecular marker as an objective diagnostic association, the vast majority of the genetic contribution to disease parameter for schizophrenia. susceptibility remains uncovered. It is likely to be overrepresented Materials and methods: We have analyzed serum samples from in non-significant top SNPs of large-scale GWAS results. In order to schizophrenic patients at different phases of the disease - before and uncover potential interesting candidates, we selected the top 6,000 after treatment, comparing them to a cohort of normal sera. We applied SNPs with significance threshold at p<0.001 from the international several methods for protein alterations’ screening: DSC (Differential PGC meta-analysis consisting of some 9,000 cases and 12,000 scanning calorimetry), protein profiling methods: 2D-SDS PAGE, controls and examined their possible involvement in schizophrenia HPLC techniques. The differences in the profiles were analyzed by using gene expression data from whole blood. Expression QTLs mass spectrometric techniques. were calculated for this selection of SNPs in a set of healthy controls Results: Initially we analyzed sera samples with DSC method to detect (n=437). The transcripts significantly regulated by the top SNPs from distinguishing serum profiles. We observed significant differences were subsequently tested for differential expression in an independent in the fractions of the more abundant serum proteins- albumin and set of schizophrenia cases and controls (n=200). The eQTL analysis immunoglobulin. We distinguished different protein profiles: before yielded significant cis-acting effects, whereas no trans effects were and after treatment of the patients; according to the medication. We observed. For seven of these transcripts we observed significant also found considerable concordance between therapy response differential expression between cases and controls. Results include and protein profiles - normalization in case of remission and marked target genes of interest both in- and outside the HLA region and alterations in non-responders. Because of these differences we contain genes that are known to be expressed in brain. These genes proceeded with analyzing serum proteins by more sensitive and are strong candidates for schizophrenia for which further genetic precise methods to find a potential marker for drug therapy and analysis is warranted. disease progression. P09.217 P09.215** Altered expression of Peroxysome proliferator-activated increased exonic de novo mutation rate in probands affected receptor Gamma 2 and serum leptin levels in schizophrenia with schizophrenia G. Akan1, O. Ozgen2, T. Acuner2, F. Oncu3, D. Yesilbursa3, S. Turkcan3, F. S. L. Girard1, J. Gauthier1, A. Noreau1, L. Xiong1, S. Zhou1, A. Dionne-Laporte1, Atalar1; D. Spiegelman1, I. Bachand1, A. H. Y. Tong2, J. Y. J. Bao2, C. Lin2, B. Millet3, N. 1Endocrinology Laboratory, Department of Nutrition, Metabolism and Jaafari3, R. Joober4, P. A. Dion1, S. Lok2, M. Krebs3, G. A. Rouleau1; Endocrinology, Child Health Institute, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 1Center of Excellence in Neuromics, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Genome 2Department of Genetics, Institute of Health Sciences, Istanbul University, Research Centre, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 3Université Paris Descartes, Paris, Istanbul, Turkey, 33Psychiatry Clinics, Turkish Ministry of Health Bakirkoy France, 4Douglas Hospital, Montréal, QC, Canada. Research and Training Hospital for Psychiatry, Neurology and Neurosurgery, Schizophrenia (SCZ) is a severe psychiatric disorder that profoundly Istanbul, Turkey. affects cognitive, behavioral and emotional processes. The wide It has long been known that schizophrenia (SCH) is associated with spectrum of symptoms and clinical variability in SCZ suggests a morbidity and mortality rates that far exceed those of the general complex genetic etiology, which is consistent with the numerous loci population. Leptin receptor (LEPR), leptin (LEP) and peroxysome thus far identified by family linkage, copy number variation (CNV) proliferator-activated receptor γ2 (PPARγ2) are the potential genetic and association studies. While SCZ heritability may be as high as determinants which might be liable of metabolic dysregulation in SCH ~80% the genes responsible for much of this heritability remain to patients. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of LEPR be identified. Using high-throughput sequencing technologies, we gene p.Q223R polymorphism and the impact of mRNA levels of LEPR, sequenced the exome of 14 patients with schizophrenia and their LEP, and PPARγ2 along with the serum leptin levels on metabolic parents. Each proband had a standardized SCZ diagnostic and every adversities in SCH patients (n=80) and controls (n=115). parent was carefully excluded of any psychiatric disorder. A list of high Methods: Metabolic profiles, LEPR gene polymorphism and the gene quality variant was validated using traditional Sanger sequencing. We expressions of LEPR, LEP and PPARγ2 were studied in SCH patients identified 14 DNMs in 8 probands, which is significantly more than and controls. expected considering the previously reported DNM rate. Beside, 4 of Results: A significant difference was determined between SCH and the 14 identified DNMs are nonsense mutation, suggesting a causal control groups concerning genotype frequency of LEPR p.Q223R role for those variants. Our study supports the notion that DNMs play (OR=10.9 95%CI=4.7-25.2) (p=0.000). LEPR p.Q223R was strongly a major role in sporadic SCZ while providing a list of genes possibly associated with waist circumference (p=0.003) in SCH patients. LEP involved in disease pathogenesis. This report suggests that de novo and LEPR gene expressions and serum leptin levels were higher in mutations (DNMs) may account for a substantial fraction of the missing SCH patients compared to controls. PPARγ2 gene expression and SCZ heritability. serum leptin levels were significantly increased in SCH patients carrying LEPR p.Q223R polymorphism (QR+RR) (p=0.003 and Complex traits and polygenic disorders 320 p=0.001, respectively) (Table1). that common variants of the HFE (rs1800562, C282Y) and TMPRSS6 Conclusion: Leptin receptor, leptin and PPARγ2 genes could be (rs855791,V736A) genes are associated with serum iron and potential risk factors in developing metabolic adversities in SCH. transferrin saturation, but no association was found with hepcidin. Table 1: Clinical ,biochemical and genetic characteristics of SCH Both variants showed a modest effect on the hepcidin/ferritin ratio, and patients with LEPR p.Q223R genotypes the association was enhanced once iron-deficient and inflammation- positive samples were excluded from the analysis. Interestingly, in traits total, mean (sD) such a subset of samples, HFE C282Y was associated to ferritin at QQ QR+RR p.Q223R P values genome wide significance and the association was further enhanced n=8 n=72 after adjusting for hepcidin levels. Our results suggest that the main Age (years) 34.5±5.07 30.4±7.05 0.188 effect of HFE C282Y variant is to increase cell iron uptake through Bmi (kg/m2) 24.4±2.7 25.3±3.5 0.399 increased transferrin saturation. The effect is in part counterbalanced Weight (kg) 70.7±11.1 75.3±12.1 0.773 by impaired hepcidin levels which favor cell iron release, especially Waist circumference (cm) 94±5.5 111.7±13.1 0.003 from macrophages, in this way likely reducing, serum ferritin levels. Fasting glucose (mU/L) 85.3±12.8 80.7±14.6 0.554 Finally we show that the effect of HFE and TMPRSS6 variants on erythroid traits is mainly mediated by variations of iron parameters, but tc(mg/dl) 188±34.4 187.2±37.8 0.968 not by variations of hepcidin. tG(mg/dl) 136.3±70 156.9±72.7 0.608 HDL-c(mg/dl) 47±6.1 42.3±6.3 0.193 P09.220 sBP(mmHg) 130±8.2 120.1±15.28 0.091 Differential analysis of molecular profiles between schizophrenia DBP(mmHg) 80±14.1 76.1±12.7 0.581 and bipolar affective disorder after genome-wide association Leptin (ng/ml) 0.3±0.01 1.77±1.5 0.001 study in Bulgarian population PPARG expression A. Yosifova1,2, E. Betcheva1,2, T. Mushiroda3, M. Kubo4, A. Takahashi5, (Arbitrary Unit) 1.27±0.48 2.6±1.7 0.003 Y. Kamatani6, N. Kamatani5, D. Stoianov7, R. Vazharova1, I. Dimova1, S. Karachanak1, I. Zaharieva1, S. Hadjidekova1, V. Milanova8, N. Madjirova9, P09.218 I. Gerdjikov7, T. Tolev10, N. Poryazova11, G. Kirov12, M. J. Owen12, M. C. serotonin receptor genes as markers of intellectual abilities O’Donovan12, D. Toncheva1, Y. Nakamura2,6; A. Timkova, O. Gumerova, V. Gorbunova; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bashcir state pedagogical univercity from name it M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Laboratory for International Alliance, RIKEN Center for Federation. Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 3Laboratory for Pharmacogenetics, Important focus in human genetics is the study of genetic determination RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 4Laboratory for of individual-personality characteristics, which primarily include a Genotyping development, RIKEN Center for Genomic Medicine, Yokohama, person’s ability, so at the forefront search of genetic markers that Japan, 5Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, RIKEN Center for Genomic define these abilities.There is evidence that, for gifted children is Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, 6Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human characterized by a more rapid transmission of neural information Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, that may be related to the activities of neurotransmitter systems, a Tokyo, Japan, 7DPB “St Ivan Rilski” Novi Iskar, Sofia, Bulgaria, 8Department special place among them being the serotoninergic system.Serotonin of Psychiatry, Aleksandrovska Hospital, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, receptor genes HTR2A, HTR1A, HTR2C are one of the major genes 9UMBAL “St Georgi”, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 10Department of Psychiatry, Dr. Georgi determined work of the serotoninergic neurotransmitter systems, and Kisiov Hospital, Radnevo, Bulgaria, 11Regional Dispensary for psychiatric their functional status can be reflected on some aspects of human diseases, Plovdiv, Bulgaria, 12Department of Psychological Medicine, Cardiff intellectual activity.Material were DNA samples 184 people.We used University, School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom. cultural-free Kettell test.To analyze the association polymorphisms of The major psychotic illnesses - schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, serotonin receptor genes with the level of intellectual development was are among the most common debilitating mental conditions that investigated sample was divided into groups according to the gradation constitute some of the leading causes of disability and pose significant level IQ: low- below 90, average- 90-139, and high - above 140.In the economic burden to society. Although genetic factors make substantial group with a high level of intellectual development showed an increase contributions to their etiology, the identification of specific susceptibility in the frequency of alleles of HTR2A * A (P = 0.002) and genotype of genes for both disorders has not been straightforward. In recent HTR2A * A / * A (P = 0.04) in the serotonin receptor gene HTR2A.In the years new molecular genetic findings have implicated risk factors for group with low levels of intellectual development showed an increase these disorders, thus allowing the possibility of a genetic relationship in the frequency of alleles of HTR2A * G (P = 0.002) in the gene for between them to be directly explored. Findings from genome- serotonin receptor type 2A, as well as genotype HTR1A * G / * G (P = wide association studies suggest a partial overlap in the genes that 0.002) in the gene for serotonin receptor HTR1A.This work was funded contribute to the susceptibility to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder. grant RHSF 10-06-84.609. To test this statement we have compared our results from genome- wide association studies on bipolar disorder and schizophrenia P09.219 conducted in 188 BAD patients, 188 schizophrenia subjects and 376 serum Hepcidin levels and association studies of tmPRss6 healthy Bulgarians. The analysis of top 100 polymorphisms revealed and HFE variants provide further insights into regulation of iron no genetic overlap between two conditions in our population. The homeostasis strongest finding in bipolar disorder was not among the top findings after M. Traglia1, D. Girelli2, G. Biino3,4, N. Campostrini2, M. Corbella2, C. Sala1, C. GWAS on schizophrenia. An SNP which revealed the most significant Masciullo1, F. Viganò1, I. Buetti1, G. Pistis1, M. Cocca1, C. Camaschella1,5, D. association with schizophrenia did not show any association with Toniolo1,3; bipolar disease. Interestingly, the genome-wide scan on schizophrenia 1Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, San Raffaele Research Institute, Milano, has detected a variant in a gene, which has already been reported Italy, 2Department of Medicine, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 3Institute of as the strongest finding in previous genome-wide association scan on Molecular Genetics-CNR, Pavia, Italy, 4Institute of Population Genetics-CNR, bipolar disorder. Although no genetic overlap between schizophrenia Sassari, Italy, 5Vita Salute University, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, and bipolar disease has been detected in Bulgarian population, this Italy. finding supports the hypothesis that common genetic factors may be Genetic variants of hepcidin-regulatory genes, TMPRSS6 and HFE, involved in the etiology of both conditions. affect erythrocyte traits and iron parameters, namely serum iron and transferrin saturation in normal populations. To analyze whether this effect is mediated by the iron regulator hepcidin, we measured serum hepcidin levels in 1657 genotyped individuals from an Italian cohort, the Val Borbera (VB) population. Hepcidin levels showed age and sex dependent variations that correlated with ferritin but not with serum iron or transferrin saturation. We replicated the observation Complex traits and polygenic disorders 321 P09.221 presented significant association with the TAS2R38 polymorphism Exercise induced steroid dependent dystonia, ataxia, and (p < 0.01); out of the various traits of tobacco dependence (drive, alternating hemiplegia associated with epilepsy: a novel priority, tolerance, continuity, stereotypy), drive presented a significant phenotype associated with an SLC2A1 mutation correlation with the ability to taste PTC ( t = 2.46, 95%CI: 0.14-1.17, W. G. Leen1, C. M. Weller2, B. de Vries2, B. G. R. Neville3, E. J. Kamsteeg4, p = 0.01). M. A. A. P. Willemsen5, G. M. Terwindt6, M. D. Ferrari6, A. M. J. M. van den In conclusion, PTC non-tasters may become more frequently smokers Maagdenberg2, H. Scheffer4; not avoiding the unpleasant taste of cigarettes; however, in those who 1Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and become smokers, a preference for bitter taste may contribute to the Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, development of dependency. Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Neurosciences Unit, Institute of Child Health, P09.223 UCL medical school and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, ESR1 polymorphic variants in stroke patients from Ukraine London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University A. Kucherenko1,2, S. Kravchenko2, D. Shulzenko3, S. Kuznetsova3, L. Livshits2; Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Paediatric 1Taras Shevchenko Kiev National University, Faculty of Biology, Kyiv, Ukraine, Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud 2Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics of the National Academy of University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 66Department of Sciences of Ukraine, Department of Human Genomics, Kyiv, Ukraine, Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. 3Gerontology Institute of the Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Kyiv, A 20 year old woman with a combination of a moderate learning Ukraine. disability, seizures, ataxia, exercise-induced dystonia and episodes Multiple data support the hypothesis of estrogen role in vascular of alternating hemiplegia was described by Neville et al. in J Neurol function, lipid metabolism regulation and neuroprotection. Two single Neurosurg Psychiatry 1998;65:241-244 (Neville, 1998). Prednisolone nucleotide polymorphisms in intron 1 of estrogene receptor alpha improved the ataxia and was associated with cessation of seizures gene (ESR1) - c.454-397T>C (PvuII) and c.454-351 A>G (XbaI) and exercise-induced dystonia. At the time, no diagnosis could - are thought to influence ESR1 gene transcription and change cell be made. Over the last years, the clinical spectrum of SLC2A1 sensitivity to estrogen-estrogen receptor complex action. (GLUT1) mutations has been expanding. Apart from the classical To establish possible involvement of PvuII and XbaI polymorphisms phenotype which consists of drug resistant seizures, mild to severe into stroke development we investigated this SNPs in: case group - developmental delay, and complex movement disorders, such as patients with ischemic stroke (n=183, men-95, women-88), control ataxia and dystonia several non classical presentations have been group I - individuals from the general population (n=100, men-50, described as well. Recently, a child with episodes of hemiplegia was women-50), control group II - healthy individuals elder then 65 found to have a mutation in the SLC2A1 gene (Rotstein, Neurology years(n=88, men-35, women-53), from different regions of Ukraine. No 2009). The combination of mental retardation, atypical absences, significant difference between the age of men and women within each movement disorders with exercise-induced dystonia and alternating group was observed. Blood samples for DNA analysis were obtained hemiplegia in this patient directed us to the possibility of an SLC2A1 after informed consent. Genotyping was performed by PCR followed mutation. Mutation analysis of all 10 exons of the SLC2A1 gene by RFLP analysis. Obtained data has shown a linkage disequilibrium revealed a novel heterozygous missense mutation in exon 2. The between studied alleles, CG and TA alleles are in phase (r2 = 0,557). parents did not carry the mutation, indicating that Gly18Arg is a de We have found no differences in genotype or allelic frequencies novo mutation. False paternity was excluded by genetic, multimarker between case group and control group I. Interestingly, difference in analysis. Screening of 150 subjects from the general Dutch population c.454-351G/G genotype frequency between women (33,7%) and men was performed by sequence analysis of exon 2 and was negative. The (20,4%) from case group was observed. Gly18Arg mutation is located in the first transmembrane segment of Frequency of c.454-351G/G genotype was higher in women from case GLUT1 and is likely to cause disruption of the glucose transport across group (33,7%) comparing to women from control group II (18%). the aqueous central channel. The Gly18Arg mutation is therefore Differences were considered significant at P<0.05 value of Fisher likely to be pathogenic. This patient presented with symptoms that all exact test. have been described in patients with GLUT1 deficiency before, but Our findings suggest a possible role of c.454-351A allele in stroke to the best of our knowledge the combination of a moderate learning development in women. disability, epilepsy, ataxia, exercise induced dystonia, and alternating hemiplegia has not been associated with SLC2A1 mutations before. P09.224 This patient is the first to be described by this specific combination of Analysis of association of GR gene haplotype and suicidal symptoms and underlines the heterogenic phenotype associated with behavior in population from Bashkortostan (Russia) SLC2A1 mutations. A. Zainullina, D. Zakirov, A. Ishmukhametova, E. Khusnutdinova; Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian P09.222 Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. Bitter taste sensitivity and nicotine dependence in a Romanian Suicidal behaviour (SB) is a complex trait for which the underlying population pathophysiology has yet to be fully explained. Hyperactivity of the K. Csep, G. Dudutz, C. Banescu, N. Argyo, A. Todoran Butila; hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis, leading to increased cortisol University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg Mures, Tg Mures, Romania. levels, has been suggested to play a role in the development of SB. The TAS2R38 belongs to the TAS2R bitter taste receptor gene family. Three effects of cortisol, the most important glucocorticoid (GC) in humans polymorphisms have been described in relationship with differences are mainly mediated by the GC receptor (GR). Several polymorphisms in bitter taste perception of phenyl-thiocarbamide (PTC). It was in the GR gene that alter the GC sensitivity are known. The aim of hypothesized that taster status is related to smoking, as individuals this study was to study the role of these GR polymorphisms in SB. who perceive PTC as bitter may find the taste of cigarettes aversive, Three SNPs (9beta, BclI and N363S) in the GR gene were genotyped and thus, present a reduced risk to become smokers and nicotine and haplotypes were constructed. We investigated a total sample of dependent, as compared to non-tasters. 636 subjects. Cases were 288 persons - hospitalized in the Clinical In 226 middle aged (median age: 41 years) Caucasians (53.53 % Republic Hospital (Ufa, Russia) after suicide attempt. Suicide attempts males, 46.47 % females), we have followed the relationship between were classified as violent - hanging (4.2%), jumping from a high the bitter tasting phenotype and genotype (rs713598), respectively, place or under a vehicle (6.3%), cutting (8.5%), or nonviolent - drug and tobacco dependence as assessed by the NDSS (Nicotine overdose (81%). Forty-seven patients (31.3%) admitted to previous Dependence Syndrome Score), HSI (Heaviness of Smoking Index) suicide attempts. The most common primary diagnoses in the sample and Fagerström Test for Nicotine Dependence. were: personality disorders (29.3%), depressive disorders (17.3%), As compared to a group of non-smokers (n = 112), the percentage of substance dependence (16%), schizophrenia spectrum disorders smokers who could taste PTC was lower (57.96 %), and the inability (14.7%). Other diagnoses were: bipolar affective disorder (2%); to taste associated with an increased risk for smoking (chi2 = 3.56, p < posttraumatic stress disorder (1.33%). The control group consisted of 0.05). In smokers, overall scores in the three systems of dependency 348 volunteers - without a personal or familial (first degree) history Complex traits and polygenic disorders 322 of neuropsychiatric disorders and SB. The AGA haplotype (P=0.006, associated with both lcSSc (P=1.71x10-3 OR=0.85) and ACA OR=1.50) was associated with increased risk of SB. This seems to production (P=9.31x10-3 OR=0.86). result from the presence of BclI, and not from the 9beta and N363S Conclusions: Our data strongly suggest that IL2RA is involved in SSc, polymorphisms. specifically with lcSSc and ACA subgroups. P09.225 P09.227** Estrogen receptor α and androgen receptor gene Identification of novel genetic markers associated with clinical polymorphisms in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus phenotypes and auto-antibody subsets of systemic sclerosis and healthy controls through a genome wide association strategy S. Andonova1, D. Tanev2, R. Robeva3, M. Nikolova4, A. Tomova3, R. Rashkov2, J. Martin1, O. Gorlova2, B. Rueda1, B. P. C. Koeleman3, P. Carreira4, E. A. Savov1, Z. Kolarov2; Vicente5, L. Rodriguez-Rodriguez6, E. Scleroderma Group7, S. Scleroderma 1National Genetics Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Rheumatology, Group1, U. Scleroderma Group8, F. C. Arnett8, T. R. D. J. Radstake9, M. D. Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinical Center of Endocrinology Mayes8, J. Martin1; and Gerontology, Medical University – Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic of 1Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez Neyra, CSIC, Armilla, Spain, Nephrology, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. 2M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States, 3University Background: Systemic lupus erymathosus (SLE) is an autoimmune Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Hospital 12 Octubre, Madrid, disease that affects mainly females. Disturbances of estrogen Spain, 5Hospital La Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 6Hospital Clinico San Carlos, metabolism and decreased androgen levels were found in SLE, Madrid, Spain, 7European Scleroderma Group, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8The however the influence of hormone receptor genetic polymorphisms on University of Texas Health Science Center–Houston, Houston, TX, United the disease progress are still not clarified. States, 9Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. methods: A total of 109 women with SLE and 47 female controls The aim of this study was to determine the genetic components were genotyped for ERα polymorphisms PvuII T/C and XbaI A/G by contributing to different systemic sclerosis (SSc) clinical sub-phenotypes RFLP analysis. The absence of PvuII and XbaI restriction sites were of limited (lcSSc) and diffuse (dcSSc) cutaneous involvement, and indicated by “P” and “X” and presence by “p” and “x”, respectively. The with the SSc-specific auto-antibodies, anti-centromere (ACA) and CAG repeat length in AR was also investigated by fluorescence-based anti-topoisomerase I (ATA) through a genome-wide association study fragment analysis on an automatic DNA sequencer. Shorter allele (GWAS). Four GWAS cohorts, comprising 2,296 SSc patients and (SA), longer allele (LA) and biallelic mean (BM) were determined. SLE 5,171 healthy controls, were meta-analyzed looking for associations disease activity index (SLEDAI) and SLICC/ACR damage index were in the selected subgroups. Eighteen polymorphisms were further also calculated and relationships with the genetic parameters were tested in nine independent cohorts comprising an additional 3,175 investigated. SSc patients and 4,971 controls. Conditional analysis for associated Results: No differences were found between the ERα alleles SNPs in the HLA region was performed to explore their independent distribution in patients and controls. The CAG repeat lengths in the association in antibody subgroups. Overall analysis showed non-HLA SA, LA and BM were also similar. The (CAG)n number of LA but not SA polymorphisms rs11642873 in IRF8 gene (P = 2.32x10-12, OR = 0.75) was inversely related to SLICC index (r=-0.207, p=0.031). In patients and rs12540874 in GRB10 gene (P = 1.27x10-6, OR = 1.15) to be with PPXX genotype SLEDAI index was significantly lower than in associated with lcSSc and rs11047102 in SOX5 gene (P = 1.39x10-7, PpXx patients (p=0.016) but not different in comparison to patients OR = 1.36) with ACA positive patients. In the HLA region, we observed with ppxx (p>0.05). highly associated allelic combinations in the HLA-DQB1 locus with conclusions: Our preliminary results showed that AR and ERα ACA (P = 1.79x10-61, OR = 2.48), in the HLA-DPA1/B1 loci with ATA polymorphisms are not crucial for the development of SLE but probably (P = 4.57x10-76, OR = 8.84) and in NOTCH4 with ACA P = 8.84x10- modulate the activity of the disease and chronic damages in patients. 21, OR = 0.55) and ATA (P = 1.14x10-8, OR = 0.54). We have identified The study was financially supported by research grant 26/2010, MU three new non-HLA genes (IRF8, GRB10, and SOX5) associated with - Sofia SSc clinical and auto-antibody subgroups. Within the HLA region, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DPA1/B1 and NOTCH4 associations with SSc are P09.226 likely confined to specific auto-antibodies. These data emphasize the the autoimmune disease-associated iL2RA locus is involved in differential genetic components of subphenotypes of SSc. the clinical manifestations of systemic sclerosis F. Carmona1, J. Martin1, P. Carreira2, E. Vicente3, L. Rodriguez-Rodriguez4, P09.228 E. Scleroderma Group5, S. Scleroderma Group1, U. Scleroderma Group6, C. molecular investigation of tFAP2A and BmP4 genes in patients Fonseca7, J. Martin1; with cleft lip and palate 1Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez Neyra, CSIC, Armilla, Spain, T. K. Araujo1, M. Simioni1, I. L. Monlleó2, M. Í. B. Fontes3, R. Secolin1, Í. Lopes- 2Hospital 12 Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 3Hospital La Princesa, Madrid, Spain, Cendes1, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes1; 4Hospital Clinico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain, 5European Scleroderma Group, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6The University of Texas Health Science Center– Campinas, Brazil, 2Department of Pediatrics, State University of Alagoas, Houston, Houston, TX, United States, 7Royal Free and University College Maceio, Brazil, 3Medical Genetics Sector, Federal University of Alagoas, Medical School, London, United Kingdom. Maceio, Brazil. Objectives: Regulatory T cells (Tregs) are crucial in the maintenance Studies with mutant animals models can point directly to candidate of the immune tolerance and seem to play an important role in genes in humans and have been contributing to the knowledge about systemic sclerosis (SSc),. The interleukin 2 receptor alpha (IL-2RA) pathogenesis of cleft lip and palate (CL+/-P). Mice with mutations in is an important Treg marker, and polymorphisms of IL2RA gene are TFAP2A and BMP4 genes present the phenotype of clefts. In addition, associated with a number of autoimmune diseases. Therefore, we mutations in BMP4 have been previously described in patients with aimed to investigate for the first time the association of the IL2RA locus nonsyndromic CL+/-P. Based on these evidence the aim of our study in SSc. was to investigate the involvement of BMP4 and TFAP2A genes in Methods: A total of 2983 SSc patients and 2652 matched healthy the etiology of CL+/-P using mutation screening by direct sequence controls, from an initial Spanish cohort and five additional replication and enzyme digestion with HphI (PCR-RFLP). The sample included European cohorts of Caucasian origin, were genotyped for the IL2RA a total of 45 patients, 20 cases of syndromic CL+/-P and 25 cases gene variant rs11594656 using the TaqMan® allelic discrimination of nonsyndromic CL+/-P. We found no pathogenic sequence variant technology. in the TFAP2A gene. In the BMP4 gene, we found the rs17563 Results: A significant association of IL2RA rs11594656*T with the polymorphism (538T->C variant), previously described as associated presence of anti-centromere antibodies (ACA) was first detected in the with CL+/-P in the Chinese population. In order to investigate Spanish cohort (P=6.30x10-3, OR=0.77). The combined analysis of whether this same association exists in our sample, we genotyped an the replication sets showed a clear association with limited cutaneous additional control group of 169 normal subjects with no antecedent SSc (lcSSc, P=5.49x10-3 OR=0.84), and the overall meta-analysis of oral clefts in neither three generations nor oriental ancestrally. We including several cohorts evidenced that this variant is consistently found no significant differences in genotypes or allelic frequencies Complex traits and polygenic disorders 323 between patients and controls (p=0.3347,OR=0.718255,95% CI: 0.4 heterozygote is of 1,1%. TPMT*2 allele was not found. to 1.27). However, further studies with larger samples are necessary to elucidate this aspect. Financial Support: FAPESP, CNPq P09.231*** A genome-wide meta-analysis of six type 1 diabetes cohorts P09.229 identifies multiple associated loci Association of the toll-like receptor 4 Asp299Gly polymorphism J. P. Bradfield1, H. Q. Qu2, K. Wang1, H. Zhang1, P. M. A. Sleiman1, C. E. with atopic dermatitis in italian children. Kim1, F. D. Mentch1, H. Qiu1, J. T. Glessner1, K. A. Thomas1, E. C. Frackelton1, L. Rigoli1, M. Miraglia del Giudice2, G. L. Marseglia3, C. Cuppari1, C. Di Bella1, R. M. Chiavacci1, D. S. Monos3, R. Pandey1, M. Bakay1, S. F. A. Grant1, C. S. Cara1, P. D. Romeo1, M. La Rosa4, C. Salpietro1; Polychronakos4, H. Hakonarson1; 1Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital, MESSINA, Italy, 2Department of 1The Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Center for Applied Genomics, Pediatrics, II Medical School, Napoli, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Medical Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2The University of Texas School of Public School, Pavia, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, Catania, Italy. Health, Division of Epidemiology, Brownsville, TX, United States, 3The Background. Atopic dermatitis (AD) is a chronic inflammatory skin Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pathology and Laboratory disease with a multifattorial pathogenesis. A genetically determined Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4McGill University, Departments of defective function of pattern recognition receptors such as toll-like Pediatrics and Human Genetics, Montreal, QC, Canada. receptors (TLRs) has been proposed as a candidate mechanism in the Diabetes impacts approximately 200 million people worldwide, of which pathogenesis of AD. type 1 diabetes (T1D) represents approximately 10%. The application Aim: To study the impact of genetic predisposition of TLR2 and TLR4 of genome wide association studies (GWAS) has robustly revealed genes encoding for pattern recognition-related molecules for the dozens of genetic contributors to the pathogenesis of T1D, with the phenotype of AD. most recent meta-analysis identifying in excess of 40 loci. To identify methods. We performed a case/control study in which we included additional genetic loci for T1D susceptibility, we examined associations 102 Italian AD children (47 males and 55 females, median age 2,4 in the largest meta-analysis to date between the disease and ~2.54 years) and 50 gender matched non-atopic, healthy individuals (27 million SNPs in a combined cohort of 9,934 cases and 16,956 controls. males and 23 females, median age 2.5 years). The severity of AD was Targeted follow-up of 53 SNPs in 1,120 affect trios uncovered three measured using the SCORing Atopic Dermatitis (SCORAD) Index for new loci associated with T1D that reached genome wide significance. the evaluation extensiveness of skin disease. We examined the allelic The most significantly associated SNP (rs539514, P = 5.66x10-11) frequencies of R753Q TLR2 and Asp299Gly TLR4 single nucleotide resides in an intronic region of the LMO7 (LIM domain only 7) gene on polymorphisms (SNPs). Genotyping was performed using PCR and 13q22. The second most significantly associated SNP (rs478222, P = restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis. 3.50x10-9) resides in an intronic region of the EFR3B (protein EFR3 Results. For the R753Q TLR2 SNP, similar allelic frequencies were homolog B) gene on 2p23; however the region of linkage disequilibrium found in both groups. Moreover, the allelic frequencies of R753Q TLR2 is approximately 800kb and harbors additional multiple genes, including SNP was no different between the groups with mild, moderate and NCOA1, C2orf79, CENPO, ADCY3, DNAJC27, POMC, and DNMT3A. severe SCORAD. A significantly increased frequency of the Asp299Gly The third most significantly associated SNP (rs924043, P = 8.06x10-9) allele TLR4 was present (p<0.001). This SNP was significantly lies in an intergenic region on 6q27, where the region of association associated with moderate and severe AD. is approximately 900kb and harbors multiple genes including WDR27, conclusion. Our results suggest that in our group of children with C6orf120, PHF10, TCTE3, C6orf208, LOC154449, DLL1, FAM120B, AD, the TLR4 gene could play a crucial role in the development of AD, PSMB1, TBP and PCD2. These latest associated regions add to the probably with other genetic factors. growing repertoire of gene networks predisposing to T1D. P09.230 P09.232 HRmA in the tPmt gene study in Polish population The influence of polymorphic positions of the HLA-DRβ1 M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, P. Borun1,2, L. Jakubowska-Burek1,3, O. Zakerska2,4, and HLA-DQβ1 allele heterogeneity on disease risk of type 1 A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja3, A. Plawski1, U. Froster5, M. Szalata1,2, R. diabetes mellitus in iranian population Slomski1,2; a. sayad1, m. zamani2, m. akbari1, a. kazem nejad1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 1tarbiat modares university, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2tehran university, 2Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Poznan, Poland, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Type 1 Diabetes mellitus (T1D) is a chronic autoimmune and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, multifactorial disease. The HLA-DRB1and DQB1 loci have the 4The NanoBioMedical Centre, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland, strongest association with T1D. Various HLA-DRB1and DQB1 alleles 5Institute for Applied Human Genetics and Oncogenetics, Leipzig, Germany. encode different amino acids in critical positions of HLA-DRβ1and Thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT) is involved in the transformation DQβ1 molecules. In this study, we investigated highly polymorphic of thiopurine drugs which are used primarily in the treatment of amino acid residues of HLA-DRβ1and DQβ1 molecules to determine autoimmune disorders such as inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). their susceptibility or protective effect in100 Iranian T1D patients and Gene TPMT encoding thiopurine methyltransferase is highly 105 healthy controls. Analysis of the amino acid sequence of HLA- polymorphic. In our study we investigated the three most common DRβ1 and DQβ1 chains revealed the DRBβ1Lys71+ (p: 10-14; OR: 6.084) TPMT alleles responsible for a decreased enzyme activity: TPMT *2 and the DQβ1Asp57- (p: 10-8; OR: 3.31) were significantly more frequent (p.Ala80Pro), *3A (p.Ala154Thr, p.Tyr240Cys) and *3B (p.Ala154Thr). in patients and had a positive association with T1D. The homozygous These variants determine 80 - 95% of the intermediate and low DRβ1Lys71+ (p: 2× 10-7; OR: 30.938) and DQβ1Asp57- (p: 10-5; OR: 4.111) enzyme activity, and increase the risk of thiopurine-induced toxicity. had the strongest association with T1D susceptibility. According to The aim of our study was to optimize the HRMA (High Resolution our results indicating the crucial rule of the DRBβ1Lys71+ , we designed Melting Analysis) to identify main TPMT alleles as a simple alternative allele-specific primers to develop an easy, fast and cost-benefit method method to automatic sequencing and RFLP (Restriction Fragment to detect the DRβ1Lys71+. We also calculated PcPPV and PcNPV which Length Polymorphism). Moreover, we determined the frequency of showed that the person carrying the DRB1Lys71+/+ genotype has 1% these changes in Polish population. We tested 283 DNA samples of absolute risk to develop T1D. Polish population including 91 IBD patients treated with thiopurine drugs. Fragments of exon 4, 6 and 9 of TPMT gene enclosing codon P09.233 80, 154 and 240 respectively, were amplified and their melting profiles Two novel genes were identified as the susceptibility genes of were analyzed using LightCycler® 480 equipment. The results were the type 2 diabetes in Han chinese confirmed standard sequencing. Identification of sequence variants C. Yang1, F. Tsai2, J. Wu1, C. Chen2, C. Chen1, Y. Chen1; using HRMA is highly sensitive and less time consuming compared 1Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, to standard sequencing or RFLP. It can be easily integrated into Taichung, Taiwan. diagnostic testing. Furthermore, we found TPMT*3A allele frequency Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is the forth leading cause of death in Taiwan. of 5,3 % in Polish population. The frequency of TPMT*3B allele in To identify susceptibility genes that increase the risk of T2D in Han Complex traits and polygenic disorders 324 Chinese that accounts for 98% of the Taiwan population, we conducted gave the strongest evidence for association while TNNI3K and POMC, a genome-wide association study in which 643 cases and 812 random which were only detected in adult studies when using hundreds of controls were genotyped using Affymetrix SNP6.0 genechips. In the thousands of participants, were readily detected in our relatively first stage for genome wide scan, we selected 75 SNPs in 43 regions small sample size. We elected to take forward all novel loci yielding that had-logP>4 with trend test for subsequent cross-plateform association with P < 5x10-6 (n = 11) in order to test for replication in validation using Sequenom. After cross-plateform validation, a total of multiple existing datasets. To date, we observe consistent evidence 72 SNPs in 40 loci yielded consistent results using both Affymetrix and for replication at two loci, harboring the genes encoding alpha- Sequenom, including KCNQ1 and CDKAL1 loci previously reported protein kinase 1 (ALPK1) on 4q25 and glypican 5 (GPC5) on 13q31, to be associated with T2D. We took these SNPs forward to replicate respectively. As more data for the replication attempt is received, we in 785 additional samples (stage 2: 597 T2D cases and 188 controls). anticipate additional signals will survive this effort. Of the 72 SNPs in 40 loci selected in stage 1, only two novel loci still showed a strong association in the joint analysis of stage 1 and stage J09.01 2, except previously mapped KCNQ1. The strongest new association PON1 phenotype and gene polymorphisms in children with signal was found for SNP#1 located 2.6 kb upstream of a gene autism involved in pancreatic islet development (P=5.46x10-6). The second E. Dronca1, M. Dronca2, T. Mocanu3, I. V. Pop1; strongest signal was found with SNP#2 (P=8.28x10-6), which lies 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu 24.5kb downstream from a gene involved in the conversion of ketone Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, bodies. Our study may lead to a better understanding of differences in University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, the molecular pathogenesis of T2D among various populations. 3Department of Physiology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. P09.234 Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder of unknown etiology. Visfatin gene mutation may increase tendency to nephropathy Many genetic and environmental factors are incriminated in its among diabetics pathogenesis. Subacute exposure to organophosphates (OPs) S. Demir1, A. Ozgoz2, F. M. Icduygu2, K. Hekimler2, T. Koken3, N. Imirzalıoglu2; during critical periods of prenatal neurodevelopment is one of the 1Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, Nephrology Department, factors that may trigger autism. Human serum paraoxonase (PON1) Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Afyon Kocatepe University, School of Medicine, is a HDL-associated hydrolase, which in addition to hydrolyzing the Medical Genetics, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 3Afyon Kocatepe University, School OPs, plays a physiological role in reducing LDL oxidation. The PON1 of Medicine, Biochemistry Department, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey. gene shows two functional polymorphisms: M55L and Q192R. These Visfatin is a novel adipocytokine, which is suggested to play a role in polymorphisms influence the concentration and activity of PON1 kidney diseases. This study was performed to evaluate the association towards different substrates, including OPs. between visfatin gene promoter region SNPs and diabetic nephropathy. The gene-environment interaction is tested in the present study SNPs (1001T/G, 423A/G, 1535C/T) of the visfatin gene promoter by assessing the distribution and frequency of M55L and Q192R region were studied for 30 subjects with diabetic nephropathy, 30 polymorphisms in 58 autistic children and 43 controls. subjects without nephropathy and 30 healthy subjects, who served as No significant difference (p>0.05) in genotypes distribution was found controls, by real-time PCR method. Routine biochemical parameters, between autistic patients and controls (QQ 51.72%, QR 43.1%, RR serum insulin, TNF-α, visfatin, urinary protein and microalbumine were 5.17% / MM 12.1%, ML 60.3%, LL 27.6% for autistic group and QQ tested in subjects. Insulin resistance was evaluated by HOMA method. 51.16%, QR 44.18%, RR 4.65% / MM 9.3%, ML 53.5%, LL 37.2% for Heterozygotes for the SNPs 423 A/G and 1001 T/G had significantly control group). more risk to have nephropathy. They had lower serum visfatin levels Although, the paraoxonase activity did not present a significant than the subjects with AA and TT genotypes. There wasn’t any relation difference between the patients and controls (p>0.05), there was a between serum visfatin levels and the serum insulin, TNF-α, BMI, significant activity increase in the autistic groups with R allele number HbA1c, insulin resistance, proteinuria and creatinine clearence. But, and both in autistic and control groups with L allele number (p<0.05). healthy volunteers and diabetics with nephropathy had significantly The arylesterase activity was significantly decreased (p<0.05) lower serum visfatin levels compared to the diabetics without in autistic patients, with no relation to the number of R alleles, but nephropathy. The two SNPs, 1001 T/G and 423 A/G were in perfect increased in relation with L allele number (p<0.05). linkage disequilibrium. These results provide support for the hypothesis that PON1 To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study indicating arylesterase activity could represent a biochemical/genetic test in an association between diabetic nephropathy and visfatin gene estimating autism risk. polymorphism. High visfatin levels may harm the kidney and after development of nephropathy visfatin levels may decrease. J09.02 Assessment of functional impact in lumbar disk disease P09.235 D. Stoicanescu1, M. Cevei2, A. Belengeanu1, E. Sirbu3, M. Stoian1; meta-analysis of genome wide association studies reveals new 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, loci associated with childhood obesity 2University of Oradea, faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, R. Taal1, J. P. Bradfield2, V. W. V. Jaddoe1, S. F. A. Grant2, on behalf of the 3West University, Timisoara, Romania. EGG consortium; Lumbar disk disease is a common musculoskeletal disease that has 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Children’s Hospital of a very strong genetic component, revealed by elevated risks to both Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. near and distant relatives supporting a heritable contribution to the Genetic determinants of adult obesity have been established through development of the disorder. The aim of this study was to correlate meta-analyses of genome wide association studies (GWAS). However, some functional indicators that are used for patients with lumbar disk less progress has been made to establish genetic influences specific to disease. The lot was formed by 103 cases with clinical diagnosis of low childhood obesity though similar approaches. To identify novel genetic back pain accompanied or not by radiculopathy through lumbar disk factors that influence early-onset obesity, we performed a meta- hernia, examined in the Medical Rehabilitation Clinical Hospital Felix analysis of genome-wide genotyped datasets consisting of 5,447 cases Spa, between February-November 2010. All patients were investigated (>=95th percentile of BMI achieved any time from age 2 to 18 years by MRI, which confirmed the clinical diagnosis. In order to evidentiate old) and 8,185 controls (<50th percentile of BMI consistent throughout the impact of the lesion on functionality and daily activities, we used all measures during childhood) of European ancestry. Following the pain appreciation and consecutive disability parameters: Oswestry meta-analysis of ~2.54 million SNPs (directly genotyped or imputed), questionnaire. We also used MOS SF-36 Health Survay. Using AMA variation at seven loci showed notable evidence for association with Guide criteria we have evaluated infirmity that generates disability, childhood obesity (P < 5x10-8). All these loci have been previously measuring mobility of dorso-lumbar column. Correlation between reported in the context of adult BMI GWAS (FTO, MC4R, TMEM18, disability, investigated with Oswestry questionnaire, a functional POMC, FAIM2, TNNI3K and SEC16B), but their relative magnitude evaluation scale, and infirmity evaluated through AMA Guide criteria, of association were different in the childhood obesity setting.TMEM18 mobility evaluation parameter, was small, but significant (p=0.025). Complex traits and polygenic disorders 325 Life quality indicators registered with MOS SF36 and participation of, 2Institute of Genetics, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 3Institute of Molecular restriction evaluated with AMA, strongly correlate, statistically very Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. significantly (p<0.00001). The strongest correlation was noticed The aim of the present study was to examine the possible role of D between participation restriction revealed by AMA and variable allele as a risk factor in the development of ischemic stroke. It was ”physical function” of MOS- SF36 scale (r=0.49) statistically very analyzed 156 patients with ischemic stroke and 90 controls without significant (p<0.00001). Affection of mobility had a moderate functional cardio-vascular diseases. impact on the organism as a whole, but evaluation of life quality of The frequency of D allele was 63.8 % in patients and 43.3% in controls patients revealed that it decreased to half of the standard value. (x2=1.76, p=0.19). The distribution of the ACE gene genotypes frequencies weren’t statistically significant between stroke group and J09.03 controls (x2=2.70, p=0.26). Comparison of DRD1-DRD5 Expression Profiles in Rheumatoid But a significant increase in the frequency of ACE DD genotypes arthritis and systemic Lupus Erythematous Patients has been found in studied elderly male patients with ischemic stroke M. Sadeghi koupaei1, g. Aangari2, S. Nazari3; (OR=3.53; CI, 1.05-11.86, x2 =4.90, p=0.03) when compared ACE 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology(NIGEB)Shaheed genotypes frequencies in the male of control group. Beheshti Medical University (SBMU), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB, No increase in ACE DD genotype frequency was seen in all females Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical when compared to the respective control group (x2=0.81, p=0.67). Sciences, Mofid Hospital,Department of Hematology & Oncology,, Tehran, Also we have reported the D allele (60%) in hypertensive group of Islamic Republic of Iran. male carriers is more prevalent compared with female patients (50%) Background and Aims: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and Systemic lupus and male carriers of control group (48.4%) (x2=0.3.62, p=0.04). There erythematosus (SLE) are both autoimmune disease that their causes is significant difference in the correlation of D allele carrier and patient are still unknown. It appears that both genetic and environmental serum total cholesterol, triglyceride with correlation respectively factors play a role in their pathogenesis. Dopamine and its receptors coefficients r = 0.25 (p = 0.03) and r = 0.36 (p = 0.02). are the important components of neurotransmission network. Recent In this study we have demonstrated that DD genotype have some studies reveal that in addition to the CNS, immune cells synthesis association with hypertensive male individuals, the data shown neurotransmitters such as dopamines so that these catecholamines statistical significance. The ACE D allele in male could be is an can regulate immune functions. The aim of this study is to evalute independent risk factor of development of the hypertension and the dopamine receptor gene expression level on peripheral blood ischemic stroke in elderly persons. mononuclear cells of RA and SLE patients compared to normal individuals. J09.06 material and methods: In the present study, we investigated dopamine thrombosis in young men homozygous for Leiden mutation receptor gene expression in PBMCs of 30 RA and SLE patients and M. M. Litvinova; 20 healthy individuals using Real Time-PCR. The specificities of First Moscow State I.M. Sechenov Medical University, Moscow, Russian the obtained Real time PCR products for the respective dopamine Federation. receptors fragments were confirmed by sequenced analysis capillary Hereditary thrombophilia is one of the most important medical and system (ABI3700, Applied Bio system, USA). social problems. It is characterized by activation of coagulation system Results: The results showed that D2 and D4 receptors mRNA and lead to the propensity to develop thrombosis. It is known that Expression significantly altered in PBMC of RA and SLE patients. factor V Leiden is one of the main members of coagulation pathway. Compared to normal individuals, D2 receptor mRNA in RA and SLE Factor V Leiden thrombophilia is characterized by a poor anticoagulant patients response to activated protein C and an increased risk for venous decreased, whereas D4 receptor mRNA Expression increased. The thromboembolism. Mutation G1691A (rs6025) of F5 gene also called changes of D1, D3 and D5 receptors mRNA Expression was not as Leiden mutation is responsible for such condition. In European significant. countries allele 1691A frequency is around 2%. Homozygous genotype conclusion: It is suggested that dopamine and its receptors have an for Leiden mutation is very rear. effective role in pathophysiology of RA and SLE diseases. We report three cases of thrombosis in young male patients homozygous for Leiden mutation. Beside Leiden mutation in F5 all three patients J09.04 were genotyped for SNPs in F2 (G20210A or rs1799963), MTHFR Identification of Novel Mitochondrial Homoplasmic T14512C (C677T or rs1801133 and A1298C or rs1801131), MTRR (A66G or mutation in iranian Brugada syndrome Patients rs1801394), and MTR (A2756G or rs1805087). Data on patients is M. Khatami1, M. Heidari2, F. Khatami3; shown in the table 1. 1Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University,, Yazd, Islamic It is important to mention that in all three cases additional exogenous Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, factors as smoking and long hiking together with exposure to cold Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology, Science School, were presented. Thus thrombosis can occur in very young patients Ferdowsi University, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. with combination of genetic risk factors of thrombophilia. It is important Brugada syndrome is a disorder characterized by sudden death to detect such predisposition as early as possible to be able to prevent associated with one of several ECG patterns characterized by thrombotic complications. incomplete right bundle branch block and ST elevations in the anterior Characteristic of patients (DVT - deep vein thrombosis) precordial leads. We identified a homoplasmic T14512C mutation in Genotype the mitochondrial ND6 gene in 20 unrelated patients with Brugada F5 F2 MTHFR MTHFR MTRR MTR syndrome patients by PCR-SSCP. This Mutation causes a change of Met to Val (M54V missense mutation). In this study, the effects of this Age missense mutation upon transmembrane helixes were assayed by Patients G1691A G20210A C677T A1298C A66G A2756G Additional of means of PolyPhen database (Polymorphism Phenotyping). PolyPhen risk factors first is an automatic tool for prediction of possible impact of an amino acid DVT substitution on the structure and function of a human protein. The Smoking, result of this prediction showed that M54V mutation is benign. Thus, #1 A/A G/G T/T A/A A/A A/G hyperhomo- 18 further investigations necessary to clarify this correlation. cisteinemia Long hiking, J09.05 #2 A/A G/G T/T A/C G/G A/G exposure to 19 Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene i/D polymorphism and cold ischemic stroke in moldavian patients #3 A/A G/G C/T A/A A/G A/G Smoking 26 E. Mocan1,2, L. Lisiy1, S. Protopop1, E. Bondarenko3, N. Barbacari2, S. Limborska3; 1the State Medical and Pharmaceutical University, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic Complex traits and polygenic disorders 326 J09.07 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, a co-substrate for homocysteine re- molecular genetics of severe asthma in children: no association methylation to methionine. Previously it has been reported, that there with cFtR gene mutations common to Russian populations is association between MTHFR mutations C677T and A1298C, and V. S. Tikhonova1, A. N. Voitovich1, E. G. Mikhailova2, T. E. Ivaschenko2, A. V. increased risk of schizophrenia, there are also publications without any Orlov3, L. A. Zhelenina1, D. S. Korostovsev1, V. I. Larionova1; association. 1St.Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, the aim to detect frequency of MTHFR polymorphisms C677T and 2Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics & Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, A1298C in children with schizophrenia, and to compare results with 3St-Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, control group Russian Federation. materials and methods The patient group was 53 children with Background: Currently little is known from the literature about a schizophrenia, but the control group consisted of 150 volunteers. relationship between severe asthma (SA) in children and cystic fibrosis DNA was extracted from whole blood and purified by standard phenol/ (CF). We hypothesized that children with severe asthma may carry a chloroform protocol. The presence of C677T and A1298C mutations «mild» and/or a «severe» mutations of cystic fibrosis transmembrane was analyzed using PCR with subsequent restriction enzyme Hinf I conductance regulator gene. Objective: To detect sixteen CFTR gene and MboII digestion, respectively, and detected in PAGE. mutations most common to Russian populations in children with severe Results The observed frequency of the T allele of the C677T mutation asthma. Patients and methods: SA group included 59 children aged 4 was 0,324. There were no statistically significant differences between - 17 years old (43 boys and 16 girls) with severe asthma. CF group patient group and control group- 0,319 (p value 1,0). The observed included 29 children aged 5 - 16 years old with a primary diagnosis of frequency of the C allele of the A1298C in patients group was 0, 311 CF confirmed by CFTR genotyping (15 boys and 14 girls). Genotyping whereas in control group - 0,367, the difference was not statistically of CFTR gene was confirmed by experts Laboratory Ott’s Institute of significant (p value 0,395). Obstetrics & Gynecology. We used two kits developed by Center for Distribution between genotypes in patients’ groups is showed in table Molecular Genetics (Moscow): “CF - 5” kit (G542X, W1282X, N1303K, Wild type (c677t) Wt/c677t c677t/c677t 3849+10kbC>T, R334W) and “CF - 11” kit (del21 kb, F508del, I507del, Wild type (A1298C) 6 16 5 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821delT, L138ins, Wt/A1298C 12 6 1 604insA, 3944delTG). Results: In the group of children with CF, the frequency a major mutation F508del was 79% (48% with genotype A1298C/A1298C 6 1 0 F508del/F508del and 31% with compound genotype F508del/others). In 14% of the cases, there were identified some other mutations of conclusions the CFTR gene: N1303K, 394delTT, 2143delT, CFTRdele2, 3 (21kb). 1. The present results suggest that the investigated MTHFR The rest 7% of the cases were not clarified. We have found neither polymorphisms do not influence susceptibility of schizophrenia «mild» nor «severe» the mutations of CFTR gene in the SA group. 2. It is necessary to continue this study with a greater number of Conclusion: This study failed to show an association of mutations of patients. CFTR gene with severe asthma in children. J09.10 J09.08 the study of a role of genes catechol-O-methyltransferase What a role vitamin D receptor and its gene polymorphism can (Val108met), tyrosine hydroxylase TH (VNtR in 1 exon), play in the development of axial myopia in children? and a dopamine receptor DRD4 (VNtR in 5 ‘ UtR ‘-areas) in R. Bannour, A. N. Voytovich, V. V. Brzhevskii, V. I. Larionova; development of disease and neuropsychological abnormalities St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian at Parkinson’s disease patients Federation. G. Akhmadeeva, I. Khidiyatova, I. Gilyazova, A. Baitimerov, A. Sadyikova, R. The axial myopia in children caused by the eyeball overgrowth Magzhanov, E. Khusnutdinova; in the anteroposterior direction is an actual problem of pediatric Institute of biochemistry and genetics Ufa Scientic Centre RAS, Ufa, Russian ophthalmology today. The aim of this study was to investigate a Federation. probable association of TaqI polymorphism of vitamin D receptor (VDR) The purpose of the study is searching of the genetic factors and gene with the development and severity of axial myopia in children to neuropsychological abnormalities in Parkinson’s disease (PD) identify its possible role and the role of its protein product in the eye development. During our clinic and genetic research of Parkinson’s tissues development. We examined 84 children (168 eyes) aged 4 to disease we’ve examined PD patients (N=658) and control individuals 17 yo with emmetropia and axial myopia of various degree. The results (N=538). Psychological investigation of 319 PD was carried out. of echo biometric evaluation of the axial length, anterior chamber depth In the expanded samples of patients and control individuals the (ACD), lens thickness, and vitreous chamber depth of each eye were association analysis of PD with polymorphic variants of monoamine compared according to the TaqI genotypes polymorphism detected by metabolizing enzyme genes was performed: TH (VNTR in 1 exon), PCR-RFLP method. We have found a relationship between the TaqI COMT (Val108Met) and DRD4 (VNTR in 5 ‘ UTR ‘-areas). The most polymorphism of the VDR gene and the size of the ACD that correlated important results have been received in COMT gene analysis, giving with the axial length of the eyeball. ACD for tt-genotype carriers was evidence concerning the influence of Val108Met polymorphism on PD 3.73 Â± 0.04 mm, and ACD for b/T-allele carriers was 3.44 Â± 0.05 development: genotype *H/*H and allele *H, determining synthesis mm, (p < 0,001). TaqI polymorphism affects the vitamin D-binding of the enzyme with high activity, may be considered as genetic domain of the receptor. Therefore we hypothesize that VDR gene markers of the increased risk contributing to development of PD in polymorphism in combination with external factors such as vitamin Bashkortostan Republic as a whole and to the most severe PD form, D and/or ultraviolet deficiency might be a cause of axial myopia in in particular. Genotype *H/*H and allele *H were also risk markers children. Undoubtedly, further studies addressed to the identification for the development of such neuropsychological abnormalities as of a role of vitamin D receptor and its gene, as well as an implication personal anxiety, depression, dementia, whereas the genotype *L/*H, of vitamin D and ultraviolet exposures, in the development of axial defining average activity of COMT, made protective impact, reducing myopia in children are required. risk of PD development. The comparative analysis of the investigated polymorphic loci of TH and DRD4 genes hasn’t revealed significant J09.09 differences between PD samples and controls. No association between functional polymorphisms in mtHFR and childhood schizophrenia in Latvian population J09.11 M. Kreile1,2, L. Piekuse1,2, D. Bauze2, Y. Stankevich1, A. Zarina1, B. Lace3,2, A. eNOs polymorphism and AcE polymorphism gene in secondary Krumina3; arterial hypertension in a romanian children population 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Children’s University Hospital, Riga, C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, I. Pascanu3; Latvia, 3Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia. 1Pediatric Department No 2, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, introduction Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 2Genetic Department, University of Medicine catalyzes the conversion of 5,10-methylenetetrahydrofolate to and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 3Endocrinology Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 327 Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. are important regulators of muscle energy metabolism during exercise. Mures, Romania. There is a conflicting data concerning whether A/G CKMM(rs8111989) The aim of our study is to investigate whether genetic polymorphisms and C/T AMPD1(rs17602729) gene polymorphisms are associated in the endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) gene (in intron 4 with endurance performance related phenotypes. (4b/4a)) or insertion/deletion (I/D) polymorphism of the angiotensin-1 Purpose of the study was to determine whether there is a difference converting enzyme (ACE) gene are associated with secondary in A/G CKMM and C/T AMPD1 genotypes distributions between elite hypertension (HT) in children. Russian endurance athletes (EA) and students of Saint-Petersburg We genotyped 40 healthy (controls), and 38 hypertensive children Universities without training experience (Con), and to investigate the and adolescents. We compared the distribution of eNOS and ACE association of these polymorphisms with VO and its response 2max genotypes in the two study groups of subjects. Arterial hypertension (deltaVO ) to 4 months endurance training program. 2max was defined as systolic/diastolic blood pressure measurements higher The analysis was performed on DNA of 170 EA and 209 Con. VO 2max than 95 age-gender-height percentile of the adopted reference values. was measured for EA during cycle ergometry tests, for 27 EA - before The 4a/a and 4a/b genotype for the intron 4 polymorphism was more and after 4 months of endurance training. The A/G CKMM and C/T common in normotensive than in hypertensive children. The 4a/b AMPD1 gene polymorphisms were detected by RFLP-analysis. eNOS genotype distribution in patients with secondary hypertension There were no differences in genotypic and allelic distributions of (aa= 0%, ab= 23,68%, bb= 76,32%) did slightly differ from genotype A/G CKMM SNPs between EA and Con. Frequencies of AMPD1 distribution in controls (aa= 5%, ab= 37,5%, bb= 57,5%), and the bb CC genotype and C allele were significantly (P<0.01) higher for EA genotype was not associated with secondary hypertension (RR 1.611; compared with Con. VO of EA was genotype-dependent for CKMM 2max CI (0.9-2.88); p = 0.09 ). Moreover, the I/D ACE genotype distribution (AA:59.9±8.2ml/min/kg, AG:54.4±9.3ml/min/kg, GG:43.2±9.2ml/min/ in patients with HT (DD= 18,42%, ID= 68,42%, II= 13,16%) did differ kg,P<0.001) and AMPD1 (CC:54.8±7.9ml/min/kg, CT+TT:47.6±5.4ml/ significantly (p=0.029) from genotype distribution in controls (DD= min/kg,P<0.001). A significantly lower mean deltaVO was detected 2max 47,5%, ID= 42,5%, II= 10%), and the DD genotype was not associated in EA with GG genotype (AA+AG:15.5ml/min/kg, GG:8.5ml/min/ with HT kg,P<0.04) and in T AMPD1 allele carriers (CC:15.0ml/min/kg, (RR 0.4516; 95% CI 0.23-0.88; P = 0.0084). In conclusion, we failed CT+TT:9.2ml/min/kg,P<0.03). to demonstrate that the 4a/b eNOS polymorphism and the ACE I/D Results provide evidence that A/G CKMM(rs8111989) and C/T polymorphism are genetic markers for secondary hypertension in AMPD1(rs17602729) gene polymorphisms contribute to differences children. in VO and VO -response to endurance training and might be 2max 2max Acknowledgments: This study was supported by a CNCSIS Grant - molecular markers for endurance performance in athletes. 137/2008 for Young PhD, Romania. J09.12 AcE gene polymorphism in children with nephrotic syndrome in P10 Evolutionary and population genetics, and a Romanian population Genetic epidemiology Z. Gall1, C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, E. Kiss1; 1Pediatric Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 2Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania. P10.01 Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is one of the commonest renal problems ADAM33 polymorphisms and overall, cardiovascular and cOPD encountered in children. The role of angiotensin-converting enzyme mortality: prospective cohort study (ACE) insertion/deletion (I/D) gene polymorphism in various renal S. M. Figarska, J. M. Vonk, H. M. Boezen; disorders has been investigated. We have evaluated the frequency of Department of Epidemiology, Groningen, Netherlands. ACE polymorphisms and their impact on the clinical course of INS in Background: The ADAM33 gene is associated with the children in a romanian county hospital. pathophysiology of COPD and atherosclerosis. This study investigated This study comprised 20 pediatric patients with nephrotic syndrome, overall, cardiovascular (CVD) and COPD mortality, in relation to SNPs 11 males (55%) and 9 females (45%). Forty children without previous in ADAM33. renal diseases and negative proteinuria were enrolled as a control methods: The vital status of 8,465 participants in the Vlagtwedde/ group (50% males and 50% females). Polymerase chain reaction Vlaardingen cohort study was assessed at December 31st, 2008. amplification was performed on genomic DNA isolated from peripheric Vlagtwedde/Vlaardingen is a general population based cohort with a blood leucocytes. follow-up of 25 years (1965-90) with medical surveys every 3 years. The distribution of ACE DD, ID, and II genotypes in NS patients were We genotyped four ADAM33 SNPs (S_1, S_2, T_2, Q_1) in 1,390 20; 70 and 10%, respectively; the corresponding numbers for the subjects participating in the last survey. We performed Cox regression control group were 47,5; 42,5 and 10%, respectively. Angiotensin- to estimate the risk of the SNPs in relation to mortality, with adjustment converting enzyme genotypes were no significantly different between for gender, age, FEV, height, place of residence and packyears of 1 patients and control groups (p>0.05). smoking. In addition, stratified analyses according to gender and The study groups consisted of 14 (70%) with steroid-sensitive smoking habits were performed. nephrotic syndrome (SNSS) and 6 (30%) with steroid-resistant Results: At December 31st, 2008, 284 (20.4%) of the included subjects nephrotic syndrome (SRNS). The distribution of the ACE genotype was had died (107 due to CVD and 20 due to COPD). Homozygous II, 14,29%; ID, 64,29%; and DD, 21,42% in the SSNS population and mutants for SNP T_2 had an increased risk of total and CVD mortality ID, 83,33% and DD, 16,67% in the SRNS population. No statistically compared to wild types [HR=3.6 (95% CI 2.0- 6.7) and 3.4 (1.2-9.5) significant difference was found between steroid sensitivity and ACE respectively]. Individuals homozygous for the minor allele of S_1, S_2, genotypes. T_2 or Q_1 had a significantly increased risk of COPD mortality. In Conclusion: The current study reveals no association between the ACE stratified analyses the risk of total mortality associated with SNP T_2 gene I/D polymorphism and clinical course and steroid responsiveness. did not change: females [3.5 (1.5-8.3)], males [3.1 (1.2-7.6)], never Further studies with a larger number of patients are needed. smokers [3.8 (0.9-16.3)], ever smokers [3.6 (1.8-7.2)]. conclusion: This study shows for the first time that ADAM33 is a pleiotropic gene J09.13 that is associated with total, CVD and COPD mortality, independent of A/G CKMM and c/t AMPD1 gene polymorphisms in elite Russian potential confounders. athletes and response to endurance training O. Fedotovskaya1, I. Ahmetov2, V. Rogozkin1; 1Research Institute of Physical Culture, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. There is evidence that athletic performance is influenced by genetic factor. Skeletal muscle isoforms of creatine kinase and AMP-deaminase Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 328 P10.02 P10.04 A statistical method for estimation of the age of an admixed Grading the credibility of genetic associations in Alzheimer’s population disease using the interim Venice criteria S. Bhattacharya1, A. Ghosh1, A. Basu2; L. Broer, M. Schuur, A. C. J. W. Janssens, C. M. van Duijn; 1Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India, 2National Institute of Biomedical Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Genomics, Kalyani, India. The Alzgene database is a valuable resource for researchers working Whereas the vast majority of DNA sequence-level variation evolves in Alzheimer’s disease (AD). In the database, the credibility of genetic neutrally and is maintained by a balance between the mutation associations is graded using the interim Venice Criteria but these criteria process and random drift, some parts of the human genome have have never been formally evaluated. We evaluated the robustness of been subjected to natural selection. Admixed populations are unique in the Venice grades in Alzgene data in a simulation studies by adding that they represent the sudden confluence of geographically diverged hypothetical results of simulated studies to the meta-analyses in the genomes with novel environmental challenges. Thus, genomes from top list. We further conducted a follow-up study of the interim grades each ancestral population were presented with new challenges. This of the top list. The Alzgene ‘top list’ changed considerably (40%) over kind of selection pressure may be quite different from that faced by the course of one year. A total of 3 genes with strong credibility were stationary populations, in which the local environmental changes may graded to weak within this short period. When evaluating the question occur gradually, allowing for rare advantageous alleles to increase in whether this is due to a high type 1 error (p-values) or type two error frequency. Admixed populations therefore offer special opportunities (low power), we found that increasing power had very little effect on for studying recent selection. the positive predictive value of a finding, but the impact of testing with a In this study, we propose a method for estimating the ‘age’ of an lower p-value is major. Based on a data-freeze of December 2009 our admixed population. Using Kimura’s (1955) solution of a process of simulations show that many genes could drop due to a low OR (<1.15; random genetic drift, we developed a novel method of determining bias criterion), except for APOE and ACE. .Our simulation studies the time of a past admixture event based on genetic data comprising show it is impossible to change the credibility of ACE based on the of both correlated and independent markers. An extension of the heterogeneity (I2). However, the credibility for ACE altered empirically work has been identification of markers exposed to natural selection due to first study bias. Based on our finding we propose evidence followed by proposition of a revised time estimator for the admixture criterion by a criterion based on the p-values and to replace the low event. summary OR criterion for bias by a criterion based on the presence of Using simulated datasets generated under different assumptions, we replication. have shown that the estimators we propose are robust to fluctuations in the time of the admixture event, proportion of mixing and the genetic P10.05 divergence between the ancestral populations. However increase in Variation at Follicle stimulating Hormone Receptor (FsHR) gene population size and number of markers attributed to a remarkable and age at natural menopause influence the onset of Alzheimer’s improvement in the efficiency of the estimators, even under the disease in women. scenario of natural selection. R. M. Corbo1, G. Gambina2, L. Ulizzi1, E. Broggio2, R. Scacchi3; 1Biology and Biotechnology Department, La Sapienza University, Rome, P10.03 Italy, 2Neurology Division, Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy, 3CNR Institute of interactions between genetic ancestry and socioeconomic Molecular Biology and Pathology, Rome, Italy. status shape self-identification and discrimination among Puerto There is evidence of a higher prevalence of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) Ricans in women, and it is becoming clear that it may be due not only to their M. Via1,2, M. E. Esteban1, L. Fejerman2, L. Avilés3, E. G. Burchard2, J. C. longer life expectancy, but also to biological risk factors. In previous Martínez-Cruzado3; investigations we observed that, in addition to genes involved in 1University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2University of California, San estrogen metabolism (ESR1 and CYP19), also gender-specific factors Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States, 3University of Puerto Rico, such as past fertility may play a relevant role in the development of AD Mayagüez, Mayagüez, Puerto Rico. in women. In the present study we investigated the possible influence Puerto Ricans are a complex society resulting from the admixture of the on AD onset of FSHR gene, that is involved in the regulation of fertility original Taíno Amerindians, Europeans, and Africans. This admixture in women. As a possible AD risk factor, age at natural menopause was process was not random and we identified assortative mating based examined as well. on genetic ancestry in a previous study. Moreover, historical processes In a sample of 212 women with late-onset sporadic AD and 85 control have contributed to the geographic heterogeneity in the distribution women the FSHR Thr307Ala (rs 6165) polymorphism was examined. of admixture across the island of Puerto Rico, which also influenced A significant excess of FSHR GG genotype (Ala/Ala) (OR = 0.46 , 95% social differences. CI 0.24-0.90, p=0.02) was observed in controls suggesting that Ala/Ala Here, we analyze a census-based sample of 405 Puerto Ricans that genotype could have a protective effect on AD development in women. fulfilled a comprehensive survey about the concept of race, the use AD women had an age at natural menopause (49.7± 0.21) lower of racial classifications, perception of discrimination, and social class. than controls (50.6± 0.34, p=0.02) and linear regression analysis These individuals were also genotyped using a panel of 106 Ancestry showed a significant positive relationship (p=0.03) between age at Informative Markers (AIMs) to determine their admixture proportions. natural menopause and age at AD onset. These observations seem to Our sample of Puerto Rican individuals showed average proportions support the hypothesis that the loss of neuroprotective estrogens after of 19.5% African, 64.3% European, and 14.9% Amerindian ancestries, menopause may play a role in AD development in women. similar to previous studies. There were significant differences in ancestry between individuals that self-identified as “White” or “Black”, P10.06 although both groups overlapped in the distribution of ancestry values. Association of genetic polymorphism at the APOAi/ciii/iV/V gene Other variables, such as socioeconomic status, income, or education, loci with variation in plasma lipid levels among a sample of the contributed to the differences in self-identification and to differences general Kuwaiti population in the perception of race and discrimination. As previously observed S. A. Al-Bustan, B. G. Annice, M. A. Alnaqeeb; for other demographic factors, Amerindian ancestry did not play any Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Kuwait University, substantial role in these processes. These results have substantial Safat, Kuwait. implications to understand the social and demographic processes that Apolipoproteins are responsible for the clearance of lipoproteins, have formed this population. failure of which may lead to the development of dyslipidemia. Numerous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have been identified at the APOAI/CIII/IV/V gene cluster on chromosome 11q23- 24 that may alter the transport and/or metabolism of lipoproteins. As hypercholesterolemia and hypertriglyceridemia have been reported to be highly prevalent in the Kuwait population, the objective of this study was to determine genetic polymorphisms at the APOAI/CIII/IV/V Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 329 locus in a sample of the general Kuwaiti population (n=482). A total patients”, “Founder effect”. of 8 SNPs were genotyped and analyzed with regards to plasma lipid Results: The distribution of the autosomal recessive disorders was levels, BMI and Arab ethnicity. The SNPs included APOAIV Q360H not uniform and some traits are common. Some examples are: and T347, APOCIII 3238C with APOCIII 3238C›G, -455T›G, -484C›T Familial Mediterranean Fever, ßthalassemias, cystic fibrosis. The as well as the APOAV -1131T›C, c.56c›G and c.1259T. Genotype and relative homogeneity of populations from North Africa has often allele frequencies were determined by simple gene counting methods been underlined, and several founder mutations have already been and tested for Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium and Linkage disequilibrium suggested. A number of rare diseases described from North Africa using GENEPOP (Version 3.4) while haplotypes were constructed have now been few recognised in other countries; this result suggests using HAPLOVIEW. Genotype and allele frequencies as well as that the private syndrome does exist such as Andermann Syndrome, haplotypes were comparable to those reported in other populations Hutchinston-Gilford syndrome and Anderson disease. For theses and will be presented. Multivariate analysis was carried out to reasons, our region will continue to be a source of new information’s investigate the association of minor alleles with variation in lipid levels. about genetic disorders for the whole world. With the special religious Preliminary results indicated a genetic component to be involved in and cultural backgrounds, more work should be given in planning and predisposing Kuwaiti’s to dyslipidemia. Investigating potential direct research ways of prevention and treatment of genetic disorders. or indirect involvement of minor alleles in Kuwaiti’s could reflect the interaction of environmental factors such as fat-rich diet and sedentary P10.09 life-style with the diverse ethnicity in Kuwait to promote dyslipidemia. stR data from forensics: what can it tell us about human Further analysis of other polymorphisms in a larger sample is currently population history? being analyzed. N. M. Silva1, E. S. Poloni2, M. Currat2, L. Pereira1,3; 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto P10.07 - IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2Laboratory of Anthropology, Genetics and Association of the APOD gene with cardiovascular and Peopling history (AGP), Department of Anthropology, University of Geneva, metabolic events Geneva, Switzerland, 3Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade do Porto, Porto, N. Erginel-Ünaltuna1, C. Gulec1, N. Coban1, F. Guclu-Geyik1, A. Onat2; Portugal. 1Istanbul University, Institute of Experimental Medical Research, Deperment of Forensic genetics is prolific in generating genetic profiles based on Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Cardiology Society, Istanbul, Turkey. Short Tandem Repeats (STRs), at a worldwide scale. The most used ApoD is a lipocalin which plays a role for transport of hydrophobic commercial kits include 13 common autosomal STR loci, being widely molecules. While it is well known that ApoD has tissue-specific screened for consistency and quality control purposes between labs. physiogical ligands and functions, these are still subject for exploration. The availability of such amount of data at a worldwide scale drove Transgenic mice over-expressing ApoD show changes in lipid and us to construct an online database of allele frequency data - Strdna- glucose metabolism. db - and an online tool comprising genotype profiles - PopAffiliator. Our previous findings show that ApoD is present among genes that Here, we intended to understand how informative these markers are expressed mainly in the heart and its expression is significantly used in forensics can be to unravel human demographic history. The decreased on atherosclerotic plaques. Furthermore, as a preliminary analysed datasets included frequency data - 190 populations and finding, variations at the functional regions of ApoD gene on 50 69,229 individuals - and genotype data - 43 populations and 11,181 patients with coronary heart disease has been explored using DHPLC individuals. and differences in sequences were found on 16 patients. These pilot Inter-population comparisons indicate a significant level of population studies lead us to the hypothesis that ApoD gene polymorphisms and structure, with a global FST value of 4.3-5.0% for both datasets, thus in protein may play a role in cardiovascular diseases and metabolic agreement with levels inferred in non-forensic studies. This agreement syndrome in humans. We further analyzed one of those SNPs in in our further extends to the pattern of within-population diversity, which DNA bank of 2235 people specific for Turkish Population, There were shows a decrease from sub-Saharan African to American populations, significant associations with this genotype and hypertension, physical in accordance with the recent African origin of modern humans. activity in the whole group. Gender-specific analyses showed that Actually, the geographic distance to East Africa explains 55% of the there was an association with ApoA1 levels and physical activity after decrease in genotype diversity, a pattern that could be explained by a exclusion of drug usage in women. In men, however, hypertension, series of founder effects during the expansions out-of-Africa. physical activity as well as fasting glucose levels, after exclusion of Our results show that extensive datasets from forensics can be used drug usage, were found to be associated. to address population genetics’ questions, and the statistical methods These is the first study to show that ApoD might play a role in used provide reliable results as they account for the particularities and cardiovascular and metabolic event. ApoD-protein analyses can limitations of those markers. be performed and investigated, if this protein can be specified as a biomarker. P10.10 Epidemiological study of Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome in P10.08 European population Autosomal recessive disorders in the south mediterranean L. Odak1, I. Barisic1, M. Loane2, E. Calzolari3, E. Garne4, D. Wellesley5, H. Region: An overview from North Africa Dolk6; O. MHAMDI1, W. KELMEMI1, M. KHARRAT1, R. MRAD1,2, H. CHAABOUNI 1Children’s Hospital Zagreb, Clinical Hospital Center Sisters of Mercy BOUHAMED1,2; Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 2EUROCAT Central Registry, University of Ulster, 1Department of Human Genetics. University Tunis El Manar, Faculty of Newtonbabbey Co Antrim, UK, Ulster, United Kingdom, 3Division of Medical Medicine, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Department of congenital and Hereditary diseases; Genetics, Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, University of, Charles Nicolle hospital, Tunis, Tunisia. Ferrara, Italy, 4Kolding Hospital, Kolding, Odense, Denmark, Odense, Denmark, Hereditary diseases and congenital abnormalities have been reported 5Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Ane Hospital, Southampton, to affect 2 - 5 % of all live births. Actual data suggest that genetics United Kingdom, Southampton, United Kingdom, 6EUROCAT Central Raegistry, disorders are common also in countries of the North Africa. This University of Ulster, Newtonbabbey Co Antrim, UK, Ulster, United Kingdom. population is made of a mosaic of communities. This heterogeneity Beckwith Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth syndrome with the same social and economic structure has contributed to characterized by growth disregulation, risk of tumour development increase the rate of endogamy and consanguineous unions. These and congenital anomalies. In this study we analysed 197 patients practices lead to the emergence of autosomal recessive. registered in EUROCAT network of congenital anomaly registries Aim: The aim of this study was to report the genetics spectrum of in 1980-2007 period by monitoring population of 13 546 771 births. autosomal recessive disorders and analysed their prevalence in North The prevalence was 1.45 per 100 000 births. Male to female ratio Africa. was 1.3:1. High proportion of patients was diagnosed by prenatal methods: An exhaustive electronic and library research of the recent ultrasound examination (70/166; 42.1%), 41 patient was discovered publications was carried on the biomedical databases Pubmed and at birth (41/166; 24.69%) and 55 patients (33.3%) were diagnosed OMIM using Keywords “autosomal recessive diseases”, “North African during the first month of life. Most patients were live births (177/197; Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 330 89.8%), eight were stillbirths (8/166; 4.81%), and twelve pregnancies people with blood group O should be tested for Bombay phenotype. were terminated after prenatal diagnosis (12/70; 17.4%) due to heart, kidney or limb anomalies. Seven live births didn’t survive the P10.13 first week of life (7/177; 3.9%). In 148 (75.12 %) of patients major Genetic-epidemiological study of BRcA1 in an isolated malformations were present, with the hallmarks of the syndrome, population of south tyrol. Description of a new mutation. omphalocele (54.72%; 81/148) and macroglossia (52.7%; 78/148), C. Platzer, A. J. Lanthaler, M. Mitterer, H. Heidegger, F. D. Vogl; being the most common. Other associated anomalies were present General Hospital Merano, Merano, Italy. in 68 (46%) patients: cardiovascular in 20.28 % (30/148), urinary in Purpose: Due to its geopolitical situation and socio-cultural heritage 17.56% (26/148), limb defects in 9.15% (14/148), and central nervous South Tyrol can be considered a population isolate. The annual system malformations and cleft lip in 2.0% (3/148). In thirteen patients incidence of breast cancer in this region is approximately 300 cases. more than one congenital anomaly was present. In conclusion, with This is the first study investigating the contribution of the cancer estimated frequency of 1 in 69930 births, BWS is a rare congenital susceptibility gene BRCA1 in this population. anomaly disorder, often associated with major congenital anomalies. Patients and Methods: Patients were identified from the Tumor Pregnancies that are carried out to term mainly result in live births with Registry. Inclusion criteria were a) all breast (BC) and/or ovarian cancer high survival rate. (OC) patients diagnosed in the year 2002, b) BC patients diagnosed age ≤50 between 1998 and 2001 and c) all OC patients diagnosed P10.11 between 1998 and 2001. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood the relationship between tNF-alpha gene polymorphisms and and direct sequencing of all exons and exon/intron boundaries was susceptibility to Behcet’s disease in iran. performed. M. Taghizadeh, Z. Jahan Afruz, M. Jabbarpur Bonyadi, S. Dastgiri, M. Results: In total 153 patients were analyzed. We identified two Esmaeeli, S. kolahi, A. khabbazi, A. Ebrahimi, M. Haj Ali lu, T. Moharrami; deleterious mutations (c.1687C>T; c.4183C>T) in two BC and one OC Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. patients; both of them non-sense mutations leading to a premature Background- Behçet is a multisystematic disease which includes stop codon and previously reported in the BIC database. The missense recurring mouth and genital ulcers along with inflammation inside variation c.83T>C was found in one BC/OC patient. We report a novel the eye and skin problems. BD patients have higher serum levels of germline mutation c.5539_5544del6 in exon 24 in a BC patient. This Tumor necrosis factor (TNF). The positive response of BD patients to mutation leads to an in-frame deletion of two amino acids in the highly Anti- TNF therapy suggests a pivotal role for TNF-alpha in disease conserved BRCT-domain and to the best of our knowledge has not expression. been documented before. All of the mutation carriers had a positive Aim- The aim of the current study was to investigate the possible family history. relation between TNF- alpha-1031T/C and TNF- alpha -308G/A Conclusion: The BRCA1 mutation frequency of 3.3% in unselected polymorphisms and susceptibility to Behcet’s disease in Iranian Azeri breast/ovarian cancer patients from South Tyrol is comparable to that Turkish Patients. of other European populations. To determine if the newly identified Method- In this study, the distribution of two polymorphisms within TNF mutation is a founder mutation, further analyses are needed. gene promoter region was compared in 53 BD patients and 79 healthy controls using PCR-RFLP technique. P10.14 Findings- A significant difference was observed with respect to the science of Breeding and Heredity from Ancient Persia to modern alleles frequency of TNF-alpha-1031C which was higher in BD patients iran as compared to controls; while the alleles frequency of TNF alpha- M. M. Kariminejad, A. Khorshidian; 308A revealed no difference in the two groups. Kariminejad & najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Conclusions- The frequency of CG haplo-type was significantly high in Republic of Iran. BD patients while the frequency of TA haplo-type was significantly low The prophet Zoroaster declared equal right for women and men in these patients. The result reveals that in the North West population to choose their “own ways”. There is much evidence that ancient of Iran TNF alpha gene is involved in susceptibility of Behçet’s disease. Persians believed in the equal contribution of women and men towards producing a child, and its hereditary characteristics. P10.12 The Greek philosophers believed that man’s water (Semen) contains Genetic basis of Bombay Blood group all human characteristics, and the female uterus is only responsible for P. Taskar, M. Barath, A. Kanugovi; nurturing and development of fetus. Dr.D.Y Patil University, Department of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Navi After detection of the ovum Malpigy proposed the preformation theory Mumbai, India. (ovist) which means there is a miniature human inside ovum, that grows The Bombay Blood phenotype was first discovered in Bombay by after Semen has entered the uterus and grow into a well developed Dr.Y.M Bhende, present in about 0.0004% of the world population fetus. This hypothesis was later delegated to spermatozoa. These and in some populations like Mumbai, the occurrance can be as high contradictory and inappropriate beliefs were subject to dicussions and as 0.01% of inhabitants. This blood group is identified by reverse dispute; until C.E.Wolf demonstrated that the embryo is a product of grouping. The antigens determined by the human ABO blood group the fertilization of ovum by spermatozoa. locus are oligosaccharide molecules constructed by the sequential 800 years prior the sage Ferdowsi explains nicely the equal participation action of specific glycosyltransferases, the final step being catalyzed of man and woman in the production and transmission of characters. by allelic glycosyltransferases encoded by the ABO locus. These After the renaissance and especially in recent years tremendous enzymes require an oligosaccharide substrate known as the H blood achievements have been made in unraveling biological secrets of group antigen, constructed by α-(1,2)-fucosyltransferase; GDP-L- reproduction. There was no work on genetics in Iran until 1936; fucose-βD-galactoside 2-α-L-fucosyltransferase, whose expression is when a genetic course to biology curriculum in related colleges and determined by H and Secretor (SE) blood group loci known as FUTI universities was added Iranian Genetics Society was founded in 1966, and FUT2 genes respectively. Erythrocytes from individuals with rare initiation steady movement in this field. Bombay and para-Bombay blood group phenotypes are deficient in H Although there was an inevitable gap during the revolution and war, determinants, and thus A and B determinants, as a consequence of now there is great effort by researchers to eliminate the gap and bring apparent homozygosity for null alleles at the H locus (h,h) . FUT1 and us into the mainstream of world science; development in biomedical FUT2 sharing a high degree of sequence homology, are located within sciences in the 3rd Millennium. a 100 kb region in chromosome 19q13.3 suggesting their common origin. Occurrence of the phenotype among unrelated individuals P10.15 indicates spontaneous mutations in the gene. A T725G mutation in the Detection and genotyping of human papillomaviruses in coding region of FUT1 and a gene deletion of FUT2 cause classical Bulgarian patients for the period of 2009-2010 Indian Bombay phenotype. In para- Bombay blood phenotype (secretor P. P. Grozdanov1, V. Zlatkov2, G. Ganchev3, I. Karagiosov4, D. Toncheva5, A. S. positive), the expression of this variation is due to a missense point Galabov1; mutation at codon 164 in the FUT1 gene. Prior to blood transfusion, 1Institute of Microbiology “Stephan Angeloff”, BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2G&O Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 331 “Majchin Dom” Hospital, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Institute of Oncology P10.17 and Hematology, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4“Tokuda” Hospital, Sofia, Sofia, Variants in the cYP1A1/cYP1A2 locus are associated with coffee Bulgaria, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, drinking Bulgaria. Variants in the CYP1A1/CYP1A2 locus are associated with coffee drinking Human papillomavirus (HPV) is now considered as a causative agent Coffee consumption is a model for addictive behaviour. We performed of carcinoma of the uterine cervix. Genital human papillomaviruses a meta-analysis of genome-wide association scans (GWAS) on are classified into low-risk and high-risk groups. The low-risk HPVs coffee intake from eight Caucasian cohorts (N = 18,176) and sought are associated with genital warts and lesions, as for the high-risk they replication of our top findings in a further 7,929 individuals. Significant are commonly associated with high-grade squamous intraepithelial evidence of association was detected at a variant (p-value = 1.6*10- lesions and cervical cancer. Cervical cancer is the second most 11) in the 23-kilobases long commonly shared 5-prime flanking region frequent cause of death from cancer in women worldwide; however between CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 genes. CYP1A1 was found to be cervical screening programs reduce the incidence of this type of down-regulated in lymphoblastoid cell lines treated with caffeine. cancer. In this research we have used Roche’s LINEAR ARRAY HPV CYP1A1 is known to metabolize polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons Genotyping Test. This test combines multiplex PCR with 40 pairs of which are important constituents of coffee, while CYP1A2 is involved primers with DNA hybridization and analyzes 38 types and subtypes in primary metabolism of caffeine. Significant evidence of association of HPV. The cervical smears were collected from Bulgarian patients was also detected at another variant (p-value = 3.9*10-09) near the with condylata acuminate lesions. One hundred and twenty six NRCAM gene -- a gene implicated in vulnerability to addiction -- in the cervicovaginal smears and scrapings were tested. Forty two percent of meta-analysis of discovery and replication cohorts. Our results from them were found positive for HPV DNA and 58% - negative. We found GWAS and expression analysis also strongly implicate CAB39L in more then one type of viral DNA in all positive samples. We found in coffee drinking. Moreover, the variant in the CYP1A1/ CYP1A2 locus twenty two samples HPV 16 DNA (38%), in eight samples - HPV 18 also showed significant positive association with systolic and diastolic DNA (18%), in five cases - HPV 6 DNA (10%), in seven cases - HPV blood pressure. 53 DNA (11%), in three cases - HPV 31 DNA (4%), in four cases - HPV 35 (5%) and in two cases we found positive for viral DNA types HPV P10.18 61 and HPV 62. Further studies are needed to determine the influence Population variability of sNPs associated with common mental these HPV infections have on the epidemiology of the genital tract of and neurological disorders in North Eurasia these patients. V. A. Stepanov, K. V. Simonova, A. V. Marusin; Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. P10.16 Ethnic background appears to be an important factor in personalized Upgrading the chimpanzee reference genome health care and predictive medicine directed to prevention of common D. P. Locke1, M. Mele2, G. Lunter3,4, W. C. Warren1, P. Minx1, L. W. Hillier1, R. diseases. Common psychiatric and neurological disorders including S. Fulton1, A. Navarro2, T. A. Graves1, E. E. Eichler5, T. Marques-Bonet2, E. R. schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s diseases (AD), and Parkinson’s disease Mardis1, R. K. Wilson2; (PD) are now the subject of intensive genome-wide association 1The Genome Center at Washington University, Washington University studies (GWAS). The aim of this study was to estimate the variability School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, 2IBE, Institut de Biologia of genetic markers strongly associated with neurological and mental Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra. PRBB, Barcelona, Spain, diseases across the multiple Eurasian populations. We selected 55 3MRC Functional Genomics Unit and Department of Physiology, Anatomy single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) reported in recent GWAS and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust as highly significantly associated with AD, PD, schizophrenia and Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Department of Genome cognitive performance, and investigated the population variability of Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United these markers in 8 populations representing Eastern Europe, Central States. Asia, North Asia and Siberia. Considerable between-population Comparative genomics is an intensive and fruitful field of research that variability in allele frequencies was found. The average range of risk seeks to unravel the main mechanisms underlying the evolution of the allele frequency for 55 SNPs was 24.3%. Population differentiation different species. Comparisons between the chimpanzee genome and measured by Fst varied widely across the loci studied (from 0,006 to the human genome have already given huge insights to understand 0,146). Mean Fst for all 55 SNPs was 0,045. Mean Fst for AD (0,029) adaptive processes that have taken place after the separation of the proved to be substantially lower than population differentiation for PD two species. In 2005 the first draft genome of a Western chimpanzee (0,044), schizophrenia (0,054) and cognitive performance (0,049). (Pan troglodytes verus) was assembled using a whole genome shotgun Allele frequencies tend to correlate between populations according their approach using Sanger technology and an effective coverage of 3.6x geographical locations. Our data indicate that wide inter-population was reached. However, the draft nature of the assembly precludes variation in the frequency of alleles associated with common diseases deeper analyses, and still the genome contained gaps in the sequence exists even on a sub-continental level. This variability may play a every 15.7 Kbps substantial role in the variation in genetic predisposition to common We are planning to upgrade the chimpanzee assembly by integrating neurological and mental disorders in ethnically different populations. 640 finished BAC clones, making 49.000 contig joins, improving N50 This work was supported by the project 242257 ADAMS under the 7th contig length from 26 kbps to 39 kbps and finishing chromosome 7 Framework Programme of the EU. entirely in BAC clones. We have also sequenced the same individual at a much higher coverage (40x) using the Illumina technology with P10.19 read length of 100 bp to help gap closure. We have performed an cONAN: Analysis software for Genome-Wide cNV Association extensive study of the new assembled chimpanzee genome and we studie have compared it with the human genome (NCBI 37, hg19). We will L. Forer1, S. Schönherr2, H. Weißensteiner1, C. Gieger3, H. Wichmann3, G. put special emphasis to detect and resolve spurious indels or SNP Specht2, F. Kronenberg1, A. Kloss-Brandstätter1; variants, and to identify improperly represented duplicated regions 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular using read depth and paired end mapping methodologies. Moreover, and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, we will reanalyze some of the main statements in the initial study 2Department of Database and Information Systems, Institute of Computer such as a detail characterization of the main differences that separate Science, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Institute of Epidemiology, humans from chimpanzees including indels and structural variation. Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health, We believe that this update will be useful for most of the scientific Neuherberg, Germany. community working in the genomics field and that by comparing the Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) based on single nucleotide new assembled chimpanzee genome with the human genome/s, we polymorphisms (SNPs) revolutionized our perception of the genetic will improve our understanding of human specific genomic features. regulation of complex traits and diseases. Copy number variations (CNVs) are genomic segments which are duplicated or deleted among different individuals, ranging from kilobases to several megabases in length. CNVs promise to shed additional light on the genetic basis of Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 332 monogenic as well as complex diseases and phenotypes. However, cases alleles 16 and 7 were presented in patient genotype.Our results while several software packages support the determination of CNVs support single origin of chromosomes with 2184insA mutation in our from SNP chip data, the downstream statistical inference of CNV- CF population. However, data on haplotype analysis of CF mutations phenotype associations is still subject to complicated and inefficient from other studies revealed that 2184insA mutations originated in-house solutions, thus strongly limiting the performance of GWAS from multiply events - several haplotypes linked to this mutation based on CNVs. were observed in different populations. Our results suggest that the We present CONAN, a freely available software solution which provides appearance of the 2184insA mutation in the gene pool of Ukraine and an intuitive graphical user interface for categorizing, analyzing and reaching such high frequency may have been connected with recent associating CNVs with phenotypes. CONAN assists the evaluation founder effect and slippage has not given rise to any microsatellite process by visualizing detected associations via Manhattan plots in variability. To clarify this suggestion analysis of additional polymorphic order to enable a rapid identification of genome-wide significant CNV markers will be necessary. regions. Various file formats including the information on CNVs in population samples are supported as input data. P10.22 CONAN facilitates the performance of GWAS based on CNVs and the Complete screening of CFTR gene mutations in cystic fibrosis visual analysis of calculated results. CONAN provides a rapid, valid patients from Eastern Hungary and straightforward software solution to identify a part of the genetic G. Ivady1, L. Madar1, B. Nagy1, F. Gonczi2, E. Ajzner3, E. Dzsudzsak1, L. variation underlying the ‘missing’ heritability for complex traits that Dvorakova4, E. Gombos1, J. Kappelmayer1, M. Macek4, I. Balogh1; remained unexplained by recent GWAS. The freely available software 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Kenezy Gyula County Hosptial, can be downloaded at http://genepi-conan.i-med.ac.at. Debrecen, Hungary, 3Josa Andras County Hospital, Nyiregyhaza, Hungary, 4Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. P10.20 Introduction. Molecular genetic diagnostic strategies of cystic fibrosis Identification of p53 and CYP2C9 gene polymorphisms among (CF) are dependent of the mutation distribution of the analyzed iranian (turkmen & non-turkmen) and iraqi populations population. The goal of our study was to establish the mutational F. Biramijamal1, A. Hossein-Nezhad2, M. Soltani1, S. Al-Awadi3, A. Al-Zaad3; spectrum of 40 clinically diagnosed severe CF patients in Eastern 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Endocrinology and Metabolism Hungary. Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Materials and methods. For the mutation testing, a multiplex Republic of Iran, 3Baghdad University, Baghdad, Iraq. commercially available diagnostic assay was used together with The Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 enzyme is involved in drug a specific PCR assay for the detection of the CFTRdele2,3(21kb) metabolism and in detoxification of carcinogenic compounds. It is enabling to detect 30 CFTR mutations. In patients having mutations reported that CYP2C9 polymorphism is involved in drug resistance. not included in this panel, the entire coding region of the CFTR gene Additionally, the p53 protein is considered a key combination in was sequenced. Large alterations were analyzed using MLPA. countering stress messages such as DNA damage. It is reported Results. Using the mutation detection kit only, the detection rate that p53 polymorphism at codon 72 is involved in response to was 81%. Integrating the CFTRdele2,3(21kb) mutation to the panel chemotherapy. The aim of this study is to determine the prevalence of increased the detection rate to 86%. When DNA sequencing was the p53 and CYP2C9 genetic polymorphisms in different ethnic groups used, disease-causing mutations could be identified in 79 out of the in Iran compared with those from Baghdad city in Iraq. After obtaining 80 CFTR alleles. The complete analysis verified four 2184insA (5.0%), signed informed consents, blood samples were collected. For this two L101X (2.5%) and one Q220X, S466X, Y1092X, E831X alleles purpose the blood samples were collected from 70 Iraqi healthy (1.25% respectively). No large insertion or deletion was found. individuals and 130 healthy Iranian population (Turkmen and non- Conclusions. Our results suggest, that in Eastern Hungary the majority Turkmen). We assessed the genotype patterns of p53 and CYP2C9 of CF-causing mutations are small scale. Presence of six mutations among Iranian ethnic groups. Then, the data was compared with the (delta F508, CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 2184insA, N1303K, G542X and allele distribution for above genes among Iraqi population. The p53 L101X) was shown in 91% of CF chromosomes. Two mutations genotypes at codon 72 and CYP2C9 polymorphism at codon 144 were (CFTRdele2,3(21kb), 2184insA) were found in suprisingly high determined by PCR-RFLP analysis and the results were confirmed frequency, in four patients each (5.0%). by DNA sequencing analysis. It is showed that the frequency of Cys allele for CYP2C9 at codon 144 among Iranian population (10%) was P10.23 two times higher than Iraqi population (5%). In contrast, Arg allele Genetic polimorphism of cytochrome P450 genes in the ethnic for p53 gene at codon 72 among Iraqi population (42%) was higher groups of Bashkortostan than Iranian population (35%). Thus, these polymorphisms may be a G. F. Korytina1, L. Akhmadishina1, O. Kochetova1, T. Victorova1,2; suitable target for research in the field of pharmacogenetics among 1Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Iranian and Arab populations. Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Aim. To determine the prevalence of the most common allelic variants of P10.21 CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP1B1, CYP2A6, CYP2C9, CYP2E1, CYP2F1, Frequency and origin of 2184insA mutation in cF patients from CYP2J2 and CYP2S1 in a representative sample of the three ethnic Ukraine population from Republic of Bashkortostan (Russia), and to compare S. A. Kravchenko1, H. V. Makukh2, V. M. Pampukha1, M. Burlova-Vasylieva3, L. these data with exiting published data from other populations. Bober2, O. Hnateyko2, L. Livshits1; Methods. CYPs genotypes were determined in DNA samples of 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, healthy unrelated individuals representatives of three ethnic groups 2Institute of Hereditary Pathology of the Ukrainian Academy of Medical (N=319 Russians, N=279 Tatars, and N=144 Bashkirs. The CYPs Sciences, Lviv, Ukraine, 3Taras Shevchenko National University, Kyiv, Ukraine. genes polymorphisms were examined using PCR-RLFP method. Analysis of mutations in CFTR gene among CF patients from different Results. The frequencies of the variant genotypes, alleles and populations revealed that highest frequency of 2184insA mutation halpotypes of the CYPs genes were determined. Analysis of the was observed in Eastern Europe. In our study we screened mutation CYP1A1 (rs1048943, rs4646903), CYP1A2 (rs762551), CYP2A6 2184insA in 351 CF patients from different regions of Ukraine. The (rs71790353), CYP2E1 (rs2031920) allele, genotype and haplotype frequency of this mutant allele was 5.5%. This is the second most frequencies detected significant differences among healthy residents common CF mutation in Ukraine (F508del - apr. 50% ). of Republic of Bashkortostan belonging to different ethnicity. To determine origin and distribution of this mutation in Ukraine the Significant differences among Russians, Tatars, and Bashkirs were not haplotype analysis of two intragenic polymorphisms (IVS8CA and detected for CYP1A2 (rs35694136), CYP1B1 (rs1056836), CYP2F1 IVS17bTA) was performed. For haplotype construction of polymorphic (rs11399890), CYP2J2 (rs890293), CYP2S1 (rs34971233, rs338583), loci the carrier parents and CF individual were analyzed. 28 out of 39 CYP2C9 (rs1799853, rs1057910) genes. Analysis of the CYPs chromosomes with 2184insA mutation carried the haplotype 16-7 for genes allele frequency distribution patterns among the ethnic groups IVS8CA and IVS17bTA loci respectively. In 11 families gametic phase of the Republic of Bashkortostan in comparison with the worldwide could not be established for one or both markers, but in all these populations were conducted.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 333 Conclusion. The allele and genotype frequencies distributions of their significance in risk assessment in cancer and other phenotypes. the CYPs genes markers among the inhabitants of the Republic DNA was isolated from the peripheral blood sample of 154 healthy of Bashkortostan demonstrate the influence of different ethnic and unrelated individuals and the genotypes were determined by components on contemporary populations occupying the region PCR-RFLP. The allele and genotype frequency distribution at the of interest. The results of present investigation will form the basis five SNPs among Tunisians revealed a characteristic pattern may be for identification of the genetic risk factors to cancer susceptibility, explained by the fact that the Tunisian population is a mix of ethnic determining the toxic potentials of environmental pollutants and might groups. This could assist in high-risk screening of humans exposed the genetic background of drug response. to environmental carcinogens and cancer predisposition in Tunisian population. P10.24 implementation of a recently developed whole genome P10.26 amplification method on DNA profiling of old skeletal remains Down syndrome (DS) space clustering suggests fixed Z. Zafari1,2, M. S. Farzad2, A. Shirkavand2,3, A. Ghasemi2, S. Habibi4, M. geographical exposures Tavallaei5, S. Zeinali2,6; N. V. Kovaleva1, M. V. Prozorova2, V. A. Blinova2, D. V. Voronin2, T. V. 1Biology Group, Faculty of Sciences, Khatam University, Tehran, Islamic Kuznetsova3; Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar’s Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, 1St. Petersburg Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Biology Group, Faculty of Sciences, Razi University, Federation, 2St. Petersburg Centre for Medical Genetics, St. Petersburg, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Human Genetic Research Center, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St. Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Petersburg, Russian Federation. 55Human Genetic Research Center, Baqiyatallah Medical Sciences University, Space and time clustering of DS has for a long been a matter of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur controversy. Recent study suggests clustering to be associated with Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. more densely populated urban areas (McNally et al. Int J Epidemiol An insufficient DNA quantity along with the presence of inhibitors and 37:1169-1179). St.Petersburg is a large densely populated city with DNA degradation are of utmost challenges implicated in DNA profiling comparatively low migration rate. The study included all cases of DS of old skeletal remains. Apart from approaches using smaller amplicons born alive or prenatally diagnosed in 1970-2009, except for twins, both which have significantly increased the possibility of obtaining DNA parentally derived trisomy 21 and trisomy 21 suspected to be parentally profiles from highly degraded DNA samples, amplification of low copy derived (recurrent cases in the same family). It was found that 2590 number (LCN) DNA samples and reduction of inhibitory effects are DS cases were unevenly distributed throughout the study area. We attainable with our recently reported whole genome amplification have identified 253 cases of a multiple occurrence of unrelated DS (WGA) method named KI-PEP PCR. Implementation of this improved at the same dwelling, including 223 clusters of two DS, 23 clusters of degenerate 15-mer primer extension preamplification PCR on the DNA three DS, 5 clusters of 4 DS, and two clusters of five DS. Clusters of isolated from 44 skeletal remains of Iranian war (1980-1987) victims two DS cases were estimated as a chance coincidence predominantly. was followed by specific amplification with specific primers and Real- Analysis of 30 clusters of 3 to 5 DS showed a highly significant excess time PCR. DNA from fresh blood and a mixture of bone and blood DNA over expected figures (one case in 714.6 flats) for 16 of them. Mothers samples were also concomitantly examined. of DS individuals from 16 clusters (n=50) were younger compared to Subsequent to the amplification by KI-PEP PCR, partial DNA profiles mothers of DS from outside the clusters (n=2409): 28.8 vs. 30.8 yo, were obtained from 15 samples with both Identifiler and minifiler Kits proportion of mothers aged 35 and older 20% vs. 35.9%, p=0.02. Only and no superior results were generated in comparison to DNA profiling 14% of dwelling units inside 16 clusters were located at the ground without prior amplification. These results demonstrated that despite floor which makes the effect of radon exposure as a major cause of increasing the low quantity of DNA and relieving inhibitors by the utility clustering quite improbable. Our data suggests an effect of some of KI-PEP PCR, no significant improvement can be achieved in DNA geographically fixed exposures other than radon. profiling of old skeletal remains on account of the presence of too many degraded DNA and the overall size reduction of DNA by the method. P10.27 Keywords: DNA Profiling, Whole genome amplification, Improved molecular diagnosis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy in primer extension preamplification PCR, Skeletal remains romanian patients by mLPA method L. Tamas, M. Puiu, A. Anghel, E. Seclaman, C. Samoila, C. Gug, L. Pop, I. M. P10.25 Ciuca; DNA repair gene polymorphisms at XRcc1 (Arg194trp, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. Arg280His, and Arg399Gln), XRcc3 (thr241met), and XPD Dystrophinopathies are a group of fatal muscle diseases with X-linked (Lys751Gln) in healthy tunisian population inheritance which have as common cause mutations in the DMD gene. G. Ben Salah1, F. Kallabi1, N. Fendri-Kriaa1, K. Jmel-Hammami2, N. Belghith- The frequency of the diseases is high - 1:3500 newborns (male). The Mahfoudh1, A. Fourati3, M. Larbi-Masmoudi2, H. Ayadi4, F. Fakhfakh1, H. DMD gene mutations cause in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) Kamoun1; a complete absence of dystrophin synthesis. 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Occupational Method. 28 patients were analysed and genomic DNA was extracted Medicine, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Research Unit, Chemical from blood samples using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit. Samples Tunisian Group, Sfax, Tunisia, 4Centre of Biotechnology, Sfax, Tunisia. were collected from DMD patients with clinical diagnosis of DMD, Reduction in DNA repair capacity is associated with increased rates of from their relatives and in one case amniotic fluid was collected for birth defects, cancer, and accelerating ageing. Genetic polymorphisms prenatal molecular diagnosis. Isolated genomic DNA was analyzed by in DNA repair genes might influence the repair activities of the enzymes MLPA technique, which can identify extensive deletions or duplications predisposing individuals to cancer risk. Owing to the presence of these of gene fragments. The results which were obtained by capillary genetic variants, inter-individual and ethnic differences in DNA repair electrophoresis on AbiPrism 3130XL were quantified and interpreted capacity have been observed in various populations. The present using Coffalyser program. study aimed to determine the allele and genotype frequencies of Results. In 13 patients were identified extensive deletions (59.1%) five non-synonymous SNPs, XRCC1 Arg194Trp (C>T, rs1799782), and duplications only in two patients (9.1%). 6 female patients with XRCC1 Arg280His (A>G, rs25489) XRCC1 Arg399Gln (A>G, heterozygous genotypes confirmed the previously identified mutations rs25487), XRCC3 Thr241Met (G>A, rs861539), and XPD Lys751Gln in male patients. In one case prenatal diagnosis was performed on a (T>G, rs13181) in Tunisian population and to compare them with patient having a child with DMD, confirmed by molecular diagnosis. In HapMap populations. The variant alleles of these SNPs have been 6 patients (27.27%) no deletions or duplications were identified. found to be positively associated with different forms of cancer in Conclusions several genetic epidemiological studies in other populations. To the Our results confirm literature data that indicate a higher frequency of best of our knowledge, this is the first report of these DNA repair large deletions and a lower frequency of duplications, the two types gene polymorphisms in Tunisians. The basic prevalence of these together representing over 68% of mutations identified in patients with polymorphisms in the general population must be known to evaluate clinical diagnosis of DMD. MLPA technique is particularly effective if Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 334 Duchenne disease, allowing the detection of mutations in most cases the genetic drift is probable one of the factor which determined genetic and both prenatal diagnosis and diagnosis. differentiation of populations by the prevalence of autosomal (AD and AR) HDs. Genetic diversity of HDs in the investigated populations was P10.28 revealed 480 disorders (7300 affected). Basic part of load (56 % of FmR1 haplotype analysis in mentally retarded male population patients) for all types of inheritance concern to the common 28 forms Z. Daneberga1,2, B. Lace1, N. Pronina1,2, R. Lugovska1,2; (15 with AD, 8 with AR and 5 with X-linked inheritance) of the HDs 1University Children’s Hospital, Medical Genetic Clinic, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga causing only 5,83 % of all registered disorders. However, frequencies Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. of these 28 disorders also varied between regions. The HDs which DXS548-FRAXAC1-FRAXAC2 microsatellite markers and ATL1 SNP are finding out locally high frequencies in some populations/ethnic previously have been described as markers associated with Fragile groups were submitted. Specific common diseases and accumulation X syndrome (FXS) causing gene FMR1 and CGG repeat instability. of some HDs in several populations/ethnic groups were revealed in Haplotypes linked to FXS are described widely across Western each population. It has been demonstrated that the genes of HDs are a European populations and Scandinavia in contrast to Eastern Europe promising tool for characteristic ethnogenetic processes in populations. including Baltic States. The aim of this study was to report specific haplotypes among FXS patients and patients with normal number of P10.31 CGG repeat in Latvian population. Gilbert syndrome molecular diagnostics and clinical In our study were included 11 FXS patients and 122 patients with characterization in Latvia normal CGG repeat alleles. Microsatellite markers were genotyped on L. Piekuse1, J. Keiss2, V. Sondore2, I. Micule1, M. Kreile1, B. Lace1, A. Krumina3; ABI 310 genetic analyser and results validated by direct sequencing 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Infectology Center of Latvia, Riga, of random alleles for each locus. ATL1 SNP amplified by allele specific Latvia, 3Latvian Biomedical Study and Research center, Riga, Latvia. PCR and analyzed on agarose gel. Gray zone alleles (35-50) were Gilbert syndrome or benign hyperbilirubinemia is caused by changed analysed for AGG interspersion pattern by direct sequencing. number of (TA) repeats in UGT1A1 gene promoter - (TA)5 and (TA)6 In total 27 different DXS548-FRAXAC1-ATL1-FRAXAC2 haplotypes is associated with high enzyme activity, but alleles with 7 or 8 repeats were detected - 26 in control group, 3 in FXS group. The prevalent - with low activity. Gilbert syndrome is usually described as autosomal haplotype in control group was 7-4-A-5+ (rel. frequency 0.327). The recessive disease. prevalent haplotype in FXS group was 2-2-G-4 (rel. frequency 0.818). Aims: to characterize Gilbert syndrome patients by biochemical and Gray zone alleles with long uninterrupted CGG tract on 3` end were molecular data. To compare molecular genotyping methods for Gilbert statistically significant associated with 2-2-G-4 haplotype. This finding syndrome. let us hypothesize instability of these CGG alleles in next generations. Materials and methods. 500 DNA samples from patients that were Statistical results of our study indicate significant difference among sent with elevated bilirubin levels. 400 control individuals. DNA was FXS and control group. Most frequent haplotype in FXS group analyzed by SSCP, direct sequencing and fragment analysis using ABI differs from literature data of European populations. Analysis of FXS PRISM 300 (Lin J. P. et al 2006). chromosomes across Baltic States would be desirable. Results. Comparing genotyping methods for UGT1A1 gene the best method was found to be fragment analysis using ABI Prism 300. P10.29 Between patients with changed bilirubin levels diagnose of Gilbert molecular phylogenetic analysis of the iranians and other syndrome was approved for 90%. Main clinical complaints were populations icterus at stress situations, fatigue, very rare as complaints were Z. Fazeli, S. Vallian; mentioned pain. Comparing bilirubin levels there were found statistical University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. significance between individuals with genotype (TA)6/(TA)6 and The allele frequency of polymorphic markers has proven to be useful for heterozygous and homozygous (TA)7 individuals. Gilbert syndrome survey of human migration and genetic origin. Moreover, the estimation frequency in population of Latvia is 10%. There are found alleles (TA)5 of genetic distance between populations could improve our viewpoint and (TA)8 that is uncommon in European descent. about their genetic origin. In this study, we used allele frequency Conclusion: fragment analysis is most cost and time effective method data of 12 polymorphic markers on 250 (500 alleles) individuals for Gilbert syndrome genotyping. Clinical picture doesn’t differ from from the Iranian population to estimate genetic distance between the already described picture from other populations. Alleles that is found Iranians and other world populations. The phylogenetic trees for three in UGT1A1 gene includes alleles that are described in Africa descent. different sets of allele frequency data were constructed. Our results showed that the Iranians had genetic similarity with some European P10.32 populations, of which the lowest genetic distance of the Iranians with mutation analysis of the mtDNA A1555G,a3243G,and A7445G the studied populations was observed with some populations reside mutations in nonsyndromic sensorineural subjects in north iran in Russia. Furthermore, the high genetic distance was observed . between the Iranians and East Asian populations. The data suggest F. Taji1, M. Zohoor2, F. Farrokhi3, M. Hashemzadeh - Chaleshtori3; that the Iranians might have relatively close evolutionary history with 1Payamenoor university of medical sciences, plant research center, Shahrekord Europeans, but historically independent from East Asian populations. Univ. of Med. Sci. Shahrekord, Shahrecord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular This study could provide a new insight into the evolutionary history of and molecular Research center. Shahrekord Univ. of Med. Sci. Shahrekord, the Iranian population. Shahrecord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord univ. Of med. Sci. Shahrekord, Shahrecord, Islamic Republic of P10.30 Iran. Genetic epidemiological study of hereditary disorders in Three mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations including Russian populations A1555G,a3243G,and A7445G occurring in MTRNR1,MTTL1 and R. A. Zinchenko, G. I. Elchinova, E. K. Ginter; MTTS1 genes are considered to be the main causes of mitochondrial Research Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation. hearing loss in some populations. However variouse frequevcies of the Genetic epidemiological study the prevalence’s of AD, AR and X-linked mtDNA mutations have been reported from different populations. This disorders in some regions (7 ethnic groups) of Russia was established: study aims to determine the frequency of the A1555G,a3243G,and Russian from seven populations, Adygean, Maris, Chuvashes, A7445G mutations in nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss Udmurt, Bashkirs, Tatars (more than 3 millions of inhabitants). Genetic subjects in Gilan province in north Iran . differentiation between populations of different hierarchical levels in materials and methods: Fourty six nonsyndromic sensorineural the load of Mendelian hereditary diseases (HDs) was established. The subjects were screened for the presence of mtDNA A1555G,a3243G prevalence rate of all HDs varied in the investigated populations from and A7445G mutations using PCR-RFLP procedure and subsequent 1.34 to 9.78 per 1000 persons. Simultaneously with medical genetic direct sequencing. study the population genetic study was performed. Correlation analysis Result:We found no mtDNA A1555G,A3243G,and A7445G mutations between prevalence rates of AD and AR HDs and random inbreeding in the cohort of 46 deaf individuals studied .However PCR-RFLP of F as well as index endogamy was carried out. It was proposed that the MTTL1 gene represented a G3316A mutation due to destroying a stEvolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 335 restriction site in the A3243G PCR fragment examined. P10.35 conclusion: Our finding indicate that the association of mitochondrial Effective Prediction of HLA Allele Genotypes Using sNP Data for mutation with deafness is very low in deaf subjects, in north Iran . a Han chinese Population S. Chang1, P. Chen2,3, T. Chang3,4, C. Chang5, C. S. J. Fann1; P10.33 1Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, FV, Prothrombin and MTHFR gene mutations in patients with 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, thrombosis risk from middle Black sea region of turkey Taiwan, 3Division of Endocrinology & Metabolism, Department of Internal H. Bagci1, N. Kara1, S. Gunes1, N. Karakus1, E. Taskin1, M. Yuce1, K. Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department Ozdamar2; of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 1Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical 5Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, Chang-Gung University, Biology, Samsun, Turkey, 2Osman Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Biostatistics, Eskisehir, Turkey. Genetic variation at classical human leukocyte antigen (HLA) loci has FV (Factor V), Prothrombin (Factor II) and MTHFR (Methylene played an important role in the regulation of fundamental molecular tetrahydrofolate reductase) genes mutations are listed among the or cellular processes and susceptibility to various diseases. Direct causes of hereditary thrombophilia, so these genes can be used typing of HLA alleles can provide insights into complex associations in population-based large-scale genotyping studies. We aimed to among genomic structure, SNP variation and variation at respective determine the frequencies of thrombophilic gene mutations in the alleles. However, the excessive cost has compelled researchers to middle Black Sea region of Turkey. adopt more economical approaches, such as SNP-based tagging In this study we screened 2070 patients (1373 females, 697 males) and allele prediction algorithms. In this study, we modified a statistical sent to our laboratory from various clinics of Ondokuz Mayis University, methodology developed by Leslie et al. (2008) and applied it to predict Faculty of Medicine for genetic testing for thrombosis risk between alleles at 6 classical HLA loci (HLA-A, -B, -C, -DPB1, -DQB1 and February 2005 - November 2010. FV Leiden (G1691A), Prothrombin -DRB1) by using commercially available SNP data including Illumina G20210A and MTHFR C677T gene mutations were analyzed using HumanHap550K, Affymetrix 500K SNP, Affymetrix SNP 6.0 genotypes reverse hybridization Strip Assay (1818 patients) and real-time PCR alone and combinations of them within the MHC region for the sample of (252 patients). 437 unrelated Han Chinese individuals residing in Taiwan. Our results Embolism (32.1%), coronary artery and heart diseases (14.3%), indicated that overall, a single panel of ~160 SNPs typed across the abortion (14.1%), anemia (7.2%), infertility (5.5%), thrombosis (4.9%), region was sufficient for predicting HLA alleles at 6 loci with up to 98% malign neoplasia (4.0%) were among the reasons of genetic test accuracy at 4-digit resolution. In conclusion, the effective prediction request. The percentages for heterozygosity and homozygosity for FV, algorithm provides a low-cost alternative to direct typing of HLA alleles Prothrombin, and MTHFR gene mutations were, in order, 18.2, 7.1, and sheds light on building a representative estimation background of 43.0, and 1.9, 0.1, 10.3, respectively. HLA allele genotypes in the Han Chinese population. Moreover, the Determining the distribution of allelic frequencies of FV, Prothrombin specific prediction SNP sets may aid in disease screening and medical and MTHFR gene mutations that increase the risk of thrombosis, will treatment in the future. contribute to understanding of the frequency of these mutations in middle Black Sea region of Turkey. P10.36 Keywords: Thrombophilic genes, mutation frequencies Huntington Disease in Hungary E. Sáfrány1, L. Balikó2, J. Nemes1, E. Baricza1, B. Duga1, C. Sáfrány1, B. P10.34 Melegh1; Neuromuscular Disorders in Rostov Region (Russia) 1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of Neurology N. Vetrova1, S. S. Amelina1, E. L. Dadali2, R. A. Zinchenko2; and Stroke, County Hospital, Veszprém, Hungary. 1Rostov Region Hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Research Huntington disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, disorder that results from a mutation that expands the polymorphic Russian Federation. trinucleotide (CAG) tract in the HTT gene. Molecular genetic analysis Research of Hereditary Neuromuscular Disorders (HND) is especially is available since 1997 in our Institute in Hungary. Until the end of 2010 important because of their prevalence among neurological disorders we genotyped 319 subjects originating from 195 families. Amongst is high, most neuromuscular disorders have a progressive course them 149 people were tested positive with a repeat length ranging with a lethal outcome. The population of 12 districts was examined to from 40 to 90 CAG repeats (46.7% of all tests). 32 subjects carried access prevalence of HND in Rostov Region. Total size of investigated an intermediate allele (10.0% of tests), with CAG repeat ranging from population was 497460. Data collection and processing were done 26 to 36. according to the protocol of Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory of Medical Epidemiological studies report a wide variation of HD prevalence. Centre in Moscow. The HND in Rostov Region’s population compose Molecular studies suggested that different prevalence rates could 80% of all hereditary nervous system diseases. Their prevalence is be due to differences in other genetic factors responsible for the 25,73 per 100,000. Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) disease. In this respect, we analysed the CCG length polymorphism is the most common HND in Rostov Region. This study identified 54 that is adjacent to the CAG region and compared our results to those cases of HMSN in 26 families. The prevalence was 10,86 per 100,000. of other European studies. The CCG7 allele was overrepresented DNA testing was performed to identify duplication of the gene PMP22 among affected chromosomes (94.6%), while we found a low percent in all patients. The mutations were found in members of 6 families. of the CCG10 allele (5.38%); this result is in accordance with studies Myotonic dystrophy (MD) is the most common adult-onset muscular performed previously on other European populations. Since the origin dystrophy. We found 21 cases with clinical manifestations of MD. of Hungarian population differs from other European Caucasian The prevalence was 4,22 per 100,000. We observed tremendous ethnical groups, as founders of the ancient Hungarian state were variability in the phenotypic expression and severity of the disease, from the eastern side of the Ural Mountains, we might expect different especially within families. This study identified 16 cases of Duchenne/ frequencies of the intragenic polymorphisms compared to populations Becker muscular dystrophy in 13 families. The prevalence was 6,43 of Western European ancestry. The fact that we found similar per 100,000 male. DNA testing was performed to identify deletions in frequencies suggests that the founder mutation of HD in Hungary is of gene DMD; 3 families with Duchenn/Becker muscular dystrophy had Western European and not of Asian origin. deletions. HMSN, Duchenne/Becker muscular dystrophy, and MD are prevailing HND among Rostov Region’s population, which is also true P10.37 for the Russian Federation neuropathology spectrum. investigation of cAG and ccG repeats in affected patients and risk group of Huntington disease in 61 Brazilian individuals. L. A. Agostinho1, C. R. Rocha1, E. Medina-Acosta2, H. N. Barboza2, A. F. A. da Silva2, S. P. Pereira3, E. R. Paradela1, A. S. Figueiredo1, D. Coelho1, E. M. Nogueira1, R. P. Alvarenga1, S. R. dos Santos1, C. L. A. Paiva1; 1Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 336 Brazil, 2Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), of severe and mHP in European populations. The prevalence of severe Campos dos Goytacazes, Brazil, 3FAMINAS, Muriaé, Brazil. HP was estimated at 1/300,000 on the basis of the number of cases Huntington Disease (HD) is a rare fatal neurodegenerative genetic tested in our laboratory and originating from France during the period disease. In this study we determined, in 61 Brazilian individuals, 2000-2009. We observed a significant discrepancy between North and the sizes of the polymorphic CAG and CCG regions and correlated West Europe where the prevalence was similar to France (1/340,000), these sizes to age at onset of HD. We also investigated the genetic and South and East Europe where the value was significantly lower origin of IT15 gene (4p16.3) and calculated the minimum prevalence (1/1,360,000). This difference may be due to several factors among of HD for Ervalia City, Brazil. PCR-SSP was used for amplifiying which no request of mutation analysis and molecular testing in other the target regions, and amplicon size was determined by capillary laboratories than ours, but also to particular recurrent mutations in electrophoresis. It was found that 13 subjects had normal alleles. Out North and West Europe reflecting founder effects. The prevalence of of the 48 subjects with abnormal alleles, two had intermediate number mHP was then estimated by using the proportion of dominant mutations of CAG repeats (27-35) and no HD phenotype; and 46 individuals among severe alleles and by estimating the penetrance of the disease had expanded alleles. The average age of onset of HD was 41.7 in heterozygotes for dominant mutations. According to a genetic model years. The correlation between number of CAG repeats and age of with 4 alleles resulting in 10 distinct genotypes, the prevalence of onset of clinical manifestations was negative (r = -0.84). There was dominant mHP in the European population was estimated at 1/6370, no statistically significant correlation between CCG repeats and age pointing out that mHP is much more frequent than severe HP. at onset of HD (r = 0.26). Among those cases that had expanded alleles, 11 had alleles with reduced penetrance (36-39 CAG) and P10.40 35 had alleles with complete penetrance (> 39 CAG). Alleles of 7 or Estimating the prevalence of autosomal recessive disorders 10 CCG repeats are predominant in populations, and strong linkage through mutational records and consanguinity: the disequilibrium between the CCG(7) allele and HD has been shown Homozygosity index (Hi) in western HD chromosomes. CCG(7) alleles were found in 78% of A. Gialluisi1, T. Pippucci1, Y. Anikster2, U. Ozbek3, M. Medlej-Hashim4,5, A. 48 individuals who had abnormal alleles. Therefore, the majority the Mégarbané4, G. Romeo1; mutated IT15 genes for HD show putative Western European ancestry. 1Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze Ginecologiche, Minimum prevalence of HD for Ervalia was nine times higher than in Ostetriche e Pediatriche, Bologna, Italy, 2Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Europe. Lily Safra Children’s Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 3Genetics Department, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, P10.38 Istanbul, Turkey, 4Unité de Génétique Médicale and Inserm, Laboratoire Origin and possible ways of evolution of Huntington’s disease International Associé à l’UMR_S 910, Université Saint Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, alleles in Ukrainian population 5Department of Life and Earth Sciences, Faculty of Sciences, Branch II, N. V. Hryshchenko, L. A. Livshits; Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon. Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine. Mutational records make it possible to estimate frequencies of disease Huntington’s disease (HD) is a late onset neurodegenerative disorder alleles (q) for autosomal recessive disorders using a novel approach resulting from an expansion of a CAG-repeats of HTT gene on 4p16.3. based on the calculation of the Homozygosity index (HI), i.e. the The frequencies of HD are different in ethnic groups (0,6-100:1000000). proportion of homozygous patients, which is complementary to the The highest ones are found in countries of European origin. proportion of compound heterozygous patients P(CH). To test this To investigate the HTT gene expansion alleles’ origin and possible hypothesis, we used mutational records of individuals affected with ways of evolution in Ukrainian population the analysis of allelic Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) and Phenylketonuria (PKU), of CGG-repeats and “del2642” polymorphisms of HTT gene was born to either consanguineous or apparently unrelated parents from conducted in a group of HD-patients with CAG-expansions (40-52 six Mediterranean population samples. Our method gave q estimates CAG-repeats) and their relatives from Ukraine. CAG-expansion was very similar to those of previous descriptive epidemiological studies found in chromosomes 4 marked by different CCG-allele variants (7, (Table 1). By simulation studies, the minimum sample size needed for 8, 10, 12 CCG-repeats). Linkage disequilibrium between expanded this approach is of 25 patients with either unrelated or first cousins CAG-alleles and the major (CGG)-allele (83%) has been displayed. parents. These results indicate that the Homozygosity index can 7 We also found that the frequency of 2642-deletion of HTT gene is give a ranking order of prevalence for autosomal recessive disorders, significantly higher in the group of HD-patients than in controls. Its may especially in populations with high frequencies of consanguineous be due to “Western Europe founder” effect of HD-chromosomes with marriages. (CCG)-del2642 haplotypes. High frequency of (CGG) -allele in HD- 7 10 inbreeding sample chromosomes (12%) may be a result of migration from populations in Gene country Hi q P coefficient (F) size which the HD-chromosomes are predominantly marked by this CCG- 0.123 1:66 variant (Asia, ets.). Minor CCG-alleles ((CCG) and (CCG) ) may 0.0625 34 0.5588 8 12 (0,0951) (**) appear due to step-by-step mutations of major alleles. We also studied Lebanon Unrelated* 0.143 1:49 instable intermediate CAG-alleles (27 CAG-repeats of HTT gene). It MEFV 107 0.3458 (0.02) (0,0951) (**) has been shown that these chromosomes (5% of normal ones) have (HCDC-Gm)u7t-adteiol2n6 i4n2 U hkarapilnoety pheass a(s rinegcluer roernigt ionr)i.g Oinu. rW fien dailnsog sf osuungdg ethsat t ththaet Turkey U(0n.0re0l4a-t0e.d0*0 96) 55 0.4545 0.03(-*0*).073 (1:11:01705822--11:1:108080 3) de novo HD-expansions may arise from intermediate CAG-alleles on Unrelated* 0.014-0.023 1:4785-1:1838 30 0.5667 chromosomes 4 with (CCG)-del2642 HTT-haplotypes. Israel (0.015-0.024) (**) (1:82004) 7 (Arabs) 0.0126 1:6344 PAH 0.0625 8 0.875 P10.39 (**) (1:82004) A molecular-based estimation of the prevalence of Israel Unrelated* 0.007 1:6061 87 0.2299 hypophosphatasia in the European population (Jews) (0.001) (**) (1:125004) E. Mornet1,2, A. Yvard2, A. Taillandier2, D. Fauvert1,2, B. Simon-Bouy2; 1UPRES EA-2493 University of Versailles, Versailles, France, 2Laboratoire SESEP, Centre Hospitalier de Versailles, Le Chesnay, France. table 1. Total allele frequencies (q) and prevalences (P) estimated The prevalence of hypophosphatasia (HP), a rare metabolic disorder by the present method or (traditional methods). (*F chosen among due to mutations in the ALPL gene, has never been estimated in the previously published inbreeding data; **data not available; 1Mattit et European population. Only one published study evaluated the incidence al., 2006; 2Ozen et al, 1998; 3Dinc et al, 2000; 4Berchovich et al., 2008). of severe HP at 1/100,000 in Canada 53 years ago. Moderate forms of hypophosphatasia (mHP), including HP with moderate bone features and the mildest form odontohypophosphatasia, reflect both recessive and dominant inheritance, and are therefore expected to be more frequent than severe forms. Here we estimated both the prevalences Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 337 P10.41 Andalusian Government Centre for Genomics & Oncology), Granada, Spain. Association between K469E and R241G polymorphisms of The study of genetic markers allows the characterization of the intercellular adhesion molecule 1 and inflammatory bowel populations as well as the genetics relationships between them. disease in iran A lot of authors have studied the genetic relationships established M. Habibi1, N. Naderi1, A. Farnood2, H. Balaii1, T. Dadaei1, S. Almasi1, M. Zali1; between North African and South European people as well as 1Reserch center of castroenterology and liver diseases shaheed beheshti the relationships with Iberian Peninsula inhabitants in order to university of medical science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran determine the genetic legacy that remains in the present population. university of medical science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. But, nowadays, there are not any studies which explain the genetic introduction: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) consists of ulcerative relationship between the population of Granada, Málaga and Almería colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease (CD), two chronic idiopathic (GMA), former Kingdom of Granada; and all those African people who inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract. Among various inhabited in this region for more than 700 years and had an influence genes contributing in IBD susceptibility, Intercellular adhesion in its creation and establishment. molecule (ICAM)-1 and its polymorphisms are of concern. ICAM-1 That is why, 15 STR genetic markers from 100 non-related individuals gene is located on chromosome 19p13 and plays a pivotal role in the (aSTR), residents of Granada, Málaga and Almería, have been studied. inflammatory processes. There are two single base polymorphisms of Observed-allelic frequencies and common-use forensic parameters ICAM-1 gene (G241R and K469E). In this study, we examined the have been analyzed. Furthermore, genetic structure and its association between G241R and K469E, and IBD in Iranian patients. homogeneity have been studied. For a better characterization of our material and method: In this case-control designed study, 156 IBD population, GMA population has been compared with North African, patients (110 UC and 46 CD patients) and 131controls were enrolled. Iberian Peninsula, South European populations. Genetic distances The study was performed in Shaheed Beheshti University during 2006 between all the populations have been calculated. Moreover, a - 2009. The polymorphisms (G241R and K469E) were assessed by correspondence analysis of the allelic frequencies of the genetic polymerase chain reaction (PCR) followed by restriction fragment markers has been executed. length polymorphism (RFLP). By the analysis of all the results, it can be affirmed that, owing to the Results: The mutant allele of R241G was more frequent in CD patients studied genetic markers, the GMA population maintains characteristics compared to controls (33.7% vs. 22.9%; p=0.042; OR=1.71; 95%CI: that show the genetic influence of North African people, even though 1.02-2.88) and K469E mutant allele frequency was significantly higher our population resembles the rest of the Spanish population. in CD patients compared to controls (55.4%vs. 40.5%; p=0.013; OR=0.546; 95%CI: 0.34-0.88). No difference was observed among P10.44 UC patients compared to controls. Epidemiological study of Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy in conclusion: Our findings suggest that both mutations of ICAM1 gene the Novosibirsk District, Russian Federation may probably participate in pathogenesis of Crohn’s disease in Iran I. O. Mazunin1, N. V. Volodko1, E. B. Starikovskaya1, I. Y. Bichkov2, I. E. Mikhaylovskaya2, R. I. Sukernik1; P10.42 1Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Novosibirsk, Russian Relationship of iNOS gene expression with TNF-α and iNOS Federation, 2Regional Center of Eye Microsurgery, Novosibirsk, Russian gene polymorphisms among iranian mazandarani and turk Federation. populations A 10-year epidemiological study of Leber’s Hereditary Optic Neuropathy F. Biramijamal1, S. Khoshbakht2, A. Hossein-Nezhad3; (LHON) in the Novosibirsk District, Russian Federation revealed the 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2NIGEB & Azad University, Tehran, prevalence of the disease is at least 1/45,000. We have found primary Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, LHON mutations (3460, 11778 and 14484) in only 44% of LHON Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. pedigrees and only 30% of them are caused by 11778 pathogenic The identification of genetic alterations in different populations could mutation. So-called LHON-like patients with the clinical characteristic be useful in recognizing the therapeutic aspects of drugs as well as of LHON disease (Abu-Amero and Bosley 2006) compose 56% of estimating the prevalence of a variety of diseases. The promoter our sample. Phylogenetic analysis of the entire mtDNA sequences of polymorphisms of -308G/A in TNF-α gene as well as -954G/C and all patients in this study showed that certain novel and haplogroup- CCTTT repeat polymorphism of iNOS gene were studied in this specific mtDNA mutations meet the criteria of the pathologic research. Due to similar conditions of TNF-α and iNOS production, mutations. Our data imply that genetic modifiers, such as haplogroup- the polymorphisms of these genes were studied in both Iranian Turk specific mutations in mtDNA and various mutations in nDNA-encoded and Mazandarani ethnic groups. In addition, the expression of iNOS mitochondrial genes, may promote disease development in Russian gene in transcriptional level has analyzed in comparison with iNOS LHON patients. polymorphism genotypes. To identify the genetic polymorphisms, the PCR-RFLP and sequencing P10.45 based method were used. The expression of iNOS gene was interaction within LPA gene between two multiallelic measured by real-time PCR. The results revealed that allele frequency polymorphisms (5’PNRP and KIV2RP) influences Lp(a) levels of polymorphic -308A allele of TNF-α in Turk and Mazandarani ethnic and is revealed as a risk factor for myocardial infarction in a groups was 15.5% and 16.3% respectively. The polymorphic -954C spanish family-based sample. allele of iNOS gene was not observed in both ethnic groups. The most R. Carreras-Torres, M. Via, E. Esteban, P. Moral; prevalent CCTTT repeat number in promoter region of iNOS gene in Faculty of Biology - University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. both groups was shown as 14 repeats. The transcriptional expression LPA gene codes for apolipoprotein(a) (apo(a)), which constitutes of iNOS was higher in presence of 15 repeats of CCTTT rather than part of lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) and influences Lp(a) bloodstream 14 repeats. Moreover, it was shown that the presence of A allele at levels, important risk factor for early atherosclerosis and myocardial -308 position of TNF-α gene is associated with lower expression of infarction. LPA gene chromosomal region (6q26-q27) has recently iNOS in transcriptional level (p <0.001). In conclusion, the results of emerged as one of the top 12 loci associated with Coronary Artery this study suggest the effect of TNF-α gene polymorphism on iNOS Disease/Myocardial Infarction (CAD/MI) in recent Genome-Wide gene expression and this can be modified the inflammation process Association Studies (GWAS). In this work we test the influence on in the cell. Lp(a) levels and the association with MI of two repeat polymorphism, 5’ Pentanucleotid (TTTTA) repeat polymorphism (LPA 5’PNRP) and P10.43 Kringle IV-type2 domain repeat polymorphism (LPA KIV2RP), in 101 Genetics population flows in the region comprised by the former family trios from Spain with younger than 55 MI affected descendent Kingdom of Granada (N=302 individuals). The polymorphism were not in LD. Significative M. Saiz1, L. Martínez-González2, M. Álvarez-Cubero1, B. Sánchez Martín- correlation showed an inverse relationship between Lp(a) levels and Moreno1, J. Álvarez1,2, J. Lorente1,2; mean repeat number of 5’PNRP and KIV2RP in the whole sample, 1Legal Medicine and Toxicology Department, Faculty of Medicine, University but only for 5’PNRP in the patients sample. The analyses of variance of Granada, Granada, Spain, 2GENYO (Pfizer - University of Granada & showed a significative interaction between mean repeats of 5’PNRP Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 338 and KIV2RP for Lp(a) levels in the patient sample, explaining the P10.48 63,4% of the observed variance of Lp(a) levels. In order to test for the utility of commercial stRs beyond forensic purposes: Transmition Disequilibrium (TDT) the alleles were grouped into Population relationships in North Africa categories. No transmition deviation was observed for the single M. Gaibar1, M. Esteban2, M. Via2, P. Moral2, M. Kandil3, N. Harich4, A. alleles. But, it was observed overtransmition for the most frequent Fernández-Santander5; haplotype (0.197) (p=0.007), which grouped the shorter alleles of both 1Dpt. de Ciencias Biomédicas Básicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biomédicas, polymorphisms (5’PNRP*8 repeats and KIV2RP*<23 repeats). This Universidad Europea de Madrid, Villaviciosa de Odon, Spain, 2Secció results revealed an interaction effect between the shorter repeats of d’Antropologia, Dpt. Biologia Animal, Facultat de Biologia, Universitat de 5’PNRP and KIV2RP on the Lp(a) levels and, in consequence, on the Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Dpt. Biologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université risk of early atherosclerosis and myocardial infarction. Chouaïb Doukkali, El Jadida, Morocco, 4Dpt. Biologie, Faculté des Sciences, Université Chouaïbb Doukkali, El Jadida, Morocco, 5Dpt. de Ciencias P10.46 Biomédicas Básicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biomédicas, Universidad Europea Human lymphatic filariaisis: Genetic Polymorphism of de Madrid, Villaviciosa de Odón, Spain. Endothelin-1 and tNF receptor ii correlate with development of The variability of 15 commercial STRs used for forensic purposes has chronic disease been employed in this work to analyze the relationships of different A. K. Panda1, P. K. Sahoo2, A. S. Kerketta2, S. K. Kar2, B. Ravindran1, A. K. Arabic and Berber-speaking North African ethnic groups. A total of Satapathy2; 165 individuals from the Doukkala and Khenifra Moroccan regions 1Institute of Lifesciences, Bhubaneswar, India, 2Regional Medical Research have been genotyped using the AmpFISTR identifiler kit (Applied Centre, Bhubaneswar, India. Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Data from these two samples Background: Hydrocele and elephantiasis are two clinically very completed a previous genetic database of five North African groups diverse and often mutually exclusive chronic manifestations of human genotyped for a variety of autosomal polymorphisms (STRs, Alu, and bancroftian filariaisis. Plasma levels of Endothelin-1(ET-1), a major Alu-STR combinations). The joint use of markers with different mutation angiogenic factor and TNF receptors (TNFRs) that regulate host rates could be very useful to detect ancient relationships and/or more inflammation have been associated with development of chronic recent demographic events such as gene flow. Our results underlined filariasis although their genetic basis are not known. the genetic distinctiveness of North African samples (Morocco and Methods: We studied polymorphisms of ET-1(Ala288Ser) and Algeria) from North (Spain) and South East Mediterranean groups TNFRII (Met196Arg) genes by means of polymerase chain reaction (Egypt). Differences in genetic heterogeneity estimates strengthened confronting two pairs primers method and restriction fragment length the necessity of taking into account information from genetic markers polymorphism respectively. Plasma ET-1 levels was measured by with different mutation rates to explain properly human population Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. events. In particular, in those populations that share close geographic Results: Met196Arg genotype frequency of TNFRII polymorphism was and historical relationships. significantly more in hydrocele cases in comparison to elephantiasis patients (OR: 4.34 and 95% CI: 2.04 to 9.20). Conversely, significantly P10.49 high prevalence of Ala288Ser mutation of Endothelin-1 was observed Prevalence of rs41274239 polymorphism in the miRNA gene in elephantiasis patients as compared to hydrocele cases (OR: 2.15 miR96 in different ethnic groups in siberia and in patients with and 95% CI: 1.13 to 4.10). Decreased plasma ET-1 levels correlated common diseases significantly with Ala288Ser mutation in the study population. A N. P. Babushkina, V. Petrov, M. V. Golubenko, A. N. Kucher; combined analysis indicated a 23 fold for higher risk for developing Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. elephantiasis in subjects with TNFRII (Met196Met) and ET- MicroRNAs are short noncoding RNAs which are involved in 1(Ser288Ser). posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression. The primary Conclusions: ET-1 (Ala288Ser) and TNFRII (Met196Arg) transcript of miR96 (7q32.2) generates miR96 and antisense product polymorphisms are associated with development of one or the other miR96* (miRBase:MI0000098). SNP rs41274239 (+36A/G) is located forms of chronic disease in bancroftian filariasis. in the loop-like structure of pre-miR96; minor allele frequency is 2.8% (NCBI database). We have studied prevalence of this polymorphism P10.47 in Siberian populations (Russians, Buryats, Yakuts. Tuvinians, 352 mannan-binding lectin serine peptidase 2 gene (mAsP2) individuals in sum). The minor allele frequency in Russians was polymorphisms in rheumatoid arthritis patients from Brazil. estimated as 1.05%, with only heterozygous genotypes; in other I. Goeldner1, S. R. R. Utiyama1, T. L. Skare2, A. B. W. Boldt1, I. T. M. Reason1; populations (all of mongoloid origin) the polymorphism was not found. 1Laboratory of Molecular Immunopathology, Clinical Hospital, Federal University We have studied also this SNP frequency in Russians with different of Paraná, Curitiba, Brazil, 2Rheumatology Unit of Evangelic University diseases: ischaemic heart disease, hepatitis C, tuberculosis, asthma Hospital, Curitiba, Brazil. (126, 173, 207, 144 DNAs, respectively). The polymorphism was very Aims. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is an autoimmune disease (AID) which rare in all groups, being registered only in heterozygous state with affects at least 1% of the world’s population. The immunopathogenesis frequency from 0.24% in tuberculosis to 0.69% in asthma. In the pooled of RA is not entirely clarified but the importance of complement system sample of patients, heterozygosity was 0.0094 +/- 0.0035; minor allele in its development is unquestionable, although still poorly understood. G frequency 0.47%. The present study is the first representative work The present study aimed to evaluate the prevalence of MASP2 gene on this SNP. The results show that the G allele of rs41274239is rare in polymorphisms in patients with RA from Brazil. Caucasians and was not registered in Mongoloid Siberian populations. Methods. Nine MASP2 polymorphisms distributed from the promoter to the last exon were haplotyped through multiplex PCR amplification P10.50 with sequence-specific primers. A total of 156 RA patients (24 male, Possible functional differences of the two mitochondrial DNA 132 female, mean age 51 [24-65] years) and 125 healthy individuals polymerase gamma (POLG) gene haplogroups (18 male, 107 female, mean age 43 [24-69] years) were investigated. B. Malyarchuk, M. Perkova, M. Derenko; The study was approved by the local ethics committee. Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Magadan, Russian Federation. Results. We identified 10 different MASP2 haplotypes with genotype About 150 mutations in the human mitochondrial DNA polymerase distributions in Hardy and Weinberg equilibrium. There was a trend for gamma (POLG) have been identified in patients with mitochondrial higher frequency of MASP2 haplotypes with the p.D120G and p.P126L diseases such as Alpers syndrome, progressive external polymorphisms, causing low MASP-2 levels in the RA patients (Fisher ophthalmoplegia, and ataxia-neuropathy syndromes. However little exact test = 0.06), but no difference was found in the frequencies of is known about the haplotypic structure of this gene. Here we have high-, low and intermediate MASP-2 producers between patients and sequenced POLG1 gene 5’-promotor region and analyzed distribution controls. of this gene haplotypes in two North Eurasian populations - in Conclusions. In the present analysis, we did not find an association of Russians (n=63) and Buryats (n=90). Only one polymorphic locus, MASP2 polymorphisms and haplotypes with RA disease. namely rs2856268, was revealed in the 5’-promoter region studied. Comparison with our previous haplotypic data has shown that the alleles Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 333399 rs2856268-G and -A are strongly associated with haplogroups A and While striking prevalence of Y chromosome haplogroup N1c in B of the POLG1 gene. Interestingly that association of the rs2856268 gene pool differentiates Yakuts from other populations, the mtDNA variants with diabetic polyneuropathy (DPN) in type 1 diabetes mellitus and autosomal analyses demonstrate genetic similarity of all native has been recently reported in Russians (Spitsina et al. 2009). It was populations of Sakha, in particular Yakuts and Evenks. The results also found that the carriers of G-allele and GG-genotype had higher risk demonstrate closest genetic proximity of the populations of Sakha with of DPN development than the carriers of A-allele and AA-genotype. southern Siberians. Both mtDNA and autosomal analyses reveal deep One may suggest that the polymorphism in the 5’-promotor region can genetic discontinuity between Siberian and Beringian populations. differentially modulate expression of the whole POLG1 gene, pointing MtDNA haplogroups A2 and G1b, prevalent in Beringian populations, to a higher possibility for G-allele to determine a lower level both of are either minor or even absent in Sakha, where haplogroups C and D the POLG1 gene expression and the mtDNA repair. In addition, taking dominate. Autosomal analysis also differentiates Beringian populations into account that haplogroups A and B could evolve separately for a from those of Sakha. Our results support the scenario that the territory long time (about 1.5 millions of years), it is important that possibly of Sakha was colonized from the regions west and eastward of Lake more accurate form of enzyme is associated with younger and more Baikal with only minor gene flow from Lower Amur/Southern Okhotsk frequent in humans haplogroup B. This work was supported by the region and/or Kamchatka. grant from FEB RAS (09-3-A-06-221). P10.53 P10.51 Genetic epidemiology of DFNB1-associated hearing loss in HaploGrep - automatic classification of mitochondrial DNA Russia haplogroups E. I. Sharonova, R. A. Zinchenko; H. Weißensteiner1, S. Schönherr2, D. Pacher2, L. Forer1, G. Specht2, F. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Kronenberg1, A. Kloss-Brandstätter1; Moscow, Russian Federation. 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Medical Genetics, Molecular The major objective of this study was to determine contribution and Clinical Pharmacology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, of DFNB1 locus allelic variants to development of non-syndromic 2Department of Database and Information Systems, Institute of Computer hereditary hearing loss (NSHL) among Russian patients of different Science, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. populations. 228 NSHL patients were analyzed. 35delG mutation Background: Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is routinely was responsible for development of disease in few cases (Chuvash analyzed in various disciplines, such as medical genetics, population Republic - 28,6%; Republic of Bashkortostan - 0,0%; Republic of genetics and forensic genetics. For studying mechanisms of human Udmurtia - 50,0%; Kirov Region - 26,8%; Rostov Region - 19,2%). evolution, discovering genes involved in complex diseases and quality We determined the effect of other mutations in DFNB1 in NSHL management, the determination of the mtDNA haplogroup is a critical progression in different groups of Russians. We analyzed coding exon requirement. However, despite the availability of Phylotree, a regularly of Cx26. As the result, the number of patients with identified alleles updated classification tree of global mtDNA variation, the process of achieved 35.8% in Kirov Region and 30,8% in Rostov Region. Second haplogroup classification is still time-consuming and error-prone, as mutation has been identified in almost all patients heterozygous for researchers have to manually compare the polymorphisms found in a 35delG. However, spectrum of mutations differed in investigated population sample to those summarized in Phylotree, polymorphism areas. We analyzed noncoding exon of Cx26, but no changes were by polymorphism, sample by sample. observed. Results: To eliminate these shortcomings we designed HaploGrep, We have shown the differences in allele frequencies involved in a fast and reliable algorithm to determine the haplogroup affiliation formation of DFNB1-associated NSHL in different Russian patients. of thousands of mtDNA profiles genotyped for the entire mtDNA or Furthermore, sequencing of coding exon of Cx26 increased the any part of it. HaploGrep is implemented as a freely available web proportion of patients with a confirmed diagnosis beside the analysis application, uses open source technologies and scales well in time and of 35delG mutation only. Involvement of Cx30 wasn’t confirmed in this space. For every input sample the top 10 results and the phylogenetic type of NSHL development. position of the respective haplogroups are displayed, thus providing a Based on our investigation, we could postulate the feasibility of testing detailed explanation of how and why a haplogroup was ranked best. of the coding exon of Cx26 in DFNB1-patients of Russian nationality Furthermore, numerous export possibilities are given and all results during genetic diagnosis. It’s required to search for additional mutations are visualized in a tree structure, showing the current position in in DFNB1 which are not detected by sequencing of Cx26 and Cx30, Phylotree with hints for further refinement of the actual haplogroup as well as in other genes involved in genetic interactions with Cx26. status and potential errors in the classification process. Conclusions: HaploGrep uses the latest version of Phylotree and P10.54 offers an all-in-one solution for quality assessment of mtDNA profiles Prevalence monogenetic syndromes of multiple congenital in clinical genetics, population genetics and forensics. HaploGrep can malformations in population of Rostov region (Russia) be accessed freely at http://haplogrep.uibk.ac.at T. Ponomareva1, S. S. Amelina1, R. A. Zinchenko2; 1Rostov regional clinical hospital, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, P10.52 2Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Autosomal and uniparental genetic diversity of the populations Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. of sakha (Yakutia): implications for the peopling of Northeast A total medical genetically study of the population of the Rostov region Eurasia was carried out (12 districts - 497,460 total investigated persons). S. A. Fedorova1, M. Reidla2, E. Metspalu2, M. Metspalu2, S. Rootsi2, K. Monogenic syndromes of multiple congenital malformations (MMCM) Tambets2, B. B. Yunusbayev3, J. Parik2, I. A. Kutuev3, M. I. Tomsky1, E. K. was examined. The overall prevalence of MMCM was 1:2292 Khusnutdinova3, R. Villems2; persons. Among the syndromes MMCM with autosomal dominant 1Yakut Research Center of Complex Medical Problems, Russian Academy of (AD) inheritance type was identified 29 diseases in 129 patients, with Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Department of Evolutionary autosomal recessive (AR) inheritance type was identified 19 diseases Biology, University of Tartu and Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute in 32 patients, with X-linked type of inheritance - 6 of diseases in 15 of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Academy of patients. Sporadic syndromes MMCM was identified in 41 patients Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. (6 diseases). Among frequent syndromes MMCM with AD type of Sakha Autonomous Republic occupies a quarter of Siberian total land inheritance were revealed Noonan syndrome (prevalence of 1:18424), area in its northeastern part, is an important region for understanding Aarskoga syndrome (1:41455), Opitz BBBG syndrome (1:55273), the colonization of the Northern Eurasia by anatomically modern Klippel-Feil syndrome (1:55273), Greig cephalopolysyndactyly humans. To characterize the genetic variation in Sakha both the syndrome (1:71066), Waardenburg syndrome, type I (1:82910), haploid mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) and Y chromosomal as well as hemifacial microsomia (1:82910), EEC syndrome (1:82910), diploid autosomal loci (650 000 SNPs) of genome were analyzed in LEOPARD syndrome (1:82910). Some syndromes had met with a five native populations of Sakha (Yakuts, Evenks, Evens, Dolgans and lower prevalence (1: 100001-1:200000): camptodactyly with muscular Yukaghirs). hypoplasia, skeletal dysplasia, and abnormal palmar creases, Pfeiffer Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 340 syndrome, Saethre-Chotzen syndrome, Beckwith-Wiedemann Fulani (Africa), and Trio-Indians (America). We genotyped three syndrome, velocardiofacial syndrome, Williams syndrome, Prader- non-synonymous TLR2 polymorphisms: 1892C>A, 2029C>T and Willi syndrome, frontonasal dysplasia. Among the most frequent 2258G>A. To avoid false-possitive results for 2029C>T we have also syndromes MMCM with AR inheritance type were identified Dubowitz sequenced the TLR2 non-coding exon 3 duplication. syndrome (1:99492), Coffin-Siris syndrome (1:165820), Seckel RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: The 2029C>T seems to be absent syndrome (1:165820). Among the most frequent syndromes MMCM among both European and non-European populations, with the with X-linked type of inheritance were identified Lujan-Fryns syndrome exception of the Vlax-Roma, suggesting that this polymorphisms most (1:82910), Coffin-Lowry syndrome (1:165820). Among the frequent likely aroused in Indo-Aryan people after migration into South-Asia. sporadic form of syndromes MMCM were identified constricting bands, Due to very low frequency of the minor allele (1.3%), it was difficult to congenital (1:17154), Pallister-Killian syndrome (1:165820), VATER- identify enough individuals bearing this mutation, in order to perform association (1:165820). These results agree with data previously experiments on its functional effects. 1892C>A was found exclusively surveyed populations of Russia. in European populations, but not in Asian, African or American volunteers, probably occurred in Proto-Indo-Europeans. Interestingly, P10.55 2258G>A was present only in Europeans, but not in Vlax-Roma. The Association of OS, ESR1, COL1A1 and CALCR gene differential pattern of the various TLR2 polymorphisms in various polimorphisms with osteoporosis in postmenopausal women populations may explain some of the differences in susceptibility to S. Tural1, N. Kara1, G. Alayli2, L. Tomak3; infections between these populations. 1Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Samsun, Turkey, 2Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty P10.57 of Medicine, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Samsun, Phylogeographic Analysis of mitochondrial DNA in the Arabian Turkey, 3Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Peninsula Biostatistics, Samsun, Turkey. V. Fernandes1,2, V. Černý3, F. Alshamali4, N. M. Silva1, P. Soares1, L. Pereira1,5, Osteoporosis is a common multifactorial disease characterized with M. B. Richards2; reduced bone mass. The purpose of this study was to examine the 1Instituto de Patologia e Imunologia Molecular da Universidade do Porto relationship between osteoporosis and variants of osteocalcin (OS) (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal, 2Institute of Integrative and Comparative Biology, -298 C>T, estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) 397T>C, collagen type 1 alpha Faculty of Biological Sciences, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, 1 (Col1A1) 2046G>T and calcitonin receptor (CALCR) 1340T>C. 3Institute of Archaeology of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Blood samples collected from 158 postmenopausal women with Prague, Czech Republic, 4Dubai Police GHQ, General Department of Forensic osteoporosis and 108 postmenopausal healthy female controls were Sciences & Criminology,, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 5Faculdade de Medicina analyzed by PCR-RFLP method. da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. ESR1 CC genotype compared with TT + TC genotypes were found Phylogeographic analyses of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) provide to increase two fold the risk of osteoporosis. [p= 0.039 OR=2.156 insights into modern human evolution. In recent years, worldwide %95CI (1.083-4.293)]. CALCR CC genotype compared with TT+TC studies of contemporary mtDNAs have indicated that modern humans genotypes were found to be protective effect against osteoporosis left Africa ~60,000-70,000 years ago along the “southern coastal [p=0.045 OR=0.471 %95CI (0.237-0.9372)]. There was no statistically route”, across the Red Sea and via the Arabian Peninsula. Yet no significant difference in the genotype and allele frequencies of patients obvious signs of the passage though Arabia have been found in and controls for OS -298 C>T (p= 0.293, p= 0.437, respectively) and genetics and archaeology fields. The aims of this work are to seek Col1A1 2046 G>T polymorphisms (p= 0.283, p= 0.491, respectively). for possible mtDNA relicts of the initial dispersal from Africa in Arabia In the combined genotype analysis, ESR1/CALCR TCCC combined and to investigate the origins of lineages that arrived later. We are genotype was found to be protective effect against osteoporosis doing this by sequencing the complete mtDNA molecule (~16,568 bp) [p=0.0125 OR=0.323 %95 CI (0.1383-0.755)]. However, OS/Col1A1 from unclassified lineages (referred to as the paraphyletic clusters CCTT and ESR1/CALCR CCTT combined genotypes were risk factors L3*, N* and R*) and poorly studied haplogroups within the Eurasian for osteoporosis (p=0.027, p=0.009). macrohaplogroup N, which is predominant in Arabian populations According to the results of our study, ESR1 CC genotype and OS/ today (86% in Saudi Arabia, 66% in Yemen and 79% in Dubai), in 90 Col1A1 CCTT, ESR1/CALCR CCTT combined genotypes cause a samples from Dubai, Yemen, North/East Africa, the Near East and predisposition to osteoporosis. However, CC genotype of CALCR gene Europe. Our results will allow to test hypotheses about the settlement and ESR1/CALCR TCCC combined genotype have a protective effect of the Arabian Peninsula. against osteoporosis. This is the first study in Middle Black Sea region, by enlarging the study population we hope that more explanatory and P10.58 definitive results can be obtained. Prevalence of hereditary pathology among the childrenâ€™s population of Bashkortostan Republic of Russia P10.56 L. A. Bessonova, R. A. Zinchenko, E. K. Ginter; Different patterns of tLR2 polymorphisms in populations of Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, various ethnic and geographical origins Moscow, Russian Federation. M. Ioana1,2,3, A. Cimpoeru2, B. Ferwerda1,4, T. S. Plantinga1, F. Burada2, M. Results of prevalence of a monogenic hereditary pathology (MHP) Oosting1, N. M. Panduru3, M. G. Netea1; among the children’s population of Republic Bashkortostan (eight 1Department of Internal Medicine, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Districts) was submitted. The total size of investigated population was Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Craiova, made 250110 people (64935 children). All Districts were examined by Craiova, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Carol Davila”, standard protocol of medical genetic research elaborated in laboratory Bucuresti, Romania, 4Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, of genetic epidemiology, Research Centre for Medical Genetics. Philadelphia, PA, United States. About 2800 MHP and syndromes of OMIM could be identified by BACKGROUND: Innate immunity is triggered upon invasion of the this research. Clinical investigations were performed by neurologists, host by microorganisms through pathogen recognition by pattern ophthalmologists, orthopedic, otolaryngologies, dermatologists, recognition receptors (PRRs). The best studied class of PRRs, Toll-like pediatricians and clinical geneticists, focused on diagnostic of MHP. receptors (TLRs) recognize specific pathogen-associated molecular The load of children’s population by all types MHP - autosomal patterns (PAMPs) from various microorganisms. Genetic variation in dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR), and X-linked, separately TLRs may influence susceptibility to infections. We studied genetic for urban and rural populations was calculated. Total load of AD and variation of TLR2 in various populations and whether this variation AR disorders was 3.87Ã‘Â±0.24 and 2.51Ã‘Â±0.20 per 1000 children, may be due to genetic drift or natural selection. X-linked disorders 0.92Ã‘Â±1.17 per 1000 boys. Our analysis showed MATHERIAL AND METHODS: We have recruited a total of 776 that the total load of MHP in children is very high, and close to 1.4%. individuals from different populations classified according to The spectrum of MHP detected in the eight Districts comprises 113 geographic and ethnic criteria into 7 groups: Romanians, Vlax-Roma, nosologycal forms. Spectrum of MHP was analyzed according to age Dutch (European populations), Han-Chinese (East-Asia), Dogon, of manifestation of disease, life expectancy of patients and fitness. The Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 334411 total fitness of patients with AD pathology is close to unity (0.87), in P10.61 families with AR pathology was 0.04, with X-linked disease was 0.16. Role of some apoptosis genes polymorphisms in aging and Patients with low-fitness genotypes are rarely found among patients longevity older than 30 years, and practically do not occur among patients older V. V. Erdman, I. Tuktarova, T. Nasibullin, R. Mustafina, O. Mustafina; than 40 years. In this case, the reduction in fitness caused, as a low Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. survival rate and almost zero fecundity. Aim of study was to estimate alleles and genotypes frequencies dynamic of SIRT1 (-1138C>T), NFKB1 (28081564T>A), TP53 (P72R), P10.59 Casp8 (-652(6)I/D), BAX (919 A>G), BCL2 (140016C>T) genes with the genome sequence and assembly of world’s oldest woman: a age in Tatars (Bashkortostan, Russia). longevity reference genome Total group was composed of 1602 unrelated persons from 16 to 109 H. Holstege1, D. Sie1, T. Harkins2, C. Lee2, T. Ross2, S. McLaughlin2, M. Shah2, years. Gene polymorphism was analyzed by PCR-RFLP. Search of B. Ylstra1, G. Meijer1, H. Meijers-Heijboer1, P. Heutink1, S. Murray3, S. Levy3, G. genetic markers associations with age was performed using logistic Holstege4, E. Sistermans1; regression analysis (SPSS18.0). Increase or decrease of certain 1VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, genotypes with age in periods, defined by applying ROC-analyze, was United States, 3Scripps Translational Science Institute, La Jolla, CA, United estimated in odds ratio index - OR (> 1 or <1 respectively). States, 4University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. In male there were increase of genotype frequencies of NFKB1*T/*T Human genetic diversity has fundamental implications for in age until 72 years (p=0.028, OR=1.014), TP53*P/*P in 16-80 understanding the genetic basis of diseases. Much effort is currently years (p=0.029, OR=1.012), BAX*A/*A from 17 years (p=0.006, spent on identifying the genetic variants that are associated with OR=1.01); decrease of genotype frequencies of SIRT1*C/*C in age longevity. However, an anonymous reference such as Hg19 can until 58 years (p=0.026, OR=0.976), NFKB1*T/*T in age until 72 years introduce a reference bias in longevity studies; a de novo assembly (p=0.038, OR=0.985), Casp8*I/*I in 15-76 years (p=0.045, OR=0.991), of a unique genome coding for long healthy life represents a more BAX*G/*G from 26 years (p=0.026, OR=0.983), BCL2*T/*T in age until accurate biological reference genome for such projects. 80 years (p=0.002, OR=0.989). In female SIRT1*C/*C (until 90 years, We had the opportunity to study the genome of a woman who, at the p=0.002, OR=1.023), BAX*A/*A (from 73 years, p=0.022, OR=1.033), time of her death, was the oldest human being alive in the world. She BCL2*T/*T (since 50 year, p=0.002, OR=1.023) genotype frequencies lived until the age of 115 years without experiencing any problems were rises; SIRT1*C/*T genotype frequency until 90 years (p=0.027, associated with vascular disease or dementia. At the age of 112- OR=0.987) and BCL2*C/*C genotype frequency since 65 years 113, she was subjected to neuropsychological examinations, which (p=0.009, OR=0.971) were reduces. revealed that her general performance was above average for healthy Thus, TP53(P72R) and SIRT1(-1138C>T) gene polymorphisms are adults between 60-75 years. Post-mortal examination showed almost important for achieve of senile age in men and women respectively; no signs of atherosclerotic plaque formation. BAX(919A>G) polymorphic marker (in both men and women) and We sequenced and assembled the genome of this individual thus BCL2(140016C>T) gene polymorphism (among women) may be generating an independently assembled reference genome. For associated with longevity. this, we employed short and long insert paired end reads on the Supported by grant RFH 10-04-01614. SOLiD™ System. Initial analysis of this genome is focused on identifying the presence or absence of DNA variants associated with P10.62 atherosclerosis as this is the main cause of death among older people, Genotype and haplotype analysis of tP53 and health related and the associated vascular dementia is a leading cause of dementia. traits in croatian senescent population Ultimately, we will use this genome as an independent reference for P. Krajačić1, Ž. Tomas1, M. Zajc Petranović1, T. Škarić-Jurić1, V. Bišof2, J. larger longevity studies such as the Scripps Wellderly study. Miličić1, S. Tomek-Roksandić3, N. Smolej Narančić1; 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Department of P10.60 Oncology, Clinical Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Dr. A. Štampar mtHFR c667t polymorphism, folate level and hypertension in Institute of Public Health, Department of Gerontology, Zagreb, Croatia. croatian elderlies The TP53 gene has been suggested to be associated with various Ž. Tomas1, M. Zajc Petranović1, P. Krajačić1, T. Škarić-Jurić2, J. Miličić1, S. diseases and with longevity due to its important functions in preserving Tomek-Roksandić3, N. Smolej Narančić1; the genome integrity. In this study we investigated the association of 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute for two polymorphisms of TP53 gene - Arg72Pro and PIN3 (+16bp) - with Anthropological Research,, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Dr. Andrija Štampar Institute of health related traits in 324 persons of very old age (85-101 yrs). The Public Health – Department of Gerontology, Zagreb, Croatia. results showed that the health status in elderly is sharply discriminated The Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) enzyme is by PIN3 (+16bp) genotypes: carriers of A1A2 or A2A2 genotype more involved in reducing homocysteine level which, when elevated, has frequently have cardiovascular diseases (CVD), osteoporosis, risk for been found to predict cardiovascular events. Adequate blood folate undernutrition (weight loss, diarrhea), and they also recently suffered status may decrease the circulating level of homocysteine and lower from stress or acute illness. In contrast, for the carriers of A1A1 the incidence of cardiovascular diseases (CVD). We studied MTHFR genotype none disadvantageous condition could be detected. The gene variant C667T, its association with hypertension (HT) and CVD Arg72Pro polymorphism differentiated the study participants as follows: endpoints in Croatian elderly population (85-101 yrs; mean=88.23 yrs; ArgArg carriers showed more frequently CVD while ArgPro and ProPro N=303; 65.3% hypertensives). Compared to the previously reported carriers had lower body mass index and they more frequently suffered data, the TT genotype frequency was twice as high in senescents as from stress or acute illness. Further analysis showed that the most in Croatian general population (12.5% vs. 6%, p=0.023). The results frequent haplotype ArgArg_A1A1 (48.9% of all haplotypes), although of multiple logistic analysis in elderlies showed significance of younger very advantageous for many traits is characterized by increased fasting age (<90 yrs) and TT genotype (OR 2.175, p=0.039) in predicting HT. glucose levels or/and diabetes. The remaining two A1A1 haplotypes T allele carriers had increased incidence of stroke in comparison to (ProPro_A1A1 and ArgPro_A1A1) have lower frequency of CVD and non-carriers (p=0.027). Further, we evaluated associations between CVD risk factors as well as of osteoporosis; the only disadvantageous MTHFR genotype, serum folate and HT. Regardless of association characteristic being an increased risk for undernutrition. The present of low folate (<7 pmol/l) and TT genotype (p=0.002), we found no preliminary study exposes A1A1 genotype as the most advantageous association of folate and HT. According to our results, adequate TP53 genotype while A2 allele (A1A2 and A2A2 genotypes) bears folate levels in blood serum have no protective effect on incidence substantial risk for various health related traits and it is so irrespective of HT. Therefore, we suggest that further research of folates - CVD of codon72 status. endpoints relation should be directed towards broader spectrum of genes involved in folate and homocysteine metabolism rather than focusing on MTHFR polymorphisms as the main factor. Also, our results indicate that T allele may have some selective advantage that contributes to longevity.Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 342 P10.63 P10.65 Peroxiredoxin-5 gene polymorphism and human longevity in Reference population database for forensic DNA typing Russian population N. A. Akram1,2, S. R. Farooqi2; A. Vasilishina1, O. Kononova2, O. Semenova3, M. Shavlovsky1, V. Larionova2; 1Hamdard University, Karachi, Pakistan, 2University of Karachi, Karachi, 1St. Petersburg Medical Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Petersburg, Pakistan. Russian Federation, 2St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint- The probability of a random match between two individuals derived Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Research Center for People, who lived in from a large heterogeneous population database is likely to have Blockaded Leningrad, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. potentially serious errors. It is hypothesized that the genetic variation Peroxiredoxin-5 (PRDX5) is a mitochondrial antioxidant enzyme that between larger populations is not different from that between smaller neutralizes reactive oxygen species (ROS). According to the free populations and the match probability estimates are not affected radical theory of aging, an accumulation of oxidative damages as a by the population substructure. In order to test the first hypothesis, result of ROS attack is probably a reason of aging and age-related allele frequency data for three STR loci (TPOX, TH01 and CSF1PO) pathology. PRDX5 gene polymorphism may cause a different activity taken from 37 other studies, were analyzed. A hierarchy of the of peroxiredoxin-5 and thus may play a role in human longevity. populations (Races→Caucasoids→Caucasoid Asians→Caucasoid The purpose of our study was to reveal associations of PRDX5 gene Indians) was constructed and statistically analyzed. (A) Significant polymorphism with human lifespan. differences (p<0.05) in the allelic frequency distribution were in order We analysed 2 SNPs in PRDX5 gene (-540A>C, rs 28364831 and of Races>Caucasoids> Caucasoid Asians = Caucasoid Indians. 1955C>T, rs 627425) in two groups of unrelated persons from St- (B) Significant difference (p<0.05) in average number of alleles (n) a Petersburg: young (4-17 years old, n=123) and elderly (80-106 years was observed between Races and between Caucasoids. However old, n=173), including long-livers (90-106 years old, n=85). Genotyping significant correlation was observed between sample size and the was carried out by PCR-RFLP-analysis. Linkage disequilibrium and number of alleles. (C) Ratio of allelic frequencies of > two fold was haplotype frequencies were estimated by EH program. Allele and in order of Races>Caucasoids> Caucasoid Asians > Caucasoid genotype frequencies were compared by using Chi-square test, Indians. Ratio of >25 folds were observed only between Races. (D) A Fisher’s exact test. frequency differential of > 20% was observed only between Races and We have revealed linkage disequilibrium between SNPs (D = 0,12) and between Caucasoid Asians. Second hypothesis was tested through only 3 alleles (haplotypes). Allele -540/1955 is absent in our population. STR genotype data across five Pakistani subpopulations. The match No statistically significant differences in allele frequencies between probability estimates of the pooled data differ significantly (p≤0.05) groups were found. The genotype distributions are consistent with from that of the subpopulations. The combined match probability also Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in both groups. We found the -540/1955 shows as much as seven folds difference from the subpopulations. genotype was significantly less frequent in long-livers compared with The analyses showed that a reference database from a homogeneous young group (11% vs. 24%; =0,012; OR=0,37; 95%CI: 0,16 - 0,82), smaller population is more likely to provide reliable estimates of match with group aged 80-89 years (11% vs. 27%; =0,006; OR=0,32; 95%CI: probability. 0,14 - 0,73) and with combined group aged <90 years (11% vs. 26%; =0,004; OR=0,34; 95%CI: 0,16 - 0,73). P10.66 Vlax Roma in croatia - signs of endogamy in maternal gene pool P10.64 M. Pericic Salihovic1, A. Baresic1, I. Martinovic Klaric2, L. Barac Lauc3, B. molecular, audiological and population features of autosomal Janicijevic1; recessive deafness 1A (DFNB1A) in Yakut population isolate 1Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Institute for Migration from Eastern siberia and Ethnic Studies, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Croatian Science Foundation, Zagreb, N. A. Barashkov1, L. U. Dzhemileva2, S. A. Fedorova1, F. M. Teryutin1,3, O. L. Croatia. Posukh4,5, E. E. Fedotova3, S. L. Lobov2, E. K. Khusnutdinova2; Vlax Roma are a branch of Romani people who were enslaved in the 1Yakut Scientific Centre of RAMS, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of historic Romanian states Wallachia and Moldavia between 14th and Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Audiology-Logopaedic 19th centuries. After Roma slavery was abolished, larger Vlax Roma Center, Republican Hospital #1, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4Institute of groups immigrated to Croatia. Since Roma population is made of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, numerous socio-cultural endogamous groups, we investigated the Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 5Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, extent of fragmentation of Vlax Roma in Croatia by analysing hyper Russian Federation. variable segment I (HVS-I) and typing relevant RFLP sites in the Hereditary forms of hearing impairment (HI) causing by GJB2 (Cx26) mitochondrial DNA of 390 Bayash from two Croatian regions: Baranja mutations are the frequent sensory disorders registered among (235) and Medjimurje (155). Diversity indexes point to higher level newborns in various human populations. In this study we present data of variation among Vlax Roma settled in Eastern (Baranja) than on the molecular, audiological and population features of autosomal in Northwestern Croatia (Medjimurje). The analysis of mismatch recessive deafness 1A (DFNB1A) associated with the donor splicing distribution clearly points to differences in demographic changes of site q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A) mutation of GJB2 gene in Yakut population these two subpopulations. Those results are in concordance with field isolate of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) located in Eastern Siberia research data on residence patterns indicating higher endogamy in (Russian Federation). The Yakut population exhibits high frequency Northwestern than Eastern Croatia. Interestingly, collected socio- of some Mendelian disorders which are rare in other populations cultural data point to absence of marriage unions between Vlax worldwide. Mutational analysis of GJB2 gene in 86 unrelated Yakut Roma from Eastern and North-western Croatia, indicating that shared patients with congenital HI without other clinical features has been mtDNA lineages are a result of common gene pole that predates their performed. In this study we registered a large cohort of Yakut patients separation in Croatia. Despite similar origins and shared demographic homozygous for the q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A) mutation (70 unrelated deaf history of two Croatian Vlax Roma populations, founder effect followed subjects in total). Detailed audiological analysis of 40 deaf subjects by strict endogamy shaped their evident population differentiation. with genotype q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A)/q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A) revealed significant association of this genotype with mostly symmetrical P10.67 bilateral severe to profound HI (85% severe to profound HI versus 15% A genome-wide analysis of sardinian population structure mild to moderate HI, p<0.05). The extremely high carrier frequency M. Steri1, L. Morelli2, M. Pitzalis3, M. Zoledziewska3, F. Busonero1, A. Maschio1, of the q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A) mutation (11.7%) from six investigated F. Poddie3, M. Uda1, D. Schlessinger4, F. Cucca1,3, S. Sanna1; populations has been found in Yakut population. Reconstruction of 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica (ex INN), CNR, Monserrato, Italy, 140 haplotypes with q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A) mutation demonstrates the 2Dipartimento di Zoologia e Genetica Evoluzionistica, Università di Sassari, common origin of all mutant chromosomes found in Yakuts. The age of Sassari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, mutation was estimated to be approximately 800 years. These findings Sassari, Italy, 4Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, characterize Eastern Siberia as the region with the most extensive MD, United States. accumulation of the q.-3179 (IVS1+1G>A) mutation in the world as a Sardinia is particular attractive for human genetic studies, being one result of founder effect. of the larger isolated populations and thus suitable for large-scale Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 334433 studies. Several attempts have been made to explore its genetic classified as cases(n=515) and those not suffering VF classified structure, but they either analyzed a large set of markers in very few as controls(n=457). SNPs associated with ECG conduction and samples or thousands of individuals at specific loci. Here we genotyped repolarization indices at genome-wide significant p-values (P<5×10-8) 2,615 individuals with the Affymetrix 6.0 array. Samples were recruited in previous GWAS were identified. Genotypes were obtained either by from the north, south and central east areas of the Island, and initially direct genotyping(Illumina610) or were imputed using HapMap build considered as 3 distinct populations. Genotype calling was performed 36. Logistic regression was used to test for association with VF. with Birdseed-v2, considering all samples as a unique cluster to avoid Results: Besides previously reported rs6795970 in SCN10A, two batch effects. Subsequently, we applied standard filters for samples SNPs, rs11897119 and rs17779747 were found to modulate risk of and SNP quality, and used IBD sharing to detect, and discard, VF during MI. rs11897119 (OR:1.23, 95%CI:1.03-1.49) is located in hidden relatives. Using principal component analysis, we identified MEIS1, and was previously shown to be associated with PR-interval outliers and reassigned each individual accordingly. An analysis of in the general population. rs17779747 (OR:1.28, 95%CI:1.05-1.54) is molecular variance indicated that only 0.21% of the variability could located 600 kb far from KCNJ2, and was previously associated with be attributable to inter-population variation (Fst=0.002), confirming a QT-interval in the general population. lack of large-scale substructure. We thus considered the Sardinians Conclusions: SNPs impacting cardiac conduction and repolarization as a unique sample. Compared to HapMap3 populations, as expected, may modulate risk of sudden cardiac death during acute MI. higher similarity was observed with Tuscany and CEPH samples (Fst=0.005 and 0.010, respectively). A genome-wide search for P10.70 SNPs highly differentiated between Sardinians and these European incidence of spinal muscular Atrophy in chuvashia populations confirmed the specialness of HLA and LCT regions, and V. V. Zabnenkova, E. L. Dadali, A. V. Polyakov; also showed elevated Fst values (>0.27) at the CR1 gene, known to be Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. related to malaria severity. We are now integrating sequencing data of The proximal spinal muscular atrophy is a severe autosomal recessive many individuals to provide a more comprehensive analysis of variants neuromuscular disease characterized by degeneration of alpha motor in addition to the common SNPs in current genotyping platforms. neurons in the spinal cord, which results in progressive proximal muscle weakness and paralysis. This disease is caused by mutation P10.68 in the telomeric copy of the survival motor neuron gene (SMNt). Most The theoretical value of kin in aging theory: a modification of carriers of SMA have one chromosome 5 with a normal SMNt gene Hamilton’s equations of declining selection and one with a deleted SMNt gene. S. J. Newman, S. Easteal; This study sought to evaluate the incidence of SMA in Chuvashia. Australian National University, Acton, Australia. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification was used to assess The evolutionary theories of aging proposed by Hamilton, Williams the copy number of the two survival motor neuron genes (SMNt and and Medawar during the last century remain our dominant explanation SMNc) on chromosome 5q13. This method allows to determinate for the phenomenon of senescence. Hamilton, Williams and Medawar accurately the carriers for spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), with one pointed out numerous shortcomings of these theories in their original copy of SMNt. papers and subsequent comments, yet since their publication little has Analysis of 260 normal Chuvashia individuals revealed a carrier been attempted to directly address these issues. incidence of 2,7% (1 per 37, 7/260), the calculated incidence of SMA The criticisms levelled at these theories include an inability to explain equal to 1 per 5476. These findings are significant comparable with prolonged post-reproductive survival, the evolution of menopause carrier frequency 1 per 40-50 and incidence 1 per 6000-10000 in the and early infant mortality, the existence of ‘negative’ and ‘negligible’ general population. senescence, positive selection for cellular suicide, and an apparent tautology in defining the likelihood of death. All of these valid criticisms P10.71 can be addressed using a simple modification of Hamilton’s equations. Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in iL-20 and The Eueler-Lotka equation and the Malthusian parameter form the iL-10 with Hepatitis c virus definitional basis of fitness for Williams and Hamilton. Yet these E. Arbabi Aval, S. Mohebbi, F. Rostami, P. Azimzadeh, s. Romani, A. Sharifian, equations carry an implicit and incorrect assumption: that the F. Derakhshan, M. Zali; production of offspring is the measure of fitness for an individual. Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Tehran, Islamic This assumption creates a situation where fitness must always be a Republic of Iran. positive, declining vector. Back ground: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is an infectious blood-borne By the simple introduction of an indirect fitness term, and the removal pathogen that usually persists as a chronic infection. However, in of the dx variable, the traditional equations of Hamilton become more approximately 15% of cases, patients can clear the virus, indicating accurate measures of fitness and can account for all of the above that host differences could be critical in determining the course of HCV phenomena. infection. The inflammatory response is crucial to resolve the virus or progress to chronic infection after acute phase. The aim of this study P10.69** was to determine effects 5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in investigating genetic modulation of sudden cardiac death by the IL10 and IL 20 genes for association with HCV. variants discovered in genome wide association studies for EcG methods: We conducted based case-control study. DNA from indices of conduction and repolarization 120 patients and 110 controls was investigated. IL-20 gene single R. Pazoki1, R. F. Marsman1, M. W. T. Tanck1, J. S. S. G. de Jong1, L. R. C. nucleotide polymorphisms in (rs1518108), (rs1400986) and IL-10 Dekker2, A. A. M. Wilde1, C. R. Bezzina1; single nucleotide polymorphisms in (rs1800872) , ( rs1800871) and 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Catharina Hospital, (rs1800896) were evaluated by polymerase chain reaction and the Eindhoven, Netherlands. restriction fragment length polymorphism technique. Background: Sudden cardiac death is a leading mode of death in adults Result: This study demonstrated a significant association between in the Western world and is largely caused by ventricular fibrillation(VF) polymorphism of rs1518108 and HCV infection in the Iranian population. during acute myocardial ischemia-infarction(MI). Although a genetic Also no significant differences were found in the polymorphisms of component in risk of VF in MI is recognized, underlying genetic factors IL-20 and Other IL-10 allele polymorphisms between patients and remain largely unknown. ECG parameters predict risk of sudden controls. death; and recent genome-wide association studies(GWAS) have conclusion: The rs1518108 T allele might be a risk factor for HCV in revealed common single nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs) associated Iranian population. with variation in ECG indices of conduction and repolarization. In this study we investigated the effect of these SNPs in modulating risk of P10.72 VF in acute MI. Human chromosome 4p and malaria infection Methods: Patients studied were from the Arrhythmia Genetics L. C. Pereira1,2, J. M. Pescarini1,2,3, R. G. M. Ferreira4,2, A. A. Casseb5, L. M. A. in the NEtherlands study (AGNEs), which consists of Dutch Camargo1,2, H. Krieger1,2, L. M. Garrido1,2; Caucasian patients with a first acute MI, with those suffering VF 1Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas – Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 344 Brazil, 2Instituto Nacional de Genética Médica Populacional (INAGEMP) – P10.74 Brazil, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 3Instituto de Biologia Molecular do Paraná – Paraná Association between sNPs in tNF gene and clinical - Brazil, Curitiba, Brazil, 4Fundação Oswaldo Cruz - Rôndonia - Brazil, Porto manifestations of Dengue in Rondonia, Western Brazilian Velho, Brazil, 5Fundação Universidade Federal de Rondônia – Rondônia - Amazon Brazil, Porto Velho, Brazil. D. Delani, L. M. Cantanhede, A. Krauze, J. J. O. Amaral, A. A. Casseb, V. E. In the world over 300 million people are infected by malaria each year. G. Oliveira; In Brazil this cases are concentrated in legal Amazon region. It is Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Porto Velho, Brazil. known that human genetic factors may contribute to susceptibility and TNF gene showed a significant association with severe forms of the response to infectious diseases. Genes like HbS, DARC, G6PD infection caused by Dengue virus (Sierra 2010). By an extensive and others are responsible for resistance to Malaria infection and the variability of SNPs, it has become essential tool for genetic linkage severity of the disease. studies or association in composition and frequency within and Tool-like Receptors (TLRs) are a family of signaling proteins involved between different ethnic groups (Vejbaesya, 2009). Aiming to genotype in the innate immune response to different kind of pathogens. In the the SNPs -238 and -308 located in the promoter region of this gene last few years several studies associating TLR genes with infectious and the genetic association observed between individuals infected diseases were reported. with dengue, we collected blood samples from 108 individuals living Recent studies by our group identified a genetic association between in Cacoal and Jaru, Rondonia’s State. DNA extraction was performed the number of malaria infection and a specific region of the human using the protocol described by Higuchi and analysis of samples chromosome 4p in Western Amazonian individuals, using a panel of was by PCR and RFLP, followed by electrophoresis on PAGE 6%. STR markers. It has been postulated that the TLR1 gene may be a Statistical data were obtained using the program GENEPOP (Version good candidate for susceptibility/resistance to malaria infection, since 4.0). The allele frequency was 0.936 for -238G, and 0.0640 for -238A, it is related to others infectious diseases and it is located in the 4p corresponding to that observed in European populations (0.068 and human chromosome. 0.932 respectively, NCBI, 2010). In dengue patients the presence of A sample from the Western Amazonian population of Monte Negro this mutant allele-238A is associated with protection (Oliveira 2004). (RO) was studied in a Case-Control fashion. Seventy cases and In this study, no association was found (p> 0.05). -308G allele had a controls were selected through regression analysis, based on the frequency of 0.878 and -308A of 0.122, similar to described for African- sex, age and the malaria history of 925 individuals. The genotyping American (0.123 and 0.877 respectively, NCBI, 2010), confirming the assay was made by RFLP of the rs5743618 (I602S).No significant ethnic heterogeneity of the study population. Unable to establish a association was detected between the number of malaria infection and biological basis of susceptibility and resistance in relation to TNF, even the genotype of the analyzed SNP. Other causes for these associations though there is data in the literature (Fernández, 2004). New molecular should be searched in order to explain the above findings related to 4p approaches and statistics will be performed for the association dengue chromosome(CNPq/CAPES). / TNF can be analyzed in order to confirm whether or not the literature. P10.73 P10.75 Evaluation the number of carriers of mEFV common mutations Polymorphisms of thiopurine s-methyltransferase (tPmt) gene in Familial mediterranean Fever in North-Western area of iran. in the average Roma and Hungarian population samples T. Moharrami, A. Karimi, M. Jabbarpur Bonyadi, S. Dastgiri, K. Sakha, M. C. Sipeky1, A. Maasz1, E. Saghy1, G. Tarlos1, M. Szabo2, I. Takacs3, B. Taghizadeh; Melegh1; Department of Medical Genetics and Student Research Center, Tabriz 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Koch University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. Robert Hospital, Edeleny, Hungary, 3Department of Institute of Internal Medicine Background- Familial Mediterranean Fever, one of the most common and Haematology, Semmelweis Teaching Hospital, Miskolc, Hungary. and recognized periodic fevers syndromes, is a recessive autosomal Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) gene polymorphisms are the disorder. This disease is prominently present in the non- Ashkenazi major determinants of interindividual differences in haematological Jews, Arabs, Turks and Armenian people. toxicity of 6-mercaptopurine. The purpose of this work was to determine Considering the geographic location of North-West of Iran and its the frequency of TPMT polymorphisms, to study the genetic variability neighborhood with two high-risk regions i.e. Armenia and Turkey, the and ethnic differences in average Hungarian, and Roma population high prevalence of FMF in this area is expected. samples. Total of 370 Hungarian and 271 Roma subjects were Aim- The purpose of this study was to evaluate the number of carriers genotyped for the TPMT*2 (G238C, Ala80Pro, rs1800462), TPMT*3B of MEFV common mutations in healthy controls. The result can be (G460A, Ala154Thr, rs1800460), TPMT*3C (A719G, Tyr240Cys, of help in estimating the prevalence of Familial Mediterranean Fever rs1142345) and TPMT*3A (G460A and A719G) variant alleles by disease and awareness-raising to avoid potential Amiloidosis. PCR-RFLP assay. Comparing the genotype and allele frequencies Methods- 200 healthy controls who were not suffering from FMF were of Roma and Hungarian populations differences were found in the selected randomly from North-West area. After obtaining their consent TPMT 460 GG (93.0 vs. 96.5%), GA genotypes (7.00 vs. 3.50%) and blood sampling, their DNA was extracted. Then through PCR- and in A allele frequency (0.035 vs. 0.018) between the two studied RFLP and PCR-ARMS techniques, the mutation was studied. groups (p<0.05). Futhermore, in frequency of TPMT 719 AA (91.5 Findings- Out of 400 studied alleles, 44 mutant alleles for E148Q vs. 95.4%), AG (8.50 vs. 4.60%) genotype and in G allele frequency mutation and 7 mutant alleles for V726A mutation were found. In (0.042 vs. 0.023) was significant difference between the Roma and the other 3 mutations, no mutant allele was found. The frequency of Hungarian population samples (p<0.05). Predominant variant alleles general alleles for these 5 common mutations is 0.1325. The carriers were the TPMT*3A (7.00 and 3.52%) and the TPMT*3C (0.70 and rat was 23.4%. 0.54%) both in Roma and Hungarian populations. Interestingly, the Conclusions- The result with 23.4% of carriers indicates that FMF is frequency of total variant alleles was almost two times higher in Roma significantly prevalent in North-West of the Iran. than in Hungarian population samples (7.70 vs. 4.20%). The results of This high number suggests that North-West of Iran, like other high- TPMT polymorphisms found in the Hungarian population were similar risk areas, is susceptible to Familial Mediterranean Fever. Like other to that observed in other Caucasian populations. By contrast, the studies carried out in other countries, this study also suggests that Roma population differs from Hungarians, from Caucasians, and from E148Q has reduced influence in the patients of North-West area. populations of India in common TPMT polymorphisms. P10.76 Analysis of UcPs, PPARs and PGc-1 genes polymorphism in elderly people I. V. Tarkovskaya1,2, O. S. Glotov2, L. V. Turjeva3, L. P. Khorohinina4, V. S. Baranov1,2; 1St-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 334455 Federation, 3St-Petersburg State Medical Academy department of internal Medical and Chemical Laboratory Diagnostics. Medical University, A-8036 diseases, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4St-Petersburg Medical Graz, Austria. Academy of Postgraduate Studies, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. Vitamin D (25(OH)VitD) plays an important role in many areas of Our goal was to investigate whether polymorphisms in UCP2, UCP3, health and disease. Prospective studies showed associations between PPARA, PPARD, PPARG and PGC-1 genes influence life expectancy. low vitamin D and mortality. Vitamin D insufficiency affects as many as All genes are involved in storage and energy burning and provide half of otherwise healthy adults in developed countries. The vitamin opportunity to study energy balance in humans.We have analyzed six D binding protein gene GC (“group-specific component”) contains an polymorphisms of this genes: UCP2 Ala55Val, UCP3 C-55T, PPARA A>C polymorphism, whereby the GG genotype has been associated G/C, PPARD +294T/C, PPARG Pro12Ala and PGC-1 Gly482Ser, by with an increased risk for vitamin D insufficiency. We investigated the RLFP method in 145 elderly people (group1) and 133 control group potential role of this GC polymorphism for bone mineral density and (25-65 aged people) (group2) from North-West Region of Russia. bone fractures. Distribution of genotypes of UCP3 gene was significantly different GC genotypes were determined in two independent cohorts, 370 between group1 in comparison to group2 (p=0.009, df=2) for C/C elderly otherwise healthy and in 970 nursing home subjects. Genotypes genotype 43.9% and 24.4%, C/T genotype 46.2% and 67.1%, T/T were related to 25(OH)VitD and fractures in both groups and with bone genotype 9.8% and 8.5%, respectively. So as for PGC-1 (p=0.04, mineral density (BMD) in healthy elderly subjects. df=2) for Gly/Gly genotype 40.0% and 28.6%, Gly/Ser genotype Mean vitamin D levels were within the lower normal range in the healthy 47.6% and 62.4%, Ser/Ser genotype 12.4% and 9.0%, respectively. elderly cohort (32,8±13,2 ng/ml) and very low in the nursing home For PPARD polymorphism both genotypes and alleles differences patients (9,3±6,8 ng/ml). The GG genotype was highly associated with were founded between group1 in comparison to group2 (p=0.0007, lower 25(OH)VitD values (p<0,001). Age-adjusted measurements of df=2) for T/T genotype 66.0% and 88.8%, T/C genotype 31.9% and BMD expressed as Z-scores (n=356) at the lumbar spine, the total 9.0%, respectively, and increasing of C allele in group1 compared with hip and femoral neck were not associated with the GC polymorphism. group2 (18.1% and 6.7%, respectively) and decreasing of T allele in GC frequencies were not statistically different between persons with group1 in comparison to group2 (81.9% and 93.3%, respectively). fractures (n=583, GG: 8,2%, GT: 42,7% TT: 49,1%) and persons Also increasing of C allele (PPARA) in group1 in comparison to group2 without fractures (n=744, GG: 3,6%, GT: 41,1% TT: 52,3%). (26.3% and 17.5%, respectively, p=0.07) and decreasing of G allele We conclude that the GC polymorphism is a determinant for raised risk in group1 in comparison to group2 (73.7% and 82.5%, respectively, of Vitamin D insufficiency but not for bone mineral density and fracture p=0.07) were founded. Consequently we suggest that UCP3, PPARD risk, at least in our highly deficient 25(OH)VitD nursing home cohort. and PGC-1 polymorphisms are significant for survival. P10.79 P10.77 the place of the population of Lithuania between Northern and Vitamin B12 status during pregnancy and cognitive ability of Eastern Europe: Y chromosome analysis children at age 8: a mendelian Randomization study in a UK birth I. Uktverytė1, O. Balanovsky2,3, S. Frolova3, M. Kuznetsova3, E. Balanovska3, cohort V. Kučinskas1; C. Bonilla1, D. A. Lawlor2, A. E. Taylor1, D. Gunnell1, Y. Ben-Shlomo1, A. R. 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius Ness3, N. J. Timpson2, B. St. Pourcain1, S. M. Ring1, P. Emmett1, G. Davey University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vavilov Institute for General Genetics of Russian Smith2, S. J. Lewis1; Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Centre for 1School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Medical Genetics of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Kingdom, 2MRC Centre for Causal Analyses in Translational Epidemiology, Federation. School of Social and Community Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol, United The population of Lithuania is constituted of 6 dialectal groups which Kingdom, 3School of Oral and Dental Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, form two major ethno-linguistic groups known as Aukštaitish and United Kingdom. Žemaitish, both speaking Baltic languages of Indo-European family. Vitamin B12 is essential for maintenance of a healthy neuronal Neighbouring Finno-Ugric (Northern and Eastern Europe), Slavonic system. Brain development occurs primarily in utero and early infancy, (Eastern Europe) and Germanic (Northern Europe) populations but the role of maternal vitamin B12 levels during pregnancy on surrounding the Baltic sea region influenced historical formation offspring cognitive function is unclear. In this study we examined the of Lithuanian ethno-linguistic groups. Analysis of the Lithuanian relationship between vitamin B12 status in pregnant women from the population genetic composition helps to understand the origin, history UK ALSPAC birth cohort and the cognitive ability of their offspring. and place among other populations. First, we conducted an observational study of maternal vitamin B12 Y chromosome analysis was performed for 301 individuals from 6 dietary intake during pregnancy and child’s IQ at 8 years of age. dialectal groups. 25 SNPs were genotyped (TaqMan) to determine Y There was a positive observational association between maternal haplogroup and 17 STR were analysed to determine haplotype for each vitamin B12 intake and child’s IQ that was attenuated somewhat after individual. Most frequent haplogroups in the population of Lithuania adjustment for potential confounders, but remained. We then employed are R1a1a (42.2%, R1a1a1g compose 8.97% in studied population) a Mendelian randomization strategy that assessed the association of and N1c1 (40.5%) and less frequent haplogroups are R1b1b1, I1, maternal genotype at SNPs in the genes FUT2 (rs492602) and TCN2 I2a, E1b1b1 (<5% each). AMOVA showed no statistically significant (rs1801198), which have been previously found to be reliably related differences between two major ethno-linguistic groups Aukštaitish and to serum vitamin B12 in genomewide and candidate gene association Žemaitish (among groups p-value=0.897, among population within studies, with child’s IQ. This approach allows us to evaluate the causal groups p-value=0.194, within populations p-value=0.282 based on relationship between exposure and outcome without confounding from 10100 permutations). MDS of genetic distances based on Y-biallelic lifestyle and environmental risk factors. In this case, maternal alleles markers showed that Lithuanians are closer to Latvian and Estonian associated with an increase in serum vitamin B12 were also associated populations than to Slavic populations (European part of Russia, with higher IQ scores in children. These associations were present Poland, Ukraine, Belorussia, stress=0.029). after adjustment for the equivalent offspring SNP and population According to the frequencies of haplogroups, no statistically significant stratification. Our findings support the hypothesis that low vitamin B12 differences between ethno-linguistic groups were detected (p>0.05), levels in utero adversely impact children’s cognitive function. moreover, MDS analysis sets the population of Lithuania between Northern and Eastern European populations. P10.78 This study was supported by The Genographic Project. Allelic determinants of vitamin D insufficiency and bone mineral density P10.80 O. Trummer1, N. Schweighofer1, U. Lam1, E. Wehr1, V. Schwetz1, H. Dobnig1, Y-chromosome genetic variation of modern Bulgarians M. Gugatschka2, T. Pieber1, W. Renner3, B. Obermayer-Pietsch1; S. Karachanak1,2, V. Grugni2, D. Nesheva1, V. Battaglia2, S. Fornarino2,3, N. 1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of internal Medicine, Al-Zahery2, V. Carossa2, Y. Yordanov4, A. Galabov5, B. Atanasov6, A. Torroni2, Medical University, A-8036 Graz, Austria, 2ENT University Hospital, Department D. Toncheva1, O. Semino2; of Phoniatrics, Medical University, A-8036 Graz, Austria, 3Clinical Institute of 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Evolutionary and population genetics, and Genetic epidemiology 346 Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università Dogas16, I. Rudan15,16, M. Merrow17, B. Penninx9, C. P. Kyriacou7, A. Metspalu4,5, di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, Pavia, Italy, 3Human Evolutionary Genetics, CNRS URA C. M. van Duijn2,18, T. Meitinger11, T. Roenneberg1; 3012, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, Paris, France, 4Institute of Experimental 1Institute of Medical Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Morphology and Anthropology with Museum-Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Germany, 2Genetic epidemiology unit, Department of Epidemiology and Clinical Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5The Stephan Angeloff Institute of Microbiology, Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Max-Planck-Institute of Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 4Estonian Genome Center and Institute of Organic Chemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Molecular and Cell Biology of University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Estonian Bulgaria. Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 6Estonian Genome Center and Institute of Molecular To date, Bulgarian Y chromosomes have been studied only in and Cell Biology of University of Tartu, Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, macrogeographic context or in the lineage-based approach. Therefore, 7Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, in order to comprehensively characterize Bulgarian Y-chromosome 8Medical Research Council, Human Genetics Unit, IGMM, Edinburgh, United variation, we have performed high-resolution phylogenetic analysis of Kingdom, 9VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 812 healthy,unrelated Bulgarian males and compared the results with 10Institute of Genetic Medicine, European Academy of Bolzano, Bolzano, Italy, Y-chromosome data from other Eurasian populations. 11Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, The genotyping of 60 biallelic markers was performed in hierarchical Germany, 12Institute of Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, order by RFLP and DHPLC analyses. The position of Bulgarians Germany, 13Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology, Ludwig- among other populations was visualized by Principal Component (PC) Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, 14Klinikum Großhadern, Munich, analysis. Germany, 15Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, About 80% of the total genetic variation in Bulgarians falls within Community Health Sciences, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 16Croatian Centre for haplogroups E-M35, I-M170, J-M172, R-M17 and R-M269. This finding Global Health, University of Split Medical School, Split, Croatia, 17Department shows that the Bulgarian haplogroup profile is congruent with those of Chronobiology, University of Groningen, Haren, Netherlands, 18Centre of described for most European populations. Medical Systems Biology, Netherlands Genomics Initiative (NGI), The Hague, Among the prehistoric events marked by the observed haplogroups, Netherlands. the greatest contribution comes from the range expansion of local Extremes of sleep duration and timing have been associated with Mesolithic foragers triggered by adoption of agriculture introduced by adverse health outcomes that characterise the metabolic syndrome. a cadre of Near Eastern farmers. The Bulgarian Y chromosome gene Body homeostasis and circadian rhythm are though to interact to pool also bears signals of the recolonization from different glacial regulate these phenotypes, but little is known about the molecular refugia, the spread of agriculture from the Near East and the expansion mechanism behind it. We thus investigated 7 European populations of early farmers along the Central and East European river basins. in relation to their sleep duration habits and genome-wide variability. As for the interpopulation analysis, similarly to mtDNA, Bulgarians Meta-analysing the independent genome-wide association results, belong to the cluster of European populations, still being slightly distant we identified a variant (P = 3.99 x 10-8) in the ABCC9 gene that from them. Bulgarians are distant from Turks (despite geographical explains ≈ 5 % of the variation in sleep duration. We found supportive proximity), Arabic and Caucasus populations and Indians. These trends evidence for this association in a subgroup of an independent de novo in the PCA graph likely reflect not only prehistoric, but also more recent replication cohort, which we selected based on gene-environment (time demographic events that have shaped the Y chromosome structure of of year) and sleep timing interactions. To investigate the functional modern Bulgarians. relevance of our findings, we knocked down a homologue of the gene in Drosophila, which resulted in a night-sleep duration reduction of 3 P10.81 h. Our study shows that ABCC9 modulates epidemiological variation Eight-year investigation of Yq-microdeletions in azoospermic and in human sleep duration, which is also influenced by inter-individual severe oligozoospermic men in iranian population differences in sleep timing and seasonality (seasonal differences in H. Imanian, M. Rostami, M. Azad, N. Almadani, H. Najmabadi; entrainment of the biological clock). Therefore, scanning only for main Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathlogy and Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. effects on sleep duration, one might miss important genetic variants Genes on the long arm of Y-chromosome (Yq), particularly within specific to subgroups of the population. ABCC9 is involved with energy interval 6, are believed to play a critical role in human spermatogenesis. homeostasis, and the susceptibility to overweight and cardiovascular It has shown that microdeletions of Yq may account for a significant disease, which correlate with sleep duration. The relation of these proportion of men with infertility in different populations. Y-chromosome genes to metabolism and disease indicates a common mechanism for microdeletions are known as the second frequent genetic cause of the regulation of these phenotypes and sleep duration. spermatogenetic failure in infertile men after Klinefelter syndrome. Over last 8 years, total of 900 infertile individuals referred to our J10.01 center for Yq-microdeletion analysis. The aim of this study was to HPV infection prevalence and subtypes‘ distribution among determine the proportion of men with idiopathic azoospermia or severe women with cytology findings, attending two private clinics in oligozoospermia, who carry microdeletions in Y-q. Larissa (central Greece) EDTA blood was taken from each of patients and DNA extracted E. PAPPADA, A. GALMPENIS, M. THANOS, V. STYLOPOULOU, G. according to standard protocol. Yq-microdeletion analysis was DIMISIANOS; performed by PCR method using different STSs multiplex reaction BIOANALYSIS LARISSA, DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORY, LARISSA, Greece. designed for covering three regions of Y-chromosome known as INTRODUCTION: Infection from Human Papillomavirus has been AZFa, AZFb, and AZFc. As the results showed, 4.7% azoospermic and establisthed as a cause of cervical cancer. HPV screening in women oligozoospermic samples failed to amplify 1 or more STS. Interestingly, with positive cytology results, helps to identify the women in need for 34 out of 42 patients had microdeletions in AZFc region that accounts therapy and further screening. The aim of the study was to identify for 80.95% of all detected microdeletions. the most prevalent HPV subtypes in Larissa, Greece. The sample These data suggest a 4.7% prevalence of Yq-microdeletions in population consisted of women attending two private gynaecology Iranian men with idiopathic azoospermia/severe oligozoospermia. The clinics and referred to our laboratory for HPV screening due to findings physical locations of these microdeletions provide further support for in their cytology test indicating HPV infection. the concept that a gene(s) on Y-q interval 6 plays an important role in METHODS: A total of 255 women were studied. All women underwent a spermatogenesis. regular gynaecological examination including Papanicolaou test. None of the women had been previously diagnosed with an HPV infection. P10.82 The following 32 HPV types were studied using a commercially A gene involved in metabolism modulates natural variation in available method based on an LCD array hybridization (CHIPRON), human sleep duration following a duplex PCR : K. V. Allebrandt1, N. Amin2, B. Müller-Myhsok3, T. Esko4,5, M. Teder-Laving6, 6, 11,16,18,31,33,35,39,42,44,45,51,52,53,54,56,58,59,61,62,66,67,6 R. V. D. M. Azevedo7, C. Hayward8, J. van Mill9, N. Vogelzangs9, E. W. Green7, 8,70,72,73,81, 82,83,84,90 and 91. S. A. Melville10, P. Lichtner11, H. E. Wichmann12,13,14, B. A. Oostra2, A. C. J. W. RESULTS: HPV infection was detected in 79.3% of the study Janssens2, H. Campbell15, J. F. Wilson15, A. A. Hicks10, P. P. Pramstaller10, Z. population. Among the infected population, 35.8% had a single type Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 334477 infection with the most prevalent type being type 16 (18%) followed by P11 Genomics, Genomic technology including types 45 (9.7%) and 56 (8.3%). bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene 22% of the infected population had infection with 2 types of hpv, 17% product function and Epigenetics with 3 types, 13,9% 4 types, 5.4% 5 types. The rest had between 7 and 16 types of HPV. CONCLUSIONS: There is a high prevalence of HPV infection amongst women attending private gynaecology clinics in Larissa. Findings are P11.001 in accordance with the published literature on the prevalence of each investigation of an atypical 16p11.2 microdeletion as a possible subtype studied. pathogenic rearrangement associated with congenital defects and mental retardation. J10.02 M. A. Ramos-Arroyo1, R. Narvaiza-Martinez1, A. Bengoa-Alonso1, M. Moreno1, Population Genetic study of Russia B. Nieva2, M. E. Querejeta2; G. I. Elchinova, R. A. Zinchenko; 1Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain, 2Policlínica San Sebastián, San Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Sebastián, Spain. Moscow, Russian Federation. Chromosome 16p11.2 deletion is an emerging syndrome associated Parameters of Barrai calculated in populations: 13 districts of Rostov to a variable phenotype, including autism. The common deleted region region (I from 0.0005 to 0.0022) , 29 districts of Kirov region (I extends from genomic location 29.4-31.1Mb and its flanked by low copy r r from 0.0017 to 0.0201 ), 6 districts of Tver region (I from 0.0031 to repeats. A deletion of the adjacent region has been also described in a r 0.0049), 2 districts of Arkhangelsk region (I from 0.0020 to 0.0030), boy with mental retardation and his father with learning disabilities. We r 7 districts of Marii El Republic (I from 0.0017 to 0.0133), 33 districts present an additional case with the same atypical 16p11.2 deletion and r of Yakutia (Sakha) Republic (I from 0.0010 to 0.0468), 16 districts speculate about its possible pathogenic effect. r of Tatarstan Republic (I from 0.0008 to 0.0065). Parameters of The girl showed facial dysmorphic features, congenital malformations r Isolation by distance of Malecot calculated in populations: 6 districts (aortic valve defects, agenesis of the corpus callosum and uretero- of Chuvashia Republic (a from 0.00016 to 0.00054), 5 districts of Marii vesical reflux), moderate-severe mental retardation and speech El Republic (a from 0.00025 to 0.00058), 2 districts of Yakutia (Sakha) disorder. She carried a de novo balanced (1;17)(q21;q23) translocation, Republic (a from 0.0013 to 0.0106), 10 districts of Rostov region (a observed by conventional karyotype. Genome-wide oligonucleotide from 0.00012 to 0.00046), 7 districts of Kirov region (a from 0.00011 arrays studies detected a 289kb deletion (location 28.73-29.02Mb), to 0.00149), 2 districts of Tver region (a from 0.0009 to 0.0011), 2 flanking the recurrent 16p11.2 microdeletion/duplication region. The districts of Arkhangelsk region (a from 0.00047 to 0.00056), 6 districts deletion was confirmed by FISH studies and ruled out in both parents. of Bashkortostan Republic (a from 0.00015 to 0.00227), 6 districts of Translocation breakpoints, located at 1q11.1 (a non-containing gene Udmurtia Republic (a from 0.00027 to 0.00065), 12 districts of Tatarstan region) and 17q23.1.q23.2, did not present genomic imbalances. It Republic (a from 0.00012 to 0.00041). Crow Index and its components has been shown that around 30% of cases with apparently balanced calculated in rural populations: Rostov region (I =0.050, I=0.211, reciprocal translocations and abnormal phenotype present genomic m f I =0.272), Tver region (I =0.029, I=0.171, I =0.205), Pskov region rearrangements in other chromosomes. We, therefore, hypothesis that tot m f tot (I =0.019, I=0.261, I =0.286), Marii El Republic (I =0.105, I=0.424, the atypical deletion of 16p11.2, present in our patient and previously m f tot m f I =0.575), Chuvashia Republic (I =0.068, I=0.273, I =0.360), Yakutia reported in two cases with intellectual disabilities, may have a tot m f tot (Sakha) Republic (I =0.072, I=0.364, I =0.462), Bashkortostan pathogenic effect, either as a primary cause or as a contributing factor m f tot Republic (I =0.051, I=0.251, I =0.315), Udmurtia Republic (I =0.046, to the phenotype. Further investigations to rule out the possibility of m f tot m I=0.258, I =0.316), Kalmykia Republic (I =0.038, I=0.300, I =0.350). gene disruption within 17q23 region and characterization of additional f tot m f tot cases with 16p11.2 deletions are needed to fully understand the role J10.03 of this rearrangement. Genetical and epidemiological research of a hereditary ophthalmic pathology among the children‘s population P11.002 V. V. Kadyshev, O. V. Khlebnikova, R. A. Zinchenko; study of the AcVR1 gene expression and regulation: the 5‘UtR Research Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. and the promoter region We carried out genetic and epidemiological research into hereditary F. Giacopelli1, S. Cappato2, M. Mura2, R. Ravazzolo1,2, R. Bocciardi1; ophthalmic pathology (HOP) among children of 9 districts 1University of Genoa and CEBR, Genova, Italy, 2G. Gaslini Institute Laboratory (Bogorodsky, Svechinsky, Nemsky, Uninsky, Shabalinsky, Darovsky, of Molecular Genetics, Genova, Italy. Verhoshizhemsky, Kumensky, Sunsky) of the Kirov province (Russian ACVR1 encodes a BMP type I receptor mutated in Fibrodysplasia Federation). The total investigated population was 93,790, of whom Ossificans Progressiva, a severe form of heterotopic ossification. 17% were children (0-18 years old inclusive). The prevalence of HOP Mechanisms regulating ACVR1 expression are still unknown. among children was 2.31±0.38 per 1000 persons. The ophthalmologist According to our analysis, the 5’ genomic region of ACVR1 is subjected in one of the districts actively carried out routine inspections, starting to alternative splicing generating several transcripts in which different at 2-3 years old. This method allowed detection and registration of 5’UTR exons are combined to a common coding sequence, with disease in an initial stage of illness, without the presentation of different expression profiles according to cell type. As assessed by cell subjective complaints, and subsequent monitoring. Considering the transfection with different full length cDNA constructs and western blot high prevalence of isolated HOP, the pronounced clinical variability, analysis, we observed that different splicing isoforms correlated with genetic heterogeneity, severity of the pathological processes, and the different quantitative expression of the protein. extent of disability in the population, it will be necessary to carry out Moreover, with the aim to identify regulatory elements involved in the routine inspections of children. Early diagnosis of disease will help not transcriptional control of ACVR1 expression, we focused on a genomic only to reveal cases, but it will also motivate treatment of illnesses region spanning around 2.9 kb, from position -2.893 to +32 upstream at sub-clinical levels of the pathological process, that considerably of transcription start site (tss, +1). This region is highly conserved and postpone long-term disability. It will raise the quality of life and will particularly rich in GC nucleotides. A functional characterization of the positively impact on social and economic welfare. ACVR1 promoter was obtained by subcloning the whole fragment and a series of derived deletion segments in a Luciferase expression vector and transfection in different cell lines. The strongest promoter activity was displayed by a 700 bp fragment upstream of tss, but a residual and quite significant activity was still present in a 100 bp fragment. Our data suggest that besides the transcriptional control of ACVR1 expression operated by the promoter region, other mechanisms involving the 5’UTR region, in particular translational regulation, can take place. Supported by RFPS-4-631972 grant “Genetic Bases of Birth Defects” from the Italian Ministry of Health.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 348 P11.003 although recent analyses have shown that missense mutations (of Identification of new putative Alpha globin mutations in Iranian which the majority are glycine substitutions) give a better prognosis population than other types of mutations. A genotype-phenotype correlation was N. Bayat, S. Jalilnejad, F. Daneshimehr, A. Azarkevan, H. Imanian, H. examined with regards to age at onset of ESRD and: (i) distance of Najmabadi; mutation from closest natural interruption, (ii) location of mutation along Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Iran, the gene, (iii) change in number of side-chain carbon atoms caused by Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the mutation, and (iv) change in charge and hydrophobicity caused Alpha thalassemia is usually caused by deletions in alpha globin gene by the mutation. Trends were evident for all statistical analyses and a cluster, and the role of point mutations is less investigated. statistically significant (p-value: 0.0017) correlation (R square: 0.1362) In present study a total of 3438 individuals with unexplained could be found, with age at onset of ESRD decreasing with increasing hypochromic microcytic anemia who did not reveal the most common number of carbon atoms found in the side chain of the substituting alpha thalassemia deletions (3.7kb, Med, 4.2kb, 20.5kb) by gap-PCR, amino acid. We also examined the possibility of interruptions were subjected for alpha2 and alpha1 globin gene DNA sequencing, representing subtle mutational hotspots and although a trend could respectively. Total of 2194 alpha2 and 1244 alpha1 globin DNA be seen with having less mutations within interruptions, no statistical sequencing assays were performed. In cases of absence of nucleotide significance could be reached. Hence, the size of the side chain of change, the sequences were analyzed by CodonCode aligner the substituting amino acid is an important factor in determining the software (V. 3.7.1), to exclude frame shifts and none sense mutations. disease phenotype with regards to age at onset of ESRD. This can be Other variations were checked by Polyphen online software to identify explained by the fact that any other aminoacid substituting glycine is whether the mutation is damaging or not. larger and therefore cannot be accommodated where the three chains Seven new mutations have been identified, of which 2 located in meet in the collagenous triple helix. alpha2 loci (Cd 83 T>G, Cd43 C>A) and 5 in alpha1 loci (Cd99 A>T, Cd34 T>C, IVSI-4 A>G, Cd44 insC and Cd109 delC). Among alpha1 P11.006 globin mutations, the Cd99 was nonsense, Cd44 and Cd109 were targeted Re-sequencing in ALs / FtD and patients with frameshifts, and the Cd34 was considered as possibly damaging by neurodegenerative and movement disorders Polyphen but the role of IVSI-4 needs to be further analyzed. S. Biskup1,2, T. Scheurenbrand2, H. Pander3, M. Synofzik1, C. Wilhelm2, D. This study remarks the importance of point mutations in alpha globin Boehm2; gene cluster, and can identify their role in microcytic anemia. Besides, 1Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, 2CeGaT there were plenty of nucleotide variations identified as polymorphisms. GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 3Olgahospital Stuttgart, Tübingen, Germany. Locating these positions and studying their relations with damaging Background: Several genes have been implicated in the pathogenesis mutations enables us to perform a population study for discovering the of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal dementia (FTD) origin of the mutations. and other types of neurodegeneration. As each gene accounts for only a small fraction of cases, it is crucial to develop an efficient tool for P11.004 investigating all genes simultaneously. Here we present a very fast and Rapid high-throughput Alport diagnosis by next generation cost-efficient targeted re-sequencing approach to screen for all known sequencing. ALS / FTD and genes associated with neurodegeneration and potential R. Artuso1, C. Fallerini1, L. Dosa1, F. Scionti1, M. Clementi2, G. Garosi3, L. candidate genes simultaneously. We expect to identify major genetic Massella4, R. Mancini1, F. Mari1, I. Longo1, F. Ariani1, A. Renieri1, M. Bruttini1; risk factors in a significantly larger proportion of cases as compared 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Padova, Italy, 3Nephrology, to the cases identified with the conventional sequencing method. In Siena, Italy, 4Nephrology and Dialysis, Roma, Italy. addition, careful collection of all clinically relevant information will allow Alport syndrome is an hereditary nephropathy often associated with us to investigate how the genotype determines the phenotype in the sensorineural hypoacusis and ocular abnormalities. Mutations in the different subsets of neurodegenerative diseases. COL4A5 gene causes X-linked Alport syndrome. Mutations in COL4A4 Methods: Genomic DNA is enriched using a custom made Agilent and COL4A3 genes have been reported in both autosomal recessive SureSelect in solution kit. Sequencing of 50 genes (360kb in total) is and autosominal dominant Alport syndrome. The conventional performed using barcoded libraries on one oct (1/8 slide) on the SOLiD mutation screening, performed by DHPLC and/or Sanger sequencing, 4 platform generating approximately 5 Million mappable 50 basepair is time consuming and has relatively high costs due to the absence of reads per patient. The basic data analysis is performed with Bioscope hot spots and to the high number of exons per gene: 51 (COL4A5), 48 v1.2. Additionally, we developed a diagnostic pipeline. All variants (COL4A4), and 52 (COL4A3). Usually, several months are necessary are then re-sequenced by the gold standard Sanger sequencing or to complete the diagnosis, especially in cases with less informative quantitative PCR, respectively. pedigrees. To overcome these limitations, we designed a next Results and Conclusion: We introduce a fast and highly efficient generation sequencing protocol enabling simultaneous detection of screening tool for variants in genes associated with movement all possible variants in the three genes. We used a method coupling disorders and neurodegenerative diseases. Here, we present solved selective amplification to the 454 Roche DNA-sequencing platform cases and troubleshooting of unsolved cases. (GS junior). The application of this technology allowed to identify the second mutation in two Alport patients (p.S1147F in COL4A3 and P11.007 p.R1682W in COL4A4) and to exclude the diagnosis of Alport in a Clinical significance of rare CNVs in epilepsy: a case-control third patient. This study therefore illustrates the successful application genome-wide study of next generation sequencing to routinely diagnosis of Mendelian M. Malacarne1, S. Pasquale2, A. Coppola3, R. Paravidino1, S. Gimelli4, A. disorders with locus heterogeneity. Robbiano5, M. Pezzella5, M. Traverso2, V. Belcastro6, A. Bianchi7, M. Elia8, A. Falace2, E. Gazzero2, E. Ferlazzo9, E. Freri10, R. Galasso11, G. Gobbi12, P11.005 C. Molinatto13, O. Zuffardi14, S. Striano3, G. Ferrero13, F. Dagna Bricarelli1, C. Genotype-phenotype correlation in X-Linked Alport syndrome Minetti2, D. Coviello1, M. Fichera15, F. Zara2; patients carrying missense mutations in the collagenous domain 1S.C. Human Genetic Laboratory, Ente Ospedaliero Ospedali Galliera, of cOL4A5 Genoa, Italy, 2Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Muscular and Neurodegenerative D. Tsiakkis1, P. Koupepidou1, &. Christodoulakis2, M. Pieri1, K. Felekkis1, G. Diseases Unit, Institute G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, 3Epilepsy Center, Federico Papagregoriou1, P. Demosthenous1, C. Deltas1; II University, Napoli, Italy, 4Genetic and Laboratory Medicine, Geneva 1University of Cyprus,Department of Biological Sciences, Nicosia, Cyprus, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 5Laboratory of Neurogenetics, 2University of Cyprus,Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Muscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases Unit, Institute G. Gaslini, Genoa, Nicosia, Cyprus. Genoa, Italy, 6Ospedale ‘S. Anna’, Como, Italy, 7Epilepsy Centre, San Donato The X-linked Alport syndrome (XLAS) is caused by mutations in Hospital, Arezzo, Italy, 8Unit of Neurology, Oasi Institute for Research on COL4A5. More than 400 mutations have been reported in the literature Mental Retardation and Brain Aging, Troina, Italy, 9Institute of Neurology, to date and this allelic heterogeneity is also reflected by a phenotypic Magna Græcia University, Catanzaro and Regional Epilepsy Centre, Reggio heterogeneity. Genotype-phenotype correlation remains elusive, Calabria, Italy, 10Division of Child Neurology, Institute “C. Besta”, Milan, Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 334499 Italy, 11Epidemiology and Statistics Unit, Institute G. Gaslini, Genoa, Italy, Deletion Syndrome(2 patients), Mental Retardation(52 patients), 12Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Maggiore Hospital, Bologna, Italy, Prenatal Diagnosis(10 patients), Implantation Failure(50 patients), 13Dipartimento di Scienze Pediatriche, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, Primary Amenorrhea(1 patients), IVF improvement(7 patients) and 14Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, Hematological Malignacy(4 patients). We isolated DNA samples of 514 15Laboratory of Genetics, Oasi Institute for Research on Mental Retardation and patients. DNA samples labelled according to the protocols.Samples Brain Aging, Troina, Italy. were hybridized with CytoSure Syndrome Plus(v2) 4x44K microchips This study show an extensive search for genomic rearrangements by and with 24Sure platforms.Hybridised platformes were scanned microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) in with Agilent Microarray Scanner.Scanned results were analysed by patients with epilepsy of unknown etiology. Cytosure Analysis Software-v.2.0.8 and BlueFuse Multi-v2.1. Two sets of 279 patients with unexplained epilepsy and 246 controls REsULts: We found 7 aberrations in 35 autistic patients, 35 were screened by using a 44K CGH-array. CNVs overlapping >50% microdeletions in 35 patients, 6 aberrations in 10 prenatal diagnosis with those reported in the Database of Genomic Variant were not investigations, 38 aberrations in 52 mental retardation patients, 4 followed-up. Validation was performed by FISH, higher density array- aberrations in 50 implantation failure patients, and 5 aberrations in 4 CGH, or quantitative-PCR. GeneCodis2.0 software was used to hematological malignancy patients.All aberrations were confirmed with explore the biological function of genes included within the identified FISH analysis.All analysis have been completed less then 72 hours. CNVs. Starting DNA amounts were between 10ng to 500ng. Rare CNVs occurred in twenty-six (9.3%) patients and in sixteen cONcLUsiON: We conclude that, targeted aCGH platforms have (6.5%) controls (p=0.26). CNVs identified in patients were larger a precious contribution to solve our diagnostic problems in clinical (p=0.027) and showed higher gene content (p=0.021) than controls. use. This technology is an efficient tool for delineating chromosomal CNVs sized >1Mb (p=0.002) and including >10 genes (p=0.005) aberrations. It is an indispensable attachment to conventional occurred more frequently in patients than controls. Conversely, the cytogenetics. two groups did not differ for CNVs smaller than 1Mb (p=0.051) and involving 10 or less genes (p=0.547). Nine (34.6%) patients among P11.010 those harboring rare CNVs showed rearrangements associated saudi Biobank experience in enhancing biological and genomic with emerging microdeletion/microduplication syndromes. Mental research at King Abdullah international medical research center retardation and neuropsychiatric features were associated with rare I. Alabdulkareem, M. Aljumah; CNVs (p=0.004) whereas epilepsy type did not. Significant enrichment KAIMRC, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. of genes involved in ion transport was observed within CNVs identified Biobanks are a new frontier for biomolecular research, clinical genomics in patients. Patients with epilepsy have a significantly increased burden and personalized medicine that seeks to integrate collections of bio- of large, rare, gene-rich CNVs, particularly when associated to mental specimens with corresponding patient’s medical histories, and lifestyle retardation or other neuropsychiatric features. Therefore, we suggest information. Combining and comparing biological tissue samples with that CNVs screening should be routinely performed for diagnostic genetic and historical patient information, researchers will be able purposes only in such patients. Moreover, the implementation of very to investigate the fundamental mechanisms of diseases in rich new high resolution screening in clinical practice deserves caution. ways. New insights into molecular and genetic process will lead to better techniques for predicting disease susceptibility, as well as to P11.008 more targeted and innovative ways to treat serious diseases. Assessing size distribution and integrity of high molecular Saudi Biobanking study is designed as a longitudinal study of weight DNA prior to acGH experiments constitutional and environmental factors influencing the development R. Salowsky, M. Gassmann; of most prevalent chronic diseases in Saudi population. Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany. To ensure the value of the stored biological material in serving is main Multiple genomic applications such as for example aCGH or next-gen purpose of advancing healthcare of our country through research. sequencing (NGS) require highest DNA quality as the level of DNA Ethical standard and Several quality measures has been implemented degradation can have a significant effect on downstream sample to guide the collection process, sample processing, health data processing and therewith final data quality and interpretation. Over acquisition, blinding and retrieving the Saudi Biobank (SB) is designed the past years, microfluidic on-chip electrophoresis has become the to store for more than 4 million tubes from 200,000 persons. The blood standard tool for assessing size, quantity and integrity of DNA and RNA components, urine, tissue DNA, RNA and dry DNA/blood materials will starting material in many experimental workflows. With an optimized be accumulate into SB. In addition to that, the banking of purified DNA/ protocol and improved electrophoresis chemistry, the analytical size RNA from patients will not be limited to the above number; however, range could be extended which resulted in a new prototype assay. DNA and Buffy coat is already in our bank. This extended size range enables the integrity assessment of high This presentation is to summarize the value of biobanking in enhancing molecular weight DNA isolated from tissues or cell lines by column biological and genomic research. based extraction methods. In contrast to slab gel analyses, this prototype assay provides standardized information on DNA size P11.011 distribution, quantity and integrity. Results from a study correlating BiosHaRE-it: solving the bioinformatic challenges of DNA sample quality with aCGH read-outs are discussed. biobanking A. J. Brookes1, P. Burton1,2, V. Ferretti3, I. Fortier3, J. R. Harris4, R. K. Hastings1, P11.009 H. Hillege5, J. Litton6, M. Swertz5; Diagnostic use of targeted array cGH platforms: 2009-2010 1Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, Kocaeli University Experience 2Department of Health Sciences, University of Leicester, Leicester, United H. Savli, D. Sunnetci, N. Uzulmez, E. Gumuslu, S. Eren, B. Enguzel, R. Kingdom, 3Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, Public Akkoyunlu, D. Yavuz, Z. Ilkay, N. Cine; Population Project in Genomics, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Norwegian Institute of Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Public Health, Oslo, Norway, 5University Medical Center Groningen & University Turkey. of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 6Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, iNtRODUctiON: Array CGH technology is a new method for Sweden. screening human genetic disorders that cause changes in DNA copy Current IT infrastructure in biobanking is imperfect. Biobank databases number. This molecular karyotyping technology is remarkable with are often rather basic and almost never interoperable. The project fast analysis and highly sensitive diagnostic value. We aimed to use ‘Biobank Standardisation and harmonisation for Research Excellence this technology as a diagnostic tool in Kocaeli University Hospital. We in the European Union’ (BioShaRE-EU http://bioshare.eu/) was performed analysis for nine groups of patients, using different targeted launched in early 2011. It explicitly addresses the informatics needs of array CGH platforms. biobanking through its sub-program ‘BioSHaRE-IT’. mAtERiALs and mEtHOD: Following patient groups were accepted BioSHaRE-IT will work with other initiatives (e.g., BBMRI, DataSHaPER, to Kocaeli University Medical Genetics Department; Microdeletion ELIXIR, GEN2PHEN, OBiBa, P3G) as part of an open collaboration, to Syndrome(35 patients) Primary Autism(35 patients), 18q21.31 tackle many complex computational and data management challenges Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 350 relevant to biobanking. Efforts will exploit ‘starting reagents’ such as Environmental inTeraction tOOL), for large-scale analysis of gene- OPAL, MOLGENIS, GWAS Central (HGVbaseG2P), DataShield, environment interactions, in human studies of complex diseases DataShaper, etc, with a focus upon; including a large number of subjects, SNPs, as well as environmental 1) developing data models for core molecular, phenotype, and factors. That resource uses standard statistical packages to build environmental data along with ontologies so that data can be managed, and fit the gene-environment interaction models by means of syntax integrated and represented optimally scripts in predicting one or more continuous or dichotomic phenotypes. 2) developing federated databases for local storage and deployment Codominant, dominant and recessive genetic interaction models of different types of biobank content, such as sample and research including control for covariates are automatically created for each SNP catalogues, genetic/genomic data, detailed phenotype information, in order to test the best model. Environment variables can be used epidemiological and environmental data both as continuous and as categorical. From the standard outputs, 3) devising data exchange formats and data access mechanisms HUGETOOL extracts a selected set of parameters (regression (based upon digital identifiers) to allow a smooth and secure exchange coefficients, p-values, adjusted means, etc.), and groups them in a of data to, from, and between biobanks single MS Excel Spreadsheet. The tool allows editing the set of filter 4) providing tools and solutions for study design, phenotype parameters, filtering the selected results depending on p-values, as harmonisation, data curation, and data visualisation, so that biobanks well as plotting the selected gene-environment interactions to check can adopt these solutions directly and not have to reinvent them consistency. We implemented our tool in real data obtained in two 5) developing tools for biobank data searching and remote analysis, standard cardiovascular studies carried out in the Mediterranean along with distributed grid technologies to deal with the data population, and demonstrated the excellent performance of this tool. In computation and data storage management issues. conclusion, HUGETOOL is a very useful and friendly tool for exploring BioSHaRE-EU is funded by the European Community’s Seventh and identifying gene*environment interactions in complex diseases. Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement 261433 P11.014 Evaluation of a novel, single molecule, amplification-free method P11.012 for the detection of copy Number Variation (cNV) identifying knowledge contributors - motivating online sharing T. Guettouche1,2, Y. Cardentey1, M. A. Pericak-Vance3, J. R. Gilbert2, D. J. of research data Hedges2; G. A. Thorisson, O. Lancaster, A. J. Brookes; 1University of Miami, School of Medicine, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. Center, Miami, FL, United States, 2Hussman Instititute for Human Genomics, Contributor identification is a core challenge in data publication. As Center for Genome Technology, Miami, FL, United States, 3University of Miami, in scholarly communication more generally, non-unique person Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, Miami, FL, United States. names and the current lack of a global identification infrastructure Copy number Variation (CNV) is a major component of the genomic for producers of scholarly content makes it difficult to establish the diversity present within the human population. Several methods for identity of authors and other contributors. This in turn makes it difficult genome-wide discovery of structural variants now exist , including to accurately attribute datasets published via online digital repositories array-based genomic hybridization and High throughput SNP to their creators - one of several key requirements for including these genotyping arrays (i.e. GWAS arrays). More recently, structural important outputs in the scholarly record. variation has also been inferred from Second Generation Sequencing In the GEN2PHEN project (http://www.gen2phen.org) we are data . As CNV calls made from each of these approaches can be developing a series of novel web-based systems and processes for subject to appreciable false positive rates, detected variants of interest online dissemination of genetic variation and other research data. are generally corroborated by an independent method. The method of The core aim is that of ensuring that data creators are recognized and choice for CNV confirmation has primarily been real-time qPCR. Here rewarded for publishing data. This work builds on and integrates with we report the evalution of a novel CNV assay based on the NanoString recently launched international initiatives to i) extend and adapt the nCounter Analysis System. The nCounter system uses a hybridization- existing DOI infrastructure for identifying, locating and citing online based single molecule capture approach not requiring amplification datasets (DataCite: http://www.datacite.org), and ii) create a global of input DNA. Invidual tripartite complexes of the target molecule, a registry of unique identifiers for authors and other contributors (ORCID: biotin labeled probe and a fluorescently labeled (“barcoded”) probe http://www.orcid.org). are directly counted. We compared the performance of the nCounter The technical approach we are exploring in this pilot project utilizes system at 30 putative CNV loci in a set of 96 human samples, all of this emerging global data citation and contributor identification which have data at these same loci from ABI Taqman CNV assays. framework, in order to allow published datasets to be discovered, cited A subset of samples also have data available from Agilent aCGH in a scholarly context and unambiguously attributed. We argue that, 244k custom and Illumina 1M Infinium arrays. Preliminary results along with other measures, such an incentive-based approach is key show that the Nanostring method exibits 86% agreement with the to motivating the sharing of data and other types of digital research Taqman CNV assays across all studied loci and individuals. When outputs in the life sciences. three problematic repetitive loci are excluded, concordance rises to GEN2PHEN is funded by the European Community’s Seventh 96%. Our initial results suggest the nCounter system will provide a Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement promising alternative for validation of copy number variants. 200754. P11.015 P11.013 selection of sNPs to be replicated in GWA investigations: a HUGEtOOL: A computer-based method for automated Bayesian approach identification of gene-environment interactions in human A. De Grandi1, M. Modenese1, F. Domingues1, C. Pattaro1, F. Ruggeri2, A. studies including a large number of participants, sNPs and Pastore3, J. Attia4,5, J. Barrett6, M. Boehnke7, G. Borsani8, G. Casari9, C. S. environmental factors Fox10,11, A. Hicks1, F. Marroni12, G. Parmigiani13, A. Pfeufer1, C. Schwienbacher1, O. Coltell1, J. M. Ordovas2, C. Saiz3, M. Forner1, F. Gabriel4, D. Corella3; The CKDGen consortium, P. P. Pramstaller1,14,15, J. R. Thompson16, C. Minelli1; 1Universitat Jaume I, Castellon, Spain, 2Tufts University, Boston, MA, United 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, European Academy Bozen/Bolzano (EURAC), States, 3Valencia University, Valencia, Spain, 4Hospital Clinic de Valencia, Bolzano, Italy, 2Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Istituto di Matematica Valencia, Spain. Applicata e Tecnologie Informatiche, Milano, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Economia, Common diseases are determined by the complex interplay between Ca’ Foscari Venezia University, Venezia, Italy, 4Centre for Clinical Epidemiology environmental and genetic factors. However, current methods of data and Biostatistics, The University of Newcastle, Hunter Medical Research analysis of gene-environment interactions using traditional approaches Institute, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 5Department of General Medicine, are inefficient. High-throughput methods of analysis in large scale John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 6Section of Epidemiology epidemiological studies including thousands of subjects and hundreds and Biostatistics, Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, of SNPs and environmental factors should be implemented. We Leeds, United Kingdom, 7Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical developed an integrative computer tool, HUGETOOL (HUman Gene Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 8Department of Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 351 Biomedical Sciences and Biotechnology and School of Medicine, University of P11.017 Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 9Human Molecular Genetics Unit, Center for Genomics, GWAs central: an advanced database for the integration and Bioinformatics, and Biostatistics, San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy, comparative interrogation of genome-wide association study 10The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute’s Framingham Heart Study, datasets Framingham, MA, United States, 11Center for Population Studies, Framingham, R. C. Free, R. K. Hastings, S. Gollapudi, T. Beck, G. A. Thorisson, A. J. MA, United States, 12Institute of Applied Genomics, Udine, Italy, 13Department of Brookes; Biostatistics and Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. MA, United States, 14Department of Neurology, Central Hospital, Bolzano, Comprehensive genome-wide association study (GWAS) data-sets Italy, 1515 Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, are rarely published in journals or databases, and in the case of 16Department of Health Sciences, Centre for Biostatistics and Genetic negative findings often not reported at all. Consequently, comparing Epidemiology, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. different studies is difficult, and it is impossible to examine a full and In GWA investigations, SNPs for replication are selected based either on unbiased picture of all the data that exist. discovery p-values alone or with some consideration of the SNP/gene To address this deficit, GWAS Central (www.gwascentral.org) function. In the former approach, a SNP located within a biologically (previously HGVbaseG2P) was constructed - representing a free and relevant gene has the same a priori probability of being selected as a open access resource for the interrogation of summary-level GWAS SNP located in any random genome position. In the latter, inclusion of data, ultimately combining the features of a database and a scientific biological considerations is usually made in a very subjective way. We journal. are developing a Bayesian approach to SNP selection that formally GWAS Central employs powerful graphical and text based data incorporates evidence from different sources supporting the effect of presentation methods for discovery, visualisation and co-examination a SNP/gene. We identified 15 sources of evidence, from functional to of many studies, at genome-wide and region-specific levels. Studies linkage and association studies, information on which is retrieved from of interest can be identified using chromosomal regions/genes and publicly available databases using an ad-hoc bioinformatics tool. Since markers. There is also the facility for researchers to securely view their different types of evidence may carry different “weight” in influencing own uploaded datasets alongside many published studies. SNP selection, we defined such “weights” through expert-opinion Current content includes top p-values from collections; supplementary elicitation, using a structured group communication process organised data; direct researcher submissions; and publicly available data. in two Delphi rounds involving 10 anonymous experts. Using as an Consequently, the database now hosts >21 million p-values and 708 example a GWA meta-analysis of 20 studies on glomerular filtration studies (vs 3,948 p-values and 798 studies in the NHGRI GWAS rate from the CKDGen consortium (Köttgen et al, Nat Genet 2010), catalog), representing an estimated ~5% of all such data yet produced. we are testing the hypothesis that our approach may help identify A version of GWAS Central will soon be released for research groups true associations in situations with limited sample size. We present to install on their own servers allowing them to manage, analyse the framework of our approach, the types of evidence incorporated and control access to their own data. These installations will be in the Bayesian model with “weights” defined by the experts, the interoperable and searchable as a federated network. bioinformatics tool for evidence retrieval, and preliminary results on This research received funding from the European Community’s the performance of the method. Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement number 200754, GEN2PHEN. P11.016 GWAs central curation tool: solving the bioinformatics P11.018 challenges of complex data management with mOLGENis Non-Disjunction: from a Bioinformatic and Epigenetic Approach S. Gollapudi1, M. A. Swertz2, R. C. Free1, R. K. Hastings1, A. J. Brookes1; towards a clinical validation 1Department of Genetics, University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, I. Ejarque-Doménech1, B. Banelli2, G. López-Campos3, F. Vicente-Martín4, C. 2Genomics Coordination Center, University Medical Center Groningen & Baldo5, A. Díez-Juan.6, L. Gil-Alberdi.7, F. Martín-Sánchez.4; University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. 1Agencia Valenciana de Salut, Utiel, Spain, 2Advanced Biotechnology Centre., The creation, management and validation of complex biological Genova, Italy, 3Department of Bioinformatics and Public Health. Institute of datasets are time-consuming and error-prone, so software tools are Health Carlos III., Majadahonda, Spain, 4Department of Bioinformatics and needed to ease the burden on curators. We have therefore developed Public Health. Institute of Health Carlos III., Majadahonda., Spain, 5Galliera a curation tool in the GEN2PHEN project (http://www.gen2phen.org) Genetic Bank. Ospedale Galliera., Genova., Italy, 6Príncipe Felipe Research for the genetic association database GWAS Central (http://www. Centre., Valencia., Spain, 7University Alfonso X “El sabio”., Madrid., Spain. gwascentral.org) using the MOLGENIS tool (http://www.molgenis.org) The aim of this work is to present a fully “in silico” approach for the for rapid development of biomedical database software. identification of genes that might be involved in the susceptibility GWAS Central is a comprehensive resource of summary-level findings for non-disjunction diseases and their regulation by methylation from >700 genome-wide association studies with >18M p-values. processes. Previous methods for importing study metadata and marker data We have carried out a strategy based on the use of online available involved time-consuming construction of custom software pipelines. To bioinformatics databases. Among these the most relevant ones used solve this, we built a dedicated curation tool with many useful features: were OMIM, HUGO, GeneOntology and PubMed. Bioinformatics a ‘quick-add’ interface for new studies (to become a submission tool for programs were used to select, retrieve and analyse the genes and their users to submit data directly to GWAS Central); automatic assignment promoters to identify regions susceptible of being methylated, and thus of stable identifiers for all study components; study ‘overview’ and identify those genes susceptible of being epigenetically regulated. ‘preview’ interfaces for quick data management; a PubMed look-up As result we have obtained 34 putative susceptibility genes regulated service for annotating studies with citations; and marker data import by methylation processes. We were neither on the need of developing and validation. We are now constructing a security layer to track new software nor carrying out clinical laboratory experiments for the updates and deletions within the database. identification of these genes. So it would be interesting to analyze the We are also exploring the use of the SOAP and REST web services methylation patterns of these genes in the mothers of children with generated by MOLGENIS to develop Taverna workflows, which can Down syndrome (cases) to compare it with the one of mothers of sound then be integrated within the GWAS Central site. This will enable children. MSP (Methylation Specific PCR) is a good method to analyze it. users to enact complex queries over millions of p-values from We consider that this “in silico” methodology is robust enough to behind a simple, easy-to-use web portal, without requiring significant provide candidate genes that must be checked “in vivo” due to the bioinformatics expertise. clinical relevance of non-disjunction diseases with the aim of providing This research received funding from the European Community’s new tools and criteria for their diagnosis. The molecular origin of Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant constitutional aneuploidies is a classical area of research that could agreement number 200754, GEN2PHEN. be of great interest if investigated with new approaches: bioinformatics and epigenetics. EsHG congress non-disjuntion may 2011. Version ENViADA 20- 02-2011.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 335522 P11.019*** 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2TGEN, Phoenix, AZ, United Using GENcODE annotation to investigate the functional effects States, 3Baylor-Sammons Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States. of Loss of Function variants identified by the 1000 Genomes Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by the absence of Project expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and Her2-neu, G. Mukherjee, C. Amid, I. Barnes, A. Bignell, D. Carvalho-Silva, A. Frankish, accounting for 15% of all breast cancer diagnosis. Targeted therapies T. Hunt, M. Kay, D. MacArthur, J. Mudge, G. Saunders, C. Snow, M. Suner, C. have a reasonable likelihood of improving the cure rate of early stage Tyler-Smith, J. Harrow; TNBC, and promising therapies discovered in the metastatic setting Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. are rapidly advancing through clinical trials. We present integrated The GENCODE consortium is producing a reference human gene analysis of matched normal and tumor whole genome data, along set rich in alternative splicing and functional annotation that will with tumor transcriptome sequencing data of multiple individuals with provide the basis for analysis by the 1000 Genomes project. Manual metastatic chemo-resistant TNBC. annotation is supplemented by automated gene predictions from In each case, two independent 1.5kb Mate-pair libraries were generated Ensembl to produce the GENCODE gene set, the default annotation in for both tumor and germ-line derived genomic DNA and sequenced the Ensembl browser. A catalogue of variants in protein coding genes using SOLiD version 4.0 paired 50mers to a target of 30x depth. The predicted to result in Loss of Function (LOF), based on 1000 genomes tumor transcriptome was sequenced on four replicates and compared data, were identified by investigating the intersection of SNPs and to transcriptome sequencing from ethnicity-matched population- indels from the three pilot phases, together with GENCODE gene based control hyperplastic breast tissue. Genome analysis was models. We have manually analysed 885 SNPs/indels that introduce performed using multiple aligners and variant callers. Transcriptome premature termination codons or splice site disruptions, firstly to alignment was performed using Life Technologies Bioscope pipeline, validate and ensure completeness of the gene models on which LOF and differential expression analysis was performed using EdgeR calls are based. One third of all variants investigated were miscalled and DESeq. We prioritized annotated germline and somatic variants due to errors in genome sequence or computational gene predictions. by integrative analysis with differential expression results. Several Secondly, we have assessed whether the exon containing a LOF striking examples of intronic events correlating with either altered variant is constitutive or alternatively spliced, and finally we predict splicing or differential expression were observed in genes relevant to the functional impact of the variant. Of the valid calls, 36% affected cancer treatment, suggesting that transcriptomic data may have high exons that showed transcriptional evidence of being skipped in splice value in interpreting somatic events that fall outside of coding regions. variants. Furthermore, 17% are predicted to effect changes in the Final integration of data was validated through knowledge mining and protein product that may not result in LOF; producing for example convergence of somatic events and expression. small CDS truncations. We will describe how high quality annotation of For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human gene models are essential to accurately predict the consequences of a therapeutic or diagnostic use. SNP, and we propose a model whereby LOF may be considered at the level of the transcript and not the overall locus. P11.022 Using high-throughput SNP data to define the relationship P11.020 between self-reported ethnicity and genetic identity in three Automated nucleic acid purification with Thermo Scientific Australian breast cancer studies KingFisher magnetic particle processors and KingFisher Kits G. Athanasiadis1, M. Bui2, E. Makalic2, D. Schmidt2, J. Stone2, D. Park3, K. S. Suomalainen, M. Suomalainen, N. Lindholm, V. Puro, A. Lamberg; Aujard2, M. Southey3, J. Hopper2; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland. 1Unitat de Genòmica de Malalties Complexes, Institut de Recerca, Hospital The pure and intact DNA and RNA are doubtless the most important de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Centre for Molecular, sample materials for various experiments in molecular biology. The Environmental, Genetic and Analytic Epidemiology, Melbourne School of magnetic particle technology combines the speed and efficiency of Population Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, automation with high quality nucleic acid purification capability. Thermo 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences, Scientific KingFisher processors offer a patented technology based on The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. the use of magnetic rods with specially designed plastic consumables, Background.- Choosing the right subjects for a genome-wide and the process can be combined with optimized KingFisher Kits. This association study implies, among other things, obtaining a sample with automated nucleic acid purification method is described in the poster. little or ideally no population structure. Even though efficient methods Additionally, the process is compared with the competitors’ purification correcting for stratification now exist, these may fail when cases and systems. controls come from entirely different populations. Subject recruitment KingFisher Kits are available for genomic and viral nucleic acid is often based only on self-reported information about ethnic origin, purification from wide variety of sample types e.g. blood, cells but how well does this strategy deal with population structure issues? and animal or plant tissues. We analysed the performance of the Aim.- Here, we evaluate self-reported ethnicity as a predictor of purification process with five different KingFisher Kits. The KingFisher genetic identity with respect to more objective information, such as Blood DNA Kit was compared to three competitive methods or patient/ parent/ grandparent place of birth in three Australian breast instruments, and the KingFisher Plant DNA Kit to four competitors. In cancer studies. each case the KingFisher Kits performed as well as or better than the Methods.- A total of 412 subjects from the (i) Australian Breast competitors, and the performance was excellent. With the KingFisher Cancer Family Study; (ii) Multiple Case Breast Cancer Families; and Cell and Tissue DNA Kit and Total RNA Kit different sample materials (iii) Australian Mammographic Density of Twins and Sisters were and variable lysis times were tested. The results indicate the sensitivity considered. Genotypes for 552,131 SNPs were determined with the of the purification process. In addition the performance of KingFisher Infinium® HD Human610-Quad BeadChip. Major population clusters Viral NA was tested in different applications. were defined by means of principal component analysis (PCA) using The KingFisher processors together with the KingFisher nucleic acid EIGENSOFT. A naïve Bayes (NB) classifier was developed using self- purification kits and the Thermo Scientific BindIt software constitute reported ethnicity and place of birth as attributes and PCA clusters as an exceptional purification system for obtaining high yield and purity the target value. Accuracy measures were used for the evaluation of of DNA and RNA. the classification. Results.- The sample showed a considerable level of stratification. P11.021*** PCA also revealed several inconsistencies, mostly concerning self- integrative analysis of whole-genome and transcriptome reported ethnicity, whereas the NB classifier indicated grandparent sequence data for identification of treatment options for place of birth as the best predictor of genetic identity. metastatic triple negative breast cancer Conclusion.- Self-reported ethnicity, as opposed to grandparent A. Siddiqui1, D. Craig2, J. O’Shaughnessy3, J. Kieffer2, T. Moses2, C. place of birth, may not be the best guide for subject recruitment in Barbacioru1, S. Sirani2, O. Sakarya1, T. Izatt2, S. Wong2, J. Paquette1, L. epidemiological studies. Hoang1, J. Aldrich2, A. Christoforides2, J. Dinh2, A. Kurdoglu2, S. Mousses2, D. Von Hoff2, J. D. Carpten2; Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 353 P11.023 P11.025 Loss-of-Function Exomic Analysis in the identification of copy number variation and aberrations derived from cancer predisposition genes targeted exome resequencing E. Ruark, K. Snape, S. Hanks, J. Douglas, N. Rahman; P. Flaherty1,2, B. Kim2, J. Buenrostro1, G. Natsoulis2, D. Burgess3, M. Rodesch3, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom. X. Zhang3, T. Albert3, H. P. Ji1,2; Exome sequencing has proved to be a powerful approach in the 1Stanford University, Stanford Genome Technology Center, Palo Alto, CA, identification of causative variants underlying several Mendelian United States, 2Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United disorders. Two of the challenges that currently limit the widespread States, 3Roche NimbleGen, Madison, WI, United States. application of exome sequencing in disease gene identification are 1) Next generation DNA sequencing is rapidly becoming the platform the requirement for extensive, experienced statistical and bioinformatic of choice for numerous genomic applications. Complete genome infrastructure for sequence analysis and 2) the identification of sequencing is used to derive germline copy number variation (CNVs) insertion-deletion variants in short read data which impedes the ability and cancer copy number aberrations (CNAs) but its genomic resolution to detect one of the commonest types of pathogenic mutation in is limited by the extent of sequencing. Targeted resequencing human disease. We have been developing strategies to address these (sequence capture) provides an option to increase the resolution and challenges. To address the first challenge we have been utilising and sensitivity of CNV and CNA analysis in a highly accurate and cost optimising a commercially available software, known as NextGENe, effective manner. For cancer genome analysis, targeted resequencing which uses a Burrows-Wheeler alignment algorithm to align short substantially increased the fold coverage over regions of interest, read data. We have analysed over 75 exomes from individuals with which is useful in more sensitive applications like CNA discrimination a variety of genetic conditions and to address the second challenge in complex tumor-normal tissue mixtures. we have optimised indel calling and we have undertaken validation We have developed an experimental and statistical algorithmic experiments. These showed that 48/54 (89%) insertion-deletion solution to derive copy number variation from targeted resequencing variants chosen randomly across our sample series were real. We on the scale of gene subsets up to whole exomes. We focused on have also developed a loss-of-function (LOF) script which identifies all four cancer samples with matched normal-tumor pairs including breast variants predicted to result in premature protein truncation and have adenocarcinoma, colorectal carcinoma and lymphoma. To minimize applied the script to all of the exomes. This has led to the identification experimental variance from the sequencing process, we used a novel of six truncating mutations that are pathogenic and several others that indexing approach where matched tumor-normal pairs are sequenced we are currently investigating. Our scripts allow the accurate detection together in a single sequencing lane. We enriched either gene subsets and prioritisation of variants in exome sequencing that are most likely or whole exomes from these cancer samples. We then developed a to be pathogenic and may be of value to other groups. statistical approach that incorporates absolute depth of coverage to provide a confidence in the tumor-normal read ratio. Using these P11.024 combined procedures, we not only were able to confirm CNVs on the A breast-cancer DNA methylation signature associated with field resolution of exons but also could discriminate indels smaller than 150 defect bases. Overall, our approach for CNV and CNA analysis on exome S. Kumar Botla1, A. Moghaddas Gholami1, M. Malekpour2, E. A. Moskalev1, A. and exon subsets is robust and straightforward to implement. Aghajani3, I. S. Bondar4, R. Omranipour2, F. Malekpour5, A. Jahangiri Babadi1, V. V. Bubnov6, H. Najmabadi3, J. D. Hoheisel1, Y. Riazalhosseini1; P11.026*** 1Division of Functional Genome Analysis, German Cancer Research Center Identification of low prevalence somatic mutations in (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 2Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini Hospital, heterogenous tumor samples Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, J. Warner1, S. Kotsopoulos1, O. Harismendy2, L. Bao2, D. Amorese3, M. 3Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Stapleton3, J. Olson1, M. Nakano2, B. Crain2, K. Messer2, P. Chen3, V. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Regional Oncology Clinic, Odessa, Sementchenko3, R. Schwab2, K. A. Frazer2, D. R. Link1; Ukraine, 5Shohada Tajrish Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical 1RainDance Technologies, Lexington, MA, United States, 2Moores UCSD Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Department of Genomics and Cancer Center, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States, Immunology, Odessa State Medical University, Odessa, Ukraine. 3NuGEN Technologies, San Carlos, CA, United States. DNA methylation patterns have been recognised as cancer-specific To understand the progression and prognosis of cancer, researchers markers with potential clinical application. We aimed at identifying face a number of unique challenges. Current whole-genome differential methylation patterns between breast cancers and other sequencing studies are unable to cost-effectively achieve the required breast lesions to establish a DNA methylation signature for breast depth of coverage to discover rare mutations that represent 1% of cancer diagnosis. 117 fresh-frozen breast specimens including a heterogeneous sample. Researchers have also been unable to cancer, benign, normal-appearing breast tissue from patients and routinely apply next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology to healthy individuals were analysed. Candidate genomic loci were Formalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) samples, which are the isolated from DNA following bisulfite treatment and were hybridised to standard archival method for nearly all solid tumors, due to challenges specialised oligonucleotide microarrays. A DNA methylation signature with low yield, degraded DNA, and sample extraction methodologies. was identified by unsupervised analysis on the screening set, and The RainDance DeepSeq™ FFPE Solution is the first ultra-deep its performance was assessed through bisulfite pyrosequencing targeted sequencing system for fresh-frozen and FFPE samples. in an independent validation set. The DNA methylation signature Researchers can now interrogate as many as 500 targets across discriminates breast cancers from other samples in the screening extensive collections of well-annotated clinical samples to discover set (10-12< adjusted p<10-6) (n=52) and is validated against an rare cancer and other disease-specific mutations that represent as independent set of breast tissue samples (adjusted p<1.92e-07) little as 1% of a heterogeneous sample. (n=65). High sensitivity and specificity of the signature to detect breast To test the performance of the DeepSeq FFPE Solution, two matched cancer is demonstrated by Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) breast and colon tumor samples from Fresh-Frozen Normal Adjacent, curves and the corresponding area under the curve (AUC) analysis Fresh Frozen (FF), and FFPE Tissue were validated against a primer (AUC> 0.90). This signature is constituted of 12 CpG sites associated library targeting known cancer mutation hotspots across 46 genes. All with SFRP2 and GHSR genes, and show significant hypermethylation samples were processed with the RainDance 2-Step Tailed Primer in cancers. Strikingly, the normal-appearing breast tissues from Assay and sequenced using the Illumina GAII with 100 base-pair cancer patients are also methylated in these loci but at lower extent. reads. The data was analyzed and evaluated for sequence coverage This study reports a highly sensitive and specific molecular classifier and uniformity, along with the SNP detection and concordance between for breast cancer detection based on DNA methylation. Furthermore, the FF and the FFPE tumor samples. Results demonstrate the ability detection of methylated DNA in the normal-appearing breast tissues of for the RainDance DeepSeq FFPE solution to detect low prevalence cancer patients indicates an epigenetic field defect. mutations present in the FF and FFPE samples in both types of tissue.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 335544 P11.027 unknown and should be confirmed by immunoprecipitation assays. Expression profiling of rectal tumors defines genetic This study, besides defining the regulatory mechanisms of CDK5R1 determinants of response to treatment expression, may help to identifying the pathogenetic implications of the M. Cuadros1, C. Cano1, C. Olmedo2, I. Segura3, R. Conde3, A. Blanco1, P. gene in neurodegenerative and cognitive diseases. Bueno2, J. A. Ferrón3, P. Palma3; 1Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence, University of P11.029 Granada, Granada, Spain, 2Department of Surgical Research, Virgen de methylation status of the cyclin-dependent kinase 2A (p16iNK4a/ las Nieves Hospital, Granada, Spain, 3Division of Colon & Rectal Surgery – cDKN2A) promoter in human atherosclerotic plaques Department of Surgery, Virgen de las Nieves Hospital, Granada, Spain. M. S. Nazarenko1,2, V. P. Puzyrev1,2, I. N. Lebedev1,2, A. V. Markov1, A. A. BAcKGROUND. To date, none of the identified signatures or molecular Sleptsov1, A. V. Frolov3, O. L. Barbarash3, L. S. Barbarash3; markers related to response to pre-operative chemoradiation (CRT) 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian in locally advanced rectal cancer (LARC) has been successfully State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute for validated as a diagnostic or prognostic tool applicable to routine complex studying of cardiovascular diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation. clinical practice. We applied DNA microarrays to gain insight into the Genome-wide association studies have linked common single molecular signatures associated with response to treatment after CRT. nucleotide polymorphisms on chromosome 9p21.3 with risk of mEtHODs. RNAs from patients with LARC without metastasis atherosclerotic diseases; however the underlying mechanism remains were obtained and subsequently cDNA and cRNA were synthesised unknown. This genomic region contains several genes including for hybridization on Human WG CodeLink bioarrays. Tumor tissue the CDKN2B (p15INK4b) and CDKN2A (p16INK4a and p14ARF), biopsies were obtained before CRT. Significant genes were found using which are key regulators of the cell cycle. Epigenetic inactivation Significance Analysis of Microarrays. Real time quantitative RT-PCR of the CDKN2A gene by CpG islands methylation is well known in (qRT-PCR) was used to confirm the results from the arrays. Results cancerogenesis and aging. The aim of the present research was to were correlated with pathological response (Mansard’s criteria). determine whether such methylation occurs in the atherosclerotic REsULts. We used a t-test to find those genes that have an expression disease. Methylation-sensitive PCR using Hpa II restriction was significantly different between responders and non-responders employed in studying of the p16INK4a/CDKN2A promoter methylation patients. We found 257 genes with an adjusted p<0.05, which clearly in tissue samples of carotid artery (54 atherosclerotic tissues and 54 differentiate these two groups of patients after CRT. A detailed analysis paired macroscopically normal specimens from the same patients). identified genes encoding proteins associated with several canonical The promoter was not methylated in all studied tissue samples. This pathways, such as Pyrimidine and Purine Metabolism, and Colorectal research was supported by Grant of Russian Foundation of Basic Cancer Metastasis Signaling. As occurred in the microarrays, the level Research (10-04-00674). of expression of MYC determined by qRT-PCR, showed significant differences between Responder and Non-Responder subgroups. P11.030 cONcLUsiONs: Molecular signatures could provide the basis for microarray-based DNA methylation analysis of human improved treatment stratification of patients with LARC and define atherosclerotic plaques novel prediction of response to CRT treatment. Elevated levels of V. P. Puzyrev1,2, M. S. Nazarenko1,2, I. N. Lebedev1,2, A. V. Frolov3, O. L. MYC not only induce growth and proliferation but also strongly could Barbarash3, L. S. Barbarash3; sensitize tumor cells toward pro-apoptotic stimuli including DNA 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian damaging agents. State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute for Acknowledgements: This work has been carried out as part of complex studying of cardiovascular diseases, Kemerovo, Russian Federation. projects P08-TIC-4299 and CTS2200 of J. A., Sevilla, TIN2009-13489 The contribution of epigenetic mechanisms to cardiovascular of DGICT, Madrid, and Mutua Madrileña Foundation, Madrid. diseases remains poorly understood. Hypomethylation of genomic DNA is present in human atherosclerotic lesions and methylation P11.028 changes also detect at the promoter level of several genes involved Identification of post-transcriptional regulatory elements in the atherogenesis. In the current study for the first time quantitative in cDK5R1 3’UtR gene involved in cNs development and microarray-based methylation profiling of 1505 CpG-sites across 807 functioning genes was performed in two samples of atherosclerotic aorta and P. Zuccotti1, A. Barbieri1, C. Colombrita2, S. De Palma3, S. Moncini1, C. Gelfi3, carotid artery wall lesions using the GoldenGate Methylation Cancer A. Ratti2, M. Venturin1, P. Riva1; Panel I (Illumina). We identified 103 CpG sites (associated with 90 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, genes) that varied significantly in the DNA methylation level between Milan, Italy, 2Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, the tissue samples. The most pronounced differences in the DNA Italy, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technologies, methylation level were registered for a site which is located -541 bp University of Milan, Milan, Italy. from the transcription start site of imprinted gene H19. In particular, CDK5R1 encodes p35, an activator of CDK5, which is involved in promoter’s site showed a low level of methylation in the sample from neuronal migration and differentiation during CNS development. the aorta’s plaque area (0.02) compared to carotid artery (0.66). By It has been implicated in some neurodegenerative disorders and comparing 90 genes that were differentially methylated between candidate for the non-specific mental retardation. The considerable tissue samples in our study, 10 genes (ICAM1, GSTM1, IGFBP1, size of CDK5R1 3’UTR and the high level of sequence conservation POMC, APOA1, IL1RN, INS, LTA, MMP3, THBS2) were overlapped suggests a role in post-transcriptional regulation. We recently reported with data from Human Genome Epidemiology Network (HuGENet), in that the large CDK5R1 3’UTR contains some regulatory elements which they were identified as candidates for cardiovascular disease affecting transcript stability. Precisely, a 138 bp region was shown to continuum. This study was supported by state contract of the Ministry be the most destabilizing region within the 3’UTR. We search for post- of Education and Science (Russia) for Science and Educational transcriptional destabilizing factors in this region by UV-cross-linking Centers (N 02.740.11.0281). that showed the binding of some RBPs among which the strongest band had a molecular weight compatible with that of the nELAV P11.031 confirmed by immunoprecipitation. The fragment has been further Haplotype analysis of mcP-1/ccL2 with essential hypertension divided in four regions for UV-crosslinking experiment that allowed to in tatars from Russia identify a stretch of 7 bp binding region and through the site-directed V. Belonogova, O. Mustafina, I. Tuktarova, T. Nasibullin; mutagenesis we identified the binding sequence. Silencing and Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Science Centre of Russian Academy overexpression of this factor are in progress in order to validate its of Science, Ufa, Russia, Ufa, Russian Federation. destabilizing activity on CDK5R1 expression. To verify the binding of Objective: Inflammation play an important role in the initiation essential further regulatory elements the four regions of the 138 bp fragment hypertension (EH). Evidence suggests that the chemokine, monocyte have been transcribed and used for pulldown experiment of protein chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1; gene name, CCL2, previously extracts from SK-N-BE cells. Following mass spectrometry analysis SCYA2) is involved in EH. In the present study, we examined a possible we identified the hnRNPA2/B1 for which the cytoplasmatic function is association between polymorphic variants -5796A>T(rs1860190), Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 355 -2581A>G(rs1024611), 704(14)I/D (rs3917887) and 5357C>T like. At 2 dpf the injected embryos displayed in vivo circulatory and (rs991804) of the CCL2 gene and EH. cardiac defects, such as blood stases in the head and caudal region, Subjects and methods: We analyzed the association of genetic variation block of circulation and heart shape defects. A preliminary molecular in the CCL2 gene in groups of hypertensive patients and healthy characterization on morphants at 2 dpf showed that the injection of subjects from Tatar ethnic group (Bashkortostan, Russia). MCP-1 the centa2-like morpholino caused heart looping defects, in particular genotypes were determined in 164 and 209 individuals, respectively. the formation of a tubular heart or an inverted heart looping. WISH DNA was isolated from whole venous blood using phenol-chloroform analysis on morpholino-injected embryos at different developmental extraction by standard method. Genotypic frequencies in control stages with different cardiac markers will allow further investigation of subjects for each SNP were tested for departure from Hardy-Weinberg the role of centa2-like during zebrafish cardiac morphogenesis. equilibrium using a Fisher`s exact test. Haplotype block structure was determined with Haploview 4.2 program using EM algorithm. P11.034 Results: In this study, we have successfully genotyped four SNPs of the The first sequenced carnivore genome shows complex host- CCL2 gene in 373 individuals. To test the association between MCP-1 endogenous retrovirus relationships and risk of EH, we determined 12 common haplotypes , that accounted A. Martinez Barrio1, M. Ekerljung2, P. Jern1, F. Benachenhou3, G. O. Sperber4, for 75% of all haplotypes. The EH patient group showed a significant E. Bongcam-Rudloff5, J. Blomberg6, G. Andersson2; higher frequency of the CCL2*A*G*D*T haplotype compared to the 1Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, controls (20.5% versus 13.5%, respectively; χ2=6.662, P=0.0099 Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish Pperm=0.0472, OR=1.53). Thus, CCL2*A*G*D*T haplotype has University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of association with EH. Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Conclusion: Our data demonstrate that MCP-1 is significantly Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Virology, Uppsala University, associated with the risk of occurrence EH, but the certain mechanism Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department of Neuroscience, Physiology, Uppsala of this influence remains to be elucidated. University, Uppsala, Sweden, 5Department of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Department of Genetics and P11.032 Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 6Department of Medical A study of the Insertion-Deletion polymorphism of the gene β-2 Sciences, Section of Virology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. receptor of bradykinin (BDKRB2) Host-retrovirus interactions influence the genomic landscape and G. Gumerova, D. Shamova, E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova; have contributed substantially to mammalian genome evolution. The Bashkir State Pedagogical University of M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. dog has emerged as an excellent model for complex disease genetics INTRODUCTION. Described in the literature that polymorphic variants in human. Therefore, we analyzed a female boxer (Canis familiaris) of genes encoding components of the kallikrein-kinin system are genome for complexity and integration pattern of canine endogenous associated with physical performance rights. The presence of favorable retroviruses (CfERV) to gain further insights into comparative evolution alleles of this system provides a more effective implementation of regarding the human genome. Intriguingly, we could only identify 407 physical work and, therefore, contributes to better results in various CfERVs constituting 0.15% of the dog genome, compared to six times sports. The study aims to estimate the frequency distribution of more ERVs identified in the human genome. Primates and canines genotypes and alleles of gene ß2-bradykinin receptor (BDKRB2) have likely different mechanisms to purge, restrict and protect their in individuals with different coefficients of endurance. MATERIALS genomes against retroviruses. The CfERV integration landscape AND METHODS. We studied samples DNA of 199 of individuals with showed a non-uniform intra- and inter-chromosomal distribution different values of endurance aged 18-30 years. Endurance coefficient in agreement with distinct selective pressures at different loci. (EC) is determined to assess the state of the cardiovascular system in Evidence for selection against CfERVs in sense orientation relative to accordance with formula Kvaasa: EC=heart rate×10/pulse pressure. chromosomal genes was supported by a majority of CfERVs integrated The analysis genetic polymorphism is realized by polymerase chain in antisense orientation within 100 kb from annotated protein-coding reaction (PCR). Statistical data processing was carried out using a genes. Finally, a novel group of gammaretrovirus-like CfERVs with software package ANOVA (spss v13). RESULTS. Analysis of the high similarity to HERV-Fc1 was found to have potential for active frequencies of genotypes and alleles of gene ß2-bradykinin receptor retrotransposition and possibly result from lateral transmissions (BDKRB2) between groups with different endurance factor revealed a between dog and human as a consequence of at least 10.000 years significant increase in the frequency of the genotype *D/*D and allele of close interactions. In conclusion, this ERV analysis of the first *D in the group with increased activity of the cardiovascular system sequenced carnivorous species supports the notion that different (P=0.04,x2=3.951). The data obtained are of interest for understanding mammals interact distinctively with endogenous retroviruses and the molecular and genetic mechanisms of predisposition to perform suggests that retroviral lateral transmissions have occurred between physical activity. This work was partially funded by the grant of Russian dogs and. This comprehensive CfERV study will provide an excellent Foundation for Humanities 10-06-84609. resource for dog-to-human comparative genomics. P11.033 P11.035 Morpholino knockdown of the zebrafish CENTA2 orthologue impact of cis-regulatory motifs in non-coding regions on cFtR results in cardiovascular defects expression M. Venturin1, S. Carra2, G. Gaudenzi2, G. Gallo2, F. Cotelli2, P. Riva1; V. Viart1,2, J. Varilh1,3, M. Claustres1,2,4, M. Taulan1,2; 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, 1INSERM - U827, Montpellier, France, 2Université Montpellier I, Faculté de Milan, Italy, 2Department of Biology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. Médecine, Montpellier, France, 3Université Montpellier II, Faculté des Sciences, Cardiovascular malformations (CVMs) have a higher incidence in Montpellier, France, 4CHU Arnaud de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France. patients with NF1 microdeletion syndrome, compared to classical Cystic Fibrosis is a rare and lethal autosomal recessive disease. NF1 patients (18% vs 2%), presumably owing to haploinsufficiency Although CFTR shows all the features of a housekeeping gene, it is of genes lying in the deletion interval and important for cardiac tightly regulated both spatially and temporally. In addition to several morphogenesis. One of the possible candidate genes for CVMs onset regulatory motifs identified within the minimal promoter, (Pittman et inside the deletion, CENTA2, was found, by WISH (Whole-mount In al. 1995, Taulan et al. 2007, René et al. 2010, Lopez et al. 2010), Situ Hybridization) on mouse embryos, to be turned on in heart at this gene is also post-transcriptionally regulated by ARE (AU-rich 9-9.5 dpc, when the heart tube is looping and the valves and septa are elements) motifs in its 3’UTR region (Baudoin-Legros et al. 2005). forming, suggesting a role in heart development. In order to provide However, tissue- and developmental-specific regulatory elements further evidence on a possible role of CENTA2 in cardiac development, governing CFTR gene expression are still not defined. The aim of this we employed zebrafish as a model system. Zebrafish is a useful model work is to identify the most of functional motifs involved in the basal that allows a detailed cardio-vascular analysis even in embryos with CFTR gene expression control. severe defects that would be lethal in other organisms. We performed Use of bioinformatic tools leads to the identification of new putative loss-of-function experiments injecting a morpholino that is able to block regulatory sites, binding sites for transcription factors in 5’UTR the mRNA translation of the zebrafish CENTA2 orthologue, centa2- (TFsearch, consite...), and for specific proteins (AREsite) and Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 335566 microRNA (TargetScan, miRBase...) in non-coding 3’UTR part. status between samples, up- and downstream from the critical To assess impact of each motif, we have carried out many constructs, regions, up to the end of the rearranged chromosome. Coherently, countaining or not, natural or experimental mutants. Reporter gene we pinpointed alteration of chromosomal looping interactions between assays, quantification of CFTR transcript level, RNA stability studies..., affected gene loci and the rearranged interval using an unbiased were performed to test functional significance of each mutation. variant of chromosome conformation capture (3C-seq). Here, we have identified new binding sites for essential transcription We conclude that large genomic rearrangements can lead to changes factors in the promoting part (as C/EBP proteins, another motif as in the state of the chromatin spreading far away from the critical region, previously described by Pittman et al. 1995). We have also shown thus possibly affecting expression globally. the role of some microRNA (as hsa-miR-101) on the CFTR gene expression regulation. These cis-regulatory motifs might constitute P11.038 new therapeutic stategies to modulate transcriptional and post- A practical method for high-resolution cNV estimation and transcriptional regulation of CFTR gene. validation using digital PcR J. Regan, P. Belgrader, B. Hindson, S. Saxonov; P11.036 QuantaLife, Pleasanton, CA, United States. Integrative analysis of gene coexpression networks identifies Digital PCR (dPCR) is a practical solution for validating copy number novel ciliary proteins in human tissues variations identified by next generation sequencers and microarrays. A. E. Ivliev1,2, P. A. C. ‘t Hoen3, D. J. M. Peters3, M. G. Sergeeva2; The dPCR method we developed empowers one person to screen 1Department of Bioengineering and Bioinformatics, Moscow State University, hundreds of samples for CNV analysis in a single work shift. The Moscow, Russian Federation, 2A.N. Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical dPCR workflow involves using restriction enzymes to separate tandem Biology, Moscow State University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Center copies of a target gene prior to assembling a duplex TaqMan assay for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, that includes reagents to detect both the target gene and a single-copy Netherlands. reference gene. The reaction mixture is then partitioned into 20,000 Cilia are multifunctional cell organelles whose dysfunctions cause nanoliter droplets that are thermo-cycled to end-point before being ciliopathies - an emerging group of human genetic diseases. analyzed in a two-color reader. The fraction of positive-counted droplets Understanding molecular biology of cilia requires genome-wide enables the absolute concentrations for the target and reference genes identification of proteins involved in biogenesis and function of this to be measured, from which, a relative copy number is determined. organelle. Here, we explored the human ciliome by constructing gene 20,000 PCR replicates per well provide the statistical power to resolve coexpression networks in 10 public microarray datasets from 3 tissues higher-order copy number differences. This low-cost method reliably containing cells with motile cilia (airways, fallopian tubes and brain). generates copy number measurements that cluster near integer values The network analysis identified a cilia-related module of coordinately without overlap with adjacent copy number states allowing consistent expressed genes shared by the tissues. This transcriptomic signature discrimination between four and five copies at 95% confidence level. recapitulated 294 known ciliary genes (including ciliopathy genes Lastly, to our knowledge, this technology is the first to be capable of DNAH11, DPCD, HYDIN, LCA5, MDM1, RSPH4A, RSPH9) and phasing copy number variants, as we can easily determine whether identified 77 novel genes with expression patterns specific to ciliated all copies of a target locus are on the same or different chromosomes. cells. We used data from the Protein Atlas project to validate their Applications of this technology include: validation of CNV discoveries expression at the protein level: for 138 proteins we found an increased from GWAS, follow-ups to next generation sequencing experiments, staining in the ciliary subcellular compartment or the apical region cytogenetic analyses, copy number alterations in cancer, and CNV of the cytoplasm. We finally searched for genes with differences in phasing. expression between the ciliated tissues and found SLC47A2 as a gene highly expressed in ciliated cells in brain only. SLC47A2 represents P11.039 one of the few known examples of differences between ciliated cells the Effect of sulforaphane on transcriptional Repression and across tissues. This protein belongs to multidrug and toxin extrusion Gene Expression of coREst transporters (MATE) and may play a role in efflux of metabolites and M. Yucebas, C. Biray Avci, Z. O. Dogan Sigva, S. Yilmaz, T. Balci, C. Gunduz; xenobiotics from brain. Our analysis provides novel insights into the Medical School, Izmir, Turkey. human ciliome and illustrates how combinations of open-access Sulforaphone (SFN), a compound derived from cruciferous vegetables transcriptomic and proteomic resources can be utilized to annotate like broccoli, is reported to inhibit HDAC activity in prostate cancer protein function at a genome-wide scale. This work is partly supported cells. Aberrant activity of HDACs has been documented in several by grant RFBR 10-04-01385-a. types of cancers and HDAC inhibitors (HDACi) have been employed for therapeutic purposes. CoREST, a subunit of HDAC1, HDAC2 and P11.037 LSD1, plays a role in blocking the expression of key target genes. In copy number variation and chromatin structure this study, we aimed to investigate the effect of sulforaphane on the R. M. Witwicki, E. Migliavacca, G. Didelot, A. Reymond, N. Gheldof; transcriptional repression of CoREST in prostate cancer cell lines PC3 Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, and V-CAP, by chromatin immunopresipitation method (ChIP) and Switzerland. gene expression analysis. The cytotoxicity (IC50) of sulforaphane was The functional consequences of structural variation in the human found as 31.95 and 27.5 μg/ml in V-CAP and PC3 respectively, by XTT genome range from adaptation, to phenotypic variation, to method. The CoREST ChIP relative ratios in control and IC50 dose predisposition to diseases. We, and others, have previously shown groups were 19.08 and 9.87 in PC-3, while it was 17.37 and 6.28 in that alteration in copy number of a given genomic region influences the V-CAP cell lines. The gene expression analysis of CoREST in control expression of genes mapping within, but also on its flanks. To assess and IC50 dose group was found as 0.0036 and 0.0028 in PC-3 cell the possible mechanism(s) behind this neighboring effect, we gauged line and 0.00026 and 0.00022 in V-CAP cell line. The transcriptional the histone modification status by ChIP-seq in human lymphoblastoid repression of CoREST was decreased by 51.74% and 36.16% and cell lines from patients affected by Williams-Beuren, Williams-Beuren gene expression was decreased by 79.3% and 84.90% in PC-3 and region duplication, Smith-Magenis or DiGeorge Syndrome and control V-CAP cell lines. individuals. We monitored monomethylation of histone H4 K20 and The HDAC inhibitor effect of Sulforaphane may depend on the trimethylation of histone H3 K27, as proxies for open and condensed decrease of the CoREST gene expression in PC-3 and V-CAP cells, chromatin, respectively. and additional studies with a wide range of cell lines are needed Sequences were mapped using Bowtie, while SICER and DESeq to evaluate this compound as a new approach for the treatment of were used to define regions with modified histones. Upon comparison prostate cancer. between samples we observed that the rearranged regions (22q11.2, 17p11.2 and 7q11.23) were significantly modified in their chromatin structure. Consistent with the changes in expression levels of multiple genes mapping on the entire length of the chromosomes affected by structural variants, we also detected regions with modified histone Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 357 P11.040 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Molecular Profiling of Human Sporadic Craniosynostosis Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, C. Bernardini1, M. Barba1, F. Novegno2, L. Massimi2, G. Tamburrini2, F. Michetti1, United States, 3Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research C. Di Rocco2, W. Lattanzi1; Center, Seattle, WA, United States. 1Inst. Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, Macrosatellite repeats (MSR) present an extreme example of 2Dept Pediatric Neurosurgery, Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli, Rome, Italy. copy number variation, yet their epigenetic regulation is largely Craniosynostoses (CRS), the premature fusion of cranial sutures, are understudied. The CT47 cancer-testis antigen array on human the more prevalent human craniofacial malformation, often associated Xq24 consists of 4.8kb-large units and the CT47 gene encoded in to brain abnormalities, mental retardation and relevant morbidity. each unit is expressed in testis and in certain types of cancer, but The molecular pathogenesis of CRS is still largely unknown. This not in non-malignant somatic tissue. We studied CT47 for possible study attempted to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying correlations between copy number variation, epigenetic regulation and the premature ossification of calvarial sutures. Ten sporadic non- transcriptional activity in normal and malignant cells. In lymphoblastoid syndromic CRS patients were enrolled in the study upon obtaining cell lines and in primary fibroblasts CT47 transcripts were absent, informed consent and excluding known mutations in the FGFRs and corroborating the observed heterochromatic structure and DNA TWIST genes. Calvarial cells (CC) were isolated from prematurely hypermethylation of the CT47 promoter. Heterochromatinization of fused and normal unfused suture surgical specimens. CC displayed CT47 occurs early in human embryonic stem cells showing high levels a homogenous mesenchymal IP (CD29+,CD44 +,CD105 +,CD73 of DNA methylation and repressive chromatin modifications in the +,CD34-. CC morphological features and in vitro osteogenic potential, absence of CT47 expression. In small cell lung carcinoma cell lines along with the expression of osteospecific genes was analyzed showing low levels of CT47 transcripts we observed reduced levels comparatively in fused and unfused suture-samples. CC isolated from of H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 without increase in euchromatic histone pathological sutures showed a premature osteogenic commitment modifications. DNA methylation levels in the CT47 promoter region are along with the augmented expression of upstream osteogenic genes also significantly reduced in these cells. Apparently during oncogenic (LMP, RUNX2, NELL-1 and OC). Moreover, genome-wide expression transformation there is a relative loss of repressive markers resulting profiling was performed at the exon level using microarray analysis on in leaky expression of CT47. Comparing the epigenetic regulation of total RNA isolated from matched suture specimens of each patient. CT47 with other published MSR like the autosomal MSRs TAF11- Up-regulated genes included ADAM21, involved in cell-cell/cell-matrix Like, PRR20, ZAV and D4Z4 which is involved in facioscapulohumeral interactions during tissue development; CLCF1, a potent neurotrophic muscular dystrophy, a model emerges in which some MSR seem to factor implicated in structural head and spine abnormalities. be governed by common regulatory mechanisms with their abundant Interestingly, FGFR1, FGFR2, FGFR3 and TWIST1 were among expression mostly being restricted to the germ line. significantly alternatively spliced genes. This suggested that possible post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression occurring at the P11.043 somatic level could be one possible pathogenic mechanism in sporadic Automatization of cYP2D6 genotyping in patients under CRS. The identification of genes, whose function is impaired at the paroxetine treatment somatic level in CRS, would help the future development of targeted J. Zrustova1, E. Pindurova2,3, A. Zourkova4,5, J. Jurica6; molecular therapy. 1Department of medical genetics, Faculty hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2BioVendor - Laboratory medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Faculty of Medicine, P11.041 Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Faculty of medicine, Masaryk Identification of cRSS with close structural similarity to RSS of University, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Psychiatric clinic, Faculty Hospital, Brno, ig and tcR genes in the human genome Czech Republic, 6Department of pharmacology, Masaryk University, Brno, A. Y. Gubsky1, V. G. Zinkovsky2; Czech Republic. 1Odessa National I.I. Mechnikov University, Odessa, Ukraine, 2University of Cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6 is one of the most investigated from Opole, Opole, Poland. CYP family in relation to genetic polymorphism. There is a wide Cryptic recombination signal sequences (cRSS) are motives that interindividual variability in the enzyme activity of CYP2D6. Typical potentially can mediate instability of mammalian genome, when V(D) substrates for CYP2D6 are largely lipophilic bases and include J recombination system gets out of control. It is known that there antidepressants, antipsychotics, antiarrhythmics, antiemetics, are a lot of cRSS in the human genome outside the Ig and TCR loci. ß-blockers and opioids. The CYP2D6 activity vary within a population However, at present no information is available about origin, quantity and includes ultrarapid metabolizers (UMs), extensive metabolizers and genomic location of cRSS with close structural similarity to RSS of (EMs), intermediate metabolizers (IMs) and poor metabolizers (PMs). functional V, D, J segments of Ig and TCR genes (fRSS). There is a considerable variability in the CYP2D6 alelles distribution Using specially developed program algorithms we found that there among different ethnic groups, resulting in variable percentages of are 580 cRSS in the human genome (Build 37.1), which have close PMs, IMs, EMs and UMs in a given population. structural similarity to fRSS. Only 67 of these cRSS were found in In our study psychiatric patients under the paroxetine therapy duplicated V, D segments of Ig and TCR genes. Appearance of 32 have been automatically genotyped by using INFINITI Analyzer % cRSS in the genome may be explained by random nucleotide (Autogenomics Inc). The INFINITI™ Analyzer is an automated, combinations. We observed that 27, 14, 3, 3 and about 1 % cRSS multiplexing, continuous flow, random access microarray platform that are structural elements of non-LTR retrotransposons (AluJb, L1MDa, integrates all the discrete test processes such as sample handling, etc.), endogenous retroviruses and LTR retrotransposons (ERVL- reagent management, hybridization, stringency and detection for E-int, MER65B, etc.), simple repeats ((CA)n, (CAGA)n, etc.), DNA analyses of DNA into totally self-contained system. It can be used transposons (Charlie25, MER5B, etc.) and other repeats respectively. for clinical multiplex systems intended to measure and sort multiple In 85 % cases the nucleotide sequences of motives are fully localized signals from clinical sample. INFINITI analyzer is designed to measure inside repeats. 195 (34 %) cRSS were found in 189 (0,8 %) protein- fluorescence signals of labeled DNA target hybridized to BioFilmChip™ coding genes (GRIP1, PDE8A, etc.). microarrays. It automates assay and integrates all the discrete Our study shows that cRSS with close structural similarity to fRSS can processes of sample handling, reagent management, hybridization, be found in many human protein-coding genes. Their appearance in the detection, and results analysis. Assays are processed automatically human genome can be explained by duplications of Ig and TCR gene and read by the built-in confocal microscope. Results are analyzed fragments, spread of repeats and random nucleotide combinations. and presented in numerical and graphical format. The genotype has been determined and compared with clinical data, phenotype, drug P11.042 dosages and compliance. The results are described in included tables. Epigenetic regulation of the X chromosomal macrosatellite repeat encoding for the cancer testis gene ct47 J. Balog1, D. Miller2, E. Sanchez-Curtailles1, J. Carbo-Marques1, G. Block2, M. Potman1, P. de Knijff1, R. J. L. F. Lemmers1, S. J. Tapscott3, S. M. van der Maarel1; Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 335588 P11.044 3Landspitali - University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland. Assessing DNA copy numbers in large-scale studies using Background. The main DNA damage caused by ultraviolet radiation genomic arrays (UV) are base changes that cause bending of DNA molecules. I. Ruczinski; They include cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers, pyrimidine (6-4) Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States. pyrimidone photoproducts and its Dewar isomers. Two-dimensional Oligonucleotide-based arrays are commonly used to assess genotype- electrophoresis, a method that can separate bent DNA from normal phenotype association on a genomic scale, and studies involving DNA, was used to analyse DNA lesions in complex DNA samples and DNA copy numbers are becoming more common. While genotyping cell cultures after UV radiation. algorithms are largely concordant when for example assessed on Methods. Human genomic DNA was digested with MboI and radiated HapMap samples, methods to assess DNA copy number alterations with UVB (312 nm, 5-30 J/cm2) in a droplet on a Petri dish. HeLa often yield discordant results. One explanation for the discordance cell culture was radiated with UVB (15-45 J/cm2), the DNA isolated is that DNA copy number estimates are particularly susceptible and digested with MboI. The samples were analysed using Two- to systematic differences that arise across batches of samples Dimensional Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis (2D-SDE) that were processed at different times or by different labs. Analysis and Two-Dimensional Conformation-Dependent Electrophoresis algorithms that do not account for such systematic biases are more (2D-CDE). AvaI digested lambda DNA was UVA radiated (44 J/cm2) prone to spurious findings that will not replicate in other studies. and analyzed in the same manner. This presentation describes statistical methods and software for the Results. DNA induced by UVB migrated in front of normal DNA on locus-level estimation of DNA copy number that specifically adjust for 2D-CDE gel, due to bending caused by the DNA lesions. UVA radiation batch effects. We illustrate a workflow for copy number analysis using of lambda DNA also caused migration of DNA in front of normal DNA HapMap Phase 3 data, including normalization, genotyping, adjusting with 2D-SDE. Surprisingly, 2D-SDE analysis of DNA radiated with UVB for batch effects in copy number estimation, visualizations to inform revealed formation of a DNA arc behind normal DNA. The ratio of this downstream processing, and smoothing point estimates as a function arc increased with increased UVB dosage up to 43%. The same effect of physical position via segmentation and hidden Markov models. We was detected in DNA from UVB induced cell culture. also discuss the importance of GC content, and show a case study Conclusions. 2D-SDE and 2D-CDE can be used to assess DNA on inferred and validated (via RT-PCR) de-novo deletions in trios with lesions associated with UV-radiation. The DNA arc caused by UVB cleft-palate probands. We also provide a performance assessment radiation may be explained by cross-links or formation of A-helix DNA of four different copy number microarray platforms using a spike-in due to either base lesions or deoxyribose oxidation to ribose. experiment. P11.047 P11.045 LUPA: Discovering human disease susceptibility loci via the icF syndrome, a model to investigate how DNA hypomethylation power of dog genetics affects DNA replication M. Ramos Pamplona1, T. LUPA consortium2; E. Lana1, A. Mégarbané2,3, G. Lefranc4,5, P. Sarda6, M. Claustres1,6,7, A. DE 1Unit of Animal Genomics, GIGA-R, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium, 2EU SARIO1; large-scale integrating project, FP7-HEALTH-n201370, Brussels, Belgium. 1INSERM U827, Montpellier, France, 2Saint-Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, Given the many human diseases that exert increasing social and 3Institut Jérôme Lejeune, Paris, France, 4UM2, Montpellier, France, 5CNRS economic burdens on society, there is a compelling need to propose UPR1142, Montpellier, France, 6CHRU, Montpellier, France, 7UM1, Montpellier, novel therapeutic strategies. As innovative therapies are best France. designed based on the underlying genetic and molecular mechanisms In addition to regulating gene expression, epigenetic modifications of the disease, state-of-the-art research must be conducted on animal contribute to the control of other biological processes, such as DNA models of human pathologies. The domestic dog is an exemplary replication, but their relationships is not well understood. Using cells genetic resource for the dissection of human disease pathways. Due from ICF (Immunodeficiency, Centromeric instability and Facial to intensive selection for desirable traits in a pet animal, each dog anomalies) patients, we investigated how a DNA methylation defect breed is characterized by a highly homogenous genetic structure. A affects DNA replication in human cells. ICF is a rare autosomal spectrum of equivalent diseases afflicts both man and dog and exhibits recessive disorder resulting from impairment of the DNMT3B very similar pathological symptoms. The EU-funded project LUPA has protein, a de novo DNA methylating enzyme. ICF patients suffer conducted extensive genome-wide association studies on a collection from a severe immunodeficiency and are characterized by loss of of dog cohorts diagnosed with a range of disease conditions including DNA methylation in repetitive sequences and decondensation of cancer, cardiovascular, inflammatory, neurological and monogenic constitutive heterochromatin and chromosome instability. Previously, diseases. Given its collaborative nature, LUPA has leveraged on we showed that heterochromatic genes undergo hypomethylation a network of veterinarians for diagnosis and sample collection, a and escape silencing in ICF cells. DNA hypomethylation was centralized high-throughput genotyping facility, and geneticists and generalized to all the heterochromatic genes and to all the ICF cell computational biologists for data analyses. Since 2008, with ~10,000 lines, whereas gene expression was restricted to some genes, every samples genotyped, a number of associated loci have been identified patient having his own group of activated genes. Herein, we showed for various diseases, including a region on CFA 5 for cardiovascular, that heterochromatic genes replicate earlier in the S phase in ICF DLA class II alleles for immunological and CCDC39 for respiratory compared to control cell lines. The change in the replication timing disorders. LUPA has successfully built an infrastructure of resources, was not correlated with gene activation. Next, to investigate further the most notably a new SNP array and a comprehensive database of well- effect of DNA hypomethylation on DNA replication, we measured fork characterized phenotypes and SNP genotypes. The achievements speed by molecular combing and S-phase length by flow cytometry. of LUPA are key to facilitating investigations in comparative and Replication fork speed was higher and the S-phase was shorter in ICF translational studies in partnership with the human disease research cells suggesting that the alteration of DNA replication is not restricted community. to heterochromatin but is generalized to the whole genome. ICF cells are an ideal model to investigate DNA methylation changes and their P11.048 molecular and pathological consequences. High resolution map of canine copy number variation E. Nevalainen1,2, C. Hitte3,4, J. Berglund5, M. Webster5, C. André3,4, K. Lindblad- P11.046 Toh5,6, H. Lohi1,2, and the LUPA Consortium; Analysis of DNA Lesions induced by Ultraviolet Radiation with 1Department of Medical genetics and Department of Veterinary Biosciences, two-Dimensional Electrophoresis University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, B. Gudmundsson1,2, W. Dankers1, G. H. Gunnarsson1,2, H. G. Thormar1,2, J. J. Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 3CNRS, UMR6061, Institut Jonsson1,3; de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France, 4Université 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Lifeind ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland, de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 5Department of Medical Biochemistry and Microbiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 6Broad Institute of Harvard Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 359 and Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, United States. P11.050 Copy number variations (CNVs) are an important form of structural The transcription factor MEIS1 marks a megakaryocyte-specific variation in mammalian genomes. Substantial amount of phenotypic alternative promoter of the DNm3 locus at the position of a differences between healthy individuals have been attributed to CNVs GWAs sequence variant for platelet volume and they also contribute to disease risk in several human disorders S. Nürnberg; including autism spectrum disorders, schizophrenia and epilepsy. Dog University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. breeds as genetic isolates have recently emerged as a new model for We recently identified 12 quantitative trait loci for mean platelet volume human inherited diseases. Hundreds of genetic diseases have been and three for platelets count by a Genome-Wide Association Study identified in dogs, many of which are similar to human diseases and (GWAS). One of the association single nucleotide polymorphisms are likely to have a similar genetic background. CNVs are expected (SNPs), rs10914144, lies in intron 2 of the DNM3 gene on chromosome to play a role in several disease conditions in dogs and contribute 1q24.3. to breed-specific characters. This study aims to map and catalogue We set out to elucidate the mechanism by which sequence variation in CNVs in 50 dogs from 17 breeds (2-10 dogs/breed) and 3 wolves by the DNM3 locus exerts its effect on platelet volume. comparative genome hybridization (aCGH) using Nimblegen’s arrays First we reproduced the GWAS association in platelets from two with 2.1 million probes giving a high resolution of approximately 1 kb groups of 19 healthy individuals each, who were homozygous median probe spacing across the canine genome. This density gives for the major and minor alleles of the association SNP (P<0.05, considerably higher resolution than previously published studies. A unpaired t-test). We then measured DNM3 transcript abundance Finnish Boxer DNA was used as a reference for other breeds. The and observed significant differences between the groups. Chromatin results of this high resolution analysis of the CNVs in a large number immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with massive parallel sequencing for the of breeds provide important discoveries likely to contribute to several MK-specific transcription factor MEIS1 in the MK-like cell line CHRF- phenotypes in dogs and are being followed up in many cohorts 288-11 identified four MEIS1 binding sites within the DNM3 locus. available in the European canine genomics effort, LUPA consortium. One site in intron 2 of DNM3 harbours a SNP (rs2038479) 10,600 bp Furthermore, findings associated with genetic diseases can be tested downstream of the original association SNP, with which it is in strong on human cohorts and eventually this will improve the health of both linkage disequilibrium (r2=0.941). Sequencing of MK mRNA and 5’ species. The new CNV data will be discussed in the meeting. RACE identified a novel, alternative DNM3 transcript that lacks the first two exons and instead contains a novel exon, named 2B, which P11.049 is located in intron 2. Real-time qPCR analysis demonstrated that in Evaluation of global DNA methylation and twelve MKs transcript 2B is predominant whilst being virtually absent from polymorphisms of folate pathway on Down syndrome etilogy neuronal cells. Promoter studies identified an alternative promoter B. L. Zampieri1, C. C. Mendes1, J. M. Biselli1, M. N. Eberlin2, R. Haddad2, M. F. upstream of exon 2B which is only active in MKs but not in neuronal Riccio2, V. M. Carvalho3, H. Vannucchi4, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo1, E. C. Pavarino1; cells. Studies are currently underway to assess DNM3 protein function 1Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto - FAMERP, São José in megakaryopoiesis and platelet formation. do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2Laboratório Thomson de Espectrometria de Massas, Universidade Estadual de Campinas – UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil, 3Centro P11.051 de Medicina Diagnóstica Fleury, São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 4Faculdade de Using an Emt in vitro model to approach novel intronic based- Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo – USP, São Paulo, mechanisms underlying pathological cadherin impairment Brazil. P. Oliveira1, A. Moussavi2, A. Burleigh2, C. Roskelley3, E. Stupka4, R. Seruca1, Down syndrome (DS) is, in most cases, attributed to maternal non- D. Huntsman2, C. Oliveira1; disjunction which occurrence is associated with DNA hypomethylation 1IPATIMUP, Porto, Portugal, 2BCCA, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3University of as consequence of abnormal folate metabolism. Thus, global British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 4UCL, London, United Kingdom. methylation was compared between 10 mothers of individuals Epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental mechanism with DS and 10 of individuals without the syndrome. Association controlling multiple events during embryonic development and between DNA methylation, Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase cancer. The loss of E-cadherin expression, and consequently of (MTHFR) C677T and A1298C, Methionine synthase (MTR) A2756G, cellular adhesion, is a key event in this phenomena. Cancerous Reduced folate carrier 1 (RFC1) A80G, Transcobalamin 2 (TC2) cells undergoing EMT, exhibit a mesenchymal-like phenotype with A67G and C776G, Cystathionine beta-synthase (CβS) 844ins68, concomitant polarity loss, increased invasibility and apoptosis Methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase 1 (MTHFD1) G1958A, resistance, enabling metastization. Many proteins have been proved Serine hydroxymethyltransferase (SHMT) C1420T, Methionine to induce EMT and others to be modulated by EMT, but nothing has synthase reductase (MTRR) A66G, Betaine-homocysteine been explores in terms of intronic transcription modulation during this methyltransferase (BHMT) G742A and Dihydrofolate reductase process. (DHFR) deletion of 19 base pair (bp) polymorphisms, serum folate To better understand the role of intronic-based transcription during and plasma homocysteine (Hcy) and methylmalonic acid (MMA) EMT, we have reproduced this process in vitro by treating a normal concentrations was also evaluated. Global methylation analysis was mouse mammary cell line with TGF-β1. DNAse treated RNA extracted carried out by Imprint Methylated DNA Quantification Kit (Sigma at distinct EMT-timepoints was then subjected to RNA-sequencing. Aldrich). The investigation of polymorphisms was performed by We confirmed the occurrence of EMT via analysis of the differential Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), Real time PCR and PCR followed transcription of epithelial and mesenchymal markers and the activation by digestion. Plasma MMA and Hcy concentrations were determined of the TGF-beta pathway underlying EMT. Moreover, we were able to by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry and folate by identify both differential and constantly transcriptionally active intronic chemiluminescence. Percentage of methylation between DS mothers areas within cadherin genes, which putatively underlie novel cis- and non-DS mothers did not differ (P=0.19). DHFR 19 pb polymorphism regulatory elements. In addition we have detected a differential rate of was asscociated with global DNA methylation with a mean of DNA transcription from within introns and exons of both CDH1 and CDH2 methylation percentage in heterozygous genotype mothers (ID) of genes, both hallmarks of epithelial and mesenchymal states of EMT. 24.67 ± 6.51%, mothers DD 18.73 ± 5.65% and II, 14.32 ± 9.62% These observations point out a specific role for CDH1 and CDH2 (P=0.05). This work is the first to measure global methylation in DS intronic transcription in EMT. mothers and association between DHFR 19 bp polymorphism and DNA methylation shows the importance of abnormal folate metabolism P11.052 on DS etiology. Epigenetic effects of prenatal exposure to ethanol: a specific effect on the H19 gene methylation in sperm A. Paoloni-Giacobino1,2, C. Stouder1; 1Geneva University Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Swiss Center for Applied Human Toxicology, Geneva, Switzerland. Alcohol exposure during pregnancy, in humans and mice, induces a wide range of disorders in the offspring referred to as the fetal alcohol Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 336600 syndrome (FAS). Epigenetic alterations like, in particular, methylation (QIAGEN Pyromark Q24 at -350 (I.4.1) and -316 (I.4.2) bases changes in some imprinted genes may play a role in the teratogenic upstream of the transcription start site (TSS) of promoter I.4 and +152 effects of alcohol. The aim of our study was to evaluate the possible (I.4.3) bases downstream of the TSS within an SP1 binding site. Total effects of alcohol administration in pregnant mice on the methylation aromatase expression was determined using qRT-PCR, with primers pattern of 5 imprinted genes (H19, Gtl2, Peg1, Snrpn and Peg3) binding to the coding region. in the tail, liver, skeletal muscle, hippocampus and sperm DNAs of Results: There were no differences in methylation at I.4.1 and the male offspring over 2 generations. The effect observed on the I.4.3 in either omental or subcutaneous tissue with mean values imprinted genes was a small (3 %) but highly significant decrease in between 75.8% and 79.2% (range 2.0 - 98.0%). I.4.2 methylation the number of methylated CpGs of H19, in the F1 generation. The was significantly lower with mean values between 21.9% and 36.8% effect disappeared in the F2 generation. The prenatal exposure also (range 3.0 - 96.0%). In omental tissue percentage methylation at I.4.1 induced a decrease (26%) in the mean sperm concentration of the F1 and I.4.2 were positively correlated with each other and negatively that was not detected anymore in the F2 offspring. The CpGs of the correlated with total aromatase RNA expression (R = -0.516, P = 0.017 H19 CTCF-binding site 2, were analyzed. A correct methylation of H19 and R = -0.522, P = 0.015). In subcutaneous tissue methylation of the CTCF-binding sites is indeed known to be important for the production I.4.3 was positively correlated with aromatase expression (R = 0.549, of mitogen factors controlling fetal growth. The 1st, 2nd and 6th CpGs P = 0.004). exhibited significant methylation percentage losses in alcohol-exposed Discussion: Methylation of CPG sites in the promoter region of human offspring as compared to the same positions in control mice whereas adipose tissue aromatase have both positive (I.4.3) and negative the 3th, 4th and 5th CpG methylation patterns were unaffected. A link can (I.4.1and I.4.2) effects on transcription. be hypothesized between the hypomethylation of a fraction of the H19 CpGs and the decreased spermatogenesis observed in the alcohol- P11.055 administered female offspring. DNA methylation and gene expression changes in monozygotic twins discordant for psoriasis: identification of functionally P11.053 important genes involved in immune response Epigenetic signatures of the human extraembryonic tissues K. Gervin1, M. D. Vigeland1, M. Mattingsdal2, M. Hammerø1, H. Akselsen1, H. reflect the common principles of genome reprogramming during Nygaard1, A. O. Olsen1, J. R. Harris3, D. E. Undlien1, R. Lyle1; early embryogenesis 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashevarova, N. A. Skryabin, I. N. Lebedev; 3Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway. Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Psoriasis is a common chronic inflammatory disease affecting the Initiation of tissue-specific differentiation in the early ontogeny is skin, scalp, nails and joints. Psoriasis has a strong genetic component considered as a result of global epigenetic modifications. Studies with ~20 susceptibility loci, but epigenetic changes are involved since in model mammals have shown a clear difference in the DNA concordance rates among monozygotic (MZ) twins are 35-70%. methylation level between embryonic ectoderm and mesoderm in Here we used MZ twins (n=20 pairs) discordant for psoriasis to explore comparison with primitive endoderm and trophoblast. However, there genome-wide differences in DNA methylation and gene expression. is sparse information about the mode of epigenetic reprogramming The study of discordant MZ twins is an attractive model to investigate during human development because of tissues unavailability after epigenetic mechanisms in disease. Discordance in this context can implantation. The first accessible samples can be obtained from early be interpreted as a result of external factors that shape the epigenetic miscarriages only. We have performed genome-wide DNA methylation profile and thereby the susceptibility for disease through altered gene analysis of the cytotrophoblast (CT) and extraembryonic mesoderm expression. We isolated different lymphocyte subpopulations and (EM) from 2 induced abortions, 5 miscarriages with normal karyotype studied single-cell types (CD4+ and CD8+) to overcome the issue of and 6 spontaneous abortions with diploid-aneuploid mosaicism using epigenetic heterogeneity in whole blood. In order to detect gene specific HumanMethylation27 BeadChip (Illumina, USA) covering 27,578 DNA methylation differences, we used the 27K Infinium methylation CpG sites of 14,495 genes. All samples regardless the karyotype assay (Illumina). To integrate the analysis of global methylation status and developmental results were clearly separated by two clusters and gene expression of approximately all associated genes we used specific to the studied tissues. This finding can be explained by higher HumanHT gene expression assays (Illumina). Analysis of these data methylation of CpG-sites in EM (16,450) vs. CT (10,138). Differentially identified genes where differences in DNA methylation between twins methylated CpGs were observed in 4,898 genes (FDR<0.01, were correlated with gene expression in CD4+ cells, thus identification P<0.01). To determine the biological relevance of these genes a of genes where DNA methylation has a functional role in development Gene Set Enrichment Analysis using hypergeometric testing for of psoriasis. We also present preliminary data on genome-wide DNA KEGG pathways and Gene Ontology categories was performed. The methylation (RRBS) and ChIP. selected genes were related to cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions To our knowledge this is the first study using MZ twins discordant for (120 genes, P=0.0003), neuroactive ligand-receptor interactions (116 psoriasis in order to reveal epigenetic alterations which potentially genes, P=0.0005), cell-cell signaling (275 genes, P=0.0002), cellular contributes to the development of disease. homeostasis (275 genes, P<0.0001), and others. Our results provide first evidence for the significant impact of epigenetic modifications P11.056 into tissue specificity and confirm the common principles of genome Finding the Genetic cause of Bladder Epispadias-Exstrophy- reprogramming. This study was supported by Federal Program P806 complex (BEEc) and P1161. C. J. Jorgez, S. Bian, H. Vangapandu, D. J. Lamb; Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. P11.054 The Bladder Epispadias-Exstrophy-Complex(BEEC) includes Tissue specific epigenetics mechanisms of the I.4 promoter of urological anomalies with different degrees of anterior midline defects the cYP19A1 gene in human adipocytes that include epispadias(E), bladder exstrophy(BE), and cloacal T. J. McNab1,2, J. R. Lewis1,2, J. Tan2, P. Hudson3, J. Wang1,2, R. L. Prince1,2; exstrophy(CE). The incidence of these conditions varies from 1:30,000 1University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia, 2Sir Charles Gairdner for BE, 1:100,000 for epispadias, to 1:300,000 for CE. Although rare, Hospital, Perth, Australia, 3Qiagen, Doncaster, Australia. treatment for these birth defects requires numerous surgeries over the Background: Aromatase encoded by the gene CYP19A1, catalyses first years of life that can be traumatic and costly. The majority of cases the synthesis of oestrogens from androgens. In adipose tissue, basal are sporadic, nonsyndromic, with a normal karyotype, and unknown transcription is in part driven by promoter I.4. We sought to determine etiology. Although most genetic studies failed to identify specific whether methylation of CpG sites within this region is associated with genes defects that underlie the disorder, there is evidence of strong aromatase RNA expression. genetic component. We used array comparative genomic hybridization Methods: Omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue samples were (aCGH) to find submicroscopic regions of chromosome gains or taken from 31 obese subjects undergoing bariatric surgery. DNA and losses in BEEC. DNA from 6-epispadias, 14-BE, and 3-CE patients RNA were extracted from purified mature adipocytes. Methylation were analyzed using a 3x720K aCGH from NimbleGen. Analysis was status of CpG sites was determined using quantitative pyrosequencing performed with Nexus Copy Number and SignalMap software. Each Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 361 suspected CNV (copy number variation) was validated by Taqman- cause for mental retardation. QPCR. Sequence analysis of selected genes was then performed. 3) When dealing with a rare recessive monogenic disorder the We identified microduplications in chromosome 7 that include genes identification of the disease gene is intrinsically easier because the important in urinary tract development, such as HOXA1-11(7p15.2) search is for two independent events in a single gene. We have shown and a novel gene PHF14 (7p21.3). Also in other affected patients, we for patients with Sensenbrenner syndrome that a single patient and a found several microdeletions in novel genes located at chromosome sufficient amount of control data can suffice to determine the cause of 13(13q14.2 and 13q32). Additionally, we found CNV-losses in the the disease. developmental genes DLG2(11q14.1) and NOTCH2(1p12) that display We conclude that exome sequencing allows robust and unbiased interesting expression profiles in the genitourinary system. Further disease gene identification in both rare and common genetic disorders. studies of these genes and their expression profiles will help us to understand the genetic cause of BEEC that may lead to advances in P11.059 the diagnosis, counseling, and treatment of these patients. A common micro-deletion in intron 2 of the human GLA gene identified by a fast PCR - Sanger sequencing workflow P11.057 E. Schreiber; the effect of sample mixups in genome-wide studies Life Technologies - Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States. H. Westra1, R. C. Jansen2, R. S. N. Fehrmann1, G. te Meerman1, D. van Heel3, Aberrations in the X-linked human GLA gene cause Fabry disease C. Wijmenga1, L. Franke1; and a large number of mutations have been described. Given this 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Groningen, multitude of mutations the only comprehensive mode of detection is Netherlands, 3Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The DNA sequencing of the exons and intron-junctions. London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, During testing of published primer pairs for amplification and London, United Kingdom. subsequent sequencing of the seven exons in the GLA gene I have Sample mix-ups can arise during sample collection, handling, found that a micro-deletion of the pentamer CAGCC is frequently genotyping or data management, and might account for part of the found upstream of exon 3 in the bona fide healthy population. Of the missing heritability of complex diseases. However, it is unclear how 95 specimen of a “normal” human DNA control panel tested, 79 were often sample mix-ups occur in genome-wide studies, as there are no found to be homozygous intact, 11 were heterozygous for the deletion post-hoc methods that can identify these mix-ups in unrelated samples. and 5 were homozygous carriers of the deletion. The significance of We have therefore developed an algorithm (MixupMapper) that can this unusually frequent micro-deletion is unknown; does it point to a both detect and correct sample mix-ups in genome-wide studies by “mutational faultline” in the GLA gene ? looking at gene expression levels. Our method utilizes the principle The poster also describes a novel, fast workflow for re-sequencing exon/ that some genetic variants strongly affect expression phenotypes, intron portions of the human genome: fast PCR (ca. 50 min), followed permitting us to check for every sample whether its phenotypic by amplicon purification using preparative e-gel electrophoresis (ca. measurements correspond to the genetic variants that affect these 20 min) and subsequent fast Sanger cycle sequencing (ca. 40 min), phenotypes. electrophoresis on an Applied Biosystems capillary Genetic Analyzer We show that sample mix-ups are common in genome-wide studies by (ca. 60 min) finalized by sequence detection using Variant Reporter™ applying our method to five publicly available human datasets on the data analysis software. genetics of gene expression. On average, 3% of all analyzed samples had been assigned incorrect expression phenotypes; in one of the P11.060 datasets 23% of the samples had incorrect expression phenotypes. New approaches for Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) genetic The consequences of these sample mix-ups are substantial: when diagnosis we corrected these sample mix-ups, we identified on average 15% L. Palacios, S. Catarino, L. Osaba, D. Arteta, D. Tejedor, M. Stef; more significant cis-expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs). In one Progenika Biopharma SA, Derio, Spain. dataset, we identified three times as many significant cis-eQTLs after Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant correction. disorder caused by mutations in the LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 genes. Through simulations we show that a low percentage of sample mix- Classically, FH mutation detection is carried out by Sanger sequencing ups may lead to an underestimation of the explained heritability of and MLPA, since Copy Number Variations (CNVs) account for 5-10% complex traits in genome-wide datasets as well. Sample mix-ups of LDLR mutations. should therefore call for serious attention in past and future genome- We have developed the LIPOchip® tool, a DNA-array that detects point wide studies. mutations and CNVs simultaneously and has been used to diagnose more than 5,000 index cases. LIPOchip® current versions detect P11.058** more than 80% of the Spanish, Dutch, Italian and British mutations Disease gene identification by exome sequencing but, due to the LDLR heterogeneity and the lack of frequency studies, C. Gilissen, A. Hoischen, L. Vissers, B. van Bon, J. de Ligt, H. Arts, B. van Lier, LIPOchip® is not viable worldwide. M. Steehouwer, P. de Vries, I. Janssen, N. Wieskamp, M. del Rosario, B. de Two technical approaches have been tested to produce a new, rapid, Vries, H. Brunner, J. Veltman; economic and universal FH genetic diagnosis tool: the Affymetrix Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. resequencing chip and the Next Generation Sequencing Genome Classical positional cloning techniques for disease gene identification Sequencer Roche GS Junior. We have developed protocols to allow have benefited from the recent advancements of next generation these tools detecting substitutions, small indels and CNVs in the sequencing technology. In this presentation we discuss three whole LDLR, APOB and PCSK9 genes. exome sequencing strategies for disease gene identification in rare Our first results revealed the potential of our Affymetrix array design in and sporadic disorders where classical genetic approaches do not detecting FH causing variants (even small indels and CNVs). However, apply. there are two main issues to improve: the number of no calls and the 1) Rare sporadic disorders lack large pedigrees due to reduced robustness of the results. fecundity. For this we hypothesize that de novo mutations in a single Regarding the GS Junior, the accuracy of the obtained results was gene are the underlying genetic cause. We resolved the genetic cause high and we have managed to sequence the whole LDLR gene and in two of such disorders (Schinzel-Giedion syndrome and Bohring target exons of the APOB and PCSK9 genes. CNV detection was also syndrome) by identifying rare coding variants that affect the same analyzed and we expect to reach a routine tool able to analyze 40 gene in multiple patients. patients by run, obtaining their final result in a week. 2) In case of more frequent (genetically heterogeneous) sporadic disorders, the underlying cause might be attributed to single de novo mutations in a large mutational target. The amount of patients required to find an overlap however increases exponentially with the amount of disease loci. By sequencing a patient as well as the unaffected parents we identified de novo mutations in 6 out of 10 patients as the potential Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 336622 P11.061 Antwerp, Belgium. multiplexed targeted next-generation sequencing as a The Marfan (MFS) and Loeys-Dietz (LDS) syndromes are caused by comprehensive mutation screening approach for Fanconi a wide variety of mutations in the Fibrillin 1 (FBN1) and Transforming anemia Growth Factor Receptor 1/2 genes (TGFBR1/2), respectively. With N. Ameziane, D. Sie, S. Dentro, H. J. P. Gille, J. P. de Winter, E. A. Sistermans; conventional mutation screening technologies, analysis of this set of Vrije Universiteit Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. genes is time-consuming and expensive. Background: Fanconi anemia (FA) is a recessive chromosomal We have optimized a cost-effective and reliable mutation discovery instability syndrome characterized by congenital malformations, bone strategy using Next Generation Sequencing technology. In a first phase, failure, and susceptibility to malignancies. Mutations in 15 genes have five MFS or LDS patient samples with previously identified mutations been shown to cause FA. Since FA patients require special treatment, and/or polymorphisms in FBN1 or TGFBR1/2 were amplified using and syndromes with overlapping clinical symptoms exist, molecular a multiplex PCR reaction and sequenced on a Genome Sequencer diagnosis is required. The current screening approach is neither time- FLX (Roche). All expected mutations could be identified. In a second nor cost-effective and may miss various aberrations, such as large phase, we validated the technique on 87 samples from MFS patients deletions. Here we evaluate the use of a multiplexed targeted next- fulfilling the Ghent criteria using two GS-LR70 runs and one Amplicon generation sequencing (NGS) approach in the diagnosis of FA. Titanium XLR70 run (Roche). To differentiate the samples within a Methods: We selected samples from 12 FA patients with various single run, we have used up to 30 different Multiplex Identifiers (MIDs). hetero-/homozygous variations including large deletions and small This resulted in the identification of 66 different FBN1 mutations in a deletions/insertions. For one sample, only one pathogenic mutation total of 74 patients. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification had been found by Sanger sequencing. We used a custom Agilent (MLPA) analysis of the remaining 13 negative samples identified one in-solution SureSelect kit to enrich for the known FA genes. The 12 duplication and two deletions in FBN1. For the remaining 9 negative resulting sequence libraries were tagged with a unique barcode and samples, Sanger sequencing of the coding sequences which were pooled before sequencing 74 cycles paired-end in one lane on the investigated with NGS, did not reveal additional variants. Illumina GAIIx platform. An in-house variation detection pipeline, Our data support that multiplex PCR of all coding exons of FBN1 and including a tool for large deletion detection, was used to score for TGFBR1/2 followed by Next Generation Sequencing analysis and relevant mutations. complemented with MLPA, is a clear-cut strategy for a time- and cost- Results: An average of 2.8 million unique reads were obtained per effective identification of mutations. sample, resulting in a median coverage of ~100 fold. All disease causing mutations have been detected in our validation panel. In P11.064 addition, a novel large deletion mutation in an unresolved case has Evaluation of single-step homogenous screening assays for been detected and validated through conventional sequencing. rapid detection of FMR1 cGG repeat expansions Conclusion: Multiplexed targeted NGS offers a fast and reliable S. S. Chong1,2, C. R. L. Teo1, H. Y. Law3, C. G. L. Lee1,4,5; method for molecular 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University diagnosis, without the need for preselection by complementation Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 3KK Women’s and Children’s Hospital, studies. Singapore, Singapore, 4National Cancer Center, Singapore, Singapore, 5Duke- NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore. P11.062 Fragile X syndrome is one of the most common genetic causes of transcriptional regulation of Fanconi anemia (FA) genes mental retardation, second only to Down syndrome. It is predominantly containing NLs-encoding sequences controls nuclear FA caused by hyperexpansion (>200 repeats) and hypermethylation of pathway activity CGG repeats in the FMR1 promoter region, which results in gene A. Haitjema, J. Jørgensen, D. A. P. Rockx, H. Joenje, J. C. Dorsman; silencing. Smaller unmethylated expansions in the gray zone and VUmc, Amsterdam, Netherlands. premutation range (45 - 200 repeats) have been associated with The study of the FA/BRCA pathway in the last decade has added premature ovarian failure (POF) and fragile X-associated tremor ataxia increasing insight in the function of individual FA proteins as well in syndrome (FXTAS). We previously developed several methylation- their role in DNA damage repair. Few studies, however, have focused specific and direct triplet-primed PCR based assays for analysis of the on the transcriptional regulation of the genes themselves. Since the FA FMR1 CGG repeat structure and expansion. We have now adapted pathway plays a role in the cell cycle, one can expect that (a subset these assays for single-step homogeneous screening of FMR1 CGG of) the FA genes will be cell-cycle regulated. The aim of this study is to repeat expansions by melting curve analysis in the presence of SYBR determine the behavior of all FA genes during the cell cycle combined Green I nucleic acid dye. Melting peak profiles from 5’-anchored and with an in silico analysis of their promoter elements. 3’-anchored triplet-primed PCRs were evaluated. For 3’-anchored We could separate the pathway genes into two groups based on their triplet-primed PCRs, the melt peak profiles or normal and expanded mRNA expression during the cell cycle and/or response to serum alleles were distinctly different. In contrast, 5’-anchored triplet-primed in the human glioblastoma cell line T98G. The responsive group PCRs produced similar melting peak morphologies from normal consists of four core-complex members (FANCA, -B, -E, and -M), the and expanded alleles, although melting peak temperatures from ID-complex members (FANCD2 and, -I), and the downstream genes expanded alleles were slightly increased compared with normal BRCA2, and -J. The non-responsive group consist of the subcomplex alleles. Therefore, 3’-anchored triplet-primed PCRs are more sensitive partners of FANCA, -G, of FANCB, -L, of FANCE, -C and -F, and compared with 5’-anchored triplet-primed PCRs in distinguishing of BRCA2, PALB2. The promoters of each group were analyzed to normal from expanded alleles by melting curve analysis. This identify common transcription factor models with Genomatix. For both difference likely stems from the position(s) of the AGG interruption(s) groups, models containing homeodomain TF families, known to be in most expanded alleles. We conclude that melting curve analysis involved in development were identified. The responsive genes are represents a viable single-step strategy for rapid screening of FMR1 furthermore characterized by SP1 and E2F sites in the vicinity of their CGG repeat expansions. transcription start sites. The responsive genes contain Nuclear Localization Signals (NLSs)- P11.065 encoding sequences, suggesting that these constitute the driving Evaluation of mGmt gene promoter methylation by comparing forces for nuclear import when necessary during DNA replication. qms-PcR and ms-HRm analysis in GBm C. B. Avci1, S. Yilmaz1, Z. O. D. Sıgva1, M. Yucebas1, T. Balci1, O. Cogulu2, N. P11.063 Oktar3, T. Dalbasti3, T. Akalin4, C. Gunduz1; Applying massive Parallel sequencing to molecular Diagnosis of 1Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology, Izmir, Turkey, marfan and Loeys-Dietz syndrome 2Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, M. Baetens1, L. Van Laer2, K. De Leeneer1, M. Renard1, J. Hellemans1, J. De 3Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Neurosurgery, Izmir, Turkey, Backer1, A. De Paepe1, B. Loeys2, P. Coucke1; 4Ege University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Pahtology, Izmir, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 363 Turkey. Approved gene symbols are based on names describing the structure, Current therapeutic options for patients with glioblastoma multiforme function or homology and the HGNC organise genes into gene groups (GBM) consist of surgical resection followed by radiation and and gene families where possible. Previously the HGNC has created chemotherapy. Despite this aggressive multimodality approach, dedicated Gene Family web pages many of which have specialist patients continue to have a poor prognosis, indicating the need advisors that both check their accuracy and help to maintain them. for an individual molecular drug therapy for each case as a novel However, these pages currently only represent a subset of human therapeutic modality. Expression of the O(6)-methylguanine-DNA gene families. We now intend to expand and generate more Gene methyltransferase (MGMT) gene has shown to correlate with the Family pages using data curated by the HGNC combined with external clinical outcome in GBM patients treated with alkylating agents. HRM resources that specialise in particular gene families. These new Gene is an extended melting curve analysis method, but it requires additional Family pages will be sorted into meaningful categories including analysis software and special reagents. The aim of the study is to functions, structure, homology or a mixture. We will provide links from evaluate the effectiveness of qMS-PCR and MS-HRM, two distinctive our Symbol Reports to our improved Gene Family resources. methods for identifying methylation in GBM patients. We evaluated the If you have a gene family that you think should be represented, contact status of MGMT gene promoter methylation in 20 primary glioblastoma us hgnc@genenames.org. patients and 2 GBM cell lines (U-87MG, U-118MG) and analyzed the The work of the HGNC is supported by the NHGRI and the Wellcome correlation between qMS-PCR and MS-HRM methods by individually Trust. designed primers and probes. In qMS-PCR, 5 cases were found to be unmethylated. According to P11.068 the analysis of the MS-HRM results; 3 of the 5 cases were correlated Genomic imprinting of canine MAS1, a component of the renin- with qMS-PCR and 2 cases were heterogenous. Methylation status angiotensin system was correlated in both cell lines, 55-65% methylated and 75-85% C. M. Nolan, S. O’Boyle, R. E. Shiel, J. J. Callanan; methylated groups in these two analysis. University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland. The results indicated the importance of determining individual genetic Genomic imprinting occurs in mammals and refers to parent of origin differences by using both qMS-PCR and MS-HRM analysis for specific epigenetic modifications of genes. The consequence of these inactivation of MGMT is indispensible. modifications is that the two alleles of imprinted genes are differentially expressed. Although few in number, the function of imprinted genes is P11.066 essential for normal growth and development, and they also regulate Whole transcriptome expression microarray profiling of aspects of adult behaviour. Aberrant regulation of imprinted genes cancerous and adjacent normal total RNA contributes to a variety of clinical conditions in humans, including A. Bergstrom Lucas, B. Mullinax, J. Venneri, E. Lin, V. Kulkarni, M. Janis, J. somatic undergrowth and overgrowth, behavioural disorders and Ghosh, J. Gao, E. Leproust, S. Fulmer-Smentek; cancer. Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. Imprinted genes have mostly been studied in mice and humans. For Whole transcriptome expression profiling by microarray analysis is an comparative purposes, and because the dog is now considered an important tool for classifying tissue and tumor types and understanding excellent model of human disease, we examined genomic imprinting biological mechanisms. This profiling measures the alternative splicing in the canine. For canine orthologs of three well-characterized of exons from RNA leading to the translation of different proteins. To imprinted genes (IGF2, H19 and IGF2R), we have shown parent of address the need for whole transcriptome expression profiling we origin specific effects on expression. Imprinted genes usually occur have developed an exon workflow which includes catalog and custom in genomic clusters that are co-regulated by a common imprint. The microarrays, a whole transcript labeling method, and data analysis MAS1 gene lies upstream of IGF2R in mammals and its imprint status software. The Low Input Quick Amp Whole Transcriptome Labeling in humans is somewhat controversial. Here we report that canine Kit employs a mixture of random nucleotide and oligo dT-based MAS1 is imprinted, with expression of the maternally-derived allele T7 promoter primers resulting in high cRNA yields and Cy-labeled in several fetal tissues and in neonatal umbilical cord. The protein specific activities from nanogram amounts of RNA. The probes on the encoded by MAS1 is a component of the renin-angiotensin system, SurePrint G3 microarrays were designed from the high quality content a complex regulatory network that is essential for normal human of public databases including RefSeq and Ensembl. Exon arrays were physiology and is altered in several disease states. If MAS1 (or other analyzed for gene level and exon level expression using GeneSpring RAS components) is imprinted in humans, this could have implications GX 11.5 software, thus enabling whole transcript profile comparisons for human health and disease. We suggest that the imprint status of within two days. Comparisons of technical replicate samples human MAS1 should be re-evaluated. demonstrate high reproducibility with wide dynamic range across a broad range of RNA input. High correlations were also demonstrated P11.069** in comparisons to orthogonal expression measurement techniques towards a comprehensive overview of genomic variation in including RNA-Seq. The whole transcriptome workflow was used to patient-parent trios detect alternative splicing of exons between cancerous and normal J. de Ligt, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, L. E. L. M. Vissers, C. Gilissen, H. G. Brunner, J. A. cells resulting in gene and exon expression profiles consistent with Veltman; the current literature. SurePrint G3 microarrays were also used to Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. assess differential expression of non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) in these We performed exome sequencing on 10 patient-parent trios to obtain samples. The combined results demonstrate the value of identifying a comprehensive overview of genomic variation. These patients were known exons and showcase the importance of including non-coding selected based on the presence of unexplained mental retardation in RNA profiling in cancer research. the absence of de novo or rare Copy Number Variations (CNVs) and syndromic diagnosis. P11.067 Initial array data (250k) provided a low-resolution insight in the Using HGNc to improve and expand Gene Family resources patients common CNVs (on average 3, with an average size of 648 L. C. Daugherty, R. L. Seal, S. M. Gordon, M. J. Lush, M. W. Wright, E. A. kb). Furthermore we detected on average 7,098 common (based on Bruford; dbSNP130), 100 uniquely inherited, and 1.2 de novo Single Nucleotide HGNC, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. Variants and 1,953 Insertions/Deletions (InDels) per patient. The HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) has assigned Currently, different algorithms are being tested for the detection of unique approved gene symbols and names to over 30000 human loci, Structural Variation (SV), including CNVs and inversions, and their over 19000 of which represent protein coding genes. We also name concordance with high-resolution array data (Affymetrix 2.7M arrays) pseudogenes, phenotypic loci, genomic features and non-coding which will provide a detailed overview of the larger SVs. In combination RNAs. Our website: genenames.org is an online repository of HGNC- with the extensive analysis on InDels and SNVs, our analysis will approved gene nomenclature and associated resources including provide a comprehensive overview of the genomic variation within an links to genomic, proteomic and phenotypic information, as well as individual, including de novo and inherited variants. dedicated Gene Family pages.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 336644 P11.070*** study, we want to analyse the methylation status of gene GSTP1 in G2P Knowledge centre: An integrated genotype-phenotype data urine samples from prostate cancer (PCa) patients, as a noninvasive access portal and online collaborative network method to detect PCa from urine. A. J. Webb, A. J. Brookes; Material and method: We collected voided urine specimens from University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom. 75 men who underwent transrectal ultrasound-guided biopsy of the The unprecedented quantity and complexity of genotype-phenotype prostate for suspected malignancy, and from 58 men with benign (G2P) data currently being generated by research and diagnostic prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), representing the control subjects. We labs worldwide, together with a shift toward online data dissemination isolated genomic DNA from urine specimens and after, subjected them and collaborative work patterns, has spawned the need for new data to sodium bisulfite modification. handling, integration and online community workspace tools. To tackle Analysis of the methylation status of GSTP1 gene was done by data handling issues, the GEN2PHEN Project has spearheaded the methylation-specific PCR (MSP) method, and we correlated them with creation of a hybrid federated-centralised database network where Gleason score and PSA levels. disparate G2P data (for both Mendelian traits, and data from genome- Results: Using methylation-specific PCR (MSP) method, we found wide association studies (GWAS)) are held in multiple distributed GSTP1 gene hypermethylated in 69 of 75 (92 %) PCa patients , and in databases. These independent databases are then interlinked using 5 of 58 (8.62%) patients with BPH. common exchange formats and data standards. Conclusion: From the obtained results we can conclude that, the The ‘G2P Knowledge Centre’ (http://www.gen2phen.org) leverages detection of aberrant methylation of gene GSTP1 in urine may offer a this broad yet complex network, and enables valuable distributed promising approach for the noninvasive diagnosis of prostate cancer. G2P data to be quickly located through an intuitive yet powerful holistic search tool. Allied to the data search is the provision of a P11.073 user annotation system whereby any user may leave comments or molecular Diagnosis of the BRcA genes in Hereditary Breast feedback on any search result, dataset or resource. These annotations and Ovarian cancer families, using Roche/454 Pyrosequencing are then made available to the original data provider and the wider technology. G2P community, adding real value to the data and a second-level B. Yannick1, N. Uhrhammer2, L. Lafarge2, Y. Bignon2; peer-review system. To further foster an online collaborative G2P 1Université d’Auvergne, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Centre Jean Perrin, community, the ‘G2P Knowledge Centre’ provides discrete online Clermont-Ferrand, France. workspaces (Interest Groups) as well as blogs, news items, events Screening for deleterious mutations in the BRCA genes is an essential listings, training materials and full access to the many outputs of the service to women with familial risk of breast or ovarian cancer. To GEN2PHEN project. offer this service as widely as possible, it is necessary to develop faster and less expensive methods. New high-throughput genotyping P11.071 technologies give high-quality sequence data with quick turnaround GNAs NEsP and XL hypermethylation in and low cost. We evaluated Roche-454 technology for genetic pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism patients. diagnosis. B. Izzi1, K. Devriendt2, D. Lambrechts3, C. Van Geet1,4, K. Freson1; Sixty-four familial breast cancer cases were analyzed by amplicon 1Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, pyrosequencing and Sanger dideoxy sequencing, plus 14 by 2Center for Human Genetics- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Vesalius Research pryosequencing only. Center- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Pediatrics Department-University Pyrosequencing was validated for up to 97 % of amplicons in each Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. of four standard runs of 16 cases, and up to 98 % using Titanium Endocrinopathies in patients with hypocalcemia and chemistry. A minimum coverage depth of 40 reads was required to hyperphosphatemia that share resistance to parathyroid hormone validate an amplicon as ‘analysed’. All variants detected by dideoxy (PTH) are named pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP). Most PHP types sequencing were also detected by pyrosequencing, including eleven are caused by defects in GNAS, an imprinted gene locus consisting deleterious mutations. of maternal, paternal and biallelic transcripts. PHPIb patients have Six of the 84 amplicons contained homopolymer tracts in the coding isolated PTH resistance and GNAS epidefects while PHPIa presents sequence systematically misread by the Amplicon Variant Analysis with hormonal resistance and characteristic physical features such software. Development of in-house software for the reanalysis of as mental problems, brachydactyly, shortness, round face and homopolymer data showed that most misread sequences were the subcutaneous ossifications, jointly termed as having Albright’s result of intermediate pyrosequencing signals: histograms of read data Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO) due to maternally inherited GNAS aided the analysis considerably and allowed validation of the majority mutations. PPHP patients have AHO without hormone resistance and of homopolymers. paternally inherited GNAS mutations. This classification of PHP was This pilot study on the BRCA genes indicated that pyrosequencing was made years ago but was recently questioned since GNAS epidefects as sensitive as dideoxy sequencing, and the effort and cost involved were also identified in PHPIa. Our present study further complicates were comparable. Moving to Titanium chemistry, with more and longer this (epi)genotype/phenotype relation as we found for the first time reads and the multiplexing of samples, permits analysis of 64 or more GNAS epidefects in PPHP. We quantified 3 differentially methylated samples simultaneously, giving pyrosequencing an advantage over regions in GNAS: NESP (2 regions of 13 and 20 CpGs), XL (24 CpGs) classic techniques. and exon A/B (20 CpGs) methylation via the Sequenom EpiTYPER in 3 PPHP patients with variable degree of AHO (shortness, brachydactyly, P11.074*** behavior problems, round face) but no GNAS coding mutation. These An inflammasome genome screen to detect novel disease genes patients showed significant hypermethylation of preferential CpGs in in hereditary autoinflammatory disorders. NESP and XL (Z-test, p<0,05) and one patient also had significant M. E. van Gijn1, W. Kloosterman1, J. Frenkel2, I. Nijman1, J. van de Belt1, K. A/B hypermethylation. This is a novel imprint pattern that has not been Duran1, R. van der Burgh3, L. H. Jongeneel4, M. L. Boes3, E. P. J. G. Cuppen1; described since PHPIb/PHPIa epidefects are characterized by A/B and 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, XL hypomethylation and NESP hypermethylation. Further studies are Netherlands, 2Department of General Pediatrics, University Medical Center needed to unravel this novel methylation pattern in relation to an AHO Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatric Immunology, University phenotype by including more patients. Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. P11.072 Hereditary autoinflammatory disorders, for example Familial Noninvasive detection of GstP1 gene in urine samples from Mediterranean Fever (FMF), and the cryopyrinopathies (CAPS) are prostate cancer patients caused by mutations in ‘inflammation-related genes’, which include R. Dumache, B. Bumbacila, S. Negru, A. Tudor, M. Puiu; genes in which a mutation can trigger an uncontrolled, aimless University of Medicine and Pharmacy’’Victor Babes’’, Timisoara, Romania. activation of the inflammatory process in response to innocuous Purpose: Methylation of the GSTP1 gene promoter region is the stimuli. most common epigenetic change in prostate carcinogenesis. In our A large number of patients with autoinflammatory diseases, remain Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 365 genetically unexplained. Several studies have shown that aberrant of specific terms from the Gene Ontology database (GOs) associated activation of the IL-1β pathway via the inflammasome is a common with the pathogenesis of HSCR. We have used a new bioinformatic tool: mechanism in the pathogenesis of autoinflammatory diseases. We http://gesbap.bioinfo.cipf.es, to compare Spanish patients (reference hypothesize that mutations in a variety of genes involved in the control group) with the rest of populations (Consortium) from ICHSCR through of inflammasome function can result in autoinflammatory disease in a 2 consecutive methods: specific patient. 1) Using the p value (<0.05) of the GOs obtained from gesbap from To test this hypothesis an ‘inflammasome genome’ was designed. This both populations, we got 17 significant GOs in Spanish population of ‘inflammasome genome’ consists of 120 genes known to be involved which just 11 were significant in all the populations. in, or associated with proteins functioning in the inflammasome. 2) “2-step functional analysis”: we calculate the adjusted p value Next Generation Sequencing was used to efficiently screen the from the nominal one applied to Consortium populations. Results: 27 ‘inflammasome genome’ in 60 selected patients, for novel disease significant GOs in all the populations (Spanish and Consortium). associated variations. A combination of 60 barcoded-patient-DNA- We have established a new tool to select a wide spectrum of genes libraries was pooled and enriched on a single custom Agilent CGH 1M as candidates in the context of HSCR. Further analyses are needed to array followed by SOLID sequencing. Sanger Sequencing confirmed elucidate the complex nature of HSCR. 50 novel candidate disease associated variations found in 34 different patients. P11.077 We are currently in the process of functionally testing the identified immunostaining of acetylated histone H3 on metaphase candidates for their effect on inflammasome function in human cells chromosomes reveals band-specific patterns differing in pre- to determine their implication in the disease. The identification of new and postnatal human development disease-causing genes are expected to not only help diagnostics but A. V. Tikhonov1, O. A. Efimova2, J. G. Lezhnina1, A. A. Pendina2, I. A. also future therapies. Moreover, this study will shed more light on the Galembo1, O. G. Chiryaeva2, L. I. Petrova2, V. S. Dudkina2, V. S. Dudkina2, N. function of various inflammasomes, which are still poorly understood. A. Sadik2, T. V. Kuznetzova2, V. S. Baranov2; 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, P11.075 2D.O.Ott’s Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, laboratory for Identification of the causative gene for SPG27 by Exome capture Prenatal Diagnosis of Human Inborn and Inherited Diseases, Saint-Petersburg, A. Noreau1, S. L. Girard1, A. Szuto1, I. A. Meijer1, P. Cossette1, P. A. Dion1,2, G. Russian Federation. A. Rouleau1,3,4; Acetylation of 9th lysine residue in histone H3 (AcH3K9) is an 1Center of Excellence in Neuromics of Université de Montréal (CENUM), epigenetic modification of human genome involved in gene regulation Centre de Recherche du Centre H, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Université de and generally associated with transcriptionally active, or potentially Montréal, Department of pathology and cellular biology, Montreal, QC, Canada, active, chromatin. 3University of Montreal, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Montreal, We aimed at analysis of acetylated histone H3 distribution in metaphase QC, Canada, 4Research Center, CHU Sainte-Justine, Montreal, QC, Canada. chromosomes from PHA-stimulated fetal cord blood lymphocytes Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a motor neuron disease for compared to that from adult lymphocytes. Study was performed on which the key symptoms are lower limb spasticity and weakness 79 metaphases from 3 embryos (20-24-weeks gestation) and 60 because of progressive neurodegeneration events. The group of HSP metaphases from 5 adults fixed with 2% acetic acid in ethanol. is particularly heterogeneous because different modes of inheritance Distribution of AcH3K9 on metaphase chromosomes was studied were observed (dominant, recessive and X-linked) as well as various by indirect immunofluorescence with specific monoclonal antibodies levels of symptoms complexity; pure and complicated forms were against AcH3K9 (Abcam, USA). Chromosomes were identified by described. To date, over 45 spastic paraplegia locus were identified centromeric index and DAPI banding. Immunostaining of metaphase and 20 genes identified. A previous linkage analysis on an autosomal chromosomes revealed regions of different fluorescence intensity, recessive pure HSP family identified a new locus (SPG27) on the with most bright fluorescence in R-bands and absence of signal in 10q22.1-10q24.1 region; a locus partially overlapping the SPG9 pericentromeric heterochromatin. locus. We proposed to perform use an exome capture approach Signal distribution in chromosomes from fetal lymphocytes with the Agilent Technology SureSelect Human All Exon Kit (50MB) demonstrated difference in fluorescence intensity between homologous and proceed to resequencing with ABI SOLID4 DNA sequencer. chromosomes in bands 1p36.3, 2p23, 2q33, 10p11.2, 11p15. These Four affected individuals, the unaffected-carrier father and another differences may be determined by genomic imprinting. unaffected sibling carrying the same disease-allele as the father will Five bands - 5p13, 5p15, 9q13,16p13,18p11.32 - showed differences be used. As we may be looking for compound-heterozygote mutations, in AcH3K9 level between fetal and adult chromosomes. Bands 5p13, we will develop an algorithm to determine the parental origin of variants 5p15and16p13 were hypoacetylated; bands 9q13and18p11.32 and the more promising mutations will be validated through Sanger demonstrated higher acetylation level in fetuses compared to adults. sequencing. By this method, it will be possible to cover the 40 genes, Thus, pattern of AcH3K9 distribution along metaphase chromosomes find the causative mutation and maybe solve the SPG9 clue. of both fetal and adult lymphocytes corresponds to a band-specific manner, resembling R-banding. Differences in AcH3K9 of some bands P11.076 between fetal homologous chromosomes as well as between fetal and integration of GWAs data using Gene Ontologies and “2-step adult chromosomes might be attributed to stage-specific epigenetic analysis” to select disease genes candidates for HscR. patterns in the same cell types of humans. B. Luzón-Toro1,2, M. Marbá2,3, R. Fernández1,2, I. Medina2,3, M. Acosta1,2, D. Supported by RFBR and S.C.02.740.11.0698. Montaner2,3, G. Antiñolo1,2, J. Dopazo2,3, S. Borrego1,2; 1Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocio, Sevilla, Spain, 2Centro de P11.078 Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Sevilla Holoprosencephaly and Notch signalling pathway: and Valencia, Spain, 3Bioinformatics Department, Centro de Investigación transcriptomic approach using chick model Príncipe Felipe, Valencia, Spain. L. Ratié1, I. Gicquel1, S. Mercier1, C. Dubourg1,2, S. Odent1,3, V. David1,2, V. Hirschsprung’s disease (HSCR) is a congenital malformation of the Dupé1; hindgut with low sex-dependent penetrance, variable expression and 1UMR 6061, Université de Rennes1, Rennes, France, 2Génétique Moléculaire, involvement of one or more genes. CHU, Rennes, France, 3Service de Génétique médicale, CHU Hôpital Sud, One of the most innovative tools for the identification of additional Rennes, France. genomic regions associated with HSCR is a Genome Wide Association Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a congenital malformation of the human study (GWAS). An International Consortium (ICHSCR) was settled in brain due to an imperfect division of forebrain during early development. 2004 to achieve this goal. Using this strategy, several loci have been It is now currently admitted that HPE is a multihit pathology caused by described as “HSCR-associated regions” and their “HSCR gene”. We at least two or more dysfunctional events involving genes from more propose a new approach based in an innovative data processing of than one signalling pathway. the results obtained from a GWAS performed on 213 S-HSCR trios The Shh and Nodal pathways have been presented to be the main worldwide recruited by ICHSCR. Such approach leads the identification signalling pathways involved in human HPE. To a lesser extend, FGF Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 336666 has also been identified to be implicated. Importantly, by CGH array small RNA libraries. we have recently identified a component of the Notch pathway, Dll1, as The Illumina HiSeq 2000 provides the industry’s highest sequencing a new HPE candidate gene. This result suggests that a dysregulation output, quality and fastest data generation rate for resequencing and of Notch pathway may well confer a susceptibility to HPE. quantitative analysis. However, if previous studies have showed the importance of Notch Amplicons can be sequenced on the Roche GS FLX or with the throughout the neurogenic phase of forebrain development, a link classical Sanger technology to obtain longer reads. with HPE has never been described. To assess this question, we With the Pacific Biosciences PacBio RS real time single molecule have implemented an ex ovo chick embryos culture system with a sequencer, long reads in the range of Sanger sequencing and so- pharmacological inhibitor known to block specifically Notch pathway. called strobe readscan reveal multiple types of genetic variation, such Subsequently, the molecular reprogramming of the treated brain has as large-scale rearrangements, as observed in cancer. been tested using expression microarray and in situ hybridization In addition, direct sequencing of methylated and other modified bases approaches. These analyses provide functional data about the Notch will be possible. pathway during HPE appearance as well as throughout normal Proprietary tools are used for the analysis of Next Gen sequencing forebrain development. data, while third party tools are available for optimised de novo assembly or improved hybrid assemblies.. P11.079 conclusion mutations in KLF1 as a cause of Hereditary Persistence of Foetal High quality results will be obtained by optimally combining several Haemoglobin library preparation methods and the newest Next Gen technologies J. Borg1,2, P. Papadopoulos3, M. Georgitsi4, L. Gutiérrez3, G. Grech1,2, P. Fanis3, with state-of-the-art bioinformatics.Thus, the deepest analysis of data M. Phylactides5, A. J. M. H. Verkerk6, P. J. van der Spek6, C. A. Scerri1,2, W. and as a consequence, the most robust analysis of the sequence you Cassar1,2, R. Galdies1,2, W. van IJcken7, Z. Özgür7, N. Gillemans3, J. Hou3,8, F. are working on, will be achieved. G. Grosveld3,8,9, M. von Lindern10, A. E. Felice1,2, G. P. Patrinos4, S. Philipsen3,8; 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Physiology and Biochemistry, P11.081 University of Malta, Msida, Malta, 2Thalassaemia Clinic, Section of Pathology, A novel mutation in alpha-Actinin-2 responsible for Hypertrophic Mater Dei Hospital, Msida, Malta, 3Erasmus MC, Department of Cell Biology, Cardiomyopathy identified by massively parallel next generation Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pharmacy, University Campus, sequencing University of Patras,, Patras, Greece, 5Cyprus Institute of Neurology and M. Iascone1, S. Bardi2, F. Girolami3, L. Berti3, L. Pezzoli1, F. Cecchi2, I. Olivotto2, Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 6Erasmus MC, Department of Bioinformatics, F. Torricelli2; Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Erasmus MC, Center for Biomics, Rotterdam, 1USSD Medical Genetic Laboratory, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, Italy, Netherlands, 8Netherlands Consortium for Systems Biology, Rotterdam, Bergamo, Italy, 2Referral Center for Myocardial Diseases, Genetic Diagnostic Netherlands, 9Center for Biomedical Genetics, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Unit, Careggi University Hospital, Florence, Italy;, Florence, Italy, 3Referral 10Erasmus MC, Department of Hematology, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Center for Myocardial Diseases, Genetic Diagnostic Unit, Careggi University Reactivating the foetal haemoglobin (HbF) program of development to Hospital, Flore, Florence, Italy. raise the level of HbF in sickle cell disease or β-thalassemia patients Aim of the present study was to evaluate the capacity of sequence would greatly ameliorate the symptoms of these diseases. This can enrichment and next generation sequencing (NGS) to successfully only be achieved by first understanding fully the genetic switch from identify mutations in a large family with an atypical variant of hypertrophic foetal to adult haemoglobin. Substantial progress has recently been cardiomyopathy (HCM). Sequence capture target enrichment and made in this field, however the exact mechanism remains elusive. massively parallel NGS might be particularly advantageous in testing Using a combination of clinical research coupled with basic research for genetically heterogeneous hereditary conditions, such as HCM. using state-of-the-art technologies generated data and knowledge Current diagnostic evaluation proceeds by sequencing a large number that addresses parts of this intricate mechanism. A unique and large of genes, based mainly on the relative frequency of the mutations. In Maltese family with elevated levels of HbF was identified through more than 35% of patients, the pathogenic mutation is unknown even the National Screening Program conducted in Malta. An extensive after very extensive and expensive molecular testing. molecular study revealed a novel mutation in the human EKLF/KLF1 We designed a custom in-solution SureSelect enrichment system transcription factor that was responsible for an overall dominant HbF covering 36 genes. The genes were chosen based on reports of increase in this family from Malta. Gene expression array analysis identified mutations in at least one patient. We tested the proband, an delivered a list of KLF1-target genes that might also be implicated 82 year-old man with a mild, asymmetric LV hypertrophy localized to the in the globin biosynthesis pathway. The same study showed how apex, marked bi-atrial dilatation, restrictive LV filling patter and juvenile BCL11A is developmentally regulated by KLF1 and that diminished onset of atrial fibrillation. After the run on GAIIx and bioinformatics levels of BCL11A as a result of KLF1 haploinsufficiency resulted in analysis, three variants were identified: TTNchr2:17918115C>T; higher HbF levels. A different Maltese family carrying the same p.Arg13823Gln ACTN2 chr1:234961223T>C; p.Met228Thr and mutations has recently been identified, but these individuals displayed MYH3 chr11:47313204C>G; p.Ala1198Thr. Of these, only ACTN2 much lower foetal haemoglobin levels. This suggested the presence chr1:234961223T>C; p.Met228Thr co-segregated with the disease of modifier genes strongly affecting the Hereditary Persistence of manifestations in the proband’s pedigree . Foetal Haemoglobin (HPFH) phenotype in conjunction with the This is the first study that showed the feasibility of using genomic KLF1 mutations and therefore we device methods at the genomic, enrichment by sequence capture followed by NGS to investigate transcriptomic and proteomic levels to identify these modifier genes genetic causes of HCM. Such strategy allows simultaneous, efficient acting in conjuction with KLF1. and low-cost sequencing of all genes implicated in a particular genetic disorder, with potential implications for other monogenic cardiovascular P11.080 disorders. Re-sequencing of human samples: comparing and combining different libraries, sequencing technologies and software tools P11.082 K. A. Stangier, H. Hegele; Loss of function mutations in ZBTB24 cause immunodeficiency, GATC Biotech AG, Konstanz, Germany. centromeric instability and facial anomalies (icF) syndrome type 2 Strategies for sequencing human genomes and transcriptomes need J. C. de Greef1,2,3, J. Wang1,3, J. Balog1, J. T. den Dunnen1, R. R. Frants1, K. to be designed based on the goals of the project. R. Straasheijm1, C. Aytekin4, M. van der Burg5, L. Duprez6, A. Ferster7, A. R. Genomic libraries with small (300 bp) and large(up to 8 kb) inserts Gennery8, G. Gimelli9, I. Reisli10, C. Schuetz11, A. Schulz11, D. F. Smeets12, to identify SNPs and rearrangements can be prepared. Different Y. Sznajer13,14, C. Wijmenga15, M. C. van Eggermond16, M. M. van Ostaijen- enrichment technologies are applied to sequence specific subsets of ten Dam17, A. C. Lankester17, M. J. van Tol17, P. J. van den Elsen16,18, C. M. genes or the whole exon. Weemaes19, S. M. van der Maarel1; Transcribing RNA into cDNA is another procedure for transcriptome 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, analysis.For a quantitative analysis, UTR libraries are used to generate Netherlands, 2Current address: Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Carver expression profiles. Regulatory studies are performed withChIP-, and College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 3These authors Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 367 contributed equally to this work, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatric P11.084 Immunology, Dr. Sami Ulus Children’s Health and Diseases Training and Next generation sequencing in a family with infantile onset Research Center, Ankara, Turkey, 5Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, spinocerebellar ataxia identified a novel missense mutation in University Medical Center Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Department C10orf2 gene of Medical Genetics, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 7Department of H. Dündar1, R. K. Özgül1, D. Yalnızoğlu2, S. E. Özdamar3, D. Tuncel4, N. Paediatrics, Haemato-Oncology Unit, Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Akarsu5, A. Dursun1; Fabiola-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 8Department of Paediatric Immunology, 1Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Nutrition and Metabolism Unit, Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospital, NHS Foundation Trust, and Institute of Cellular Ankara, Turkey, 2Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Neurology Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 9Laboratorio di Unit, Ankara, Turkey, 3Hacettepe University, Department of Neurology, Ankara, Citogenetica, Instituto G. Gaslini, Genove, Italy, 10Department of Immunology Turkey, 4Sütçü İmam University, Department of Neurology, Kahramanmaraş, and Allergy, Selcuk University, Konya, Turkey, 11Department of Pediatrics and Turkey, 5Hacettepe University, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 12Department Infantile Onset Spino Cerebellar Ataxia (IOSCA) is a quietly rare of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, disorders characterized ataxia associated with peripheral sensory Netherlands, 13Pediatric Clinical Genetics and Center for Human Genetics, neuropathy, athetosis, epilepsy, deafness, opthalmoplegia and Hôpital Universitaire des Enfants Reine Fabiola (HUDERF), Brussels, Belgium, optic atrophy, and primary hypogonadism in female. Typically, the 14Current address: Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques Universitaires progressive symptoms developed after upper tract infection in a child St Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 15Genetics Department, University Medical with normal developmental milestones until 9-18 months. Center and Groningen University, Groningen, Netherlands, 16Department of In this study, next generation sequencing together with homozygosity Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center, mapping identified the disease causing mutation in effected individuals Leiden, Netherlands, 17Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical in a Turkish family with spinocerebellar ataxia. Homozygous Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 18Department of Pathology, VU University Medical missense mutation c.1366C>G (L456V) in C10orf2 gene encoding Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 19Department of Paediatric Infectious the Twinkle protein was identified as the disease causing mutation. Diseases and Immunology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The open reading frame of C10orf2 spans five exons and encodes Nijmegen, Netherlands. 684 amino acids Twinkle protein, which is a helicase responsible for Immunodeficiency, centromeric instability and facial anomalies the replication and maintenance of mitochondrial DNA in mammalian syndrome (ICF; MIM 242860) is an autosomal recessive immune cells. While recessive mutations in the C10orf2 gene result in IOSCA disorder that is characterized by recurrent, often fatal, respiratory and and hepatocellular encephalopathy syndrome accompanied by gastrointestinal infections due to greatly reduced serum immunoglobulin mitochondrial depletion, autosomal dominant mutations in the gene levels. About 50% of ICF patients (ICF1) carry mutations in the DNA cause autosomal dominant progressive external ophthalmoplegia methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) gene rendering specific repetitive (adPEO) mainly manifesting itself in adulthood. DNA sequences in their genome hypomethylated. The remaining Pathogenic effect of this amino acid change (L456V) was supported patients carry unknown genetic defects (ICF2), but share with ICF1 by several lines of evidence. Firstly, c.1366C>G nucleotide change patients similar immunological and epigenetic features including was not detected in 150 Turkish individuals and has not been reported hypomethylation of juxtacentromeric heterochromatin regions. By in dbSNP. Secondly, the ClustalW alignment of the amino acid homozygosity mapping and whole exome sequencing we identified sequence indicated that L456V homozygous missense mutation was nonsense mutations in the zinc finger and BTB domain containing 24 at highly conserved position in C10orf2 shown by comparison to the (ZBTB24) gene in four consanguineous ICF2 patients, in an affected corresponding sequence of six vertabrates. Lastly, PolyPhen analysis sibling pair and in one patient of whom consanguineous descent was showed that this amino acid change is possibly damaging on the unknown. function of the protein. ZBTB24 belongs to a large family of transcriptional repressors including members with regulatory roles in hematopoietic development P11.085 and malignancy. By the combinatorial use of FACS analysis and Identification of the IRXB gene cluster as candidate genes in quantitative RT-PCR we demonstrated that ZBTB24 is ubiquitously severe dysgenesis of the ocular anterior segment. expressed in human tissues and cell lines and that the highest M. Chaabouni1,2, H. Etchevers3,4, M. De Blois2, P. Calvas4, M. Waill-Perrier2, M. ZBTB24 mRNA levels are observed in human peripheral blood B cell Vekemans2, S. Romana2; subpopulations, especially in naive B cells. Altogether this argues that 1Department of Hereditary and congenital disorders, Charles Nicolle Hospital, ZBTB24 is not only involved in the methylation of juxtacentromeric Tunis, Tunisia, 2Service de Cytogenetique Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, heterochromatic regions, but that it also regulates the development Paris, France, 3INSERM U781, Hopital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, and/or differentiation of B cells. 4INSERM U563, Hopital Purpan, Toulouse, France. PURPOsE: Anterior segment ocular dysgenesis (ASOD) is a broad P11.083 heterogeneous group of diseases detectable at the clinical and implicit conceptual links in the literature: a large untapped molecular level. In a patient with bilateral congenital ASOD including reservoir of gene discovery aniridia and aphakia, a complex chromosomal rearrangement, inv(2) H. van Haagen; (p22.3q12.1)t(2;16)(q12.1;q12.2), was characterized at the molecular LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. level, to identify candidate genes implicated in ASOD. The published literature and bioinformatic data are growing faster than mEtHODs: After negative sequencing of the PAX6, FOXC1, and individual researchers can track. Text- and data-mining tools have PITX2 genes, we used fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and been developed to retrieve explicit links between pairs of concepts Southern blot analysis to characterize the chromosomal breakpoints. (e.g. genes and disease). However, in addition to explicit links, text Candidate genes were selected, and in situ tissue expression analysis also contains a complex network of indirect (implied) links containing was performed on human fetuses and embryos. useful information. We applied concept profiling to probe this vast REsULts: Molecular analyses showed that the 16q12.2 breakpoint in network of implied information. In a retrospective analysis of 18 gene- this rearrangement occurs in a 625-bp region centromeric to the IRX3 disease relationships, implicit information alone could prioritize the gene, which belongs to the IRXB cluster. In situ hybridization expression causative gene on average within the top 13 out of 200 genes located studies showed that during early human embryonic development, the in a specified linkage interval, at least one year before publication of IRX3 gene is expressed in the anterior segment of the eye. Of interest, the landmark paper. The concepts shared between gene and disease it has been shown previously that a highly conserved noncoding region enabled the evaluation of the plausibility of the inferred relationship. (HCNCR) is located 300 kb centromeric to the IRX3 gene and induces, Of the 40,404,412 possible gene disease pairs, 120,246 (47%, p < in a murine transgenic assay, an expression pattern fitting that of the 0.003) arose exclusively from implicit relations. These results reveal IRX3 gene. an enormous untapped discovery potential in the implied information cONcLUsiONs: The authors propose that the 16q12.2 breakpoint of biomedical literature . of this complex translocation is causally related to the ocular anterior segment dysgenesis observed in this patient. This translocation is assumed to separate the HCNCR from the IRXB cluster genes, thus Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 336688 deregulating the IRXB cluster and leading to the ASOD observed by a Subsequently, in a panel of 75 individuals without previously identified positional effect. EHMT1 mutations, we detected one additional case with a deletion comprising only this 5’ part of the EHMT1 gene and the proximal P11.086 flanking C9orf37. Genetic analysis of a glomerulonephropathy segregating in a These results have important implications for the genetic screening of pedigree of French mastiff patients with Kleefstra syndrome and further studies of the functional G. F. J. S. Battaille1, R. Lavoué2, D. Peeters3, F. Farnir4, M. Georges1, C. significance of EHMT1. Charlier1, A. Lequarré1; 1Animal Genomics Unit, GIGA-R, University of Liège, Liege, Belgium, 22Small P11.088 Animal Medicine, Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, Potential use of quantitative expression profiles of mutated 3Clinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Liège, Liege, Lamin A/c gene as part of the diagnostic work-up of patients Belgium, 4Biostatistics and Bioinformatics applied to veterinary sciences, with dilated cardiolaminopathies University of Liège, Liege, Belgium. N. Narula1, V. Favalli1, P. Tarantino1, A. Pilotto1, M. Grasso1, A. Serio1, F. Human primary glomerulopathies have a high incidence (~6/1000). Gambarin1, R. Bellazzi2, M. Bollati3, E. Arbustini1; Several have suspected or confirmed genetic basis. Implicated genes 1Centre for Inherited Cardiovascular Diseases, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico encode structural proteins such as collagen type IV (Alport syndrome) San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 2Department of Computer Engineering and Systems or the laminin β2. A dozen genes are responsible for alterations of Science, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Department of Biomolecular podocyte function, of which three involved in juvenile disorders Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. (NPHS1, NPHS2 and WT1). Other glomerulopathies have a genetic Introduction: Diagnosis of dilated cardiolaminopathy, characterized component but the causative genes are not yet discovered. by dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) and increased risk of arrhythmias, Juvenile glomerulonephropathy has been reported in a pedigree of is made after sequencing the Lamin A/C (LMNA) gene. Current French Mastiffs. Affected dogs develop symptoms during the first year knowledge regarding myocardial expression of Lamin A/C protein of life with polyuria, polydipsia and signs of azotemia. Diseased dogs and quantitative expression of mutated LMNA in myocardium and are born from clinically healthy parents, without gender predisposition. peripheral blood is very limited. If significant differences in quantitative The proportion of affected dogs within a litter suggests an autosomal expression profile exist amongst DCM patients with mutated LMNA recessive mode of transmission. A genome wide association (GWA) (DCM-LMNA-Mut), DCM patients with wild type LMNA (DCM-LMNA- study using the 50K canine SNPs Affymetrix array on 30 healthy and WT), and normal control individuals (CTRL), this could be important in 10 affected dogs did not reveal any region significantly associated diagnostic work-up of cardiolaminopathies. with the disease. In one chromosome region, however, affected dogs Methods: We performed immunohistochemistry on myocardial carried one of only two haplotypes over a 4Mb segment. Candidate samples from 25 DCM-LMNA-Mut patients and on endomyocardial genes lying within the interval are currently under investigation in biopsies from 20 normal donor hearts, with anti-Lamin A/C antibodies. conjunction with expression studies in kidney samples from affected Mutated LMNA mRNA levels in 20 myocardial and 67 blood samples dogs versus healthy ones. A new genome wide scan with data coming from DCM-LMNA-Mut patients were determined. We examined wild- from the 170K Illumina array is statistically studied at the moment. type LMNA mRNA levels in 20 myocardial and 96 blood samples The genome of two affected dogs (representing the two haplotypes) from DCM-LMNA-WT patients, and 115 blood samples from CTRL has been completely sequenced and the resulting traces are being individuals. analyzed. RNA-seq experiments of affected and healthy kidney Results: Myocardial samples from DCM-LMNA-Mut patients have samples are also in progress. Latest results will be presented. variable loss of protein expression at the nuclear membrane of cardiac myocytes versus DCM-LMNA-WT and CTRL samples. LMNA was P11.087 significantly under-expressed in myocardial samples from DCM-LMNA- characterization of a novel transcript of the EHMT1 gene reveals Mut versus DCM-LMNA-WT patients. In mRNA from peripheral blood, important diagnostic implications for Kleefstra syndrome LMNA was significantly under-expressed in DCM-LMNA-Mut versus W. M. Nillesen1, H. G. Yntema1, M. Moscardo2, N. E. Verbeek3, L. C. Wilson4, F. DCM-LMNA-WT and CTRL individuals, with most under-expression in Cowan5, M. Schepens1, A. Raas-Rothschild6, O. Gafni-Weinstein6, M. Zollino2, splice site, out-of-frame and premature termination codon mutations, R. Vijzelaar7, G. Neri2, M. Nelen1, H. van Bokhoven1, J. Giltay3, T. Kleefstra1; followed by missense and in-frame insertion/deletion mutations. 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute of Medical Conclusions: Loss of protein expression of myocyte nuclei, and Genetics, Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Medical Genetics decreased gene expression in myocardial and peripheral blood UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Clinical Genetics Unit Great Ormond mRNA of DCM-LMNA-Mut patients, reveal that immunohistochemistry Street Hospital for children NHS trust and Institute of Child Health University and gene expression could supplement diagnostic work-up for College, London, United Kingdom, 5Perinatal Neurology Department of cardiolaminopathies. Paediatrics Imperial College Healthcare Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Human Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Hadassah Hebrew P11.089 University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 7MRC Holland bv, Amsterdam, Genotype instability observed in the long term subculture of Netherlands. LcL samples Kleefstra syndrome is characterized by intellectual disability, childhood J. OH, Y. Kim, J. Lee, Y. Cho; hypotonia and a characteristic facial appearance. It can be caused by Korea National Institute of Health, KCDC, Cheongwon-gun, Korea, Republic of. either submicroscopic deletions of 9qter or intragenic loss of function The high-throughput microarray based method for single nucleotide mutations in the EHMT1 gene. Until now, routine DNA diagnostic polymorphism (SNP) genotyping has a great advantage in genome testing for Kleefstra syndrome comprised direct sequencing and wide association studies (GWAS) for identifying human disease MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) analysis of susceptibility loci. Although peripheral blood mononuclear (PBMC) is a the coding region of transcript NM_024757.3. Remarkably, in three major resource to collect genomic DNA for genotyping, the Epstein-Barr patients with a clinical suspicion of Kleefstra syndrome, molecular Virus (EBV)-transformed lymphoblastoid cell line (LCL) is a promising cytogenetic analysis revealed a submicroscopic interstitial 9q deletion alternative choice to overcome the insufficiency of PBMC. To gain proximal to this transcript. Furthermore, by RT-PCR of the transcript insight into the fidelity of SNP array genotyping in using DNA extracted in two of these patients, we found mono-allelic expression of EHMT1. from LCL, we tested genotype stability of LCL at different propagation in agreement with haploinsuffciency of the gene. We therefore stages in terms of cell passages. We genotyped PBMC and LCLs of hypothesized that a deletion of regulatory elements or so far unknown 20 different individuals using Affymetrix SNP 500k genotyping chips. coding sequences in the 5’ region of the EHMT1 gene might result in Six LCL samples for each individual were generated from long-term a phenotype compatible with Kleefstra syndrome. Based on in silico subcultures up to a passage number of 160. We extensively monitored data, it appeared that the N-terminus of the EHMT1 gene was recently the genotype concordance for overall SNPs by comparing identity- updated with an extra exon, and that the first untranslated exon of the by-state (IBS) between PMBC and LCL at each propagation stage, old transcript is now coding exon 2 (NM_024757.4). MLPA analysis by which we were able to profile mismatch rate by chromosome at confirmed that in all 3 cases, this novel 5’ part of EHMT1 was deleted. different propagation stages. Although little difference in genotypes Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 369 between PBMC and LCL samples has been reported previously, that we have chosen considering the role of LMX1B in development of this study detects slightly decreased concordance between PBMC kidney, some districts of the central nervous system, and limb. and LCL samples in old passages. These results suggest that DNA Supported by RFPS-4-631972 grant “Genetic Bases of Birth Defects” isolated from old passage LCL samples (older than passage number from the Italian Ministry of Health. 41) should be avoided for microarray based genotyping. P11.092 P11.090 Analysis of worldwide tandem repeat copy number variation of Evaluation of multiple High Resolution melting (HRm) eight macrosatellite repeats techniques conducted on three commercially available HRm M. Schaap, R. Maassen, P. J. van der Vliet, P. de Knijff, R. J. L. F. Lemmers, S. platforms. M. van der Maarel; M. D. Poulson, R. Lems, M. Wall, C. Gundry, R. Crisp; Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Idaho Technology, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Netherlands. introduction: HRM is a genetic screening tool that allows investigators Macrosatellite repeats (MSR) comprise a significant proportion of to rapidly detect, identify and focus on samples with relevant mutations the human genome, usually spanning hundreds of kilobases of before they proceed to expensive and time consuming traditional or genomic DNA. Because of their highly polymorphic nature, MSR next generation sequencing. This study used diverse HRM methods to represent an extreme example of copy number variation, but their compare three HRM capable platforms. structure and function is largely understudied. This study comprises methods: A suite of assays highlighting different HRM techniques, the genetic analysis of six autosomal and two X chromosomal MSR mutation scanning, small amplicon genotyping (SAG) and unlabeled of HapMap individuals representing Caucasian, Asian and African probe genotyping, were optimized on three HRM platforms: the populations. Tandem repeat copy number variation and stability of LightScanner® (Idaho Technology, Inc.) / Eppendorf MasterCycler the autosomal macrosatellite repeats RS447 (chromosome 4p), Realplex2 (Eppendorf), the LightCycler® 480 (Roche), and the 7500 MSR5p (5p), FLJ40296 (13q), RNU2 (17q) and D4Z4 (4q and 10q) Fast DX (ABI). The assays used LightScanner mastermix and High and X chromosomal CT47 and DXZ4 were investigated. Repeat Sensitivity mastermix that include the double stranded DNA dye array size distributions show that these MSR are highly polymorphic LCGreen®Plus (Idaho Technology, Inc.). with the highest genetic variation among Africans and the least Results: All platforms were able to differentiate the mutations in genetic variation among Asians. A mitotic mutation rate of 0.4-1.5% the LIPC (Scanning) and Human THO1 (SAG) assays and detected was observed, explaining the high size variability found for MSR. down to 10% allele fractions in the ADH4 (LunaProbe) assay. All Multimodal distribution patterns show that MSR are organized in a three platforms were able to distinguish between heterozygous and higher order structure. This study extends our knowledge about MSR homozygous samples in the CPS1 (SAG) class 4 SNP assay. The regarding array size variation and behavior at the population level. LightScanner was also able to differentiate the two homozygous Considering that MSR are large repeat arrays, highly polymorphic and samples. The LightScanner correctly grouped all three genotypes of can cover large regions of the genome, it is imperative to get a better the OTC class 4 SNP (LunaProbe) assay while the other instruments understanding of their structure and function. Indeed, this extreme could not group the heterozygous samples. With the HFE (Multiplex form of copy number variation may well explain some of the missing LunaProbe) assay, the LightScanner correctly separated each group heritability observed in genome-wide association studies. of samples while the other platforms could not. conclusions: All three systems performed HRM well. The P11.093 Lightscanner/Realplex platform provided more precise mutation FBN1 gene expression in marfan syndrome: a Rt-qPcR study. discovery, differentiation and genotyping of difficult target regions V. Favalli, B. De Giorgio, M. Grasso, N. Narula, L. Gesa, C. Canclini, E. including class 4 SNPs. Disabella, F. I. Gambarin, A. Serio, E. Arbustini; IRCCS Policlinico, Pavia, Italy. P11.091 Background LmX1B expression in tissues and splicing isoform detection Marfan Syndrome (MFS) is caused by defects of the Fibrillin 1 gene M. MARINI1, M. Di Duca2, A. Puliti3, T. Bachetti1, F. Giacopelli3, R. Bocciardi3,1, (FBN1). We investigated the quantitative expression of FBN1 mRNA P. Seemann4, S. Vainio5, M. Rastaldi6, R. Ravazzolo1,3; in total RNA isolated from blood samples of MFS patients with FBN1 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, mutations. 2Laboratory of Physiopathology of Uremia, G. Gaslini Institute, Genoa, GENOA, Methods Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics and CEBR, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, Quantitative real-time reverse transcription-PCR was performed in 203 4Charite, University of Berlin,, Berlin, Germany, 5Laboratory of Developmental mutated vs. 80 wild type subjects. First-strand cDNA was synthesized Biology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 6Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale from RNA according to the cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit protocol Maggiore Policlinico and Fondazione D’Amico per la Ricerca sulle Malattie (Applied Biosystems, FosterCity, CA, USA) with three replicas for each Renali,, Milan, Italy. sample. Analysis was performed using Applied Biosystems 7900HT LMX1B protein is a member of the LIM-homeodomain family of Real-Time PCR on FBN1 cDNA using Hs00153462_m1 probe. Beta transcription factors, containing two zinc-finger LIM domains and actin (ACTb, Hs99999903_m1) was selected as the housekeeping a homeodomain. It is encoded by LMX1B gene (MIM 602575), gene (HGK). Difference in gene expression was calculated by fold responsible for Nail-patella syndrome (NPS, MIM#161200), a rare change ratio dividing mean 2^-DeltaCt value in mutated/control autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a classic clinical tetrad individuals. Subgroups were generated based on age and mutation of changes in the nails, knees, elbows, iliac horns and in 40% of cases type. Statistical significance was assessed by the Mann Whitney test renal involvement. for unpaired data (alpha=0.05, STATA 10). A major problem in studying the human LMX1B gene is its scarce or Results null expression in adult tissues. We were able to detect expression of FBN1 gene expression declined with age in both cases (31% less in LMX1B in the cells of hair follicle and urine cells pelleted. MFS adults than children, p=0.03) and controls (65% less in adults Our previous work demonstrated the presence of two isoforms of than children, p<0.01). FBN1 gene showed 53% (p<0.01) and 76% LMX1B, differing for seven aminoacids, due to alternative splicing in (p<0.01) underexpression in MFS adults and children, respectively vs. exon 7. Here we present analysis of different cell types in human and age-matched controls, irrespective by mutations type. mouse, showing difference of expression of the two isoforms, that in-frame premature could be due to cell specific difference in the mecchanism of splicing Missense Insertion/Deletion termination codon Splice site and could reflect their differential functional roles. Children 55% 56% 57% 61% In order to investigate on the biological role of isoforms, we have (N=95) (p<0.01) (p=0.05) (p<0.01) (p=0.02) investigated difference in cellular localization and evaluated their effect Adults 75% 74% 77% 76% on regulation of trasciptional activity by measure of the luciferase reporter (N=108) (p<0.01) (p=0.03) (p<0.01) p<0.01) gene, controlled by regulatory sequences of different LMX1B putative target genes, like Podocin, WNT4, PXO2A, PHOX2B, and ACVR1 Table 1: FBN1 underexpression group by mutaton typeGenomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 337700 Conclusions P11.096 Defects of FBN1 are associated with significantly lower FBN1 mRNA Four patients with overlapping microdeletions in 9q33.3-q34.1 levels in peripheral blood, irrespective of the type of the mutation in associated with developmental delay and micro- / brachycephaly both children and adults. J. A. Lee1,2, E. Wohlleber1, S. Vogt1, A. M. Zink1, E. Rossier3,4, M. Bonin3,5, U. Grasshoff3, A. Bevot6, M. Mathieu7, A. de Broca8, S. Kanafani7, M. Holder- P11.094 Espinasse9, I. Simonic10, L. Willatt10, J. Andrieux11, H. V. Firth10, A. Dufke3, H. Practical tools to implement massively parallel pyrosequencing Engels1; of PcR products in next generation molecular diagnostics 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department K. De Leeneer1, J. De Schrijver2, L. Clement3, M. Baetens1, S. Lefever1, S. of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, De Keulenaer4, W. Van Criekinge4,2, D. Deforce4,5, F. Van Nieuwerburgh4,5, S. 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Bekaert4, F. Pattyn1, B. De Wilde1, P. Coucke1,4, J. Vandesompele1,4, K. Claes1, Germany, 4Genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 5Microarray Facility, University of J. Hellemans1,4; Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 6Children’s Hospital, University of Tübingen, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, Tübingen, Germany, 7Centre de Génétique, CHU d’Amiens, France, 8Service 2Biobix, laboratorium for Bioinformatics and computational genomics, Ghent, de Neuropédiatrie, CHU d’Amiens, France, 9Service de Génétique Clinique, Belgium, 3Biostat, Department of Applied Mathematics, Biometrics and Process Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, France, 10Department of Medical Control, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 4NXTGNT, Ghent University, Ghent, Genetics, Addenbrooke’s Hospital NHS Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Belgium, 5Laboratory for Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Ghent University, 11Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Ghent, Belgium. Lille, France. Despite improvements in terms of sequence quality and price per We report four patients with overlapping microdeletions identified by basepair, Sanger sequencing remains restricted to screening of molecular karyotyping using various array platforms. Their common individual disease genes. The development of massively parallel clinical features include developmental delay with delayed or absent sequencing (MPS) technologies heralded an era in which molecular speech and micro- and/or brachycephaly. diagnostics for multigenic disorders becomes reality. Here, we outline In patients 1 through 3, de novo deletions of 1.76 Mb, 1.3 Mb, and different PCR amplification based strategies for the screening of 2.8 Mb, respectively, in 9q33.3-q34.11 have been detected. Patient 4 a multitude of genes in a patient cohort. We performed a thorough has a maternally inherited deletion of ~432 kb spanning 9q33.3. Her evaluation in terms of set-up, coverage and sequencing variants on mother is reported to have mild intellectual disability. the data of 10 GS-FLX experiments (over 200 patients). Crucially, we The smallest region of overlap of the deletions is defined by the determined the actual coverage that is required for reliable diagnostic deletion of patient 4 and her mother and includes only three RefSeq results using MPS, and provide a tool to calculate the number of genes. Interestingly, the three larger deletions in patients 1, 2, and 3 patients that can be screened in a single run. Finally, we provide an have 27 genes in common including STXBP1, which is predominantly overview of factors contributing to false negative or false positive expressed in brain and plays a role in synaptic transmission. STXBP1 mutation calls and suggest ways to maximize sensitivity and specificity, loss-of-function mutations and deletions have been associated both important in a routine setting. with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE, or Ohtahara By describing practical strategies for screening of multigenic disorders syndrome), and were identified in patients with intellectual disability in a multitude of samples and providing answers to questions about and non-syndromic epilepsy. Neither patient 1 nor 2 presented with minimum required coverage, the number of patients that can be seizures, although an EEG of patient 2 gave pathological results. screened in a single run and the factors that may affect sensitivity and Thus, the seizure phenotype appears to be incompletely penetrant. specificity we hope to facilitate the implementation of MPS technology Notably, patient 4 presented with epilepsy, although her deletion in molecular diagnostics. excludes STXBP1. Thus, the involvement of STXBP1 and/or possibly other genes due to deletion of long range regulatory elements cannot P11.095 be ruled out. chromothripsis as a mechanism driving complex de novo We suggest that deletions of this region on chromosome 9q may cause structural rearrangements in the germline epilepsy of incomplete penetrance and a clinical spectrum including W. Kloosterman1, V. Guryev2, E. van Binsbergen1, M. Tavakoli1, M. van developmental delay concerning especially speech, micro- and / or Roosmalen1, K. Duran1, E. de Bruijn1, S. Bakker3, T. Letteboer1, B. van brachycephaly, and mild dysmorphisms. Nesselrooij1, R. Hochstenbach1, M. Poot1, E. Cuppen1; 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute, P11.097 Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Gelre Hospital, Apeldoorn, Netherlands. clinical routine implementation of custom a-cGH in the A variety of mutational mechanisms shape the dynamic architecture diagnosis of patients with psychomotor development delay and/ of human genomes and occasionally result in congenital defects or mild-severe mental retardation and disease. We have developed an efficient experimental and E. Vallespin1,2, M. Palomares1,2, S. Garcia-Miñaur1,2, F. Santos1,2, M. A. Mori1,2, bioinformatics platform to systematically analyze de novo and inherited A. Delicado1,2, M. L. De Torres1,2, L. Fernandez1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, F. A. Garcia- structural variation by using genome-wide long mate-pair sequencing in Santiago1,2, M. C. Crespo1, P. D. Lapunzina1,2, J. Nevado1,2; families, which include offspring with severe congenital abnormalities. 1INGEMM-IdiPaz (HULP), MADRID, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. The resolution for detection of structural variation allows reconstruction introduction: The use of array-CGH (comparative genomic of chromosomal rearrangements at nucleotide precision. We identified hybridization) in clinical routine is already a common practice in and characterized simple de novo structural changes as well as many countries. We report the implementation in clinical routine of a complex series of inter- and intra-chromosomal rearrangements custom genome-wide high resolution oligonucleotide aCGH-platform, consisting of multiple breakpoints involving different chromosomes. previously validated (KaryoArray® v3.0), for the study of patients Detailed inspection of breakpoint regions for complex rearrangements with psychomotor development delay and/or mild to severe mental indicated that in some cases series of simultaneous double-stranded retardation. DNA breaks caused local shattering of chromosomes. Fusion of the methods: A prospective study of 100 strictly selected patients with resulting chromosomal fragments involved non-homologous end- psychomotor development delay and/or deficit cognitive were carried joining since junctions displayed limited or no sequence homology out. Patients with one or more of the following associated findings: and small insertions and deletions. The pattern of random joining structural defects (heart, kidney); facial dysmorphic features; hypo/ of shattered chromosomal fragments that we observed for some de over-growth disorders; macro/microcephaly; family history of mental novo rearrangements, strongly resembles the somatic rearrangement retardation. In addition these patients had: karyotype, molecular study patterns - termed chromothripsis - that have recently been described of FRAXA and MLPA of subtelomere regions and recurrent-genomic- in deranged cancer cells. We conclude that a similar mechanism may disorders done previously, with normal results. To end this, we also drive the formation of de novo structural variation in the germline. selected 60-mer oligonucleotide features from Agilent’s eArray_v4.0 probe library in a custom format of 8x60K (KaryoArray®), covering more than 350 microdeleción/microduplicación syndromes, as well as telomeric/centromeric regions with a resolution from 1 kb in the regions Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 371 of interest, with an average density of 7 Kb. The average density of the (epi)genetic disturbances identified in previous analyses by other probe coverage is 43Kb. techniques. In all cases, the aberrant methylation was confirmed by Results: we identified in ~30% of these patients at least one genomic the newly developed MS-SNuPE approaches. imbalance responsible for its phenotype. Discussion: The implementation of use of KaryoArray® in patients P11.100 with unexplained development delay/intellectual disability and MCAs MicroRNA expression profiling and bioinformatic analysis in offers a much higher diagnostic yield than karyotype and/or currently human myocardial infarction with focus on innate immunity and available platforms for this selected cohort of patients. We highly ventricular rupture recommend such kind of aCGH-platform as the first-tier test for E. Boštjančič1, N. Zidar2, D. Štajer3, D. Glavač1; individuals with development disabilities or congenital anomalies. 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Granted by Redes/FIBHULP08 2Institute of Pathology, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Centre for Intensive Internal Medicine, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia. P11.098 Recent studies have indicated the role of microRNAs in various forms methylation of mitochondrial D loop in twins of cardiovascular disease, but little is known about the genome-wide M. Szalata1,2, A. Kalabuk1, M. Waszak3, K. Cieslik3, K. Wielgus4, M. Nawrocki5, microRNAs expression profile in human myocardial infarction (MI). B. Siemieniako1, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska2, M. Podralska2, A. Seremak- After MI, innate immunity is activated leading to an acute inflammatory Mrozikiewicz6, R. Slomski1,2; reaction. An intensive inflammatory reaction might contribute to the 1Poznan University of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Institute of Human development of ventricular rupture (VR), as well as some microRNAs Genetics PAS, Poznan, Poland, 3University School of Physical Education, have influence on the innate immune response. Based on this Poznan, Poland, 4Institute of Natural Fibres and Medicinal Plants, Poznan, knowledge, we further analyzed microRNAs in MI patients with and Poland, 5Combined Voivodeship Hospital, Kalisz, Poland, 6Poznan University of without VR. There were 60 patients with MI and 10 healthy adults. Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. Using microarrays, microRNAs expression was analyzed on human MI DNA methylation constitutes an epigenetic DNA modification and compared to healthy adult hearts. Results were validated using qPCR. plays important cell function through changes in gene expression. In MicroRNAs target prediction was performed in silico (TargetScan, mammalian cells methylation is catalysed by DNA methyltransferase miRanda), and further subjected to functional classification (DAVID). and covalent binding of the methyl group to cytidine is most common. Of 719 microRNAs analyzed, 57 were confidently dysregulated; many Usually it is the cytosine residue situated 5’ in relation to guanosine in of them were not previously related to cardiovascular disease. For 5 CpG dinucleotides that undergoes methylation. Methylation appears microRNAs 37 target genes were predicted, some of them have been also in mitochondrial genome. Due to unique twin genetics, group of already shown to be involved in microRNAs network. qPCR analysis twins has been studied as an ideal subject for observations of epigenetic confirmed dysregulation of miR-150, miR-186, miR-210, miR-451, changes. Still, so far no wide range analysis of mtDNA in twins has miR-34a, miR-146a, miR-155, miR-1, miR-133a/b, and miR-208. been reported. In this study the analysis of mitochondrial DNA D-loop Comparison of MI patients with VR to those without VR revealed in group of newborn twins was performed. Level of DNA methylation in miR-146a up-regulation, and miR-150/miR-155 down-regulation. miR- collected samples was estimated using sodium bisulphite assay which 146a, miR-150, and miR-155 have been described to play a role in leads to a change of 5mC>C and C>U, followed by a PCR reaction and the regulation of the innate immunity. Their differential expression in pyrosequencing using PyroQ-CpGT software. Using this approach MI patients with VR compared to those without VR provides further quantitative analysis was possible and revealed differences in DNA evidence that innate immunity and intense inflammatory reaction play methylation of CpG in mtDNA D-loop. Different levels of methylation an important role in the VR pathogenesis after MI in humans. were observed within dizygotic and also monozygotic twins pairs and seems to be related to heteroplasmy of mitochondrial genome. In most P11.101 cases methylation was not observed. Differential expression profile of miRNA in human bloods from This work was supported by the grant N N303 457238 from the Ministry preterm infants and adults of Science and Higher Education C. Y. Lai1,2, S. L. Yu2,3, C. M. Liu4, W. S. Hsieh5, Y. T. Wu6, H. G. Hwu1,4, S. F. Jeng6,7, W. J. Chen1,2,4; P11.099 1Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, College of Public ms-sNuPE as a diagnostic tool for the detection of aberrant Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Genetic Epidemiology methylation patterns in growth retarded patients Core Laboratory, Center of Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University, M. Begemann, I. Leisten, T. Eggermann, S. Spengler; Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences and Medical Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Biotechnology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, Germany. 4Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine and National Taiwan University In the last decade the crucial role of imprinted genes in human growth Hospital, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Department of Pediatrics, and development has become evident. A number of diseases have National Taiwan University Hospital College of Medicine, College of Medicine, been found to be directly linked to aberrant methylation of specific National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 6School and Graduate Institute loci including Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS), Beckwith-Wiedemann of Physical Therapy, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, syndrome (BWS) and Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus (TNDM). Taiwan, 7Physical Therapy Center, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, A considerable fraction of SRS, BWS and TNDM patients shows Taiwan. aberrant methylation at other than the disease specific loci (multilocus Accumulating evidence suggests a role for microRNAs (miRNAs) in methylation defects - MLMD). To identify epigenetic changes a number regulating various age-related diseases and human aging. However, of methods have been described. MS-MLPA and MS-PCR as well as little is known about the changes of miRNA expression before and after MS-pyrosequencing and bisulfite sequencing are meanwhile well adulthood. The aim of the study is to investigate whether there are established methods. However, they are either time-consuming and/or differential expression in miRNAs between infants and adults, and then labor intensive or complex to establish. It is therefore necessary to have explore the possible biological functions of these miRNAs. We profiled simply adjustable assays to analyze different loci with the possibility the expression of 365 miRNAs in peripheral blood mononuclear cells of direct quantification in single-tube reaction formats available. from preterm infants (n=30) and adults (n=60, age ranging from 21 to Based on the AB Prism® SNaPhot technology we established MS- 60) using real-time RT-PCR analysis. This genome-wide assessment SNuPE (methylation-specific single nucleotide primer extension) of miRNA expression revealed that the majority of differentially approaches to analyze the methylation status of several imprinted loci expressed miRNAs increased in adults. Among 365 miRNAs, 228 and to elucidate applicability of MS-SNuPE in research and routine (62.5%) were detectable in the more than half of the peripheral diagnostic. We chose the loci of GRB10, MEST, IGF2R, H19, LIT1, mononuclear cells in the samples of either adults or preterm-infants. DLK1/GTL2 (chromosomes 6, 7, 11, 14) because methylation of these Among these miRNAs, there were 22 miRNAs expressed in the differentially methylated regions is frequently disturbed in MLMD. adults’ group only, and one (has-miR-325) is specific to the preterm- The method was validated by screening a cohort of probands with infants. For the remaining 205 miRNAs, 101 differentially expressed Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 337722 between the two groups (p<0.00024 with bonferroni correction), in fast, and scalable technology for transcriptome analysis using which 81 miRNAs were up-regulated in adults and 20 were down- established RNA-Seq library methodology. regulated in preterm-infants samples. Finally, these differentially expressed miRNAs were subjected to the knowledge-base software of P11.104 ingenuity pathway analyses (IPA, version 8.8) and found that the most Plasma mir-155, mir-21 and mir-126 expression profiling in significantly associated biological networks were reproductive system patients with cerebrovascular accident (cVA) disease, cellular assembly and organization, and nervous system I. V. Iancu1, A. Botezatu1, M. Anton2, I. Huica1, E. Lupeanu3, G. Anton1; development. The results indicated that approximately one third of the 1 “Stefan S Nicolau” Institute of Virology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Coltea” Clinical miRNAs was modulated from infant to adulthood, and the implication Hospital, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 3 “Ana in human development warrants further investigation. Aslan” Institute of Geriatric and Gerontology, Bucharest, Romania. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous 21-25 nucleotides in length P11.102** RNAs involved in the ethiopathology of various diseases. Recently, Identification of trait- and disease-relevant genetic plasma miRNAs have been reported to be sensitive and specific polymorphisms in miRNA target sites biomarkers of various tissue injuries and pathological conditions. S. Busche1, M. Georges2, T. M. Pastinen1; miRNAs have distinct expression patterns in stroke etiology, that 1McGill University and Genome Quebec Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, modulate pathogenic processes including atherosclerosis (miR- Canada, 2University of Liege, Liege, Belgium. 21, miR-126), hyperlipidemia (miR-33, miR-125a-5p), hypertension MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are ~22 nucleotide long noncoding RNAs that (miR-155), and plaque rupture (miR-222, miR-210). The aim of this regulate the expression and function of eukaryotic genomes by acting study was to evaluate some circulating miRNAs expression in plasma as adaptors to specifically recognize and degrade targeted mRNAs. patients with cerebrovascular accident (CVA). Blood samples were Candidate studies suggest that genetic polymorphisms in miRNA collected from patients with cardio-vascular disease (CVD) (n=30, target sites (poly-miRTS) are associated with various disorders like aged 57-86 years old, mean = 71.5) who presented hypertension and Tourette’s syndrome, hypertension, or the risk to develop breast hyperlipidemia, and from healthy subjects (n=10, aged 20-53 years old, cancer. We aim to create a genome-wide catalogue of poly-miRTS mean = 35.96). 12/30 of the CVD patients presented stroke. Total RNA to provide the fundamental basis for the characterization of miRNA- was extracted from plasma using Trizol reagent. Plasma expression of related genetic alterations with an impact on human traits and disease, target miRNAs (miR-126, 21 and 155) were assessed by a Real-Time and to unravel the mechanisms of action of some causal poly-miRTS. RT-PCR using TaqMan MicroRNA Assays (ABI). Statistical analysis To identify poly-miRTS in a genome-wide scale, we will monitor RNA was performed using Mann-Whitney test. qPCR assessment revealed levels and differences in allelic expression (AE) with and without lower plasma levels of miR-21, and miR-126 in CVA group of patients active miRNA gene regulation. To shutdown miRNA-mediated gene as compared to non-CVA and to the controls. Further evaluation of regulation we interfere with the miRNA processing machinery by the miRNA levels in plasma from CVA patients (n =12) demonstrated silencing Drosha, DGCR8, and/or Exportin-5. Importantly, interference that miR-155 levels were substantially lower than those from patients with any of these genes is not expected to prevent siRNA processing. with non-CVA (n = 18, P < 0.03) or healthy people (n = 10, P < 0.01). Our present results show that silencing any single gene within the The results revealed a significantly reduced plasma concentration of miRNA machinery does not substantially inhibit the level of mature miR-155 in CVA patients indicating it as a potential biomarker for CVA. miRNAs. However, successful silencing of Drosha and Exportin-5 leads to a 50% reduction of mature miRNAs. Initial RNA-sequencing and P11.105 SNP genotyping experiments are underway. To circumvent off-target sm2PH-kb: a novel tool for the integrated study of human effects in assessing the global impact of silencing miRNA expression missense variants to phenotypes relationships we will monitor genome-wide differences in allelic rather than total T. Luu1, N. Nguyen1, A. Friedrich2, J. Muller1, L. Moulinier1, J. Mandel1, O. gene expression. We anticipate that this effectively eliminates non- Poch1; specific effects and allows focusing on interaction of miRNA binding 1IGBMC, Illkirch Graffenstaden, France, 2Department of Genetics, Genomics and genetic variants at binding sites. and Microbiology, Strasbourg, France. Understanding how genetic alterations affect gene products at the P11.103 molecular level represents a first step in the elucidation of the complex Profiling miRNA using semicondutor sequencing technology on relationships between genotypic and phenotypic variations, and is the Personal Genome machine thus a major challenge in the postgenomic era. SM2PH-kb (http:// K. Bramlett, J. Schageman, L. Qu, S. Heater, J. Myers, B. Setterquist; decrypthon.igbmc.fr/sm2ph) is the second generation of our tool Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States. designed to investigate structural and functional impacts of missense RNA-Seq technology has become widely utilized as a tool to variants and their phenotypic effects in the context of human genetic understand the transcriptome of a given experimental system. This diseases (Friedrich et al Hum Mutat. 2010). We present our recent method utilizes next generation sequencing platforms to sequence and future developments together with a practical example (Audo et a cDNA library in order to gain information about the RNA content al Arch Ophthalmol. 2010) on how SM2PH-kb can be used to analyse and transcriptional status of an experimental system. Profiling the genotype to phenotype relations. transcriptome of a system in this way has become an invaluable tool Up-to-date interconnected information is provided for each of the in many genomic studies. 2,375 disease-related entries including data retrieved from biological The Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM™) utilizes databases (e.g. STRING networks, KEGG pathways, BioGPS tissue revolutionary technology, simplifying next generation sequencing gene expression) and data generated from evolutionary inference instrumentation in order to make this technique available to a wider in biological networks (e.g. multiple alignments, 3D structural group of individuals beyond the basic researcher. The PGM™ models). The 18,700 recorded disease causing mutations have now instrument combines semiconductor technology with simplified been complemented by the 143,000 missense SNPs from dbSNP chemistry including natural nucleotides and no enzymatic cascades (release 132). The introduction of the Inductive Logic Programming to create a simple and scalable sequencing platform devoid of the allowed us to automatically, extract knowledge from these data and need for expensive and complicated optics and imaging capabilities. generate classification rules. This will guide human experts to improve This new sequencing platform has successfully provided genomic our understanding of the relationships between physico-chemical information for multiple DNA based applications, such as amplicon and evolutionary features and deleterious mutations. This leads to sequencing, in record time. improved prediction of functional effect and pathogenicity of submitted Here we report the first RNA-Seq libraries analyzed on the Ion Torrent missense variations. PGM™ instrument. The miRNA content of multiple RNA types was SM2PH-kb provides a robust infrastructure, interactive analysis profiled using novel RNA library preparation reagents. Resulting cDNA tools supporting in-depth study and interpretation of the molecular libraries were sequenced on the PGM™ in record time providing consequences of mutations, with the more long-term goal of elucidating valuable information on the transcriptome of the interrogated RNAs. variants pathogenicity. This is the first demonstration of the Ion Torrent PGM™ as a simple, Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 373 P11.106 P11.108 Potentials and pitfalls of mitochip v.2.0 in the diagnostic of mutation Hotspot - a web application for mutation mining in mitochondrial encephalomyopathies publicly available exome sequences V. Remenyi1, G. Inczedy-Farkas1, T. Kalmar2, S. Spisak3, B. Bereznai1, A. Gal1, S. Rudd, R. Hercus, T. Liang Chung, L. Chiew Mui, H. Kim Fong, C. Soo Meng, I. Rasko2, M. J. Molnar1; M. Kumar, I. Maarif; 1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology Semmelweis University, Malaysia Genomics Resource Centre Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Budapest, Hungary, 2Developmental Genetics Lab Genetics Institute BRC, Genome and exome sequencing has become affordable and, within Szeged, Hungary, 32nd Department of Medicine, Semmelweis University of clinical research projects, it is now reasonable to perform whole Medicine, Budapest, Hungary. genome or exome sequencing for moderately sized cohorts of Background: The identification of mitochondrial disorders due to individuals. Sequence reads from a variety of sequencing technologies mutations mtDNA is difficult because the lack of phenotype-genotype are mapped to a reference genome and the analysis of the systematic correlation and mutation hot spots in the mitochondrial genome. To differences relative to the reference and those shared by different verify an mtDNA disease the whole mtDNA should have been analyzed. project subjects may be used to identify rare novel gene variants, Methods: Ten patients with neurological and psychiatric symptoms genes associated with disease or to characterise finer patterns of have been investigated. The whole mtDNA was resequenced by genomic context. MitoChip 2.0 (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The assignment of meaning and the identification of patterns within The doubtful SNPs detected by the MitoChip were controlled by the data are complicated by the large volumes of complex data. To bidirectional sequencing with ABI Prism 3100 sequencing machine. simplify the process of identifying different classes of variation, we Result: In 1 case a pathogenic heteroplasmic mtDNA substitution have implemented a web-accessible database system for the mining A12770G (Glu145Gly) was detected in the ND5 gene. In the other 9 of sequence variation. Starting with primary sequence read data from cases many synonym and non-synonym mutations were present .We publicly available exomes, we mapped the reads to a reference human found 7 unclassified variants in 5 cases. In 2 patients with psychiatric genome. By applying scoring algorithms to the sequence variations symptoms, axonal neuropathy a unique SNP combination was found characterised within individual exomes, mutations can be filtered on which was described previously predisposing for breast cancer the basis of confidence scores. The total variation has been loaded and AMD. The haplotype of these patients were: T2, J1c2. These into a relational database. haplogroups harbor substitutions capable of modifying the phenotype Simple user interfaces provide functionality to identify the patterns of LHON. One of our patients with epilepsy and schizophrenia of variation, namely, those that are common to groups of individuals, had haplogroup D4j containing SNPs previously associated with those that contrast groups of individuals, and can be used further hypoacusis, schizophrenia, LHON. Six of our patients had the typical to identify the polymorphisms that appear unique within individuals. Hungarian haplogroups (H5, H4, H1, R0, U4). On the base of the Genes containing variations, genes enriched for multiple variations MitoChip sequenogram about 22% of the presumed heteroplasmic and genes belonging to functionally related gene sets are linked to mtDNA mutations couldn’t verified with bidirectional sequencing. external databases so that the meaning and relevance of specific Discussion: We conclude that MitoChip v2.0. is a quick method variations can be assessed. determining the mtDNA haplotypes and disease modifying homoplasmic SNPs and SNP combinations. To justify the pathogenic P11.109 heteroplasmic mutations in the mtDNA the bidirectional sequencing is mitochondrial proteins are responsible for Neurodegeneration crucial. with Brain iron Accumulation (NBiA). S. Dusi1, C. Giorgi2, D. Brunetti1, H. Hama3, P. Pinton2, V. Tiranti1; P11.107 1IRCCS Foundation Neurological Institute C. Besta, MIlan, Italy, 2Department mUtALYZER 2: improved sequence Variant Descriptions from of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Section of General Pathology, next generation sequencing data and locus-specific mutation Interdisciplinary Center for the Study of Inflammation (ICSI) and LTTA center, databases Ferrara, Italy, 3Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical J. Laros, M. Vermaat, G. Stouten, J. den Dunnen, P. Taschner; University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, United States. Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. Neurodegeneration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) comprises Unambiguous and correct sequence variation descriptions are of a group of neurodegenerative disorders characterized by brain iron utmost importance, not in the least since mistakes and uncertainties deposition and presence of axonal spheroids. Pantothenate Kinase may lead to undesired errors in clinical diagnosis. The free Mutalyzer Associated Neurodegeneration (PKAN) and Infantile Neuroaxonal sequence variation nomenclature checker (www.mutalyzer.nl/) names Dystrophy (INAD) are the most frequent forms of the disease and are all sequence variants following the Human Genome Variation Society due to mutations in PANK2, coding for Pantothenate Kinase 2, and sequence variant nomenclature recommendations (www.hgvs.org/ PLA2G6, coding for a calcium independent phospholipase. Recently, mutnomen), using a GenBank or Locus Region Genomic (LRG) mutations in an additional gene dubbed FA2H and coding for a accession number, a HGCN gene symbol and the sequence variant Fatty Acid 2-Hydroxylase were found in two families with symptoms as input. Mutalyzer 2 has new functionality lacking in the commercial resembling NBIA. Alamut tool used by many DNA diagnostic labs. Mutalyzer generates Several findings indicate that PANK2 and PLA2G6 are localized into an output containing a description of the sequence variant at DNA mitochondria, although it is not completely clear in which compartment. level, the effect on all annotated transcripts, its deduced outcome at In addition, although the putative localization of FA2H was reported to protein level and gains or losses of restriction enzyme recognition be into the Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER), software prediction for this sites. Mutalyzer facilitates batch-wise conversion from dbSNP rsIDs or protein scores high for mitochondrial localization. chromosomal position numbering used in next generation sequencing Objective of this work is to establish the PANK2 and PLA2G6 sub- data to transcript position numbering, as well as checking of sequence mitochondrial localization and to test the hypothesis that the FA2H variant descriptions in locus-specific mutation databases (LSDBs). protein could also be located in this organelle. Mutalyzer is also used to quickly check new variant submissions in We here demonstrated that the three known proteins involved in NBIA LSDBs based on LOVD software (www.LOVD.nl/). The new Name are indeed located into mitochondria with the FA2H being present Generator can be used to train your self to generate correct HGVS also in the ER. These data indicate that communication between descriptions. New webservices also support the use of Mutalyzer’s mitochondria and ER is crucial during the transfer of essential lipids functionality from other computer programs. and underline the important role of these organelles and lipids Funded in part by the European Community’s Seventh Framework metabolism in causing the disease. Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement nº 200754 - the GEN2PHEN project.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 337744 P11.110 2University of Verona, Department of Biotechnology, Verona, Italy. Parallel copy number variation and sequence variation detection The millions of short sequences (reads) generated by next-generation with next generation sequencing (NGs) sequencing (NGS) platfroms can be used for a wide range applications C. Haag1, E. Schulze1, M. Schanz1, J. Strub2, F. Raue1; including genomewide measurement of gene expression levels 1Endocrine Practice, Heidelberg, Germany, 2JSI Medical Systems GmbH, (RNAseq), detection of RNA or DNA sequence variations and DNA Kippenheim, Germany. rearragments. Large genomic duplications and deletions have been recognized as We were interested in detecting non annotated junctions sequences pathogenic mutations for many years. Therefore the determination (JS) at DNA or RNA level. There are several bioinformatic tools of gene dosage in combination with the sequence variation detection (tophat; MMES; gmap; GSNAP) that can do that. However they becomes very important in clinical medicine. generally suggest a huge amount JSs that have to be verified. A first We describe a method for the simultaneous mutation and copy number validation step can be conducted in silico generating all the sequences variation (CNV) detection with next generation sequencing (GS Junior, corresponding to a JS. If several reads map on a JS, then we have a Roche). first indication that the JS suggested by the bioinformatic tools is likely We developed a two-step multiplex PCR for the amplification of all to be a true JS. Therefore we developed a computer program able to coding exons of 4 candidate genes (RET protooncogen, MEN1, CASR generate all possible JSs using genomic coordinates (chromosome and SHOX) in comparison with 10 control fragments. For validation name, start and stop positions) of a reference sequence. This tool of the multiplex PCR based method we compared these results with has now been used to create in silico all possible annotated isoforms traditional Sanger sequencing and MLPA analysis. One big challange for a given gene to check if some unmapped short reads might map with the multiplex PCR approach is the formation of spurious PCR on JSs of a specific isoform. This tool can be also used to get an products due to primer dimerization. For removal of primer dimers individual sequence from a genome reference sequence by indicating or short failed PCR products we used the size-selective solid phase the genomic coordinates of the multiple fragments of interest. The reversible immobilization (SPRI) purification technology. After primer program is included in the Short Reads ToolKit (http://ddlab.sci.univr. dimer removal, about 95% of all reads are within the specific 300 - it/srtk/), a Python library of functions and programs dedicated to NGS 400bp range. data computation. The evaluation of the NGS data as well as the Sanger sequence and MLPA analysis was performed with the Sequence Pilot software (JSI P11.113 medical systems). For the detection of CNVs, dosage quotients were Highly multiplexed barcoded enrichment of up to 96 samples for calculated using control fragments and target fragments for patient next-generation sequencing and control samples. M. Harakalova1, I. J. Nijman2, S. van Lieshout1, K. Duran1, M. van Roosmalen1, All deletions or duplications in the 4 candidate genes, which were I. Renkens1, B. Hrdlickova1,3, M. Mokry2, R. Houwen4, P. van Hasselt4, T. de known from MLPA analysis, could be detected by NGS. Therefore, Koning4, M. van den Boogaard1, E. Brilstra1, B. Koeleman1, H. Y. Kroes1, M. van the multiplex PCR based method for next generation sequencing is Haelst1, H. Ploos van Amstel1, W. Kloosterman1, E. Cuppen1,2; an efficient technique to detect copy number variations and sequence 1Department of Medical Genetics, UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht variation simultaneously. Institute, UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of Pediatrics, UMCU, Utrecht, P11.111 Netherlands. Next Generation sequencing on small amounts of DNA and RNA The unprecedented increase in throughput of next-generation from FFPE-fixed tissues using NuGEN’s Ovation® amplification sequencing (NGS) technologies allows for efficient sequencing of products multiple exon-centric samples in a single sequencing run. However, L. Vahlkamp, M. Stapleton, L. Turner, V. Sementchenko, D. Amorese; library preparation and enrichment of multiple samples has now NuGEN Technologies, Inc., San Carlos, CA, United States. become a limiting step for high-throughput genomic analysis. To The analysis of clinical samples has long presented challenges to address this, we developed an efficient strategy for enriching pools researchers based on sample availability, amount, and integrity. of pre-barcoded samples using both microarray-based as well as These challenges are most significant for small and typically degraded solution-based approaches. We have optimized custom protocols and formalin-fixed, paraffin embedded (FFPE) samples widely used in pipelines for probe design, library preparation, enrichment and variant cancer research and clinical diagnostics. analysis and prioritization. The multiplexed enrichment protocol is We have developed highly sensitive and robust amplification systems highly efficient and provides the experimental flexibility that meets the for the amplification of DNA and RNA from FFPE tumor samples needs of various types of variant discovery projects, ranging from small that take advantage of the proprietary Single Primer Isothermal families to population studies, while screening small sets of candidate Amplification (SPIA®) technology developed at NuGEN®. genes or large genomic intervals. We found that performance for pools The whole genome amplification system uses 100 ng of routinely between 3 and up to 96 samples is similar in comparison to non- isolated FFPE DNA and produces DNA suitable for multiple downstream multiplexed samples. applications such as aCGH and next generation sequencing (NGS). Here, we focus on detection of causal variants using X-chromosome Data will be presented that illustrates the performance of the SPIA exome sequencing in families with an X-linked inheritance pattern. We amplified material benchmarked against microgram quantities of its designed a custom enrichment array for all protein and RNA coding unamplified counterpart. These studies reveal a preservation of copy genes on human chromosome X with a densely tiled probe overlap, number changes and breakpoints. which resulted in a very even coverage distribution (>99% of all The whole transcriptome approach used in NuGEN’s Ovation RNA- positions covered by at least 1 read). Using this array, it is possible to Seq FFPE System, enables amplification and sample preparation of enrich approximately 30 individuals from different families in a single as little as 100 ng of FFPE total RNA for accurate and robust analysis assay, which fits the capacity of a single SOLiD sequencing run and on next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms. RNA isolated from provides a flexible strategy for high-throughput variant detection with FFPE and Fresh Frozen (FF) matched Colon Tumor and Normal significantly lowered costs and efforts. Adjacent Tissue (NAT) pairs was amplified and the products were used to prepare libraries with the NuGEN Encore NGS Multiplex System I P11.114 and sequenced using the Illumina GAIIx platform. Development of an exome sequencing workflow in a diagnostic setting P11.112 M. Nelen, L. Visser, K. Neveling, C. Gilissen, H. Yntema, D. Bodmer, M. A bioinformatic framework to build junction databases for the Buckley, H. Brunner, J. Veltman, H. Scheffer; detection of alternative splicing isoforms from Next Generation UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands. sequencing data For many years Sanger sequencing has been the golden standard L. Xumerle1, A. Ferrarini2, V. Mijatovic1, M. Delledonne2, P. F. Pignatti1, G. and workhorse in DNA diagnostic laboratories. However, implementing Malerba1; gene tests for all known monogenic diseases is impossible in single 1University of Verona, DLRS - Section of Biology and Genetics, Verona, Italy, laboratories. Moreover, the cause of many genetic diseases is still Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 375 unknown. Together with genetic heterogeneity adding another level Sequencing, eliminates the need for a separate PCR clean-up step, of complexity to clinical diagnosis, diagnostic yield remains overall thereby saving time and cost and reducing possible pipetting errors. relatively low. Targeted Next Generation Sequencing approaches These improvements reduce the entire workflow time for PCR to allows rapid and affordable analysis of genetic variation in multiple loci finished sequence data to less than 5 hours, compared to 8 hours for in parallel. This has been of enormous value in recent disease gene the standard workflow. identification studies, especially when expanded to the exome. In a We have sequenced many exon sequences, including challenging recent family-based exome sequencing study we showed that rare de templates, using our enhanced sequencing primers and workflow novo mutations can be reliably identified and may explain the majority on an Applied Biosystems 3500xl Genetic Analyzer. We compared of cases with mental retardation (Vissers et al, 2010). These results 5’ resolution, basecalling accuracy and quality of electropherograms demonstrate that exome sequencing is becoming a robust approach generated with traditional sequencing primers and workflows versus for identification of genetic variation and can be implemented in a BigDye® Direct novel primers and workflow. diagnostic setting, even for genetically heterogeneous and largely On average, the new primers produced high quality bases by base 5, unexplained common disorders like mental retardation. and by base 1 in many cases, compared with base 25 with traditional In this presentation we will describe the development and validation primers on POP-7™ polymer. The superior resolution increased of a diagnostic workflow for exome sequencing in genetically basecalling accuracy, both in the 5’ end and in mixed base positions. In heterogeneous disorders such as hereditary blindness, hereditary conclusion, the simplified BigDye® Direct Cycle Sequencing workflow deafness, mitochondrial diseases, movement disorders and mental generates data superior in quality relative to other currently used retardation. Important aspects of the implementation of NGS as a reagents and offers significant time savings up to 40%. The product is diagnostic tool will be addressed; the informed consent procedure, for research use only. Not for use in diagnostic procedures. description into our quality system, the laboratory and data-analysis workflow, as well as the reporting to referring clinicians. This will be P11.117 followed by a discussion on the results of our first diagnostic exome comparison of solution based exome capture methods for next sequencing analyses. generation sequencing A. Sulonen1,2, P. Ellonen1, H. Almusa1, M. Lepistö1, S. Eldfors1, S. Hannula1, P. P11.115 Mattila1, P. Salo1,2, A. Suomalainen-Wartiovaara3,4, C. Heckman1, S. Mustjoki5, Exome sequencing of an italian patient with dHmN T. Raivio6,7, A. Lehesjoki8, J. Saarela1; L. Citrigno1, S. Züchner2, A. Magariello1, J. Huang2, A. Gabriele1, G. 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Montenegro2, F. Conforti1, E. Powell2, R. Mazzei1, C. Ungaro1, W. Sproviero1, A. Helsinki, Finland, 2Unit of Public Health Genomics, National Institute for Gambardella1, A. Patitucci1, A. Quattrone3, M. Muglia1; Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 3Research programme of Molecular 1CNR - Institute of Neurological Sciences, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Hussman Neurology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Neurology, Institute for Human Gemonics - University of Miami - Miller School of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Hematology Research Miami, FL, United States, 3Institute of Neurology - University “Magna Graecia”, Unit, Biomedicum Helsinki, Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology, Catanzaro, Italy. Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 6Institute of Biomedicine, Distal hereditary motor neuronopathy (dHMN) is heterogeneous Department of Physiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7Children’s group of disorders characterized by an exclusive involvement of Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 8Folkhälsan the motor part of the peripheral nervous system. Often, unusual or Institute of Genetics, Department of Medical Genetics and Neuroscience additional features are present in ‘complicated’ distal HMN, including Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. predominance in the hands, vocal cord paralysis, diaphragm paralysis Techniques enabling targeted re-sequencing of the best-understood and pyramidal tract signs. To date 16 loci and height genes have been regions - the protein coding sequences - of the human genome on identified. We have previously mapped a novel locus in an Italian family next generation sequencing instruments are of great interest. We with dHMN complicated by pyramidal signs on chromosome 4q35, in a conducted a systematic comparison of the solution based exome 26cM region between markers D4S1552 and D4S2930. capture kits provided by Agilent (SureSelect and SureSelect 50Mb) The full exome of the proband from the family was submitted to a and Roche NimbleGen (SeqCap and SeqCap v2.0), to weigh their capturing/enrichment process with SureSelect target Enrichment advantages and disadvantages. system (Illumina/Solexa) technology. The captured DNA was submitted A control DNA sample was captured with all four capture methods to a high throughput sequencing using the Genome Analyzer II and prepared for Illumina GAII sequencing. Protocols provided by the (Illumina). We were able to obtain 0.9 Gb of genomics sequences manufacturers were slightly modified for equalization. Read counts from two runs. The raw data was trimmed and aligned with the human were normalized to comparable amounts of high quality, non-duplicated genome reference (hg19 ) using MAQ software. We identified 65508 reads. Sequence data from additional samples (n 28) prepared with high-confidence single nucleotide variants and 87 deletion/insertion the same protocols in our laboratory for other projects were used in polymorphisms (DIPs). After the reads stringencies and based the analyses. For the data analysis a bioinformatics pipeline for QC, on linkage evidences, the results showed 80 unique variants that variant identification and annotation (VCP) was also developed. The are not present in dbSNP (v.131) and 2 novel synonymous DIPs in performance of the capture methods was evaluated for sensitivity and heterozygous state. The identified variation was confirmed by Sanger specificity of the enrichment of the target regions, ability to identify sequencing and will be assessed in all members of the family and in a known and novel variants, and correlation of sequenced variants and normal control population. genotypes from Illumina 660K Chip. Exome sequencing of a proband from the families with linkage Both the target designs and the actual captured regions varied evidence is a powerful and efficient strategy for identifying the genes between the capture methods. While Agilent kits targeted more underlying rare mendelian disorders. regions, sequences from the NimbleGen capture covered more CCDS exons and genes with a minimum of 20x coverage. There was virtually P11.116 no difference in the concordance compared to chip genotypes, and Novel sequencing primer and simplified PCR-Sanger a minimum of 11x coverage was required to make a heterozygote sequencing workflow increase 5’ resolution and throughput genotype call with 99% accuracy when compared to common SNPs S. Hung, P. Ma, S. Berosik, M. Wenz, S. Schneider, S. Lim; on GWA arrays. Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. High quality and high accuracy are the hallmarks of Sanger re- P11.118 sequencing projects. We have developed new sequencing primers and Exact call chemistry enables superior accuracy in next- workflow that improve 5’ sequence resolution, increase throughput, generation sequencing and reduce hands-on time. The novel sequencing primer chemistry H. E. Peckham1, V. R. Tadigotla1, E. F. Tsung1, F. C. Hyland2, A. Siddiqui2, and workflow produces high quality sequence data from base 1 on M. Sikora2, S. Datta2, C. Yang2, H. Breu2, D. Brinza2, A. P. Blanchard1, E. M. POP-7TM polymer that previously only could be resolved with longer run Beasley2; time on POP-6TM polymer. 1Life Technologies, Beverly, MA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Foster City, The new primer chemistry and workflow, BigDye® Direct Cycle Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 337766 CA, United States. b) SNP and Indel identification: Maq, Samtools and Dindel Exact Call Chemistry (ECC) is a unique ligation-based sequencing This allowed us to compare the results obtained using different methodology that builds on the SOLiDTM system chemistry. While combinations of aligners/variant callers. 11,596±631 described and every base of the DNA template is interrogated twice using two-base 280±88 novel SNPs and 59±3 described and 10±4 novel Indels were encoded probes, ECC performs an additional inspection of the template called by all the methods. The comparison lead us to Novoalign as using a new, four-base encoded probe set that is carefully designed our aligner of choice, Samtools to call the SNPs and Dindel for Indel to complement two-base encoding and jointly form a redundant calling. error-correction code. This strategy allows for error detection and With those, we processed 140 exomes, analyzing effects, frequency correction without the use of a reference sequence. We demonstrate and distribution of the variants identified and comparing them with the the performance of ECC in the sequencing of human genomes and characteristics of the variants in ENSEMBL and the 1000 genomes compare the performance to that of two-base encoding in the absence consortium. This analysis allowed us to characterize Indels across a of ECC. ECC increases overall throughput including over 60% more sizeable dataset. None of our calls exceeds 15bp length, most of them reads with zero mismatches compared to the reference sequence. being smaller than 6bp. The correlation of the size of the Indel identified We use ECC to detect SNPs and structural variations in these human with its described counterpart in Ensembl is 0.7642 for insertions and genomes and demonstrate that the more accurate reads translate 0.6118 for deletions. Most of the described variations fall within 10bp to improved variant detection. Using human genomes with 10-14x from the starting point of the Indel called in our dataset. Frameshift coverage, we detect 5% more SNPs with ECC and 30% to 100% coding consequences represent 49.56% of all the indels annotated more small indels (deletions up to size 11 and insertions up to size 3) by ENSEMBL, while being 5.97% of the known Indels and 27.89% of without loss of specificity using a split-read approach. ECC chemistry the novel ones in our data. Non synonymous-coding indels represent also enables the optimization of sample preparation techniques to 2.59% in ENSEMBL Indels, 9.13% of our described calls and 5.47% reduce errors in these steps. Additionally, we introduce reference- of our novel ones. assisted ECC sequencing which further increases accuracy. The multi- base encoding functionality of ECC contributes to a lower error rate P11.121 and reduced systematic noise, resulting in unsurpassed sequencing simultaneous Evaluation of small RNA, Whole transcriptome, accuracy and variant discovery. Whole Genome and targeted Resequencing on Next Generation For Research Use Only. Not intended for any animal or human sequencing Platforms therapeutic or diagnostic use. C. Patel, S. Boege, J. Briggs, D. Cox, E. Foster, N. Fong, N. Hoag, D. Hom, C. Inman, P. Kinney, A. Kivett, R. Padilla, M. Shariati, J. Yang, T. Burcham, H. P11.119 Shepherd, L. Joe; A New Sequencing Workflow Increases Accuracy and 5’ Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. Resolution for capillary Electrophoresis Resequencing Researchers are using Next Generation Sequencing platforms to Applications support more and more applications. It is critical for such platforms C. Davidson1, P. Ma1, S. Hung1, S. Berosik1, S. Schneider1, V. Bourdon2, T. to be flexible enough to support many applications at the same time Noguchi2, H. Sobol2, B. Terrill3, S. Vemula3, M. Wenz1; while maintaining low cost, high quality and throughput. In this study 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2lnstitute Paoli Calmette, we describe the development of a next generation sequencing process Marseille, France, 3University of California San Francisco Dermatopathology, that facilitates the interrogation of up to twelve independent samples or San Francisco, CA, United States. applications run simultaneously. In a single run we sequenced a single- Applied Biosystems™ introduces the BigDye® Direct Cycle Sequencing plex human whole transcriptome sample, a multi-plex of universal Kit: BigDye® terminator chemistry that combines post PCR clean up human reference, human placenta, human brain reference and HeLa with cycle sequencing steps for increased throughput. BigDye® Direct whole transcriptome sample, a microbial whole genome sample, and (BDD) uses M13 universal primers and is ideal for resequencing a human placenta smRNA sample. Each sample type used required applications. BigDye® Direct improves 5’ sequence resolution through a different sequencing run, yet with this new process they all were run novel sequencing primer chemistry producing high quality bases from together saving time, reagents, and freeing the researcher from having base 1 on POP-7™ polymer that previously only could be resolved with to wait to collect sample of the same type to run together. longer run time POP-6™. Some of the benefits that BigDye® Direct Cycle Sequencing Kit provides include no sample transfer between P11.122 PCR and sequencing reactions, the complete workflow is performed An Easy to Use Workflow for Next Generation Sequencing in the same well of a plate, thus saving time and labor and reducing L. K. Joe, S. Boege, J. Briggs, S. Chang, J. Fayet-Faber, D. Hom, J. Ichikawa, human error. In conjunction with the BigDye® Direct Cycle Sequencing P. Kinney, T. Makuta, K. Perry, H. Shepherd, M. Simon, L. Xu, J. Yang, T. Kit are new mobility files for improved basecalling accuracy. Here we Burcham; describe BigDye® Direct sequence reads that are equal to or better Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. than BigDye® Terminator v3.1 reads when the reactions are analyzed A flexible and easy to use workflow is critical for any next generation using POP-7™. Further, BigDye® Direct is able to achieve readable sequencing platform. As part of such workflow the 5500 and 5500xl bases after the sequencing primers and high quality bases after the SOLiD™ Sequencers are the latest next generation sequencing gene-specific primer sequences. Nearly 40% of BigDye® Direct reads systems to be introduced by Life Technologies. Both systems fit on have ≥25 bases with QV20+ scores when compared to the same a bench top and are designed to be user-friendly from a hardware, amplicons sequenced using BigDye® Terminator v3.1. BigDye® Direct consumable and software point of view. Improvements to the system can resolve peak compression problems that occur when certain are designed to support the list of ever expanding applications on amplicons are sequenced with BigDye® Terminator v1.1 chemistry. next generation sequencing platforms with fast time to result, scalable In conclusion, the novel primer chemistry and workflow generates throughput, low run and acquisition cost, and accurate data. Here we data superior in quality when compared to current chemistry solutions describe fluidic, optic, stage, and electronic innovations to reduce and obtains readable sequence within 5 bases of the primer offering cycling, imaging, and processing times. New reagent configurations improved polymorphism detection. allow for more flexibility in desired read length and high accuracy output. Other novel features include an internal control that provides P11.120*** real time feedback on the quality of the run and microfluidic chambers Variant calling experience from 150 human exome sequences that allow interrogation of up to twelve independent samples or F. Lescai, E. Stupka; applications at a time, such as whole genome, targeted resequencing, UCL Genomics, University College London, London, United Kingdom. small RNA and whole transcriptome. New software concepts include Exome sequencing provides an approach to detect causative an intuitive user interface for run setup, sequence quality monitoring, mutations, especially in a clinical context where clinical and familiar primary analysis, and troubleshooting. For Research Use Only. Not information can assist an informed choice of candidate SNPs. We first intended for any animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use. analyzed 11 exomes to compare: a) Alignment algorithms: Maq, BWA and Novoalign,Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 377 P11.123 is a significant association which we have discovered between semiconductor sequencing for Life nonsense SNP in OR11H7P and sensitivity for isovaleric acid. To J. W. Myers, J. M. Rothberg; provide a genomic infrastructure for associating OR genotypes to Ion Torrent by Life Technologies, South San Francisco, CA, United States. olfactory phenotypes we applied in-silico data mining, combined Ion Torrent has invented the first device_a new semiconductor chip_ with Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) to the OR sub-genome and capable of directly translating chemical signals into digital information. transcriptome sequences. Scrutinizing dbSNP, the 1000 Genomes The first application of this technology is sequencing DNA. The device Project (1000GP), and several published individual genomes, we leverages decades of semiconductor technology advances, and in identified 285 deleterious variations in 210 ORs. Using the recently just a few years has brought the entire design, fabrication and supply published CopySeq algorithm, applied to the low-coverage 1000GP chain infrastructure of that industry_a trillion dollar investment_to bear data we obtained 72 OR genes with deletion allele. Altogether, we find on the challenge of sequencing. All of these benefits are a result of that ~60% of the OR genes segregate in the human population between applying a technology that is massively scalable, as proven by Moore’s an intact and disrupted allele, indicating huge functional variability and Law, to a task that has traditionally used optics-based solutions, which suggesting that each human on the planet has a different nose. NGS work in a linear fashion: increasing capacity requires increasing the transcriptome analysis of human olfactory epithelium unravels novel number of signals that must be read resulting in longer run times, mutation targets, including 412 genes that are X10 overexpressed higher capital costs and ever more sophisticated optics. By contrast, compared to control tissues. In addition, we successfully assembled Ion Torrent semiconductor technology can provide increases in from the data 452 novel transcripts that are in the OR gene territories chip capacity without impacting capital costs or runtime. Ion Torrent uncovering yet uncharacterized untranslated exons in ORs and in sequencing uses only natural (label-free) reagents and takes place in olfactory transduction genes (targets for general olfactory sensitivity Ion semiconductor microchips that contain sensors which have been phenotypes). Many of these variations are presently tested for genetic fabricated as individual electronic detectors, allowing one sequence association with odorant threshold phenotypes. read per sensor. We will show how the technology has scaled in just a few months from ~1 million sensors in the first-generation Ion 314 chips P11.126 to ~7 million sensors in the second-generation Ion 316 chips_all while characterization of cD4+ NKG2D+ t lymphocytes based on maintaining the same 1- to 2-hour runtime. We will also demonstrate whole genome expression analysis that Ion semiconductor sequencing provides exceptional accuracy, K. Schlangen1, B. Suarez-Alvarez2, A. Fernandez-Sanchez2, C. Lopez-Larrea2, long read length and scalability on a single, affordable bench-top A. M. Aransay1; sequencing platform. 1Genome Analysis Platform, CIC bioGUNE, Derio, Spain, 2Unidad de Histocompatibilidad y Trasplante. Servicio de Inmunologia. Hospital P11.124 Universitario Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain. Whole Genome sequencing in patients with the Hallermann- The NKG2D activating receptor is expressed on γδ T, αβ CD8+ streiff syndrome T, NKT and all NK cells but not on CD4+ T cells. However, under G. Froyen1, H. Van Esch1, K. Devriendt1, T. De Ravel1, S. Belet1, P. Marynen1, certain circumstances, such as infections, autoimmune diseases or M. Veugelers2, S. Plaisance2; tumors, an anomalous expression of NKG2D on CD4+ T cells can be 1Dept. Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium, 2VIB Bioinformatics Training and detected. Flow cytometric analysis of NKG2D expression on CD4+ T Service Facility, Ghent, Belgium. lymphocytes from several transplanted patients (kidney, heart, liver) The recent introduction of next-generation sequencing has shifted the and healthy donors revealed that kidney and liver transplanted patients focus of gene identification in human diseases from Sanger sequencing presented an unusual subset of CD4+ NKG2D+ T lymphocytes (41.0% and copy number analysis to deep sequencing of linkage intervals, and 27.6% respectively) whereas only in a negligible number of heart targeted regions and exomes. Although the sequencing technologies transplanted and control donors this cell type could be detected. provide solid data the main bottleneck remains the isolation and Whole genome microarray expression studies were performed with this enrichment of these specific regions. Sequence capture on arrays or CD4+ NKG2D+ T cell population compared to CD4+ NKG2D- T cells in solution has significantly improved over the last years but introduces in order to determinate its phenotypic and functional characteristics. a bias in sequence recovery and still misses a significant proportion of Furthermore, functional analyses using Gene Ontology annotations the targeted regions. Deep sequencing of whole human genomes has were conducted in order to identify molecular pathways that exhibit now become available through the company Complete Genomics. The activation or repression in this cell type. coverage exceeds 40X for 95% of the exome while repeat-free intra- Functional analysis showed that several pathways associated with and intergenic regions are well covered too. The overall error rate is immune response, apoptosis, inflammatory response and cellular estimated at 1 in 100,000 nucleotides. Through their service, we have catabolic processes were significantly affected. Examination of sequenced the genomes of three patients with the Hallermann-Streiff costimulatory molecules and specific cytotoxic cell markers as well syndrome (HSS) as well as the parents of one of these patients. Since as apoptosis-related molecules showed that the CD4+ NKG2D+ T the inheritance pattern of HSS strongly points to an autosomal dominant cells in the kidney and liver transplanted patients represented a highly disorder, we aimed to search for de novo variants in genes based on differentiated T cell subset with cytotoxicity ability and apoptosis the trios samples, and then look for unknown variants in overlapping resistance. The identification of biomarkers to predict the allograft genes in the other two patients. For the five samples we obtained 160 outcome and immune response in transplanted patients is decisive to to 250 Gb of mapped data, which contained about 3.2 million SNPs decrease the current transplantation failure. each. We are currently validating a set of candidate variations in our patients. We will present data and discuss the experimental set-up in P11.127 order to maximize the screening efficiency. Non-coding elements of disease-causing genes M. Naville1, C. Mugnier2, M. Girard3, S. Bandiera3, A. Munnich3, S. Lyonnet3, H. P11.125 Roest Crollius4, A. HENRION-CAUDE3; the immense genomic variability of human olfactory receptor 1Ecole Normale Superieure, CNRS UMR8541, Paris, France, 2Université René genes Descartes, Service Informatique, Paris, France, 3INSERM U781, Paris, France, T. Olender1, Y. Hasin1, I. Keydar1, M. Khen1, Y. Gilad2, E. Ben-Asher1, D. 4Ecole Normale Supérieure, CNRS UMR 8541, Paris, France. Lancet1; Three percent of the human genome consists of conserved non-coding 1The Weizmann Instiute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2University of Chicago, elements (CNEs). Those elements are non-transcribed or transcribed Chicago, IL, United States. such as microRNAs. In the present work, we considered three groups Humans are highly variable in their olfactory sensitivity and odor of genetic diseases: diseases with mapped loci but no known genes quality perception. This is partially attributed to genetic variations in (group I), diseases with cloned genes (group II), and diseases with the olfactory receptor (OR) coding regions. Specifically deleterious recurrent chromosomal rearrangement (group III). To address the variations, such as frame-disrupting single nucleotide polymorphism interest of studying non-coding elements in disease-causing genes (SNP) or copy number variation (CNV) with deletion alleles, are for which mutations are already known and characterized, we plotted excellent candidates to underlie this phenomenon. One example group II together with the location of microRNAs. Interestingly, we Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 337788 could identify 274 diseases with cloned genes that may still involve Inc., San Diego, CA, USA) that cover the predicted promoter regions microRNAs. In particular, we were able to identify a notable enrichment of over 14 500 genes. in monogenic diseases with clinical heterogeneity in this category. By Cluster analysis was performed with Limma program of Bioconductor comparative genomics alignments across multiple vertebrate species package in R statistical computing software. We’ve detected we then selected possibly functional CNEs. We further aimed at 496 CpG-s in 379 genes hyper- and 373 CpG-s in 335 genes and establishing functional linkages between these CNEs and their likely pseudogenes hypomethylated in NSCLC. All the methylation target gene by replacing them in an ancestral mammalian genome, differences were identified with FDR corrected p<0.05 and ≥0.136 and postulating the maintenance of CNE/target gene physical mean difference in methylation level. Analysis with Ingenuity Pathway proximity in ancestral and modern genomes. This approach led us to Analysis (IPA) software (Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, the identification of 72 disease-causing genes putatively controlled USA) showed that the top functions of these genes were cell-to-cell by CNEs and involved in diseases that are listed herein. Our results signaling and interaction, hematological system development and provide a source of non-coding elements associated with disease- function, immune cell trafficking, cellular growth and proliferation, causing genes to be sequenced in those patients with no mutation cell death, cancer, inflammatory response etc. The most prominently previously identified. It also paves the way to unravel sets of CNEs represented gene network was related to tumor necrosis factor (TNF). aiming to the concerted phenotypic-specific regulation of a disease- Comparing methylation data with gene expression data, we found causing gene, otherwise involved in numerous developmental fields. form the hypermethylated genes 41 downregulated and from the hypomethylated genes 12 upregulated. Many of these hypermethylated P11.128 and downregulated genes haven’t been reported yet to be involved Disruption of the histone acetyltransferase mYst4 leads to a with lung cancer but some of them (RASSF1, AXUD1) are known or Noonan syndrome-like phenotype and hyperactivated mAPK proposed to be tumor suppressors in lung cancer progression. From signaling the hypomethylated and upregulated genes the most interesting M. Kraft1, A. Voss2,3, T. Thomas2,3, I. C. Cirstea4, I. Goehring5, B. Sheikh2,6, L. finding was SERPINB5 (Maspin). Gordon2, H. Scott2,3, G. Smyth7,3, M. Ahmadian4, U. Trautman1, M. Zenker5, M. Tartaglia8, A. B. Ekici1, A. Reis1, H. Doerr9, A. Rauch10, C. T. Thiel1; P11.130 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Walter and Eliza Hall Distal gene regulatory elements have an average size of a Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 3Department of Medical nucleosome Biology, Parkville, Australia, 4Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology O. Wallerman, M. Bysani, M. Wadelius, C. Wadelius; II, Dusseldorf, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany, IGP, Uppsala, Sweden. 6Department of Medical Biology, Pakrville, Australia, 7Walter and Eliza Nucleosomes consists of 147 bp of DNA wrapped around eight histone Hall Institute of Medical Research, Meölbourne, Australia, 8Dipartimento di proteins, with a normal distance of 20-30 bp between the nucleosome Ematologia, Rome, Italy, 9Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Erlangen, ends. Transcription factors (TFs) bind to promoters and distal regulatory Germany, 10Institute of MedicalGenetics, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland. elements and regulate the activity of nearby genes. Promoters located Epigenetic regulation of gene expression through covalent modification upstream of genes are well known but distal regulatory elements are of histones is a key process controlling growth and development. poorly defined as to location and size. Using 200 million aligned reads Breakpoint mapping of a balanced de novo chromosomal translocation from MNase I digested HepG2 chromatin, we created genome-wide t(10;13)(q22.3;q34) in an individual with a Noonan syndrome- nucleosome profiles. These were correlated to ChIP-seq results for the like phenotype encompassing short stature, blepharoptosis and TFs HNF4a and FOXA2, which bind to distal regulatory elements. The attention deficit/hyperactivity disorder, identified haploinsufficiency patterns suggest that one nucleosome is displaced at the regulatory of the MYST4 gene. MYST4 belongs to the family of MYST histone elements. Footprints of nucleosomes around public ENCODE data of acetyltransferases (HAT) and specifically acetylates H3k14. We DNase I hypersensitivity sites at distal locations also suggests that in observed a correlation of MYST4 levels with H3 acetylation in two general, a single nucleosome is removed by the TF complexes. cell lines after siRNA knock down (Rank Correlation coefficient p < To apply the strategy to a gene of medical interest, we studied SNPs 0.02793). In Mice homozygous for a hypomorphic gene trap allele of identified in GWAS studies for dose requirement of the drug warfarin, Myst4 [Querkopf (Qkfgt/gt)] we found a failure to thrive phenotype and which is commonly used to prevent thrombosis. These studies have high expression in the primordial of the cartilage and the neuronal stem identified several SNPs in high linkage disequilibrium in and around cells. Genome wide transcriptome profiles in three human and two the VKORC1 gene, but the functional one has not been identified. We mice cell lines uncovered an enrichment of significantly differentially used several chromatin signals and FAIRE DNA as a measure of open expressed genes in 10 KEGG pathways. To distinguish between chromatin to prioritize among VKORC1 SNPs and found that most of primary and secondary targets we performed ChIP-CHIP and found them are located in chromatin without regulatory potential. Out of 22 enrichment only for the MAPK signaling pathway. As hyperactivation tested VKORC1 SNPs, 7 are located in nucleosome-free regions as of the RAS-MAPK transduction pathway is the main underlying determined by MNase-seq and qPCR of FAIRE DNA, which indicates pathomechanism in Noonan syndrome we confirmed a hyperactivation that they may be functional. of the MAPK pathway by hyperphosphorylation of key proteins by MYST4. In addition, we were able to reverse this effect by MYST4 P11.131 overexpression in MYST4 deficient cell lines. Distillation of potential drug targets for type 2 diabetes This further elucidates the complex role of histone modifications in by overlaying tcF7L2 chiP-seq and pancreatic islet open mammalian development and adds a new pathomechanism to the chromatin maps phenotypes resulting from misregulation of the RAS signaling pathway. J. Zhao1, J. Schug2, J. Sainz3,4, K. H. Kaestner2, S. F. A. Grant1,2; 1Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2University P11.129 of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Institute methylation markers of early-stage non-small cell lung cancer of Biomedicine and Biotechnology of Cantabria (IBBTEC), University of K. Kirotar1, T. Vooder1,2, R. Kolde3, K. Välk1, M. Solovjova1, R. Roosipuu2, T. Cantabria, Santander, Spain, 4Spanish National Research Council (CSIC), Annilo1, A. Metspalu1,4, N. Tõnisson1,2; Santander, Spain. 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu / Estonian Biocentre, Variation in TCF7L2 is strongly associated with type 2 diabetes Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Computer (T2D). We previously mapped the genomic regions bound by TCF7L2 Sciences, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, using ChIP-seq. The list of genes bound by TCF7L2 harbor a highly Estonia. significant over-representation of loci uncovered in GWAS of T2D. DNA methylation changes are common and relatively stable in Further support for our conclusions came from a subsequent VDR various types of cancer and may be used as diagnostic or prognostic ChIP-seq study that gave a similar enrichment of GWAS-discovered biomarkers. To gain an insight into the epigenetic dysregulation in genes. Therefore, it is our hypothesis that a substantial portion of NSCLC, we’ve analysed stage I NSCLC samples from 48 patients the reminder of genes bound by TCF7L2 on our list, not previously together with 18 matching macroscopically cancer-free control implicated in disease, also harbor genetic variants associated with samples with Infinium™ HumanMethylation27 BeadChips (Illumina T2D. We aimed at distilling down genes bound by TCF7L2 that encode Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 379 proteins that would be considered attractive drug targets. We analyzed in the introns (less frequently just downstream) of genes, like trim8.1, the overlap of loci between our TCF7L2 ChiP-seq gene list and the whose human orthologs are annotated as putative p53 targets. We published open chromatin map for pancreatic islets in order to get an thus assessed if the p53 transcription regulator was able to bind indirect measure of relevant sites in this key tissue. We found that 94 members of this family of TEs, through a putative p53 responsive genes overlapped, and interestingly, 36% of the gene products fall in elements (RE) mapping within the EnSpm-N6_DR transposons. By to drug target classes. Attempting to distill this gene list further, we luciferase assay, we showed that this well conserved p53 binding also carried out ChIP-seq in HepG2 cells where TCF7L2 is abundantly site can be directly associated with p53-dependent transcriptional expressed. 24 genes remained of which 7 encode what would be activation of multiple zebrafish orthologs, including trim8.1 and spred2. considered druggable targets. In summary, we have distilled down loci Our data strongly support the hypothesis that the EnSpm-N6_DR that are both bound by TCF7L2 across two cell lines and coincide with class of mobile genetic element promoted the spreading of p53RE open chromatin in human pancreatic islets, of which a number encode within Danio rerio’s genome, potentially illustrating a remarkable case potentially attractive drug targets that are also likely candidates to be of convergent evolution. genetically validated when sequenced in a T2D cohort. P11.134 P11.132 A new missense mutation (p.L481R) of the ABcB4 gene identifying candidate Genes for Phenotypes in cNV Diseases by segregates in three affected members belonging to one large computational model Organism comparisons family with more siblings affected by recurrent cholelithiasis S. C. Doelken1, C. Mungall2, S. Köhler1, G. V. Gkoutos3, B. J. Ruef4, P. and/or cholestatic diseases Schofield5, M. Westerfield4, P. N. Robinson1, S. E. Lewis2; D. Degiorgio1, G. Castaldo2,3, R. Tomaiuolo2,3, M. Seia1, L. Costantino1, L. 1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Berkeley Bioinformatics Porcaro1, M. Castagni1, L. Castellano4, A. Ragozzino5, M. P. Rastaldi6,7, D. A. and Ontologies Project, Lawrence Berkeley National Labs, Berkeley, CA, Coviello1,8, C. Colombo9; United States, 3Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda, Ospedale United Kingdom, 4ZFIN University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, United States, Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie 5Department of Physiology, Development and Neuroscience, University of Mediche, Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, 3CEINGE Biotecnologie Cambridge, United Kingdom. avanzate, scarl, Naples, Italy, 4Gastroenterologia, ASL Napoli 1, distretto An accurate description of phenotypic abnormalities is the foundation 33, Naples, Italy, 5Radiologia, Ospedale S.M. delle Grazie, Pozzuoli (NA), of clinical diagnostics and the basis of our understanding of diseases. Italy, 6Renal Research Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale The Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) was developed by our group Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 7Fondazione D’Amico per la Ricerca sulle as a hierarchical, standardized vocabulary for human phenotypes in Malattie Renali, Milan, Italy, 8E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Laboratory of Human human monogenic and other diseases (http://www.human-phenotype- Genetics, Genoa, Italy, 9Department of Pediatrics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ ontology.org). Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. Applying standardized vocabularies is the basis of a computational Progressive intrahepatic cholestasis type 3 associated with complete interspecies comparison of phenotypic features and disease models. absence of biliary phosphatidylcholine (PC) results in liver failure at Using phenotypic data for human CNV diseases (HPO), as well as pediatric age. zebrafish (ZFIN, Oregon) and mouse phenotypes (MGI, Jackson This phenotype is caused by 2 ABCB4 alleles which encode a protein Laboratory, Cambridge and Bar Harbor), we have developed novel without floppase activity across the canalicular membrane of the strategies for computational interspecies comparisons and applied hepatocyte. these phenotypic similarity algorithms to identify the disease causing Liver failure associated with absence of biliary PC was originally genes in recurrent human copy number variation disorders (CNV described in mice knockout for the orthologous ABCB4 gene whereas disorders). We examined the relationships between phenotypes no detectable pathology was then reported in mice with a single associated with CNV disorders and phenotypes associated with mutant allele. humans or model organisms with single-gene diseases whose genes Molecular analysis of the ABCB4 by sequencing the 27 coding exons are located within the CNVs in order to identify previously unrecognized was carried out in three siblings, a 45 year old man and two women, genotype-phenotype associations by using interspecies phenotypic 41 and 47 years old. comparisons to uncover the pathogenesis of CNV disorders. All had experienced recurring symptomatic cholelithiasis, the younger Our method reliably detected known associations such as the sister has also presented an episode of cholangitis and pruritus in relationship between elastin haploinsufficiency and supravalvular aortic pregnancy. stenosis in Williams syndrome as well as a host of novel explanations In these siblings we identified the new mutation c.1442T>G (absent in for phenotypic features of CNV disorders including candidate genes for 110 controls), in the heterozygous state, which leads to an amino acid cancer risk in CNV-related Sotos syndrome and for diabetes mellitus change (p.L481R) in the Nucleotide Binding Domain; the family history in Williams syndrome. Our methods for interspecies comparison will suggests paternal lineage of the mutation: their father with a history of provide a basis for integrating the large amounts of model organism cholelithiasis died at the age of 56 years with biliary cirrhosis. phenotype data expected to come from the international knockout This family includes others 12 siblings, 4 with symptomatic cholelithiasis mouse consortium and other projects. (their DNA is not currently available). Although it is plausible that additional genetic loci (and environmental factors) with modifier effect P11.133 may be involved, the analysis of segregation in 3 siblings suggests Enspm-N6_DR DNA transposons shape the repertoire of p53 that a single mutant allele of the ABCB4 can be a critical factor for target genes in zebrafish susceptibility to the manifestation of cholelithiasis or progressive liver M. N. Loviglio, L. Micale, C. Fusco, A. Calcagnì, B. Augello, E. V. D’Addetta, disease in adulthood. G. Merla; Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. P11.135 Transposable elements (TEs) represent a considerable fraction multi-omics Landscape of clear cell Renal carcinoma of the genome of eukaryotes. With their high turnover, TEs play L. Wang, X. Wang; a strong role in genomes evolution and adaptation. They directly BGI, Shenzhen, China. regulate the expression of nearby genes both transcriptionally and Tumor is considered to be a systematic disorder of molecular network post-transcriptionally. For instance, TEs are known to donate a wide in tissue cells, while the incidence of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) variety of gene regulatory sequences to the human genome, which has a significant and continually increasing trend. In our study, we exert diversifying effects on the expression patterns of adjacent genes. present a comprehensive (more than 250 Gbp) data set from whole Here we report their role in shaping the repertoire of a transcription genome, DNA methylome and transcriptome sequencing of RCC. By factor, the pleiotropic master regulator p53. The multiple copies of comparison between RCC and corresponding para-carcinoma (PARA) En-SpmN6_DR non-autonomous DNA transposon are mapping tissues, we identified 43428 single nucleotide variations (SNVs), with throughout the genome of zebrafish (Danio rerio), mainly upstream or 168 in coding region, 5448 insertions and deletions (indels, 1-10 bp) Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 338800 and 9095 segmental rearrangements or copy number changes (SVs/ degeneration and blindness, with a frequency of about 1 in 4000 births. CNVs, 1k-50k bp). We discovered 24187 differentially methylated Inheritance of RP can be either autosomal recessive, autosomal regions and 8416 differentially expressed protein-coding genes as dominant or X chromosomal with also rare cases of mitochondrial well as non-coding RNAs between RCC and PARA. We attempted to transmission. Recessive and isolated cases account for 50-60% integrate all information from these omics levels to detect the inter- of all forms of RP. Recently, we have identified a new gene, EYS, correlations in-between, and the discovered patterns are associated corresponding to the RP25 locus, as a commonly mutated gene with Focal adhesion, MAPK signaling and other pathways related to cell in arRP. Spanning over 2 Mb within RP25, EYS is the largest eye- metabolism, proliferation and development. The methylation pattern specific gene identified so far. Population studies in cohorts of and expression level indicates IFI16 gene, which encoding interferon, different origins have been performed, resulting in the identification gamma-inducible protein 16, not only modulates p53 function, but also of more than 70 mutations so far. Among them, 3 pathogenic variants plays an important role, as a hub gene, in apoptosis pathway. Our have been recurrently reported in Spanish and Dutch populations: results demonstrate an initial investigation of whole omics landscape p.I2239SfsX17, p.W2640X and p.Y3135X. In this study, we performed of tumor tissues and pave a new way to understanding the important the haplotype analysis in the non related families bearing those disease by multi-omics sequencing approaches. mutations with the aim of elucidating their recurrent or founder origin. For that purpose, we used both microsatellite and SNPs genotyping P11.136 covering EYS and the specific mutations regions, respectively. EYS Novel study of copy number variations in EYs using the multiple flanking microsatellite haplotypes were different among families in ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) technique all the mutation groups, suggesting a recurrent origin of the variants. J. I. Pieras1,2, I. Barragan1,2, M. González-Del Pozo1,2, N. Matamala1, I. Audo3,4,5, However, SNPs genotyping of the mutation intervals allowed a higher S. Bernal6,7, B. Montserrat6,7, C. Zeitz3,8,4, S. S. Bhattacharya9, B. Salud1,2, G. resolution haplotyping. According to these data, we can confirm that Antiñolo1,2; mutations p.W2640X and p.Y3135X have an ancestral origin, each 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. of them transmitted by a common founder, whereas p.I2239SfsX17 Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del is recurrent. Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Sevilla, Spain, P11.138** 3INSERM, U968, Paris, F-75012, Paris, France, 4UPMC Univ Paris 06, targeted next generation sequencing as a powerful diagnostic UMR_S 968, Institut de la Vision, Paris, F-75012, Paris, France, 5Centre tool for RP Hospitalier National d’Ophtalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, INSERM-DHOS K. Neveling1, R. W. J. Collin1, C. Gilissen1, B. J. Klevering1, L. I. van den Born2, CIC 503, Paris, F-75012, Paris, France, 6Servei de Genética, Hospital de la N. Wieskamp1, M. P. Kwint1, M. Zonneveld-Vrieling1, S. Gijsen1, M. Nelen1, Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 7Centro de Investigación Biomédica A. Hoischen1, A. Siemiatkowska1, M. Buckley1, A. I. den Hollander1, F. P. M. en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 8CNRS, Cremers1, J. A. Veltman1, H. Scheffer1; UMR_7210. Paris, F-75012, Paris, Spain, 9Department of Cellular Therapy 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2The and Regenerative Medicine, Andalusian Molecular Biology and Regenerative Rotterdam Eye Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Medicine Centre (CABIMER), Sevilla, Spain. Next generation sequencing (NGS) opens the way to high throughput Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a heterogeneous group of inherited retinal analysis of targeted genomic regions or even the whole exome/ dystrophies characterised by the loss of photoreceptors cells and genome. Recent publications show the advantages of NGS in genetic retinal pigment deposits. Autosomal-recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa research, e.g. in gene discovery in rare inherited syndromes. However, (arRP) has recently been associated with mutations in a novel gene, for the usage of NGS in diagnostics several additional performance EYS, which is a major gene for this disease. All published mutations parameters have to be met: high quality, high throughput, low costs. so far are based upon conventional PCR and are not adequate to Here we describe the design and validation of an NGS approach identify mid-sized DNA rearrangements. The purpose of this study for the diagnostics of inherited retinal dystrophy. We developed a was to establish the prevalence of Copy-Number Variations (CNVs) 12-plex Nimblegen sequence-capture array to enrich exons, splice in the EYS gene, using a novel EYS specific MLPA kit, in a cohort junctions and UTRs of 111 known retinal dystrophy genes. This array of arRP patients, including individuals in whom only one pathogenic was used to enrich the determined gene package in 100 previously change was detected by PCR-based sequencing. Here we report unsolved patients with isolated or autosomal-recessive RP. DNAs of the identification of 6 pathogenic CNVs and confirm the presence of 12 RP patients carrying 24 known disease-causing variants served mid-sized rearrangements as the second mutated allele in a ~15% as controls. All 112 samples were sequenced on a Roche454 GS-FLX of families that were carriers of another EYS mutation. Our results Titanium. Stringent bioinformatic data-analysis and variant detection also suggest that mid-sized genomic rearrangements in EYS gene on average resulted in 4 variants per sample which were validated would be a common event in the appearance of RP phenotype with an using conventional Sanger sequencing and subsequently tested for estimated frequency of ~4% (3/71) of total arRP cases with unknown segregation within the family. Preliminary data on the confirmation mutation. We have demonstrated an efficient and cost-effective and segregation analysis revealed the likely pathogenic mutations strategy validating a novel MLPA Kit as a complementary diagnostic in at least 35 probands. These results show that our approach method for EYS pathogenic evaluation. is operational, e.g. that the coverage obtained allows for reliable identification of the disease-causing variations. Targeted NGS P11.137 combined with stringent bioinformatic data-analysis holds the promise Haplotype analysis of EYS mutations identified in different to optimize cost-effectiveness in molecular diagnostics for genetically European populations heterogeneous disorders like RP, and we are convinced that this I. Barragán1,2, N. Matamala1, M. González-Del Pozo1,2, J. Pieras1,2, K. Littink3,4, approach is an important step towards the successful implementation F. Cremers3,5, S. Borrego1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2; of NGS in diagnostics. 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del P11.139 Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, SEVILLA, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación mutation screening of multiple genes in spanish patients with Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Sevilla, Spain, Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa using a custom- 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical designed Resequencing microarray Centre, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4The Rotterdam M. González-Del Pozo1,2, J. I. Pieras1,2, I. Barragán1,2, B. Naranjo1, N. Eye Hospital, P.O. Box 70030, 3000 LM, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Nijmegen Matamala1, S. Borrego1,2, G. Antiñolo1,2; Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 1Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Genética, Reproducción y Medicina Fetal. Netherlands. Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Hospital Universitario Virgen del Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a heterogeneous group of inherited Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación disorders primarily affecting rods with secondary cone degeneration. It is the most common inherited form of potentially severe retinal Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 381 Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Seville, Spain. date, the underlying mechanism of this association is unknown and Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a heterogeneous group of inherited retinal functional characterization of alleles discriminated by this SNP using dystrophies characterised ultimately by the loss of photoreceptor cells. an allelic imbalance assay may give more insight in putative genetic RP is the leading cause of visual loss in individuals younger than 60 regulatory elements underlying the association. years, with a prevalence of about 1 in 4000. The molecular genetic Cartilage RNA obtained from heterozygous individuals (N=13) was diagnosis of autosomal recessive RP (arRP) is challenging due to subjected to an allele discriminating Taqman assay and the relative the large genetic and clinical heterogeneity. Traditional methods for peak heights of allele C and T fluorescence signals were assessed sequencing arRP genes are often laborious and not easily available at both genomic DNA (1:1 reference) and RNA level. Deviations and a screening technique that enables the rapid detection of the from allelic balance in the normalized log transformed RNA samples genetic cause would be very helpful in the clinical practice. The goal of were tested against the normalized log transformed DNA samples for this study was to develop and apply microarray-based resequencing significance using a Mann-Whitney non-parametric test. technology capable of detecting both known and novel mutations on a We show a highly significant allelic imbalance, where the OA risk single high-throughput platform. Hence, the coding regions and exon/ allele (C) is present at higher levels in OA cartilage RNA of 13 subjects intron boundaries of 16 arRP genes were resequenced using Affymetrix than allele T (Table 1). None of the genomic DNA’s showed signs microarrays in 103 Spanish patients with clinical diagnosis of arRP. of deviations from allelic balance when tested against all remaining All the detected variations were confirmed by direct sequencing and genomic DNA’s. To further investigate the DIO2 gene activity in OA we potential pathogenicity was assessed by functional predictions and aim to assess absolute expression levels of DIO2 in both healthy and frequency in controls. For validation purposes 7 positive controls for OA affected cartilage samples and investigate the protein presence of variants consisting of previously identified changes were hybridized DIO2 in OA and healthy cartilage. on the array. As a result of the resequencing screening, we detected Table 1. Allelic imbalance measurements. 36 variants, of which 17 are very likely pathogenic. They consist of cDNA1 Genomic2 Relative 1 nonsense mutation, 3 splicing mutations, 1 5’ UTR variant and 12 Donor Sex Age Joint (%) (%) fraction C/T P-value3 missense mutations. The 19 remaining identified variants included 3 1 F 70 Right Shoulder 18 (90) N/A 1.30 <0.01 non synonymous, 4 synonymous and 12 intronic polymorphic changes. 2 F N/A Left Hip 19 (95) 5 (100) 1.26 <0.01 The accurate detection of the positive controls allowed the validation of the technique. 3 M 61 Right Hip 20 (100) 5 (100) 1.29 <0.01 4 F 59 Right Hip 16 (80) 4 (80) 1.34 <0.01 P11.140 5 M 71 Right Hip 19 (95) 4 (80) 1.32 <0.01 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) associated-gene, CD244 expressed in 6 F 75 Left Knee 20 (100) 5 (100) 1.33 <0.01 RA synovial tissue 7 F 78 Right Hip 19 (95) 5 (100) 1.25 <0.01 A. Suzuki1, R. Yamada1,2, Y. Kochi1, Y. Okada1, M. Yamanaka1, T. Sawada3, K. 8 F 75 Left Hip 20 (100) 5 (100) 1.60 <0.01 Yamamoto1,4; 9 F 79 Right Knee 20 (100) 5 (100) 1.38 <0.01 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 3Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan, 4University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. 10 M 56 Left Hip 17 (85) 5 (100) 1.36 <0.01 RA is well-known as an autoimmune disease and is a chronic 11 F 62 Right Hip 18 (90) 5 (100) 1.41 <0.01 inflammatory disorder characterized by the destruction of multiple 12 F 79 Right Hip 17 (85) 5 (100) 1.42 <0.01 joints. Many genome wide association studies were performed and 13 F 62 Shoulder 17 (85) 5 (100) 1.42 <0.01 multiple RA-susceptibility loci and autoimmune-susceptibility loci 1 cDNA PCR measurements passing quality control (max. 20) have been identified. These studies suggested that multiple genes 2 Genomic PCR measurements passing quality control (max. 5) and its functions were related with disease causing and development. 3 Mann-Whitney non parametric test (cDNA per individual versus genomic DNA samples pooled) These studies also indicated an important factor regarding genetic factors of RA and autoimmune diseases; some of the RA-susceptible P11.142 polymorphisms also increase the risks of other autoimmune diseases. multiplexed and targeted next-generation sequencing for the One of the mechanisms of the inflammation in autoimmune diseases molecular genetic diagnostics of Osteogenesis imperfecta associated with signal transduction via signaling lymphocytic activation F. S. van Dijk, N. Ameziane, E. Setijowati, S. Dentro, D. Sie, T. Uithuisje, Y. molecule (SLAM). It was reported that SLAM family gene, e.g., Ly108 Moutaouakil, H. Meijers-Heijboer, E. Sistermans, G. Pals; is also associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). We VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands. identified CD244 gene as susceptibility gene to RA. The association Background: Osteogenesis Imperfecta(OI) is characterized by peak in the block was observed at two functional SNPs (rs3766379 and susceptibility to bone fractures and defects in collagen type I rs6682654) in CD244 in two independent RA cohorts from Japan (P= biosynthesis. OI is caused in 90% of cases by dominant variants in 2 3.23 x 10-8 and P=7.45 x 10-8) and a SLE cohort. These RA-susceptible genes(COL1A1, COL1A2) and in ≤10% of cases by recessive variants variants of rs3766379 and rs6682654 upregulate expression of in 7 genes (CRTAP, LEPRE1, PPIB, SERPINH1, FKBP10, PLOD2, CD244, their causative role to increase the risk of autoimmunity has SP7). In some cases no mutation can be found in these genes. or in to be further investigated for its validity and its precise molecular other unidentified genes. Sequencing occurs stage wise, which is time mechanism. Furthermore, we indicated that CD244 also expresses in consuming, and expensive. synovial tissues of CIA mice and RA patients. We supposed that up- methods: OI patients were selected for abnormal collagen type regulation of CD244 affect on RA and other autoimmune diseases, I production without sequencing results or because of negative including SLE. Thus, CD244 is a novel genetic risk factor for RA and sequencing results with clinical/radiological information and/or protein may have a role for autoimmunity in RA. analysis suggestive of OI types II-IV. Samples were analysed by targeted enrichment for known and candidate genes, followed by P11.141 next-generation sequencing on the Illumina GAIIx platform. DNA Functional characterization of OA risk polymorphism rs225014 libraries from 20 individuals were multiplexed and sequenced on a at DiO2 in human OA cartilage single Illumina flowcell lane using a 75 cycles paired-end protocol. An S. D. Bos1, J. Loughlin2, R. G. H. H. Nelissen3, P. E. Slagboom1, I. Meulenbelt1; in-house variation detection pipeline was used to score for relevant 1Department of Molecular Epidemiology, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands mutations. & Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging, Leiden, Netherlands, Results: An average of 2.9 million reads per sample was obtained Leiden, Netherlands, 2Newcastle University, Institute of Cellular Medicine, of which 2.1 million reads (71%) mapped to the targeted regions. Musculoskeletal Research Group, Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, This resulted in an average depth of coverage exceeding 180 fold. United Kingdom, 3Department of Orthopedics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, Analyzing 12 out of 20 samples, 2 causative COL1A1 variants and 2 Leiden, Netherlands. causative COL1A2 variants were discovered. Furthermore, 12 non- Previously, the deiodinase iodothyronine type-2 gene (DIO2) was synonymous amino acid changes were detected, which are predicted identified as an osteoarthritis (OA) risk gene, and SNP rs225014 to be harmful and may represent causative variants. located within the DIO2 gene was found to be associated with OA. To conclusion: Multiplexed and Targeted next-generation sequencing Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 338822 allows for comprehensive genetic screening of OI patients in a fast P11.145 and cost-effective manner. contrasting features of the close homologues sERPiNA2 and sERPiNA1 P11.143 P. Marques1,2, Z. Ferreira1,3, M. Martins1, J. Figueiredo1, J. Correia1, S. Seixas1; Identification of genes expressed in human inner ear tissue 1Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, using next generation RNA sequencing Porto, Portugal, 2Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Porto, J. J. Corneveaux1, J. Ohmen2, C. White2, A. N. Allen1, G. Van Camp3, R. Portugal, 3Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. Friedman2, M. J. Huentelman1; Serine protease inhibitors (SERPINs) are a superfamily of highly 1Translational Genomics Research Institute, Arizona, AZ, United States, 2House conserved proteins that play a key role in controlling the activity of Ear Institute, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 3University of Antwerp, Antwerp, proteases in diverse biological processes. In humans, the largest Belgium. SERPIN cluster is located at 14q32.1 region and includes the gene Characterization of the human inner ear transcriptome is important for coding for the archetypical SERPIN, SERPINA1, and a highly the study of the basic biology of hearing and diseases of the inner ear. homologous sequence, SERPINA2, which was originally thought to be We present RNA-Seq data of the cochlea, ampulla, saccule, utricle, a pseudogene. However, several lines of evidence collected in our work and total vestibular regions of the human inner ear derived from have identified SERPINA2 as a polymorphic gene, probably encoding fresh surgically resected tissue from four donor patients. Tissue was a functional protein with unknown inhibitory activity. Previously, we collected from non-diseased regions during an operation to remove have found that SERPINA2 could carry a 2kb deletion leading to an a tumor located near the inner ear. Libraries were sequenced on the inactive SERPINA2 that is likely to be associated with a signature of Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument with an average of 127 million quality- positive selection in Africa. To further evaluate SERPINA2 functionality filtered, 104bp paired-end reads per sample. We performed mapping we performed several molecular assays in cell lines stably expressing with TopHat to human GRCh37 and quantitation with Cufflinks. In different SERPINA2 and SERPINA1 variants. In contrast to SERPINA1 the three sequenced cochleas, we measured expression from 20655 recombinants, which were found at both intra- and extra-cellular levels, genes that produce 89066 total transcripts. In vestibular regions we find SERPINA2 was detected only inside the cells. These results differ 21501 expressed genes with 92377 unique transcripts. Comparisons from the expected patterns of Clade-A SERPINs, which are normally between cochlea and vestibular regions showed 1567 genes unique secreted and retained in the cells, within the endoplasmatic reticulum to the cochlea and 2413 genes unique to vestibular tissue. In total (ER), in case of abnormal folding. Still, assays of proteosome and we find 23068 genes expressed in the inner ear along with 98837 fagosome inhibition resulted in similar patterns for SERPINA2 and total transcripts, an average ratio of >4 transcript variants per gene. SERPINA1, suggesting that both recombinants expression is down- Of note, Aquaporin-1 is expressed 25-times higher, FOS is 18.5-times regulated by post-translation mechanisms mainly involving ER- higher, and Otospiralin is expressed 40-times higher in cochlea associated degradation. Although enzymatic assays are still needed to versus vestibular samples. Otogelin is expressed 65-fold higher in determine the inhibitory properties of SERPINA2, our findings provide vestibular tissue over cochlea replicating previous expression studies the first in vitro evidence for SERPINA2 expression and suggest an in the mouse. These data represent one of the first high-resolution activity distinct from its closest homologue, SERPINA1. transcriptome maps of the human inner ear and may prove useful as a resource for prioritization of candidate genes for the study of hearing P11.146 loss. Effects of a dietary intervention with red wine, dealcoholized red wine and gin on the expression of SIRT1 in human peripheral P11.144 blood mononuclear cells RNA-seq uncovers the influence of structural variants on D. Corella1, C. Andres-Lacueva2, G. Chiva-Blanch3, R. Estruch3, O. Portoles1, transcriptome diversity E. Serna4, M. Urpi-Sarda2, M. Guillen1; E. Ait Yahya Graison, A. Reymond; 1University of Valencia and CIBER OBN, Valencia, Spain, 2University of Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland. Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 4Faculty of Structural variation (SV) of DNA segments has been identified as a Medicine. University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain. major source of genetic diversity, but a comprehensive understanding Sirtuins are becoming increasingly recognized as important epigenetic of the phenotypic effect of these variants is only beginning to emerge. drug targets in aging and several metabolic diseases. The first sirtuin Our group and others established extensive maps of SVs in wild mice identified was silent mating type information regulation-2 homolog and inbred strains, covering ~11% of their autosomal genomes. SVs (SIRT1), considered a longevity gene. Resveratrol, a polyphenol shape tissue transcriptomes on a global scale and thus represent found in red wine, is known to activate SIRT1. Various studies have a substantial source for within-species phenotypic variation. The demonstrated that resveratrol extends the life span of diverse species recently described RNA-seq method has brought transcriptome through activation of SIRT1. On the other hand, some studies have analysis to a new level, as it addresses gene expression at nucleotide reported that alcohol intake can also increase SIRT1 expression. resolution and alternative splicing events simultaneously. We used Our aim was to investigate the effects of a dietary intervention with these advantages to unravel the effects of SVs on expression. We red wine (resveratrol+alcohol), dealcoholized red wine (resveratrol) generated by ultra high-throughput sequencing on Illumina Genome and gin (alcohol) on the expression of SIRT1 in humans. 73 men Analyzer II >450 millions RNA-seq reads from brain and liver of three (60+/-8 years) were enrolled in a crossover study in which three mouse inbred strains (129S2, DBA/2J and C57BL/6J) to monitor dietary interventions (28 days each) were randomized. During these expression changes of transcripts that map within and outside SVs. interventions the same subjects must take 100 ml of gin (or 272 ml of We used TopHat and Cufflinks to map, assemble and estimate the red wine or 272 ml of dealcoholized red wine per day. We analyzed abundance of the different isoforms. Results show that SVs impact SIRT1 expression in 66 subjects who completed the trial. Total RNA gene expression and splicing diversity of genes lying within, but also was extracted from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC). RNA that of genes which present structural variation in their 5’ and/or 3’ levels were measured with real-time PCR and normalized using the Ct regions. SV related genes are enriched among isoforms differentially method of relative quantification. We checked 31 housekeeping genes, expressed between strains (p-val = 5e-08 and 8e-04 in 129S2 and and GADPH was used. We observed that the dietary intervention with DBA/2J respectively). red wine, dealcoholized red wine and gin statistically increased SIRT1 This study provides a unique opportunity to extensively gauge the gene expression (about a 11%) compared to baseline levels (1.14+/- influence of structural variants on the transcriptome complexity and 0.5 vs 1.03+/-0.03; P=0.008). In conclusion, our results suggest regulation. that both resveratrol and ethanol contribute to increase SIRT1 gene expression in human PBMC.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 383 P11.147 P11.149 Architecture and patterns of population differentiation of sNPs An integrative bioinformatics pipeline for structural variation in drug response pathways analysis of whole-genome sequencing data C. G. Lee1,2,3, M. Bachtiar2, J. Wang2, S. S. Chong2; G. Escaramís, C. Tornador, L. Bassaganyas, J. M. C. Tubio, S. Ossowski, R. 1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of Rabionet, X. Estivill; Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 3DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School, Center Genomic Regulation (CRG-UPF), Barcelona, Spain. Singapore, Singapore. Recent introduction of high-throughput sequencing technologies has Response to drugs varies amongst different populations. We increased research activities in efficient computational tools for the hypothesized that these differences in drug response are influenced identification of structural variants (SV) and their association with by Single-Nucleotide-Polymorphisms (SNPs) that are highly human diseases. We have designed a pipeline (PeSV-Fisher) for differentiated amongst the different populations. We thus examined the analysis of paired-end and mate-paired sequencing data, using a the SNP architecture and patterns of population-differentiation (F ) combination of geometrical paired-end mapping strategies (PEM) and ST of SNPs in genes of drug-response-pathways (DRP) in the human depth-of-coverage analysis(DOC), and focused on the identification genome using a gene-based ‘functional region-directed approach. A of somatic variation. It is capable of analyzing several samples total of 500,000 SNPs were found to localize to 715 genes of 66 DRPs. simultaneously and provide a list of variants and their carriers. The 5’/3’UTRs of genes in most DRPs exhibit significantly higher SNP PEM is used for the identification of four types of SV: insertions, density than the average genome SNP density while the coding region deletions, inversions and translocations. Read-pairs with a phred- showed the reverse trend suggesting that the UTRs of DRP genes are based quality score over 35 are classified into four categories: (1) more polymorphic while the coding regions are more constrained and correct order and orientation (insertions, deletions and normal); (2) highlighting that differences in drug response may be more likely due wrong orientation (inversions); (3) mapping to different chromosomes to differences in the expression of these genes and not to differences in (translocations); and (4) unpaired or unmapped. The empirical the protein structure/function. Significantly, non-synonymous coding- distribution of the insert size is calculated from the first category, SNPs of 2 DRPs of drugs involved in vasoconstriction and ischemic and used to define cut-off sizes to discriminate read-pairs supporting heart diseases were found to be significantly population differentiated insertions or deletions. Then, a clustering procedure to group read- suggesting that population differences in response to these drugs may pairs pointing to the same SV is performed. Breakpoints of presumed be due to population differences in SNPs of these pathways. Notably, SV are predicted from each cluster containing at least two read-pairs. SNPs in most regions, except promoter and 3’UTR, of the genes Further support for identified variants is obtained by DOC analysis. involved in drugs affecting the Sympathetic Nerve Pathway (SNPy) The genome is fragmented into non-overlapping 100 nt intervals. exhibit significant population differentiation suggesting that there may The number of sequences mapping to each fragment is counted be population differences in response to drugs targeting this SNPy and normalized based on GC-content. This values are fed into a pathway. Hence this study highlights potential population differences segmentation algorithm. In addition, sequences from the 4th category in the response to drugs that target specific pathways with high F . mapping around the breakpoints of the predicted SV are checked for ST split reads using GEM. P11.148 A sNP array evaluation tool to identify autosomal recessive P11.150 conditions in the offspring of consanguineous unions. the new method for quantitative tracking of t cell clones. K. J. Wierenga1, Z. Jiang2, A. M. Alazami3, F. S. Alkuraya3, N. F. Tsinoremas2; I. Z. Mamedov, I. V. Zvyagin, S. V. Ustyugova, V. Y. Dorodnykh, O. V. 1OUHSC, Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 2University of Miami, Miami, FL, Britanova, D. A. Bolotin, D. M. Chudakov, Y. B. Lebedev; United States, 3King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russ. Acad. Sci., Saudi Arabia. Moscow, Russian Federation. Introduction. The individual repertoire of T Cell Receptors (TCRs) is a mirror of Mendelian disorders for which the genetic basis has been identified is functioning of an immune system that keeps detailed information increasing rapidly. These disorders pose a challenge to the clinician to concerning infectious and autoimmune conditions. Here we have diagnose. In a consanguineous union, the offspring has various runs of developed a new approach that enables unbiased quantitative homozygosity (ROHs), identifiable by single nucleotide polymorphism analysis of the human TCR V beta repertoire by mass sequencing. (SNP) array technology. We hypothesized that an evaluation tool that The method based on direct amplification of TCR cDNA with universal identifies all genes associated with OMIM-annotated AR conditions primers with subsequent next generation sequencing. Two next in ROHs of a patient will allow the clinician to compare the patient’s generation sequencing platforms were compared showing good clinical features with the phenotypes of these autosomal recessive (AR) correspondence of obtained results. We employed the new method conditions, making a SNP-array the preferred diagnostic approach. to perform detailed long-term tracking of the fate of T cell clones after Approach/Results. high-dose chemotherapy and autologous hematopoietic stem cell We developed a Perl-CGI online evaluation tool that allows the clinician transplantation (HSCT). We show that multiple clones survived the to identify genes associated with OMIM-annotated AR conditions in transplantation procedure, some of them being essentially suppressed, ROHs obtained from SNP-array. It incorporates the OMIM database but some of them expanding and fighting infections early after HSCT. and other genetic databases, providing the user with a summary of We believe that wide application of the proposed approach will lead genes and pertinent genetic information mapping to the query ROHs. to better understanding of infectious and autoimmune conditions, and The scale of gene search on the query ROHs can be adjusted. We have development of the individual sequence-based diagnostics of immune tested this tool using cases from our clinical practice. In this manner status. we diagnosed known AR conditions that had remained unrecognized until employment of this tool. P11.151 Conclusions. Epimutations in teratocarcinoma development SNP-array can be employed to determine the ROHs in the setting of N. Sincic1, M. Vlahovic1, F. Bulic-Jakus1, Z. Herceg2; consanguinity. These ROHs can be evaluated for OMIM-annotated AR 1School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia, 2International Agency for Research on conditions. We have developed a genomic SNP-array evaluation tool Cancer, Lyon, France. allowing the clinician to evaluate for these AR conditions. We have Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCTs) are the most frequent cancers in demonstrated its usefulness in clinical practice, and believe that the young men. Present study takes advantage of the experimental mouse SNP-array, together with this Perl-CGI evaluation tool, will change the teratocarcinoma (TCa) model, a powerful tool for detecting /monitoring diagnostic approach in the setting of consanguinity. alterations, including epigenetic disruptions, during a timeframe of cancer development in vivo. TCas were obtained by transplanting 7,5-days-old C3H embryos under the kidney capsule of syngeneic adults. Animals were killed after 2, 4, 6 or 8 weeks. Bisulfite modification of gDNA was performed and DNA methylation status was analyzed by pyrosequencing assay.Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 338844 TCas exhibited two time points of intensive growth; in the 4th and 8th syndrome, confirmed by microsatellite analysis to have maternal UPD week. Significant changes in Oct3/4 DNA methylation were found 15, was used as a positive control. during 8 weeks TCa development. From the 4th week, TCas showed To evaluate the UPD detection approach, we confirmed heterodisomy significant Oct3/4 hypermethylation when compared to testicular tissue. along the long arm of chromosome 15 in case of the control patient, but Only 8 weeks old TCas showed strong negative correlation between also revealed a maternally inherited isodisomic segment encomapssing Oct3/4 DNA methylation and TCa growth. Significant changes in the region. Using genome-wide high-density SNP markers gives an DNA methylation of Nanog promoter were found during 8 weeks TCa advantage over locus-specific analyses for detecting UPD events and development. All TCas showed significant Nanog hypomethylation describing the mechanisms of formation. So far our results in general when compared to testicular tissue. We noticed negative correlation population and MR trios suggest that UPD is not extensively present in between TCa weight and Nanog DNA methylation in 4 weeks old the human genome. A similar outcome has previously been reported in TCas. Scgb3a1 and Prss21 showed constant hypermethylation in other cohorts of patients with idiopathic MR by SNP arrays. TCas when compared to normal testicular tissue.We suggest that Nanog DNA hypomethylation represents an early cancerogenic force P11.154 pushing cells into TGCT/teratocarcinoma development while Oct3/4 Haploinsufficiency of the CLIP2 gene is not the cause of DNA hypermethylation seems to compensate cancer initiation and visuospatial impairment in Williams-Beuren syndrome inhibit cancer progression. If Oct3/4 is not methylated, intense cancer F. Kooy1, G. Vandeweyer1, N. Van der Aa2; progression can take place. Genes involved in testicular differentiation 1University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 2University and University Hospital seems to remain suppressed during TCa cancerogenesis. Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium. Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a contiguous gene deletion P11.152 syndrome, associated with a recognizable facial appearance and Genetic variation in monozygotic twins an unusual cognitive profile. In total 26-28 genes are located in the S. White1, E. Turbitt2, R. Chavez2, J. Ellis2, E. Joo2, B. Novakovic2, R. commonly deleted region on chromosome 7q11.23 that is 1.5 Mb in Andronikos2, R. Saffery2, J. Craig2; size. The study of atypical deletions and mouse models with deletions 1Monash Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 2Murdoch of individual genes has enabled limited unravelling of the relationship Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. of the individual genes to each of the clinical features. Three genes Twins are defined as two births from a single pregnancy. Fraternal, are believed responsible for the Williams-Beuren syndrome cognitive or dizygotic twins, are derived from separate fertilization events and profile, including LIMK1, CLIP2 and GTF2I(RD1/2) , yet no specific share on average 50% of their DNA, as do any other siblings. However, deletions or mutations in any of these 3 individual genes have approximately one third of twins are derived from a single egg that splits been described. A major role for the CLIP2 gene in the cognitive post-zygotically. These are referred to as identical or monozygotic characteristics of WBS has been suggested in reports of patients with twins, and are considered to be genetically the same. Based on this partial deletions of the WBS region not including CLIP2 , that displayed assumption, twin studies have been considered a powerful tool for only mild or no visual-spatial impairment. determining the contribution of genetic versus environmental factors We describe here two patients with deletions taking away exon 3-15 of to specific phenotypes. the CLIP2 gene in two sibs. Specific deletions of the CLIP2 gene have In recent years there have been reports suggesting that genetic not been reported before. Cognitive testing of both sibs revealed an differences within twin pairs due to somatic mosaicism may have intelligence in the normal range and showed no evidence for deficits been underestimated. To explore this further we have performed copy in visual-spatial construction. These data make it highly unlikely that number variation (CNV) analysis on DNA from four different sources haploinsufficiency of CLIP2 on its own causes the cognitive disabilities - placenta, buccal swabs, umbilical vein vascular endothelial cells associated with this syndrome. The cognitive profile in the Williams and cord blood mononuclear cells - from four different monozygotic Beuren syndrome can therefore not be explained by dissecting twin pairs (32 samples in total) using the Illumina HumanOmni1-Quad the contribution of individual genes but has to be considered the beadchip. consequence of the interaction between several genes within the To date we have identified a number of potential mosaic CNVs, either deleted region. between tissues within an individual or between individuals of a twin pair. We are currently confirming these findings using different P11.155 molecular techniques such as high resolution melting curve analysis, New clinical delineation of the 14q11.2 duplication syndrome and are looking at single nucleotide variant differences using next- based on a new case and the contribution of maternal UPD14 in generation sequencing. the previous patient F. Martinez1, S. Mayo1, F. Galan2, S. Monfort1, J. Jover3, M. Rosello1, S. Oltra1, P11.153 C. Orellana1; sNP array study of uniparental disomy in Estonian mental 1Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain, 2Centro de Genética Humana, retardation patients and general population Alicante, Spain, 3Hospital General Universitario de Alicante, Alicante, Spain. M. Nõukas1, K. Männik1, S. Parkel1, R. Mägi1,2,3, M. Remm1,2, A. Metspalu1,2,4, In 2007 we reported a de novo duplication of 14q11.2 A. Kurg1; (5.38 Mb) associated to short stature, mild mental retardation, 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, hypotonia and minor dysmorphic features. Later the complementary 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for Human microdeletion syndrome was characterized and narrow down to ~35 Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Estonian Genome kb, with SUPT16H and CHD8 as the best candidate genes. Here we Centre, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. present the new clinical delineation of the 14q11.2 duplication syndrome Detecting loss of heterozygosity or uniparental disomy (UPD) with based on a new case, as well as on the recent finding that the previous whole-genome SNP arrays might be as informative as copy-number patient also showed maternal uniparental disomy 14 (UPD14). In data in unexplained cases of genomic disorders. Although these copy- consequence, many of the clinical features previously associated neutral rearrangements have not been extensively studied at whole- to 14q11.2 duplication, were indeed due to maternal UPD14. These genome level so far, it has been shown that SNP microarrays are features include prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, hypotonia, reliable in detecting known UPD regions. orthopedic problems, motor delay, early onset of puberty and minor We report a cohort of Estonian patients with idiopathic mental dysmorphic features of the face.On the other hand, array-CGH analysis retardation (MR) and their unaffected family members screened by of a new patient identified a de novo duplication of 4.62 Mb in 14q11.2 Illumina Infinium HD whole-genome genotyping arrays. To detect (18679179-23294903; hg18). She presented expressive language possible inconsistencies in Mendelian inheritance as indicative in delay, no motor delay, behavioral problems and minor dysmorphic UPD, we compared genotype data for 36 parent-offspring trios. As a features: hypothelorism, bushy eyebrows, flat nasal root, highly arched reference we used 48 parent-offspring trios provided by the Estonian palate, bilateral genu recurvatum and dorso-lumbar kyphosis. Other Genome Centre at the University of Tartu to investigate possible UPD clinical features, such as growth parameters or IMR, were normal regions in general population by applying the same genotyping platform at examination. Based on the common clinical signs between both and UPD detection approach. A patient diagnosed with Prader-Will patients, we can conclude that 14q11.2 duplication only associates a Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 385 mild developmental delay and minor dysmorphic features, but no or platform for convenient analysis of clinical and other DNA samples in very mild cognitive impairment. a multitude of scenarios. This research received funding from the European Community’s P11.156 Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant The Efficiency of Double-Stranded DNA Formation in cDNA agreement 201418, entitled READNA. synthesis can be crucial for Precision of microarray Expression Analysis P11.158 H. G. Thormar1,2, B. Gudmundsson1,2, F. S. Eiriksdottir2, G. H. Gunnarsson1,2, transcriptome analysis in haematopoiesis in development and M. K. Magnusson1, S. Kil3, J. Hsu3, J. J. Jonsson1,4; disease 1Univ. of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Lifeind ehf., Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Ohio M. A. Kostadima1, S. Nuernberg2,3, W. H. Ouwehand2,3,4, P. Bertone1; State University, Columbus, OH, United States, 4Landspitali - University 1EMBL - European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland. Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Department of Haematology, University Introduction. The quality and reproducibility of microarray expression of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3NHS Blood and Transplant, experiments within and between laboratories are compromised by the Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, complexity of the samples and procedures. We used Two-Dimensional Cambridge, United Kingdom. Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis (2D-SDE) to investigate Platelets are the second most abundant cell in the blood and are derived the quality and reproducibility of the cDNA synthesis. 2D-SDE can from haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) through a process named measure double-stranded cDNA the essential template for T7 RNA megakaryopoiesis. The process of platelet formation by polyploid polymerase. megakaryocytes (MKs) in the bone marrow is tightly regulated and Material and Methods. SuperScript III reverse-transcriptase was each MK produces about 3000-6000 platelets. The anucleated platelet used to synthesize cDNA from Universal Human Reference RNA plays an important role in maintaining haemostasis by surveying the (Stratagene) using T7(dt) primer. The samples were synthesized both vessel wall for damage and if identified initiate repair. Rare inherited according to kit protocol and according to our improved methodology. Mendelian disorders of platelets may be associated with impaired The amount of dsDNA was mesured with 2D-SDE. The cDNA was platelet function, abnormal platelet numbers and/or volume and some transcribed with T7 RNA Polymerase and the labeled aRNA hybridized of these disorders are associated with a propensity of bleeding. to Agilent microarray containing probes from 230 genes. Each gene Studying the transcriptome of platelets is challenging given that was represented by 10 probes and each probe was replicated six times platelets survive only nine days on average and their mRNA degrades to estimate the variability of the experiments. Results were analyzed rapidly. We have therefore used high-throughput technologies using the R software. (microarrays and next generation sequencing platforms) to gain a Results. The amount of double-stranded cDNA after synthesizing the comprehensive insight in the repertoire of actively expressed RNA same RNA samples six times was very variable ranging between 0 transcripts in megakaryocytes, the precursors of platelets. and 73%. Microarray experiments showed that the higher the dsDNA In this study we have applied high-throughput sequencing of RNA percentage the fewer probes had significant variability between from human MKs that have been obtained by in vitro culture of purified samples. Approximately 15% of probes showed variability (p = 0,05) CD34+ HSCs in the presence of thrombopoietin and interleukin 1β. between samples when the dsDNA percentage was between 12% We integrate these data with ChIP-seq data of two key transcription and 35%. In contrast, only 3% of probes showed variability between factors in megakaryopoiesis and platelet formation (MEIS1 and NFE2) samples when the dsDNA percentage was 69% and 73%. in order to study genome-wide regulatory targets and their role in Conclusions. Our results indicate that an important component in driving lineage-specific transcription in megakaryocytes. imprecision in T7 RNA polymerase-based microarray expression analysis can be explained by the amount of double-stranded cDNA P11.159 synthesized. Parallel Detection of copy Number Variation and Loss of Heterozygosity with cGH microarrays P11.157 J. M. Geoghegan, X. Zhang, E. Rorem, T. A. Richmond, K. O’Moore, D. Array-DAsH: Dynamic microarrays for broad utility in DNA Raterman, C. J. Shaw, R. R. Selzer; fingerprinting, genotyping, and re-sequencing in diagnostics Roche NimbleGen, Inc., Madison, WI, United States. S. Gibson1, N. Zahra1, J. Avarre2, J. van Helvoort3, S. Matysiak3, C. Schäfauer2, High resolution array CGH has been widely used to investigate DNA A. J. Brookes1; copy number variation (CNV) associated with complex disorders. 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Genewave, Paris, France, Disease association studies have become increasingly focused on 3FlexGen B.V., AL Leiden, Netherlands. CNVs, and several recent reports show links between CNVs and Despite the emergence of ultra-high-throughput DNA analysis platforms, schizophrenia, autism, and cancer, among others. However, many it is probable that the need for low cost and simple/automated methods copy neutral events undetected by conventional array CGH, including that robustly assay specific fragments of DNA will remain. Examples copy neutral loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and uniparental disomy include DNA diagnostics of infectious disease, Mendelian disease, (UPD), also contribute to disease phenotypes. Regions of the genome certain cancer situations, environmental monitoring, and forensics. absent of heterozygosity are usually determined through the detection In such cases, microarrays offer a convenient and flexible way of of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for which each parent has analysing DNA, but suffer from imperfect fidelity if hybridisations are contributed a different allele. conducted at a single stringency. Arrays can, however, fully resolve all Until recently, cytogenetic research needing both high resolution, short DNA sequence variations in all sequence contexts if hybridisation high quality copy number analysis and LOH detection required two and/or washing entails a dynamically changing temperature range with separate array platforms. At Roche NimbleGen we have developed real time signal monitoring. a combination array CGH/LOH detection platform by adding probes This ‘Dynamic Allele Specific Hybridisation’ (DASH) principal requires that respond to SNPs to existing array CGH designs. Two probes interpretation of surface-phase melt-curves, enabling DNA fragments detect each SNP location, including a perfect match probe (A allele) to be re-sequenced with high precision compared to standard arrays, and a mismatch probe (B allele) similar to our comparative genomic in both a quantitative and sensitive manner (alleles detectable at a few sequencing platform. Using our patented probe design strategy, the percent of the input DNA). detection of over 600,000 common SNPs (MAF >0.4) was tested to Current work fuses the original plate-based DASH approach, with ensure the best responding SNP probes were added to the array CGH the semi-automated HybLive microarray platform (Genewave) and designs. We will show data from a new 6X630K platform that allows on-slide oligo synthesis using the FlexArrayer (FlexGen). Single high resolution and high sensitivity detection of both CNVs and LOH base variants, small indels, and microsatellites are resolved with following the standard CGH workflow. Samples with known regions of melting temperature differences of up to ~10°C. ‘Array-DASH’ is now UPD were used to assess the performance of this new design with a being assessed for real world diagnostics applications involving re- resolution for detecting LOH at approximately 1MB. sequencing, multiplexed mutation scoring, regional scanning for mutations, and combinations of the above - providing a single, generic Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene product function and Epigenetics 338866 J11.01 consist of islands of purines or pyrimidines. Furthermore, while over investigating the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms at -7 95% of the genes lack more than one short tandem repeat (STR) in & -138 positions on mGP gene promoter activity their core promoters, certain gene promoters are exceptionally rich M. Taghizadeh, P. Ahmadi, M. Keramatipour; in multiple STRs (e.g. eight consecutive STRs in UBE2QL1, and six Tehran University of Medical Sciences, School of Medicine, Department of STRs in GRIA2). We found sequence bias for the majority of those Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. promoters across species, supporting functional roles for them in The matrix Gla protein (MGP) is an important inhibitor of vessel and gene expression. Genes downstream to those promoters were also cartilage calcification that is strongly expressed in human calcified, found to be of ontologic importance (i.e. we were able to track the atherosclerotic plaques. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) majority of those genes to the lower species such as S. Cerevisiae at -7 & -138 positions on MGP gene have been suggested to play a and C. elegans). The exceptional promoters presented in this study role in susceptibility towards Coronary Artery Disease (CAD). Such a lack the conventional motifs for the TATA, and TATA-less promoters, role is possibly due to the effect of these SNPs on the level of gene hence offering novel mechanisms for gene expression. They may also expression. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible effect provide potential mechanisms for inter-individual variations in gene of -7 and -138 SNPs on MGP gene promoter activity in vitro. expression, and complex traits/disorders. To achieve this aim, four appropriate vectors that express GFP under the control of different haplotypes of MGP promoter have been J11.04 constructed. To assess the effects of haplotypes on promoter activity, screening of three mtDNA mutations using PcR-RFLP technique vectors were transfected into the Hek293 cells and relative expression a province of iran of GFP was quantified. Analysis of data using Student’s T-test, F. Azadegan-Dehkordi1, M. Montazer-Zohouri2, E. Farrokhi1, A. Shirmardi3, revealed that G-7A SNP has a significant effect on promoter activity M. Saedi-Marghmaleki1, Z. Ataei4, S. Reisi1, M. Abolhasani1, H. Khazraei5, M. in cultured cells. Presence of nucleotide A in -7 position resulted in Akbari6, M. Hashmzadeh-Chaleshtori7; 12% increase in promoter activity (p<0.002). T-138C SNP did not 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center. Shahrekord Univ. of Med.Sci, show a significant change in promoter activity (p>0.7). The maximum Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics school difference in promoter activity is seen between vector containing of Medical Sciences-Tarbiat Modares university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of A-C and G-T haplotypes (p<0.0005). Less significant differences in Iran, 3General Physician, Welfare Organization of Chaharmahal va Bakhtiari promoter activity were shown between A-T and G-T haplotypes as well province, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Human Genetics, Iran as A-T and G-C haplotypes (p<0.05). University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Assistant Professor of ENT, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, J11.02 Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Assistant Professor of Medical Genetics, Tarbiat Genetic analysis of HtR2A and HttLPR polymorphisms in Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Professor of Human Russian population using biochips. Genetics, Cellular and Molecular Reserch Center, Shahrekord university of D. Galaktionova1, O. Gra1, N. Filimonova1, Y. Lysov1, V. Golimbet2, T. Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. Nasedkina1; Non-syndromic hearing loss may be induced by mutations in both 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Moscow, Russian Federation, nuclear and mitochondrial genes. Mutations in mtDNA are present 2Mental Health Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. in less than 1% of the children with pre-lingual deafness but are Previously it was show that both serotonin 2A receptor (5-HTR2A) and more prevalent later. Most of the molecular defects responsible for serotonin transporter linked promoter region (HTTLPR) were important mitochondrial disorder, associated with hearing loss may be induced for normal functioning of the brain. Molecular genetic studies revealed by mutations in the 12SrRNA and tRNA genes. This aim of this study that HTTLPR and 5-HTR2A polymorphisms were associated with was to investigate the frequency of three common mtDNA mutations schizophrenia and possibly influenced clinical outcome or response including A1555G, A3243G and A7445G in a cohort of autosomal to treatment. recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) subjects in Sistan va The objective of this study was to develop a biochip to determine Baluchestan province. serotonergic system genes polymorphisms for further clinical Material and Methods: In this descriptive- experimental based study, a application. A biochip allows to analyze a spectrum of allelic variants total of 110 methods: ARNSHL subjects from Sistan va Baluchestan in two different genes such as HTR2A (rs6311, rs6313, rs6314 and province were investigated for three common mtDNA mutations using rs7997012) and HTTLPR (rs28914832). To estimate the accuracy of PCR-RFLP procedure. The possible mutations were confirmed by the method we examined 120 DNA samples of healthy individuals in direct sequencing. Russian population. The results of hybridization on biochip showed Results: None of the A1555G and A7445G mutations were detected 100% coincidence with direct sequencing. The genotype distributions in this study. However, we found one sample to carry A3243G mutation were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The frequencies of serotonergic (0.9%). Moreover abolishing a MTTL1 restriction site close to A3243G system gene alleles in healthy individuals are compared with allele mutation revealed a G3316A allelic variant in 0.9% of patients studied. frequencies in patients with schizophrenia to find out susceptibility Discussion: This study showed that mtDNA mutations are responsible allelic variants of the disease in Russians. for less than 1% of pre-lingual ARNSHL associated subjects. The The work was supported by Federal Task Programme for Scientific and present study will improve the genetic counseling of hearing impaired Technical Research (grants ## 02.740.11.0869 and 02.527.11.0006). patients in Sistan va Baluchestan province, Iran. J11.03 J11.05 Exceptional human core promoter nucleotide compositions study of genetically determined production of interleukin-1b H. Darvish1, M. Olad-Nabi1, S. Ghasemi Firouzabadi1, M. Karimlou2, A. E. M. Vasilyeva, G. F. Galikeeva, E. V. Vorobieva, V. Y. Gorbunova; Heidari1, S. Jamldini ezabady1, M. Ohadi1; Bashkir State Pedagogical University of the name M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Federation. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biostatistics, Revealed increasing levels of interleukin-1 beta (IL-1b) have University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, “conditional” healthy people in the republic of Bashkortostan. Islamic Republic of Iran. Investigated 180 “conditionally” healthy individuals. The level of The proximal promoter sequences contain basic motifs for the production IL1b sample was divided into groups: Group 1 (n = 96) - expression of the downstream genes. We present genome-scale product IL1b to 10 pg / ml, group 2 (n = 56) - from 10 to 50 pg / ml, computational analyses of the 120-bp immediate upstream sequences group 3 (n = 28) - above 50 pg / ml. to the +1 transcription start sites (TSSs) of 10,117 human protein- To identify genetic characteristics of the regulation of production IL-1B, coding genes, and unravel exceptional genes in respect with the core have studied the distribution of genotypes and alleles of the family, promoter nucleotide composition. Our data reveal that while in 99% interleukin-1 in the three groups studied: IL1b (C3953T), an antagonist of the genes the absolute purine/pyrimidine ratio ranges between of IL-1 receptor - IL1Ra (VNTR-polymorphism), IL-1 receptor - IL1RI 0.2 - 2.5, certain genes show exceptional skew in this balance (e.g. ( T976C). ratios of 82.3 in VWA3A, 61.5 in Sox5, and 24.0 in BRWD3), and Results. In group 1, revealed a high frequency of combinations of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 387 genotypes E1E1 / / I / I / / CC (p = 0,05, χ2 = 3,7), it provides a low J11.08 production and reception of IL-1b, high competition for the cytokine in silico and ex vivo analysis of two chimeric polytope receptors with anatagonistom. Balance between the production, constructs for applications in dendritic cell-based cancer expression and inhibition of synthesis of IL-1 plays a key role in the immuno-genetherapy course of the inflammatory process. M. M. Forghanifard1, M. Gholamin2, M. R. Abbaszadegan2; In group 2, and 3 revealed a high frequency of combinations of 1Islamic Azad University, Damghan Branch, Damghan, Islamic Republic of Iran, genotypes E1E2 / / I / II / / TC (p <0.05), whereas in group 1 is the 2Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Bu-Ali Research combination does not occur. This interaction between genotype Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic causes high production and reception of IL-1b, and also promotes the Republic of Iran. launch of a cascade of reactions involving other cytokines. In silico techniques are suited for discovery of new and development of existing vaccines. Cancer immunization using the epitopes derived J11.06 from the processing of proteins that are preferentially expressed on Establishment of stable cHO cell line, expressing recombinant tumor cells appears to be a reasonable approach to induce antitumor HO-1 and study of its cytoprotective property’ immunity aimed at achieving therapeutic advantage. It would be S. Ebrahimian Motlagh1, R. Halabian2, M. Jalili2, M. Habibi Roudkenar2; beneficial to use T cell epitopes from more than one tumor Ag to 1Islamic azad university, Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic increase disease coverage and prevent the emergence of tumor- Republic of Iran, 2Iranian blood transfusion organization,research center, escape variants. In current study, the related sequences of HLA- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. restricted immunogenic epitopes for some cancer/testis antigens which Exposure of mammalian cells to oxidative stress conditions induces are highly overexpressed in cancers were obtained from Genbank. Two Heme Oxygenase-1(HO-1) as well as 32-KD a heat shock protein. chimeric sequences were constructed by fusing the selected epitopes Heme oxygenases are rate- limiting enzymes in Heme degradation. using hydrophobic amino acid linkers. The in silico gene analysis and Three distinct isoforms of Heme oxygenase have been described: multi parameter gene optimization of the synthetic chimer genes were HO-1, HO-2 and HO-3.Application of pharmacological agents and performed using Stand-alone softwares. The mRNA and recombinant genetic probes to manipulate HO has brought about to new insight into protein secondary-structures were predicted and 3D structural stability the complex relationship of the Heme-HO system with the biological of the synthetic proteins were analyzed. The VaxiJen server was and pathological system under investigation. The strategies used to used to predict the immunogenecity of the whole antigens. Finally target HO-1 offer promising therapeutic opportunities for the effective the desired properties were verified by Gen-Script (NJ, USA) and treatment of many diseases, including diabetes, obesity, hypertension, the multimeric genes were synthesized. Monocytes-derived dendritic heart disease, cancer, autoimmune disease and even allograft cells (DCs) of a healthy donor were electroporated with synthesized rejection. chimeric genes. T cells were primed with transfected DCs and lytic In our study ho-1 gene was cloned to pcDNA3.1 plasmid by using effects of the generated CTL were measured with Cytotoxicity assay. genetic engineering method. The recombinant vector was transfected Based on in silico and primary ex vivo results, this is promising that to CHO(Chinese Hamster Ovarian) cell line in order to establish stable the structural models for chimeric genes from antigenic epitopes of cells expressing ho-1 gene and the expression of HO-1 confirmed by CTAs which are presented may define accessibility, solubility and RT-PCR .Then CHO-HO-1 cell lines were treated by variety of Ho immunogenicity for applications in cancer immuno-genetherapy. 2 2 concentrations in different times compared with CHO-pcDNA3.1 and the cell viability was measured by MTT assay. The results indicated that the expression of ho-1 lead to cytoprotective effect since the CHO-ho-1 cells showed higher viability rate compared P12 molecular basis of mendelian disorders with the control cells. On the other hand the Flow-Cytometric test revealed that the ho-1 has anti-apoptotic effect as the CHO-ho-1 cells had delay in promoting apoptosis after Ho treatment in comparison 2 2 with CHO-pcDNA3.1 cells. P12.001 targeted re-sequencing of the 22q11 region in atypical DiGeorge J11.07 patients. scN1A gene polymorphism in iranian patients with migraine B. A. Nowakowska1,2, J. K. J. Van Houdt1, A. Swillen1, K. DeVriendt1, J. R. M. Ansari1, A. Ebrahimi2, M. Moghadasi3, N. Hatamnejadian1, B. Sedaqati Vermeesch1; Khayat1, F. Abbasi1, F. Rezaei2, M. S. Fallah2; 1Center for Human Genetics, K.U.Leuven, UZ Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium, 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 2Foundation for Polish Science (FNP), Warsaw, Poland. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center The 22q11 deletion syndrome, also called the DiGeorge syndrome (KHGRC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 34Department of Neurology, Tehran (OMIM 188400) is the most common chromosomal deletion syndrome University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. in humans with an incidence of 1 in 2-4000 live births. Although the Introduction: Migraine is a prevalent and debilitating disease affecting clinical presentation of 22q11 syndrome is variable, the major clinical a large proportion of the population. Mutations in three genes characteristics of the syndrome are the intellectual disability, congenital (CACNA1A, ATP1A2 and SCN1A) have been detected in familial heart anomalies, velopharyngeal abnormalities and characteristic facial and, more rarely, in sporadic cases with migraine. Here we report appearance. Also these patients are at significant risk for psychiatric the molecular analysis for 2 SNPs in SCN1A gene in affected Iranian disorders. In addition, to the variability amongst patients with the “typical” patients with migraine. phenotypic features, occasionally (about 1/100) 22q11 deletion carriers Material and Methods: Patients with clinical diagnosis of migraine present atypical malformations. Despite intensive studies it remains according to the international headache society criteria entered in the unclear what causes this phenotypic variability of patients with the same study. SCN1A gene polymorphisms (rs7601520 and rs2298771) were deletion. We hypothesize that the distinct rare features are caused by investigated using direct sequencing method. unmasking a recessive allele which occurs at low frequency in the general Results: Genotypes for rs7601520 were AG, AA and GG in 23 (56.1%), population. In our study we focused on 24 patients with 22q11 deletion and 14 (34.15%) and 4 (9.76%) respectively. Allele frequency were one of the phenotypic features outside the traditional 22q11 spectrum, like A and G in 51 (62.2%) and 31 (37.8%) respectively. Genotypes for anorectal malformation, arthrogryposis, polymicrogyria, eye anomalies, rs2298771 were AG, AA and GG in 26 (57.8%), 15 (33.3 %) and 4 inner ear malformations and laryngeal web. For identification of the (8.9%) respectively. Allele frequency were A and G in 56 (62.2%) and functional role of genes within the common deletion we captured coding 34 (37.8%) respectively. parts of the remaining 22q11 region using custom designed Nimblegen Conclusion: Genotype and allele frequency were in the range of other capture arrays, and re-sequenced the enriched samples with 454 GS studies. Further analysis f other common SNPs in this gene and in FLX Titanium chemistry. Analysis was performed based on comparison comparison with healthy controls could be helpful to study association of variants present in patients with the same phenotypic feature against with the risk of migraine. variants found in patients without that characteristic. The candidate genes responsible for particular features will be presented.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 338888 P12.002 the Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms. Demographic data, A 14kb homologous deletion in intron2 of DmRt1 in two sisters disease severity, ocular pressure tests and betaxolol medication with 46,XY karyotype usages were recorded for each patient. The frequencies of the Arg16 B. Xiao, X. Ji, F. Long, W. Jiang, Y. Xing, J. Tao; and Gln27 alleles were found to be 48.8% and 72.07.%, respectively. Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University,Shanghai Institute Two haplotypes were estimated, i.e. Arg-Gln, Gly-Gln with frequencies for Pediatric research, Shanghai, China. of 5 (15.2%), 10 (30.3%). We found no statistical differences in the We describe two sisters with 46,XY karyotype in a consanguineous outcome of betaxolol treatment between the different haplotypes. We family manifested primary amenorrhea, no onset of puberty, no consider that other genetic factors, apart from ADRB2 polymorphisms, secondary sexual characteristics, small immature uterus and gonadal are involved in the outcome to the hypotensive response to topical dysgenesis. Mutations in known candidate genes including SRY, betaxolol . SOX9, DAX1, DMRT1, SF1, WT1, CBX2, DHH, SOX8 had been excluded. Genome wide copy number changes were analyzed by P12.005 running on SNP 6.0 arrays and a about 14kb homologous deletion Patients with Alagille syndrome and large deletions in JAG1 in intron 2 of DMRT1 was identified, PCR spanned the junction and gene. gap revealed healthy parents were heterozygous carriers. Using A. Skórka1,2, D. Jurkiewicz2, D. Gliwicz3, N. B. Spinner4, J. Gerfen4, E. Ciara2, comparative genomics in vertebrate organisms, generated by D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk2, D. Gieruszczak-Białek1,2, M. Kugaudo2, M. PhastCons on sequence alignments created by MULTIZ, we found Krajewska-Walasek2; several evolutionarily conserved segments in this 14kb region. Further 1Department of Pediatrics Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland, study on the potential effect of this noncoding sequence on DMRT1 2Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, expression is undergoing. Warsaw, Poland, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Immunology, the Children’s memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, P12.003 4Division of Human Genetics, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Aarskog-Scott syndrome : Report of the first duplication in the PA, United States. FGD1 gene. Alagille syndrome (AGS) is a complex autosomal-dominant I. Maystadt1,2, N. Ronce3,4, C. Hubert3, S. Vonwill3,4, K. Devriendt5, M. P. multisystem disorder with a highly variable expressivity. The main Moizard3,4, M. Raynaud3,4; phenotypic features include chronic cholestasis caused by paucity of 1Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique (IPG), Charleroi (Gosselies), Belgium, intrahepatic bile ducts, cardiac disease (mainly peripheral pulmonary 2Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix (FUNDP), Namur, Belgium, stenosis), posterior embryotoxon in the anterior chamber of the eyes, 3CHRU de Tours - Hôpital Bretonneau, Tours, France, 4INSERM U930 - CHRU vertebral defects and a typical face characterized by a triangular de Tours, Tours, France, 5University Hospitals Leuven (KUL), Leuven, Belgium. shape with prominent forehead, broad nasal bridge and a pointed chin. Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS), a rare X-linked condition characterized Current screening methods allow for identification of mutations in 70- by skeletal and genital anomalies, is caused by mutations in the 90% of individuals with AGS. Most of cases are caused by intragenic faciogenital dysplasia 1 (FGD1) gene. To date 27 distinct point point mutations in the JAG1 (Jagged1) gene localized on chromosome mutations and 2 deletions have been described. Here, we report on 20p12. A minority of AGS patients (3-6%) have microdeletions of a male patient presenting with highly suggestive clinical features of chromosome 20p12. AAS (postnatal growth retardation, widow’s peak, hypertelorism, short Here we present 6 Polish cases of Alagille syndrome with deletions nose, short broad hands, camptodactyly, cryptorchidism and shawl comprising a number of JAG1 exons or the entire JAG1 gene. Analysis scrotum). No mutation was found by sequencing of the entire coding was performed by multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification sequence of the FGD1 gene. Quantitative PCR and cDNA sequencing using SALSA MLPA KIT JAG1 (MRC-Holland). In two cases deletions analyses revealed a large out-of-frame tandem duplication of exons were inherited from one of the parents who presented with minimal 2-12 which probably occurred by unequal recombination between two symptoms. All 6 cases presented with classical symptoms: cholestasis Alu sequences. This maternally inherited duplication implicates the due to paucity of bile ducts, cardiac defects, eye and vertebral RhoGEF (DH or Dbl homology) and the first plekstrin homology (pH) anomalies and typical facies. One patient was also diagnosed with domains and is predicted to be a loss-of-function mutation. This is the hearing impairments, one with renal tubular acidosis and one with first duplication described in the FGD1 gene and systematic screening bilateral ureterovesical refluxes. of large rearrangements should be included in the diagnostic strategy The study was supported by Children’s Memorial Health Institute of AAS. Grant no. 212/10. P12.004 P12.006 ADRB2 gene polymorphisms and the ocular hypotensive X-linked Alport syndrome investigation in Hellenic families. response to topical betaxolol in mexican patients with open G624D mutation in COL4A5 may explain many familial hematuria angle glaucoma. cases in Greek mainland that hardly can be diagnosed as Alport L. Gonzalez-Huerta1, O. Messina1, I. Babayan1, F. Lara1, G. Pacheco1, S. syndrome Cuevas2; P. Demosthenous1, K. Voskarides1, M. Hadjigavriel2, M. Arsali3, C. Patsias3, P. 1HOSPITAL GENERAL DE MEXICO, MEXICO D.F., Mexico, 2HOSPITAL Zirogiannis4, P. Goudas5, A. Diamantopoulos5, K. Sombolos6, C. Stavrou7, E. GENERAL DE MEXICO, UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL AUTONOMA DE Alexopoulos8, A. Pierides9, C. Deltas1; MEXICO, MEXICO D.F., Mexico. 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Nephrology, Larnaca Glaucoma is defined as a disease characterized by loss of retinal General Hospital, Larnaca, Cyprus, 3Department of Nephrology, Nicosia ganglion cells, excavation of the optic nerve head, visual field defects General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Lamia Hospital, Lamia, Greece, 5Renal and eventually blindness, being the second leading cause of blindness Department, St Andrews General State Hospital, Patra, Greece, 6Department worldwide. The main risk factors include elevated intraocular pressure, of Nephrology, General Hospital G. Papanikolaou, Thessaloniki, Greece, age, ethnicity, family history and myopia. camenteiccionario - Ver 7Evangelismos Hospital, Paphos, Cyprus, 8Department of Nephrology, Aristotle diccionario detallaB-adrenergic receptors. ADRB2 (B-2 adrenergic University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, 9Department of Nephrology, receptor) is expressed in the ciliary body, trabecular meshwork Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. and wall of the vasculature of the optic nerve. Betaxolol is a beta The X-linked Alport syndrome (ATS) is caused by mutations in adrenergic blocker that acts selectively on beta 1 receptors, at eye COL4A5. ATS is heralded with continuous micro-hematuria which level, it is assumed that betaxolol inhibits the adrenergic tone and rapidly progresses to proteinuria, hypertension and chronic or end- therefore the formation of aqueous humor in the ciliary body. The stage renal disease (ESRD) by adolescence, frequently accompanied present study aimed to determine the association between the by sensorineural deafness and ocular complications. Milder forms of Arg16Gly and Gln27Glu polymorphisms of the ADRB2 gene and the ATS also exist. We initially studied nine Hellenic families suspected ocular hypotensive response to topical betaxolol in Mexican patients clinically of X-linked ATS who presented with marked phenotypic with open angle glaucoma. Thirty-three patients were genotyped at heterogeneity. We identified four mutations in COL4A5 in six families. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 389 Males currying E228X or c.2946delT mutation had the classical ATS having had commenced at 58 years of age. We found five affected symptoms with early onset of renal failure and deafness. However subjects of the same family, who showed cognitive disorders with the four males with the milder mutation G624D, belonging in two families age at onset ranging from 50 to 65 years. Conclusion: In this study, originating from Greek mainland, reached ESRD after 39-yo and one we found a D678N mutation in a patient showing a inheritance pattern patient showed Thin Basement Membrane Nephropathy (TBMN: a consistent with EO-autosomal dominant transmission. Our data milder phenotype than ATS, classically attributed to COL4A3/COL4A4 confirmed that APP is actually an EO-AD gene, in which onset occurs genes). Another 5/8 affected males with mutation P628L also developed primarily prior to 65 years of age and often much younger; and for a ESRD between 30-57-yo, while three exhibit only mild chronic given mutation, onset ages are tightly clustered. renal failure (CRF). Surprisingly, screening three more hematuric families from Greek mainland for G624D, were found positive for this P12.009 mutation. The data support previous findings that certain mutations missense mutations in myosin light chain kinase mYLK in are associated with milder phenotypes, such as TBMN and familial familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and dissections (tAAD) microscopic hematuria. G624D may explain a lot of familial hematuria F. Cayami1,2, A. Maugeri1, E. Sistermans1, S. M. H. Faradz2, G. Pals1; cases in Greece. We are designing a Greek genetic epidemiological 1VU medical center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Center for Biomedical study in order to find the exact frequency of the mutation in hematuric Research, DiponegoroUniversity, Semarang, Indonesia. patients. Similar conclusions apply for missense mutation P628L. Background: A recent study showed that mutations in myosin light Interestingly, mutations G624D and P628L are near the 12th natural chain kinase MYLK may cause familial thoracic aortic aneurysms and interruption of COL4A5 triple-helical domain, which may explain the dissections (TAAD). Five mutations were found in 193 probands. milder phenotype. Two previously identied TAAD genes, MYH11 en ACTA2, encode respectively the SMC-specific isoform of actin and myosin heavy chain, P12.007 while MYLK encodes the MCLK protein. This kinase phosphorylates three novel mutations in turkish patients with Alstrom regulatory light chain (RLC), a protein that regulates the actin and syndrome myosin activities and actin-myosin II cytoskeleton-mediated functions A. Güzel1, J. Marshall2, R. Özgül3; inside the smooth muscle cells of aortic wall. These processes 1Hacettepe University, Biology Department, Ankara, Turkey, 2Jackson are important in maintaining the aortic wall, which is subject to Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, United States, 3Hacettepe University, Institute of biomechanical forces throughout life. Child Health, Ankara, Turkey. Methods: We studied the MYLK gene in 95 probands from TAAD Alström syndrome (AS) is a rare multisystemic disorder. Major clinical families by high resolution melting curve analysis, followed by symptoms of the disease are congenital retinal dystrophy leading sequencing of aberrant fragments. All patients had negative test to blindness, neurosensorial hearing lost, childhood obesity, insulin results for sequencing of the genes FBN1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2, MYH11 resistance, and type 2 diabetes, dilated cardiomyopathy. Mutant form and ACTA2. of ALMS1 gene causes AS. ALMS1 is a novel gene which is comprised Results: Two missense mutations were identified in the MYLK of 23 exons encoding a protein of 4169 amino acids that does not gene: c.2183G>A (p.Arg728His) and c.4565C>T (p.Val1522Ala). share significant sequence homology with any other known genes. The Both mutations were not detected in 120 ethnically matched healthy ALMS1 protein is ubiquitously expressed and localizes to centrosomes controls. The mutations involve highly conserved amino acids, 100% and basal bodies of ciliated cells, perhaps playing an important role in conserved down to Tetraodon, in highly conserved domains. However, cilia function and intraflagellar transport. RNA interference knockdown there is only a small difference in properties of the variant amino acids. experiments indicate that a total lack of ALMS1 impairs cilia formation. Conclusion: We identified 2 missense mutations in 95 (2.1%) families To date, more than 100 mutations, mostly nonsense and frameshift with TAAD. This finding is in agreement with the result of the previous type, in ALMS1 have been reported in Alström syndrome. The reported study. However, to assess clinical significance of the identified mutations are primarily clustered in exons 16, 10, and 8, but less mutations, further studies, such as functional analysis of missense common mutations also occur in exons 12, 18 and 11. In present study, mutations, are needed. four Turkish AS patients were analysed. Mutation screening of the whole coding region and all intron/exon boundaries were performed P12.010 by PCR and direct sequencing. As a result of sequence analysis, three Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita associated with a novel mutations; c.4155insA; T1386NfsX15, c.5311C>T; p.Q1771X, heterozygous mutation and 855 kb microduplication in 17q12 c.9749C>A; p.S3250X and several polymorphism; IVS4+20T>A, both likely affecting function of the cation channel gene AccN1 F731F, V673G, D2674H, R4031K, IVS18-12T>C were detected in in a male fetus. patients. This study was supported by State Planning Organization of P. M. Kroisel1, K. M. Roetzer1, M. Mach1, K. Wagner1, M. R. Speicher1, E. F. Turkey (Project No: DPT 2006 K120640) Karpf2, E. Heitzer1, M. Häusler3; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, 2Institute of Pathology, Graz, P12.008 Austria, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Graz, Austria. APP gene mutation (D678N) in a patient with an Early-Onset A very severe form of congenital arthrogryposis multiplex was identified Alzheimer‘s Disease by prenatal sonography in the 22th week in the second pregnancy F. Trecroci, A. La Russa, R. Cittadella, M. Liguori, P. Spadafora, G. Di Palma, of a 25 years old healthy woman of Austrian origin. Her 4 years old M. Caracciolo, V. Andreoli; son is healthy as is her non-consanguineous 28 years old husband, Institute of Neurological Sciences-National Research Council, Pianolago di also of Austrian extraction. Because of an elevated risk (1:38) for fetal Mangone (CS), Italy. Down syndrome based on combined test results, an amniocentesis Introduction: Notably, the clinical presentation of familial forms of AD in the 16th week of an otherwise thus far uneventful pregnancy was (FAD) is more complex, and mutations of APP gene have also been performed, revealing normal cytogenetic and biochemical (AFP) described in these patients. Only about 26 different missense mutations, results. However during midtrimester targeted fetal organ screening located in exons 16 and 17 of APP, have been reported. Aims: To in the 22th week a complete absence of fetal movements (akinesia) better assess the genetic contribution of APP to FAD, we performed a and further fetal anomalies were recognized, leading to the diagnosis systematic mutation analysis of this gene in a series of Italian patients of congenital arthrogryposis multiplex with some similiarities to Pena- with FAD. Methods: Ninety-seven patients (age, 66.48 ± 10.1 years; Shokeir-syndrome, a heterogeneous autosomal recessive disease. mean ± SD) with FAD were recruited at the Institute of Neurology, Because of the bad prognosis parents decided to derminate the University “Magna Graecia” in Catanzaro, and subsequently screened pregnancy and further genetic analyses as well as fetal autopsy were for mutations at the Institute of Neurological Sciences, National performed. A 60k Agilent array CGH analysis of fetal DNA showed a Research Council, in Cosenza, Italy. The exonic regions of APP (exons 855 kb microduplication of 17q12 in the fetus and his mother. Because 16 and 17) gene were amplified and a mutational screening was done one of the chromosomal breakpoints is quite likely to affect the ACCN1 by DHPLC and direct sequencing. Results: Within our FAD, a non- gene, we consecutively performed DNA sequencing of this gene from synonymous change in exon 16, previously described in a Japanese fetal DNA. The heterozygous missense mutation c.137G>T[p.R46L] pedigree, was detected (D678N) in a proband with cognitive decline was identified, and this rare mutation was found to be of paternal Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 339900 origin. Although Pena-Shokeir-syndrome and related disorders are P12.013 heterogeneous and several potential causative gene have been Association study between the LiNGO1 gene and Parkinson’s identified so far, we seriously consider the compound heterozygous disease in the italian population mutations described here as another potential pathogenetic F. Annesi1, E. V. De Marco1, F. E. Rocca1, P. Tarantino1, A. Nicoletti2, P. mechanism in such disorders. Pugliese3, G. Nicoletti3, G. Arabia3, M. De Mari4, P. Lamberti4, S. Gallerini5, R. Marconi5, A. Epifanio6, L. Morgante6, A. Cozzolino7, P. Barone7, G. Torchia3, M. P12.011 Gagliardi1, M. Zappia2, G. Annesi1, A. Quattrone3; LRRK2 haplotype analysis in exon 41 p.G2019s positive patients 1Istituto di Scienze Neurologiche, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Mangone with Parkinson disease. (CS), Italy, 2Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Università di Catania, Catania, F. Sironi1,2, T. Brambilla1,2, C. Mariani2, S. Tesei2, G. Pezzoli2, S. Goldwurm2, M. Italy, 3Clinica Neurologica, Università Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 4Clinica Seia1, P. PRIMIGNANI1; Neurologica, Università di Bari, Bari, Italy, 5Divisione di Neurologia, Ospedale 1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS ca’ Granda Ospedale Misericordia, Grosseto, Italy, 6Dip. di Neuroscienze, Scienze Psichiatriche Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Parkinson Institute - I.C.P., Milan, Italy. ed Anestesiologiche, Università di Messina, Messina, Italy, 7Dip. di Scienze Mutations in the LRRK2 gene have been found to be responsible for Neurologiche, Università Federico II, Napoli, Italy. autosomal dominant forms of Parkinson Disease (PD). A genome wide association study in European and American patients The most common LRRK2 p.G2019S mutation, laying in exon 41, with Essential Tremor(TE)showed a significant association with the has been reported to account for 5-6% of familial PD and 1.6% of rs9652490 SNP of the leucine rich repeat and Ig domain containing sporadic PD in Europe. Three different LRRK2 haplotypes have been 1 (LINGO1) gene. LINGO1 gene codes for a nervous system-specific associated with this point mutation: haplotype 1, characteristic of North transmembrane protein. Its expression is increased in the substantia African, Arabs and western European subjects; haplotype 2, typical nigra of some PD patients, thus suggesting that LINGO1 may be of American European-descent individuals; haplotype 3, identified in involved in PD pathophysiology. In this study, we performed a case- Japanese families. The p.G2019S mutation seems to be occurred control analysis in an Italian population to assess the role of the independently at least twice in humans: once on the haplotype 1 and LINGO1 gene in PD patients. once in the phylogenetically related haplotype 2 and 3. A total of 567 patients with PD and 468 control subjects were enrolled A total of 2261 unrelated consecutive PD patients (Parkinson Institute in Central-Southern Italy. Genotyping of LINGO1 SNPs (rs9652490 Biobank of Milan - http://parkinson.it/dnabank.htlm) has been screened and rs11856808) was performed by TaqMan pre-designed assays and 35 subjects were found to carry exon 41 LRRK2 variants: using an ABI 7900 HT-SDS system. 30 p.Gly2019Ser heterozygotes (of which one was also heterozygote No significant differences were found in allele or genotype frequency carrier of IVS41+30 A>G) distribution of rs9652490 between patients and controls (P>0.05). 1 p.Gly2019Ser homozygote Regarding rs11856808, the C allele of this marker was more frequent 1 p.Ile2020Leu heterozygote in patients than in controls, but after Bonferroni correction only a 1 p.Pro2036Arg heterozygote borderline P-value was obtained from the comparison (P=0.024; 1 p.Tyr2018Tyr heterozygote Padjusted=0.048). Genotype frequencies did not differ between the 1 p.Pro2007Pro heterozygote two groups. In addition, 5 subjects were found to be carrier of intronic variants Our study demonstrates that LINGO1 SNPs are not associated with (2 IVS40-39 A>G heterozygotes, 1 IVS40-103 T>C heterozygote; 1 our PD patients, thus showing that this gene does not represent a IVS41+30 A>G heterozygote; 1 IVS40-47 A>G heterozygote). possible risk factor for PD in our population. Ten LRRK2 SNP markers, spanning from exon 8 to 43, have been directly sequenced in the 31 p.G2019S carriers. According to previous P12.014 studies we found that the haplotype 1 is the most frequent in p.G2019S A comprehensive mutation analysis of the PiNK1 gene in carriers in our population suggesting that the mutated allele derived southern italian patients with early- and late-onset parkinsonism from a single common founder probably of North-African origin. E. V. De Marco1, V. Scornaienchi1, P. Tarantino1, F. E. Rocca1, V. Greco1, G. Provenzano1, D. Civitelli1, F. Annesi1, G. Nicoletti1, A. Uncini2, A. Quattrone3, G. P12.012 Annesi1; Alpha-synuclein gene rearrangements in autosomal dominant 1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), form of Parkinson’s disease in Russia. Italy, 2Neuromuscular Diseases Unit, Centre for Excellence on Aging, “G. A. Drozdova1, A. Yakimovsky2, A. Emelyanov1,2, S. Pchelina1,2; d’Annunzio” University Foundation, Chieti, Italy, 3Neuroimaging Research Unit, 1Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, RAS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian National Research Council, Catanzaro, Italy. Federation, 2St.Petersburg State Pavlov Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Mutations in the PINK1 gene are associated with both familial recessive Russian Federation. and sporadic early-onset Parkinson’s disease (EOPD). Recent studies have shown that the development of Parkinson’s Data on Italian EOPD patients show mutations in a relatively high disease (PD) may be affected by the increase in the alpha-synuclein percentage (8-9%). Heterozygous or compound heterozygous gene (SNCA) copy number (duplications and triplications). We have mutations were also reported in a small number of late-onset PD assessed the frequency of SNCA rearrangements in 39 patients patients (LOPD). In this study, we aimed at assessing the frequency (average age 58.4±10.4, average age at disease onset 44.4±11.9) and possibly the pathogenic role of PINK1 mutations in familial and with autosomal dominant PD form. Alpha-synuclein gene dosage sporadic patients with EOPD and LOPD coming from Southern Italy. analysis was carried out using Real-time PCR on an ABI 7000 genetic We selected 115 patients, including 102 cases with EOPD, 9 of which analyzer (Applied Biosystems) with Taqman probes. Beta-globin gene had a positive family history, and 13 familial cases with LOPD. All the was amplified in one tube with exon 3 of SNCA as an internal control. eight PINK1 exons were analyzed by PCR and sequencing. The MLPA All samples were tested in triplicates. To assess the SNCA gene copy method was used in the heterozygous patients in order to detect exon number we compared the values of the threshold cycle of alpha- dosage changes, caused by genomic rearrangements, of the known synuclein with those of beta-globin. Ratios from 0.8 to 1.2 indicated PD genes. Four already know different mutations (three homozygous: a normal gene dosage; from 1.3 to 1.7 - a heterozygous duplication; Q126P, W437X , Q456X and one heterozygous: E476K) and one novel and from 1.8 to 2.2 - a triplication or a homozygous duplication. For heterozygous mutation (R207Q) were found in five patients (4.3%). In all samples we obtained values which were in the range 0.8 to 1.2. particular, 4 out of 103 EOPD patients (3.9%) carried PINK1 mutations. These results did not reveal multiplications of the SNCA gene in the This frequency is lower than previous studies on Italian EOPD have examined patients and allowed to suggest that SNCA duplications and suggested. Furthermore, a frequency of 1 out 13 (7.7%) in familial triplications are a rare cause of autosomal dominant PD in Russia. LOPD patient was found, thus confirming a certain influence of the PINK1 gene also in LOPD as observed in other studies. In conclusion, our study confirms the role played by the PINK1 gene mutations both in heterozygous and homozygous condition in PD development.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 391 P12.015 P12.017 cAA interrupted scA2 alleles of 38 repeats jointly several scA8 Prodynorphin (PDYN) mutations are rare in spanish patients expansions segregate from a late onset parkinsonism index case with spinocerebelar Ataxia J. Corral Seijas1, H. San Nicolàs Fernàndez1, L. De Jorge López1, M. Calopa M. Garcia-Murias1, M. Villanueva-Millán1, J. Joglar-Santos1, B. Quintáns2,3, A. Garriga2, V. Volpini Bertrán1; Carracedo1,3,4, M. Sobrido1,3; 1Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge, IDIBELL; Centre de Diagnòstic 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Santiago de Genètic-Molecular de Malalties Hereditàries, CDGM, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Compostela, Spain., Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Hospital Clínico de Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Santiago de Compostela-SERGAS, Spain., Santiago de Compostela, Spain, Barcelona, Spain. 3Centro Para Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Several Spinocerebellar Ataxia genes (SCAs) SCAs1-3, SCAs6-8, ISCIII, Spain., Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Grupo de Medicina Xenómica- SCA12 and SCA17 have been cloned, generally sharing a CAG (CAG/ University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain., Santiago de Compostela, Spain. CTG in SCA8) repeat expansion mutations which usually encodes Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) represent a group of dominantly a polyglutamine tract. In our Spanish casuistic, SCA2 was found in inherited neurological disorders characterized by variable 45 index cases over 408 familial cases with ataxia (25.47 % ± 3.90). degeneration in the cerebellum, spinocerebellar tracts, and brain No SCA mutation was found in any of 1,089 sporadic and idiopathic stem. The SCAs present with gait ataxia, dysarthria, oculomotor cases. Is generally known that SCA2 expanded alleles without CAA abnormalities and may have additional symptoms. Recently, missense interruptions are associated with pathological development of the mutations in prodynorphin (PDYN), the precursor protein for several disease and that the interruptions would prevent elongation of the opioid neuropeptides have been reported as the cause of SCA23. In expanded sequence. In this study we present one pedigree showing order to investigate the contribution of this new SCA gene in Spanish SCA2 expanded alleles with CAA interruptions coexisting with SCA8 patients we studied 335 individuals with clinical diagnosis of SCA and expanded alleles in several members. The index and founder case negative for SCA 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 12, 17 and DRPLA. A positive family shows a SCA2 interrupted expanded allele of 38 CAG repeats history was present in 43% of cases, 28% were sporadic and for the coexisting with an SCA8 allele of 89 repeats. He presents late onset reminding cases family history was unclear or unknown. All exons and essential tremor and cerebellar atrophy. No mutations were found in exon-intron boundaries of PDYN (NM_024411.4) were sequenced on LRRK2 and Parkin genes associated with Parkinson’s disease as his an ABI3730 analyzer and sequence analysis was performed with the aetiology. One of his sons and two of his grandchild’s share the same Staden package. All identified sequence variations were screened in expanded interrupted SCA2 allele, coexisting with SCA8 expansions 186 control individuals without neurological disorders. We identified from 78 to 84 repeats, and all of them remain asymptomatic. In four sequence changes in non-coding exons 1 and 2 (c.-241 G>C, conclusion, SCA2 expanded alleles in pathological range with CAA c.-162 A>G, c.-124 G>T and c.-48 G>C). In addition, a synonymous interruptions could be associated with late onset Parkinsonism with alteration (c.72 G>A; p.Ser24Ser) was identified in exon 3 and a uncertain penetrance. The role of SCA8 expansion coexisting with single nucleotide substitution c.130-46 T>G in intron 3 of PDYN. None SCA2 expanded alleles remains unknown. of these changes was present in searchable databases of human polymorphisms and they were not detected in healthy controls from P12.016** our population. SCA 23 appears to be a very infrequent cause of SCA compensatory molecular and functional mechanisms in neurons in Spain. Whether these new sequence variations in PDYN have any of the Grm1crv4 mouse, a murine model for ataxia lacking the functional effect needs further investigation. mGlu1 receptor. P. I. A. Rossi1,2, I. Musante1,2, M. Summa3, A. Pittaluga3, M. Ikehata4,5, M. P. P12.018 Rastaldi4,5, R. Ravazzolo1,2, A. Puliti1,2; Genetic and epidemiological data of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1Molecular Genetics and Cytogenetics Unit, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 8 in spanish population 2Department of Pediatric Sciences, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, H. San Nicolàs Fernàndez1, L. De Jorge López1, J. Corral Seijas1, D. Genís 3Department of Experimental Medicine, Section of Pharmacology and Batlle2, A. Matilla Dueñas3, V. Volpini Bertrán1; Toxicology, University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy, 4Renal Research Laboratory, 1Institut d’Investigació Biomèdica de Bellvitge, IDIBELL; Centre de Diagnòstic Fondazione IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 5Fondazione Genètic-Molecular de Malalties Hereditàries, CDGM, L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, D’Amico per la Ricerca sulle Malattie Renali, Milan, Italy. Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Universitari Josep Trueta, Girona, Spain, 3Hospital The metabotropic glutamate type 1 (mGlu1) and 5 (mGlu5) receptors Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain. are the only members of group I mGlu receptors, a subfamily of G Autosomal Dominant Cerebellar Ataxias (ADCAs) are a clinically and protein-coupled receptors implicated in synaptic plasticity, and in genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders mechanisms of feed-back control of glutamate release. mGlu1 and in which several Spino-Cerebellar Ataxia genes (SCAs) have been mGlu5 receptors exhibit a complementary distribution throughout cloned: SCA1-3, SCA5-8, SCA10-11, SCA13-15, SCA27-28 and the central nervous system, more evident in the cerebellum, where SCA31. We have analyzed 408 unrelated familial and 1,089 sporadic mGlu1 receptor is most intensely expressed while the mGlu5 receptor and idiopathic cases of SCA. Over the familial cases 6.25% cases is not. Despite the different distribution, they show a similar subcellular were SCA1; 25.57% SCA2; 34.09% SCA3; 7.39% SCA6; 5.68% localization relative to transmitter release sites, and use common SCA7; 14.77% SCA8; 3.41% SCA17; and 2.84% DRPLA. About transducing pathways. 55% of our pedigrees remained genetically unclassified and no SCA We recently described the Grm1crv4 mouse mutant carrying a mutations were detected in the 1,089 isolated and idiopathic cases. spontaneous inactivating mutation of the mGlu1 receptor. Homozygous In 26 pedigrees with SCA8 expansions the allele size ranges from Grm1crv4/crv4 mice exhibit a complex phenotype with ataxia. To better 85 to 726 repeats (140.94 ± 105.90; Pearson Coefficient= 75.14%). define the pathophysiological mechanisms of ataxia in these mice, Maternal transmissions presented elongations of the CAG/CTG we evaluated expression and function of the other member of group combined sequence ranging from +3 to +13 repeats. In contrast I mGlus, the mGlu5 receptor, in Grm1crv4 mouse cerebellar and brain paternal transmissions presented contractions from -1 to -17 repeats. cortices. Western blot and immunofluorescence analyses show Giant SCA8 expansions ranges from 270 to 1,126 (N=13), all carried mGlu5 receptor overexpression in the homozygous Grm1crv4/crv4 mice. by unaffected adult individuals. These expansions have been Real-time quantitative RT-PCR results indicate that up-regulation is originated from homozygous SCA8 females with alleles of moderate already evident at RNA level, suggesting a cellular compensatory size in two unrelated pedigrees. Remarkably, homozygous males mechanism due to the absence of active mGlu1 receptor molecules. have transmitted contracted alleles, as in heterozygous cases occurs. Finally, functional studies confirm an enhanced glutamate release from The distribution of SCA8 alleles in a sample of 90 individuals from cortical cerebellar and brain synaptosomes as respect to wild type, general population is bimodal, with two groups: 15 to 34 CAG/CTGs that is abolished by mGlu5 receptor specific inhibitors. with frequency of 98% and 77 to 86 with frequency of 2%. SCA8 alleles Mechanisms that affect glutamate bioavailability and glutamatergic with moderate size in general population could be the origin of new transmission at the synaptic level may contribute to the development expanded alleles. and/or to the rescue of the affected phenotype. Supported by RFPS-4-631972 grant, Italian Ministry of Health.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 339922 P12.019*** P12.021 Prodynorphin mutations cause the neurodegenerative disorder Polyglutamine-expanded protein ataxin-3 induces mitochondrial spinocerebellar ataxia type 23 ERK activation and autophagic cell stress G. Bakalkin1, J. Jezierska2, H. Watanabe2, C. Verschuuren-Bemelmans2, H. TSAI, C. Chan; K. Artemenko1, K. Hauser3, C. Wijmenga2, B. Kremer2, R. J. Sinke2, D. S. CHUNG SHAN MEDICAL UNIVERSITY, Taichung, Taiwan. Verbeek2; Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also called Machado-Joseph 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2UMCG, University of Groningen, disease, an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease, is Groningen, Netherlands, 3Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, caused by an increased number of CAG trinuclear expansion repeats United States. in coding regain of Ataxin3 and resulted in a disease protein with a Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are dominantly inherited higher polyQ domain. Although the detail mechanism of pathogenesis neurodegenerative disorders characterized by progressive cerebellar is yet to be defined, neurotoxin, especially reactive oxygen species ataxia and dysarthria. We have identified missense mutations in the (ROS), released from aggregated mutant proteins, may play a role prodynorphin (PDYN) gene to cause SCA23 in four Dutch ataxia in the pathogenic process. Previous studies also suggested that families. PDYN is the precursor protein for the opioid neuropeptides, mitochondrial phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated protein α-neoendorphin, and dynorphins A and B (Dyn A and B). PDYN kinase1/2 (p-ERK1/2) was induced oxidative stress and lead to cell peptides regulate pain processing and modulate the rewarding effects death. In this study, two lymphoblastoid cell lines were isolated from of addictive substances. Three mutations are located in Dyn A, a SCA3 patients, one contains 31 and 82 CAG repeats in ataxin-3 peptide with opioid activities, as well as non-opioid neurodegenerative individual, denoted MJD07; another contains 30 and 78 CAG actions, while a fourth mutation is in the non-opioid PDYN domain. repeats, denoted MJD08. We investigated the crucial relationship The mutations stabilize Dyn A by restricting its conversion to shorter between the expression of p-ERK1/2 and autophagy. Results found enkephalins. In addition, two of the mutant Dyn A peptides induced the endogenous p-ERK1/2 and autophagy marker protein, Atg8 toxicity above that of wild type Dyn A in cultured striatal neurons. (LC3 class II) were higher in SCA3 patients. Electron micrographs The mutation in the non-opioid domain was associated with altered showed that only the cells expressing expanded ataxin-3 contained expression of components of the opioid and glutamate system as aggregated protein and autophagic vacuoles. Based on the above evident from analysis of SCA23 autopsy tissue. In line with our observations we hypothesized that the aggregated mutant Ataxin-3 findings, Dyn A was already found to be upregulated in aging rodent proteins may generate ROS in mitochondria, which subsequently up- brain contributing to age-related impairment of spatial learning and regulate p-ERK1/2 and Atg8 expression levels and ultimately lead to memory and additionally in the prefrontal cortex of Alzheimer disease autophagy and cell death. patients, elevated Dyn A levels correlated with neuritic plaque density. Thus, alterations in Dyn A activities and/or impairment of secretory P12.022 pathways by mutant PDYN may lead to glutamate neurotoxicity which High incidence of DYNc2H1 mutations in a cohort of 51 patients underlies Purkinje cell degeneration and ataxia. with AtD/sRPiii C. HUBER1, J. Hokayem1, G. Baujat1, L. I. Al-Gazali2, A. David3, A. Dieux- P12.020 Coeslier4, C. Francannet5, P. Sarda6, S. Sigaudy7, I. Vogel8, M. Le Merrer1, K. H. investigation of correlation between triplet repeat numbers in Le Quan Sang1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; AtXN1, AtXN2, mJD, cAcNA1A, AtXN7, AtXN8Os, AtXN10, 1Service de Génétique, INSERM U 781, Université Paris Descartes, AP-HP, PPP2R2B, tBP genes and age of onset in scA suspected Hôpital Necker Enfants Malade, PARIS, France, 2Department of Pediatrics, patients Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al Z. Ghaderi Ardekani1,2, M. Houshmand1,3, O. Aryani1, N. Chaparzadeh2; Ain, United Arab Emirates, 3Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU, Nantes, 1Genetic lab,Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, France, 4Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU, 2Department of Biology, Azarbaijan University of Tarbiat Moallem, Tabriz, Lille, France, 5Génétique Médicale, CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering and 6Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHU, Biotechnology Depatment of Medical Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic Montpellier, France, 7Génétique Médicale, hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, of Iran. Marseille, France, 8of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, introduction: Spinocerebellar ataxias (SCAs) are a group of Denmark. neurogenetic diseases caused by expansion of triplet repeats in The short-rib polydactyly (SRP) group includes 4 lethal disorders i.e. various genes on different chromosomes. SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 12 and 17 type I Saldino-Noonan, type II Majewski, type III Verma-Naumoff, are produced by CAG repeats and SCA8 and10 by CTG and ATTCT and type IV Beemer-Langer and 2 disorders compatible with life, repeats, respectively. Expanded repeats in SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7 and 17 namely asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (ATD) and Ellis-van Creveld and the SCA8 coding strand code for polyglutamine tracts. Previous (EVC) syndrome. They are characterized by autosomal recessive studies have shown variable results concerning the correlation inheritance, short ribs, short long bones, inconstant polydactyly and between numbers of triplet repeats in these genes and the age of trident acetabular roof but distinct by variable malformations and onset in patients. metaphyseal changes. Recently, 6 genes encoding primary cilia materials and methods: 52 patients with clinical features resembling proteins have been involved in the SRP group (EVC/EVC2, IFT80, SCA were analysed. DNA was extracted and PCR performed for the DYNC2H1, NEK1 and TTC21B), confirming that this group belongs region of the genes containing the triplet repeat. The PCR products to the ciliopathy spectrum. We have also demonstrated that SRPIII were electrophoresed in polyacrylamide gels. repeat numbers were and ATD belong to the same heterogeneous spectrum of conditions scored and the data analysed using SPSS software. caused either by IFT80 or by DYNC2H1 mutations. Results: There was no significant correlation between triplet repeat The aim of our study was to screen DYNC2H1 and IFT80 in 51 ATD/ numbers in two alleles of all genes analysed and age of onset in all SRPIII consanguineous families or with sib recurrence and to identify SCA suspected patients. A non-significant correlation was observed other disease genes. between the number of triplet repeats in the ATXN7 and ATXN8OS We identified no mutation in IFT80 but DYNC2H1 mutations in 16 genes and age at onset. In other genes a non-significant inverse cases and the screening is still in progress for 13 cases. Among 24 correlation was observed. consanguineous families unlinked to DYNC2H1 or IFT80, a genome Discussion: Our hypothesis was that triplet repeat numbers in some of wide search was performed in 9 and led to the identification of 3 the analysed genes and age of onset would be significantly correlated, regions of homozygosity respectively for 3 families originating from but our results did not support this. We conclude that in the Iranian Algeria, Turkey and Yemen. In each region of interest, candidate population, expansion in triplet numbers does not correlate with age of genes selected from the cilia database are currently tested. onset. However, the small number of patients studied or errors in the We conclude that DYNC2H1 is involved in a significant part of ATD- remembered age of onset could also cause this result. SRPIII spectrum. Ongoing studies will hopefully lead to identify other disease genes presumably also involved in primary cilia function.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 393 P12.023 P12.025 Deafness due to mutations in Otoferlin gene (OTOF): additional in search of Oligogenicity in Bardet-Biedl syndrome identification of so far unreported mutations and unclassified L. Abu Safieh1, L. Al-Abdi1, S. Al-Anazi1, M. Hashem1, H. Alkuraya1, M. variants Alamro1, M. O. Sirelkhatim1, Z. Al-Hassnan2, M. Alrashed1, E. Faqeih3, A. X. Pepermans1, N. Deggouj2, M. Vast1, K. Dahan1, Y. Sznajer1; Suftah3, A. Al-Hashem4, J. Y. Mohamed1, B. Alkuraya1, M. Alsayed2, A. O. 1Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Center for Human Genetic, U.C.L., Khan5, L. Al-Gazali6, S. Al-Hazzaa7, F. S. Alkuraya1; Brussels, Belgium, 2Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Deafness Clinic, 1Department of genetics, King Faisal Specialist hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Audiophonology and ENT Departement, Bruxelles, Belgium. 2Department of medical genetics, King Faisal Specialist hospital, Riyadh, Background: Auditory neuropathy spectrum disorders (ANSD) are Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Pediatrics, King Fahad Medical City, Riyadh, characterised by preserved outer hair cells function (normal otoacoustic Saudi Arabia, 4Department of Pediatrics, Riyadh Military Hospital, Riyadh, emissions and/or cochlear microphonic potentials) but inner hair cells Saudi Arabia, 5Department of Retina, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, and/or cochlear nerve disrupted function (abnormal auditory brainstem Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 6Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine & Health evoked potentials). ANSD may be caused by OTOF gene mutations Sciences, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 7Department of surgery, King Faisal (DFNB9)(so far 36 genes cause recessive form). We screened for Specialist hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. OTOF gene mutations in belgian patients with ANSD. Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a model disease for ciliopathy in Methods: Patients’ DNA was studied after family history, clinical humans. The remarkable genetic heterogeneity that characterizes this evaluation were completed (absence for syndromic form, thyroid disease is consistent with accumulating data on the interaction between dysfunction, heart rhythm, kidney or inner ear malformation; mutations the proteins encoded by the 14 BBS genes identified to date. Previous in GJB2, GJB6 genes were excluded). Molecular investigation on DNA reports suggested that such interaction may also extend to instances double-strand direct sequencing of the 46 coding exons of OTOF gene of oligogenic inheritance that defies the long held view of BBS as an (NM_194248.2, long isoform, 1997 aa)(Dye Terminator Sequencing autosomal recessive disease. In order to investigate the magnitude v3.1/ABI 3130xl) was performed. Exons 19-46 of the long isoform of oligogenic inheritance in BBS, we conducted a comprehensive correspond to exons 1-28 of the short isoform (NM_004802.3, 1230 analysis of all 14 BBS genes as well as the MGC1203 modifier gene in aa). Unclassified variants (UV) refer to changes absent from Ensembl a cohort of 29 BBS families, most of which are multiplex. Two in trans and Uniprot databases or from publications. mutations in a BBS gene were identified in each of these families for Results: 10 unrelated patients, non consanguineous pedigree were a total of 20 mutations including 12 that are novel. In no instance did included. None had temperature-sensitive auditory neuropathy. we observe two mutations in unaffected members of a given family One patient was identified homozygous for the reported c.3269C>A or observe the presence of a third allele that convincingly acted as a mutations; one for compound heterozygous c.2401G>T and modifier of penetrance or even expressivity. In addition to presenting c.2402A>T mutations as well as UV (c.3608A>G). Four patients were a comprehensive genotype/phenotype overview of a large set of identified with UV (one patient: c.2123G>A /c.2406+9G>A) and 1 UV BBS mutations, including the occurrence of nonsyndromic retinitis (three patients with UV: p.Asn727Ser, p.Cys1251Gly, p.Arg1853Gln). pigmentosa in a family with a novel BBS9 mutation, our study strongly 4 patients did not show any substitution. Parental screening is pending. argues against the oligogenic model of BBS in the overwhelming Conclusions majority of cases. These results underline OTOF gene structure complexity (numerous mRNA isoforms and UV). Once identified, screening in parents/ P12.026 relatives and gene expression studies are needed to better understand screening iranian thalassemia intermedia patients with normal their possibly pathogenic role. or carrier status of beta-globin gene for mutations in 5’Hs3 and 5’Hs4 LcR core regions and NF-E2 P12.024 M. Neishabury1, A. Azarkeivan2, S. S. Abedini1, S. Zamani1, H. Najmabadi1,3; mutations in PYCR1 gene in three families with Autosomal 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Recessive cutis Laxa, type 2 Sciences, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Thalassemia Clinic, Research D. Z. Scherrer1, M. B. Puzzi2, C. V. Maurer-Morelli1, C. E. Steiner1; Center, Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO), tehran, Islamic Republic 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), of Iran, 3Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Campinas, Brazil, 2Department of Internal Medicine, University of Campinas Islamic Republic of Iran. (UNICAMP), Campinas, Brazil. Analysing beta globin gene sequence in 114 Iranian individuals with Autosomal recessive cutis laxa, type 2 (ARCL2), is a rare disorder thalassemia intermedia phenotype revealed homozygous or compound of connective tissue in which the skin sags excessively, giving to heterozygous beta-globin mutations to be the major primary disease the individual an aged aspect. It has been suggested that ARCL2 factor in 86.2% of cases. However, 8.2% of these individuals were is the same entity described under the denominations of wrinkly found to be heterozygous or wild type for beta-globin mutations. In skin syndrome and gerodermia osteodysplastica. Such confusion is search for determinants outside of the beta-globin gene, which could caused, in part, by overlapping of the histological and clinical findings, be responsible for the unexpected thalassemia intermedia phenotype thus nosology remains uncertain until the definitive elucidation of the in these subjects, we screened the alpha-globin genes, the 5’HS3 and molecular basis of these conditions. In the present study we analyzed 5’HS4 regions of the beta-globin LCR and the NF-E2 transcription factor three unrelated families who presented clinically with ARCL2 for for sequence variations in selected individuals. The -3.7 deletion was mutations in three genes implicated in several forms of cutis laxa; the only alpha-globin mutation detected, and no alterations were found ATP6V0A2, SCYL1BP1, and PYCR1. No causative mutations were in 5’HS3 and NF-E2. Sequence analysis of the 5’HS4 LCR core region identified in ATP6V0A2 and SCYL1BP1 genes. However, screening identified three known SNPs in a single patient, who required irregular for mutations in PYCR1 revealed two new variant by direct DNA blood transfusions. The A/G polymorphism in the 5’HS4 palindromic sequencing. Patients 1 and 2 were both homozygous for a missense region was also observed to be variable. Family studies were carried alteration replacing the triplet CAG of the codon 10 by TAG, creating a out on a female G/G homozygous patient , who received irregular blood stop codon that determined the loss of 298 codons. Patient 3 showed transfusions. Her father, who had the same heterozygous IVSII-1 beta- a homozygous missense alteration (c.722C>T; Ala241Val), however globin mutation, but the A/G genotype at the 5’HS4 palindromic site, it will be necessary confirm if this variant is present or not in a large presented with mild anemia and no requirement for blood transfusions. cohort of control individuals. It is important highlight that PYCR1 gene This suggests an impact of SNPs in the 5’HS4 LCR core region on the performs a critical role in proline biosynthesis. The genetic changes thalassemia phenotype, and offers an interesting subject for further found in this work contribute to the elucidation of the molecular basis investigations in the Iranian population. of cutis laxa. Further studies should be conducted in individuals with other phenotypic presentation to establish the nosology of this group.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 339944 P12.027 type (EDS VIA), caused by mutations in PLOD1. We performed direct Notch 1 mutations in patients with aortic aneurysm and sequencing of ZNF469 in two consanguineous Turkish BCS families bicuspidal valve and identified novel homozygous ZNF469 mutations, respectively T. Nikulina, O. Freilichman, A. Malashicheva, O. Irtuga, O. Moiseeva, A. c.6509_6512dupTCTT (p.Leu2171PhefsX99) in F1 and c.9792dupT Kostareva, E. Shlyakhto; (p.Ala3265CysfsX6) in F2. To unravel the molecular pathogenesis Almazov Federal Centre of Heart, Blood and Endocrinology, St. Petersburg, of BCS and the relationship with EDS type VIA, we studied gene Russian Federation. expression profiles on the Affymetrix Human Gene 1.0 ST platform NOTCH1 encodes for a transmembrane protein that activates a using patient’s fibroblasts with either a homozygous frameshift (n=2) signaling pathway with an active role in cardiac embryogenesis, or missense (n=1) mutation in ZNF469 alongside EDS VIA fibroblasts including aortic and pulmonary valve development.We, therefore, carrying PLOD1 mutations (n=3). Comparison with wild type controls investigated the potential relationship between mutations in regions of (n=6) identified deregulation of COL8A1, PLOD2, LOXL2, FBN2 and NOTCH1 recently reported to be associated with bicuspid aortic valve. MMP12, next to other extracellular matrix related genes, in both BCS We performed a sequencing analysis of 9 of coding exons (exons 10, 11, and EDS VIA fibroblasts. Deregulation of several players of the Wnt- 12, 13, 20, 23, 29, 30, 34) of NOTCH1 gene in 47 patients with sporadic pathway, important in ocular embryogenesis, was also observed in BAV. Our analyses revealed 17 NOTCH1 heterozygous variants in the both BCS and EDS VIA fibroblasts and implicate this developmental analyzed patients. Nine are located within exons and 8 within intronic. pathway in the pathogenesis of these connective tissue diseases. Seven variants were described previously as polymorphisms. However, These novel findings suggest a role for the ZNF469 protein in five coding substitutions and one silent were neither listed in public connective tissue homeostasis and ocular development and provide SNP databases nor in the literature and were therefore considered important new insights into molecular pathways involved in EDS and novel. Two novel nucleotide changes, one missense mutation c.3679 related connective tissue diseases. C > T located in exon 23 and one polymorphism c.7347 C > A located in exon 34, were nonsynonymous leading to amino acid substitutions P12.030 (p.P1227S, p.S2449R, respectively). Out of five patients, one had A novel Brugada syndrome variant shown to be causal based bicuspidal valve and aortic aneurysm, two - aortic aneurysm and on segregation analysis and familial genotypic-phenotypic valve calcification and two bicuspidal valve, aortic aneurysm and valve correlation. calcification. S. J. Van Dooren1, W. Lissens1, S. Seneca1, L. Peirsman1, U. Ullmann1, A. Four unique, nonsynonymous (2 novel) variants were identified in 4 Sarkozy2, P. Brugada2, M. Bonduelle1; (8,5%) of 47 patients with concomitant bicuspid aortic valves). 1Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel and VUB, Brussels, Belgium, 2Heart The principal finding of this targeted mutation analysis of the NOTCH1 Rhythm Management Institute, UZ Brussel and VUB, Brussels, Belgium. gene is the identification of one novel missense mutation among Brugada syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder patients with BAV phenotype. The studies warrant further investigation characterised by a primary cardiac arrhythmia in a structurally normal into the role of NOTCH1 missense variants in the pathogenesis of heart, with a propensity to sudden cardiac death. Genetic defects have aneurysmal associated valve disease. mainly been attributed to mutations in the SCN5A gene, coding for the alpha subunit of the sodium channel, although they account for only P12.028 20% of cases. A novel autosomal recessive cardiac and brain malformation SCN5A mutation analysis of all 27 translated exons and flanking syndrome in a consanguineous indian family intron-exon boundaries in our outclinic patient population revealed a M. J. DASOUKI1, W. G. Sanger2, S. W. Cheung3; novel variant c.4300-2 A>T in intron 24. This variant was discovered in 1University of Kansas Medical Center. Departments of Pediatrics & Internal one of our clinically diagnosed Brugada syndrome index patients with Medicine., Kansas City, KS, United States, 2University of Nebraska Medical a spontaneous typical type I electrocardiogram (ECG) and a positive Center. Munroe-Meyer Inst., Omaha, NE, United States, 3Baylor College of family history of Brugada syndrome. Medicine. Department of Molecular and Human Genetics., Houston, TX, United In silico splice prediction analysis corroborates the omission of splicing States. through abolishment of the splice acceptor site at the intron24-exon25 Two siblings of healthy consanguineous Indian parents were born boundary, thereby affecting the formation of the DIII/S5-S6 of alpha- with congenital heart and brain malformations including double subunit of the sodium channel. outlet right ventricular, bilateral frontal polymicrogyria, atrophy and To further investigate whether this variant is causal for Brugada periventricular cysts, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and atypical syndrome we tested all available 10 family members for the presence Dandy-Walker malformation. Both children (a brother and sister) died of this variant. The sequencing analysis demonstrated that the mutation by 3 months of age. Routine blood chromosome analysis, FISH for segregates within the family according to spontaneous or drug-induced DiGeorge syndrome and 1 Mb-BAC chromosomal microarray analysis (ajmaline) type I ECG and not within the ajmaline negative and type I (CMA) were all normal. However, CMA-SNP analysis identified a 7 ECG negative family members. Mb region of absence of heterozygosity (AOH) at chromosome 7p14 Detection of this variant in a control population is ongoing to further shared between these two affected siblings. This region contains 46 prove its pathogenic character. annotated genes, one of which (COBL) was identified as a strong candidate gene. Cordon-bleu (COBL) is a conserved and novel actin P12.031 nucleation ciliary gene involved in neural tube formation in mouse and compound heterozygous mutations D1690N and G1748D in chick embryos. Direct sequencing and expression studies of COBL SCN5A gene associated with the Brugada syndrome are pending. L. Núñez1, M. I. Rodríguez-García2, I. Mosquera2, X. Fernández3, L. Cazón3, M. Pérez3, E. Álvarez3, E. Maneiro3, M. Ortiz3, R. Barriales-Villa3, D. García3, E. P12.029 Veira3, A. Castro-Beiras2, L. Monserrat2; Gene expression profiling reveals novel insights into the 1Universida de A Coruña. Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de A Coruña molecular pathogenesis of brittle cornea syndrome and Ehlers- (INIBIC), La Coruña, Spain, 2CHUAC. Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Danlos syndrome kyphoscoliotic type de A Coruña (INIBIC), La Coruña, Spain, 3Instituto de Investigaciones P. Vlummens1, F. Malfait1, A. Christensen2, E. Rødahl2, A. De Paepe1; Biomédicas de A Coruña (INIBIC), La Coruña, Spain. 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department Purpose: Brugada Syndrome (BS) is an inherited cardiac disorder of Ophthalmology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway. caused, in 20-25% of the cases, by mutations in SCN5A gene, which Brittle cornea syndrome (BCS) is a rare autosomal recessive encodes for the alpha-subunit of the cardiac Na+ channel. connective tissue disorder characterized by thin, fragile cornea In this study, we identified two novel mutations in SCN5A in a BS leading to corneal rupture upon minor trauma, blue sclerae and joint patient. and skin hyperlaxity. The condition is caused by mutations in ZNF469, methods: To screen for mutations, the complete SCN5A coding encoding a Zinc Finger 469 protein of unknown function which belongs region, including the intron/exon boundaries, was amplified by PCR to the CH-zinc finger protein family. Clinical comparison reveals and performed to direct sequencing. For each variant we made a 2 2 considerable overlap with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome kyphoscoliotic prediction of the effect of mutation based on three online softwares Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 395 (Polyphen, PMUT and SIFT). RNAs, which, when bound to specific targets in mRNA transcripts, Results: Genetic analysis revealed that the proband carries two cause post-transcriptional repression of protein expression. We mutations, in exon 28, in two highly conserved amino-acids. The sequenced the SCN5A 3’UTR (2384bp) in a cohort of 97 BrS patients first one was a heterozygous mutation in c5068G>A, that causes the without mutations in the SCN5A coding regions or other tested genes. substitution D1690N in the linker between S5-S6 of the DIV of the Thirteen known SNPs and two new heterozygous variants were channel. The second variant found was a G to A substitution at position identified; c.*539A>G and c.*1677G>A, neither of which were detected c5243 that caused the mutation G1748D, which is located in the NH3 in more than 150 controls. termini part of the segment S6 of the DIV of the channel. In silico analysis of the two variants was performed using on-line Both mutations are predicted to affect protein function by the three programs predicting microRNA targeting to a given nucleotide softwares. sequence. Several microRNAs reported to be expressed in the heart The familial study showed that the proband transmitted the G1748D were found to target the new variant 539, however we excluded the mutation to a daughter. This result showed that the index case carried possibility that variant 1677 creates new target sites for microRNAs. the mutations in separate alleles. We are pursuing the candidate microRNAs with in vitro studies. conclusions: In this study, we described compound heterozygous It’s not known if SNPs in the 3’UTR can play a role in the regulation of mutations D1690N and G1748D in SCN5A associated with BS. The in SCN5A, however, we propose that these, or new variants, could cause silico analysis predicted that both mutations are pathogenic. Our data or influence disease severity in BrS or other arrhythmias via the action suggests an important role of compound heterozygosity in modulating of microRNAs. the phenotypic expression of BS. P12.034 P12.032 Hunting for novel dilated cardiomyopathy genes using Analysis of coding sequence of sNtA1 gene in Russian haplotype sharing and exome sequencing Brugadasyndrome patients A. Pósafalvi1, K. Y. van Spaendonck-Zwarts1, J. P. van Tintelen1, P. A. van der M. E. Polyak1, E. I. Gutovskaya1, H. Abriel2, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya1; Zwaag1, L. G. Boven1, J. J. Bergsma1, W. B. Koetsier1, D. J. van Veldhuisen2, 1Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian M. P. van den Berg2, R. M. W. Hofstra1, R. J. Sinke1, J. D. H. Jongbloed1; Federation, 2University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Background. Brugada syndrome (BrS) is inherited cardiac arrhythmic Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Cardiology, University disorder characterized by ST-segment elevation in right precordial Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. leads, conduction disorders and high risk of cardiac sudden death. Background: Idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is a clinically The SCN5A gene was identified as causative in 1998 and has been highly heterogeneous disorder, characterized by dilation and impaired only one known for BrS for many years, though mutations in this gene contraction of the left ventricle. Monogenic inheritance is observed account 15%-30% of all cases. Starting from 2007 the list of genetic in one-third of the idiopathic cases and mutations in the >40 known variants was increased up to 8 but all those genes seems to be much genes explain only ~25% of familial cases. In order to identify novel less prevalent and does not explain vast of majority BrS cases. DCM disease genes, we investigated two DCM families by Haplotype The aim of our study is to screen the coding sequence of SNTA1gene. Sharing Test (HST) combined with exome sequencing. SNTA1 protein is associated with dystrophin complex and SCN5A methods: To localise novel DCM genes, 250K SNP genotyping sodium channel. was performed to identify regions shared between patients from Patients and methods. We observed a cohort of 16 patients with a single pedigree. The HST was applied to (I) a family with 4 DCM clinical diagnosis “Brugada syndrome”. We did performed full coding and 2 peripartum cardiomyopathy patients and (II) a family with 3 analysis of SCN5A gene and did start screening of SNT1A coding DCM patients and 1 patient with reduced left ventricular function. To sequence in SCN5A-negative BrS patients. subsequently identify the corresponding disease genes, DNA of the Results. Three BrS patients were carried SCN5A mutations (19% of index-patient and an affected relative from each family were analysed cases). In SNT1A gene we did find one rare missence genetic variant by exome sequencing. c.R106Q in exon 2 in affected person. Two intronic substitutions Results: The HST revealed largest shared haplotypes of 71 cM c.IVS2+112g>a and c.IVS2+82g>t were found in three unrelated on chromosome 15 containing ~600 genes (family I) and 46 cM on patients. chromosome 9 containing ~475 genes (family II). Exome sequencing conclusion. New rare genetic variants had been found in Russian revealed potentially pathogenic variants shared by the two affected BrS cohort (about 8%).To elucidate possible causative role of c.R106Q family members in both families. Confirmation by Sanger sequencing change inSNTA1gene further investigations are required. Population and carriership analysis in affected family members and healthy analysis of ethnically-matched controls and functional analysis of controls is in progress. mutant protein will be performed. conclusions: We identified potentially pathogenic variants in the This work has been supported by grants: SNSF SCOPES Project largest shared haplotypes in two DCM families. Our results show 2010-2013- Cardiac Channelopathies; Russian Ministry of Education that a combination of the HST and exome sequencing is a promising and Science contract 2010-1.1-203-060. approach to identify novel genes underlying familial cardiomyopathies. P12.033 P12.035 Exploration of microRNAs that mis-target scN5A as a new Identification Of a Locus For Recessive Dilated-Cardiomyopathy mechanism for Brugada syndrome On chromosome 2 by Linkage Analysis in a Bedouin Family R. A. Peat1,2, S. Duchatelet1,2, S. Maugenre1,2, M. Berthet1,2, D. Klug3, I. E. MUHAMMAD1,2, A. Levitas1,3, V. Chalifa Caspi4, E. Manor5,6, J. C. Beck7, A. Denjoy1,4, F. Hidden-Lucet5, A. Leenhardt4, P. Guicheney1,2; Saada8, V. Sheffield9, R. Parvar1,10,11; 1Inserm UMR S956, Paris, France, 2UPMC Université Paris 06, Groupe 1Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Hôpital Cardiologique, Centre Israel, 2Department of Virology and Developmental Genetics, Beer-Sheva, Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Lille, France, 4AP-HP, Hôpital Lariboisière, Israel, 3Cardiac Institute, Soroka Medical Cent, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4National Service de Cardiologie, Paris, France, 5AP-HP, Institut de Cardiologie, Groupe Institute of Biotechnology Negev, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer- Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France. Sheva, Israel, 5Institute of Genetics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Brugada syndrome (BrS) is an autosomal dominant cardiac disorder Israel, 6Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, associated with ventricular fibrillation and sudden death. About 20% Beer Sheva, Israel, 7Dept. of Pediatrics - Division of Medical Genetics; of patients have mutations in SCN5A resulting in a loss of functional Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of lowa, Iowa, IA, United States, cardiac sodium channels. Rare mutations do exist in other genes, 8Deparment of Human Genetics and Metabolic Diseases. Hadassah-Hebrew however, the genetic origin of BrS in the majority of patients remains University Medical Center Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 9Dept. of Pediatrics - unknown. Division of Medical Genetics; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of We aim to determine if rare variants in the SCN5A 3’UTR region can Iowa, Lowa, IA, United States, 10Department of Virology and Developmental modulate channel expression by creating novel, (or by enhancing Genetics, Beer Sheva, Israel, 11National Institute of Biotechnology in the Negev, existing), targets of microRNAs. MicroRNAs are short single-stranded Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 339966 Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. C>T (p. R369W) mutation in the exon 8 and 3 other polymorphisms. Cardiomyopaties are the most common disorders resulting in heart Conclusion: It is the first case which reports about severe failure. Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), a disorder characterized by cardiomyopathy related to DNM2 gene mutations resulting in cardiac dilatation and reduced systolic function, is the most frequent centronuclear myopathy. Our data broaden the phenotypic spectrum cause. However, recessive neonatal isolated dilated cardiomyopathy of the symptoms due to DNM2 mutations. has scarcely been associated with a mutation. We have identified patients with acute DCM in one tribe with consanguineous family of the P12.038 Bedouin population. Three subfamilies contain five patients and four mYBPc3-Glu258Lys related Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a healthy siblings were investigated. The disease appears to be familial, founder effect in tuscany with an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. SNPs array and S. Bardi1, F. Girolami1, I. Olivotto1, L. Berti1, T. Pippucci2, F. Cecchi1, F. then linkage analysis was performed using polymorphic microsatellite Torricelli1; markers to confirm the linkage region on chromosome 2[2q35-2q36.3] 1Referral Center for Myocardial Diseases, Genetic Diagnostic Unit, Careggi with 10cM and to construct the haplotypes. The highest lod score for University Hospital, Flore, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetic Laboratory, this region was 3.5 with two point analysis. Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi ,University of Bologna, Italy., Bologna, Italy. Background: MYBPC3 is the most common gene involved in HCM. P12.036 Even if the majority of mutations identified are novel, it is possible to Identification of a new chromosomal locus for a mutation find some recurrent pathogenic mutation. A few founder mutations causing Left ventricular non-compaction with ventricular have been reported, and most of them are in the MYBPC3 gene. tachycardia cardio-pathology. Interestingly, the occurrence of a founder effect has never been R. Parvari1,2, E. Muhamad1, V. C. Sheffield3, A. Levitas4; reported in Italy. 1Ben Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 2National Institute of Objectives: The aim of the present study was to describe a founder Biotechnology Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, effect in Tuscany caused by MYBPC3-Glu258Lys mutation. United States, 4Soroka Medcal Center, Ben Gurion University of the Negev, methods and Results: A total 401 Italian unrelated index HCM Beer Sheva, Israel. patients underwent screening for myofilament gene mutations by Structural and functional disorders of the heart are important causes direct sequencing of 8 genes, including MYBPC3, MYH7, TNNI2, of morbidity and mortality. Three Bedouin patients at ages 14-18 years TNNI3, ACTC, TPM1, MYL2 and MYL3. In 135/401 (34%), a MYBPC3 of a single large consanguineous Bedouin family presented with Left mutation was identified. Of them, 42 were consecutive unrelated ventricular non-compaction and sustained Ventricular Tachycardia. probands born in the Mugello valley in Tuscany, who harboured the They were evaluated by Echocardiography which showed severe left same MYBPC3 Glu258Lys pathogenic mutation. Haplotype analysis side enlargement, severely depressed left ventricular (LV) function examined in 4 families using 9 intragenic SNPs or STRs, showed a with focal lacunas in the LV free wall, but normal origin of the coronary unique haplotype covering a 2Mb genomic region. To confirm these artery. The 2 older patients were treated with recurrent electrical results, haplotype analysis was performed all 42 index cases and cardio version and intravenous administration of amiodarone and 100 healthy adult subjects, born in the same geographical region of on discharge have undergone implantable cardioverter-defibrillator Tuscany. (ICD) implantation. The recessive pattern of inheritance in the conclusions: We have identified a novel founder mutation in the consanguineous family suggested homozygosity of the mutation MYPC3 gene (Glu258Lys) causing HCM in a Tuscan valley. The inherited from a common founder. We have performed homozygosity presence of a common haplotype suggests that all affected families mapping using the affymetrix SNP 5 array on the patients and found share the same ancestry. a single large chromosomal block of homozygosity on chromosome 11q24 shared by all of them. Verification of this block with VNTR P12.039 markers in all available family members proved linkage. The Lod score mitochondrial tRNAGln (m.4395A>G) mutation manifesting as analysis, under the model of a recessive trait with full penetrance, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy using the PedTool server, was 2.46 for 2 point with marker D11S4958 S. MAHJOUB1,2, s. MEHRI1,2, F. OUARDA3, C. JARDEL4, J. FINSTERER5, M. and 4.59 for the multipoint analysis. HAMMAMI6, S. BEN ARAB1; This chromosomal locus does not contain any of the known genes 1Faculté de Médecine de Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculté de Mèdecine, causing this disease; efforts are now being done to identify the mutated Monastir, Tunisia, 3Service de cardiologie pédiatrique, CHU la rabtaTunis, gene. Tunisia, 4Laboratoires de Biochimie et de Génétique. Service de Biochimie Métabolique - Unité de Génétique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, P12.037 5FaKrankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Danube University Krems,, Vienne, Austria, New phenotype variance in the background of dynamin2 6Faculté de Médecine, Monastir, Tunisia. mutation Background: Defects of the mitochondrial genome are responsible for A. Gal1, L. Geller2, E. Pal3, B. Bereznai1, Z. Szelid2, G. Inczedy-Farkas1, B. a heterogeneous group of phenotypes, including cardiomyopathies Merkely2, M. J. Molnar1; (CMPs). Several point mutations of the mitochondrial deoxyribonucleic 1Clinical and Research Centre for Molecular Neurology, Semmelweis University, acid (mtDNA) have been identified as a cause of hereditary CMP. The Budapest, Hungary, 2Heart Center, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, majority of pathogenic mutations are heteroplasmic, with mutated 3Department of Neurology, University Pecs, Pecs, Hungary. and wild-type mtDNA coexisting within the same mitochondrion. Background: Dynamin-2 (DNM2) gene mutations cause two Homoplasmic mutations are challenging in terms of diagnosis and district human diseases: Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) and assigning pathogenicity, as human mtDNA is highly polymorphic. centronuclear myopathy (CNM)). Here we report a 47 years-old Hypothesis: The present study concerns a family with hypertrophic women with severe cardiomypathy and centronuclear myopathy. cardiomyopathy (hCMP), which segregated with matrilinear Methods: The patient underwent detailed neurological, cardiological, transmission. electrophysiological, myopathological and genetic sequence analysis. Methods: Double-stranded DNA products generated for denaturing gel Result: Left bundle branch block was first detected at age 40. The electrophoresis (DGGE) analysis were subjected to direct sequencing echocardiogram showed diffuse hypokinesis, with severe left ventricular using a 48 capillaries Abiprism 3730 sequencer (Applied Biosystems®) dysfunction and dysyncrony. No coronary artery disease was detected with Big Dye terminator v3.1 sequence kit and SeqScape2.5 software and cardiac resyncronization device therapy was performed. The for sequence analysis”. neurological symptoms started at age 42. Neurological investigation Results: The 14-year-old index male presented with hCMP, detected ptosis on the left side, strabismus convergent, myopatic preexcitation syndrome, and severe ventricular arrhythmias. mtDNA face, atrophy and weakness in the small hand muscles, decreased sequencing revealed the m.4395A>G transition in the mitochondrial tendon reflexes. The EMG found a myopathy and complex repetitive tRNAGln gene, which was shown to be homoplasmic by DGGE. The discharges. The exercise lactate test showed aerobe metabolic m.4395A>G mutation altered an evolutionary conserved nucleotide dysfunction. Muscle biopsy detected centronuclear myopathy. The and affected a highly conserved U.G pair in the secondary structure DNM2 mutation analysis found a pathogenic heterozygous c. 1105 of tRNAGln. The mutation was absent in 350 healthy subjects and was Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 397 scored as “possible pathogenic” by the Clustal-W-program. reverse transcription of the extracted RNA, the resulting cDNAs were Conclusions: This study shows the association of the homoplasmic sequenced and compared. The mutant construct generated a product m.4395A>G mutation in the tRNAGln gene with hCMP. To study the in which exon 26 was skipped. impact of this mutation and its contribution to the pathophysiology of mitochondrial hCMP, transgenic mice with distinct mutations could be P12.042 helpful. Identification of seven novel CRLF1 mutations in Crisponi syndrome and of a founder mutation in the French gypsy P12.040 population Expansion of a diagnostic service for hypertrophic A. S. Lebre1,2,3, S. J. Dumas2,4, N. Dagoneau3, Y. Alanay5, A. Baban6, E. Bieth7, cardiomyopathy using next generation sequencing. B. Isidor8, E. Kiliç5, B. Leheup9, A. Moncla10, S. Sigaudy10, J. P. Bonnefont1,2,3, A. J. Woodley1, S. Reid1, K. Kaur2, K. Thomson1, J. Taylor1, E. Blair3, J. Taylor2, H. Munnich1,2,3, V. Cormier-Daire1,2,3; Watkins4, A. Seller1; 1Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2APHP, Paris, France, 3Inserm 1Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Biomedical U781, Paris, France, 4Université Paris-Sud XI, Chatenay-Malabry, France, Research Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, 5Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 6Gaslini Children Hospital, Genova, Italy, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Oxford, 7CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 8CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 9CHU United Kingdom. de Nancy et EA4368 - PRES de l’Université de Lorraine, Vandoeuvre-les- Since 2003 the Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory (OMGL) has Nancy, France, 10Hôpital Timone-enfants AP-HM, Marseille, France. provided a diagnostic service for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM); Crisponi syndrome (CS) is a rare and severe autosomal recessive a condition with an estimated prevalence of 1/500, reported to be the disorder (MIM ID #601378) characterized by contractions of the facial most common cause of sudden cardiac death in young athletes and muscles in response to stimuli or during crying, facial dysmorphic people under 35 years of age. Currently, mutation screening of the features, camptodactyly, major early feeding, respiratory difficulties four most commonly associated genes (MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2 and hyperthermic episodes, frequently leading to early death from and TNNI3) is undertaken using a high resolution melt analysis hyperthermia or apnea during the first year of life. CS is caused by (LightscannerTM)/ Sanger sequencing approach. To date, analysis has mutations in the cytokine receptor-like factor 1 (CRLF1 gene) and been undertaken in >1300 probands; clinical sensitivity in this cohort is allelic to Cold-Induced Sweating Syndrome type 1 (CISS1). We was ~47%. describe here the clinical and genetic features of ten patients with CS A next generation sequencing approach has the potential to increase from eight families and seven new CRLF1 mutations. For a further clinical sensitivity by expanding the number of genes that can be delineation of CS, we performed a meta-analysis of the literature screened in parallel whilst also reducing reporting times for a similar and describe the phenotypic spectrum of all patients with CRLF1 cost. mutations. CS and CISS1 are most probably a single clinical entity In collaboration with the OMGL, the Oxford Biomedical Research with common symptoms and different presentations depending on the Centre (BRC) has validated a next generation sequencing protocol. patients’ age at diagnosis. Using the Roche 454 GS-FLX platform a significant increase in clinical In addition, the homozygous duplication c.713dupC was identified sensitivity was observed in a cohort of 231 patients using an expanded in three patients from French Gypsy families with CS. A common gene panel including TPM1, ACTC1, MYL2, MYL3, CSRP3, PRKAG2, haplotype that segregated with the disease in the three families was PLN, GLA, LAMP2, FHL1 and the mitochondrial genome in addition to detected by haplotype reconstruction with six markers (microsatellites) those previously analysed. which span ~4 Mb of DNA covering the CRLF1 locus. In conclusion, Implementation into the diagnostic laboratory requires stringent we report new CRLF1 mutations and the first founder mutation in the validation in order to meet quality and regulatory requirements. The French Gypsy population. process from sample receipt to reporting must be robust to be useful in the routine environment. Here we present the development of P12.043 a workflow algorithm incorporating robotics and third party analysis The first experience of molecular-genetic analysis of CADASIL software which demonstrates that this sequencing technology has in serbia clinical utility as a diagnostic strategy for HCM. M. Z. Jankovic1, V. Dobricic2, I. Novakovic1,2, E. Dzoljic2, N. Stojsavljevic2, A. Pavlovic2, V. Kostic1,2; P12.041 1School of medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute of minigene functional assay of a splice mutation of the mYBPc3 Neurology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade, Serbia. gene in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts E. Maioli1, M. Marini2, M. I. Parodi1, M. L. Galli1, M. Castagnetta1, D. A. and leukoencaphalopathy (CADASIL) is hereditary form of stroke with Coviello1, R. Ravazzolo2, P. Spirito1, L. Perroni1; prevalence of 2/100.000 adults. Beside stroke-like episodes, cognitive 1E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy, 2IRCCS, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, disturbance, behavioral abnormalities and migraine with aura are Genova, Italy. common features of CADASIL. CADASIL is caused by mutations in Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a very common genetic cardiac NOTCH3 gene and more than 150 NOTCH3 mutations have been disease and represents the most common cause of sudden cardiac described so far. Majority of them are missense mutations, leading death in the young. The main genes involved are MYH7, MYBPC3, to loss or gain of cysteine and resulting in odd number of cysteine TNNT2, TNNI3, TPM1and ACTC1. HCM is characterized by a marked residues within one of the EGF-like domains. It has been shown that genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. In case of novel mutations at almost 90% of mutations occur in exons 2-6. Therefore, as the first step splice sites or adjacent regions, analysis of mRNA is virtually unfeasible in establishing molecular genetic testing for CADASIL in our country, because of the lack of cardiac tissue, where sarcomeric genes are we performed direct sequencing of those five exons of NOTCH3 expressed. Here we report on a minigene assay used to overcome this gene. We analyzed DNA samples of 40 patients clinically suspected problem in a case of an undescribed putative splicing mutation in the to CADASIL. DNA sequencing was performed using ABI 310 Genetic MYBPC3 gene. A HCM affected newborn, deceased at 15 days, was Analyzer. Four different mutations in seven patients (one sibling pair, double heterozygous for two mutations of the MYBPC3 gene c.772G>A one sibling trio, and two single cases) were detected: Cys65Tyr (exon and c.2414-1G>A. The paternal mutation c.772G>A was reported as 2), Gly89Cys (exon 3), Arg90Cys (exon 3) and Ala319Cys (exon 6). causative of HCM. The c.2414-1G>A mutation, involving a splice site According to our data, mutation Cys65Tyr has not yet been described was inherited from the unaffected mother and never reported in the in the literature. scientific literature. It was absent in 500 control chromosomes. As no In conclusion, we have successfully started with genetic testing of cardiac tissue of the proband was available, mRNA could not be tested. CADASIL in Serbia. However, relatively low frequency of mutations in Therefore a minigene assay was performed. Fragments corresponding tested patients (18.92%) indicates that in the further CADASIL testing to exons 25-26 of the MYBPC3 gene from the wild type and the mutant stricter clinical criteria should be introduced and also mutation analysis alleles were separated by TA cloning using the proband’s mother of the remaining NOTCH3 exons should be developed. genomic DNA. The two allelic fragments were inserted into the pSPL3 eukaryotic vector. The plasmids were transfected into HeLa cells. After Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 339988 P12.044 performed to detect any nucleotide variation. ProtScale and Discovery Very High sensitivity somatic mutation Detection using ice Studio programs were used for insilico and structural analysis. DNA cOLD-PcR and BLOcker sequencing sequencing analysis of CRYAB, CRYGC, CRYGD and GJA8 showed P. Eastlake, B. Legendre Jr, G. Wu, Y. Shi, R. Lin, T. Woodford, K. total of six variations of which two were novel (CRYGC:p.R48H), Echtenkamp, J. Scott, S. Peterson, K. Richardson; (GJA8:p.L281C) and four have been previously reported (CRYAB: Transgenomic, Inc., Omaha, NE, United States. rs11603779T>G) (GJA8:p.L268L,), (CRYGD:p.R95R, c.T564C). Both Transgenomic has developed very high sensitivity methods for the novel changes, in CRYGC and GJA8 genes were found in 16.6% detecting somatic mutations notably in the discipline of cancer therapy of the patients. Previously reported nucleotide alterations (CRYGD:p. where key genetic changes are associated with EGFR antagonists’ R95R, c.T564C) were found in 90% of the patients. Insilico and effectiveness, e.g. in the genes EGFR, K-RAS, PIK3CA, BRAF, p53 structural analysis data suggested that two novel non-synonymous and NRAS. The novel techniques of Ice COLD-PCR and BLOCker mutations altered the stability and solvent accessibility of CRYGC Sequencing preferentially enrich mutant alleles compared to wild-type and GJA8 proteins which may lead to lens opacification. We observed alleles. These are not allele-specific techniques; therefore all mutations, two novel nonsynonymous variations and four reported variations in both known and unknown, are enriched and identified in a single CRYAB, CRYGC, CRYGD and GJA8 genes. The p.R48H variation in reaction. Together these methods allow mutations at concentrations γ-crystallins C may disrupt the normal structure of lens and can cause as low as 0.01-0.05% in background of wild-type to be confirmed by cataract. Cx50 is responsible for joining the lens cells into a functional sequencing. Additionally Ice COLD-PCR and BLOCker Sequencing syncytium and mutation (p.L281C) in this gene may lead to lens require no special equipment using only standard DNA thermocyclers opacification resulting in cataract formation. This study further expands and Sanger sequencing equipment. Data will be presented showing the mutation spectrum of congenital cataract and help understanding how these methods allow DNA sequencing confirmation of somatic how mutant proteins can lead to opacification of lens. mutations in samples such as low tumor-load biopsies, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded slides, fine-needle aspirates, circulating tumor P12.047 cells and circulating free tumour DNA in plasma and serum. These Novel missense mutations of RYR2 gene in catecholaminergic methods can also be used to confirm low signal Pyrosequencing and polymorphic ventricular tachycardia patients. next-generation deep-sequencing results. Using these techniques I. Valášková1,2, J. Kadlecová1,2, E. Švandová1, R. Gaillyová1,2, T. Novotný3; routine, rapid, simple and inexpensive detection of somatic mutations 1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dpt., Brno, Czech Republic, in (1) cancer patients’ plasma or serum or; (2) samples where very 2Masaryk University, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 3University limited tumour tissue is available, offers a non-invasive option for Hospital Brno, Internal and Cardiological Dpt., Brno, Czech Republic. cancer biomarker detection as well as monitoring remission, relapse BAcKGROUND: Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular and emergence of resistance mutations post-treatment. Finally Ice tachycardia (CPVT) is a rare inherited heart disease, which can lead COLD-PCR and BLOCker Sequencing can be applied to analysis of to life-threatening ventricular arrhythmias in patients with a structurally mixed viral infections and mitochondrial heteroplasmies. normal heart., and may provide a candidate for sudden cardiac deaths CPVT is caused by mutations in the RyR2 gene encoded the P12.045*** ryanodine receptor isoform 2 (RyR2), This calcium release channel is Detection of low frequency variation in heterogeneous samples an essential intracellular ion channel that is central to Ca(2+) signaling using an accurate and sensitive next generation sequencing and contraction in the heart . platform mEtHODs: We screened 35 patients with CPVT and available M. Storm1, R. Padilla1, J. Ichikawa1, M. Rhodes1, Y. Sun1, L. Joe1, M. family members for mutations in the RyR2 gene Mutation screening Matvienko1, D. W. Craig2, J. Aldrich2, A. Christoforides2, D. Taverna2, T. Moses2, of RyR2 gene was performed on genomic DNA samples extracted J. D. Carpten2, D. Duggan2, F. Hyland1; from peripheral blood. PCR amplified fragments covering areas 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2The Translational Genomics mutative critical exons 2-4, 6-15, 17-20, 39-49, 83, 84, 87-97-105 were Research Institute (TGen), Phoenix, AZ, United States. analyzed by sequencing. For mapping of the deletions RYR2 exons, Cancers often display biological and molecular heterogeneity with a we used probes for multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification variety of genetic abnormalities. Specific genetic mutations can alter (MLPA) analysis. the course of disease progression, metastasis, and drug resistance. REsULts: We identified three novel RyR2 missense mutations Some mutations in cancer are prevalent at a low frequency in M4107V, E4182A and S4122R in three CPVT patients. These clinical samples, often due to contamination of tumor samples with RYR2 variants were found in evolutionally conservative area of normal alleles from adjacent non-malignant cells. The identification RYR2 genomic sequence. The carriers of these mutations exhibited of genetic variants resulting from sub-populations is important to frequently syncope, their age of onset was between nine and 10 years better understand the causal biology of cancer. Second-generation and their treatment consists of beta blockers. sequencing can identify low frequency alleles resulting from cellular cONcLUsiONs: Based on their character it can be assumed that sub-populations. Here we describe the reliable detection of alleles identified sequential changes are causal mutations, thus the mutations occurring at very low frequencies in heterogeneous samples by utilizing responsible for the CPVT phenotype. However, the proposed theory the accuracy of the SOLiD System. We demonstrate that the SOLiD must be proved within a group of 100 healthy controls. System with Exact Call Chemistry (ECC) provides a highly accurate Supported by grant of The Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports approach to detecting low frequency variants in cancer research and Czech Republic (grant - MŠMT2B08061) other applications. P12.048 P12.046 molecular analysis of the SEC23B gene in patients affected by mutation screening of cRYAA, cRYGc, cRYGD and GJA8 genes congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia type ii (cDAii) associated with congenital cataract in indian patients F. Punzo1, S. Scianguetta2, A. M. Bertoli-Avella1, M. Casale2, B. A. Oostra1, A. M. Kumar1, T. Agarwal2, S. Khokhar3, R. Dada1; Iolascon3, S. Perrotta2; 1Lab for Molecular reproduction and Genetics, All India Institute of Medical 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Sciences, New Delhi, India, 2Dr. RP Center for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Netherlands, 2Pediatric Department, Second University of Naples, Naples, Italy, Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 3Dr. RP Centre for Ophthalmic 3CEINGE-Advanced Biotechnologies, Naples, Italy. Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. Congenital Dyserythropoietic Anemia type II (CDAII), the most The purpose of this study was to investigate mutations in CRYAA, frequent type of CDA, is an autosomal recessive disease characterized CRYGC, CRYGD and GJA8 in Indian patients with congenital by ineffective erythropoiesis, peripheral hemolysis, erythroblast cataract. Thirty clinically diagnosed congenital cataract cases below 3 morphological abnormalities and hypoglycosylation of some red blood years of age from northern India were enrolled in this study. Genomic cells membrane proteins. Recently, we and others identified mutations DNA was extracted from peripheral blood, all coding and exon/ in SEC23B as responsible for CDAII. SEC23B is a member of the intron regions were amplified using PCR and direct sequencing was SEC23/SEC24 family, a component of COPII coat protein complex Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 399 which is involved in protein trafficking through membrane vesicles from with 105 patients sharing this common mutation due to an extended the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi apparatus. The aim of the study founder effect. Families originate mainly from one of two geographic was to characterize the molecular defect in CDAII patients of Italian regions of Cyprus. Heterozygous carriers of the duplication were origin. detected via a simple PCR test using three specific primers. An Sixteen CDAII index patients from unrelated families were analyzed additional gap PCR test was designed to detect probable homozygous by direct exon sequencing. We identified 15 different mutations, carriers. No homozygous carrier was found. The most striking finding four of which were novel (p.Gln214Stop, p.Thr485Ala, p.Val637Gly, is the big difference between the two genders as regards progression p.Ser727Phe). In particular, four patients were carrying homozygous to proteinuria, chronic renal failure (CRF) and end stage renal disease missense mutations and 10 patients were compound heterozygotes (ESRD). Proteinuria with CRF or ESRD developed on top of hematuria (five patients carried a missense and a non-sense mutation and five in 68% male patients instead of 14% female patients aged over 50- carried two different missense mutations). The new mutations affected yo. Fifteen men reached ESRD compared to only three women. The highly conserved aminoacids and were not found in 200 controls. disease penetrance is nearly 90%, as 10 mutation carriers were The mutations lead to a 50% decrease in mRNA expression levels symptomless. of SEC23B in lymphocytes and erithroid precursors of patients with These data stress the wide clinical spectrum of CFHR5 nephropathy, a missense/non-sense mutations compared to controls. Despite the new disease entity, characterized by high risk for renal failure especially sequencing of all exons and flanking intronic regions, two patients in males. Based on our experience, it is probable that some patients displayed a single heterozygous mutation, suggesting that mutations with CFHR5 nephropathy and episodes of macroscopic hematuria could also be located in non-coding regions. Other possibility could be may be misdiagnosed with IgA nephropathy. the presence of copy number alterations within the gene. Alternatively, we cannot exclude that a second gene could be involved in the P12.051 pathogenesis of CDAII. A DNA variant within the 3’-UtR of HBEGF alters the regulatory action of hsa-miR-1207-5p and is associated with progression of P12.049 renal failure in cFHR5 nephropathy iPs cells to model cDKL5-related disorders G. Papagregoriou1, H. Dweep2, K. Voskarides1, P. Koupepidou1, Y. M. Amenduni1, R. De Filippis1, A. Y. Cheung2, F. Ungaro3, F. Ariani1, F. Mari1, M. Athanasiou3, A. Pierides4, N. Gretz2, K. N. Felekkis5, C. Deltas1; Mencarelli1, J. Hayek4, J. Ellis2,5,6, V. Broccoli3, A. Renieri1, I. Meloni1; 1University Of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Medical Research Center, University 1Medical Genetics, Siena, Italy, 2Developmental & Stem Cell Biology Program, of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 3Department of Nephrology, Nicosia Toronto, ON, Canada, 3Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, Dibit, Milano, Italy, General Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Department of Nephrology, Hippocrateon 4Child Neuropsychiatry, University hospital of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Ontario Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus, 5Department of Life and Health Sciences, University Human iPS Cell Facility, SickKids, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Department of of Nicosia, Nicosia, Cyprus. Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. HBEGF (Heparin Binding Epidermal Growth Factor) is expressed in Rett syndrome is a progressive neurologic disorder that represents podocytes and was shown to play a role in glomerular physiology. one of the most common causes of mental retardation in females. MicroRNA binding sites on the 3’-UTR of HBEGF were predicted using Mutations in CDKL5 gene have been identified in females with the early miRWalk software followed by sequence analysis in 162 patients onset seizure variant of Rett syndrome and also in males with X-linked diagnosed with mild or severe glomerulopathy. A single nucleotide epileptic encephalopathy. CDKL5 is a kinase protein highly expressed polymorphism, mirSNP C1936T (rs13385) of the 3’-UTR, was identified in neurons, but its exact function inside the cell is unknown. To at the second base of the seed region of microRNA hsa-mir-1207- address this issue we established a human cellular model for CDKL5- 5p. AB8/13 undifferentiated podocytes were transfected with miRNA related disease using the recently developed technology of induced mimics of hsa-mir-1207-5p and HBEGF protein levels were reduced by pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). iPSCs can be expanded indefinitely 50%. An extensive sequence containing the mirSNP allele-1936C was and differentiated in vitro into many cell types, including neurons. then cloned into the pMIR-Report Luciferase vector and co-transfected These features make them the ideal tool to study disease mechanisms with miRNA mimics of hsa-mir-1207-5p into AB8/13 undifferentiated directly on the primarily affected neuronal cells. We successfully podocytes. In agreement with the western blot data, transfection of derived iPSCs from fibroblasts of two CDKL5-mutated female patients mimic resulted in reduced luciferase expression demonstrating the affected by early onset seizure variant of Rett syndrome and one male ability of hsa-mir-1207-5p to regulate HBEGF expression by direct with X-linked epileptic encephalopathy. We demonstrated that our binding. On the contrary, in the presence mirSNP 1936T allele, this female CDKL5-mutated iPSCs maintain X-chromosome inactivation regulation was abolished. Collectively, these results demonstrate that and we identified clones expressing either the mutant CDKL5 allele or variant 1936T of this mirSNP blocks the ability of hsa-mir-1207-5p to the wild type allele. These last clones represent the ideal experimental regulate HBEGF expression in podocytes. We hypothesized that this control since they are genotypically identical to those expressing the variant may have a functional role as a genetic modifier. Interestingly, in mutant allele and differ only for CDKL5 expression. Furthermore, our a cohort of 72 patients who were diagnosed with CFHR5 nephropathy, data indicate that both CDKL5-mutated iPSCs can be differentiated inheritance of the mirSNP 1936T allele was significantly increased in into neurons and are thus suitable to model disease pathogenesis in the group who demonstrated faster progression to chronic renal failure vitro. (p-value of 0.0485). No similar association was detected in a cohort of patients with Thin Basement Membrane Nephropathy. A larger cohort P12.050 is required for further validation of these results. CFHR5 nephropathy: a new inherited hematuric glomerulopathy with increased frequency in cyprus due to a founder mutation P12.052 K. Voskarides1, Y. Athanasiou2, D. Gale3, L. Damianou4, P. Maxwell5, P. Diagnosis of charcot-marie-tooth Disease Demosthenous1, A. Pierides6, C. Deltas1; C. Casasnovas1,2, I. Banchs2, D. Laura2, L. De Jorge2, V. Volpini2; 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Nicosia General Hospital, Nicosia, 1Unitat de Neuromuscular. Neurology Department. Hospital Universitari de Cyprus, 3Imperial College Kidney and Transplant Institute, London, United Bellvitge - IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Ll, Spain, 2Diagnostic Molecular Centre Kingdom, 4Limassol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus, 5University College, of Hereditary Diseases. Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques de Bellvitge London, United Kingdom, 6Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Ll, Spain. Our team contributed to the molecular investigation of a new autosomal Charcot-Marie- Tooth disease (CMT) is a genetically heterogeneous dominant renal disease, seeming to be endemic in Cyprus, which group of diseases that affect the peripheral nervous system. The is characterized by microscopic and synpharyngitic macroscopic most commonly used classification combines clinical findings with hematuria, renal failure and C3 glomerulonephritis. The only mutation the inheritance pattern and either electrophysiological or anatomical found thus far in complement factor H related protein 5 (CFHR5) gene, pathology findings. The combination of these data allows the is a duplication of exons 2-3 resulting in reduced affinity for glomerular- identification of several main categories of CMT. The majority of cases bound complement. can be classified demyelinating forms (or CMT1, characterized by a Here we present clinical data from 16 families, some being very large, low NCV in electrophysiological studies), CMT2 (axonal form caused Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 400 by specific effects on the axon itself, and conserved NCV) or CMT4 In order to investigate the “different mutation type” hypothesis and find (recessive and severe forms). Recently, disease variants have been the frequency of COL4A3/COL4A4 inherited and de novo mutations described that have intermediate NCV. Each of these types can be we set up a COL4A3/COL4A4 mutation screening in a large cohort further divided into subtypes, depending on the underlying causative of 122 familial and sporadic hematuria cases. The exons and flanking molecular defect. However, it should be noted that there is not a intronic regions of COL4A3/COL4A4 are amplified with appropriate good genotype_phenotype correlation and that great variability primers. Using SURVEYOR endonuclease for mutation detection exists, both within and between families, regarding the degree of we will have the genetics results in order to be able to investigate clinical expression. The prevalence of CMT ranges from 10 to 30 per deeper the functional role of the collagen IV mutations. SURVEYOR 100,000, depending on the geographical region of origin. The most digestion cleaves at mismatched base pairs in heteroduplexes. If common cause of CMT1 is CMT1A, which results from the duplication cleavage is evident (on agarose electrophoresis), DNA re-sequencing of a genomic fragment that encompasses the PMP22 gene on is performed. chromosome 17, followed by CMT1B, 1C, 1D and 1E. In the recent Preliminary results of our screening are the polymorphisms COL4A3- years, all the published studies identify CMT2A as the most common G43R, COL4A3 IVS2+12GT, COL4A3-P74P, COL4A3-P414L and cause of CMT2 (which would account for 10- 33% of cases). We COL4A3-E162G. Possible phenotypic contribution of these SNPs propose a diagnostic CMT algorithm including the recent molecular as a functional haplotype cannot be excluded. Appropriate cell findings that allows the diagnosis of more than 80% of CMT1 patients culture studies will be designed to investigate the functional role of and more than 40% of CMT patients. polymorphisms and mutations in COL4A3, and COL4A4 chains. P12.053 P12.055 Duplication of cis-regulatory DNA elements downstream of A novel NDUFV1 gene mutation associated with complex i sHOX gene causes Leri Weill syndrome deficiency by a genome-wide approach in consanguineous L. Capone1, A. Forabosco2, M. Baldi2, R. Bertorelli3, L. Iughetti4, B. Predieri4, S. siblings with brainstem lesions and Leigh syndrome Vannelli5, B. Stasiowska5, D. A. Coviello2, M. Baffico2; C. N. Vilain1, C. Rens2, A. Aeby3, P. Van Bogaert3, J. Smet4, R. Van Coster4, I. 1Laboratorio di Biologia molecolare e Genetica medica, Fano, Italy, 2E.O. Pirson2, M. J. Abramowicz1,2; Ospedali Galliera, Laboratory of Human Genetics, Genoa, Italy, 3Laboratorio di 1Center of Human Genetics, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, Biologia molecolare e Genetica medica “Cante di Montevecchio”, Fano, Italy, 2Institute of Interdisciplinary Research (IRIBHM), Université Libre de Bruxelles, 4Dipartimento di Pediatria- Università di Modena e Reggio Emilia, Modena, Brussels, Belgium, 3Neuropaediatrics Department. Hôpital Erasme. Université Italy, 5S.S. Auxologia – Università di Torino, Torino, Italy. Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Leri-Weill syndrome (LWS) is a dominantly inherited skeletal dysplasia Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. ascribed to haploinsufficiency of the SHOX protein caused by While deficiency of complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain is deletions or point mutations of the gene and to heterozygous deletions a frequent cause of encephalopathy in children, only a few mutations downstream the intact SHOX gene, involving conserved non coding have been reported in each of its subunits. Furthermore, in the absence cis-regulatory DNA elements (CNEs) showing enhancer activity. of families large enough for conclusive segregation analysis, and of We describe the first cases of “pure” duplications of the CNEs- robust functional testing, it is difficult to unequivocally demonstrate containing region downstream the SHOX gene in two LWS families, the causality of the observed mutations and to delineate genotype- suggesting the duplication of the cis-regulatory DNA elements as the phenotype correlations, making additional observations of these very possible cause of the LWS phenotype. rare genetic defects necessary. We observed two siblings with an early The precise mechanisms of the pathogenic effect caused by the onset encephalopathy with medulla, brainstem and mesencephalon microduplication of the CNEs-containing region are unclear. The lesions on brain MRI and death before eight months of age, caused by disturbance of the long range regulation of gene expression, essential a complex I deficiency. The parents were first cousins and unaffected. for producing the gene product in the proper time and place and in Assuming that the disease was caused by homozygosity for an the correct quantity, has been proposed as the cause of a number ancestral mutation in a nuclear-encoded gene, we used homozygosity of diseases in which the suspected target genes appeared to be mapping and identified 4 genomic regions that were homozygous and completely normal. It is possible that duplication exerts a negative effect concordant in the two patients, encompassing 4 complex I genes, one on SHOX transcription. Recently, it has been demonstrated that the of which only, NDUFV1, showing a missense mutation. The mutation, proper gene regulation depends not only on the required transcription p.Arg386His, affects a highly conserved residue, contiguous to a factors and associated complexes being present but also on the cysteine residue known to coordinate a Fe ion. Another mutation of the integrity, chromatin conformation and nuclear positioning of the gene same codon had been reported in similarly affected patient, yielding chromosomal segments. On the basis of the above considerations it is additional strong evidence for causality. This observation adds to our not unlikely that the duplication alters the three dimensional chromatin understanding of complex I deficiency. It validates the important role spatial organization impeding in some way the enhancer to contact the of Arg386, and therefore supports the current molecular model of iron- promoter, resulting in a lack of gene activation resulting in a condition sulfur clusters in NDUFV1. of haploinsufficiency. P12.056 P12.054 Prevalence of congenital Adrenal hyperplasia (cAH), due to screening for COL4A3/COL4A4 mutations in 122 familial and 21-hydroxylase deficiency, in a Jordanian sample pool sporadic cases of microscopic hematuria H. Daggag, D. Hiyesat, N. Khawaja, M. Abu-Jbara, A. Al-Batayneh, M. El- L. Papazachariou1, P. Demosthenous1, K. Voskarides1, M. Arsali2, A. Pierides3, Khateeb, K. Ajlouni; C. Deltas1; National Center for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Genetics, Amman, Jordan. 1University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Limassol General Hospital, Nicosia, CAH represents a family of autosomal recessive disorders. About Cyprus, 3Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. 95% of the CAH cases are caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency, Recently described mutations in glomerular basement membrane resulting from a defect in the CYP21A2 gene. The main aim of this (GBM) related genes (COL4A3, COL4A4, LAMB2) in patients with study was to screen the Jordanian population for the 8 most common hematuria and severe nephrotic syndrome give more evidence for the small CYP21A2 mutations and introduce a prenatal and a neonatal significance of the GBM in glomerular filtration. Familial microscopic genetic test for CAH in Jordan. Current sample study consisted hematuria, thought to be a benign disease, seems to be a frequent of 37 clinically diagnosed index patients, including 20 males and condition and COL4A3/COL4A4 mutations explain about half of 17 females. In most cases, DNA samples for family members were the cases. However, recent data from our laboratory subsequently available, bringing the total number of samples to 140. As a screening confirmed by others, show that more than 50% of these patients method we implemented the amplification refractory mutation system develop chronic renal failure and even end-stage renal disease. We (ARMS), identifying mutations in 33 index patients, 15 of which were believe that this phenotypic heterogeneity is due to different mutation heterozygotes for a single mutation, 5 were compound heterozygotes, types or due to modifier genes action. 11 were homozygotes and 2 were compound homozygotes. Mutation Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 401 frequency was the highest for In2cs mutation at 37.8%, followed by 98% of CYP21A2 mutations associated with CAH. Q318X at 24.3% and 13.5% for 8bp deletion. Also, in 25% of CAH method/Results: 22 samples were tested by locus-specific PCR/ cases due to CYP21A2 gene defect, mutations are caused by large multiplex minisequencing and MLPA (P050, MRC-Holland): 4 had no gene deletions (i.e. 30 kb gene deletion). Hence, to be able to obtain a mutations, 9 had point mutations, 2 had large deletions and 7 had a true statistical representation of CYP21A2 mutations in the Jordanian common point mutation combined with a large deletion or duplication. population, our sample pool needs to be tested for the 30 kb deletion. conclusion: The present work stresses the importance of considering This will be achieved through Multiple Ligation-dependant Probe detection of CYP21A2 point mutations and large rearrangements Amplification (MLPA) method, utilizing a CAH-MLPA kit. Once the (particularly CYP21A2 duplications that can be responsible for some analysis is complete, we can implement a prenatal and a neonatal false positive cases), for CAH diagnosis and counselling. testing on a national scale, hoping to reduce the overall incidence of CAH in a Jordanian population. P12.059 First case report of PHOX2B-confirmed congenital central P12.057 hypoventilation syndrome in Russia Identification of CYP21A2 mutations in Czech patients with L. P. Nazarenko1,2, M. S. Nazarenko1,2; 21-hydroxylase deficiency - structural analysis of the chimeric 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian cYP21A1P/cYP21A2 gene State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Z. Vrzalova, Z. Hruba, L. Fajkusova, E. Stahlova Hrabincova; Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is a rare Centre of molecular biology and gene therapy; Masaryk University Brno, Brno, autosomal dominant disorder of the autonomic nervous system Czech Republic. characterized by the absence of adequate control of respiration Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) comprises a group of autosomal with decreased sensitivity to hypoxia and hypercapnia. The paired- recessive disorders caused by an enzymatic deficiency. Approximately like homeobox 2B (PHOX2B) gene has been identified as the major 90% of all CAH cases is associated with mutations in the steroid gene involved in CCHS. Case presented in the newborn period 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2). The CYP21A2 gene and its inactive with multiple episodes of apnoea and respiratory insufficiency that pseudogene (CYP21A1P) are located within the HLA region on required ventilatory support. There was no family history of CCHS. chromosome 6p21.3. Their intergenic recombinations are responsible A heterozygous insertion of 21 bp DNAs for coding 7 alanines was for about 95% of mutations. detected in exon 3. Analyses of the parents’ PHOX2B genes were In 267 Czech probands with 21-hydroxylase deficiency were identified normal. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of clinical 30 different CYP21A2 mutant alleles (4 of them were not described description and confirmation of CCHS by molecular genetic testing in so far). The most frequent mutation, a chimeric CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 Russia. gene, was found in 33,7% of mutant alleles (a new type designated CH-7 was characterized). Small DNA rearrangements of the CYP21A2 P12.060 gene were present in 59,2% of mutant alleles (3 novel point mutations Novel and recurrent JAG1 mutations in patients with tetralogy of were detected). Total deletions of CYP21A2 were detected in 4,9% Fallot and duplications of CYP21A2 associated with a mutation on both V. Guida1, F. Chiappe2, R. Ferese1, G. Usala2, G. Maestrale3, I. Chiara1, E. copies were detected in 0,4% of mutated alleles. Bellacchio1, R. Mingarelli1, M. Digilio4, M. Uda3, A. De Luca1, B. Dallapiccola4; In the set of 90 patients, we identified four types of chimeric 1Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital IRCCS, Laboratorio Mendel, San CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 genes. The most common type was the newly Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, CNR, characterized CH-7 type (21,4% of mutant alleles). We performed a Cagliari, Italy, 3Istituto di Genetica delle Popolazioni, CNR, Sassari, Italy, detailed sequence analysis of chimeric CYP21A1P/CYP21A2 genes to 4Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. determine the breakpoints in CYP21A1P-CYP21A2 conversion areas. Mutations in the ligand of Notch signaling pathway Jagged1 (JAG1) All chimeric genes have the CYP21A1P promotor and p.Pro30Leu have been identified in patients with Alagille syndrome (AS) and in mutation in exon 1 but differ in the presence of other mutations and some patients affected by apparently non-syndromic tetralogy of polymorphisms. Fallot (TOF). We analyzed the entire coding sequence of JAG1 gene Mutations in CYP21A2 gene were determined using a long-range to determine the occurrence of small deletions, insertions and point PCR, secondary PCR and restriction analysis, direct sequencing, and mutations in 123 TOF individuals. None of the patients presented MLPA method. clinical features of AS, all cases had normal standard karyotype This work was supported by grant MSMT LC06023. and 22q11 deletion was excluded. The patients’ cohort included 112 subjects with non-syndromic TOF and 11 with multiple anomalies in P12.058 the setting of an unidentifiable disorder. Mutation analysis of JAG1 molecular Diagnosis of congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia due to gene using dHPLC identified three different, possibly pathogenetic, 21-Hydroxylase Deficiency aminoacidic substitutions in 4 unrelated patients, including 3 sporadic R. Cerqueira, I. Miguel, H. Gabriel, M. Teixeira, A. Palmeiro, P. Rendeiro, P. cases and one with familial congenital heart disease. One of the JAG1 Tavares; sequence changes (p.Gly309Arg) was novel, while two (p.Pro810Leu, CGC Genetics (www.cgcgenetics.com), Porto, Portugal. p.Arg937Gln) were known. The p.Pro810Leu mutation was identified introduction: 21-hydroxylase deficiency is the most common cause in a patient with TOF, cleft lip and palate and mild mental impairment, of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (90%-95% of cases), a family of while p.Gly309Arg and p.Arg937Gln variants were detected in 3 autosomal recessive disorders with highly variable phenotypical patients affected by isolated TOF (3/112, 2.7%). All identified variants expression involving impaired synthesis of cortisol from cholesterol by were excluded in 300 controls. The present results expand the JAG1 the adrenal cortex. The CYP21A2 gene is located on 6p, within the mutational and phenotypic spectrum and confirm that these mutations HLA complex, a region that displays a complex organization of genes occur in a subset of non-syndromic TOF individuals. with great variability in gene size and copy numbers. Approximately 30 kb from the functional gene of 21-OHD is located a nonfunctional P12.061 pseudogene (CYP21A2P) that shares significant sequence homology High frequency of NOTCH1 mutations in familal LVOtO : a study with CYP21A2. Due to the complexity of large rearrangements that can of 324 probands and their families affect CYP21A2 and its pseudogene, correct genotyping of CYP21A2 W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, R. M. F. Berger2, M. W. Wessels3, Y. J. Vos1, R. gene is difficult and requires not only the identification of CYP21A2 M. W. Hofstra1; common mutations but also the detection of CYP21A2 deletions, 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre,University of Groningen, CYP21A2P/CYP21A2 chimeric genes (20% of mutant alleles, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Centre of Congenital Heart Disease, University resulting from the common 30-kb deletion) or CYP21A2 duplications Medical Centre,University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Department (7% of the alleles). Therefore we developed a testing approach that of Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands. combines the detection of CYP21A2 common point mutations and Background: Left ventricular outflow tract obstructions (LVOTO) are large rearrangements, and allows the detection of approximately 80- highly heritable congenital heart diseases, with bicuspid aortic valve Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 402 (BAV), aortic valve stenosis (AVS), coarctation of the aortae (COA) suggesting that the pathomechanisms are amino acid-dependent and and hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) being the most frequent not linked to modifier genes. We established a sequencing hierarchy diagnoses. The BAV may be undetected, but has a risk for serious for hotspot-containing exons based on the patients clinical data and complications and sudden cardiac death. Mutations in NOTCH1 are thereby help to guide genetic counselling and molecular diagnostics. reported to cause LVOTO, but data on prevalence and phenotypic spectrum in a large cohort have not been published. P12.063 methods/Results: NOTCH1 mutation screening was performed the molecular genetic study of gene CFTR for cF patients from in a well documented cohort of 324 probands with LVOTO. Sixteen chuvash Republic mutations were detected (5%): eight mutations are considered disease A. Stepanova1, A. Abrukova2, E. Savaskina2, A. Polyakov1; causing (one deletion, five truncating and two splice site mutations). 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Ministry Two of these 8 mutations are de novo, the other six occur in familial of Health and Social Development of Chuvash Republic, Presidential Perinatal disease (6/76= 8%). Moreover we found 8 possible causative non- Center, Cheboksary, Russian Federation. synonymous mutations. Apart from these 16 mutations, 69 unclassified Cystic fibrosis (CF) is a common and generally severe autosomal variants were detected. The relatives of all mutation carriers were recessive disorder of the European population. It’s caused by screened for mutations and for cardiac defects. We detected besides mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator LVOTO, also non-penetrance, tetralogy of Fallot and pulmonary valve gene (CFTR) on chromosome 7q31. stenosis/atresia In this work we analyzed 11 CF Chuvashes families, consisting of 12 conclusion: Firstly, disease causing NOTCH1 mutations are detected patients with classic form of CF and their 25 relatives. in 8% of familial LVOTO. Secondly, NOTCH1 mutations cause all We’d designed the multiplex system of direct PCR analysis and the subtypes of LVOTO, but non-penetrance or right sided defects multiplex system based on allele-specific ligation reaction PCR analysis may occur like tetralogy of Fallot and pulmonary valve atresia. We and used it for most frequent mutation screening (ΔF508, ΔI507, recommend NOTCH1 mutation screening in patients with LVOTO, CFTRdele2,3, 1677delTA, 2143delT, 2184insA, 394delTT, 3821DelT, especially in familial LVOTO, because it will help to detect relatives at L138ins, G542X, W1282X, N1303K, R334W, 3849+10kbc>t, 604insA, risk for complications of a previously unknown heart defect and at risk 3944 delTG, S1196X, 621+1g>t). There were found two CFTR for affected offspring. mutations ΔF508 for two CF patients in this work. We analyzed all patients and relatives by four intragenic SNP markers P12.062 IVS1CA, IVS6aGATT, IVS8CA and IVS17BCA. The haplotype 22-7- centronuclear myopathy: 38 novel DNm2 mutations reveal 16-13 was observed for 6 patients in the homozygous state and for 4 hotspots and a genotype/phenotype correlation patients in the heterozygous state. By sequencing of the CFTR gene J. Böhm1, E. Schaefer2, E. T. DeChene3, H. Karasoy4, N. Dondaine2, C. coding regions and exon-intron junctions the p.E92K mutation was Kretz1, N. Haumesser1, C. Poirson1, A. Toussaint1, A. Nicot1, J. Vissing5, N. found in homozygous state for two CF patients. The p.E92K mutation Witting5, E. Zanoteli6, C. Wallgren-Pettersson7, A. Echaniz-Laguna8, L. Bomme was determined for 10 patients with haplotype 22-7-16-13: 6 patients in Ousager9, A. Krause10, C. Jern11, L. Merlini12, A. S. B. Oliveira6, V. Biancalana2, the homozygous state, 2 patients in heterozygous state in compound J. Mandel1,2, A. H. Beggs3, C. R. Pierson13, J. Laporte1; with mutation ΔF508 and 2 patients in compound heterozygous with 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Faculté de Médecine, Laboratoire de Diagnostic unidentified mutation. Génétique, Nouvel Hopital Civil, Strasbourg, France, 3Genetics, The Manton After analyzing 343 unaffected unrelated Chuvashes we identified 5 Center for Orphan Disease Research, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, heterozygous state p.E92K mutation and 4 heterozygous state ΔF508 United States, 4Department of Neurology, Ege University School of Medicine, ones. Izmir, Turkey, 5Dept of Neurology, Danish National Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Department of Neurology, Medical School of the University of Sao P12.064 Paulo (FMUSP), Sao Paulo, Brazil, 7The Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics and multicenter validation study of a novel stripAssay for cystic Department of Medical Genetics, Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, fibrosis Helsinki, Finland, 8Department of Neurology, Hopital Civil, Strasbourg, France, H. Puehringer1, M. Macek2, A. Stambergova2, L. Dvorakova2, M. Duno3, B. 9Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 10Division of Human Genetics, Tuemmler4, S. Hedtfeld4, M. Tzetis5, M. Poulou5, C. Oberkanins1; National Health Laboratory Service and School of Pathology, University of the 1ViennaLab Diagnostics GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Department of Biology and Witwatersrand, Johannisburg, South Africa, 11Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Medical Genetics, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Department Göteborg, Sweden, 12Medical Genetics, University of Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Department 13Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United of Pediatrics, Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 5Department of Medical States. Genetics, National Kapodistrian University, Athens, Greece. Centronuclear myopathies (CNM) are associated with general skeletal Cystic fibrosis (CF), with an incidence of approximately 1 in 3000 live muscle weakness. The histopathological findings involve muscle births in Caucasians, is caused by mutations in the cystic-fibrosis fiber atrophy, type I fiber predominance and abnormally centralized transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. To date, more nuclei. The severe X-linked and the milder autosomal recessive CNM than 1500 CFTR mutations have been described, the majority being result from mutations in MTM1 and BIN1, respectively. The autosomal very rare or private. Worldwide, the most frequent mutation F508del dominant form with mild to moderate etiopathology and childhood or accounts for 30-72% of CF chromosomes depending upon ethnicity. adult onset is linked to DNM2 mutations. Specific DNM2 mutations Overall there is great heterogeneity in the remaining pathogenic are also associated with a peripheral neuropathy, Charcot-Marie-Tooth mutations, as type and distribution vary substantially between (CMT) disease, the most common inherited neurological disorder. populations. DNM2 (19q13) encodes dynamin 2, a mechanochemical enzyme We have developed a reverse-hybridization assay for the rapid and hydrolyzing GTP to apply forces on membranes and is therefore a simultaneous analysis of 23 CFTR mutations recommended by the key player for membrane trafficking at the plasma membrane and the ACMG plus 10 additional ones prevalent in different parts of Europe, trans-Golgi network. as well as the IVS8 polyT (5T/7T/9T) variants. The CF StripAssay, Fourteen different CNM-related DNM2 mutations in 39 families showing a coverage of 70-93% almost all over Europe, is rapid, have been reported so far. In this study we describe a cohort of 38 simple and accessible to automation. The test requires very small novel autosomal dominant CNM families harbouring 8 known and 2 amounts of samples, which is of particular importance for prenatal new mutations including the first splice mutation, thereby expanding diagnosis and newborn screening. In the first phase of a multicenter the genotypic CNM spectrum and confining regions more prone to validation study genotyping results from 96 out of 111 (86.5%) mutations. Combining our results with the published data, distinct previously tested samples were confirmed by the CF StripAssay. The mutation hotspots became apparent in exons 8, 11, 14 and 16 and remaining discrepant genotypes were due to missing mutant probes allow a reliable genotype-phenotype correlation. Notably, exon 16 on the teststrips. Currently the assay is validated prospectively under mutations are invariably associated with a severe neonatal phenotype. routine diagnostic settings in the participating centers. (oberkanins@ None of the mutations are associated with both, CNM and CMT, viennalab.co.at)Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 403 P12.065 At inspection of 246 healthy inhabitants of the Novosibirsk region the IFRD1: a possible modifier gene for Cystic Fibrosis Lung genital age, selected by epidemiological criteria, the R408W of PAH Disease gene and delF508 of CFTR gene among all alleles of these genes A. R. Lo Presti1, F. Belpinati1, M. D. Bettin1, G. Malerba1, L. Xumerle1, C. have made frequencies of 0,0061 and 0,0041 accordingly. Testing Castellani2, P. F. Pignatti1, C. Bombieri1; mutations R408W of PAH gene and delF508 of CFTR gene has high 1Section of Biology and Genetic, Department of Life and Reproduction diagnostic value at inspection of families burdened on CF and PKU Sciences, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 2Veneto Regional CF Center, and for revealing of heterozygotic carriers of the given diseases during Verona Hospital, Verona, Italy. mediko-genetic consultation. Cystic fibrosis (CF), the most frequent autosomal recessive disease In our practice in a family surveyed concerning reproductive health, in the Caucasian population, is a lethal multi-system disorder caused at the woman presence in the heterozygotic form simultaneously by mutations in the CFTR gene. Severity of clinical manifestation, mutation R408W of PAH gene (inherited from the father) and mutation particularly, the pulmonary phenotype, is widely variable, even among delF508 of CFTR gene (inherited from mother) has been established. patients with the same CFTR genotype or within the same family. This Thus, the patient is the carrier simultaneously two hereditary diseases variability is only partially explained by allelic heterogeneity at the (CF and PKU), and her family needs genetic inspection at planning and CFTR gene, therefore many genes have been investigated as possible pregnancy conducting.The given fact confirms the importance testing CF phenotype modifier. Literature data reports the IFRD1 (Interferon- mutations of the PAH and CFTR genes at mediko-genetic consultation Related Developmental Regulator 1) gene as a possible modifier of of families planning pregnancy. cystic fibrosis lung disease severity (Nature 458:1039-42, 2009). In this study we analysed the three SNPs (rs7817, rs3807213, P12.068 rs6968084) of IFRD1 gene, previously described in association with Identification of CFTR splicing defects from mRNA analysis a more severe lung phenotype, to confirm these data in a North-East M. Ramos1, J. Giménez1, A. Álvarez2, A. Moreno3, J. De Gracia2, T. Casals1; Italian population. 1Idibell, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital To this purpose,146 CF patients attending the Veneto Regional CF Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain. Center of Verona were enrolled. All patients were diagnosed according Cystic fibrosis (CF; OMIM 219700) is a multi-systemic disorder to international criteria and clinically evaluated for respiratory and produced by mutations in the CFTR gene (ABCC7; OMIM 602421). So gastrointestinal parameters. far, over 1,600 mutations determine its variable phenotypic expression. SNPs were genotyped by PCR and restriction enzyme analysis. Splicing mutations account for 15% of CF alleles. However, missense, An association study between IFRD1-polymorphisms and qualitative nonsense and synonymous SNPs have been found to affect the parameters relatively to respiratory and gastrointestinal traits in CF efficiency of the splicing process in CF and other genetic disorders. patients was done. A significant association between the rs7817-CT DNA analysis has allowed us to characterize 97% of the CF alleles; heterozygote genotype and a higher FEV value was found (p=0.0307). however, the effect of most mutations is not well understood. In silico 1 No other significant association was observed. analysis has being applied to different kind of mutations, although These results confirm that genetic variations in the IFRD1 gene, or at the information provided by the different software, sometimes least other mutations in linkage disequilibrium with the studied SNPs, controversial, needs further studies to be corroborated. The aim of this may contribute to the modification of pulmonary phenotype severity in work is to define the optimal conditions to the implementation of mRNA CF patients. analysis in our current CF strategy to assess the effect of mutations already identified as well as to search undetected mutations in our P12.066 population. To this aim, nasal epithelial cells were collected by brushing Next generation sequencing with ion torrent’s PGm™ sequencer from CF patients and controls. Total mRNA was extracted and reverse and the 5500 sOLiD™ system: targeted resequencing of the transcription performed following standard protocols. Six PCRs CFTR gene using sample multiplexing overlapping the complete CFTR mRNA (6.1kb) have been developed R. Achmann1, R. Greither2, R. Dixon2, A. Rico2, A. Sartori2, S. Zahn1, F. to identify normal and aberrant transcripts in 30 samples. The PCR Stellmer1, L. Argyriou1, B. Auber1; products were sequenced to corroborate the nature of transcripts. Our 1MVZ genteQ GmbH, Hamburg, Germany, 2Life Technologies GmbH, results suggest that mRNA analysis is a powerful molecular tool to Darmstadt, Germany. detect alterations in the splicing process and could contribute to the Using high-throughput next generation sequencing platforms for development of new therapeutic strategies in Mendelian disorders. resequencing of the CFTR gene requires highly accurate data in Supported by the ISCiii PI080041 and Fundación Sira Carrasco the coding and flanking intron regions of the gene. While PCR has proven to be a reliable method for amplification of gene specific target P12.069 regions, it suffers from limited multiplexing capability. We describe induced pluripotent stem cells (iPsc) from a lissencephaly a pilot study comprising 20 human samples with different known patient with a DcX gene mutation CFTR gene mutations, using a Multiplicon™ multiplexing assay for J. Schuster1, M. Sobol1, T. Bergström1, D. Raykova1, S. Kundu1, J. Dahlqvist1, the CFTR gene, sample barcoding and subsequent Next-Generation K. Forsberg Nilsson1, A. Wanders1, G. Annerén1, B. Anderlid2, N. Dahl1; Sequencing with the 5500 SOLiD™ System and the semiconductor- 1University Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, based IonTorrent Personal Genome Machine™ Sequencer. Results Sweden. of the samples obtained from the two next generation sequencing Congenital neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders constitute platforms were validated by Sanger sequencing. a heterogeneous group affecting approximately 3% of the population. Genetic factors play a major role in a large proportion of cases. Studies P12.067 of the underlying disease mechanisms have been hampered by the case of a simultaneous carriage of mutations R408W of PAH unavailability of the appropriate tissues as well as the lack of model gene and delF508 of CFTR gene. systems. We have established somatic cells from a patient with a A. B. Maslennikov, L. F. Mitrohina, A. R. Shorina, E. V. Maslova; DCX gene mutation resulting in lissencephaly, a neuro-developmental State Novosibirsk Regional Clinical Diagnostic Center, Novosibirsk, Russian disorder characterized by a smooth cerebral surface (pachy- or Federation. agyri), mental retardation and seizures. The disease is caused by In Western-Siberian region cystic fibrosis (CF, MIM 219700) and insufficient migration of maturing neurons. Patient-derived fibroblasts phenylketonuria (PKU, MIM 261600) diseases meet on the average were reprogrammed through forced expression of four transcription frequency 1:4000-1:7000 and 1:6000-1:10000 newborns accordingly. factors (Oct4, Kfl4, c-MYC and Sox2) and the resulting iPS cells (Liss- Molecular-genetic inspection of patients CF and PKU, living in the iPSC) were characterized by RT/PCR, immunostaining, karyotyping, Novosibirsk region, has shown that frequency delF508 of CFTR gene methylation analysis as well as embryoid body and teratoma formation among all mutations of this gene makes 0,425, and frequency R408W assay. Patient derived Liss-iPSC express stem cell markers and show of PAH gene - 0,638. These mutations are revealed at patients, both in de-methylation of the NANOG and OCT4 promoters and a normal the homozygous form, and in a compound with other rare mutations. karyotype. Analysis of a teratoma obtained after injection of Liss-iPSC Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 404 into a SCID-mouse showed all three germ layers. Liss-iPSC will be (m.961insC (0,25%), m.961delTinsC (0,74%)), tRNASer(UCN) (n) (n) differentiated into neuronal cells and neuronal subtypes will be scored (m.7444G>A (0, 25%)), SLC26A5 (q.-53-2A>G) (0,25%), SLC26A4 for growth, morphology, migration and apoptosis. iPS cells from normal (q.919-2A>G) (0,25%). Discussion: GJB6, GJB3, 12SrRNA, individuals are used as controls. The expected results will provide tRNASer(UCN), SLC26A4, SLC26A5 and MYO7A genes mutations novel and basic understanding about pathophysiological mechanisms are not major causes of hearing loss in patients with non-syndromic underlying lissencephaly. hearing loss from Bashkortostan. We suggest other genes may be causes of non-syndromic hearing loss in our region. However, GJB2 P12.070 gene should be checked for all patients, at first. molecular analysis of the FOXP2 gene in italian patients affected by specific language impairment P12.072*** M. Amorini1,2, P. Romeo1, L. Rigoli1, C. Impallomeni1, L. Bernardini3, A. Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome: broadening the phenotypic Capalbo3, A. Novelli3, M. Briguglio1, V. Procopio1, G. Tortorella1, E. M. Valente3, spectrum C. D. Salpietro1; D. J. Josifova, W. Roworth, C. Ridout, S. Abbs, D. Moore; 1Department of Pediatric, University of Messina, Messina, Italy, 2Department Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Farmaco-Biologico, School of Pharmacy, University of Messina, Italy, Italy, We have recently discovered that mutations in C20orf54 are the 3CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy. principal cause of Brown-Vialetto-Van Laere syndrome (BVVLS), an The specific language impairment (SLI) are defined as primary autosomal recessive disorder characterised by progressive ponto- disorders of language development. They are not associated with bulbar palsy and sensorineural deafness. The hearing loss is of significant difficulties in cognitive development and relationship, insidious onset and precedes the neurological signs. The neurological neuromotor or neurosensory disorders and social deprivation. They phenotype is complex and precipitated by the onset of cranial nerve are interested in children over the age of 4 years when the expression palsies in a previously healthy individual, followed by anterior horn language is relatively developed. Because FOXP2 gene on 7q31 neuronopathy and long tract signs. The disease course is progressive, has been implicated in the etiology of severe speech and language but the rate of decline is variable. Rapid development of diaphragmatic disorders, we searched for FOXP2 gene mutations in 61 children with weakness is a frequent complication in children and cor pulmonale clinical diagnosis of SLI. secondary to chronic hypoventilation in adults. All probands underwent metabolic, neuro-physiological, psychometric There is increasing evidence that Fazio-Londe disease (FLD), clinically and psycho-linguistic studies, as well as molecular analysis of the similar to BVVLS except for the deafness, is also caused by mutations FOXP2 gene for the detection of point mutations. We also studied 5 in C20orf54 and that BVVLS and FLD are effectively the same entity. intragenic microsatellites (7-113847; 7-113941; 7-114008; 7-114072; We explored the possibility that some cases of Spinal Muscular Atrophy 7-114115) for the detection of maternal uniparental disomy. To search with respiratory distress (SMARD) may also be caused by mutations for deletions or chromosomal translocations involving the region of in this gene. SMARD patients present at birth with distal muscle chromosome 7q containing the FOXP2 gene, we analyzed the DNA weakness followed by sudden onset of respiratory distress secondary samples of the patients by FISH. The data were compared with normal to diaphragmatic weakness. About 10% of SMARD patients carry control samples. mutations in IGHMBP2. We tested 95 IGHMBP2 negative patients and The analysis of the FOXP2 gene revealed no mutations in all patients confirmed that 5% harboured mutations in C20orf54. included in our study. In 5 patients, we found two polymorphisms We give an overview of the clinical features of BVVLS, FLD and (IVS3+33 T>A; IVS5 +17 T>G) previously described. In 4 subjects, a SMARD, provide some evidence of genotype/phenotype correlation nucleotide substitution (A183T) was detected. Moreover, by FISH and and discuss the clinical overlap. In view of the management implications, uniparental disomy analysis, we found no chromosomal aberrations. we emphasise the importance of considering mutations in C20orf54 as Our data underline that the role of FOXP2 gene could be no essential the cause of motor neuronopathy in infancy and childhood. in severe speech and language disorders and that could be necessary to examine other genes. P12.073 Detection of deletions/duplications in alpha-thalassemia by P12.071 mLPA spectrums and frequencies of GJB2, GJB6, GJB3, 12srRNA, N. Nezhat1, G. R. Javadi1, F. Khordadpoor1, M. T. Akbari2,3; tRNAser(UcN), sLc26A4, sLc26A5 and mYO7A genes mutation 1Department of Biology ,Science and Research branch,lslamic Azad University, among patients with non-syndromic hearing loss from Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, Tehran, Bashkortostan (Russia) Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Genetics ,Tarbiat Modares L. U. Dzhemileva, S. L. Lobov, E. K. Khusnutdinova; University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Institute of biochemistry and genetics USC RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. Although Iran is one of the countries with high frequency of thalassemia, Introduction: Congenital hearing loss/deafness is the most common few studies have been carried out on detection of different mutations defect and the most prevalent sensorineural disorder in different in alpha thalassemia. There are patients suspected of having alpha countries but currently only a minority of genes is included in genetic thalassemia based on hematological indices but no abnormality in diagnostics. Mutations in GJB2, GJB6, GJB3, 12SrRNA, tRNASer(UCN), globin has been found by gap-PCR for the most common α-thalassemia SLC26A4 genes are responsible for more than half of all cases of deletions and no point mutations detected by ARMS and sequencing prelingual nonsyndromic recessive deafness in Caucasians. of the alpha genes . More studies are required to determine the Method: Using a custom microarray panel (Arrays HHL - Asper mutation type in these patients. So the aim of the present study was to Biothech) that contains 198 point mutations, identified in 8 main genes determine the mutations at the alpha globin gene cluster using MLPA involved on congenital deafness it is possible to identify the molecular (Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification) method in patients basis of the most common forms, both syndromic and nonsyndromic. who were suspected to be alpha thalassemia carrier but no mutations The DNA samples of 204 unrelated patients’ non-syndromic hearing had been detected in them by conventional techniques. loss from Bashkortostan had been analyzed. Twenty patients, whose mutations were not identified, were selected. Result: In group of 204 tested patients 97 patients (47,5%) were In addition, 10 samples in which deletions had been confirmed either homozygous of compound heterozygous, 56 patients (27,5%) previously by gap-PCR and 5 normal samples were chosen as positive carried only one detected mutation. Allelic frequencies for mutations and negative controls respectively and. Following confirmation of the were: GJB2 (c.35delG (34%), c.35dupG (0,5%), c.167delT (2%), positive and negative controls by MLPA, suspected samples were c.235delC (0,74%), q.-3179G>A (1,23%), c.358_360delGAG (0,5%), investigated. c.302A>G (0,25%), c.290_291insA (0,25%), c.299_300delAT (1%), MLPA results demonstrated mutations in 15% of the cases which had c.333_334delAA (0,5%), c.310_325del14 (0,5%), c.312_327del14 been remained undetected by the conventional methods. One case (3%), c.101T>C (1%), c.109G>A (0,5%), c.139G>T (0,25%), showed the deletion of regulatory element HS-40 and in two other c.380G>A (0,25%), c.224G>A (0,5%), c.95G>A (0,25%), c.551G>C cases alpha triplication in alpha genes were determined. (0,5%), c.250G>C (0,25%), c.79G>A+c.341A>G (0,25%)), 12SrRNA In conclusion ,the simplicity, high accuracy ,low cost of MLPA makes Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 405 this method a superior alternative to gap-PCR for detecting common Italy, 2Dept. of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, University known and unknown deletions and duplications in alpha-thalassemia. of Palermo, palermo, Italy, 3Dept. of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy, 4Neuroimaging Research P12.074 Unit, National Research Council, Catanzaro, Italy. The fifth DFNX1 family - possible neurodevelopmental We describe clinical, radiological and genetic features of a three disturbances and minor visual symptoms associated with generation Sicilian family affected by DRPLA. We obtained clinical reduced PRs enzyme activity and genealogical information from twelve people of a three generation C. Frykholm1, S. Ekvall1, L. Fairbanks2, H. Larsen3, U. Friberg3, M. Bondeson1; pedigree. Five out of seven affected living people were examined 1Departments of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, and blood samples were obtained. Neurological evaluations, 2Purine Research Laboratory, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of neurophysiological and neuropsychological examinations, Surgical Sciences, Uppsala, Sweden. neuroimaging studies were performed. Genomic DNA was extracted Only 1-5% of nonsyndromic hearing impairment is X-linked. To date, from peripheral blood by standard methods. Triplet expansion in four loci, DFNX1-4, have been mapped to the X-chromosome. The gene DRPLA was detected by PCR amplification with fluorescent primers. for DFNX1, PRPS1, was identified in 2010. The clinical phenotype in PCR products were separated onto a capillary sequencer (3130XL DFNX1 is related to an inborn error of purine metabolism in which the Applied Biosystems). The proband of the family, a 48-year-old man, at enzyme activity of phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase (PRS) the age of 37, began to experience episodes of loss of consciousness is reduced. Mutations in PRPS1 have also been identified in Arts with generalized seizures. Afterwards he developed an unsteady syndrome, X-linked Charcot-Marie-Tooth type 5 (CMTX5) and PRS gait, involuntary movements of the head, face and limbs, in addition superactivity. In Arts syndrome, the enzyme levels are close to zero to cognitive and psychiatric symptoms. Neurological examination affecting hearing, vision and psychomotor development. In CMTX5, was characterize by choreiform movement, myoclonus and cognitive the level is reduced resulting in peripheral neuropathy, hearing and deterioration. His gate was ataxic and tandem walking was impossible. visual impairment. In PRS superactivity, the high enzyme activity can Cranial MRI showed mild diffuse atrophy. Somatosensory,motor and be associated with hearing loss, hypotonia, ataxia, urinary stones and brainstem auditory evoked potentials were altered. Two sisters of gouty arthritis. the proband reported similar symptoms with different degree of gait, Today, only four DFNX1 families have been published. The hearing speech disturbance and choreoathetosis. The first son of the proband, impairment found in the studied male family members was highly a nephew and two young first cousins, at the age of 15 started to variable ranging from congenital profound to progressive postlingual complain of myoclonic epilepsy, and variable degree of cognitive hearing impairment. disturbance. Molecular analysis of all affected people revealed a We present an five-generation Swedish family with postlingual, heterozygous CAG repeats expansion in ATN-1 gene. We provided progressive X-linked hearing loss associated with a novel c.35A>T a detailed description of the main clinical, genetic and radiological (p.H12L) mutation in PRPS1. Both affected male family members and features of the second Italian family with DRPLA. female carriers had reduced PRS enzyme activity whereas unaffected family members had normal enzyme activity. No clear signs of auditory P12.077 neuropathy or vestibular dysfunction could be found. The clinical Detection of deletions and duplications in Dystrophin gene picture in this fifth DFNX1 family also included strabismus leading in of male patients by multiplex Ligation- dependent Probe untreated cases to unilateral amblyopathy. In one individual, reduced Amplification (MLPA) method gross and fine motor skills were noted. These additional findings could F. Khordadpoor-Deilamani1, M. Akbari2,3, M. Hashemi4, G. Javadi5; be related to the reduced PRS enzyme activity. 1Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of medical Genetics, Faculty P12.075 of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of spectrum of point mutations in czech DmD/BmD patients and Iran, 3Tehran Medical Genetics Laboratory, No. 297, Taleghani Street, Tehran, their phenotypic outcome Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran Medical Branch, Islamic Azad university, E. Zapletalova1, J. Sedlackova1, M. Hermanova1, J. Zamecnik2, L. Fajkusova1; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad 1University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2University Hospital Motol University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. Duchenne muscular dystrophy and Becker muscular dystrophy are Duchenne and milder Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD) X-linked recessive disorders caused by mutations in dystrophin gene. are X-linked recessive neuromuscular diseases. Both are caused DMD is more severe disease with progressive deterioration in muscle by mutations in the DMD gene. DMD is typically connected with power, and most patients become confined to a wheelchair by the mutations causing premature stop codon creation, while BMD is age of 12 and die early in their third decade of life from respiratory or typically connected with in-frame deletions or duplications. Excluding cardiac failure. 60% of deletions and 5% of duplications detected in DMD gene, we BMD is a milder phenotype with age of onset around 12 years. identified 63 different point mutations in 69 DMD/BMD patients and In the majority of DMD/BMD patients, the disease is due to deletions DMD/BMD female carriers. For mutation screening on the RNA and duplications in the dystrophin gene. Determining the exact size of level, we used reverse transcription-PCR, protein truncation test, deletions and duplications can help to predict frameshift and phenotype and DNA sequencing. For screening on DNA level, we used PCR of the patients. Also, in order to choose an appropriate treatment for and sequencing. We describe patients with a mutation creating a the patients, knowing the exact mutation is important. premature termination codon but with a mild BMD phenotype, which Here we used MLPA method to determine copy number of the exons present three different ways of rescuing the DMD phenotype. In one of Dystrophin gene in 37 unrelated DMD/BMD patients in which the patient we detected the insertion of a repetitive sequence AluYa5 in deletions were not detected by multiplex PCR designed for 27 exons intron 56, which led to skipping of exon 57. On the other hand, we and the promoter of dystrophin gene. Fragment separation was present two patients with mutations deep inside the intron leading to performed using a 3130 ABI capillary sequencer and the raw data was severe DMD phenotype by creating pseudoexon and leading to frame- analysed by Gene marker software (v1.6). shift. Among presented mutations, there are 32, which are typical for MLPA enabled us to find deletions and duplications in 4 patients. Also Czech population. the exact borders of deletions and duplications were determined. This work was supported by grants MSMT LC06023 and 2B08060. In conclusion the method is accurate and reliable. It makes it possible to identify deletions and duplications of all 79 exons of dystrophin gene P12.076 in patients. Therefore it provides a better diagnosis compared to the Dentatorubral pallidoluysian atrophy: clinical and genetic most of the common techniques like multiplex PCR and real-time PCR. analysis of a sicilian pedigree G. Annesi1, M. D’Amelio2, P. Tarantino1, V. Lo Re3, P. Ragonese3, G. Salemi3, M. Gagliardi1, A. Quattrone4, G. Savettieri3, P. Aridon3; 1Institute of Neurological Science, National Research Council, Mangone (CS), Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 406 P12.078 Germany, 6”Sapienza” University of Rome, Department of Molecular Medicine, serum matrix metalloproteinase-9 (mmP-9) as a promising Rome, Italy, 7IRCCS Istituto Dermopatico dell’Immacolata, Rome, Italy. biomarker for disease progression in Duchenne muscular Ectodermal Dysplasia-Syndactyly Syndrome (EDSS; OMIM#613573) Dystrophy (DmD) is a rare autosomal recessive condition with abnormal hair (pili torti), V. D. Nadarajah1, M. van Putten1, A. Chaouch2, P. Garrood2, V. Straub2, H. progressive alopecia, teeth dysplasia, and hands/feet cutaneous Lochmuller2, A. M. Aartsma-Rus1, G. J. B. van Ommen1, J. T. den Dunnen1, P. syndactyly. Recently, we identified PVRL4 mutations as the cause of A. C. ‘t Hoen1; EDSS in two families from Algeria and Italy. PVRL4 encodes nectin-4, 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, a cell adhesion molecule relevant for cadherin-based adherens Netherlands, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Newcastle, junction formation. United Kingdom. Four nectins have been described so far. Notably, PVRL1 (encoding Three proteins [MMP-9, Tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase-1 nectin-1) mutations cause Cleft Lip/Palate-Ectodermal Dysplasia (TIMP-1) and Osteopontin, (OPN)] implicated in inflammation, Syndrome (CLPED1; OMIM#225060) also known as Zlotogora-Ogur extracellular matrix degradation and tissue fibrosis were selected with syndrome, suggesting the common term “nectinopathies” for this the aim to identify serum biomarkers for monitoring the progression group of disorders. and treatment outcome of DMD. We have ascertained a further consanguineous family with EDSS and Serum biomarker levels were determined using commercially available identified a novel missense alteration in PVRL4. Affected individuals immunoassays. We observed serum levels of MMP-9 (median level= were homozygous for an evolutionary conserved p.Val242Met change 1185.34 ng/ml, IQR= 966.56) and TIMP-1 (median level= 245.55 ng/ (c.724 G>A), that was predicted to be pathogenic by computing ml, IQR= 69.57) to be significantly higher in DMD patients (N=63) analysis. Modelling analysis showed that the p.Val242 residue is part compared to healthy controls (N=16)( MMP-9 median level= 73.22 ng/ of a linker between the 2nd-3rd Ig-like domain and suggested that ml, IQR= 121.00 and TIMP-1 median level=164.77 ng/ml, IQR= 62.45). the replacement with the larger Met residue imposed new nectin-4 OPN levels however showed no significant difference between groups. contacts with p.Arg251 and p.Glu273, potentially affecting homo-/ MMP-9 levels were also significantly higher in older non ambulant heterophilic interactions with other Ig-like molecules. (N=34) patients compared to younger ambulant DMD (N=29) patients This family adds to the two previously described easing the delineation suggesting an increase in MMP-9 levels with disease progression of a very homogeneous phenotype resulting from PVRL4 mutations (ambulant MMP-9 median levels= 927.89ng/ml, IQR= 885.60; non and characterized by: thick and fragile hair with pili torti, hair loss with ambulant MMP-9 median levels=1328.45ng/ml, IQR= 822.95). patchy alopecia starting at childhood and affecting as well eyebrows Pearson’s correlation analysis confirms significant positive correlation and eyelashes, conical and abnormally spaced teeth, and partial between MMP-9 levels, age and duration of corticosteroid treatment in cutaneous syndactyly of digits and toes (2-3 and 4-5). the 63 DMD patients. However linear mixed model analysis with nine Our description of EDSS reveals broad clinical overlap with the PVRL1- DMD patients whose serum samples were collected longitudinally over associated nectinopathy, with cleft lip/palate being a distinguishing four years showed significant and positive linear relationship exists feature. between MMP-9 and age i.e. disease progression, and the duration of steroid treatment did not contribute significantly to this relationship. P12.081 In conclusion, we identify MMP-9 as a serum biomarker for DMD EGFR gene mutation testing in non-small cell lung cancer disease progression and as such will be useful to monitor response to (comparison of different methods) therapies that are currently in clinical trials. J. Simova1, B. Kubová1, M. Uvírová1, D. Konvalinka1, M. Jalůvkova1, I. Urbanovská1, I. Žebráková1, J. Dvořáčková2; P12.079 1CGB laboratory Inc., Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, University Analysis of the dystrofin gene in Armenian patients of Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. N. Nalbandyan; Targeted cancer therapy requires the rapid, sensitive and accurate Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia. identification of genetic abnormalities predicting the therapeutic Duchenne (DMD) and Becker (BMD) muscular dystrophy are allelic response. Somatic mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor disorders caused by mutations in the dystrofin gene. The molecular (EGFR) gene are associated with the objective reponse to EGFR genetic analysis of these disorders in among the most difficult tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI). Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) encountered in a routine laboratory diagnostic. The deletios vary patients harboring EGFR mutations benefit from this specific inhibitors. in size and location, but are clustered in three “hot spot”, the major Almost of all mutations are located within exons 18 - 21 of the EGFR site encompassing exons 41-60, and a minor region including exons gene (85-90% of the mutations occured at exons 19 and 21 in EGFR 3-19. Deletions are detected using a multiplex polymerase chain gene). reaction method, in which 26 exons are analyzed in three separate The analysis of EGFR mutations was performed on DNA isolated from PCR reactions. These exons were chosen to include the two deletions cytology sample and formalin-fixed and paraffine-embedded (FFPE) ‘hot spots’, and this system is estimated to identify approx 98% of all tissues from NSCLC patients. deletions. The aim was comparison of different methods and finding a sensitive, There is no data of this mutation and frequencies of carriers in reliable, simple and fast method for routine screening of these mutations Armenian population. In 27 armeniam patients with a clinical suspicion in clinical practice, because sometimes is difficult to obtain sufficient of DMD/BMD molecular testing has been performed for 26 exons tumor sample of patients with NSCLC. EGFR gene mutations were frequent mutations/deletions. The genotyping analysis of this patients analysed by following methods: direct sequencing, fragment analysis revealed mutations in 10 cases. (exon 19 of the EGFR gene), primer extension analysis (SNaPshot The frequent detected mutations are in 3, 49 exons in 11% and 50 in assay), real-time PCR (Scorpions-ARMS) and mutant-enriched PCR 33% correspondingly. The other mutations were detected in 42-43: 46- targeting exons 19 and 21 of EGFR gene. We examined 43 tumor 47: 6: 13: and 52 exons. samples of patients with NSCLC. SNaPshot assay and mutant-enriched PCR, simple and high sensitive P12.080 assays, were proved as suitable methods for routine mutational Ectodermal dysplasia-syndactyly syndrome (EDss): broadening analysis of EGFR gene in NSCLC patiens in our laboratory. This the spectrum of PVRL4 mutations and phenotypic delineation applies especially for the cytology samples with only few cancer cell among “nectinopathies” and thus limited amount of DNA. F. Brancati1,2, P. Fortugno3, I. Kurth4, K. Tsiakas5, R. Santer5, E. Agolini2,6, E. Bellacchio2, I. Bottillo2, G. Zambruno7; 1Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, Mendel Laboratory, Rome, Italy, 3IRCCS Bambino Gesù Children Hospital, Rome, Italy, 4Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 5Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 407 P12.082*** P12.084 Loss-of-function mutations of CHST14 cause a new type of A novel homozygous mutation of the ENPP1 gene causes autosomal recessive Ehlers-Danlos syndrome generalised arterial calcification in infancy N. Miyake1, T. Kosho2, S. Mizumoto3, T. Furuichi4, A. Hatamochi5, S. Ikegawa4, N. Marziliano1, V. Motta1, F. Orsini1, P. Faldini1, L. Ilardi1, A. Proto1, G. Chiesa2, S. Yamada3, K. Sugahara3, N. Matsumoto1; S. Martinelli1; 1Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan, 2Shinshu University School 1Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, MILANO, Italy, 2Azienda of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan, 3Hokkaido University Graduate School of Ospedaliera Ospedale Cà Granda Niguarda, Milano, Italy. Life Science, Sapporo, Japan, 4Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN, Tokyo, Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI, MIM#208000) is Japan, 5Dokkyo Medical University, School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan. a rare autosomal recessive disorder generally due to homozygous/ Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a heterogeneous connective tissue compound mutations of the ENNP1 gene (6q22-q23). Classical features disorder involving skin and joint laxity and tissue fragility affecting as include calcification of large- and medium-sized arteries and marked many as 1 in 5,000 individuals. We reported a novel subtype of EDS myointimal proliferation leading to arterial stenosis. Extravascular similar to kyphoscoliosis type but without lysyl hydroxylase deficiency. signs include foci or periarticular calcifications. Most affected children Patients are characterized by distinct craniofacial characteristics, die in the infancy as consequence of vascular occlusion (myocardial multiple congenital contractures, progressive joint and skin laxity, and infarction) or congestive heart failure due to pulmonary hypertension. multisystem fragility-related manifestations. As two of six patients are We here describe a child diagnosed with GACI harbouring a novel consanguineous families, we hypothesized this is autosomal recessive mutation of the ENNP1 gene. disorder. We mapped its locus at 15q15.1 by homozygosity mapping Methods and Results. The proband was born preterm with a using two consanguineous families and identified a homozygous respiratory distress; he is a son of two consanguineous Turkish CHST14 mutation in the two families and compound heterozygous parents. Echocardiography showed increased echogenicity of the mutations in four other sporadic cases. Transfection experiments walls of pulmonary arteries, the aorta and the coronary arteries, patent of mutants and enzyme assays using fibroblast lysates of patients foramen and thin pulmonary valve. Additionally, calcification foci have showed the loss of D4ST1 activity. CHST14 mutations altered the been localised within the aortic arch, thoracic aorta and both carotids. glycosaminoglycan (GAG) components in patients’ fibroblasts. Because of the above features the ENPP1 gene was screened. Interestingly, dermatan sulfate (DS) of decorin proteoglycan, a key Bidirectional sequencing of the gene showed a gene re-arrangement regulator of collagen fibril assembly, was completely lost and replaced (Insertion and Deletion) within the exon 20 in the proband. Both by chondroitin sulfate (CS) in the patients’ fibroblasts, leading to parents were carriers of the above mutation. decreased flexibility of GAG chains. The loss of the decorin DS Conclusions. This work identified a novel mutation of the ENNP1 gene proteoglycan due to CHST14 mutations may preclude proper collagen linked to the GACI disease. When in heterozygous state this mutation bundle formation or maintenance of collagen bundles while the sizes leads to mild clinical sign such as short stature, facial dysmporhysms and shapes of collagen fibrils are unchanged as observed in the and hypophosphatemic rickets. In the homozygous condition GACI patients’ dermal tissues. These findings indicate the important role of features are present. The identification of a ENPP1 mutation allowed decorin DS in the extracellular matrix and a novel pathomechanism prompt biphosphonate treatment and the establishment of a causative in EDS. link between the GACI syndrome and the ENPP1 gene. P12.083 P12.085 Ellis-van creveld syndrome - a new UKGtN service Acid Fatty metabolism: a new pathway involved in L. Yarram1, T. Antoniadi1, S. Smithson2, J. Goodship3, S. Batey3, M. Williams1; Epidermolysis Bullosa simplex 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Pathology Sciences, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, M. Bchetnia1, M. Tremblay1, G. Leclerc2, A. Dupérée2, J. Powell3, C. McCuaig3, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United C. Morin2, V. Legendre Guillemin1, C. Laprise1; Kingdom, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle, United Kingdom. 1Université du Québec à Chicoutimi, Département des sciences fondamentales, Ellis-van Creveld syndrome (EvC) is an autosomal recessive Saguenay, QC, Canada, 2Centre de santé et de services sociaux de Chicoutimi, chondrodysplasia, characterised by short ribs, short limbs, postaxial Saguenay, QC, Canada, 3Hôpital Sainte-Justine, Montréal, QC, Canada. polydactly, dysplastic nails and teeth and a range of dental anomalies. Epidermolysis bullosa simplex (EBS) is the most common form of Congenital heart defects occur in 60% of cases. inherited epidermolysis bullosa. The disease is characterized by EvC is caused by mutations in EVC (21 exons) and EVC2 (22 exons) intraepidermal blistering due in most cases to mutations in cytokeratin at 4p16. These genes are divergent in orientation separated by 2.6kb. 5 (KRT5) or 14 (KRT14) genes and patients present with widely EvC is a rare disorder most prevalent in the USA Amish. The birth varying severity. prevalence in non-Amish is estimated as 0.7/100,000. Consanguinity In order to document the molecular biology of the disease, we is reported in 30% of cases (Ulucan et al. 2008, BMC Med Genet 9: established an EBS biobank including biological materials from six 92). Canadian EBS patients (2 EBS-DM and 4 EBS-loc patients) and A new UKGTN service for Ellis-van Creveld has been established six unaffected individuals paired for the age and gender. We first using high throughput semi-automated bidirectional sequencing of 44 characterized these patients at the genetic level and we identified fragments followed by analysis using Mutation Surveyor (Softgenetics). six pathogenic mutations from which three are novels (I412F (K14), Sequencing of EVC/EVC2 is expected to detect approximately 69% R125S (K14), and R559X (K5)). Then, we performed an expression of EvC cases (Tompson et al. 2007, Hum Genet 120: 663-670). The microarray analysis of the EBS epidermis tissue in order to examine service has been validated using 17 EvC samples provided through the broad spectrum of effects of KRT5 and KRT14 mutations “in vivo” our collaboration with Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle. and to identify potential regulatory networks and pathways altered in The identification of unclassified variants remains a challenge for this disease. Expression profiling show that 28 genes are differentially diagnostic laboratories. We present service results to date including expressed in EBS patients compared to control subjects (p value two interesting cases found to be homozygous for novel variants. One <0.05 and absolute fold change >2). Nine genes (AWAT2, DGAT2L6, patient of consanguineous parents with an antenatal diagnosis of EvC ELOVL3, THRSP, FADS2, FAR2, ACSBG1, AADACL3, and CRAT) are is homozygous for c.451-1_452del in EVC2; this deletion at the intron- implicated in fatty acid metabolism and three other genes (SPRR2B, exon boundary of exon 4 is predicted to alter the acceptor splice site, SPRR4, and KRT79) in epidermal keratinisation. These two biological resulting in exon skipping. The second patient is homozygous for a pathways contribute both to the formation of the cell envelope barrier c.2507C>A; this results in a premature STOP codon in exon 17 of structure. This study demonstrates, for the first time, the relevance of EVC. metabolic cluster, specifically fatty acid metabolism in EBS biology.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 408 P12.086 P12.088 chromosome 15q13.3 region disruptions in idiopathic One novel and one recurrent mutation in scN1A gene generalized epilepsy I. Yordanova1,2, T. Todorov3,2, P. Dimova4, D. Hristova5, R. Tincheva6, I. A. V. Kirov1,2, P. Dimova3, T. Todorov1,2, A. Todorova1,2, V. Bojinova3, G. Litvinenko6, O. Yotovska7, I. Kremensky1, A. Todorova3,2; Saraylieva3, V. Mitev1; 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Medical Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic 3“St. Naum” Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. of Child Neurology, St. Naum University Hospital of Neurology and Psychiatry, We report on two patients with different phenotype of idiopathic Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Tokuda Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 6Clinic of Child Neurology, generalized epilepsy (IGE) bearing microduplication and microdeletion University Hospital of Pediatrics, Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, of the 15q13.3 region, respectively, both inherited form their unaffected 7Institute for Mental Health of Children and Youth, Skopje, Macedonia, The mothers. Former Yugoslav Republic of. A 13 years old girl suffering IGE with generalized tonic-clonic seizures The range of disease phenotypes produced by mutations in the was analyzed by MLPA for 15q13.3 deletions/duplications (MLPA SCN1A gene is quite broad. SCN1A mutations have been linked to kit P297-B1). A microduplication involving only the CHRNA7 gene several epilepsy syndromes sharing some common clinical features was found. The molecular-genetic analysis of the family members of different severity and in rare cases of familial migraine and autism. showed that the mother and the sister carry this microduplication, We report on two patients with SCN1A mutations and severe epilepsy but they did not report any history or presented symptoms of within the spectrum of generalized epilepsy with febrile seizures plus neurological disturbances. The father was healthy and negative for the syndrome (GEFS+), the phenotypes being consistent with Dravet microduplication. We also searched for 2 bp deletion polymorphism in syndrome (DS) and myoclonic astatic epilepsy (MAE, or Doose the CHRFAM7A fusion gene and it was detected in both parents. The syndrome), respectively. Analysis of SCN1A revealed a heterozygous children did not carry this polymorphism. Unfortunately, at present it de novo frameshift mutation (c.4205_4208delGAAA) in the patient with was not possible to determine the exact duplication breakpoints. The DS, and a recurrent missense mutation (c.3521C>G) in that suffering role of 2 bp deletion polymorphism in the CHRFAM7A fusion gene is from MAE. The missense mutation has been reported in patients with unclear. neuronal diseases of various manifestations, which suggests that this The second patient is a boy with idiopathic childhood absence epilepsy variability is likely to result from the modifying effects of other genetic or and mild mental retardation. MLPA analysis showed chromosome environmental factors. To date, truncation mutations have been found 15q13.3 deletion, covering [15q13.2 - MTMR15, TRPM1, KLF13, exclusively in patients with DS, while manly missense mutations and CHRNA7 - 15q13.4] gene probes. The genetic defect was inherited very few nonsense mutations have been found in the milder GEFS+ from the patient’s mother, who did not report any past or present signs phenotypes. of neurological impairment. Given the fact, that other similar reports exist and that there is no P12.089 definite explanation for the phenotypic variability of 15q13.3 region stXBP1-related encephalopathy manifesting as infantile spasms disruptions, one possible hypothesis could be the so called “two-hit and generalized tremor in three patients model”. C. Mignot1,2,3, M. Moutard2, O. Trouillard4, I. Gourfinkel-An5, A. Jacquette1,3, B. Acknowledgements: The study was supported by the grant No29/2010, Arveiler6,7, D. Lacombe8,7, C. Chiron9, D. Ville10, P. Charles1, E. Leguern11,12,13, C. Sofia Medical University, Bulgaria Depienne11,14,13, D. Héron1,3,12; 1UF Génétique Clinique. Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Service P12.087 de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, Paris, France, 3CR Whole-exome sequencing to detect mutations causing light- Déficiences Intellectuelles de Causes Rares, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, UF sensitive epilepsy with jaw spasms in a large family Neurogénétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Département de Génétique et C. G. F. de Kovel1, I. J. Nijman2, H. M. Schippers3, D. Lindhout1, A. C. Cytogénétique, Génétique Moléculaire et Chromosomique, Hôpital ¨Pitié- M. Sonsma1, A. Rapcencu1, D. G. A. Kasteleijn - Nolst Trenité1, B. P. C. Salpêtrière, Paris, Paris, France, 5Unité d’Epileptologie, CR Epilepsies Rares, Koeleman1; Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, Paris, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Instituut, Utrecht, Netherlands, Humaine, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France, 7Service 3St Antonius Ziekenhuis, Nieuwegein, Netherlands. de Génétique Médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 8Laboratoire Aim: To identify the genetic variant(s) underlying light-sensitive de Génétique Humaine, EA 4137, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, epilepsy with jaw-spasms in a large Dutch family. Bordeaux, France, 9Inserm, U663, Paris, F-75015 ; University Paris Descartes, methods: A large family showing strong light sensitivity up to the age Paris, F-75005 ; AP-HP, Neuropediatric dpt, Necker hospital, Paris, France, of 50, and suffering from jaw-spasms when talking, was collected 10Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Femme-Mère-Enfant, Bron, France, and described. We performed linkage analysis with a 6000 SNP- 11AP-HP, UF de Neurogénétique Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Département array (Illumina) to identify regions linked to the light-sensitivity. In the de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et proband we performed whole-exome sequencing (Agilent/SOLID). Chromosomique, Hôpital de la ¨Pitié- Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 12INSERM, Variants under the linkage peak passing filters of being novel, CRicm (U975), Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 13UPMC Univ functional and predicted damaging were sequenced with Sanger Paris 06, F-75005, Paris, France, 14INSERM, CRicm (U975), Hôpital de la Pitié- sequencing in the family to identify segregation patterns. Genes with Salpêtrière, F-75013, Paris, France. variants co-segregating with the phenotype are currently followed up Twenty-four patients with dominant mutations in the STXBP1 gene by sequencing all exons in healthy controls and in other light-sensitive causing epileptic encephalopathy have been published. We report on patients. three patients with STXBP1 mutation/deletion. Two patients belong to Results: The linkage analysis resulted in four linkage peaks with LOD- a series of 29 patients with infantile epileptic encephalopathy selected scores around 2.9. The total sequencing effort identified almost 380 for a sequencing of STXBP1. Identified de novo mutations were exonic variants under the linkage peaks, of which around 30 were the recurrent p.Arg406His substitution and an insertion of six bases novel, and less ten than were predicted to be functional. An interesting inducing a frameshift. The third patient was diagnosed with a deletion variant was found in SCNM1, sodium channel modifier 1, and this of STXBP1 by CGH-array. All three patients had infantile spasms variant was co-segregating with the phenotype. Follow-up of the associated with partial seizures that responded to antiepileptic drug variant, as well as other variants, is in progress. therapy, severe intellectual impairment, and a striking tremor. conclusions: SCNM1 is a good positional and functional candidate Mutations in STXBP1 are relatively frequent in patients with infantile for the phenotype in this family. Follow-up must shed more light on the epileptic encephalopathies. STXBP1-related encephalopathy may probability of this variant as the cause (or one of the causes) of the present as drug-responsive infantile spasms with focal/lateralized phenotype in this family. discharges. Generalized tremor may be a clue to the diagnosis in some patients.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 409 P12.090 P12.092 sorting defects of mutant cLc-Kb in Bartter syndrome. Genetic Peculiarities of Juvenile chronic Arthritis in patients E. Kamsteeg1, R. D. A. Weren1, J. Schoots1, J. Robben1, N. V. A. M. Knoers2, with Familial mediterranean fever. H. Scheffer1, P. M. T. Deen1, L. H. Hoefsloot1; T. F. Sarkisian, H. S. Hayrapetyan, G. G. Amaryan; 1Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, Armenia. Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is the most common autosomal Bartter syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized recessive autoinflammation disorder in populations of Mediterranean by renal salt wasting and hypokalaemic metabolic alkalosis. Bartter region ancestors. FMF is caused by MEFV gene mutations (homozygous syndrome type 3 is caused by mutations in CLCNKB, encoding the and compound heterozygous genotypes). The frequency of the renal chloride channel CLC-Kb. Defects of the CLCNKB variants may carriers of MEFV mutations is 1:3 in non-FMF Armenian population. include a disturbed subcellular sorting or defective gating. Analysis of Number of FMF and related disorders is very high in Armenians, these variants in polarized epithelial cells is a valuable tool to assess formed as a founder population experienced genetic drift and social their sorting properties. Here, we present the analysis of the subcellular and geographical isolation. Clinical and molecular investigations in distribution of eleven CLC-Kb missense variants in such cells. more than 16000 FMF patients demonstrated significant correlation MDCK type II cells were transfected with GFP-tagged CLC-Kb between MEFV-genotypes and phenotype. Familial study showed encoding constructs and subjected to imunnofluorescence studies the transmission of mutations in parents and siblings. Comparing the and confocal laser-scanning microscopy. Of the eleven variants, five MEFV genotypes in two generations among the families was found. (S113T, A204T, M427V, G465R and R595Q) were transported to the Acute recurrent/chronic destructive arthritis is one of the common basolateral plasma membrane, like wt-CLC-Kb. Five others (P124L, features of FMF and could be the first, single manifestation. We G164R V170M, G433E en L656P) were retained intracellularly, and present the peculiarities of JCA (EULAR criterion) in FMF patients with colocalized to a major extend with an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) different spectrum of MEFV mutations. HLA B27 was identified in 58%. marker or vesicles (only V170M). The final variant (C626Y) showed JCA manifested first in 58% of patients; FMF joined as short-term rare a unexpected staining of both the nucleus and the basolateral plasma attacks of thoracalgia or isolated fever and/or hemorrhagic vasculitis membrane. with fever. In 42% of patients FMF developed in 2-3 years. In 33% of These data indicate that a subset of the CLC-Kb variants is properly patients with atypical FMF athropathy and polyserositis was revealed. sorted to the basolateral plasma membrane. These variants may reflect Patients with JCA should be investigated for familial anamnesis for non-pathogenic variants, or pathogenic variants that are functionally FMF and MEFV mutations. In JCA patients early detection of MEFV impaired (i.e. defective gating). However, another subset is retained mutations is important for on-time colchicinotherapy, improvement of in the ER, as is common with misfolded membrane proteins, such as arthritic syndrome and prevention of FMF complications. At the same CFTR or AQP2. One mutant (V170M) shows a yet to be determined time FMF patients with resistancy to treatment of arthritis should be vesicular staining. Altogether, studying the subcellular distribution of tested for HLA-B27. CLC-Kb variants in polarized cells is a valuable additive tool to test their pathogenicity. P12.093 comparative analyses of the Fanconi anemia core complex P12.091 genes reveal conserved transcription regulatory elements Facioscapulohumeral muscular Dystrophy (FsHD1) - simple D. Meier, D. Schindler; sequence Length Polymorphisms (ssLP) haplotype analysis University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, which confirms pathogenicity on ‚permissive‘ chromosomal Germany. backgrounds. The Fanconi anemia (FA) gene family is a recent addition to the R. Whittington1, S. O’Shea1, A. Gardner1, Y. Shamsah1, P. Lunt2, L. Yarram1, complex network of proteins that respond to and repair certain types M. Williams1; of DNA damage in the human genome. Since little is known about 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Pathology Sciences, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, the regulation of this novel group of genes at the DNA level, we United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics, St Michael’s Hospital, Bristol, United characterized the promoters of eight genes (FANCA, B, C, E, F, G, L Kingdom. and M) that assemble into the FA core complex. The promoters of these FSHD (FSHD1; OMIM 158900) is an AD disease affecting 1 in 20,000 genes show characteristic attributes of housekeeping genes: high GC and is the third most common form of muscular dystrophy, characterized content, rich in CpG islands, and lack of TATA boxes. They function in a by progressive wasting of upper body muscles. FSHD1 is associated monodirectional way and are, in their most active portions, comparable with a contraction of D4Z4 tandem repeat units in the subtelomere in strength to the SV40 promoter in the reporter plasmids. They are region 4q35. Diagnosis is complicated by the homologous nature of 4q marked by a distinctive transcriptional start site (TSS). In the 5’ region and 10q D4Z4 arrays. of each promoter, we identified a region that, in isolation, is able to Bristol Genetics laboratory offers a UKGTN specialist diagnostic FSHD negatively regulate promoter activity in HeLa and HEK 293 cells. The service for UKGTN and international laboratories and processes central and 3’ regions of the promoter sequences harbor binding sites around 400 referrals annually for diagnostic, predictive, and prenatal for several common and rare transcription factors including STAT, testing. Molecular confirmation of FSHD1 is currently by EcoRI/BlnI/ SMAD, E2F, AP1 and YY1, indicating that there are cross-connections ApoI digests using probe p13E-11 (to confirm the chromosome of origin to several established regulatory pathways. Electrophoretic mobility and size of the D4Z4 contraction), and distal 4qA/4qB haplotyping shift assays and siRNA experiments confirmed shared regulatory (4qA being associated with the pathogenic haplotype). Patients with a responses between prominent members of the TGF-beta and JAK/ deletion of the p13E-11 region (~2%) can be identified using the D4Z4 STAT pathway and members of the FA core complex. We identified 1kb probe. a bi-partite nature to these promoters and the results supported the Lemmers et al (Science 2010; 329(5999):1650-3) has recently hypothesis based upon a co-evolution of the FA core complex genes published a unifying genetic model for FSHD. FSHD patients were and was expanded to include their promoters. reported to carry specific single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) distal to the last D4Z4 repeat, which create a polyadenylation site for P12.094 transcripts derived from DUX4. Specific SNPs are suggested to result DNA bank of the polyposis syndroms in Poland in efficient polyadenylation and increase DUX4 transcript stability A. Plawski1, M. Podralska1, A. Lacka2, D. Nowakowska3, T. Banaseiwicz4, J. thereby causing FSHD through a toxic gain of function. In FSHD1 the Paszkowski4, P. Krokowicz4, M. Drews4, J. Lubiński5, J. Limon6, W. Cichy4, R. contraction of the D4Z4 repeat units is only pathogenic in 4 specific Slomski1; ‘permissive’ chromosomal backgrounds 4A161, 4A161L, 4A159 and 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2Regional Oncology Center, 4A168. Poznan, Poland, 3Maria Skłodowska-Curie Institute of Oncology, Warszawa, We present cases and data for establishing SSLP haplotype analysis Poland, 4Karol Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, as an additional diagnostic service for FSHD1. 5Pomeranian Medical University, Szczecin, Poland, 6Medical University of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 410 Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland. P12.096 Nowadays molecular genetics is inseparable part of classical medicine the role of the R92Q TNFRSF1A mutation in patients with to proper diagnostics. Here we present Polish register of patients familial mediterranean fever with the predisposition towards intestinal polyposis. The creation of D. Yagel1,2, Y. Berkun3, S. Padeh3, M. Lidar4, Y. Shinar4, I. Bar-Joseph2, H. the register is a result of cooperation between the many oncological, Reznik-Wolf2, P. Langevitz4, A. Livneh4, E. Pras1,2; surgical and genetic centers in Poland. Bank comprises the total of 1Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2The Danek Gartner Institute of Human 1097 DNA samples derived from 449 families with intestinal polyposis Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, Israel, 3Department of Pediatrics A, Sheba of which 945 samples come from persons in whose families Familial Medical Center, Israel, 4Department of Medicine F, Sheba Medical Center, Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) occurred. We collected the DNA Israel. samples from 30 Peutz-Jeghers families, 28 with juvenile polyposis Objective: To define the frequency of the R92Q Tumor Necrosis families, 2 Cowden syndrome families and one Proteus syndrome Factor Receptor-Associated Periodic Syndrome (TRAPS) mutation in case. Investigations were conducted on DNA isolated from cells of the patients with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) and to study the role peripheral blood. The search for mutations in APC, MUTYH , PTEN , of this mutation in FMF. BMPR1A, SMAD4 and STK11 genes preconditioning the occurrence Methods: Ninety two FMF patients and 250 controls were genotyped of individual diseases was performed employing PCR-SSCP, PCR-HD, for the R92Q mutation. The frequency of R92Q was assessed among DHPLC as well as RFLP techniques and DNA sequencing. General the 5 groups of FMF patients. performed molecular investigations allowed identification of mutations Results: R92Q was found in 6% of the controls, with an especially in studied syndromes ranging from 44 to 50%. The mutations high carrier rate among Moroccan Jews (8%). R92Q was found in 3 spectrum for the genes conditioning polypsis syndromes in Poland of the 92 FMF patients (3.2%), 1 homozygous for the MEFV M694V was established. The performed investigations also broadened our mutation and 2 heterozygous for M694V. All 3 patients showed partial knowledge about correlations between the genotype and phenotype response to colchicine. R92Q was not found in patients unresponsive as well as cases of an atypical course of the disease. to colchicine, nor was it found in patients with amyloidosis or in patients The study was financed by the Ministry of Education and Science, with FMF like disease without MEFV mutations. Poland, grant number N N402 481537, N401 331936, N402 431438, Conclusion: The frequency of the R92Q mutation in FMF patients is N401 014435 comparable to that of controls. Despite the fact that TRAPS and FMF share common biochemical pathways we found no evidence for an P12.095 interaction between these two genes. mutations in FHL1 impair expression and functionality of Kv1.5 in XmPmA patient myoblasts. P12.097 C. WINDPASSINGER1, I. POPARIC1, W. SCHREIBMAYER2, A. GORISCHEK1, Advances in understanding the molecular mechanism of A. GORISCHEK2, H. MIEDL3, G. DESOYE3, S. HOCHMEISTER4, J. BINDER5, Goldberg-shprintzen syndrome S. QUASTHOFF4, H. MÄCHLER6, K. WAGNER1, B. SCHOSER7, E. MALLE8; L. Drévillon1, A. Megarbane2, P. Benit3, A. Briand-Suleau1, J. Ghoumid1,4, M. 1Medical University of Graz, Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, Nasser1, V. Bodereau1, D. Gaillard5, M. Doco-Fenzy5, N. Bondurand4, P. Rustin3, 2Medical University of Graz, Institute of Biophysics, Graz, Austria, 3Medical M. Goossens1,6,4, I. Giurgea1,4,6; University of Graz, Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Graz, Austria, 1AP-HP, Groupe hospitalier Henri Mondor, Service de génétique, Créteil, 4Medical University of Graz, Institute of Neurology, Graz, Austria, 5Medical France, 2Faculty of Medicine, University Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, University of Graz, Department of Cardiology, Graz, Austria, 6Medical University 3INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4INSERM U955 IMRB of Graz, Institute of Cardiac Surgery, Graz, Austria, 7Friedrich Baur Institute, équipe 11, Groupe hospitalier Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 5Service de Department of Neurology, Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich, Munich, Génétique, CHU, UFR de médecine, IFR53, Reims, France, 6Université Paris- Germany, 8Medical University of Graz, Institute of Molecular Biology and Est, Faculté de Médecine, Créteil, France. Biochemistry, Graz, Austria. Goldberg-Shprintzen syndrome (GOSHS, MIM #609460) is an Four-and-a-half LIM domain protein 1 (FHL1), predominantly autosomal recessive disorder associating severe intellectual disability, expressed in skeletal and cardiac muscle, is suggested to play a role typical facial gestalt and Hirschsprung disease. KIAA1279 was in sarcomere synthesis and assembly. Mutations in the FHL1 gene identified as the disease causing gene with homozygous nonsense (leading to different FHL1 splice variants) were identified as the cause mutations. The encoded protein KBP (KIF-binding protein) was initially of different myopathies including X-linked myopathy with postural claimed to be located at the mitochondria, a subcellular localization not muscle atrophy (XMPMA). As FHL1 has been addressed to act as confirmed by a recent study. To assess the functional consequences a likely modulator of human atrial potassium voltage-gated channel of the KIAA1279 truncating mutations, degradation of the relevant Kv1.5, we here describe physical and functional interaction between transcripts by the nonsense mediated mRNA decay (NMD) was FHL1 and Kv1.5 in XMPMA patient myoblasts. tested. Finally, because of the putative localization of the protein to RT-PCR and Western blot techniques revealed almost complete the mitochondria, we also studied the effect of this mutation on the absence of FHL1A and reduction/absence of Kv1.5 in myoblasts mitochondrial function. from XMPMA patients. Myoblast cell proliferation was decreased in We report two novel patients diagnosed with GOSHS, and homozygous patients compared to controls while an increased number of patient truncating KIAA1279 mutations. In fibroblasts of one of the patients myoblasts was found to reside in the G0/G1 phase. Two-electrode and his father (heterozygous) we quantified the KIAA1279 mRNA by voltage clamp experiments demonstrated that Xenopus laevis oocytes RT-qPCR and the protein by Western blot, studied the subcellular overexpressing Kv1.5 and FHL1 variants exerted markedly reduced localization by immunocytochemistry and the activities of respiratory currents when compared to oocytes expressing Kv1.5 only. The most chain complexes by spectrophotometry. pronounced effect was observed for FHL1C. Potential interaction KIAA1279 mRNA was barely detectable in the patient’s fibroblasts between FHL1C and Kv1.5 was confirmed by a pull down assay. and a two-fold decreased was observed in the father’s fibroblasts Immunohistochemistry confirmed colocalization of both proteins after as compared to control, suggesting a NMD mechanism. KBP protein overexpression in an atrial cardiomyocyte cell line. quantification confirmed these results. The activities of the respiratory We here describe functional interactions between FHL1 and Kv1.5 in chain complexes were normal in the patient’s fibroblasts. myoblasts from XMPMA patients. Since Kv1.5 expression and activity In conclusion, we report for the first time a KIAA1279 NMD as the is altered in XMPMA patient myoblasts it is likely to assume that FHL1 molecular mechanism of GOSHS. The absence of normal KBP protein will regulate Kv1.5 channel activity in both cardiac and skeletal muscle did not influence mitochondrial respiratory chain complex activity in leading to (patho)physiological alterations in XMPMA patients. human fibroblasts.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 411 P12.098 In conclusion, we have identified a novel deletion of the GATA3 gene, Identification of Alu-mediated, large homozygous deletion associated with HDR syndrome, widening the spectrum of GATA3 of HAX1 gene spanning exons 4-7 in a patient with severe mutations that cause this disease. congenital neutropenia M. Kurnikova1, I. Shagina1, M. Maschan2, E. Dinova2, A. Shcherbina2, D. P12.100 Shagin1,3; A multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay 1Evrogen JSC, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal Research and Clinical specifically developed to detect novel deletions causing non- Center for Pediatric Hematology, Oncology and Immunology, Moscow, Russian syndromic hearing impairment at the DFNB1 locus Federation, 3Shemyakin and Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, M. Gandia1,2, F. J. del Castillo1,2, A. Pollak3, L. Hoefsloot4, E. L. Sartorato5, A. Moscow, Russian Federation. C. Batissoco6,7, R. C. Mingroni-Netto6,7, U. Lechowicz3, M. Mueller-Malesinska3, Severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) is a rare primary immunodeficiency H. Skarzynski3, P. H. Skarzynski3, M. A. Moreno-Pelayo1,2, M. Villamar1,2, F. syndrome characterized by sustained neutropenia and early onset of Moreno1,2, H. Kremer4,8, R. Ploski9, I. del Castillo1,2; severe bacterial infections. We report a case of a large homozygous 1Unidad de Genetica Molecular, Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, HAX1 deletion in a patient with autosomal-recessive SCN (Kostmann IRYCIS., Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en Red de syndrome). The patient was a 2-year old boy who manifested with Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of Physiology and recurrent bacterial infections at three months of age. The parents and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Human Genetics, the older sister had no signs of SCN. While performing electrophoretic Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, gel analysis of PCR-products of each exon of HAX1 gene, we found 5Center of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering (CBMEG), Human an absence of PCR-products corresponding to exons 4 through 7 in Molecular Genetics Laboratory, State University of Campinas-UNICAMP, the proband. For detection of the deletion, a genome-walking method Campinas, Brazil, 6Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, Sao Paulo, with Universal Genome Walker Kit according to the manufacturer’s Brazil, 7Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de instructions (Clontech) was used. Amplified products from the nested Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 8Department of PCR were cloned using p-GEM®-T Vector System (Promega) and Otorhinolaryngology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, directly sequenced. We identified a homozygous gross deletion in the Netherlands, 9Warsaw Medical University, Warsaw, Poland. HAX1 gene: NG_007369.1:g.(6484_6510)_(8526_8552)del2042. The DFNB1 deafness, caused by mutations in the GJB2 gene (connexin-26) analysis of the HAX1 gene revealed that both 5’ and 3’ breakpoints on 13q12, is the most frequent subtype of autosomal recessive non- were located inside Alu elements. Sequence alignment of the hybrid syndromic hearing impairment. Molecular testing for GJB2 mutations intron and normal introns 3 and 7 indicated recombination between is the standard diagnostic approach for subjects with this disorder. these Alu elements. Each of the unaffected parents of the patient had However, in 10-50% of affected subjects with GJB2 mutations, only the same deletion in a heterozygous state. The deletion was not found one mutant allele is found. Some of these unelucidated cases are in a group of 100 healthy controls. Alu-element regions are known just coincidental carriers of the most frequent GJB2 mutations, but to be hot spots for recombination events. Gene rearrangements by a variable proportion of cases across different populations carry in Alu-mediated recombination have been reported previously as the trans one of four different deletions at the DFNB1 locus. The number molecular basis of some congenital disorders; SCN may now be of GJB2 heterozygotes that remain unelucidated after screening for considered as another example. the known deletions indicates that still unidentified DFNB1 mutations exist. It was hypothesized that all these deletions remove a cis-acting P12.099 regulatory element that would control GJB2 expression in the inner ear. Identification of a novel deletion in GATA3 gene in a French Overlapping of all deletion intervals defined a 95.4 kb interval located patient with HDR syndrome more than 100 kb upstream from GJB2 that must contain the regulatory M. LOUHA1,2, L. JONARD1,2, V. DROUIN-GARRAUD3, B. LETAVERNIER1,4, element. To detect further DFNB1 deletions, we designed a multiplex C. BONNET1,2, R. COUDERC1,2, E. GARABEDIAN1,5,2, F. DENOYELLE1,5,2, S. ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay featuring 9 MARLIN1,2,6; probes evenly spaced across the critical interval. By using this assay, 1AP-HP, PARIS CEDEX 12, France, 2Centre de référence des surdités we screened a cohort of 236 unelucidated GJB2 heterozygotes from génétiques, Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France, 3CHU ROUEN GENETIQUE Spain, the Netherlands, Brazil and Poland. We just identified one MEDICALE, ROUEN, France, 4APHP NEPHROLOGY UNIT HOSPITAL Polish subject harbouring the del(GJB6-D13S1854) allele, which had TROUSSEAU, Paris, France, 5APHP ORL UNIT HOSPITAL TROUSSEAU, not been previously tested for in the entire Polish cohort. Our results Paris, France, 6APHP MEDICAL GENETICS UNIT HOSPITAL TROUSSEAU, imply that other deletions at the DFNB1 locus may be rare or that such Paris, France. deletions would be small enough (<10 kb) to escape detection by this HDR syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant congenital disorder MLPA assay. characterized by hypoparathyroidism, sensorineural deafness, and renal dysplasia. This triad of symptoms does not occur in all P12.101 patients. Indeed, renal abnormalities are heterogeneous with variable An overview of mitochondrial Genetics in Hearing Loss : penetrance. HDR syndrome is caused by mutations in the GATA3 Research Progress in iran gene that belongs to a family of dual zinc-finger transcription factors M. Montazer Zohour1, M. A. Tabatabaeefar2, M. Raisi3, F. Azadegan3, S. Raisi3, that play a critical role in embryonic development. So far, various HDR- E. Farrokhi3, M. T. Akbari1, M. Hashemzadeh Chaleshtori3; associated GATA3 mutations occurring throughout the gene have 1department of medical genetics-faculty of medical sciences -tarbiat modares been reported. university, Tehran , Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Here, we report clinical and molecular findings in 2 French patients with Medical Genetics,Schoo of Medicine ,ahvaz jundishapur university of medical heterozygous intragenic GATA3 mutations. The first patient is a 5 year- sciences, ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cellular and Molecular Research old boy. He was diagnosed with PTH-deficient hypoparathyroidism, Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, Shahrekord, Islamic bilateral sensorineural deafness and vesicoureteric reflux. Direct Republic of Iran. sequencing of GATA3 identified a duplication occurring in codon 145 Hereditary hearing loss (HL) is a heterogeneous trait. Mitochondrial (c.431dup), previously described. This frameshift mutation generates DNA mutations are responsible for less than one percent of pre-lingual a premature stop codon at codon 303, and results in the loss of the HL. Causative mtDNA mutations have been found in five percent nuclear localization signal of GATA3. The second patient is a 15 year- patients with post-lingual non-syndromic HL . In this regard, mutations old male and was born with upper eyelid agenesis. He was diagnosed in 12S rRNA, RNA ser(UCN) and tRNA Leu(UUR) genes account for as having hypoparathyroidism, bilateral sensorineural deafness and most cases of maternally inherited nonsyndromic HL . kidney hypoplasia. Sequence analysis of GATA3 demonstrated a novel In this research, one thousand Iranian HL subjects were included deletion c. 807_812del (p.Ser271_Thr272del) in the N- terminal zinc from 10 provinces of Iran . We have screened three common mtDNA finger1 (ZnF1) of GATA3. ZnF1 is essential to stabilize the C-terminal mutations including A1555G , A3243G, and A7445G using PCR-RFLP zinc finger2 (ZnF2) DNA binding, and interacts with other zinc finger technique. Altogether, 13 different mutation were identified. These proteins, such as the friends of GATA (FOG). mutations were as followed: A1555G (in 5 cases), A3243G (1 case), Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 412 G3316A (6 cases), and A7445G (1 case). Interestingly, the prevalence to occur de novo in 2 patients while in other 2 the occurrence could of common mtDNA mutations were different among different Iranian not be defined since the parents’ DNA were not available. Causative populations . mutation could not be identified in one patient.conclusion:The While a relatively high levels of A1555G were found in Azarbaijan identified mutations were found to be scattered in all of the exons Sharghi (4.91 percent ) and Booshehr provinces ( 4.35 percent in except 4. It is observed that patients carrying non sense mutations had post-lingual non-syndromic HL subjects, respectively. Other mtDNA close to 90% decrease in their C1 esterase inhibitor levels. We hope mutations were detected in much less frequencies in other provinces . that our findings in Turkish HAE patients will further support the clinical In general, mtDNA mutations are present in less than one percent of and molecular data underlying hereditary angioedema the children with pre-lingual HL. However, they are found in about 5 percent of children with post-lingual HL in Iran . Our results indicate P12.104 that mtDNA mutations may play a more important role in maternally AcVRL1 germinal mosaicism with two mutant alleles in a family inherited non-syndromic post-lingual HL than in the pre-lingual with Hereditary Haemorrhagic telangiectasia associated with cases in some Iranian populations. We believe, the findings must be PAH considered in the genetic counseling of hereditary HL. M. Eyries1, F. Coulet1, F. Pires1, M. Waill1, B. Girerd2, D. Montani2, M. Humbert2, P. Lacombe3, J. Roume3, F. Soubrier1; P12.102 1Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique et d’Angiogénétique Moléculaire, Groupe spectrum of mutations in majority of patients with hemophilia A Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 2Centre National de Référence de in slovenia l’hypertension pulmonaire sévère, Service de pneumologie, Hôpital Antoine M. Debeljak, L. Kitanovski, M. Benedik Dolnicar; Béclère, Université Paris-Sud 11, Clamart, France, 3Service de Génétique, University Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Hôpital Ambroise Paré, Boulogne, France. The high mutational heterogeneity of hemophilia A is a challenge for Germline mutations in genes encoding members of the TGF-beta/ provision of genetic services. Our aim was to create a confidential BMP superfamily are causal for two hereditary vascular disorders, national database of mutations for improvement of genetic services hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia (HHT) and heritable pulmonary in Slovenia. The factor VIII gene (F8) was analyzed in 139 of 178 arterial hypertension (PAH). When the two diseases co-exist, Activin hemophilia A patients. The mutations were identified by testing A receptor type II-like kinase-1 (ACVRL1, also known as ALK1) inversions of intron 22 and 1, sequencing part of the promoter, whole mutations are mainly involved. We report a remarkable ACVRL1 coding region and exon/intron boundaries of the F8 gene. There are germinal mosaicism characterized by the presence of two mutant 178 hemophilia A patients from 126 families in Slovene registry for alleles in a woman initially diagnosed with PAH at age 21. She also met Hemophilia. We determined mutations in 81/82 patients with severe, the Curaçao diagnostic criteria for HHT based on additional findings of 14/16 with moderate and 44/60 with mild form of hemophilia A. The telangiectases and epistaxis. Mutation analysis of ACVRL1 identified detection rate was 100%. In the Slovene population 40/139 have two closely located heterozygous deleterious mutations within exon inversion of intron 22 (48,8% of severe cases) and another 99/139 10: c.1388del (p.Gly463fsX2) and c.1390del (p.Leu464X). The two have 52 different mutations in F8 gene. Of these, 16 are so far found mutations were transmitted independently to the three sons of the only among Slovene patients. Inversion of intron 1 was not detected index case. One son received the c.1388delG and two sons received in Slovene population of hemophilia A patients. Interestingly, there the c.1390del. They all present symptoms of HHT, with various were no large deletions and insertions. 30% of the small deletions and intensity, which needs to be interpreted with regards to their young insertions occurred at stretch of adenines, codons 1191-1194 (8As). age. Allele-specific PCR analysis demonstrated that c.1388del is the A T insertion in exon 26 extends FVIII protein by frame-shift mutation. predominant mutation in lymphocytes of the index case. Haplotype The spectrum of mutations Slovenian hemophilia A patients was analysis revealed that both mutant alleles have a common origin. The comparable to that found in the Italian and Austrian population, but presence of these two distinct alterations might result of an incorrect differed from the spectrum in UK. The type of mutation is a predictor repair of a larger de novo mutational event that occurred in the early of clinical phenotype. The database is a powerful tool for genetic stage embryo. An alternative hypothesis is that these two distinct counseling and medical care of families with hemophilia in Slovenia. alterations might be explained by a revertant mosaicism mechanism. P12.103 P12.105 the turkish Hereditary Angioedema Pilot study (tURHAPs): the Amplicon based high-throughput, pooled sequencing identifies First turkish series of Hereditary Angioedema mutations in cYP7B1 and Paraplegin in AR-HsP B. Eroglu Kesim1, Z. Uyguner2, A. Gelincik3, F. Özşeker3, S. Büyüköztürk3, N. N. A. Schlipf1, R. Schüle2, O. Riess1, L. Schöls2, P. Bauer1; Mete Gökmen4, Y. Laleli5; 1Institute of Human Genetics, 72076 Tübingen, Germany, 2Hertie Institute for 1Şişli Etfal Training & Education Hospital, Department of Medical Genetics, Clinical Brain Research and Center of Neurology, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. İstanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a neurodegenerative disorder of Medical Genetics, İstanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of defined clinically by progressive lower limb spasticity and weakness. Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Allergy, İstanbul, Turkey, HSP is a highly heterogeneous condition with at least 48 loci identified 4Ege University, School of Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Division so far, involving X-linked (XL), autosomal recessive (AR) and of Immunology and Allergy, Izmir, Turkey, 5Duzen Laboratuaries Groups, autosomal dominant (AD) inheritance. For correct diagnosis molecular Ankara, Turkey. testing is essential since clinical parameters by themselves are not Background: No published genetic data presently exist concerning reliable to differentiate HSP forms. Thus, the purpose of this study hereditary angioedema (HAE) in Turkey. The aim of the present study was to establish amplicon based high throughput genotyping for AR- was to initiate a preliminary multi-centric evaluation about HAE and to HSP. A sample of 187 index cases with sporadic or recessive spastic identify the causative mutations in a group of patients with hereditary paraplegia were analyzed by applying an array based amplification angioedema type I. strategy to generate amplicon libraries followed by a pooled next- methods: 10 patients with clinical diagnosis of HAE type I were generation sequencing (NGS) approach to investigate the CYP7B1- sampled to analyze the entire coding and un-coding exons of C1NH (SPG5) and Paraplegin-gene (SPG7). We identified one SPG5 and gene for mutations by DNA sequencing. Identified new mutations were four SPG7 patients. All of them were compound heterozygous for further evaluated by segregation with the first-degree relatives. two mutations. In total, three known CYP7B1 mutations and eleven Results: Causative mutations were identified in 9 out of 10 patients, mutations in Paraplegin, including five novel mutations (p.W29X, Three of the identified mutations were previously described while 6 p.R139X, p.R247X, p.G344D and p.R398X), were detected through were being first time described here in this study. One family showed amplicon-based next generation sequencing. Discovering the autosomal recessive inheritance with a novel homozygous mutation , molecular basis of the neurodegenerative disorder HSP is challenging which is a very rare condition as being only one family described in the given the increasing number of subtypes. Our study illustrates how literature before. Others all had heterozygous mutations pointing out the amplicon based NGS can be used as a suitable platform to provide autosomal dominant inheritance as anticipated. Mutations were found data on molecular mutations at a necessary throughput and accuracy.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 413 P12.106 P12.108*** Homozygosity mapping of an Omani family affected with Apolipoprotein B is a new target of the REt/GDNF signalling hereditary spastic paraplegia overlaps with sPG24 locus pathway A. H. Alkhayat AlShehi1, R. Koul2, A. Alfutaisi2, F. AlMamari1, F. AlSalmi1, S. E. Bonora1, C. Evangelisti1,2, A. Puliti3,4, A. Goldoni1, I. Sbrana4, M. Rossi4, F. Raeburn1; Bianco1,5, V. Naponelli5, R. De Giorgio5, G. Romeo1; 1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 2Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, 1Unit of Medical Genetics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Muscat, Oman. Bologna, Italy, 2Dept of Haematology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a group of neurodegenerative Italy, 3Department of Pediatric Sciences “Giovanni De Toni”, University of diseases genetically inherited from one generation to another. About Genova, Genova, Italy, 4Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy, thirty-four different loci have been mapped so far, among them 16 5Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy. genes have been identified. Autosomal recessive forms of spastic RET and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) regulate paraplegias usually have clinically complex phenotypes but the SPG5, cell survival, differentiation, migration and proliferation of neural SPG24 and SPG28 loci are considered to be associated with pure crest-derived cells. Many signalling mediators of RET have been forms of the disease. Stevanin G, et al 2009. characterized but the activated downstream genes at the end of Two affected boys from a consanguineous family were diagnosed with the signalling cascade initiated by RET are largely unknown. Since HSP. The parents have two other kids a boy and a girl and both are the molecular basis of the interaction between RET and EDNRB normal. The symptoms were reported to start as early as six months (endothelin receptor type B) has been characterized, we used a of age. In one of them, spasticity is associated with epilepsy. The MRI Caenorhabditis elegans knock out strain of nep-1, homologue of showed abnormality in the brain. human ECE1 (endothelin-converting enzyme-1) to identify new The genomic DNA was typed for SNP markers in 10K SNP chip downstream genes. microarray using Affymetrix platform. The genotypes were viewed and Transcriptome comparison between wild-type and nep-1 strains sorted according to their chromosomal location and to their physical identified vit-3 as a differentially expressed gene. We confirmed that position in an Excel file. The homozygosity regions were determined Apolipoprotein b, the mammalian gene homologue of vit-3, is activated using simple algorithm in Excel. Those regions were compared against by the RET/GDNF signalling pathway in Neuro2a cells via the MAPK known HSP loci in the literature to find out if any one of them is actually P38 kinase and it is inhibited by p53. We demonstrated that RET/ causing the disease. GDNF and EDNRB/endothelin 3 (ET-3) cooperate in inducing neuronal The second largest region of homozygosity overlapped with a reported differentiation resulting in Apob activation. In addition, ApoB expression HSP locus, which is SPG24 identified by Hodgkinson et al (2002). No is downregulated in mouse embryos homozygous for the mutation ret gene has been identified in the region yet. Although SPG24 have been C620R, causing HSCR in humans, whereas the heterozygous mice reported as pure HSP but the symptoms in our case is associated with show a significant increase in ApoB expression and do not show any epilepsy and MRI changes. We are currently perusing candidate gene HSCR phenotype, suggesting that ApoB has a significant role in ENS sequencing. development. The new finding that Apob is a downstream signalling target of RET P12.107 opens up a new perspective in studying RET roles in human health molecular diagnosis of hereditary neuropathy with liability to and diseases. pressure palsies C. Casasnovas1,2, I. Banchs3, L. De Jorge3, V. Volpini3; P12.109 1Unitat de Neuromuscular. Neurology Department. Hospital Universitari de A study of the Huntington´s disease associated trinucleotide Bellvitge - IDIBELL, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 2Diagnostic repeat in slovak population Molecular Centre of Hereditary Diseases. Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques J. Bernasovská, I. Boronova, I. Bernasovsky; de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain, 3Diagnostic University of Presov, Presov, Slovakia. Molecular Centre of Hereditary Diseases. Institut d’Investigacions Biomèdiques Huntington´s disease (HD) is a progressive neurodegenerative de Bellvitge (IDIBELL), Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain. disorder, which is clinically characterized by motor dysfunction, Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies (HNPP) is an cognitive impairments and psychiatric disturbances. The molecular autosomal-dominant disease. Motor and sensory nerve dysfunction basis of the disease is the expansion of the trinucleotide CAG in the due to compression at common entrapment sites is the characteristic first exon of the huntingtin gene in chromosome 4p16.3. Diagnosis clinical presentation of this disease, even though there is a wide of HD has been greatly simplified by the direct triplet repeat gene clinical spectrum of presentation, including asymptomatic individuals test. In the Prešov region (1998-2009) CAG repeat lenghts in the HNPP electrophysiological findings show a distinctive background HD gene were tested in twelve patients with suspected diagnosis of polyneuropathy, independent of superimposed entrapment HD. Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples by standard neuropathy. It is characterized by diffuse sensory nerve conduction extraction procedures using Jet Quick® (Genomed). Thermal cycling velocity (SNCV) slowing and prolongation of distal motor latencies with of PCR conditions were 95°C for three minutes, followed by 30 cycles relatively infrequent and minor reduction of motor nerve conduction of 94°C for one minute, 62°C for one minute, 72°C for one minute, velocities. This indicates disproportionate distal conduction slowing in with a final extension at 72°C for seven minutes performed in a the the disorder. thermal cycler Biometra®. PCR products were resolved on capillary Up to 84% of HNPP are due to the 1.5 Mb deletion at 17p11.2-12 electrophoresis with ABI technology. In seven affected patients clinical containing the PMP22 gene. This gene codifies for the membrane diagnosis of HD was confirmed by molecular-genetic methods. The glycoprotein, Peripheral Myelin Protein 22, which plays an important sex ratio in the cases, in which the diagnosis of HD has been confirmed role in the formation and maintenance of compact myelin in the was 4:3 in favor of female individuals. Mapping the occurance of HD peripheral nervous system. Small deletions in PMP22 (detected in the Prešov region is a part of population-genetic analyses and with microsatellite analysis or Multiplex ligation-dependent probe monitoring of the Prešov region population health status. amplification studies), point mutations in the PMP22 gene, point mutations at MPZ have been reported to cause HNPP. In addition, P12.110*** mutations in connexin32 gene present as a neuropathy with SCA2 normal allele modifies severity in Huntington disease intermediate NCV that could mimicry HNPP. We propose a HNPP S. Tezenas du Montcel1, C. Cazeneuve2, G. Stevanin3,2,4, A. Brice3,2,5, A. diagnosis algorithm including (microsatellite analysis, MLPA and direct Durr3,6,5; sequencing analysis of PMP22, MPZ and Connexin32 gene) that 1Service de Biostatistiques et Information Médicale, Paris, France, 2Department allows the diagnosis of almost 90% of suspected HNPP patients. of Genetics and Cytogenetics, Paris, France, 3CRicm UMRS975/NEB, Paris, France, 4Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, France, 5Centre de Référence Maladies Rares Neurogénétique, Paris, France, 6, AP-HP, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 414 Departement of Genetics and Cytogenetics, Paris, France. high LDL-cholesterol level frequently gives rise to tendon and skin Huntington disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited disorder, caused xanthomas, arcus corneae, and accelerated atherosclerosis resulting by a CAG repeat expansion in HTT gene resulting in a extended from cholesterol deposition in the arterial wall, thereby increasing the polyglutamine (polyQ) tract. Approximately 50-70% of the variability risk of premature CHD. The identification and treatment of FH patients in age at onset is due to the CAG repeat length, with the remainder and their affected relatives with effective lipid-lowering agents is likely to be due to modifying genes. Hypothesizing the potentially important as this has been shown to significantly reduce both coronary additive toxic effect of other polyglutamine proteins, we investigated morbidity and mortality. their influence on the age at onset and severity in HD. Mutations in the LDLR and APOB genes were determined using exon We analyzed the length of the polymorphic polyQ stretches in 10 by exon screening methods based on individual exon amplifications, genes in 216 HD patients and 71 controls: HTT, DRPLA, JPH3, AR, restriction analysis, DHPLC, sequencing, and MLPA. SCA1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 17. Linear regression analysis was applied to assess In the set of 2340 probands with the clinical diagnosis of FH, we the linear relation of the age at onset depending on the expanded CAG detected 311 patients (13.3%) with the APOB mutation p.Arg3527Gln repeat length. Severity was quantified by dividing the motor score by and 606 patients (25.9%) with a LDLR mutation. In 606 probands disease duration. carrying a LDLR mutation, 133 unique allelic variants were detected: As expected the HTT longer allele was significantly associated with 69.9% of these variants were DNA substitutions, 16.5% small DNA age at onset (p<0.0001), but not the size of the shorter allele, nor rearrangements, and 13.5% large DNA rearrangements. Sixty-three their interaction. In addition, DRPLA longer and shorter alleles were variants were new, not described in other FH populations. significantly associated with age at onset variability (p=0.0092 and This work was supported by grant MSMT 2B08060 and LC06023. 0.0013, respectively) as well as their interaction (p=0.0017). The expansion length in the other genes tested did not modulate the age at P12.113 onset in HD. However, disease severity was influenced by the size of mutations in WNT10A account for 26% of patients with an-/ the CAG repeat expansion in SCA2 (p<0.03). hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia In addition to the pathological HD expansion, normal CAG repeat A. H. van der Hout, M. T. Meems-Veldhuis, A. J. van Essen; lengths in DRPLA and SCA2 genes influenced significantly the age at Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. onset and severity in HD, respectively. Hypohidrotic ectodermal dysplasia (HED) is a rare genodermatosis, affecting ectoderm-derived structures, like teeth, sweatglands, nails P12.111 and hair. The condition can be caused by mutations in the X-linked the contribution of the self PolyQ load [somatic mosaicism] in EDA gene, or the autosomal EDAR, EDARADD, and WNT10A genes. the cNs to the onset, disease duration and progression rate of We performed mutation scanning in index cases from 124 families scA2. from the Netherlands and Belgium who sought genetic counseling. J. M. Laffita-Mesa; Mutations in EDA were detected in 51% of the index cases, 26% Center for the Research and Rehabilitation of Hereditary Ataxias, Holguin, had mutations in the WNT10A gene, 6% in the EDAR gene, and no Cuba. pathogenic mutations were detected in EDARADD. These data are Introduction: SCA2 show strong relationship among CAG and the comparable to those published by Cluzeau et al (2011) in a smaller onset of ataxia. Other factors might accounts for the onset and other group of patients from France. Involvement of WNT10A has only been phenotypic features. The best modifier might be intrinsically depending/ established recently. The inheritance pattern of WNT10A mutations is causing of the unstable nature of the CAG. Aims: 1) To compare the not clearly recessive, with some relatively severly affected individuals somatic mosaicism of the expanded CAG of SCA2 gene in CNS. 2) carrying only one mutation. We will present genotype-phenotype To determine the influence of somatic mosaicism on SCA2 phenotype correlations in our group of patients and their relatives. Index cases and its relationship with CAG size and architecture and haplotype. 3) either carry two nonsense mutations, one nonsense and one missense To gain insights about the dynamic of the CAG expansion in CNS of mutation, two missense mutations or only one missense mutation. Four SCA2. Methods: We have analyzed CAG expansions in 12 different missense mutations were novel. Notably, one of our patients had pili sites of SCA2 deceased patients with discordant phenotypes and torti. It appears that a heterozygous nonsense mutation is not enough somatic mosaicism indices, peaks number, CAG range and skewness to cause WNT10A related ectodermal dysplasia, since none of the of the CAG in each region was determined. Also, detailed clinical data index cases carry only one nonsense mutation and relatives carrying using rating scales trough life with follow-up using neurophysiology one nonsense mutation are not or only very mildly affected. There is biomarkers were used to generate phenotypic profiles. Results: variable expression between relatives with the same genotype. The Regions of the brain with greatest level of somatic mosaicism were collection of clinical data from index cases and their heterozygous motor cortex, occipital grey matter, olive, pons, and globus pallidus. relatives is ongoing. While those regions more compromised in SCA2, like cerebellar cortex showed lesser somatic mosaicism. Early onset was associated P12.114 with wide ranges of CAG in the CNS (with differences up to 10-17 Homozygousity mapping in a large iranian pedigree affected CAG units respecting the major CAG) in contrast to delayed onsets. with Autosomal Recessive congenital ichthyosis(ARci) reveals Sequence and STR haplotype altogether with phenotypic data are also linkage to region encompassing NiPAL4/ichthyn presented. Conclusions: Our results bring data about the role of the A. Alavi1, M. Mirshams Shahshahani2, H. Moazzeni1, J. Fan3, E. Elahi1; somatic mosaicism as the major modifier of the SCA2 phenotype. 1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, P12.112 University of Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Illumina Inc, 9885 the molecular diagnostics of familial hypercholesterolemia in Towne Centre Drive, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. czech Republic Ichthyosis is a genetically and clinically heterogeneous group of L. Tichy1, P. Zapletalova1, E. Zapletalova1, K. Stehlikova1, O. Letocha1, J. cornification disorders characterized by scaling of whole body skin. Porupkova1, T. Freiberger2, L. Fajkusova1; A subgroup of ichthyosis (ARCI) exhibits autosomal recessive 1University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2St. Anne’s University Hospital inheritance. To date, seven genes and two additional loci have been Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. associated with ARCI. Mutations in the seven genes account for Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH), a major risk factor for coronary disease in 70-75% of the patients. heart disease (CHD), is autosomal dominant disorder associated with We performed whole genome homozygosity mapping in a large mutations in the genes encoding the low-density lipoprotein receptor Iranian ARCI family using high density SNP chips. A large homozygous (LDLR), apolipoprotein B100 (APOB), and proprotein convertase region of 3.4 Mb on chromosome 5 was observed in all affected subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9). Predominantly, the clinical phenotype individuals. The NIPAL4/Ichthyn gene associated with ARCI lies within of FH is caused by mutations in the LDLR or APOB genes. the region and mutation screening revealed a homozygous mutation The frequency of heterozygotes is 1/500. The frequency of causing p.G297R. Mutation in NIPAL4/Ichthyn has been reported in homozygotes or compound heterozygotes is 1/1 000 000. The ARCI patients from Turkey, Syria, Pakistan, Algeria, Colombia and the Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 415 Scandinavia countries. Phenotypic similarities and variations among P12.117 the mutation carrying patients are detected. Localisation of a gene for rare immuno-osteodysplasia syndrome P12.115 S. A. Lynch1, J. Casey2, P. McGettigan3, R. Regan2, J. Conroy2, J. Nielsen4, K. molecular analysis of the FLG gene in a sample of mexican Butler5, A. Cant6, J. Kelleher7, S. Ennis2; patients with ichthyosis vulgaris 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2School of Medicine and F. Zuñig1, J. Cazarin1, R. Rivera1, L. Gonzalez1, H. Urueta1, R. Hernadez1, S. Health Science, UCD, Dublin, Ireland, 3Animal Genomics Laboratory, UCD, Cuevas2; Dublin, Ireland, 4School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, UCD, Dublin, 1HOSPITAL GENERAL DE MEXICO, MEXICO D.F., Mexico, 2HOSPITAL Ireland, 5Dept of Infectious Diseases Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Dublin, GENERAL DE MEXICO, UNIVERSIDAD NACIONAL AUTONOMA DE Ireland, 6Paediatric immunology and infectious disease, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, MEXICO, MEXICO D.F., Mexico. United Kingdom, 7Department of Paediatric Radiology, Our lady’s Childrens The Ichthyosis vulgaris (IV) is one of the most common genodermatosis Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. with a semidominant inheritance pattern. IV is characterized by light We report high density mapping and sequencing results on a gray to dark brown scales in extensor areas of extremities and lower consanguineous family with an immuno-osteodysplasia (IDS). The 3 abdomen. IV has an incidence of 1:250 to 1:5300 births. FLG gene affected siblings, 2 females and 1 male, presented with a deficient innate is located on 1q21, and encodes for the filaggrin protein. Mutations immunodeficiency with hypogammagloulinaemia & partial antibody in FLG gene are the cause of IV, being the most frequent reported deficiency requiring regular IVIG replacement therapy. In addition, the R501X and 2282del4 mutations, both in exon 3. The aim of the they have a renal tubulopathy leading to potassium and magnesium present study was the molecular analysis of the FLG gene in Mexicans loss. They have proportionate short stature and abnormalities individuals with IV. We included 12 patients with clinical diagnosis of on X-rays, including epiphyseal delay, flattening of the proximal IV and normal activity of the steroid sulfatase (STS) enzyme from femoral, distal femoral and proximal tibial epiphyses. The two older the Genodermatosis clínica of the General Hospital of Mexico. All IV children are maintained on oral antibiotic prophylaxia, subcutaneous patients were analyzed by PCR, RFLPs with NlaIII enzyme and DNA immunoglobulins & potassium and magnesium supplements. The automated sequencing anaysis searching for the R501X and 2282del4 youngest child, a boy, developed pneumocytis pneumoniae & mutations. Based on the proposed clinical scale, 33.3% of patients cryptosporidium positive diarrhoea. He unfortunately died following were diagnosed as mild, 41.6% as moderate and 25% as severe. The bone marrow transplantation. Runs of homozygosity (ROH) shared by molecular study revealed 3 positive patients (25%) for the mutation the 3 affected siblings were identified and subsequently compared to R501X whereas the rest showed no this type of mutations in the FLG the patterns of homozygosity in 7 unaffected relatives. The three IDS gene. There was no relationship between phenotype and genotype. patients shared 450 ROH ranging in size from 7.1 kb to 4.1Mb. A total We found a lower frequency of R501X and 2282del4 mutations in IV in of 32 ROH, totalling 6.9 Mb and containing 79 genes, were exclusively comparison with other populations shared by the IDS patients. The candidate loci were targeted using NimbleGen’s sequence capture technology and sequenced in 3 P12.116 affected and 3 unaffected individuals. We identified 34 homozygous Unraveling the origin and molecular pathogenesis of TGM1 variants (coding regions and utr’s) in 18 different genes that segregated c.984+1G>A mutation with the IDS phenotype. After excluding variants reported in dbSNP, L. Fachal1, L. Rodríguez-Pazos2, M. Ginarte2, A. Blanco1, M. Santamariña1, J. 13 homozygous mutations in 11 different genes remained for further Toribio2, Á. Carracedo1, A. Vega1; consideration as potential disease-causing mutations. Functional 1FPGMX-SERGAS, Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC, CIBERER, IDIS, studies may help in elucidating which of the 11 candidate genes is Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2Department of Dermatology, Complejo predisposing to IDS. Hospitalario Universitario, Faculty of Medicine, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. Background. Lamellar ichthyosis (LI) is a nonsyndromic disorder of the P12.118 cornification caused, in the majority of patients, by transglutaminase-1 Genetic analysis on twenty eight families with inherited (TGM1) deficiency resulting from mutations in both copies of the arrhythmogenic disorders: implications for a consanguineous TGM1 gene. population Objectives. To study the probably common origin of c.984+1G>A Z. N. Al-Hassnan1,2, S. Wakil1, S. Tulbah1, Z. Shinwani1, Y. Mallawi1, B. Al- mutation in two apparently unrelated Galician families (NW Spain) Ghamdi1, W. Al-Manea1, N. Dzimiri1, M. Al-Fayyadh1; carriers of c.984+1G>A at heterozygous and homozygous state. To 1King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, assess the pathologic effect of the splice-site mutation by bioinformatic 2Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. tools and splicing assays. introduction: Implicated in the etiology of sudden death, inherited Materials and methods. Microsatellite and SNPs data spanning 12Mb arrhythmogenic disorders (IAD) are a group of genetic conditions on chromosome 14q11 were evaluated to unravel the common origin that are characterized by locus heterogeneity. The majority of IAD is in families and 100 control individuals. The effect on splicing was caused by channelopathies and is inherited in autosomal dominant assessed using bioinformatic prediction tools follow by analysis of fashion. Objective: Molecular characterization of IAD in our highly mRNA from peripheral blood lymphocytes. Molecular modelling was consanguineous population. Patients: 28 Saudi families with various performed to investigate the effect of the variation at the protein level. forms of IAD were recruited:13 with Romano-Ward syndrome (RWS), 5 Results. Both families shared a common haplotye spanning 0.93Mb with Jervell and Lange-Nielsen syndrome , 4 with Brugada syndrome, no present in control population, confirming the origin from a single 2 with sick sinus syndrome, 3 with arrhythmogenic right ventricular mutational event. c.984+1G>A lead to two alternative mRNA splice dysplasia, and 1 with catecholaminegric polymorphic ventricular variants, that included 30 (p.Met329_Val330ins10) and 32 nucleotides tachycardia. methods: Direct sequencing for genes (KCNQ1, KCNE1, (p.Val330MetfsX12) of the 5’ of intron 6. This result was in accordance KCNH2, KCNE2, SCN5A, GPD1L, DSP, PKP2, DSG2, DSC2, CASQ2) with the presence of two cryptic splice sites predicted by bioinformatic known to be implicated in IAD and, in consanguineous families with tools. The in frame insertion would create a new loop in the surface negative gene sequencing, SNP-based genome-wide homozygosity of the catalytic domain, which is likely to interfere with the proper mapping were performed. Results: Heterozygous mutations in folding yielding a structure more susceptible to proteolytic cleavage. KCNQ1 (5 families), and PKP2 (1 family), and homozygous mutations Conclusion. Our results suggest that c.984+1G>A is a founder in KCNQ1 (4 families), CASQ2 (1 family), SCN5A (1 family) were mutation for LI in the Galician population and unravels the molecular detected. SNP-based homozygosity mapping identified a potential pathogenesis of this mutation. novel locus on chromosome 5q34 for RWS. Analysis of candidate genes in the region is in progress. conclusion: Our work represents largest cohort of Arab patients with IAD. Our molecular data illustrates the impact of the high degree of consanguinity on the genotypes of IAD; a finding that has an important preventive implication.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 416 P12.119 polymerase chain reaction allowing a simple screening test for other mutation spectrum of mLL2 in a cohort of Kabuki syndrome family members. This approach, in combination with cDNA sequencing, patients allowed us to identify LAMA2 mutations in 96.5% of MDC1A patients l. micale1, c. fusco1, b. augello1, m. N. loviglio1, e. V. d’addetta1, a. calcagnì1, I. therefore having a major impact on genetic counseling. Kabuki syndrome Group2, L. Zelante1, g. merla1; 1IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 2different P12.121 Institutions, different cities, Italy. mutation analysis of the LDL receptor gene in indian families Kabuki syndrome is a rare, multiple congenital anomalies/mental with Familial Hypercholesterolemia retardation syndrome characterized by a peculiar face, short S. S. Kulkarni1, S. Basavraj1, S. V. Hiremath2, P. B. Gai1; stature, skeletal, visceral and dermatoglyphic abnormalities, cardiac 1Research Center for DNA Diagnostics, Dharwad, India, 2Dept. of anomalies, and immunological defects. Mutations in the histone Biotechnology,P.C.Jabin Science College, Hubli, India. methyl transferase MLL2 gene have been identified as its underlying Background: Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a metabolic cause. Sanger sequencing of the coding region of MLL2 including disorder inherited as an autosomal dominant trait characterized by an intron-exon junctions was performed in 62 index patients. The putative increased plasma low-density lipoprotein (LDL). The disease is caused causal and possible functional effect of each nucleotide variant by several mutations in the LDL receptor (LDLr) gene. Identification of identified was predicted by in silico tools. We identified 46 patients individuals carrying the defective gene could be useful in reducing the with MLL2 mutations; 42 are novel mutations. The majority are risk of atherosclerosis and myocardial infraction. Our study presents nonsense or frameshift predicted to generate a truncated polypeptide. mutation analysis of the LDLr gene in 24 Indian families with FH. Yet, we reported 3 indel and 7 missense mutations. Finally 3 MLL2 methods: Genomic DNA was isolated from blood, exon-specific mutations affected the splicing process resulting in a shorter protein. intronic primers were designed and used to amplify DNA samples from 26 % (16/62) patients from our cohort with clinical evidences of individuals.PCR products were directly subjected to automated DNA Kabuki syndrome were negative for mutation in the coding region of sequencing to detect the mutations. Alongwith the affected individuals, MLL2 gene. Mutations in the regulatory regions of the gene, genetic ten ethnically matched controls were also analyzed to determine the heterogeneity of Kabuki syndrome, and exon micro duplications and/or presence of the same mutations. micro deletions gene might be the possible causes for the lack of MLL2 Result: All the 24 patients had total cholesterol level above 300mg/dl mutations in such patients. This study emphasizes the relevance of the and LDL cholesterol level above 200mg/dl. Sequence analysis of the mutational screening of the MLL2 gene among patients with Kabuki LDL receptor (LDLr) gene showed 3 novel mutations which have never syndrome to improve the actual knowledge on the clinical basis of this been reported elsewhere. In exon 10 we reported g.29372_29373insC, syndrome, to design functional studies to understand the molecular which was found in all the 24 patients and was missence mutation mechanisms underlying the disease, to establish genotype-phenotype coding for C (cysteine) instead of V (valine). correlations, to improve the clinical management, and to identify conclusion: Our study reported 3 novel mutations in 24 Indian potential targets for therapy. families. These novel mutations are predicted to produce change in the amino acid and thus leading to the conformational changes in the P12.120 structure of LDLr protein. Change in the LDLr protein makes the LDL Detection by microarray-cGH of large rearrangements of the receptor unable to transport the cholesterol in to the cell and hence LAmA2 gene in 16.8% of mDc1A patients cholesterol starts accumulating in the blood stream and leads to FH. C. Guittard1, S. Chambert1, R. Mein2, S. Cirak3, F. Rivier1, J. Cuisset4, S. Quijano-Roy5, A. Toutain6, P. Landrieu7, F. Rousselet8, M. Mayer9, J. P12.122 Urtizberea10, J. Roume11, M. Claustres1,12,13, J. Chelly14, F. Muntoni3, N. Phenotypic characterization of patients with deletions in the Lévy15,16,17, C. Béroud1,12,13; 3’-flanking SHOX region. 1CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 2Genetics Centre, Guy’s Hospital, M. Losekoot1, S. J. Broekman1, C. C. de Wit1, M. Bos1, V. Janmaat1, E. London, United Kingdom, 3Dubowitz Neuromuscular Unit, Department Bakker1, J. Wit2, S. G. Kant1; of Paediatrics, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College, London, United 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department of Kingdom, 4CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 5AP-HP, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Pediatrics, Leiden, Netherlands. Garches, France, 6CHU de Tours, Tours, France, 7APHP, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le The SHOX gene is located on the short arm of the X-chromosome Kremlin-Bicêtre, France, 8CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 9AP-HP, Hôpital in the pseudoautosomal (PAR) 1 region and escapes X-inactivation Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 10Hôpital Marin d’Hendaye, Hendaye, thus showing a pseudoautosomal pattern of inheritance. Leri-Weill France, 11CHI Poissy, Poissy, France, 12INSERM U827, Montpellier, France, dyschondrosteosis is caused by haploinsufficiency of the SHOX gene 13Université Montpellier1, Montpellier, France, 14Institut Cochin, Paris, France, in 60-70%, and in 15% by deletions of a putative enhancer sequence 15AP-HM, Marseille, France, 16INSERM, Marseille, France, 17Université de la in the 3’-flanking region. The precise localization of the enhancer Méditerranée, Marseille, France. sequence is unknown. The most frequent form of autosomal recessive Congenital Muscular We collected clinical data from patients and their relatives with different Dystrophies (MDC1A) is caused by mutations of the LAMA2 gene that deletions in the 3’-PAR region, detected by the MRC-Holland MLPA codes for the laminin alpha-2 protein. This large gene is composed kit (P018-D). PAR probes were numbered 1-12 where nr 1 is SALSA of 65 exons and extends over a genomic region of 633,366 bp. The probe 5642-L05096. molecular diagnosis revealed that most mutations are private and Twelve individuals carried a large deletion starting in PAR1 and therefore the sequencing of all exons is required. Using a series of 113 extending to PAR8/9 or to the flanking CSF2RA probe while 4 MDC1A families, we have identified two LAMA2 mutations in 79.7% of individuals had a PAR3-CSF2RA deletion. Thirty-two individuals families. Therefore, for almost 1/5 of patients, the genetic counseling carried a smaller deletion of 3 probes (PAR4-6), just 5’ to the previously is difficult as secondary merosin deficiencies can be observed mainly described common deletion interval. as a result of abnormal O-mannosylation of alpha-dystroglycan as Median height SDS, sitting height/height ratio SDS and the presence seen in the alpha-dystroglycanopathies associated with mutations in of Madelung deformity in patients with PAR4-6 deletions were -1.8, the LARGE, FCMD, POMGnT1, FKRP, POMT1, POMT2 and Fukutin +1.4, and 67%, in comparison to -2.4, +1.9 and 42% in patients with genes. larger deletions. The index patients had a median height SDS of -2.7, We therefore developed a new method for detecting and characterizing shorter than their affected parents (-2.0), but disproportion and the large rearrangements in the LAMA2 gene based on high-resolution presence of Madelung deformity were similar. However, variability of oligonucleotide array-CGH technology. The study of all patients with the phenotype in the whole group of patients was remarkable. a clinically diagnosed MDC1A but harbouring only one or no LAMA2 We conclude that the critical interval of the enhancer region may be small rearrangement revealed that they indeed harbour one or two larger than previously suggested. large rearrangements of the LAMA2 gene in most cases (16.8% of all MDC1A patients). In parallel, because of the high-resolution of this technique, breakpoints were subsequently characterized by a simple Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 417 P12.123 We characterized the frequency of LGMD2I in a cohort of 74 Rusian mutation Analysis of Limb Girdle muscular Dystrophies in the muscular dystrophy patients using DNA sequence analysis. FKRP czech Republic mutations were found in 9,5% (7/74). Pathogenic changes in both K. Stehlikova, Z. Hruba, L. Fajkusova; alleles of the FKRP gene were found in 5 patients. In two cases, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno, Brno, changes were found only in one allele. Of five founded mutations three Czech Republic. were first described (missense: c.265C>T, c.1078G>C, stop codon: Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of disorders c.229C>T). The c.826C>A change, presented in four patients, was the characterised by atrophy and weakness of proximal limb girdle most prevalent mutation. muscles. All patients were women aged 4 to 52. An age of onset varied greatly Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 2A (LGMD2A) is an autosomal (from 3 to 32 years). Correlations between the age of onset and the recessive disorder caused by mutations in the CAPN3 gene (15q15) clinical presentation severity weren’t found. Clinically, LGMD2I patients that encodes the muscle specific protein, calpain-3 (p94). LGMD2A is exhibit a great phenotypic variability ranging from a severe, rapidly the most frequent form of LGMDs in many European countries. progressive weakness and wasting of the limb-girdle muscles to mild Another relatively common forms of LGMD are LGMD2I and LGMD2D. disorders, but all clinical symptoms were typical for LGMDs. Of seven LGMD2I is caused by mutations in the FKRP gene (19q13.3) patients only one girl of 9 years old has been wheelchair-bounded since that encodes a protein which participates in the glycosylation of she was seven years old. None of them still has the cardiomyopathy. α-dystroglycan in the muscle fibre. LGMD2D is caused by mutations Three patients had a calf pseudohypertrophy. Contractures of large in the α-sarcoglycan gene (SGCA). SGCA (17q21) is an a integral joints were found in two patients having manifestation in their childhood. membrane glycoprotein that forms part of the dystrophin associated The creatine kinase activity varied from 1590 to 14197IU and hadn’t glycoprotein complex. correlations between ones and a severity of clinical presentation. We performed analysis of the CAPN3, FKRP, and SGCA genes in a cohort of patients with preliminary diagnoses of LGMD at both the P12.126 mRNA level using reverse transcription-PCR or at the DNA level using investigation of ECM1(1,2,3,4,5,9 and 10 exons) mutation in PCR and direct sequencing. lipoid proteinosis (LP) and genotype-phenotype correlation in We screened 203 unrelated patients. 50 patients were found to carry iranian patients CAPN3 defects. The homozygous occurence of the most common S. Kalayiniya1, A. Bidmeshkipour1, F. Eizadi2, M. Farhadi2, M. Tavakoli2, S. mutation in the FKRP gene (p.Leu276Ile) was found in 8 patients. Samanian3, F. Mahjoubi3; Mutations in the SGCA gene was detected in 4 patients. In total, we 1Scince Faculty, Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, determined mutations in 62 Czech LGMD patients (31 %). 2Hazrate Rasoul Hospital, Department & Research of Ear, Throat, Head This work was supported by grans MSMT LC06023 and 2B08060 & Neck Surgery and Related Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Clinical Genetic Department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering & P12.124 Biotechnology(NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. A novel cAPN3 gene mutation in a LGmD patient from southern Lipoid Proteinosis is an autosomal recessive disorder that results from italy mutations in extra cellular matrix protein(ECM1). The clinical signs P. Spadafora1, M. Liguori1, M. Caracciolo1, I. Manna1, V. Andreoli1, R. of LP are hoarseness, skin lesions, beaded eyelid papules. During Cittadella1, F. Trecroci1, A. Quattrone2, A. Gambardella1,2; childhood, the skin may be easily damaged by minor trauma or fraction, 1Institute of Neurological Sciences - National Research Council, CS, Italy, resulting in blisters and scar formation in Pox-like or cuneiform scars 2Institute of Neurology -Department of Medical Sciences, University “Magna are particularly visible on the face to hair loss. The mucosae of the Graecia”, Catanzaro, Italy. pharynx, tongue, soft palate, tonsils and lips are also infiltrated and this Limb girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD ) is a heterogeneous group may lead to respiratory difficulty, sometimes requiring tracheotomy. S of inherited progressive muscle disorders affecting predominantly the We aimed to screen 10 Iranian families clinically diagnosis with LP. shoulder and pelvic girdle muscles. There are at least 19 different Genomic DNA was extracted from all the patients and the parents. subtypes of LGMD, 7 with autosomal dominant and 12 with autosomal PCR was employed to amplify all 10 exons of ECM1 gene. The PCR recessive pattern of inheritance. Immunostaining performed on muscle products were then sequenced using ABI sequencer.In this report, biopsy and genetic analysis can discriminate between the LGMD we are going to present our data regarding ECM1 gene mutations in subtypes. Iranian LP patients. To our best knowledge this is the first reported LGMD2A is the most prevalent form of recessive LGMDs since it molecular data of Iranian LP patients generally accounts for 30% of LGMD2 in Caucasian populations. In a LGMD patient from southern Italy we identified a novel mutation P12.127 (Gln142Arg) in the exon 3 of the CAPN3 gene, in heterozygosis with Exclusion of known lymphedema genes in two families with the A236T variant previously described by others as polymorphism. severe congenital lymphedema. We already reported another LGMD patient with the same A236T M. Amyere1, S. Greenberger2, D. Chitayat3, E. Pras4, K. Chong3, T. Uster3, H. variant in heterozygosis with a null mutation (R748X) in the exon 21 Reznik-Wolf4, D. Marek-Yagel4, L. Boon5, M. Vikkula1; of the CAPN3 gene. Both patients showed elevated serum Creatine 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université Kinase level, late onset myopathy with subjective weakness of the catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vascular Biology Program and lower limbs. We also found the A236T variant in 7 unrelated LGMD2 Department of Surgery, Children’s Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical patients from the same geographic area. School, Boston, MA, United States, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical These findings suggest that the combination of A236T polymorphism Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital; University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, in heterozygosis with a mutation in the CAPN3 gene might be Canada, 4Danek Gartner Institute of Human Genetics, Sheba Medical Center, responsible for mild LGMD2A phenotypes. However, demonstration of Ramat-Gan, Israel, 5Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, the pathogenic nature of this variant required the examination of the Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Brussels, Belgium. transcription product. Lymphedema is a soft tissue swelling resulting from abnormal accumulation of interstitial fluid P12.125 containing high molecular weight proteins due to abnormal drainage clinical genetic analysis of LGmD2i in Russia. of lymph by the lymphatic vasculature. Primary lymphedema is due to O. Ryzhkova, E. Dadali, O. Schagina, A. Polyakov, I. Sharkova, G. an abnormal lymphangiogenesis which usually starts in utero. Some Rudenskaya; of the cases are inherited and in most cases have autosomal dominant Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. or recessive mode of inheritance. Some of the autosomal dominant The limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2I (LGMD2I) is caused by cases have incomplete penetrance and variable expression. Both mutations in the FKRP gene. Being one of the most common forms syndromic and non-syndromic cases have been caused by mutations of the autosomal recessive LGMDs in Europe, its prevalence, the in genes with major role in lymphangiogenesis including FOXC2, mutation spectrum and symptoms of LGMD2I in Russia are unknown. VEGFR3, SOX18, CCBE1, PTPN14 and GCJ2.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 418 We report two consanguineous families with recurrence of an testing methods such as MLPA and direct Sanger sequencing on autosomal recessive form of congenital lymphedema. One of the genomic DNA. Probably such a mutation will also be missed with next families is of Iranian-Jewish and Israeli descent and the other of Iraqi generation sequencing approaches. descent. Direct sequencing of the known lymphedema genes including coding sequences and intron-exon boundaries, did not identify any P12.130 mutation. Whole genome scan using Affymetrix SNP-Chip 250K mtDNA dysfunction in a transgenic mouse model of machado- was thus performed in both families and no copy number change Joseph Disease(mJD) was identified in the affected members. Autozygosity mapping and N. I. Kazachkova1,2, M. Raposo1,2, R. Montiel3, C. Bettencourt1,4,5, T. parametric linkage analysis also excluded the candidate lymphedema- Cymbron1,4, P. Maciel6, M. Lima1,4; genes. Three overlapping autozygous regions were identified in the 1Center of Research in Natural Resources (CIRN), University of Azores, two families and were confirmed by linkage analysis. Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 2Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University Our findings provides evidence for the existence of new causative gene of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3National Laboratory of Genomics for Biodiversity or genes associated with the autosomal recessive form of congenital (LANGEBIO), CINVESTAV-IPN, Irapuato, Mexico, 4IBMC - Institute of lymphedema. (E-mail : Miikka.vikkula@uclouvain.be). Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5Laboratory of Molecular Diagnostics of the Tissue Bank for Neurological Research (BTIN), P12.128 Faculty of Medicine, the Complutense University of Madrid (UCM), Madrid, Use of exome sequencing to identify GJc2; a gene responsible Spain, 6Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health for causing autosomal dominant primary lymphoedema Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal. P. Ostergaard1, M. Simpson2, F. Connell3, G. Brice1, S. Mansour1, K. Kalidas1, Background: We investigated the potential of mtDNA dysfunction as a P. Mortimer1, R. Trembath2, S. Jeffery1; biomarker of disease progression in MJD using a novel transgenic (TG) 1St George’s, London, United Kingdom, 2King’s College, London, United mouse model, expressing full-length human ataxin-3 and displaying a Kingdom, 3Guy’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. motor phenotype (strain FVB/N, line CMVMJD94). Genotyping array analysis was carried out on two families, all affected Methods: DNA was obtained from affected (pontine nuclei - Pn) and by four-limb, primary lymphoedema and linkage to chromosome 1 (LOD non-affected tissues (hippocampus - Hp and blood - Bl) of TG mice. 3.54) was identified. The region was approximately 17Mb (150 genes). Three distinct age-groups were considered: 8, 16 and 24 weeks (before Instead of analysing these genes using traditional Sanger sequencing, onset, at onset, and at well established phenotype, respectively). Wild- Next Generation Sequencing was employed. Exome sequencing of type mice (wt), serving as controls, were analyzed for the same tissues a proband from one of the families was performed using the Agilent and age groups. Quantitative changes (changes in copy number) as human All Exon Capture Assay and sequenced on the Illumina GAIIx well as qualitative changes (ΔmtDNA3867 deletion) in mtDNA were platform with 76bp paired end reads. The sequence reads generated studied by Fluorescent based quantitative PCR (FQ-PCR) in a total were aligned to the reference human genome sequence (hg18) and the of 177 samples (84 TG and 93 wild-type). The absolute quantities of location of variant substitutions and small insertion/deletions defined. mtDNA/nDNA were compared by the “absolute quantitation” method. Analysis of the region of the genome previously shown to cosegregate Results: A clear pattern of mtDNA copies decrease with age was with the disease status (chromosome 1 delimited by rs10494988 to observed for both wt and TG mice (1.06-2.53-fold and 1.24-2.58-fold, rs1043909) revealed only two novel nonsynonymous variants in NVL respectively). Affected tissue showed higher level of mtDNA copies (V746M) and in GJC2 (S48L). Both changes cosegregated with the decrease (1.21 times higher in TG mice) and higher level mtDNA affected status in the two families and subsequent sequencing of deletions (6.05% more in TG mice). The highest amount of mtDNA these genes in 19 unrelated individuals with four-limb lymphoedema deletions was observed in 8 weeks old mice, with higher values for TG revealed another two patients with the S48L change. Two additional mice (49.75-72.75% vs. 47.60-58% of wt animals), decreasing with nonsynonymous GJC2 variants in two patients were identified, one age. unreported (M210R) and one published (P316L). Recently it has been Conclusions: Our study confirms an association between mtDNA suggested that GJC2 is a pathogenic gene in lymphoedema (Ferrell et depletion with progression of phenotype in TG mice and indicates that al 2010). Our report describes a novel variant in GJC2 and confirms the the mtDNA 3,867 bp deletion may play a role in the early stage of the S48L and P316L changes described by Ferrell et al (2010). We have disease. therefore been successful in demonstrating how exome sequencing of one patient, together with linkage analysis, enabled rapid identification P12.131 of a new gene for primary lymphoedema. characterization of prelamin A isoforms accumulated in mandibuloacral Dysplasia type A (mADA) cells P12.129 S. M. Lepore1, D. Postorivo1, C. Capanni2, S. Squarzoni2, G. Lattanzi2, N. M. insertion of an sVA element, a non-autonomous Maraldi2,3, M. R. D’Apice1,4, G. Novelli1,4,5; retrotransposon, in PMS2 intron 7 causes Lynch syndrome 1Department of Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 2CNR- H. M. van der Klift1, C. M. Tops1, F. J. Hes1, P. Devilee2,3, J. T. Wijnen2,1; National Research Council of Italy, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Unit of 1Department of Clinical Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Department Bologna c/o IOR, Bologna, Italy, 3Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Cell Biology, of Human Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, IOR, Bologna, Italy, 4Fondazione Policlinico Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 5San LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. Pietro Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome, Italy. Germ line mutations in the mismatch repair genes MLH1, MSH2, Mandibuloacral dysplasia type A (MADA) is a rare autosomal MSH6 and PMS2 cause Lynch syndrome, an autosomal dominant recessive disorder characterized by craniofacial defects, skeletal inherited form of cancer predisposition. With an RNA-based mutation manifestations, cutaneous changes and partial lipodystrophy. MADA detection protocol we found a 71 bp insertion between PMS2 exon is caused by mutations in the LMNA gene encoding lamin A/C. The 7 and 8 in the mRNA of one suspected LS case. With Southern blot molecular features consist in the accumulation of the unprocessed analysis a heterozygous 2 kb insertion in the genomic DNA of the lamin A precursor (prelamin A) at the nuclear rim and in nucleoplasm, patient had been found before but the insert could not be amplified at with a linear increase of protein amount in older patients. The that time. A BLAST search of GenBank with the inserted 71 bp mRNA accumulation of 74 kDa protein, containing a histidine residue in sequence returned a match with high homology against part of an position 527 in C-terminal domain, is caused by wrong process of post- SVA repeat on chromosome 7q11.23. We now report that the insert translational modifications and cleavages with slowed down formation is a 2 kb long 5’-truncated SVA element consisting of a VNTR region of intermediate forms and final mature lamin A. of 1.4 kb, a SINE-R region and a polyA tail of (A) . This is the first To find out the prelamin A forms recovered in MADA cells, we 66 report of an SVA insertion as cause of Lynch syndrome. The inclusion performed the immunofluorescence analysis using three different in the mRNA of the first 57 nucleotides of the SVA element together antibodies detecting all forms of prelamin A, both non-farnesylated with 14 intronic nucleotides upstream causes a premature termination and farnesylated full-length prelamin A, and an intermediate product codon that triggers nonsense mediated RNA decay of the aberrant carboxymethylated prelamin A. PMS2 transcript. The SVA insert is not detectable by current diagnostic We show that full-length prelamin A either farnesylated or non-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 419 farnesylated is detectable in middle and high passage fibroblasts, but duplications in patients with suspected MFS without point mutation it’s not observed in cells at low passages. Carboxymethylated prelamin in FBN1, TGFBR1, and TGFBR2 can be estimated as 15/206 (7%). A is slightly expressed and detectable only in middle passages. FBN1 and TGFBR2 gross deletions or duplications could thus be In conclusion, we show that protein processing changes depending on responsible for 0.5 to 1% of MFS cases. However, the relatively high the passage numbers and the age of patients, suggesting the onset of cost of the MLPA technique raises the question of its routine use in a a feedback mechanism. diagnostic laboratory. P12.132 P12.134 No evidence for involvement of excess free transforming growth marfan syndrome with a complex chromosomal rearrangement factor-β in disturbed signal transduction in Marfan syndrome including deletion of the FBN1 gene I. Leistra1, U. Baylan2, F. S. van Dijk1, A. Maugeri1, H. W. M. Niessen2, G. Pals1; M. E. S. Colovati, L. R. J. da Silva, S. S. Takeno, T. I. Mancini, A. R. N. Dutra, 1VU University medical center, dept. of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, M. I. Melaragno, A. B. A. Perez; Netherlands, 2VU University medical center, dept. of Pathology and Cardiac Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Surgery, ICaR-VU, Amsterdam, Netherlands. Mutations in the FBN1 gene, mapped at 15q21.1, are the major cause Background: Marfan syndrome is an inherited connective tissue of Marfan syndrome (MFS), an autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder which is usually caused by mutations in the fibrillin-1(FBN1) disorder, which displays variable manifestations in the cardiovascular, gene. In the ethiology, transforming growth factor β(TGF-β) plays ocular, and skeletal systems. Only four cases with deletions of the an important role. Inactive TGF-β is stored in the large latent TGF-β whole FBN1 gene detected by molecular cytogenetic techniques were complex (LLC) in the extracellular matrix, bound to fibrillin-1. Mutations found in literature. In only two of these patients, there was the presence in the FBN1 gene are supposed to impair binding of LLC and cause of clinical features of the Marfan syndrome spectrum associated to increased free TGF-β and increased signalling. Activated TGF-β- mental retardation. Chromosomal alterations in Marfan syndrome, receptors phosphorylate Smad3, to pSmad3, which in turn is transferred such as interstitial deletions involving the 15q21.1 band are rare. into the nucleus by Smad4, where it is involved in regulation of genes There is no described patient with MFS and complex chromosome involved in growth, differentiation, inflammation and apoptosis. rearrangement (CCR) involving more than two breakpoints on two Methods: We studied these proteins by immunohistochemical staining or more chromosomes. We report a 16-year-old female with MFS of paraffin embedded aortic tissue from 5 Marfan patients, all with spectrum (positive thumb and wrist sign, scoliosis, joint hyperlaxity, a pathogenic FBN1 mutation, that underwent surgery for thoracic high-arched palate with dental crowding, dysmorphism, mitral aortic aneurysms. Control tissue (n=5) was obtained at autopsy of insufficiency with dystrophic valve, striae) associated to intellectual individuals without aortic aneurysm. Quantification of immuno-staining deficiency. Due to atypical marfanoid phenotype, cytogenetic study was performed using Mirax-Scan(Zeiss) and 3D-Histech Pannoramic was performed using G-banding that revealed a de novo balanced Viewer1.14. translocation involving chromosomes 6, 12 and 15 with breakpoints Results: In controls and patients, TGF-β showed extensive staining in apparently at 6q22, 12q24 and 15q21. Whole genomic array using the tunica adventitia. In tunica media no TGF-β was detectable, except Cytogenetics Whole-Genome 2.7M Array (Affymetrix) showed a 1.9 Mb in areas adjacent to rupture. Intact areas of the tunica media showed deletion in the 15q21.1 region, including the FBN1 gene. Fluorescence no staining of TGF-β, but did show significantly increased staining in situ hybridization (FISH) with painting and bacterial artificial of total Smad3 (p=0.006), Smad4 (p=0.001) and nuclear staining of chromosome probes revealed a much more complex rearrangement pSmad3 (p=0.048), in patients compared to controls, with eight breakpoints as follows: Conclusion: We conclude that TGF-β signal transduction is disturbed 46,XX,t(6;12;15)(6pter→6q13::15q15.1→15q21.1::15q21.1→15q in Marfan patients with a mutation in FBN1, but the underlying 22.1::6q14.1→6q16.3::12q24.22→12qter;12pter→12q24.21::6q2 mechanism is not clear. There is no evidence for involvement of 1→6q22.2::15q22.2→15qter;15pter→15q14::6q22.31→6qter).arr excess free TGF-β. 15q21.1(45,466,733-47,335,104)x1. This is the first report of MFS with a complex chromosome rearrangement with a deletion of the FBN1 P12.133 gene and contiguous genes. (Financial support: FAPESP, Brazil). mLPA analysis of FBN1 and TGFBR2 gene in marfan syndrome and associated disease: results of a large French study P12.135 N. Hanna1,2,3, L. Gouya1,3, B. Grandchamp3, C. Baumann4, C. Francannet5, D. 49 Novel mutations of marfan syndrome in czech population Lacombe6, B. Leheup7, J. Lespinasse8, L. Faivre9, G. Jondeau3, C. Boileau1,2,3; E. Průšová, R. Měch, H. Slavíková, A. Bóday; 1CHU Ambroise Paré, AP-HP, Boulogne, France, 2Inserm U698, CHU Bichat, P&R LAB a.s., Nový Jičín, Czech Republic. Paris, France, 3Centre de référence Marfan, AP-HP, Paris, France, 4CHU Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a heritable autosomal dominant disorder Robert Debré, AP-HP, Paris, France, 5CHU Estaing, Clermont-Ferrand, France, of connective tissue with prevalence of between 1 in 5-10 000. 6CHU Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 7CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre les Nancy, Approximately 25% of MFS patients are sporadic cases due to new France, 8CH de Chambéry, Chambéry, France, 9CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France. mutations. MFS is noteworthy for its clinical variability. Major features Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a prevalent connective tissue disorder of the MFS include cardiovascular disorders (dilatation and dissection with manifestations in the skeletal, ocular, and cardiovascular of ascending aorta), eye disorders - ectopia lentis, defects of skeletal systems. In most cases MFS is caused by heterozygous mutations system - pectus carinatum, pectus axcavatum and/or other diagnostics in the gene encoding the extracellular matrix protein fibrillin-1 (FBN1). criteria as arachnodactyly. Heterozygous mutations in the genes coding for transforming growth MFS is caused by mutations in fibrillin 1 gene (FBN1) resulting in factor beta receptors I (TGFBR1) and II (TGFBR2) have also been defective glycoprotein fibrillin-1. FBN1 is located on chromosome 15 reported in patients with MFS2 and MFS-related disorders. at locus q15-q21.1. Recently, there are showed that three other genes In classical MFS, mutation analyses fail to detect FBN1 involvement in FBN2 (5q23-q31), TGFBR2 (3p22) and TGFBR1 (9q22) influence about 10% of cases, possibly suggesting the limitations of commonly MFS. Mutations in these genes and their phenotype manifestations used standard PCR-based screening approaches. are also in Loyes-Dietz syndrome, Marfan syndrome type II. and In this study, we searched for partial or complete deletions/duplications thoracic aortic aneurysm. of FBN1 and TGFBR2 genes using MLPA technique in a cohort of 206 The molecular analysis includes mlpa (multiplex ligation-dependent patients with suspected MFS or MFS-like phenotypes, negative for probe amplification), separation of PCR products by SSCP (single- point mutations in the FBN1, TGFBR1 and TGFBR2 genes. strand conformation polymorphism) and sequencing. 16 abnormal patterns were found representing 14 deletions and 1 We have performed mutation detection on 395 patients with suspected duplication in FBN1, and 1 deletion in TGFBR2. Real-time quantitative MFS. There were detected 49 novel mutations. PCR confirmed 15 abnormal patterns. In one case, the abnormal pattern was due to an insertion of an interspersed Alu element in the target sequence of the MLPA probe. Taken together, the frequency of FBN1 or TGFBR2 deletions or Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 420 P12.136 P12.138 complex mutation screening of FBN1 and tGFBR2 genes in Novel, recurrent mutations and a complex rearrangement in the patients with marfan and marfan-like syndromes by different mEcP2 gene highly sensitive methods (DcODE Universal mutation Detection T. Todorov1,2, A. Todorova1,2, C. Motoescu3, V. Bojinova4, D. Iancu5, D. Craiu3, system, HRm, sequencing) D. Stoian3, L. Barbarii5, P. Dimova4, V. Mitev1; R. Valiev1, R. Khusainova1,2, E. Khusnutdinova1,2; 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of biochemistry Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, and genetics USC RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. 3Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Alexandru Obregia Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an inherited autosomal dominant 4“St. Naum” Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Genetics connective tissue disorder. Abnormalities appear in skeletal, ocular Department - National Institute of Legal Medicine “Mina Minovici”,, Bucharest, and cardiovascular systems. The main cause of MFS are mutations Romania. in the fibrillin1 gene (FBN1). Recently, the transforming growth factor Rett syndrome (RTT) is caused by mutations in the methyl-CpG- beta receptor 2 gene (TGFBR2) has been shown to be associated binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene. The MECP2 gene has some unique with a second type of this disorder with typically mild or absent ocular characteristics: 1) it is mainly affected by de novo mutations, due involvement (MFS type 2) as well as with classical MFS. Currently we to recurrent independent mutational events in a defined “hot spot” analyzed some regions of FBN1 and TGFBR2 genes in 80 patients regions or positions; 2) complex mutational events along a single allele with MS and marfan-like syndromes from different areas of Russia by are frequently found in this gene; 3) most mutations arise on paternal several methods: SSCP, TTGE, Heteroduplex Analysis on the BioRad X chromosome. The recurrent point mutations involve mainly CpG DCODE Universal Mutation Detection System and HRM-method on dinucleotides, where C>T transitions are explained by methylation- Bio-Rad CFX96 system; and sequencing on MegaBace 1000. We mediated deamination. The complex mutational events might be identified two missense mutations (G1176Y in 28 exon and C2489Y explained by the genomic architecture of the region involving the in 60 exon) which affects cbEGF-like motifs of fibrillin-1 protein in two MECP2 gene. The finding that most spontaneous mutations arise on patients with classical MFS symptoms. We also found 9 polymorphisms paternal X-chromosome supports the higher contribution of replication- both in coding and non coding regions of FBN1 gene, five of them are mediated mechanism of mutagenesis. We present 9 types of mutations not previously described. One novel mutation (670C>T; T223M) has in the MECP2 gene, detected in a group of 22 Bulgarian and 6 Romanian been found in TGFBR2 gene in two unrelated patients with marfan- classical RTT patients. Thirteen patients were clarified on molecular like syndrome who did not fulfill Ghent nosology and who did not have level (46.4%). The point mutations in our sample account for 61.5%. mutations in FBN1 gene. Mutation T223M affects highly conserved One intraexonic deletion was detected in the present study (7.7%). A serine/threonine protein kinases catalytic domain that leads to change novel insertion c.321_322insGAAG, p.(Lys107_Leu108insGluAlafs2*) phospho transferring status of TGFBR2 protein. In addition two novel was found (7.7%). Large deletions and complex mutations account polymorphisms have been found in intronic regions of TGFBR2 gene. for 23%. A novel complex mutational event c.[584_624del41insTT; Mutation screening of FBN1 and TGFBR2 genes will be continuing. 638delTinsCA] was detected in a Romanian patient. Complex gene rearrangements involving a combination of deletions and insertions P12.137 have always been most difficult to detect, to specify precisely and Genetic analysis of marfan syndrome hence to explain in terms of their underlying mutational mechanists. F. Fernández-Rosado1, E. Martínez-Espín1, M. Álvarez-Cubero2, J. García- Pinilla3, E. Rueda3, F. Cabrera-Bueno3, J. Lorente-Acosta4, C. Entrala-Bernal1; P12.139 1LORGEN GP.Bic Granada. PTS, Avda de la Innovación, 18100 Armilla Exome sequencing in siblings with intellectual disability (Granada), Granada, Spain, 2Laboratory of Genetic Identification. Department J. H. M. Schuurs-Hoeijmakers, A. T. Vulto-van Silfhout, L. E. Vissers, J. of Legal Medicine. University of Granada., Granada, Spain, 3Hospital Virgen de de Ligt, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, R. Pfundt, J. A. Veltman, B. W. M. van Bon, H. van la Victoria, Málaga. Campus de Teatinos S/N.29010 Málaga, Spain., Malaga, Bokhoven, H. G. Brunner, B. B. A. de Vries, A. M. P. de Brouwer; Spain, 4GENYO,Pfizer center, Andalusian Goverment.Avda. de la Ilustración Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences 114 and Laboratory of Genetic Identification. Department of Legal Medicine. and Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disorders, Radboud University University of Granada., Granada, Spain. Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. The Marfan syndrome is a genetic disorder of the connective tissue The extensive clinical and genetic heterogeneity of Intellectual Disability which has many different clinical features most of them affecting the (ID) poses a major challenge for the identification of the underlying skeleton, skin, and joints. The varieties are known as type I (dominant molecular causes both in research and diagnostic laboratories. Recent autosomic disease related to FBN1 gene) and type II associated to and fast technical developments allow to sequence the complete gene TGFBR2. Whereas FBN1 gene codify for a protein known as coding sequence of a human genome of one individual at once (exome fibrillin-1 which is needed for the formation of elastic fibers of connective sequencing). This has revolutionized clinical genetic research, offering tissue. However, TGFBR2 gene codify for the receptor 2 of a growth new opportunities to identify the genetic cause in ID patients and is factor. The aim of this poster is to present the analysis done in these expected to become implemented soon in the clinical practice as a both genes in eight patients from an Andalusian population (South diagnostic tool. of Spain), diagnosed of Marfan syndrome. The extraction of DNA We have collected families with at least two individuals with (non)- was done by an organic procedure with phenol/chlorophorm and the syndromic ID that are suggestive for an autosomal recessive inheritance amplification method was using VariantSEQr® (Applied Biosystems). pattern. In these families, we perform exome sequencing on genomic The sequencing process was done in adjacent codifying and intronic DNA of one individual of each family. Stringent filtering with an in-house regions of both genes. developed pipeline allows fast identification of potential homozygous As a result, we could observe four Nonsense mutations in four to eight and compound heterozygous mutations. In addition, homozygosity patients. Two of them (p.R2220X and p.R1125X), have been previously mapping with a 250K SNP genotyping array has been performed to described in international data bases (HGMD, Uniprot) in Marfan identify overlapping homozygous genomic regions in siblings because syndrome type I. However, the others (p.E1133X and p.Q1419X) we expect a significant contribution of pathogenetic homozygous have never been cited in any data base. It has also described five mutations. So far, exome sequencing has been performed for 15 Missense mutations in four to eight patients and similar results from families and potential mutations are being validated. Next, we aim to the above described has been noted. Two of them are cited in data identify additional mutations in our candidate ID genes in a cohort of base (p.R122C and p.G343R) for causing Marfan syndrome type I, patients with a comparable phenotype to confirm involvement of the whereas the others (p.C830G, p.S1345I and p.P1258S) are the first respective gene in ID. time to be notice in this syndrome. This study will contribute to identification of genes that cause recessive ID and will help to implement exome sequencing for autosomal recessive ID into the diagnostic setting.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 421 P12.140** missense mutation (E397K) in this gene segregated in 3 families A first systematic evaluation of Intellectual Disability gene from the same village with likely shared inheritance. Both missense function in neuronal development mutations affect amino acid residues that are conserved throughout M. A. W. Oortveld1, E. van Engelen1, T. Ellenkamp1, A. Fernandes2, J. M. the animal kingdom and potentially disrupt the oligosaccharide binding Kramer1, S. Keerthikumar3, D. Haddad2, B. Nijhof1, A. Castells Nobau1, H. van properties at the enzyme’s catalytic domain. MAN1B1 encodes the Bokhoven1, C. Zweier4, M. A. Huynen3, P. Verstreken2, A. Schenck1; mannosyl oligosaccharide alpha 1,2-mannosidase, which belongs to 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, the glycosyl hydrolase family 47 (GH47). GH47 proteins are believed Donders institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University to be key enzymes in the maturation of N-glycans in the secretory Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular pathway and seem to be involved in the timing and disposal of and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke misfolded glycoproteins through the endoplasmic reticulum-associated Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular degradation (ERAD) pathway. Unlike patients suffering from the Informatics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, lysosomal storage disease, mannosidosis (caused by mutations Netherlands, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University in lysosomal α-mannosidase enzyme MAN2B1, and lysosomal Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. β-mannosidase enzyme MANBA) who present with a variety of More than 440 genes have been implicated in Intellectual disability syndromic features, the patients from all 5 families identified with (ID) to date. They provide an exciting molecular window into the MAN1B1 suffer from purely non-syndromic ID. Thus we presume that neurobiology of cognition and brain development. However, little is here a different pathological mechanism, e.g. disruption of the ERAD known about the role of most ID genes in the nervous system. To pathway, is involved. change dimensions of research in this field, we use Drosophila to systematically uncover ID gene function. P12.142 In order to reveal ID gene function in flies, large scale RNAi screens 1qter microdeletion syndrome: molecular and clinical analysis are performed in which relevant aspects of neuronal architecture, of 8 patients and characterization of a critical region for mental functioning and behavior are quantitatively assessed. Because genes retardation that cause similar phenotypes likely operate together, our functional A. Paubel1,2,3, C. Dubourg4, C. Le Caignec5, S. Blesson1, M. Moizard1, M. data are further subjected to bioinformatics analysis to predict groups Delrue6, D. Cailley6, B. de Vries7, S. Lynch8, A. Toutain1,2,3; of ID genes that act in the same pathways. We aim to dissect these 1Service de Génétique - CHRU, TOURS, France, 2Université François Rabelais pathways and identify novel molecular players and interactions. - Faculté de Médecine, Tours, France, 3INSERM U930-team2, Tours, France, In my PhD project, I have systematically dissected the role of all fly 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Rennes, France, 5Service de orthologues of human ID genes in neuronal function and development. Génétique Médicale- CHU, Nantes, France, 6Service de Génétique Médicale- My RNAi screen was focused on Drosophila photoreceptor neurons, CHU, Bordeaux, France, 7Department of Clinical and Molecular Genetics, for which I have established a phototaxis assay. This assay is used as Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 8Northern Genetics Service, a simple read out to measure photoreceptor functionality. Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. I have recently completed the primary RNAi screen, which yielded The 1qter microdeletion syndrome with microscopically visible deletion many interesting results. Ablation of ID genes resulted in morphological of the distal part of the long arm of chromosome 1 (1q42, 1q43 and phenotypes in 40% of all cases and 9% gave functional/phototaxis 1q44) has a well known phenotype which was characterized by Johnson phenotypes. Strikingly, many of these first hits appear to be related to et al. in 1985. It includes mental retardation (MR), severe progressive microtubules, actin cytoskeleton, mitochondria or membrane/vesicle microcephaly, growth retardation, seizures, variable cerebral, cardiac, trafficking. urogenital, gastro-oesophageal abnormalities and dysmorphic facial I will present these findings and my follow up approach using secondary features (round face, epicanthal folds, upslanting palpebral fissures, assays such as histology and electrophysiology. short broad nose, smooth philtrum, downturned corners of the mouth and thin vermilion border of the lips, microretrognathia, palatal defects P12.141 and low set ears). Identification of MAN1B1 as a gene with elevated mutation Several studies have focussed on cerebral anomalies and have frequency in non-syndromic autosomal recessive intellectual defined critical regions for MR, microcephaly and corpus callosum disability anomalies, however differing in size and location. Recently, in a series M. Rafiq1, A. Kuss2,3, L. Puettmann2, A. Noor1, H. Hu2, M. Garshasbi2, K. of 4 patients, Caliebe et al., 2010 pointed out the HRNPU gene (1q44) Moremen4, G. Ishak5, R. Weksberg6, M. Ayub7,8, R. Ullmann2, A. Tzschach2, K. as potentially involved in corpus callosum anomalies. Kahrizi9, J. Vincent1,10, H. Ropers2, M. Ansar11, H. Najmabadi9; We report the characterization of the deletion in 8 patients with pure 1Molecular Neuropsychiatry & Development Lab, Neurogenetics Section, 1qter microdeletion syndrome by array-CGH (44K Agilent chip) and Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Max Planck analysis of their phenotype. By pooling clinical and molecular data of Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3*Current address: Institute our 8 patients with those of 65 patients from the literature, we were for Human Genetics, Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional able to define in this largest series of 1qter microdeletion patients, a Genomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt University, Greifswald, Germany, 43 Complex 450kb critical region for MR. Carbohydrate Research Center, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, United This region includes 3 genes FAM36A, HNRPU et EFCAB2 which are States, 5Division of Genetics and Developmental Medicine, University of candidates for brain development. Washington, Seattle; Children’s Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Program for genetic and Genomic Biology, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, P12.143 Canada, 7St. Luke’s Hospital, Middlesborough, United Kingdom, 8Lahore Non-syndromic XLmR due to a novel frameshift mutation in Institute of Research and Development, Lahore, Pakistan, 9Genetics Research MED12 Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, G. Lesca1,2, D. Boggio1, M. Moizard3,4, W. Chen5, H. Hu5, S. Haas5, H. Ropers5, Islamic Republic of Iran, 10Dept. of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, V. Kalscheuer5, G. Bussy6, P. Edery1,2, M. Reynaud3,4, J. Lespinasse7; ON, Canada, 11Department of Biochemistry, Quaid-I-Azam University, 1Service de Génétique, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Islamabad, Pakistan. Lyon, France, 2INSERM U1028 and CNRS UMR5292, Lyon Neuroscience We have recently identified an overlapping homozygosity-by-descent Research Center, TIGER team, University Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 3INSERM, locus on chromosome 9q34.3 (MRT15) by genome-wide genotyping U930, Tours, France, 4Service de Génétique, CHU de Tours, Tours, France, in 4 consanguineous families with non-syndromic autosomal recessive 5Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 6Service de ID (NS-ARID) from Pakistan, and 1 from Iran. Enrichment of the Neuropédiatrie, Hopital Femme Mère Enfant, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, exonic regions within the respective linkage interval followed by next France, 7Laboratoire de Génétique Chromosomique, Hôpital de Chambery, generation sequencing revealed a missense mutation (R334C) in the Chambéry, France. MAN1B1 gene, segregating with ID in the Iranian family. Mutation X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) is a common disease arising from screening in the Pakistani families revealed a homozygous nonsense many mutations along the X chromosome. They have been divided mutation (W473X) affecting MAN1B1 in one family, and an additional into syndromic and non-syndromic according to the association of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 422 additional features. Identification of genes causing non syndromic P12.145** XLMR has long been challenging but large-scale systematic Pitfalls in the diagnosis of X-linked mental retardation: next resequencing has been shown to be promising for the discovery of generation sequencing reiterates the role of ATRX in both rare, disease causing sequence variants. syndromal and non-syndromal XLmR We report on a family including 10 affected males with severe MR R. Michaelson-Cohen1, T. Walsh2, M. Lee2, F. Abidi3, C. Schwartz3, M. King2, and several females with variable cognitive impairment consistent with E. Levy-Lahad1; X-linked recessive inheritance. Male patients all had severe mental 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, retardation and behavior problems. Dysmorphic features included 2Departments of Medicine and Genome Sciences, University of Washington, long narrow face, malar hypoplasia, large forehead, full nasal root, Seattle, WA, United States, 3JC Self Research Institute, Greenwood Genetics thin nose, small philtrum. Head circumference was normal. They had Center, Greenwood, SC, United States. no marfanoid habitus or visceral malformations. Brain MRI, in two We report the 15 year evolution of genetic analysis in a non- patients, showed isolated moderate cerebral atrophy. Most affected consanguineous Ashkenazi-Jewish family. Three male sibs were females were moderately mentally affected but one of them had affected with mild-moderate MR, variable dysmorphism, and one severe MR with autistic features. also with microcytic-anemia partially responsive to iron replacement. The initial linkage study revealed a localization region from Xp11.21 Karyotypes, FraX testing were normal. Marker analysis demonstrated (AlaS2) to Xq22.3 (COL4A5) in 6 of 7 affected males. A novel, linkage to 47Mb X-pericentromeric region (DXS990-DXS1003; unreported frameshift mutation was identified in the MED12 gene LOD score 1.8), two female sibs were predicted carriers, one bore by exome sequencing performed within the EuroMRX consortium. an affected son. X-inactivation didn’t reveal skewing in obligate/ The mutation segregated with disease in all affected males. MED12 predicted carriers. Sequencing of RSK2, ACSL4, ARX, FTSJ1, GDT1, encodes a subunit of the mediator complex, which serves as an IL1RAL1, JARID1C, OPHN1, PQBP1, ZNF41 and ATRX (helicase& interface between transcription factors and RNA polymerase II. zinc-finger domains), and array-CGH were normal. An Xq23 1.5Mb Two recurrent missense mutations in MED12 have been previously duplication was identified in affected and unaffected males, therefore reported in Lujan-Fryns syndrome and in FG syndrome type 1 (Opitz- regarded unrelated to MR. One affected male was included in large- Kaveggia). The present data extends the phenotypic spectrum scale Sanger-sequencing X-exon study (718 genes, Tarpey, Nature associated with MED12 mutations. Genetics 2009); no mutation identified. We performed unbiased capture& sequencing of all X-exons (Agilent P12.144 SureSelect X-Exome kit, Illumina GAIIx platform), and identified a search for mutations and pathogenic haplotypes in hemizygous mutation in 5’ region of ATRX: c.109C>T, p.R37X. This mutation has genomic regions of patients with intellectual disability (iD) been reported by Guerrini (Neurology, 2000) in a family with mild E. Schroeck1, A. Rump1, J. Hof1, N. Tyshchenko1, K. Cremer2, D. Wieczorek2, MR and epilepsy, and subsequently identified in original Chudley- J. Hoyer3, A. Reis3, S. Berkel4, U. Moog4, M. Hempel5, S. Tinschert1, K. Lowry family (Abidi, European Journal Human Genetics, 2005). The Hackmann1; mild phenotype of this nonsense mutation is related to downstream 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Institut alternative-translation initiation. In contrast to other cases, this family für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, didn’t have skewed X-inactivation or epilepsy. In retrospect, it became 3Humangenetisches Institut, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, clear that Tarpey’s study did not include ATRX 5’ exons. We have 4Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, subsequently identified two other families with ATRX-R37X, and Germany, 5Institut für Humangenetik, TU München, München, Germany. conclude that this could be an overlooked cause of mild XLMR, which Background: Molecular Karyotyping in intellectually disabled children may not be covered in XLMR testing-panels. has revealed family-specific deletions which do not represent known CNVs. Such deletions could either be harmless familial variants or P12.146 recessive mutations. If the latter is true, the affected child should Identification of novel X-Linked Mental Retardation mutations in carry an additional mutation on the homologous chromosome. Since israeli population autosomal recessive inheritance is supposed to account for nearly D. Oz-Levi1, E. Ben-Asher1, T. Olender1, E. K. Ruzzo2, K. Pelak2, H. Resnik- a quarter of all individuals with non-syndromic MR, the likelihood of Wolve3, B. Ben-Zeev3, D. Goldstein2, E. Pras3, D. Lancet1; finding a second mutation in children with an inherited deletion is 1The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 2Duke University, Durham, substantial. NC, United States, 3Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel. Experimental approach: Sanger-sequencing of coding exons Mental retardation affects 1%-3% of the general population and of selected genes. Criteria for gene selection: complete or partial is characterized by malfunctioning of the central nervous system, deletion of one allele plus expression in brain. Selected genes: SYT11, resulting in significant intellectual disability. Genetic etiologies are NRXN1, ARPP-21, HIST1H2AG, HIST1H2AH, HIST1H2BJ, ANLN, found in about half of the cases and include chromosomal or structural EXOC4, LINGO2, VCL, ALDOA, DOC2A, ASPHD1, KCTD13, RAB37, abnormalities, genomic disorders and single gene diseases. A and SULT4A1. significant portion of known mental retardation disease-causing genes Results: Besides several SNPs in various candidate genes we resides on human chromosome X, whereby the affliction is more have identified three unclassified variants in LINGO2 (p.Asp135Asp, prevalent in males. Despite extensive investigations, the molecular p.Arg369Gln, p.Asn522Tyr) in three unrelated children with ID. Since basis for many X linked mental retardation (XLMR) cases has not been all of these children have a partial LINGO2-deletion as well, the reveled by classical genetic approaches, leaving numerous families observed variants may represent recessive mutations. without prenatal diagnosis. Next-Generation-Sequencing techniques Future work: Since LINGO1 was shown to be critical for CNS open new avenues in the elucidation of such Mendelian disorders. We myelination in mice, the closely related LINGO2 may also be critical have recruited 6 Israeli families of different ethnic origins, with a total of for mammalian brain development. As a first step to elucidate a clinical 21 affected males, showing both syndromic and non-syndromic XLMR. relevance of our LINGO2 variations, we are going to quantify LINGO2 Among syndromic families, XLMR is accompanied with neurological expression on cDNA level in our ID-patients with a LINGO2 deletion, as anomalies causing a neurodegenerative disease and early death. well as in the corresponding healthy family members. Furthermore, we To uncover the disease causing mutations, we design a novel X will determine the allele frequency of the LINGO2 variants mentioned chromosome ‘super-exome’ capture kit, which includes all coding and above by genotyping 500 healthy individuals at these loci. non-coding exons, with extended splice junctions, RNA genes, as well as regulatory and highly conserved genomic regions. In parallel, we are developing next-generation-sequencing bioinformatics tools suitable for super-exome analyses. Deciphering the disease-causing mutations will shed new light on the mechanisms of mental retardation with implications to other neuronal deficits, and would provide such families with accurate genetic testing and prenatal diagnosis.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 423 P12.147 within the DMD-gene is relatively well described and the phenotype Deletion or disruption of CNKSR2, a scaffold protein in the RAs/ mostly relates to changes in muscle biopsy. mAPK-pathway, causes X-linked mental retardation As to dup Xp22.11 there has been other reports of patients with G. Houge, R. Hovland; duplications in the same area, but not of the same size, although Center for medical genetics and molecular medicine, Bergen, Norway. there is a strong link to X-linked MR. The extent of MR, is currently too In our diagnostic laboratory aberrations of CNKSR2 were discovered early to evaluate due to the boys young age, but the contribution of in two boys with developmental delay: The first was a 5-years old boy dupXp22.11 will be difficult to assess. with microcephaly and epilepsy. He had a 234 kb deletion removing In this case we found 3 different mutations that all could contribute to 17 of 21 CNKSR2 exons. The deletion was inherited from his healthy explain the phenotype of this patient. The parents are intending to use mother. Further family follow-up is ongoing. The second patient is this prenatally in the next pregnancy. We are currently awaiting CVS. a 12-years old boy with a de novo complex rearrangement in the Xp22.1 subdomain with a 517 kb duplications/triplications affecting P12.150 the first part of CNKSR2 followed by a 695 kb duplication of the last Retrospective evaluation and prospective routine use of PcR- part of CNKSR2 and the following four genes (SMPX, MBTPS2, SMS based protocols for FMR1 screening and sizing in a clinical and PHEX). It is likely that the CNKSR2 gene is disrupted by the setting rearrangement. This boy was born with septooptic dysplasia and no D. Heine-Suñer1, B. Sierra1, C. Vidal2, J. Rosell1, N. Marlowe3; pituitary gland. He was probably moderately mentally retarded until 1Genetica-Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, age 6, when idiopathic malignant hyperthermia with rhabdomyolysis 2Sequenciació-Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, caused severe brain damage. 3Celera Corporation, Alameda, CA, United States. Our findings suggest that mutations in CNKSR2 could be novel cause Fragile X is the most common cause of intellectual disability and is of X-linked mental retardation, an assumption supported by high inherited via a dynamic expansion of a trinucleotide (CGG) repeat in expression in the brain and a role in RAS/MAPK-dependent signal FMR1. Historically, PCR assays have not adequately resolved large transduction. premutations, full mutations, male mosaics, and females with apparent homozygosity. Southern analysis can detect the full mutation, large P12.148 premutations and evaluate methylation but it does not always detect X-exome sequencing of Finnish families with X-linked small premutations. We have performed an evaluation of two protocols intellectual disability that utilize two different sets of FMR1 PCR primers to establish F. Doagu1, M. Somer2, M. Peippo2, S. Haas3, H. Hu3, I. Järvelä1, V. Kalscheuer3; preliminary evidence of reliability, robustness, sensitivity, specificity and 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, suitability for routine testing. The study was divided into a retrospective 2Department of Medical Genetics, Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, part (enriched with expanded allele types) and a prospective (routine, Finland, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. unselected) part. We studied retrospectively DNAs of 200 patients X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) is present in 2-3% of the that included a whole range of FMR1 expansion types (normal, grey population. To date, over 1000 human disorders are known that cause zone, premutation, full mutation and mosaic samples of both genders). intellectual disability (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Omim/). In half of All samples had been previously characterised by in-house PCR and the cases with severe and in 70 - 80 % of cases with mild ID the cause Southern blot. In addition, we studied 330 patients prospectively. is unknown. Genetic factors are estimated to cause about 50 % of Results obtained for prospective patients were verified with in-house severe ID. To date, over 90 genes have been identified to underlie PCR and/or Southern blotting. The results obtained were comparable. XLID (http://xlmr.interfree.it/home.htm). We were able to detect retrospectively all known expansions and Here we have applied exome sequencing of the X-chromosome to prospectively 25 expanded alleles and reliably determine if female identify causative genes in four Finnish families with affected males samples were homozygous, heterozygous (resolution of 1 repeat) or in different generations, suggesting an X-chromosomal mode of carriers of an expanded allele. We propose a workflow for the use of a inheritance. combination of both sets of primers in a clinical setting and conclude In all male patients of the analyzed families a total of 17 variants were that they can reliably detect all expanded alleles without the use of predicted. Among them were novel mutations in the established XLID Southern blotting in female and male samples. genes DLG3, CULB4 and GRIA3. In addition, a splice site mutation in a novel candidate XLID gene was found. P12.151 In the preliminary analysis the mutation found in the novel XLID Fragile X syndrome molecular diagnosis - 20-years experience candidate gene is perfectly co-segregating with the disease in the from a single laboratory. family in which it was found. Further studies are going on to establish S. O. Rzońca, M. Gos, M. Milewski, A. Szpecht- Potocka, M. Nawara, D. the causative nature of the novel gene in XLID. Co-segregation Szopa, D. Sielska, J. Czekajska, J. Bal; analysis of the mutations in the established XLID genes is in progress. Medical Genetics Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of inherited P12.149 X-linked mental retardation. More than 99% of FXS cases are caused case story: a boy with fragile X and two microduplications on by CGG triplet expansion (>200 repeats) in 5’ untranslated region of chromosome Xp. the FMR1 gene that leads to low expression or absence of the FMRP B. S. Kristiansen1, S. T. Moeller1, J. Graakjaer1, M. Rokkjaer2, A. Bojesen1; protein. 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark, Our laboratory is a reference one for FXS diagnosis. Together, 4983 2Department of Paediatrics, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Kolding, Denmark. individuals with FXS clinical suspicion and their families were tested We describe a 2 year old boy with delayed motor and cognitive with PCR screening method and Southern Blot when necessary. development, and suspicion of progressive muscle weakness. The Till 2011, 301 families with confirmed at least one FXS case were boy had healthy unrelated parents, and no family history of mental registered. Two hundred eighty five probands were diagnosed with retardation or muscle disease. FMR1 mutation. The molecular analysis performed in their families The boy was tested and found positive for Fragile X with both PCR revealed the presence of mutation in 161 relatives (82 males, 79 and Southern blotting. He had 3 different CGG-repeats on 400, 500 females) and premutation in 223 relatives (16 males and 207 females, and 900 repeats. The fragile site was inherited from the mother, who among them 149 mothers). had a premutation. Additionally two small duplications were found by In 4682 cases (3818 males, 864 females) dynamic mutation in the array-CGH analysis. Both duplications were located on chromosome X FMR1 gene was excluded. The PCR screening method, implemented (Xp22.11 and Xp21.2). MLPA-analysis confirmed both duplications. It in 2001, was sufficient for FXS exclusion in 3003 (71.5%) males and was found that both duplications were maternally inherited. 488 (32.2%) females. The implementation of GeneScan method, The duplication on Xp21.2 involves at least exon 53-67 of the DMD allowed for the reduction of the number of Southern Blot analyses gene, which explains the muscular symptoms. A muscle biopsy showed performed for uninformative cases, from 67.8% to 23.0% (p< 0,05) of muscle degeneration with Becker like immune reaction. Duplication the total female individuals.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 424 Although new methods are developed for FXS diagnosis, PCR subjects, and performed linkage analysis using the Linkage-24 DNA screening with Gene Scan method followed by Southern blot analysis Analysis BeadChip (Illumina) containing 6000 Single Nucleotide still seems to be the best protocol for this disease. Selected cases with Polymorphisms. Data were analyzed with Merlin. We identified a excluded FMR1 mutation undergo further studies of X-linked mental candidate region with a maximum LOD-score of 2.4 on chromosome retardation in our laboratory. 10q, measuring 40 MB and containing a total of 492 genes. We will apply whole exome sequencing to identify the responsible gene. P12.152 clinical variability in fragile X syndrome P12.154*** M. Macovei, M. Panzaru, R. Popescu, L. Caba, L. Butnariu, E. Braha, R. SMOC1 is essential for ocular and limb development in humans Cojocariu, C. Rusu; and mice “Gr.T.Popa” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania. N. Matsumoto1, A. Megarbane2, O. Cogulu3, T. Tohma4, I. Okada1, H. Fragile X syndrome is the most frequent cause of inherited mental Hamanoue1, H. Saitsu1; retardation and the second most common cause of genetically 1Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan, associated mental deficiency after trisomy 21. 2Medical Genetics Unit, St. Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 3Department of The majority of fragile X syndrome patients present a loss of function Pediatrics, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Bornova-Izmir, Turkey, 4Division mutation in the FMR1 gene caused by the expansion (>200 repeats) of Pediatrics, Okinawa Prefectural Nanbu Medical Center & Children’s Medical of a single trinucleotide sequence (CGG) located in the FMR1 gene Center, Okinawa, Japan. at Xq27.3. Microphthalmia with limb anomalies (MLA) is a rare autosomal Clinical features in males with fragile X syndrome are represented by recessive disorder, presenting with anophthalmia/microphthalmia developmental delay, intellectual disability, facial dismorphy (long face, and hand/foot malformation. We mapped the MLA locus to 14q24 large ears, prominent jaw) and macro-orchidism. and successfully identified three homozygous (a nonsense and two The cytogenetic test consists in identifying a “fragile site” on splice site) mutations in the SPARC (secreted protein acidic and rich chromosome X from cells cultured in a folate deficient medium. The in cysteine) related modular calcium binding 1 (SMOC1) gene in three present standard diagnostic test involves molecular genetic techniques families. Smoc1 is expressed in the developing optic stalk, ventral (Southern blot and PCR). optic cup and limbs of mouse embryos. Smoc1 null mice recapitulated For illustrating the clinical variability in fragile X syndrome, we will MLA phenotypes, including aplasia/hypoplasia of optic nerves, present cases from 2 separate families. hypoplastic fibula/bowed tibia and syndactyly in limbs. A thinned and The first case, R.D. (4 years old), male, presents cleft palate associated irregular ganglion cell layer and atrophy of the anteroventral part of with severe mental retardation, high forehead, elastic decollated ears, the retina were also observed. Soft tissue syndactyly, resulting from mild retrognathism, accentuated plantar creases. The diagnosis was inhibited apoptosis, was related to disturbed expression of genes made using PCR; the karyotype did not identify any “fragile site”. involved in BMP signaling in the interdigital mesenchyme. Our findings The second case is B.D. (27 years old), male, with severe mental indicate that SMOC1/Smoc1 protein is essential for ocular and limb retardation, asymmetric elongated face, high and narrow palate, development in both humans and mice. (Contributing doctors and prognathism, big ears, macroorchidism, bilateral thumb hypoplasia, researchers are really appreciated: Koji Terada, Eliane Chouery, Joelle plantar crease. The cytogenetic test identified a 46, XY, fraXq27 Abou-Ghoch, Nadine Jalkh, Ferda Ozkinay, Kyoji Horie, Junji Takeda, karyotype. Tatsuya Furuichi, Shiro Ikegawa, Kiyomi Nishiyama, Satoko Miyatake, The fragile X syndrome is phenotypically heterogeneous. This Akira Nishimura, Takeshi Mizuguchi, Norio Niikawa, Fumiki Hirahara, has important implications for clinical and differential diagnosis Tadashi Kaname, Koh-ichiro Yoshiura, Yoshinori Tsurusaki, Hiroshi emphasizing also the necessity of performing molecular analysis of Doi, Noriko Miyake, and Takahisa Furukawa.) the FMR1 gene in mentally retarded patients. P12.155 P12.153 common molecular mechanism in homocystinuria: misfolding A new locus for autosomal dominant microcephaly associated of cystathionine beta-synthase mutants and effect of with lymphedema chaperones L. Van Laer1, G. Van Camp1, E. Fransen1,2, H. Desimpel3, B. P. Leroy4, J. G. V. Kožich, J. Sokolová, P. Melenovská, J. Kopecká, A. Hnízda, J. Krijt; Leroy5, B. Loeys1; Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, Charles University- First Faculty of 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp and University Hospital Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2StatUA Center for Statistics, University of Misfolding due to loss-of-function mutations is a common pathogenic Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Revalidation Center ‘t Veld, Aartrijke, Belgium, mechanism in many genetic diseases including inborn errors of 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Ghent and University Hospital metabolism. To explore the role of misfolding in cystathionine beta- of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 5Department of Pediatrics, University of Ghent and synthase (CBS) deficiency we studied a series of 27 disease-causing University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. mutations located in different domains of the CBS molecule and Microcephaly can occur as an isolated, mostly recessive abnormality representing ~70% of patient-derived mutant alleles. Expression in or in association with ocular or systemic findings. Microcephaly prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells showed a propensity of mutants to associated with lymphedema is a rare syndromic variant (MIM 152950) misfold/misassemble as evidenced by increased proportion of water- with only few families reported. In some of the latter, ophtalmological insoluble to water-soluble CBS antigen and decreased formation of findings, including microphthalmia, chorioretinopathy and cataract correctly assembled tetramers accompanied by impaired catalytic have been described. Although autosomal recessive inheritance has activity (median activities of CBS mutants in E.coli and CHO-K1 been suggested in some families, the prevailing hypothesis is that the cells were 3% and 18% of the wild type CBS, respectively; median microcephaly/lymphedema/chorioretinopathy syndrome is a single amounts of tetramers in these expression systems were 12% and autosomal dominant entity with variable clinical expression. 35%, respectively). Proteolytic analysis of a subset of mutants with Here we ascertained a four-generation family with autosomal normal activity and tetramer assembly using thermolysin revealed dominant microcephaly associated with lymphedema. Lymphedema distinct conformational alterations such as increased unfolding or- in of hands and feet was apparent at birth but reduced or disappeared contrast- increased global stability with rigidification. Co-expressional spontaneously during childhood in some affected individuals. No addition of osmolytes glycerol and betaine, and of the heme precursor distinctive facial dysmorphism was noticed. The affected subjects delta-aminolevulinate to E.coli cultures increased activity and presented with mild intellectual disability or low normal intelligence. formation of tetramers for about one half of mutants; however, addition No ophtalmological abnormalities were detected in any of the affected of phenylbutyrate as a stimulator of heat shock protein expression did individuals. The proband had a normal male karyotype 46, XY and no not correct misfolding of the series of mutants in CHO-K1 cultures copy number variants were detected by array comparative genomic to a significant extent. These studies indicate that about one half of hybridization analysis. all known patient CBS alleles produce enzymes prone to misfolding/ We collected DNA from eleven family members, including five affected misassembly and that correction of misfolding by chaperones may Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 425 become an important future therapeutic target . P12.158*** Supported by the Charles University Research Project Identification Of Novel Genes For Autosomal Recessive MSM0021620806. intellectual Disability (ARiD) in consanguineous Families Z. Iqbal1, A. de Brouwer1,2, K. Neveling1, L. Vissers1, C. Gilissen1, N. P12.156 Wieskamp1, M. Kwint1, S. Gijsen1, J. Veltman1, S. Riazuddin3,4, H. van mitochondrial gene mutation screening and related whit hearing Bokhoven1,2; loss in Hormozgan province in iran 1Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, a. asgari1, M. Montazero Zohori2, E. Farrokhi1, M. Abolhasani1, M. Akbari3, F. Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Azadegan Dehkordi1, M. Chaleshtori Hashmzadeh1; 2Department of Cognitive Neurosciences, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 1cellular and molecular research center of shahrekord medical university of and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, sciences, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics, school of 3National Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Medical Sciences-Tarbiat Modares university, Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic Lahore, Pakistan, 4Allama Iqbal Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan. of Iran, 3school of Medical Sciences-Tarbiat Modares university, Iran., Tehran, Identification of the causative genes of autosomal recessive intellectual Islamic Republic of Iran. disability (ARID) has been challenging due to the extreme heterogeneity Background and aim: Hearing loss is the most frequent sensory disorder of the condition. Homozygosity mapping in consanguineous families occurs in 1/1000 newborns. About 50% of hearin loss cases are due has been proven to be very helpful in these type of disorders. Here, to genetic causes. Mutation in MTRNR1(A1555G), MTTL1(A3243G) we have ascertained 60 ARID families from the Pakistani population and MTTS1(A7445G) are known to be one of the important cause of in which there is a high degree of consanguineous marriages (>70%). nonsyndromic Sensorineural hearing loos in some populations. Homozygosity mapping data revealed one or more homozygous this study aims to demonstrate the frequency of three mitochondrial regions per family ranging in size from 1-51Mb. No pathogenic copy mutations including A1555G, A7445G and A3243G in deaf subjects in number variations (CNVs) were found. On the basis of homozygosity Hormozgan province in south of Iran. mapping, we selected seven families with novel ARID loci for targeted Method: we investigated the presence of three mitochondrial massive parallel sequencing (MPS) of the specific homozygous mutations including A1555G, A3243G and A7445G in a cohort of regions, and six families for exome sequencing. Our MPS data revealed 110 nonsyndromic Sensorineural hearing loos subjects. DNA was a number of potential mutations that are validated at the moment. In extracted using standard phenol -chloroform method. The screening one family, PKMR07, this strategy has proven to be successful as we of gene mutations was performed by PCR-RFLP procedure. Finally, have identified an intragenic homozygous deletion of five exons (11- the possible mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing. 15) of the TPO gene. Mutations of TPO are frequent and irreversible Results: None of the 110 subjects were found to carry A1555G, cause of ID (if not treated in the early postnatal life), mostly in the A3243G and A7445G mutations. How ever PCR-RFLP of the MTTL1 developing countries as well as in the entire world. This result confirms gene destroyed a restriction site due to G3316A substitution in a deaf that MPS is a powerful method to uncover submicroscopic structural subject. variations that have escaped detection by microarray analysis. Conclusion: We conclude that the association of A1555G, A3243G and A7445G mutations with hearing loss is very low in Hormozgan ‘s deaf P12.159 subjects. characterization of deletions in multiple Osteochondromas with arraycGH P12.157 I. Jennes1, D. de Jong2, P. C. W. Hogendoorn3, K. Szuhai2, W. Wuyts1; molecular diagnostic - the new face of craniofacial disorders 1Department of Medical Genetics, University and University Hospital of diagnosis Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden E. Severin1, C. Dragomir2, A. Stan2, L. Preda1, L. Savu2; University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Pathology, 1Carol Davila Univ. Med. Pharm, Bucharest, Romania, 2Genetic Lab, Bucharest, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands. Romania. Hereditary multiple osteochondromas (MO) is an autosomal dominant The great majority of dental health professionals recognized the skeletal disorder characterized by the formation of benign cartilage- importance and potential of genetic and genomic evaluations in capped bone tumours arising from the growth plate area of children’s the future, but little has been done to incorporate this knowledge long tubular bones. MO is genetically heterogeneous and is associated extensively in clinical practice. More then that, quite a few physicians with mutations in the tumorsuppressor genes EXT1 and EXT2. Gross suggested that dental disorders are common but not lethal for patients. EXT1/EXT2-deletions are responsible for up to 8% of cases. We Thus, the subject is not of broad interest to genetic medicine research characterized the breakpoints of such deletions in 10 unrelated MO- and is slow-moving field of medical genetics. patients using an MO-specific tiling-path array, allel-specific PCR- Applications of molecular diagnostics in craniofacial disorders will amplification and sequencing analysis. be described. We here report on 2 cases study: cherubism and In 3 families (EXT1 deletion exon 2-3 (2), EXT2 deletion exon 8), both cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD). deletions breakpoints were identified in homologous sequences of Objectives: The use of DNA samples and PCR assay to test for specific respectively 36bp and 32 bp, located within larger homology regions state of disease. The use of molecular genetic testing for diagnostic (~300 bp) which are known Alu-sequence elements. The EXT2 confirmation when diagnosis of cherubism / CCD is suspected based exon 8-deletion breakpoints were found to be recurrent in 2 families. on clinical and radiological criteria. Both deletions were most likely caused by non-allelic homologous methods: PCR amplification and direct sequencing of the SH3BP2 recombination (NAHR). gene / RUNX2 gene. In the 7 remaining families (EXT1 deletion exon 2-11 (2), exon 6-7, Results: Case 1 - of 5 family members, abnormal results were exon 8, exon 11, EXT2 deletion exon 2, exon 8), breakpoints were obtained for the patient and her mother. A c.1244G > A mutation located within short homologous sequences (2-5bp). Consequently, was identified in exon 9 of the SH3BP2 gene. Case 2 - of 4 family these deletions were assumed to be caused by non-homologous end- members, abnormal results were obtained only for the patient. The joining (NHEJ), in some cases facilitated by the presence of the Alu- mutation R225W was identified. A deletion of 7 Glutamines in exon sequence elements in the vicinity of one or both breakpoints. 2 was also identified.conclusions: Both identified mutations are We conclude that gross MO-causing deletions are caused by different disorder-causing mutations and have a variable expression. We mutation mechanisms and that the majority is not recurrent. This study suggest genetic counseling / molecular genetic testing for all patients emphasizes once more the high genetic variability characterizing MO. with such clinical findings, but especially for those with non-familial or sporadic forms.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 426 P12.160 characterized by delayed relaxation of skeletal muscle after voluntary qPcR-HRm applied to MUTYH screening : identification of the contraction, transitory weakness, skeletal muscle hypertrophy. first large rearrangement in a attenuated familial adenomatous Twenty one CLCN1 gene mutations were detected in 33 from 39 polyposis (AFAP) patients with MC from MGC, Voronezh. We revealed 5 cases with C. Lefol1, T. Noguchi2, A. Briaux1, H. Zattara3, V. Bourdon2, H. Sobol2, R. heterozygous CLCN1 gene mutations and 28 with two mutant alleles. Lidereau1, S. Olschwang2, E. Rouleau1; Mutation Arg894Stop was detected in 19 from 61 mutant chromosomes 1INSTITUT CURIE - RENE HUGUENIN, ST CLOUD, France, 2INSTITUT (31%). It is interesting to note a wide variety of clinical presentations in PAOLI-CALMETTES, MARSEILLE, France, 3AP-HM, MARSEILLE, France. cohort of patients with detected Arg894Stop: from phenotypes ranging Germline biallelic mutations on the MUTYH gene cause one third from pronounced myotonia to such mild symptoms that myotonia was of attenuated familial adenomatous polyposis (AFAP). This biallelic only revealed upon careful clinical examination. inactivation is associated with a 28-fold increased risk of colorectal Neurophysiologically, considerable decrement (69%) of compound cancer. Despite recurrency in exon 7 and 13, it is more and more muscle action potential (CMAP) was revealed in all patients with recommanded to develop a screening method of the entire gene. Arg894Stop during high frequency repetitive nerve stimulation (50Hz Here, we propose to apply the qPCR-HRM strategy as formarly for 200 stimuli). We marked correlation of allelic state of Arg894Stop published and show the validation process. The application of this with amplitude of CMAP. Posttetanic transitory depression (PTD) approach reveals a large rearrangement. Material and method: 44 (after 50 Hg) of CMAP considerable fluctuates (43%) in all our MC variants with at least one per exon were tested in validation set with 35 patients. In compound heterozygous (Arg894Stop/...) PTD of CMAP heterozygous and 9 homozygous variants. The protocol was designed decreased from 11,2±3,3mV to 7,1±5,5mV ( 37%). There is no PTD in duplicate with two master mix with and without template DNA. The of CMAP in heterozygous and homozygous patients. PTD correlations quantitative measure was based on delta-deltaCp method. 30 selected allow to estimate efficiency of restoration CLCN1 function in patients patients with attenuated polyposis were also screened. Results: All with different state of mutant alleles with Arg894Stop and to optimize variants were detected with the HRM curve analysis. 4 homozygous molecular-genetic diagnostic of MC patients. variants (44%) were detected in HRM only with the template DNA mix. In the 30 selected patients, we found 2 homozygous mutations P12.163 (c.[494A>G]+ [494A>G]) and 2 compound heterozygous mutations simultaneous multiplex PcR based myotonic dystrophy type 1 (c.[494A>G]+[891+3A>C] c.[1145G>A]+[307_1608del]). Variants and and type 2 molecular testing mono-allelic mutations were also identified (n=4). Discussion : The J. Radvansky1,2, A. Ficek1,2, M. Batova3, L. Kadasi1,2; approach qPCR-HRM proposed combining point mutation detection 1Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of and also large rearrangement identification helps to detect a large Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of deletion (exons 4 to 16) associated to an attenuated polyposis Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of family. This observation expands the spectrum of MUTYH alteration. Microbiology and Virology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Presently, the frequency of such event is not known. But, it reinforces Bratislava, Slovakia. the need for full screening, particularly in patients with homozygous Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is caused by expansion of a (CTG) mutations and with one single heterozygous mutation. n repeat in the DMPK gene, while myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2) is caused by expansion of a (CCTG)n part of a complex repetitive P12.161 motif (TG)n(TCTG)n(CCTG)n. The size of healthy range alleles molecular, cellular and clinical heterogeneity of mosaic is highly variable in both loci and expanded alleles may contain variegated aneuploidy syndrome several thousands of repeats in both DM1 and DM2. Combination of S. Hanks, K. Snape, E. Ruark, A. Murray, J. Douglas, N. Rahman; conventional PCR and “triplet” or “tetraplet” repeat-primed PCR (TP- Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, United Kingdom. PCR) is a commonly used approach to characterize healthy range Mosaic variegated aneuploidy (MVA) syndrome is an autosomal alleles and to prove the presence or absence of expanded alleles in recessive disorder characterised by mosaic aneuploidies, a variety of molecular testing for both disorders. We have designed three multiplex phenotypic abnormalities and predisposition to cancer. We previously PCR reactions for simultaneous characterisation of the DM1 and DM2 identified biallelic BUB1B mutations as a cause of MVA. BUB1B locus using PCR based analyses and capillary electrophoresis on encodes BUBR1 which has multiple, crucial roles in the mitotic spindle automatic DNA analyser. The first reaction includes bi-directionally checkpoint. Our data supported a causal role for aneuploidy in cancer labelled conventional PCRs for both the DM1 and DM2 locus. The development and exemplifed the insights rare genetic syndromes can second reaction contains the reverse directional DM1 TP-PCR and provide to our understanding of cancer. However, 60% of cases are not the reverse directional DM2 TP-PCR, while the third reaction was due to BUB1B mutations. There is a strong phenotypic overlap between designed to include the forward directional DM1 TP-PCR and the BUB1B-positive and BUB1B-negative cases but there is a significantly forward directional DM2 TP-PCR. These three reactions were designed higher risk of cancer in BUB1B-positive individuals. Analyses of mitotic to be performable under the same amplification and electrophoretic checkpoint function demonstrated that the checkpoint defect was conditions allowing thus their parallelisation. The usefulness of our profound in BUB1B-positive cases. In contrast, the BUB1B-negative multiplex assay is underlined by suggestions from previous studies, cases had intermediate or normal checkpoint function. In addition, which showed, that performing conventional PCR with bi-directional there was no apparent correlation between the presence or absence labelling of specific amplicons and TP-PCRs simultaneously from both of BUB1B mutations and the extent of aneuploidies. Taken together, sides of the repeat regions can increase the reliability and accuracy of our results clearly highlight the heterogeneous nature of this rare the assays which are based on the described methods. aneuploidy-cancer syndrome. The underlying molecular defect(s) in cases without BUB1B mutations have not yet been elucidated. We P12.164 are currently utilising an exome sequencing strategy to identify further A canine Arylsulfatase G (ARSG) mutation leading to a sulfatase causative gene(s) and this work will also be presented. deficiency is associated with neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis M. Abitbol1, J. L. Thibaud2, N. J. Olby3, C. Hitte4, J. P. Puech5, M. Maurer1, F. P12.162 Pilot-Storck1, B. Hédan4, S. Dréano4, S. Brahimi1, D. Delattre6, C. André4, F. Genotype-phenotype correlation in cohort of patients with Gray7, L. Charbonnier5, F. Delisle8, C. Caillaud5, F. Bernex1, J. J. Panthier1, G. myotonia congenita and frequent cLcN1 gene mutation Aubin-Houzelstein1, S. Blot2, L. Tiret1; Arg894stop 1UMR955 INRA-ENVA de Génétique Fonctionnelle et Médicale, Université S. A. Kurbatov1, V. P. Fedotov1, E. A. Ivanova2; Paris-Est Créteil, Ecole nationale vétérinaire d’Alfort, Maisons-Alfort, France, 1Genetic counseling, Medical Diagnostic Centre, Voronezh, Russian 2Unité Propre de Recherche de Neurobiologie, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Federation, 2Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Ecole Nationale Vétérinaire d’Alfort, Maisons-Alfort, France, 3Department of Federation. Clinical Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, United States, Myotonia congenita (MC) the most common form of nondystrophic 4UMR6061 Institut de Génétique et Développement, Centre National de la myotonias which can be autosomal dominant or recessive. MC Recherche Scientifique, Université de Rennes 1, Rennes, France, 5Laboratoire Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 427 de Biochimie Génétique, Assistance Publique–Hôpitaux de Paris, Université P12.166 Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 6Antagene, Limonest, France, 7Laboratoire Ketogenic diet accelerates the onset of disease in a PLA2G6 KO d’Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologique, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, mouse model 8Centre de Radiothérapie-Scanner, Ecole nationale vétérinaire d’Alfort, D. Brunetti1, S. Dusi1, F. Moda1, A. Uggetti1, C. Lamperti1, Y. Tsujimoto2, M. Maisons-Alfort, France. Morbin1, V. Tiranti1; Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCLs) constitute the most common 1IRCCS Foundation Neurological Institute C. Besta, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory of group of inherited children’s progressive encephalopathies, characterized molecular Genetics, Osaka University Medical School, Osaka, Japan. by progressive loss of vision, mental or motor deterioration, epileptic A mouse model of neuroaxonal dystrophy, with targeted disruption of seizures and premature death. All NCLs, but rare autosomal dominant PLA2G6 gene (KO), characterized by a late onset and slow progression adult-onset forms, segregate as autosomal recessive morbidity traits and of the disease, was described by Shinzawa K. et al in 2008. In order to are classified into 10 genetic forms designated CLN1 to CLN10. Eight accelerate the onset of pathology we decided to stress genotype and of them (CLN1-3, CLN5-8 and CLN10) were molecularly characterized. lipid metabolism of these mice using a high-fat ketogenic diet (KD). Genes underlying CLN9 and adult-onset forms, known as Kufs’ disease After 60 days of KD diet KO mice developed diffuse alopecia, hypotonia (CLN4), remained to be identified. of dorsal muscles with hunched posture and several motor dysfunction A spontaneous canine model of adult American Staffordshire Terriers that not appear in control animals. developping a late-onset cerebellar abiotrophy with Purkinje cell loss KO animals showed a significant loss of endurance on treadmill test has been previously described and we confirmed that US and French and a reduced stride length on foot print test. Autopsy revealed the affected dogs suffer from an autosomal recessive adult-onset form presence of fat liver in KO but not in control animals. of NCL. Through a combined genome-wide association and linkage Electron microscopy analysis of sciatic nerve ultrastructure was normal study, we identified a polymorphism in exon 2 of the Arylsulfatase G in control sample, whereas in the KO mouse disclosed the presence (ARSG) gene, encoding a lysosomal sulfatase. The polymorphism of Wallerian-like degeneration in different phases of evolution and caused a non-conservative p.R99H substitution in the protein. The a large number of myelinated fibres characterized by cytoplasmic missense change, in the vicinity of the ARSG catalytic domain, lead accumulation of vesicular and tubulo-vesicular structures. Also un- to a 75% sulfatase activity decrease in leucocytes from affected dogs, myelinated fibres showed degenerative features and the presence of confirming at the functional level that the variant may be the NCL- some swollen fibres resembling spheroid-like structures. causing mutation (PNAS 2010, vol 107, 14775-14780). Our results Histochemistry revealed a strong reduction of COX (cytochrome c unraveled a key role, presently evaluated in human patients affected by oxidase) activity in peripheral nerve, a partial reduction in the muscle NCL, played by ARSG in NCL and neuronal homeostasis. Additionally, with some COX-negative fibres, and no deficiency in the brain. In brain collection of fully phenotyped affected dogs is ongoing and should cortex we also observed some apoptotic Tunel positive nuclei. help identify modifying genes that may be further considered as hard The KD diet is able to accelerate onset and disease progression, and candidates for NCL pathogenesis. to unravel a biochemical phenotype not present in PLA2G6 KO mice fed with standard diet. P12.165 Clinical and molecular characterization of fifteen patients with P12.167 six novel mutations causing Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) NF1 and sPRED1 molecular analysis: Experience of a french NF related diseases. center. T. C. Falik Zaccai1,2, R. Erel-Segal1,3, Z. Keren1, S. Koka1, R. Segal4, S. S. Pinson1,2, A. Toussaint1, C. Chretien1, B. Chambe1, S. Giraud1, A. Calender1, Zelikson4, E. Lahad4, H. Mandel5,6, R. Bergman7, A. Luder8, R. Shpigel9, S. P. Combemale3; Shalev9, O. Biterman Deutsch1, L. Horev-Yakir10, V. Molcho-Pesach10, H. Slor11; 1HCL - HEH - Molecular and clinical Genetics Dpt, Lyon, France, 2CLB - 1Western Galilee Hospital-Naharia, Naharia, Israel, 2R.and B. Rappaport Medical genetic - NF clinic, Lyon, France, 3CLB - dermatologie, Lyon, France. Faculty of Medicine, Technion,, Haifa, Israel, 3R.and B. Rappaport Faculty of The identification of mutations in the NF1 gene causing type Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 4Shaarei Tzedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, 1 neurofibromatosis (NF1 - OMIM 162200) is still presenting a Israel, 5Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 6R. and B. Rappaport Faculty considerable amount of work mainly because of the large size of of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 7Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Naharia, the gene and the restricted number of recurent mutations. The high Israel, 8Ziv Medical Center, Tzfat, Israel, 9Haemek Medical Center, Afula, Israel, frequency of NF1 which lead us to choose two complementary 10Hadassah Ein Karem, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel, 1111Tel Chai methods for NF1 gene analysis: Academic college,, Tel Chai, Israel. - the multiplex ligation-dependant probe amplification (MLPA P081, Nucleotide Excision Repair (NER) is one of the major DNA repair P082, P122C1) mechanisms responsible for repairing DNA damaged by either UV- - and the automated denaturing high performance liquid (dHPLC) irradiation or by certain chemicals that form “bulky” DNA adducts. The screening method. NER pathway involves at least 28 genes. Mutations in 13 NER genes The MLPA method was validated by the detection of 19 known large have been associated with Xeroderma pigmentosum (XP), Cockayne NF1 gene deletions. syndrome (CS) and Trichothiodystrophy (TTD), with complex and The dHPLC was optimised for a rapid screening of the 60 exons and varying multisystem pathologies. the splice junctions of the NF1 gene. The sensitivity was evaluated These diseases are rare worldwide, but are frequent in Israel and the in a MLPA/dHPLC analysis of a panel of 150 unrelated french NF1 Middle East, probably due to the high rate of consanguinity among patients. certain populations. Seven large deletions were first detected by P081/082 MLPA. The genotype phenotype correlation in those diseases has not been Mutations were identified in 136 among the 143 patients left with a fully clarified. Each clinical phenotype can arise from mutations in global mutation detection rate of 96% [CI95%: 91-98]. more than one gene and conversely, different mutations in one gene Then, the seven NF1 negative patients were associated to nine others can give rise to more than one clinical phenotype. adult patients with a mild NF1 phenotype (pigmentary changes but We have clinically characterized fifteen patients with NER defects and no neurofibroma) to be screened by direct sequencing for mutations identified their causative genes and mutations. Our analyses revealed of the SPRED1 gene. SPRED1 mutations were identified in 2 cases 4 XP patients, 8 CS patients, 1 XP/CS patient and 2 TTD patients. We compatible with Legius syndrome phenotype. have identified 6 novel mutations in CSB, XPD, and XPG. We have Our results confirm that the association of the MLPA and dHPLC established a population screening program for CS in one of these techniques provides an accurate and fast method for the identification villages where the carrier frequency was found to be 1:9. of NF1 mutations Our data might contribute to the understanding of the phenotype The results show also the interest of the SPRED1 analysis and the genotype relationship and basic pathology of NER related diseases. implication for the counselling of NF1 families. Identification of the causative genes allows us to establish accurate genetic counseling and molecular diagnosis to couples at risk and high risk populations.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 428 P12.168 P12.170 characterization of the molecular mechanisms underlying Analysis of the NF2 gene in a cohort of 16 unselected patients atypical NF1 deletions suspected of having neurofibromatosis type 2 J. Vogt1, K. Bengesser1, K. Claes2, K. Wimmer3, L. Messiaen4, L. Kluwe5, V. F. O. Abad, J. Gardenyes, P. Fàbregas, V. Volpini, B. Campos; Mautner5, D. N. Cooper6, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; Center for Molecular Genetic Diagnosis (CDGM) – IDIBELL, L’Hospitalet de 1Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Center for Medical Genetics, Llobregat, Spain. Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 3Division of Human Genetics, Neurofibromatosis Type 2 (NF2) [MIM 101000] is an autosomal Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Medical Genomics dominant disorder that is characterized by nervous system tumours Laboratory, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, and ocular abnormalities, affecting 1 in 40,000 individuals. The Birmingham, AL, United States, 5Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University disease is caused by mutations in the NF2 tumour suppressor gene, Medical Centre, Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany, 6Institute of Medical Genetics, at 22q11.2. School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. The distinguishing clinical feature of NF2 is the presence of bilateral Large deletions encompassing the NF1 gene and its flanking vestibular schwannomas. Patients with NF2 also develop schwannomas regions constitute the most frequent recurrent mutations causing at other locations and other tumours such as meningiomas, gliomas and neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1). Four types of large NF1 deletion neurofibromas. NF2 should be distinguished from neurofibromatosis (type-1, type-2, type-3 and atypical) have been identified to date. type 1 (NF1) and from schwannomatosis. Whereas neurofibromas These differ with respect to the extent of the deleted region, the are the cardinal manifestation of NF1, patients with schwannomatosis location of the respective breakpoints and the underlying causative develop multiple schwannomas affecting the peripheral nerves and mechanisms. Whereas type-1, type-2 and type-3 NF1 deletions are spinal nerve roots without vestibular schwannomas or other NF2 mediated by NAHR between low-copy repeats, atypical NF1 deletions related tumours. appear to have non-recurrent breakpoints and differ quite markedly in We screened for mutations in the NF2 gene a panel of 16 unrelated terms of their extent. patients referred to our laboratory because of clinical features that In this study, we have collected a cohort of 16 patients with de novo required the consideration of NF2, using direct cDNA sequencing atypical NF1 deletions. Our aim was to precisely map the deletion complemented with MLPA analysis. breakpoints and to characterize the breakpoint-flanking sequences in Possible disease causing mutations were identified in 3 (18%) cases. order to identify the mechanism(s) underlying these atypical deletions. They consist in a 3’UTR reported sequence variant of unknown Initial analysis using MLPA and PCR-based breakpoint mapping using biological significance and two splice errors, one of them identified somatic cell hybrids carrying only the chromosome 17 with the deletion in a patient with bilateral vestibular schwannomas and a spinal of the respective patients generated several important findings: astrocytoma. The 13 patients without any identified NF2 mutation had First, non-homologous-end-joining (NHEJ) is the major mechanism a wide variety of nervous system tumours, but just one was suspected responsible for atypical NF1 deletions. Second, one of both deletion of having bilateral vestibular schwannomas. breakpoints maps to one of the LCRs located in the NF1 gene region. Our experience evidences that diagnosis of NF2 is often difficult to These observations imply that NHEJ is driven by the local genomic make when based only on clinical characteristics. In this context, architecture, specifically the LCRs in the NF1 gene region. Our genetic testing helps clinicians to establish a more precise diagnosis. findings indicate that the impact of the repetitivity of the LCRs located in the NF1 gene region is not confined to replication-based mutational P12.171 mechanisms such as FoSTeS and MMBIR but is also evident in the Novel and recurrent mutations in NF1 gene - the first genetic context of recombination-based NHEJ events. study in Croatian patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 Z. Sabol1, R. Gjergja Juraski2, F. Sabol1, M. Kovac Sizgoric1, Z. Gjergja1, L. P12.169 Kipke Sabol1, S. Bela Klancir1, L. Cvitanovic-Sojat2; Epidemiological and molecular genetic study of 1Sabol Clinic For Sick Children, Zagreb, Croatia, 2University Hospital Sisters of Neurofibromatosis type 1 in the Republic of Bashkortostan Mercy, Zagreb, Croatia. R. Mustafin, M. Bermisheva, E. Khusnutdinova; Background: Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the commonest Institut of biochemistry and genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. autosomal dominant disorders in man. The clinical manifestations of Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a common autosomal dominant disease are diverse, heterogeneous in origin, and age-dependent. The genetic disorder that affects 1 in 3500 individuals worldwide, in which clinical diagnosis of NF1 is based on the presence of clinical criteria affected individuals develop benign and malignant nerve tumors. This developed by National Institutes of Health Consensus Conference. To inherited disorder is due to germline mutations of the NF1 gene, a date, a number of different novel and recurrent mutations of NF1gene 17q11.2-located gene that spans 280 kb, is composed of 61 exons. have been found. In Bashkortostan Republic according to January 2011 revealed 245 The aim of this study was to identify the spectrum of disease causing NF1 patients from 196 families. The prevalence of the disease is 4.7 mutations in the NF1 gene in Croatian non-related patients who per 100 thousand population. 55% of NF1 disease are sporadic cases. fulfilled only one NIH diagnostic criterion at the time of NF1 gene DNA of 85 NF1 patients (66 families) was extracted from blood. All testing. All children with sporadic NF1 are continued to be followed-up the patients were residents of Bashkortostan Republic. Currently we prospectively. identified five mutations in 6 patients from 5 families, 4 of which were Results: Of 21 NF1 gene analyses, 18 (85.71 %) were positive. In 16/21 sporadic cases. We found: two missense mutations: c.733T>A C245S, patients the specific mutations were found by gene sequencing and in c.2990 G>C R997W; 2 nonsense mutations: c.1278 G>A W426X, 4537 two children MLPA revealed the deletion of whole NF1 gene. Thirteen C>T R1514X; 1 splice site mutation c.4514+5 G>A 4646+5G>A. All of 16 found NF1 mutations were novel: c.147C>G, c.205-2A>C (IVS2- identified mutations haven’t been previously described. Also revealed 2A>C), c.1260+1G>C (IVS9+1G>C), c.1393_1421dup, c.1659_ two polymorphisms: A2877G (Gln) and T2898C (Ala) in 5 patients from 1660dupTC, c.3144G>A, c.3445A>G, c.4076delC, c.4168C>T, 5 families. c.4168C>T, c.4686delA and c.4756dupT, while 3 mutations have In patients with identified missense and nonsense mutations the been previously identified: c.1721G>A, c.3827G>A, c.3827G>A. No disease was characterized by multiple neurofibromas and pigmented mutational hot spots in NF1 gene were observed. Among NF1 patients spots on the body; in a patient with identified splice site mutation we reported two monozygotic twins with c.4168C>T mutation and (sporadic case) neurofibromas was focal - single, spots all over his concordant clinical features so far. body. Conclusion: The mutational spectrum showed mainly nucleotide substitutions, suggesting that the genotypic characteristics of Croatian NF1 patients may be distinct from that of other populations. We present this study as the first step in the routine diagnosis procedure for Croatian patients with NF1.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 429 P12.172 average six nonsense variants in a homozygous state and about 20 in Loss of PAK3 kinase activity underlies a novel form of X- linked a compound heterozygous state together with a novel nonsynonymous neuroichthyosis or nonsense variant. P. Magini1, T. Pippucci1, S. Coppola2, E. Stellacci3, D. Bordo4, R. Zuntini1, S. Our findings illustrate the extensive number of rare and possibly Miccoli1, E. Pompilii1, C. Graziano1, G. Cenacchi5, I. Neri6, C. Garone7, D. M. disease causing variants that can be identified by exome sequencing Cordelli7, V. Marchiani7, R. Bergamaschi8, G. Neri9, O. Zuffardi10, L. Mazzanti11, in any individual. The main challenge using NGS sequencing for A. Patrizi6, E. Franzoni7, G. Romeo1, G. Romeo1, M. Tartaglia3, M. Seri1; disease gene tracking is to differentiate between the many rare benign 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Centro variants and disease causing mutations. Strategies to overcome this Nazionale per le Malattie Rare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, problem will be presented in more detail. 3Dipartimento di ematologia, Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 4Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, P12.174 Genova, Italy, 5Anatomia e Istologia Patologica, Università di Bologna, molecular Analysis of GJB2, GJB6 Genes and A1555G Bologna, Italy, 6Dermatologia, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, mitochondrial Point mutation in Patients with Nonsyndromic 7Neuropsichiatria Infantile e Disturbi Comportamento Alimentare, Policlinico Hearing Loss, the italian Job. S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 8SSD Pronto Soccorso Pediatrico e Pediatria E. Benzoni1, P. Castorina2,3, F. Lalatta2, C. Radaelli4, L. Trotta4, U. Ambrosetti3, d’Urgenza, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 9Istituto di Genetica A. Cesarani3, L. Garavelli5, P. Formigoni6, A. Murri7, D. Cuda7, M. Seia4, P. Medica, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy, 10Dipartimento Primignani4; di Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 1Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS ca’ Granda Ospedale 11Ambulatorio di Auxologia, Sindromologia e Malattie Rare, Policlinico S.Orsola- Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Service - Fondazione Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3ENT We report the identification of a gene potentially responsible for a novel Department - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, X-linked form of syndromic neuroichthyosis, segregating in a family Milan, Italy, 4Medical Genetics Laboratory - Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda characterized by ichthyosis, corpus callosum agenesis, microcephalia, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Service - seizures, mental retardation and spastic tetraparesis. Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 6ENT Department Linkage analysis revealed a critical region of nearly 25 Mb in - Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 7ENT Department - Xq21.33q24 including about 250 genes. Having observed a clinical Ospedale Guglielmo da Saliceto, Piacenza, Italy. overlap with the cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, we analyzed the Mutations in the GJB2 gene, which encodes the gap-junction protein genomic sequence of PAK3, a gene involved in K-ras pathway, coding Connexin 26 (Cx26), are the most common cause of nonsyndromic for a serin/threonine kinase with an important role in the organization hearing loss (NSHL) accounting for about 32% of cases. of cytoskeleton. We found the K389N substitution within the highly The subjects referred to our North Italian Centre are affected by sensory conserved kinase domain of the protein. This mutation segregated neural deafness with various degrees of hearing loss. Since January with the disease in the family and it has never been detected in more 2001 we analyzed 1250 patients and identified mutations in 763/2500 than 450 control chromosomes; moreover prediction tools described chromosomes. We characterized more than 40 different mutations this aminoacidic substitution as probably damaging. and nine polymorphisms in 435 NSHL subjects. Our data confirm As mutations in PAK3 have been already reported in association with 35delG as the most frequent GJB2 mutation in the Italian population isolated mental retardation (MR), we compared the kinase activity of accounting for about 64% of all the Cx26 alleles we identified. In recent the wild-type, the K389N and the MR forms, showing a complete loss years we also observed in our cases an increase of the most frequent of function for all mutants. polymorphisms in Asiatic and South American populations. The GJB6 These data suggest a causative role of the K389N mutation in the gene deletion, del(GJB6-D13S1830), was identified in seven patients pathogenesis of neuroichthyosis, although the underlying mechanism carrying a GJB2 mutation in the other allele and in homozygote status leading to a complex disease is not clear. in one subject, while the del(GJB6-D13S1854) was not observed in We can not exclude that another gene within the critical region could be our cohort of patients. Moreover, 45 affected subjects were compound involved, worsening the clinical picture caused by PAK3 mutations, but heterozygous for recessive GJB2 allele not including 35delG and 8 the relevant expression we observed in keratynocytes would suggest were carrying dominant mutations (T55N, P58A, D179N and R184Q), an implication of this gene also in the ichthyosis occurrence, possibly indicating that the complete sequence of the gene is needed for an due to additional kinase-independent activities of PAK3. appropriate molecular diagnosis. The analysis of the deafness-causing A1555G substitution in MTRNR1 mitochondrial gene was carried out P12.173 in patients without Cx26 recessive mutations. We found 24 affected Next Generation sequencing for the Analysis of monogenic subjects carrying the A1555G and the subsequently family analysis traits performed in each case has led to the pre-symptomatic identification J. Klar1, A. Ameur1, S. Hooper1, S. Baig2, U. Gyllensten1, N. Dahl1; of this mutation in relatives. 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute for Biotechnology P12.175 and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, Pakistan. spectrum of CLCN1 and SCN4A mutations in czech patients Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has opened up new with non-dystrophic myotonias. avenues for the clarification of gene variants causing Mendelian D. Paclova1, J. Sedlackova1,2, S. Vohanka3, R. Mazanec4, L. Fajkusova1,2; disorders. Most monogenic disorders are caused by either exonic 1Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno, sequence variants or splice-site mutations. These variants can now Brno, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Science, Institute of Experimental Biology, be readily identified by sequencing all exons in the human genome Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Neurology, University (exome sequencing). However, identification of a disease causing Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Neurology, Second School of Medicine, variant is not trivial due to the extensive number of rare variants University Hospital Motol and Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. identified in individual exomes. Although databases such as dbSNP The non-dystrophic myotonias are a heterogeneous group of rare can be used to reduce the candidates by filtering out common variants, inherited diseases that demonstrate myotonia as their common the remaining candidates are still often numerous. feature, in reference to a delayed muscle relaxation after voluntary or We present here the results from exome-sequencing in five individuals evoked muscle contraction. The non-dystrophic myotonias are skeletal of Pakistani origin affected by various monogenic disorders. We muscle ion channel diseases which are caused by mutations in the identified approximately 85,000 variants (synonymous and non- genes coding for the skeletal muscle chloride channel 1 (CLCN1) or synonymous) in each individual. After database filtering on average the alpha subunit of voltage-gated sodium channel 4 (SCN4A). over 12,000 variants could be described as novel and 3,300 of Mutations of the CLCN1 gene result in either autosomal dominant these are exonic. The majority of the novel exonic SNPs were non- myotonia congenita (Thomsen type) or autosomal recessive myotonia synonymous (70%) whereas 3% were nonsense variations and 1.5% congenita (Becker type). A subset of CLCN1 mutations have been were splice site alterations. Furthermore, each individual carries on found to cause both recessive and dominant myotonia. Mutations of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 430 the SCN4A gene are typically inherited as an autosomal dominant age with limited results due to supravalvular obstruction and the type trait, regardless of the associated phenotype (paramyotonia congenita, of valve. As her phenotype presented characteristics that were typical hyperkalemic periodic paralysis, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, of Noonan syndrome, we studied the PTPN11 gene by automatic normokalemic periodic paralysis, potassium-aggravated myotonia, sequencing of all exons and intron boundaries. myotonia fluctuans, and congenital myasthenic syndrome). cONcLUsiONs: The patient was heterozygous for the M504A Molecular-genetic diagnostics of non-dystrophic myotonias was mutation (c.1510A>G, p.Met504Val) in exon 13 of the PTPN11 gene. initiated in our laboratory in 2009. Since then, DNA diagnostics This mutation is located in the PTP domain of PTPN11 and is in close was performed in 55 unrelated patients suspected to be myotonia spatial proximity to important residues that stabilize the protein. The congenita, and confirmed in 41 of them. Mutations in the CLCN1 gene pathogenic mechanism in Noonan syndrome involves altered N-SH2/ were detected in 28 patients (25 with recessive and 3 with dominant PTP interactions that destabilize the inactive conformation without myotonia congenita), mutation in the SCN4A gene in 13 patients. We altering the SHP-2 catalytic capability. PTPN11 is a key molecule in identified 20 types of CLCN1 mutations (6 mutations were novel not the cellular response to growth factors, hormones, cytokines, and cell described previously) and 6 types of SCN4A mutations, (3 mutations adhesion molecules. This is the first time that the M504A mutation has were novel). been reported in the Spanish population. This work was supported by grant MSMT LC06023 and 2B08060. P12.178 P12.176 Heterozygous germline mutations in the CBL tumor-suppressor twelve-years investigation of DFNB1 (GJB2) mutations in iranian gene cause a Noonan syndrome-like phenotype population with non-syndromic hearing loss S. Martinelli1, A. De Luca2, E. Stellacci1, C. Rossi3, S. Checquolo4, F. Lepri5, V. N. Bazazzadegan1, C. Nishimura2, N. Nikzat1, M. Hildebrand2, S. Arzhangi1, N. Caputo1, M. Silvano1, C. Carta1, F. Consoli2, M. C. Digilio5, J. M. van Hagen6, G. Meyer2, K. Jalalvand1, M. Sobhani3, F. Habibi4, A. Khosh Aein5, F. Mojahedi6, P. Zampino7, I. van der Burgt8, G. B. Ferrero9, L. Mazzanti10, I. Screpanti4, H. G. Jamali7, K. Kahrizi1, R. J. H. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1; Yntema8, W. M. Nillesen8, R. Savarirayan11, M. Zenker12, B. Dallapiccola5, B. D. 1Genetic Research Center, USWR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Gelb13, M. Tartaglia1; Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United 1Istituto Superiore di Sanita’, Rome, Italy, 2Ospedale “Casa Sollievo della States, 3Genetic Counseling Centre, Gilan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Rasht Sofferenza” IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 3U.O. Genetica Medica, Welfare Organization, Gilan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Genetic Counseling Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 4Università “La Sapienza”, Rome, Centre, Mazandaran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Genetic Counseling Centre, Italy, 5Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 6VU University Medical Center, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 7Genetic counseling centre, Shahrood, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Universita’ Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Islamic Republic of Iran. Italy, 8Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, DFNB1 locus has been recognized to account for a large proportion 9Universita’ di Torino, Torino, Italy, 10Universita’ di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, of cases of non-syndromic autosomal recessive deafness and 11Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 12University Hospital, the gene that encodes connexin 26, GJB2, has been identified as Magdeburg, Germany, 13Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United causative in DFNB1. The GJB2 gene is also involved in an autosomal States. dominant form of deafness, DFNA3. In present study, we investigate RAS signaling plays a key role in controlling appropriate cell the prevalence of GJB2 mutations in Iranian deaf population with responses to extracellular stimuli, and participates in early and late different ethnic groups. Two thousand three hundred thirty individuals, developmental processes. While enhanced flow through this pathway who were referred to GRC, were subjected to GJB2 screening. The had been established as a major contributor to oncogenesis, recent study was approved by the regional ethics committee of the USWR discoveries have revealed that aberrant RAS activation causes a group for medical research. After signing consent form by all participants of clinically related disorders characterized by facial dysmorphism, a and clinical examination, patients were screened for 35delG, the wide spectrum of cardiac disease, reduced growth, variable cognitive most prevalent GJB2 mutation. Further analysis was performed for deficits, ectodermal and musculoskeletal anomalies, and increased normal or heterozygote individuals, by sequencing of GJB2-exon 2, as risk for certain malignancies. Here, we report that heterozygous well as screening of exon1 for all heterozygote families. Total of 370 germline mutations in CBL, a tumor-suppressor gene encoding for a (~16%) families were affected with GJB2-related deafness including multivalent adaptor protein with E3 ubiquitin ligase activity mutated in both recessive and dominant mutations in homozygote and compound myeloid malignancies, can underlie a phenotype with clinical features heterozygote forms. Forty five different GJB2 mutations including two fitting or partially overlapping Noonan syndrome (NS), the most novel mutations have been identified. GJB2 mutations in both alleles common condition of this disease family. CBL mutations were identified have been found in 89% of chromosomes. However, 35delG was the in four sporadic cases and two families from among 365 unrelated most common GJB2 mutation accounting for 64% of the mutations in subjects with NS or suggestive features and negative for mutations population studied. Distribution of GJB2 mutations varied in different in previously identified disease genes. Phenotypic heterogeneity and parts of Iran. Our data suggest that there is a gradual decrease in variable expressivity were documented. Four mutations were missense the frequency of the 35delG mutation and GJB2-related deafness in changes affecting the RING finger domain or the linker connecting this general as we move from the Northwest to South and East through the domain to the N-terminal tyrosine kinase binding domain. One splice- Persian Gulf countries. site nucleotide substitution, resulting in skipping of the exon coding for those domains, and one truncating mutation at the N-terminus were P12.177 also identified. Mutations were shown to affect CBL-mediated receptor First description of m504A mutation in PtPN11 gene detected in ubiquitylation and dysregulate signal flow through RAS. These findings a spanish patient with noonan syndrome document that germline mutations in CBL alter development to cause A. Zuñiga, G. Pi, Y. Bello, A. Guerrero; a clinically variable condition that resembles NS and that possibly Hospital Universitario de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. predisposes to malignancies. BAcKGROUND: Noonan syndrome (OMIM 163950) is a rare disease, mainly presenting with malformations such as dysplasia and stenosis P12.179 of the pulmonary valve, atrial septal defect and a typical pattern of Noonan syndrome diagnosed by custom molecular microarray hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. It may be sporadic or inherited as an (Array cGc) autosomal dominant or recessive trait and occurs in 1 in 1000-2500 A. Palmeiro1, A. Lopes1, L. Lameiras1, L. Dias1, J. Sá1,2, P. Rendeiro1, P. children. In more than 50% of patients with Noonan syndrome, Tavares1; mutations in the PTPN11 gene have been identified. This gene 1CGC Genetics (www.cgcgenetics.com), Porto, Portugal, 2Hospital Pediátrico encodes a tyrosine-protein phosphatase non-receptor type II (SHP-2). de Coimbra EPE, Coimbra, Portugal. cAsE REPORt: We report the case of a 9-year-old girl. This patient introduction: Noonan syndrome is a congenital genetic disease that was diagnosed at birth with severe pulmonary stenosis with a affects both males and females equally (1:1.000-2.500 newborns). dysplastic valve, and mild supravalvular stenosis. She presented with Great clinical variability has been identified: heart disease, valvular a permeable oval foramen. A valvuloplasty was performed at 2 years of pulmonary stenosis or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, short stature of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 431 postnatal onset, psychomotor development delay. Often this syndrome controls from general Czech population using high resolution melting is not diagnosed, but it is related to many complex problems such as analysis and DNA sequencing. We focused preferentially on exons in coagulation defects and lymphatic dysplasias. Differential diagnosis which mutations associated with BAV have already been reported. In includes major diseases in the same metabolic pathway: Costello, general population we detected one sequence change within exon and Cardiofaciocutaneous and LEOPARD Syndrome. two intron variants which have not been described yet. The variant method: With a custom microarray panel (Array CGC - Pat. Pending) p.Asp1026Asn was found in one control sample and causes an amino that contains a panel of 80 point mutations, in 8 main genes involved in acid substitution. The variant c.2587+20GtoA was detected in one Noonan (5 genes) and other genetically related syndromes (PTPN11, sample from general population and also two patients with BAV. Its RAF1, SOS1, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF, MAP2K1 and MAP2K2) is possible effect on alternative splicing of mRNA cannot be excluded. In addition, to identify the molecular basis of the most frequent and severe forms. we discovered two novel sequence variants within exons in the patient Results: Using the array panel we analyzed 6 cases of Noonan group. The variant p.Cys570Arg causes amino acid substitution and syndrome, where mutations on the PTPN11, were detected by probably disrupts a disulphide bond in the extracellular receptor domain. sequence analysis. All the mutations were also detected with the array. Another variant p.Cys144Cys is a silent mutation probably without a Additionally, 6 cases with clinical suspicion and a PTPN11 negative functional significance. Further studies are necessary to elucidate the sequence analysis were also studied. In one case a mutation on the potential role of detected changes in disease manifestation. In general, SOS1 gene was detected, making the molecular diagnosis possible. identification of aneurysm-predisposing susceptibility genes may lead conclusion: This approach is an useful and valuable tool for to gene-directed surgical therapy for patients with BAV in the future. diagnostics, since it detects the most common mutations associated This study was supported by grant MSMT CR No. 2B08060. with Noonan Syndrome, not only on PTPN11 gene but also in 4 other genes, improving the capacity for diagnosis. A broader clinical P12.182 spectrum and a faster diagnosis are achieved, allowing an earlier cerebral dysgenesis does not exclude OFD i syndrome decision-making process in patient management. C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, G. Lesca3, B. Aral4, N. Gigot4, S. Lambert4, L. Gueneau2, M. Macca5, B. Franco6,7, F. Huet8, M. Zabot9, T. Attié-Bitach10, J. P12.180 Attia-Sobol9, L. Faivre1,2; mutation analysis of the genes involved in the Ras-mAPK 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Equipe émergente « Génétique des pathway in Polish patients with Noonan syndrome Anomalies du Développement », Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, E. Ciara, S. Łuczak, A. Tańska, M. Pelc, M. Kugaudo, D. Jurkiewicz, D. 3Département de Génétique Clinique, Hôtel-Dieu, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Piekutowska-Abramczuk, P. Kowalski, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, J. Trubicka, A. Lyon, France, 4Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, PTB, CHU, Dijon, Jezela-Stanek, K. Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; France, 5Department of Pediatrics of the Federico II University of Naples, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. Naples, Italy, 6Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Naples, Noonan syndrome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder Italy, 7Medical Genetic Services, Department of Pediatrics, Federico II characterized mainly by short stature, congenital heart defects, facial University of Naples, Naples, Italy, 8Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d’Enfants, CHU, Dijon, dysmorphism and chest deformities. Heterozygous gain of function France, 9Département de Pathologie, Hôtel-Dieu, Hospices Civils de Lyon, mutations in various genes encoding proteins of the Ras-MAPK Lyon, France, 10Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, signaling pathway have been identified as the genetic basis of NS. APHP, Paris, France. Although NS is relatively commonly inherited disorder (1:1000-1:2500 Oral-facial-digital syndromes (OFD) are defined by the association live births), it has been molecularly characterized in only a small of malformations involving the mouth, the face and the digits, with proportion of human populations throughout the world and there are different modes of inheritance. Other organ systems can be involved, no reports on the genetic background of Slavic patients with NS. Here defining 13 specific subtypes. CNS malformations appear particularly we report the results of molecular and clinical analysis in a cohort of 59 associated with OFD I and VI syndromes. In OFD I syndrome, patients affected by NS. Mutation analysis of PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1 while corpus callosum agenesis appears common (40%), other and KRAS genes confirmed NS in 56 patients, including 40 probands malformations, including intracerebral arachnoid cysts, porencephaly, and 16 affected relatives, with a total mutation detection rate of 67.8%. heterotopias, cerebellar malformations, and abnormal gyrations, are We identified missense mutations in PTPN11 for 28, SOS1 for 10 rarely described. Only molecular bases of the OFD I syndrome have and RAF1 for 2 unrelated patients. All of the changes were already been elucidated, when the OFD1 gene has been identified. However, known, except for two novel substitutions in SOS1 and one in RAF1 mutations have also been identified in the TMEM216 gene in two gene. The correlation between genotype and phenotype is similar to patients with OFD VI syndrome and in the GLI3 gene in five patients that observed in other studies. Patients with SOS1 mutations showed with OFD syndrome and median anomalies. Few years ago, Lesca higher frequency of macrocephaly, ptosis, webbed neck, mitral valve et al. [2006] described an OFD syndrome with cerebellar dysgenesis anomaly, renal and ectodermal abnormalities in comparison to the involving all the brain structures in a sporadic female foetus. We group with mutations in PTPN11. This study demonstrated that only recently identified a causal c.400_403delGAAA mutation the OFD1 three most common genes related to Ras-MAPK pathway (PTPN11, gene. This mutation has previously been reported in two sporadic cases SOS1, RAF1) are involved in the pathogenesis of Polish NS patients. with OFD I syndrome and normal neurological examination. The X The study was supported by MNiSW Project PB0056/B/P01/2008/35 chromosome inactivation pattern studied in three fetal tissues showed and by CMHI Project 190/08. skewed X inactivation (0-100%) in all tissues. The identification of an OFD1 mutation permit to reclassify this patient as OFD I, instead of a P12.181 new cerebral dysgenesis type as proposed by the authors. It illustrates Novel sequence changes in the NOtcH1 gene in patients with also the high clinical variability in CNS features in OFD I syndrome. bicuspid aortic valves Therefore, sporadic severe CNS malformation associated or not with B. Ravcukova1, M. Vanaskova2, L. Grodecka1, J. Nejedlik1, M. Plotena1, F. cerebellar findings does not exclude primarily OFD I syndrome. Stetka1, T. Freiberger1,3; 1Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, Brno, Czech Republic, P12.183 Brno, Czech Republic, 2Dept. Medical Genetics, University Hospital Brno, Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) in the Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Dept.Clin.Immunol.Allergol.Masaryk diagnosis of 1p/19q deletions in oligodendroglial tumours. University, Brno, Czech Republic. M. Grobler, S. Butler, R. Taylor, M. Vast, K. Marks, K. Elderfield, L. R. Bridges; Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most common congenital cardiac St George’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. malformation occurring in 1-2% of the population. BAV is associated The combined loss of the short arm of chromosome 1 and the long arm with significantly increased risk of developing thoracic aortic aneurysm of chromosome 19 is a molecular signature strongly associated with and acute aortic dissection. It was shown that genotypic variations in oligodendroglial tumours. Gliomas with a 1p/19q codeletion frequently the NOTCH1 gene are associated with BAV and may contribute to respond favourably to chemotherapy and are associated with longer the observed variability in aortic phenotype. We performed NOTCH1 survival times. To date, the detection of 1p/19q loss has been most mutational analysis in 30 unrelated subjects with BAV and 20 unrelated frequently carried out by fluorescent in-situ hybridisation or by loss of Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 432 heterozygosity testing. Recently, multiplex ligation-dependent probe presence of cerebellar malformation suggested a mutation in the amplification (MLPA) has been developed as an efficient, sensitive and OPHN1 gene and mutational screening revealed a 2-bp deletion that specific alternative to these tests. This work describes the development abolishes a donor splicing site, resulting in the inclusion of 48-bp and validation of the MLPA method for detection of 1p/19q loss in tract of intron 7. This mutation leads to the production of a mutant paraffin sections from glioma samples at St George’s. oligophrenin 1 protein with 16 extra aminoacids inserted in-frame in A total of 53 brain tumours were tested by MLPA for the 1p/19q the N-terminal BAR domain. To our knowledge this is the first case of a deletions using the kit P088-B1 from MRC Holland: 5 glioblastomas mutation in OPHN1 that does not result in the production of a truncated with oligodendroglioma component (WHO grade IV); 19 anaplastic protein or in its complete loss. OPHN1 (ARHGAP41) encodes a oligodendrogliomas (WHO grade III); 19 oligodendrogliomas GTPase activating protein belonging to the GRAF proteins subfamily (WHO grade II); 1 anaplastic oligoastrocytoma (WHO grade III); 4 characterized by an N-terminal BAR domain, followed by a pleckstrin- oligoastrocytomas (WHO grade II); 2 anaplastic ependymomas (WHO homology domain and the GAP domain. GRAF proteins play a role grade III); 2 pilocytic astrocytomas (WHO grade I) and 1 central in endocytosis and are supposed to dimerize via their BAR domain, neurocytoma (WHO grade I). A comparison between MLPA and FISH that induces membrane curvature. The extra 16 aminoacids cause the is provided for 23 of the cases. insertion of 4.4 turns in the third alpha-helix of the BAR domain, which 1p/19q codeletion was detected in 79% of the pure oligodendroglial seems to impair the protein function. In fact, the clinical phenotype tumours (WHO grades II and III) and 40% of the oligoastrocytomas of these patients is identical to that of patients with loss-of-function (WHO grades II and III). Other results will be further discussed. Over mutations. 90% of MLPA and FISH results were concordant. MLPA provides a cost effective and reliable method for diagnostic P12.186 detection of the 1p/19q codeletion. mutation and haplotype analysis of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy in Yakut population P12.184 A. V. Marusin1, K. A. Kurtanov2, N. R. Maximova2, V. A. Stepanov1; OPA1 mutation in family with syndromic form of DOA from 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Russia Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Yakut Scientific Center of V. P. Fedotov1, S. Kurbatov1, O. Schagina2; Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Medical 1VOCDC genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Research Center Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is an inherited Mutations in OPA1, a dynamin-related GTPase involved in neuromuscular disease associated with a short trinucleotide repeat mitochondrial fusion, cristae organization and control of apoptosis, expansion in exon 1 of the PABPN1 gene. OPMD (MIM 164300) is have been linked to non-syndromic optic neuropathy transmitted as an rather frequent in Yakut population (~1:11680), that is 1000 times autosomal-dominant trait (DOA OMIM#165500). Here we report about higher as in Caucasoid populations. Patients (n=66) and 134 their four patients from three generation family with syndromic form DOA healthy near relatives of 44 families were investigated. In all patients the associated with sensoneural deafness, chronic progressive external mutation was confirmed by direct sequencing indicating the presence ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, axonal sensory-motor polyneuropathy. of 14 trinucleotide repeats (GCN), where as healthy individuals bear Proband is a 39-year-old woman with optic atrophy manifestation at the 10 repeats. Ten SNPs (rs2231301, rs1950252, rs1535094, rs7142474, age of 10 years and with moderate sensorineural hearing impairment rs2239579, rs8020117, rs2295126, rs2268330, rs7161120, rs4981469) since the age of 22 years. At a recent neurological examination in OPMD locus were examined. The genotype frequencies obeyed the she showed bilateral ptosis, external ophthalmoplegia, severe optic Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for all loci in both groups. Three SNPs atrophy and deafness and had an ataxic gait with positive Romberg (rs2231301, rs2239579, rs4981469) revealed strong association with sign. Neurophysiological studies suggested that deafness was caused OPMD (p<10-3). Ten haplotypes with frequencies from 1.1 to 32.0% by auditive neuropathy. Nerve conduction studies revealed an axonal were found in control group and seven haplotypes (frequencies sensorimotor neuropathy, without additional myopathic features on range 1.4 - 48.6%) were detected in patients. Patients and controls needle electromyography. Brain MR imaging revealed a number of were characterized by different LD structure in OPMD locus. OPMD small high-signal lesions in the frontal and temporal white matter on T2 mutation is associated with 11 different haplotypes, including 3 major, imaging, thought to represent focal ischemic lesions. Younger brother, 2 moderate and 5 rare haplotypes (>13, 6 and <3% frequncies, sister and nephew had similar symptoms in heavier form. The disease respectively) indicating possible modest founder effect for OPMD in current was slowly progressing. Yakut population. OPA1 gene was amplified by PCR with specific primers designed to amplify all exons and flanking intronic regions. All four affected patients P12.187 with optic atrophy ‘plus’ clinical phenotypes underwent complete mutation analysis of cOL1A1 gene in osteogenesis imperfecta sequence analysis of the OPA1 gene. The c.1334 G > A (p.R445H) patients from Russia mutation in exon 14 caused disease in this family. This mutation D. Nadyrshina, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; introduce amino-acid changes in highly conserved positions of the Institute of Biochemistry and Genetict RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. GTPase domain. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder of connective tissue characterized by wide phenotypic variation mainly including P12.185 bone fragility. The majority of patients (about 90%) with a clinical Production of a mutant oligophrenin 1 protein causes mental diagnosis of OI possess mutations in COL1A1 or COL1A2 genes. retardation and cerebellar hypoplasia in a three generation The aim of our study was to identify mutations in COL1A1 gene in italian family. OI patients from three Russian populations (Russians, Tatars,Yakuts). F. Pirozzi1, F. Di Raimo1, G. Zanni2, E. Tabolacci1, T. Tartaglione3, E. Bertini2, A. We examined 54 patients with OI from 43 families and 50 healthy Brancaccio4, P. Chiurazzi1, G. Neri1; controls corresponding by age, gender, ethnicity and place of 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Università Cattolica, Roma, Italy, 2Unità di residence. DNA sequencing of 51 exons and exon-intron junctions in Medicina Molecolare, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Roma, Italy, COL1A1 gene was performed. 3Istituto di Radiologia, Università Cattolica, Roma, Italy, 4Istituto di Chimica For the first time previously unreported nonsense mutation c.967G>T del Riconoscimento Molecolare (CNR), c/o Istituto di Biochimica e Biochimica (p.Gly323X)/1 in COL1A1 gene was identified in heterozygous state Clinica, Università Cattolica, Roma, Italy. in two Russian patients and the novel frameshift mutation c.3541insC A three-generation family with two maternal cousins and an uncle (p.Gly1181ArgfsX38) in COL1A1 gene was observed in Yakut patient. affected by moderate to severe mental retardation and strabismus We also detected 3 previously described nonsense mutations was referred to our clinic. One cousin presented during infancy with in 5 Russian patients: c.1081C>T (p.Arg361X), c.1243C>T hydrocephalus and cerebellar hypoplasia, while the other cousin (p.Arg415X) and c.2869C>T (p.Gln957X), two frameshift mutations displayed marked hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis and asymmetric in two Tatar patients: c.579delT (p.Gly194ValfsX71) and c.2444delG hypoplasia of cerebellar lobes. The X-linked inheritance and the (p.Gly815AlafsX293) and 1 splicing mutation in one Yakut patient: Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 433 c.4005+1G>T. Interestingly, individuals possessing these mutations on immunofluorescence. This compares to two cases reported by were characterized by OI type I except for the patient with mutation Alanay et al., in which cells lacking FKBP65 protein had collagen c.1243C>T (p.Arg415X) clinically diagnosed by OI type 3/4. aggregation, while cells with an in-frame FKBP10 deletion did not. The present study revealed two novel mutations in COL1A1 gene A second pedigree branch includes two children with lethal OI. Both in patients with OI type I. Severe OI phenotype was observed in parents carry a 4 nt deletion in exon 5 of PPIB (c.563_566delACAG), the patient with nonsense mutation c.1243C>T (p.Arg415X), while predicting type IX OI in offspring. Mutant transcripts would likely previously published findings described this mutation in individuals escape NMD. Persistence of misfolded CypB would be predicted to with OI type I. cause severe dysfunction of the collagen 3-hydroxylation complex, compatible with the lethal outcome. P12.188 Null CRTAP mutation Associated with Non-lethal Oi and minimal P12.190 collagen Deposition in culture Identification of a novel osteogenesis imperfecta locus in dogs M. Valli1, A. M. Barnes2, W. A. Cabral2, A. Gallanti1, S. Viglio1, M. Weis3, D. M. Hytönen1,2,3, M. Snellman1, K. Sainio2, H. Lohi3,1,4; Eyre3, F. Antoniazzi4, J. C. Marini2, M. Mottes4; 1Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 1University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2NIH\NICHD, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Research 3Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, Programs Unit, Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, United States, 4University of Verona, Verona, Italy. 4Department of Molecular Genetics, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), or brittle bone disease, is characterized Finland. by bone fragility and deformity. Deficiency of any of the components Dog genome holds a wealth of information that will benefit human health of the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation complex causes recessive OI. since most of the canine inherited diseases have similar counterparts The complex contains cartilage-associated protein (CRTAP), prolyl in human. We have characterized a novel severe congenital disorder 3-hydroxylase 1 (P3H1) and cyclophilin B; it hydroxylates the α1(I) involving multiple skeletal defects among Brazilian Terriers. Affected Pro986 collagen residue. Most CRTAP mutations cause a null allele dogs have clinical symptoms including typical craniofacial features, and lethal OI (10/15), while 2 hypomorphic or missense and 3 null growth retardation, joint hyperlaxity and osteopenia. Pathohistological alleles were non-lethal. We report a 6 year old Egyptian boy with analyses revealed abnormalities in bone formation which resemble severe non-lethal type VII OI, who has the length of a 2.5 yr old and that of human osteogenesis imperfecta (OI). After exclusion of the DXA z=-3. He is homozygous for a null insertion/deletion CRTAP known OI genes we performed a genome-wide association study mutation (c.118_133del16insTACCC). He received neridronate with 7 cases and 11 controls using Illumina 24k arrays and mapped since 3 months of age. Similar to other CRTAP probands, his dermal the disease to a autozygous genomic region of 13 Mb in CFA6. The fibroblasts synthesize fully overmodified type I collagen (40% OHL/L), associated region is gene rich and being captured for resequencing which is well secreted into media. Only 5% of proband α1(I)Pro986 is to identify the causative mutation for the canine osteodysplasia. The 3-hydroxylated. On real-time RT-PCR, CRTAP transcripts are <15% identified locus is a novel OI locus and identification of the gene would of control. CRTAP protein is absent on Western blotting, with residual provide a candidate for human OIs. P3H1 and normal CyPB levels. Dermal fibril diameters were minimally increased vs an age-matched control, without loose fibril packing. P12.191 We have noted a severe deficiency (10-15% of control) of collagen the male phenotype in osteopathia striata with cranial sclerosis deposited in extracellular matrix by proband fibroblasts in long-term S. K. Holman1, P. Daniel1, Z. A. Jenkins1, R. L. Herron1, T. Morgan1, R. cultures, examined by immunofluorescence; the fibrillar network Savarirayan2, C. Chow3, A. Bohring4, A. Mosel5, D. Lacombe6, B. Steiner7, T. surrounding proband cells was also poorly organized. This data is Schmitt-Mechelke8, B. Schroter8, A. Raas-Rothschild9, S. Garcia Minaur10, corroborated by similar deficiency of radioactively-tagged collagen M. Porteous10, M. Parker11, O. Quarrell11, D. Tapon12, V. Cormier-Daire13, S. incorporated into matrix in deposition assays. Reduced collagen Mansour14, R. Nash15, L. A. Bindoff16, T. Fiskerstrand17, S. P. Robertson1; deposition in matrix is a novel finding which may play a role in the 1Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, Dunedin School of Medicine, pathophysiology of CRTAP mutations. University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand, 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Department of Pathology, P12.189 University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4Institut fur Humangenetik, Recessive Oi probands in a consanguineous Palestinian Westfalische Wilhelms-Universitat, Munster, Germany, 5Abteilung fur pranatale pedigree are each homozygous for mutations in a different gene Diagnostik, Klinikum Osnabruck, Osnabruck, Germany, 6Genetique Medicale, (FKBP10 and PPIB) CHU de Bordeaux, Universite de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 7Department A. M. Barnes1, W. A. Cabral1, E. Makareeva2, M. Weis3, W. Chang1, L. Felley1, of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 8Division of D. Eyre3, S. Leikin2, C. Trujillo4, J. C. Marini1; Neuropaediatrics, Childrens’s Hospital, Cantonal Hospital, CH-6016 Luzern, 1BEMB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2SPB, NICHD/NIH, Switzerland, 9Department of Human Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, University Hadassah Hebrew University Hospital, Jerusalem, Israel, 10South East of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Genetics Unit, Dr. Erfan & Bagedo Scotland Genetics Service, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United General Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Kingdom, 11Department of Medical Genetics, Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is caused by defects in genes Sheffield, United Kingdom, 12Centre for Fetal Care, Queen Charlotte’s and whose products interact with type I collagen for modification and/or Chelsea Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 13Department de Genetique, folding. We identified a 5-generation Palestinian pedigree with both Hopital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 14SW Thames Regional moderate and lethal forms of recessive OI caused by homozygous Genetics Service, St Georges Hospital, University of London, London, United mutations in FKBP10 or PPIB, which encode ER-resident molecular Kingdom, 15Department of Cellular Pathology, St George’s Hosptial, London, chaperone and isomerase FKPB65 and CyPB, respectively. One United Kingdom, 16Department of Neurology, Haukeland University Hospital pedigree branch includes a child with moderate type XI OI and a and Department of Clincial Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, homozygous FKBP10 mutation (c.1271_1272delCCinsA); both 17Center for Medical genetics and Molecular Medicine, haukeland University parents and one sibling are carriers. FKBP transcripts in proband Hospital and Department for Clinical Genetics, University of Bergen, Bergen, fibroblasts are 10% of control; the mutation is detectable in cDNA Norway. from fibroblasts cultured without emetine. FKBP65 protein is reduced The X-linked skeletal dysplasia Osteopathia Striata with Cranial in proband cells analyzed by Western blot and immunofluorescence Sclerosis (OSCS) is caused by truncating mutations in WTX. Females microscopy. Transcripts for other proteins that interact with collagen, exhibit sclerotic striations on the long bones, cranial sclerosis and CRTAP, P3H1 and HSP47, are increased approximately 2.5 craniofacial dysmorphism. Males with OSCS typically have skeletal fold in proband cells, reflecting cell stress. Proband collagen gel sclerosis, malformations (omphalocoele, kidney, heart defects), electrophoresis reveals moderate band broadening, suggesting partial patterning defects and significant pre- and postnatal lethality. Males overmodification. Proband collagen α1(I)Pro986 3-hydroxylation is with milder phenotypes also have WTX mutations. In addition to normal, as is collagen T . Collagen in proband cells is not aggregated skeletal sclerosis these individuals can have Hirschsprung disease, mMolecular basis of Mendelian disorders 434 joint contractures, cardiomyopathy and neuromuscular anomalies, but of membrane-anchored cytosolic proteins. In the cochlea, otoferlin is lack congenital malformations. This study seeks to draw genotype- believed to play a role in exocytosis of synaptic vesicles at the auditory phenotype correlations between these two groups. ribbon synapse of inner hair cells. Otoferlin is encoded by OTOF WTX is alternatively spliced to encode two protein isoforms (WTXS1, (OMIM: 603681). Mutations in this gene are a cause of neurosensory WTXS2). WTXS1 contains binding domains for APC, ß-catenin, WT1 non-syndromic recessive deafness and a region implicated in binding PtdIns(4,5)P2 . WTXS2 excludes CASE REPORT: We reported a case of a 49-year-old male. The first the PtdIns(4,5)P2 binding domains and one APC binding domain. contact with the service of otolaryngology was in 2000. The patient Mutations in WTX leading to OSCS are exclusively truncating and cluster complained of tinnitus in the left ear and vertigo. In 2004, it was according to phenotype; with those producing a severe phenotype detected hearing loss in left ear. In 2005, he began to have bilateral located in the 5’ region of the gene before the ß-catenin binding hearing loss. In 2007, last tonal audiometry detected sensorineural domain. Mutations leading to survival but still significant osteosclerosis hearing loss (60dB) in left ear and mild hearing loss on the right ear are, in general, located more 3’ in the gene, implying more C-terminal and he was diagnosed with Meniere’s disease. domains also participate in bone accretion. Paradoxically mutations RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Patient was heterozygote for R822W in two mildly affected males predicted to produce a severe phenotype mutation (c.2464C>T) in OTOF gene. Role of this mutation in hearing indicate that a correlation between mutation position within WTX and loss is controversial; some authors associate this mutation with non- the phenotype severity is not absolute. Characterising new mutations syndromic deafness, and others authors classify it as a polymorphism and identifying new phenotypic features help to define functional without a pathological role. We believe that this mutation may play a domains within WTX and provide new information about the cellular role in the developing of Meniere’s disease. pathophysiology of OSCS and the role WTX plays in morphogenesis in general. P12.194 Digenic inheritance model in Pendred syndrome patients P12.192 carrying only one disease causing sLc26A4 allele? Autosomal Recessive (ARO) and Autosomal Dominant T. Rinne, M. Tjon-Pon-Fong, L. Hoefsloot; Osteopetroses (ADO): results from a new UK diagnostic service, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. focusing on cLcN7-related Osteopetrosis. Pendred syndrome is one of the most common causes for autosomal M. E. Pennock1, M. Williams1, L. Yarram1, C. Steward2, A. Villa3, A. Pangrazio3, recessive inherited syndromal deafness. It is characterized by E. Roberts1; sensorineural deafness, enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) with or 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Pathology Sciences, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, without cochlear hypoplasia and enlarged thyroid gland. Mutations in United Kingdom, 2Department of Paediatric Haematology/Oncology, Bristol the SLC26A4 gene are known to cause syndromic and nonsyndromic Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Genetic hearing loss associated with EVA. Mutations in this gene explain and Biomedical Research (IRGB), National Research Council, Milan, Italy & approximately fifty-percent of the cases with hearing loss with EVA. Instituto Clinico Humanitas (IRCCS), Rozzano, Italy. A digenic model for hearing loss with the EVA phenotype has been The Osteopetroses are a heterogeneous group of disorders established. Mutations in either the FOXI1 or the KCNJ10 gene in characterised by an increased bone density due to impaired bone combination with a pathogenic mutation in the SLC26A4 gene have resorption. been reported to cause nonsyndromic hearing loss with EVA. ARO (OMIM 259700) has a UK incidence of 1:250000. Affected The aim of our study is to investigate the prevalence of the digenic patients may present in early infancy with generalized increase inheritance in patients with hearing loss with the EVA phenotype, and in bone density, predisposition to bone fractures, frontal bossing, whether FOXI1 and KCNJ10 genes can be included in the routine progressive deafness/ blindness, hepatosplenomegaly, and severe diagnostics of Pendred syndrome. We first investigated the FOXI1 anaemia. ARO is a heterogeneous disorder currently with 7 associated gene in a group of patients carrying only one pathogenic mutation in genes (TCIRG1, RANKL, CA2, CLCN7, OSTM1, PLEKHM1 and the SLC26A4 gene. In a group of 32 patients only one possible splice TNFRSF11A). Defining the genetic basis for ARO is important in site mutation was identified. Investigation of a group of 113 patients determining whether HSCT therapy may be helpful or contra-indicated. without pathogenic mutations in the SLC26A4 gene revealed two ADO type II (OMIM 166600) has an incidence of 1:20000 and typically possible pathogenic mutations in the FOXI1 gene. The analysis of the has onset in late childhood or adolescence. Patients may exhibit KCNJ10 gene in the same patient cohorts is ongoing. Although this sclerosis predominantly involving the spine with “sandwich vertebrae”, study is not yet completed, we can already conclude that yet unknown pelvis and skull base. The main complications are fractures, scoliosis mutations in regulatory and non-coding regions or other gene(s) are and osteomyelitis, particularly affecting the mandible. Hearing/visual also involved causing hearing loss with EVA phenotype. loss may affect around 5% of individuals. The gene associated with ADOII is CLCN7. P12.195 In July 2010 theThe Bristol Genetics Laboratory launched its new Periventricular nodular heterotopia and cerebellar hypoplasia: UKGTN sequencing service for 3 of the genes implicated in ARO: compund heterozygote mutations in a novel gene identified by CLCN7, RANKL and OSTM1 (using a 48 capillaryABI 3730). Together whole genome sequencing these genes account for approximately 16%-20% of ARO cases in the R. Oegema1, D. Heijsman2, R. Schot1, S. Kheradmand Kia1, M. H. Lequin3, UK/European population. In addition, a common mutation in Exon 2 A. Bertoli-Avella1, F. G. Grosveld1, A. J. Hoogeboom1, P. van der Spek2, A. of OSTM1 has been identified in the Middle Eastern ARO population. Kremer2, G. M. S. Mancini1; We have so far processed 7 patients to date, and found 4 (ADOII) 1Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Bioinformatics, patients positive for sequence changes in CLCN7 (p.Met584Val; Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Radiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, p.Gly215Arg; p.Tyr99Cys; p.Arg286Trp). We present the clinical and Netherlands. molecular genetic findings from these positive cases. introduction: Next-generation DNA sequencing is empowering scientists to identify genetic variations associated with human disease P12.193 at higher resolution and greater sensitivity than previously possible. A patient with ménierè‘s Disease is carrier of R822W mutation in The technology becomes a powerful tool for the diagnosis of genetic OTOF gene. diseases and recently, whole exome sequencing was shown to be A. Zuñiga, Y. Bello, J. Gisbert, R. Ramirez, A. Guerrero; effective for disease-gene identification and was successfully used to Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. determine the genetic basis of autosomal recessive disorders. Here BACKGROUND: Meniere’s disease is a disorder of the inner ear we present recent data and results from a whole genome sequencing that affects balance and hearing. This condition is characterized by study focusing on a novel syndrome. sudden episodes of vertigo, tinnitus, a feeling of pressure or fullness materials and methods: We study two brothers and a sister in a Dutch in the ears, and fluctuations in hearing. The cause of Meniere’s non-consanguineous pedigree, who suffer from severe delay, epilepsy, disease is unknown, although it probably results from a combination of microcephaly, and spastic tetraplegia. Dysmorphic facial features and environmental and genetic factors. Otoferlin belongs to a small family overriding toes were noted. Brain imaging (MRI) revealed in all the Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 435 patients diffuse periventricular nodular heterotopia and hypoplasia c.47-48delCT, c.168+5G>A, c.208-210del3, R111X, P211T, R243X, of the cerebellum. Based on the pedigree an autosomal recessive A300S, E390G, R413P, Y414C, W169H, c.509+5delG, E280K, inheritance was assumed. The genetic cause of this novel syndrome Y206X, R243Q, c.1089delG, S350Y, D415N. Four new mutations were could not be identified using conventional genetic investigations revealed as well: R252P, c.116delT, c.1315+del4 in PKU patients from (including candidate gene sequencing, linkage analysis, and Bashkortostan, F331S - from North Caucasus.83.9% of the studied expression exon arrays). We analyzed the whole-genome sequences families with PKU have appeared completely informative for direct (sequencing performed by Complete Genomics) of six family members DNA-diagnostics, 12.8% - partially-informative, and 3.3% - absolutely and tested multiple inheritance models. not informative.Thus the data of mutational analysis of the PAH gene Results: Homozygous mutations in exons were excluded and may be used for prenatal diagnostics and carrier screening in PKU subsequent analysis of compound heterozygous variants revealed families in studied republics. predicted non-conservative changes in promising novel candidate genes of which one is undergoing functional validation. P12.198 conclusion: Using whole genome sequencing we identified the Identification of three novel single nucleotide changes in the candidate gene for a novel genetic syndrome. We describe the PAH gene observed in Latvian patients with phenylketonuria patients’ phenotype, the analysis workflow, results and preliminary N. Pronina1,2, R. Lugovska1,2; validation studies. 1Children’s University Hospital, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia. P12.196 Molecular analysis of 70 Latvian PKU patients has revealed very ‚Perrault syndrome in a female manifesting carrier of mtDNA high genotypic homogeneity, as 73% of the mutant alleles carry the 11778G>A mutation‘ R408W mutation typical for Eastern Europe. 51% (36/70) of patients M. Badura-Stronka1,2, W. Grotowski3, B. Męczekalski3, A. Wawrocka1, K. are homozygous for R408W mutation; the remaining 34 patients are Zawieja4, M. Krawczyński1,2, A. Latos-Bieleńska1,2; compound heterozygous. Analysis of these patients has revealed 16 1Chair and Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical different mutations E280K, R158Q, R261Q, P281L, A104D, A403V, Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Center for Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznań, E178G, R111X, IVS10-11G>A, IVS12+1G>A, G272X, R261X, E221_ Poland, 3Department of Gynecological Endocrinology, Poznan University of D22>Efs, I306V, V230I and three novel single nucleotide changes Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 4Centrum Medyczne Świętego Jerzego, in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: P292T (c.874C>A), K371E Poznań, Poland. (c.1111A>G) and IVS12-1G>A (c.1316-1G>A). Perrault syndrome (PS) is a rare autosomal recessive syndrome, Mutation P292T (c.874C>A) in Exon 8 substitutes proline at residue characterized by ovarian dysgenesis, hearing loss and ataxia in female 292 to thereonine; IVS12-1G>A (c.1316-1G>A) at he boundary of patients. Recently, pathogenic mutations in HSD17B4 gene have been IVS12 and exon 13 affects the conserved dinucleotide at the 3’ splice described in two affected sisters, however, lack of mutation in other site. Both these mutations were found in association with R408W in families with PS suggests genetic heterogeneity of the syndrome. patients with severe PKU. We have performed sequencing of 24 coding exons of the HSD17B4 Mutation K371E (c.1111A>G) in Exon 11 replaces lysine at residue 371 gene in a 21-years old female with 46,XX karyotype and clinical with glutamic acid. It was also observed in association with R408W symptoms of PS: hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, ataxia, in patient with mild hyperphenylalaninaemia (MHP), who does not intellectual impairment and hearing loss. The open reading frame was need a low-phenylalanine diet. Thereby we suppose that this mutation free of mutations. causes MHP as R408W is a severe mutation with no residual activity Several patient`s mother`s male relatives are affected by Leber of enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase. Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON). A test for mtDNA 11778G>A None of the mentioned novel single nucleotide changes had been mutation was positive in the affected males and in our patient. Further previously detected in patients’ chromosomes and 100 population ophthalmologic assessment revealed advanced optic neuropathy in controls. We assume that these variants are functionally relevant the patient. although this need to be confirmed by additional in vitro expression This case is the first reported patient with PS and mtDNA mutation. analysis. The authors provide detailed clinical data. Possibility of causal relation between mtDNA mutation and PS and influence of hypogonadism on P12.199 manifestation of LHON in females are discussed. Neurologic and ocular phenotype in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and The research is funded by the European Community‘s 7th FP [FP7/2007- a zebrafish model 2013] under grant agreement n° 223692, CHERISH project. A. Brockschmidt1, A. Filippi2, P. Charbel Issa3,4, M. Nelles5, H. Urbach5, N. Eter3,6, W. Driever2, R. G. Weber1; P12.197 1University of Bonn, Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2University of the molecular-genetic study of phenylketonuria in Russia Freiburg, Department of Developmental Biology, Freiburg, Germany, 3University V. L. Akhmetova1, I. Sadrtdinova2, M. Orasgalieva3, I. Gilyazova1, R. of Bonn, Department of Ophthalmology, Bonn, Germany, 4University of Oxford, Khusainova1, M. Bermisheva1, E. Khusnutdinova1; John Radcliffe Hospital, Nuffield Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Oxford, United 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir Kingdom, 5University of Bonn, Department of Radiology/Neuroradiology, Bonn, State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3The Scientific Center of Obstetrics, Germany, 6University of Münster, Department of Ophthalmology, Münster, Gynecology and Pernintology, Almaty, Kazakhstan. Germany. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most common inborn error of amino TCF4 haploinsufficiency was recently identified to cause the Pitt- acid metabolism in Europeans which is caused by a large variety of Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), a disorder characterized by severe mental mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH). We analyzed and motor retardation, breathing abnormalities and distinctive facial structural features of PAH gene in families with PKU from Bashkortostan features. The Danio rerio ortholog, tcf4, is expressed in several regions Republic (N=124), North Caucasus (N=36) and Kazakhstan (N=20). in the CNS and the retina during early development. The neurologic Consequently we revealed 35 various mutations that spectrum was and ocular phenotype was characterized in a PTHS-patient with a specific for each region. Our results indicated that R408W mutation uniallelic TCF4 deletion and in a zebrafish model of the disease. While accounted for 52% PKU in Bashkortostan and 45% in Kazakhstan. a cerebral MRI-scan in the PTHS-patient at age one year showed a Mutation R261X of the PAH gene is found out only in patients from the markedly delayed myelination and ventriculomegaly, no structural North Caucasus with frequency of 38.9% whereas mutation R408W in cerebral anomalies including no evidence for white matter tract the given region is revealed with frequency of 13.9%. The frequency alterations were detected on high-resolution MRI with DTI at age 9 of mutation R261Q of the PAH gene was also high in PKU patients years. Structural ocular examinations showed highly myopic eyes and from Bashkortostan and Kazakhstan (12.9% and 7.5%, respectively). an increase in ocular length, while spectral domain optical coherence Other mutations of the PAH gene were identified with frequencies from tomography (SD-OCT) imaging showed retinal layers and foveal 3.3% to 0.27% on the average: c.1315+1G>A c.1066-11G>A, R158Q, configuration to be normal. Knockdown of tcf4-function by injection of c.663-664delAG, R252W, P281L, L48S, c.441+5G>T, S349P, I306V, morpholino antisense oligos into zebrafish embryos was performed, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 436 and the morphant phenotype was characterized for expression of tissue repair. However, in epithelia of dilated tubules and cysts, strong neural differentiation genes neurog1, ascl1b, pax6a, zic1, atoh1a, nuclear YAP accumulation was observed, which was accompanied and atoh2b resulting in a developmental delay or defects in terminal by up-regulation of the suspected YAP transcriptional targets Birc-3, differentiation of brain and eyes, small eyes with a relative increase Ctgf, InhbA and Fjx1. Altered Hippo-pathway activity was confirmed in ocular length and an enlargement of the hindbrain ventricle. In in human renal ADPKD and ARPKD tissues, as well as cystic renal summary, tcf4-knockdown in zebrafish embryos does not seem to tumors. These data support the notion that during epithelial repair affect early neural patterning and regionalization of the forebrain, but Four-jointed is involved in PCP-signaling, while in cystic kidneys this may be involved in later aspects of neurogenesis and differentiation. protein is related to Hippo-signaling and cyst growth. We provide evidence for a role of TCF4/E2-2 in ocular growth control in PTHS-patients and the zebrafish model. P12.202 mutations of PKD1 and PKD2 genes in families with autosomal P12.200 dominant polycystic kidney disease in czech Republic Genetic diagnosis of the Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney J. Stekrova1, J. Reiterova1, V. Elisakova1, M. Merta1,2, V. Tesar1, M. Disease by specific sequencing of the PKD1 gene Kohoutova1; J. Garcia-Planells, M. Garcia-Hoyos, C. Ruiz, M. Bermejo, L. Rausell, I. 1General Teaching Hospital of 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Gómez, M. Perez-Alonso; Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty Hospital, Hradec Kralove, Czech Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna (Valencia), Spain. Republic. Introduction: Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the is one of the most prevalent inherited disorders, with an incidence of most common form of inherited kidney disease that results in renal 1:1000. ADPKD is a late-onset multisystem disorder characterized by failure. ADPKD is a systemic disorder, with cysts and connective bilateral renal cysts and cysts in other organs including liver, pancreas tissue abnormalities involving many organs. The disease is caused and seminal vesicles. Mutations in PKD1 gene (16p13) and PKD2 gene by mutations of PKD1 and PKD2 genes. In the PKD database (http:// (4q21-q23) are present in 85% and 15%, respectively, of the ADPKD pkdb.mayo.edu) 846 different variants of the PKD1 gene and 139 patients. Genetic diagnosis of the PKD1 gene is a tricky task because different variants of the PKD2 gene have been reported. the presence of, at least, 5 pseudogenes with a 98% similarity with the The direct detection of mutations in both PKD genes was performed 5’ region of the PKD1 gene. within research projects in our laboratory. The mutation analysis Objective: To offer an accurate genetic diagnosis to patients with of PKD1 gene has so far detected probably causal mutations in 57 clinical diagnosis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease families. Only the described nonsense mutation p.R4021X was (ADPKD). detected in three nonrelated families and the described missense Methodology: Genetic testing of the PKD1 gene in ADPKD patients mutation p.E2771K was detected in two families; other mutations has been carried out by sequencing throught the 46 exons of the gene. are unique for individual families; 42 mutations are unique for Czech To analyze specifically the 5’ region of the PKD1 gene and discard population. the homologous regions of the known pseudogenes, five specific long The mutation analysis of PKD2 gene has so far detected probably causal PCRs were designed. Obtained fragments were used as templates mutations in 36 families. The frameshifting mutation c.203_204insC for the amplification of the first 34 exons of the PKD1 gene by using was identified in 9 families, nonsense mutation p.Q160X in 6 families. intronic primers encompassing each exon. Fourteen mutations are unique for Czech population. Results and conclusions: This protocol allows obtaining specific Two families with highly variable clinical course were identified. Trans- sequences for the PKD1 gene excluding homologous regions of the heterozygous mutations in both PKD genes were found in the patient pseudogenes in normal and ADPKD samples. with end stage renal disease at 28 years. His 65-year-old father with We can conclude that this validated protocol is a good methodology only PKD2 mutation has mild renal insufficiency and his mother died for genetic diagnosis of ADPKD, avoiding misinterpretation problems because of uremia at 45 years. In the second family were found the produced for the presence of pseudogene sequences. An accurate influence of mosaicism and hypomorphic allele in PKD1 gene. genetic diagnosis is essential to provide prenatal and preimplantational Supported by the grant project VZ MSMT 0021620806 genetic diagnosis to ADPKD patients. P12.203 P12.201** impairment of the tRNA splicing endonuclease subunit 54 Altered Hippo signaling in polycystic kidney disease (tsen54) gene causes neurological abnormalities and larval H. Happé1, A. M. van der Wal2, W. N. Leonhard1, S. J. Kunnen1, M. H. death in zebrafish models of Pontocerebellar Hypoplasia Breuning3, E. de Heer2, D. J. M. Peters1; P. Kasher1, Y. Namavar1, P. van Tijn2, K. Fluiter1, A. Sizarov1, M. Kamermans2, 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, A. Grierson3, D. Zivkovic4, F. Baas1; Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Netherlands Institute Leiden, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University of Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Neuroscience, Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands. Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease (ADPKD) is Pontocerebellar hypoplasia (PCH) represents a group (PCH1-6) of characterized by the formation of many fluid-filled cysts in the kidneys neurodegenerative autosomal recessive disorders characterised and progressive deterioration of renal function, finally leading to renal by hypoplasia and/or atrophy of the cerebellum, hypoplasia of the failure. Previously we showed that tubular epithelial injury accelerates ventral pons, progressive microcephaly and variable neocortical cyst formation in inducible Pkd1-deletion mice. In these mice atrophy. The majority of PCH2 and PCH4 cases are caused by expression of the Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) component Four-jointed mutations in the TSEN54 gene; one of four subunits comprising the (Fjx1) is decreased during epithelial repair but at later stages, in cystic tRNA-splicing endonuclease (TSEN) complex. We hypothesised kidneys, Fjx1 expression is increased. that TSEN54 mutations act through a loss of function mechanism. Additional to a role in PCP-signaling, Four-jointed is also implicated in At 8 weeks of gestation, human TSEN54 is expressed ubiquitously the Hippo-signaling pathway, which controls organ size by regulating in the brain, yet strong expression is seen within the telencephalon proliferation and apoptosis. In humans, this pathway is also known from and metencephalon. Comparable expression patterns for tsen54 are its involvement in several types of cancer, and in neurofibromatosis observed in zebrafish embryos. Morpholino knockdown of tsen54 in type 2 (NF2). The role of Hippo-signaling, together with the opposing zebrafish embryos results in loss of structural definition in the brain. expression pattern of Fjx1 during epithelial repair and at cystic stages, This phenotype was partially rescued by co-injecting the morpholino led us to investigate the activity of the Hippo pathway during these with human TSEN54 mRNA. A developmental patterning defect was processes. not associated with tsen54 knockdown, however an increase in cell Examining the Hippo pathway’s final effector molecule, the death within the brain was observed, thus bearing resemblance to PCH transcriptional co-activator Yes-associated protein (YAP), we found no pathophysiology. Additionally, ENU mutant zebrafish homozygous differential expression between Pkd1-deletion mice and controls during for a tsen54 premature stop codon mutation die within 9 days post-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 437 fertilisation. To determine whether a common disease pathway exists substitution has been found in both affected and healthy relatives and between TSEN54 and other PCH-related genes, we also monitored the is thus unlikely to be pathogenic. Other parental samples were not effects of rars2 (PCH1, PCH6) knockdown in zebrafish. Comparable available yet. brain phenotypes were observed following inhibition of both genes. Among the eighteen variants observed in American and French These data strongly support the hypothesis that TSEN54 mutations cohorts, five have since been reported in the dbSNP database and one cause PCH through a loss of function mechanism. Also we suggest is also found in an unaffected individual, questioning the implication of that a common disease pathway may exist between TSEN54 and DMXL1 in the disease and suggesting a rarer frequency of possibly RARS2-related PCH, which may involve a tRNA processing related pathogenic variants than reported initially (2.7% at the most). mechanism. P12.206 P12.204 Prevalence of FmR1 intermediate alleles among women with An integrated clinical, genetic and epigenetic approach of the idiopathic POF in the Basque country Prader Willi syndrome phenotypes in Romanian population M. Barasoain1, G. Barrenetxea2, I. Huerta1, M. Télez1, E. Ortiz-Lastra3, A. J. C. Arsene1, M. Puiu2, A. Botezatu3, G. Anton3, C. Badiu4, C. Popa2, N. Cucu1; González3, P. Flores4, B. Criado5, I. Arrieta1; 1University of Bucharest, Faculty of Biology, Department of genetics, 1Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology. Epigenetics Center, Bucuresti, Romania, 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Faculty of Science and Technology, Bilbao, Spain, 2Ginecology, Obstetrics and Timisoara, Romania, 3National Institute of Virology - Stefan Nicolau, Bucharest, Assisted Reproduction Service. Center for Reproductive Medicine and Infertility Romania, 4Endocrinology Institute - C.I. Parhon, Bucuresti, Romania. Quirón Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain, 3Department of Internal Medicine. Faculty of Prader Willi syndrome (PWS) is a complex disorder whose diagnosis Medicine, Bilbao, Spain, 4Department of Nursery. School of Nursing, Bilbao, may be difficult to establish on clinical grounds, because of the Spain, 5Department of Genetics. Cooperativa de Ensino Superior Politecnico e individual variations in the phenotype and because this one develops Universitario (CESPU), Porto, Portugal. with age. Fragile X syndrome is caused by the expansion of a CGG trinucleotide Molecular mechanisms that lead to this disorder could be repeat in the 5’ untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation chromosomal deletions, uniparental disomy (UPD), intragenic 1 (FMR1) gene. The FMR1 premutation (55-199 repeats) alleles have mutations and epigenetic modifications in the process of imprinting been associated with premature ovarian failure (POF) and earlier and rarely reciprocal translocations in 15q11-q13. A common defect age at menopause. The FMR1 alleles in the intermediate range (45- is noticed in all cases: loss of parental contribution in this region. This 60 repeats) and in the high end of the normal range (>35) have also feature coupled with clinical scores and classical karyotyping have been found to be related with POF and early menopause. It has been been investigated in a group of 36 patients. They were screened for estimated that approximately 20% of FMR1 premutation women genetic factors, that is: chromosomal translocations (karyotyping), have POF and among females with idiopathic POF, about 3.2% deletions (FISH, fluorescent in situ hybridization) and combined carries the premutation allele. These values are in accordance with genetic and epigenetic factors: microdeletions and DNA methylation our previous results in a sample from the Basque Country (3.5%). To (MSPCR, methylation specific PCR and MS-MLPA, methylation complete the investigation, we have analyzed the prevalence of the specific multilocus ligation-dependent probe amplification). Among intermediate alleles in patients with POF from the Basque Country. all clinically suspected cases, only 14 cases were confirmed by We have found that 4,76% of them has an intermediate allele with methylation analyses. The resulted MLPA scheme of microdeletions more than 45 CGG repeats, but this percentage increases to 23,81% in the critical region 15q11-q13 in confirmed cases suggested the when we consider the 35-54 CGG repeats range. In the general following mechanism: the imprinting defect can occur secondary to a Basque population previously analyzed, the percentage of alleles in DNA sequence modification or mutation in a cis-acting factor or as this range (35-54 CGGs) was 6.8%. The results obtained reinforce the primary epigenetic modification in the absence of any DNA sequence association between the alleles at the high end of the normal range, change. Primary epigenetic modifications may occur after fertilization the intermediate alleles, and the ovarian dysfunction. and lead to somatic phenotype mosaicism. An indirect trans-genetic factor implication, as the mthfr gene polymorphism, was investigated P12.207 in the two families and in the 14 cases. The results of this approach Identification of a chromosomal locus associated with recessive suggested a further link of the PWS with the errors in the parental Primary ciliary Dyskinesia in a Bedouin family methylome. M. Mazor1,2, R. Parvari1,2, V. Chalifa Caspi2, S. Alkrinawi3, E. Manor4, J. Beck5, V. Sheffield5, M. Aviram3; P12.205 1Dept of Virology & developmental Genetics, Ben Gurion University, Beer- is DmXL1 a Prader-Willi like gene? Sheva, Israel, 2The National Institute for Biotechnology in the Negev, Beer- N. Calmels1, C. Seifert1, C. Gasnier1, N. Haumesser2, C. Vincent-Delorme3, J. Sheva, Israel, 3Pediatric Division Soroka medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, Böhm2, J. Laporte2, J. Muller1,2, J. L. Mandel1,2,4; 4Institute of Genetics, Soroka Medical Center, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 5Dept. of 1Laboratoire de Diagnostic Genetique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Pediatrics - Division of Medical Genetics; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Strasbourg, France, 2IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 3Service de Génétique Clinique University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States. Guy Fontaine, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandres, Lille, France, 4College de France, Primary ciliary dyskinesia is a rare autosomal recessive genetic Paris, France. disorder, caused by inherited defects of ciliary structure and function. The DMXL1 gene, encoding a WD repeats protein of unknown The clinical features reflect the distribution of dysmotile cilia and function, has been proposed recently to be mutated in patients with include neonatal and chronic respiratory distress due to lack of a Prader-Willi like phenotype (Gokhale et al., abstracts at ASHG 2008 coordinated ciliary movement. In approximately half of PCD patients, and 2009. Hegde et al, US Patent 2010/0136552 A1), with the finding there is apparent randomization of left-right axis development, or situs of heterozygous missense variants in 12/114 patients (10.5%). Eight inversus totalis proposed to result from defective function of embryonic of these twelve variants occurred in exons 20-24 of this gene. Three nodal cilia. of them were cited in the ASHG abstract as de novo mutations but We have characterized a consanguineous Bedouin family from without further confirmation. the Negev, who has two siblings diagnosed with situs inversus and We have sequenced either directly (the large exon 24) or after respiratory symptoms and numerous healthy siblings. Linkage to the high resolution melting screening (exons 20-23) these exons that 13 genes known to be associated with the disease was negated. encode 20% of the protein, in 328 patients referred to our molecular Further genome wide linkage analysis using the Affymetrix GeneChip diagnostic lab for a broadly defined Prader-Willi like phenotype without mapping 250K array and microsatellite markers was performed. chromosome 15 anomaly. We have found one already described Homozygosity mapping identified a chromosomal region larger than variant (M1589V) and six novel heterozygous missenses with five of 16cM. Genotyping the region by analyzing polymorphic markers to all them observed in a single patient each. Three out of these five variants family members has defined a locus of 30Mb on chromosome 18q with were predicted as possibly or probably pathogenic using Polyphen. a Lod score of 3.0 for multipoint analysis. Parental samples have been obtained for one case: the R2131S Prioritizing genes for search of the mutation and initial sequencing, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 438 was preformed according to the databases of proteome collections, Bulgaria. and derived from evolutionarily distant organisms which combines The nevoid basal cell-carcinoma syndrome (NBCCS), also known independently assembled ciliary, basal body and centrosome. as “Gorlin syndrome”, is an autosomal dominant disorder of high Identification of additional genes involved in cilia function will provide penetrance, but variable expression. Clinical manifestations are new insights into the molecular mechanisms of the cilia and help to extremely variable and include various skin changes and congenital develop much needed novel techniques to diagnose subjects with malformations, as well as predisposition to different neoplasms. PCD Multiple BCCs, odontogenic jaw keratocysts (OKCs), palmar and plantar pits, and falx calcifications are major criteria of the disease. P12.208 NBCCS is caused by mutations in the PTCH1 gene A novel ABCB11 mutation in an iranian girl with progressive Here we report two patients with NBCCS, caused by frameshift familial intrahepatic cholestasis PTCH1mutations. The first patient is a 12-years old girl with craniofacial E. Bagherizadeh1, R. Vazifehmand2, S. Saber1, M. Kasiri1, H. Bikker3; dysmorphism - macrocephaly, frontal bossing, malformed ears, high 1Sarem Cell Research Center, Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic arched palate, and multiple nevi. The central nervous system (CNS) Republic of Iran, 2Young Researchers Club , Islamic Azad University, Rasht, manifestations included multiple falx and tentorium calcifications, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Academic Medical Center Department of Clinical cavum vergae, cavum septi pellucidi, and occipital arachnoid cysts, Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands. mild mental retardation. Family history was positive for Gorlin syndrome Progressive familial intrahepatic cholestasis is an autosomal recessive (mother and grandmother with multiple BCCs and OKCs; uncle with liver disorder originated from biallelic mutation in ABCB11 gene. A severe mental retardation, epilepsy, BCCs, OKCs and temporal lobe 9 year-old girl with cholestasis referred for genetic counseling. The tumor; an older brother with lethal outcome in early infancy due to patient was affected by icterus and pruritis from newborn period. She congenital hydrocephalus and cerebellar tumor). Molecular-genetic had a family history of cholestasis in two previous expired siblings. analysis in the proband revealed 2bp deletion in exon 2 of the PTCH1 Hepatocellular swelling with multi nuclearative canalicular and gene - c.257_258delTC, p.(Leu87Ilefs*1). hepatocellular cholestasis, portal lymphocytic infiltration and fibrosis, The second patient is a 36-years old woman with negative family newly formed liver nodules, bridging necrosis, bile duct proliferation, history. She has been operated for BCCs and OKCs. No CNS or other giant cells and micro vesicular fat droplet can be seen in proband symptoms were registered so far. The screening for PTCH1 mutations liver biopsy. Genetic analysis on ABCB11 gene led to identifying of revealed a splice site mutation g.1602+1G>T. a novel mutation in exon 26. The homozygous mutation was found in Both established mutations are frameshifting, but they showed different sequence 3593 A>G, the mutation lead to a missense mutation at the phenotypic expression especially in regard to the CNS manifestations amino acid level (His1198Arg). This mutation caused PFIC2 due to of the disease. abnormal function in the bile salt export pump protein (BSEP). P12.211 P12.209 the molecular pathology of the inversa subtype of recessive simultaneous loss of heterozygosity and point mutation dystrophic epidermolysis bullosa detection with high resolution melting P. C. Van den Akker1,2, J. E. Mellerio3,4, A. E. Martinez4, L. Liu5, P. J. C. V. Musani1, M. Sabol1, P. Ozretic1, D. Car1, D. Leovic2, M. Levacic Cvok3, S. Dopping-Hepenstal5, A. J. Van Essen1, H. Scheffer6, R. M. W. Hofstra1, J. A. Levanat1; McGrath7, M. F. Jonkman2; 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia, 2University Hospital Osijek, 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of 31000 Osijek, Croatia, 3Rudjer-Medikol Diagnostics, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia. Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Dermatology, University Basal-cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common type of skin Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, cancer, and shows a continuously increasing incidence. BCCs occur 3St John’s Institute of Dermatology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation predominantly on head and neck of elderly fair-skinned people, with Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Dermatology, Great Ormond increased occurrence on the trunk (torso) in recent years. Patched Street Hospital NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5The Robin Eady National (PTCH1) gene is a tumor suppressor gene most often associated with Diagnostic Epidermolysis Bullosa Laboratory, GSTS Pathology, St John’s development of BCCs. It is a member of the Hh-Gli signaling pathway, Institute of Dermatology, St Thomas’ Hospital, London, United Kingdom, a pathway that plays a major role in embryonic development and stem 6Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical cell maintenance. Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of tumor suppressor Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7St John’s Institute of Dermatology, King’s genes is a frequent event in tumorigenesis, and is most often analyzed College London (Guy’s Campus) and Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation by microsatellite typing. Here we offer a fast and efficient method for Trust, London, United Kingdom. simultaneous SNP genotyping and mutation scanning, which can also All forms of the heritable blistering disorder dystrophic epidermolysis be used for LOH detection. High resolution melting (HRM) analysis bullosa (DEB) result from mutations in the type VII collagen gene, is based on differences in melting curves caused by variations in COL7A1. Clinically, DEB is heterogeneous and a spectrum of COL7A1 nucleotide sequence during the heating (melting) of the PCR product mutations has been reported. In spite of paradigms for genotype- in the presence of the intercalating dye. Based on our previous phenotype correlation, however, the molecular basis of some rare DEB experience with HRM, we expanded our mutation screening to LOH forms, such as the inversa subtype of recessive DEB (RDEB-I), has analysis with a study of 25 BCC samples. We also compared the LOH not been clearly documented. RDEB-I is characterized by predominant results obtained with HRM with those of the conventional microsatellite blistering in the body flexures and variable mucosal involvement. To typing for several STR markers in PTCH1 region. HRM is an excellent characterize RDEB-I in more detail, we screened COL7A1 in a cohort method for both point mutation detection and LOH analysis, with point of 18 Dutch and UK patients and determined genotype-phenotype mutations found in 40%, and LOH in 50% of samples, and the inter- correlation. All patients carried homozygous, functionally hemizygous, rater agreement between microsatellite and HRM LOH analyses of or compound heterozygous arginine or glycine substitutions within the κ value of 0.869, what can be interpreted as very good agreement THD of type VII collagen. However, no clear differences in position between the methods. of mutated codon or nature of substituting amino acids were evident between these RDEB-I mutations and missense mutations causing P12.210 other RDEB phenotypes. Our results do not support recent data Gorlin syndrome and PtcH1 gene mutation in two Bulgarian that have suggested that glycine substitutions close to THD non- cases collagenous imperfections might underlie RDEB-I, as 7/11 (56%) A. Todorova1,2, P. Dimova3, V. Dimitrova4, A. Kirov1,2, T. Todorov1,2, B. Veneta3, of mutated glycine codons were sited in the central parts of THD E. Slavkova3, V. Mitev1; collagenous subdomains. Our data demonstrate that RDEB-I is 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University caused by specific arginine and glycine substitutions within the type Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory “Genica”, Sofia, VII collagen THD, but the precise pathophysiological mechanism by Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Child Neurology, “St. Naum” Hospital, Medical University which they lead to the curious inversa distribution remains obscure. Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, It is plausible that these mutations only lead to disease in body areas Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 439 with higher skin temperatures, but functional data to substantiate this and physical workup including cardiac magnetic resonance. are still required. CONCLUSIONS: Althought previously reported, the p.F110L mutation demonstrated to be causatively linked to the RCM phenotype in P12.212 homozygous status: The carriers of the investigated family did not the NiGms Human Genetic cell Repository: a resource for show any disease sign of the cardiac imaging even in adulthood. biomedical research D. S. Berlin1, B. A. Frederick1, K. Fecenko-Tacka1, N. P. Gerry1, M. A. Keller1, P12.214 S. H. Kim1, D. Kusic1, T. J. Schmidlen1, Z. Tang1, L. Toji1, M. L. Batshaw2, M. molecular diagnosis of autosomal recessive retinal dystrophies Tuchman2, A. Rutkowski3, L. Kalman4, C. M. Beiswanger1; by homozygosity mapping with sNP arrays 1Coriell Institute for Medical Research, Camden, NJ, United States, 2Children’s F. Coppieters1, K. Van Schil1, S. Lefever1, E. De Vlieghere1, F. Meire2, B. P. National Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States, 3Cure CMD, Los Leroy1,3, E. De Baere1; Angeles, CA, United States, 4Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, 2Hôpital Atlanta, GA, United States. Des Enfants Reine Fabiola, Free University of Brussels, Brussels, Belgium, The National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) Human 3Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Genetic Cell Repository at the Coriell Institute for Medical Research Identity-by-descent (IBD) mapping has been instrumental in gene supplies scientists worldwide with high-quality, well-characterized cell discovery of several autosomal recessive (AR) retinal dystrophies lines and DNA for use in biomedical research. Continually expanding, (RDs). The increasing use of genomewide SNP chips makes IBD the NIGMS Repository currently offers more than 10,500 different mapping an accessible tool in a clinical context. We aimed to apply this cell lines through its web-based catalog, accessible at ccr.coriell.org. approach as a molecular diagnostic tool in consanguineous families The majority of the Repository is comprised of lymphoblastoid and with several RDs. fibroblast cell lines and DNA from individuals with inherited disorders In total, 35 patients out of 29 families underwent IBD mapping using or chromosomal aberrations, and from apparently healthy individuals 250K SNP chips. Twenty probands were diagnosed with one of the representing specific ethnic populations. Induced pluripotent stem following RDs: Leber Congenital Amaurosis (6), early-onset retinal cells (iPSCs) are a new addition to the collection: both disease-specific dystrophy (2), AR retinitis pigmentosa (9) or cone-rod dystrophy (3). and apparently healthy iPSCs will be available to investigators in 2011. In addition, nine probands presented with a syndromic RD: Senior- Most of these iPSCs have been reprogrammed from NIGMS Repository Loken syndrome (2); LCA with mental retardation (MR) (2) or deafness fibroblasts. The Repository has also established various differentiated (1); Usher syndrome type I (1) and II (2) and ARRP in combination cell lines. In collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and with mild MR, growth hormone defect and acromelic dysplasia (1). RD Prevention’s Genetic Testing Reference Material Coordination candidate genes located within major IBD regions were screened for Program and members of the genetic testing community, genomic mutations by Sanger sequencing. In patients in whom a mutation was DNA reference materials characterized by multiple laboratories using found, the clinical record was revisited. different testing platforms have been developed and are available This approach revealed mutations in nine families so far (31%), thereby through the NIGMS Repository. Available reference materials include overcoming the need for laborious gene-to-gene testing of all known panels for disorders common in individuals of Ashkenazi Jewish disease genes and the need for a well-established phenotype prior to descent, cystic fibrosis, and pharmacogenomic testing. Reference testing. New mutations were found in the following genes: RDH12 (3), materials for myotonic dystrophy and chromosomal aberrations are IQCB1 (3), USH2A, ABCA4, CNNM4. In addition, a reappraisal of the now being developed. Genome-wide genotyping of approximately clinical diagnosis was made in patients with mutations in RDH12 and 1,100 samples in the collection has been completed, with data CNNM4. Finally, we showed that IBD mapping could also be used in available to researchers through dbGAP. The NIGMS Repository is families with a single affected individual. currently recruiting urea cycle disorder and congenital muscle disease biospecimens through the Urea Cycle Disorders Consortium and Cure P12.215 CMD, respectively. First genetic study of Retinitis Pigmentosa in italian population by microarray technology. P12.213 L. Berti1, S. Palchetti1, I. Passerini1, A. Sodi2, B. Boschi1, U. Menchini2, F. the p.F110L homozygous mutation of tNNt2 is associated to Torricelli1; Restrictive cardiomyopathy 1SOD Diagnostica genetica, AOU Careggi, Florence, Italy, 2Eye Clinic, F. Orsini1, V. Motta1, A. Colosimo1, C. Lauricella1, F. Marra1, E. Araldi1, F. University of Florence, Florence, Italy. Mauri1, S. Veronese1, M. Frigerio1, M. Gambacorta1, R. Petraroli2, P. Merlini1, N. Autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa (AR-RP) displays a high Marziliano1; degree of genetic and clinical heterogeneity. The mutations spectrum 1A.O. Niguarda Ca’ Granda, Milano, Italy, 2Applied Biosystems, Life can vary among different ethnic groups; we report a molecular analysis Technologies, Monza, Italy. of Italian AR-RP patients, performed with microarray technology. BACKGROUND: Pure restrictive cardiomyopathy (RCM) is a very 94 AP-RP patients originating from different part of Italy were included rare disease clinically characterized by impaired relaxation and left in the study. Diagnostic criteria were early onset retinal dystrophy ventricular (LV) filling, dilation of both atria and absence of significant LV with typical pigment clumping, electroretinogram (ERG) severe hypertrophy. Mutations that cause RCM have been identified in several abnormalities, visual field concentric restriction. All the patients genes that encode contractile proteins like Desmin (DES), Troponin I underwent a standard ophthalmic examination. Mutation analysis was (TNNT3) and Troponin T (TNNT2). TNNT2 is the tropomyosin-binding performed by a microarray chip APEX (Arrayed Primer Extension), subunit of troponin, the thin filament regulatory complex which confers including the most frequent mutations associated with AR-RP (501 calcium-sensitivity to striated muscle actomyosin ATPase activity. To mutations in 16 genes). In the cases where the microarray screening date no benign mutations of the TNNT2 gene have been reported. Six detected only one mutation, the whole gene was sequenced. The mutations (p.I79N, p.R92Q, p.R92W, p.A104V, p.D160E and IVS15- samples of the patients where the chip could not identify any mutation 1G>A) are characterized by a incidence of sudden death in the setting were analysed for ABCA4 gene with automated sequencing system. of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). In addition, one family with 13 sequence variants (in the genes CRB1, USH2A, PDE6A, CERKL, two affected individuals carriers of the p.F110L mutation has been CNGA1, RGR, RDH12, RPE65, MERTK) were identified by means reported. We here describe the clinical phenotype associated with the of the microarray technology and other 10 sequence variants could mutation p.F110L of theTNNT2 gene within an italian family in which be detected by sequencing. 9 ABCA4 mutations were identified in 8 the proband, who showed RCM, was carrying the above mutation in patients. The protocol allowed the identification of sequence variants homozygous status. out of 34/94 AP-RP patients (36%). USH2A was the most frequently METHODS: Total DNA was extracted from whole blood. Pre-mutation mutated gene. Altogether were characterized 15/94 patients, that were analysis of the TNNT2 was carried out by means of HRM on the VIIA7 homozygous for one sequence variant in one gene, or heterozygous platform. Anomalous melting profiles were subsequent sequenced on for two different sequence variants. the ABI PRISM 3130xl. The proband and relatives underwent clinical Microarray technology may represent a cheap and fast method Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 440 for mutation analysis, providing useful information for prognostic antibodies raised against the C-terminal and an alternatively-spliced evaluation and patients’ recruitment for trials of gene therapy. exon 4. The analysis in both species revealed a positive and intense signal in the photoreceptors inner-segments as well as a weaker P12.216 staining in the outer plexiform layer. No expression was evident in the mutation spectrum of RP1 gene in saudi Retinitis Pigmentosa outer-segments. FAM161A mutations are currently the most common patients cause of arRP in the Jewish population (14%). The function of the M. Alrashed1,2,3, L. Abu Safieh1, M. Aldahmesh1, H. Alkuraya4, S. Al-Hazzaa5, F. encoded protein is currently unknown and additional experiments are Alkuraya1,6,7; needed to clarify its role in the retina. 1Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2PhD student, Institute of ophthalmology, P12.218 UCL, London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, mutational analysis of RPE65, ABcA4 and RHO genes on Greek College of Applied Medical Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi patients with retinitis pigmentosa, Leber congenital amaurosis Arabia, 44Department of Retina, King khalid Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, and stargardt‘s disease. Saudi Arabia, 55Department of Ophthalmology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital M. Tsipi1, M. Tzetis1, S. Kitsiou1, E. Tsina2, E. Kanavakis1; and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 6Department of Anatomy and 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, 21st Cell Biology, College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, Pediatric Department, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. 7Department of Pediatrics, King Khalid University Hospital and College of Inherited retinal dystrophies are a phenotypically and genotypically Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. heterogeneous group of diseases that affect more than two million Introduction: The RP1 locus was mapped using linkage analysis in a people worldwide. Clinical and genetic heterogeneity have an important large autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa (RP) family. Mutations impact on genetic testing and counseling of affected families. Typical in RP1 can cause both autosomal dominant and recessive forms of RP. examples of hereditary retinopathies are Leber congenital amaurosis, The RP1 gene encodes a protein of 2156 amino acids and localized in retinitis pigmentosa and Stargardt’s disease. the connecting cilia of photoreceptors. In this study we focused our research on the elucidation of the possible Method: Familial and single RP cases were enrolled in this study, all role of three genes (RPE65, ABCA4 and RHO) on the pathogenesis came from consanguineous families. DNA samples from all affected of hereditary retinal dystrophies in the Greek population. Mutations individuals were genotyped using the Affymetrix GeneChip Human in these genes have been associated with several forms of retinal Mapping 250K Arrays. Genome-wide scan was done using easylinkage dystrophies. There is no previous study in the Greek population on the software, multiple loci were suggested and evaluation of the potential correlation between genetic aberrations in the above mentioned genes loci was aided by homozygosity analysis. Direct sequencing of all and clinical phenotype. The first gene that was sequenced was RPE65 exons of RP1 was done. in families with Leber congenital amaurosis and retinitis pigmentosa. Results: Three novel mutations were identified in RP1 gene in Three exons of ABCA4 in families with Stargardt’s disease and 3 different consanguineous families, and one sporadic case. All retinitis pigmentosa and three exons of RHO in families with retinitis mutations identified were clustered in exon 4; two nonsense mutations pigmentosa, were also sequenced. (p.K1517X, p.W1131X) in families arRP-F028, sRP-19, respectively Mutation c.272G>A (p.R91Q) in exon 4 of RPE65 was found in a patient and one deletion (p.N1143I fs X25) in two unrelated families with retinitis pigmentosa and in his healthy mother. This mutation has arRP-F043, arRP-DF01. These mutations were predicted to truncate been associated with retinitis pigmentosa. Another important finding the RP1 protein by approximately 50% of the full length and make it was mutation c.52C>T (p.R18W) in exon 1 of ABCA4. This mutation insensitive to nonsense-mediated decay, leading to the production of was found in a patient with retinitis pigmentosa. The specific mutation truncated proteins which lacks the C terminal. has been associated with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa Discussion: and Stargardt’s disease. We will also discuss additional findings such To date approximately 47 truncation mutations have been identified as polymorphic variants, which were identified in patients as well as in in RP1, all of which are located on exon 4. Among the truncation their relatives and possible phenotype/genotype correlations. mutations only two mutations have been implicated in arRP. Here we are reporting three novel mutations to cause arRP which provides P12.219 supporting evidence that mutations in RP1 can result in arRP. A hotspot region for LiNE1 endonuclease-dependent de novo insertion in the NF1 gene P12.217 K. Wimmer1, T. Callens2, A. Wernstedt1, L. Messiaen2; mutation analysis of FAm161A in Jewish patients with autosomal 1Division Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa and protein localization 2Medical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama experiments at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States. D. Bandah-Rozenfeld1, L. Mizrahi-Meissonnier1, A. Obolensky1, T. Ben-Yosef2, RNA-based NF1 mutation analysis uncovered in 18 index patients S. B. Schwartz3, A. V. Cideciyan3, E. Banin1, S. G. Jacobson3, D. Sharon1; splicing alterations, mainly exon skipping events, which were 1Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Genetics explainable neither by an underlying point-mutation nor by a deletion Dept - Faculty of Med, Technion, Haifa, Israel, 3Scheie Eye Institute, of genomic sequences. Improved PCR protocols that avoided allelic Philadelphia, PA, United States. drop-out of the mutated alleles uncovered de novo insertions of 14 Alu We recently reported the identification of the FAM161A gene as a elements, three LINE1 elements, and one poly-(T) stretch as causes cause of autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP) in the Israeli of these splicing defects. All 18 inserted sequences showed the population due to null mutations. Aiming to further evaluate the role of characteristics of LINE1 endonuclease-mediated retrotransposition: FAM161A in arRP, we genotyped the two most common mutations we the integration sites match the reported LINE1 endonuclease identified, p.Thr452SerfsX3 and p.Arg523X, and found a prevalence of consensus cleavage site; the elements were flanked by target site 11% (21/193) and 3% (5/193) respectively, in a large cohort of Jewish duplications and contained poly-(A) tails derived from their transcripts. RP patients from Israel and USA. Clinical manifestations of patients Hence, these 18 pathogenic LINE1 endonuclease-mediated insertions with FAM161A mutations varied: the majority had RP phenotype substantially add to the so far ~60 published mutations of this type ranging from an early onset (at childhood) to relatively mild sector RP. and represent the largest number of this mutation type characterized One of the patients manifested an atypical retinal degeneration. in one single human gene. Our findings show that the main effect of Due to the high carrier frequency of the p.Thr452SerfsX3 mutation retrotransposon insertions within or close to exons is altered splicing. in some Jewish sub-populations (carrier frequency of 1 out of 32 The integration sites were distributed over the entire 282-kb NF1 gene. individuals), homozygosity for this mutation was also identified in However, six different insertions clustered in a 1.5-kb region within the families with an autosomal pseudo-dominant pattern of inheritance. gene. This cluster region contained a specific integration site that was To study the localization of the FAM161A protein in the human and used in two unrelated patients to insert an AluYa5 element. A second mouse retinas, we performed immunohistochemistry and Western site outside the cluster region was also used twice to insert an AluYa5 Immunoblotting using a commercial antibody as well as custom-made and an AluYb8 element, respectively. This supports the notion of non-Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 441 random insertion of retrotransposons in the human genome. The here systemic progressive features: severe camptodactyly, hearing identified integration sites may serve to elucidate features that make loss, hypogonadism, hepatomegaly, heart defect and skin sequences particularly vulnerable to LINE1 endonuclease-mediated hyperpigmentation. We have identified a homozygous novel missense insertions. SLC29A3 mutation in a patient presenting with only a progressive sensorineural hearing impairment and a single cervical node. The P12.220 same mutation was revealed in another patient with Rosai-Dorfman A Novel mEcP2 Gene mutation in a tunisian Patient with Rett histiocytosis, profound hearing impairment, chronic inflammation with syndrome pericarditis and ophthalmological disorders. Both patients originated N. Fendri - Kriaa, Z. Abdelkafi, F. Fakhfakh; from North Africa and their mutation may be related to a common laboratoire de genetique moleculaire humaine faculté de medecine Sfax, Sfax, ancestor. Our results suggest that SLC29A3 should be studied in Tunisia. patients presenting with histiocytosis and hearing impairment. Patients with classical Rett show an apparently normal psychomotor development during the first 6-18 months of life. Thereafter, they P12.223 enter a short period of developmental stagnation followed by a rapid Severe short-limb dwarfism resembling Grebe regression in language and motor development. Purposeful hand use chondrodysplasia: report of a third case of the teebi-Al- is often lost and replaced by repetitive, stereotypic movements. Rett Awadi-Opitz-spranger dysplasia and exclusion of GDF5 as the syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked dominant disorder caused frequently causative gene. by mutations in the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene (MECP2). The D. R. Bertola1, G. Yamamoto1, L. N. Oliveira1, C. A. Kim1, G. Nishimura2, A. aim of this study was to search for mutations in MECP2 gene in two Superti-Furga3; Tunisian patients affected with RTT. The results of mutation analysis 1Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Tokyo Metropolitan revealed mutations in exon 4 of MECP2 gene in the two patients. In Children’s Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan, 3University of Lausanne, Lausanne, one patient we identified a new mutation consisting of a deletion of four Switzerland. bases (c.810-813delAAAG), which led to a frame shift and generated We describe a severe, nonlethal short-limb bone dysplasia in a a premature stop codon (p.Lys271Arg fs X15) in transcriptional boy, the first of two twin boys, who was presented to us at age 7 ½ repression domain-nuclear localization signal (TRD-NLS) domain years. An abnormal phenotype was apparent at birth in the first twin of MeCP2 protein. With regard to the second patient, a previously with shortening of all limbs. Radiographs showed that while all long described transition (c.916C>T) that changed an arginine to a cysteine bones were affected, the humeri, tibiae and fibulae were particularly residue (p.R306C) in TRD domain of MeCP2 protein was revealed. short and globoid- or pear-shaped. Moreover, there was marked In conclusion, a new and a known de novo mutation in MECP2 gene dysmorphogenesis of the carpal and tarsal bones and phalanges were revealed in two Tunisian patients affected with RTT. of fingers and toes with delta-shaped phalanges and brachydactyly. No internal organ malformation was detected. His mother suspected P12.221 deafness since infancy, and hearing loss was confirmed on audiometry; mutation analysis of mecP2 Gene in Egyptian Patients with Rett ear CT showed malformation of cochlea and semicircular canals. syndrome Sequence analysis of GDF5 exons gave normal results. A. K. Abdel Aleem1,2, W. Al saeed1, I. Kamal3, M. Zaki4, L. Mansour5, G. Rady3; The pattern of clinical and radiographic findings, including hypoacusis 1Medical Molecular Genetics Department-National Research Centre, Giza, as well as the peculiar combination of rhizomelic shortening of the Egypt, 2Weil Cornell Medical College- Qatar, Doha, Qatar, 3Faculty of Science- upper limb and mesomelic shortening of the lower limb, are identical Cairo university, Cairo, Egypt, 4Clinical Genetics Department-National Research to those of two unrelated patients reported in 1986 by Teebi, Al- Centre, Giza, Egypt, 5Pediatric Neurology-Faculty of Medicine-Cairo University, Awadi, Opitz and Spranger (Hum Genet 74:386-390) . The peculiarity Cairo, Egypt. consists in most marked shortening of the rhizomelic segment in the This presentation describes molecular analysis of the MeCP2 gene arm and the mesomelic segment in the leg. This third observation in 15 Egyptian Patients with provetional diagnosis of having Rett seems to confirm this condition as a distinct, specific entity. Absence Syndrome. The clinical presentations of postnatal microcephaly, of mutations in the GDF5 gene confirms the distinction between this regression of milestones, and autistic behaviour with the constant disorder and the Grebe - Hunter-Thompson - DuPan dysplasia family. finding of abnormal hand movements (hand washing, flapping, and The molecular basis remains to be determined. fingers into mouth) were the main criteria for the clinical geneticist and the neurologist to refere female patients suspected to have P12.224 Rett syndrome for molecular diagnosis. Direct sequencing analysis Novel mutations in FAtP4 associated with ichthyosis Prematury of the coding region of MeCP2 gene revield pathogenic mutations syndrome in 6 patients out of the 15 ones (40%). Re-examination of mutation M. Sobol1,2, N. Dahl1, J. Klar1; negative cases confirming the picture of classical Rett. Conclusion 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2National Taras Shevchenko University , Large genomic rearrangements or other genes involvement may of Kyiv, Kyiv, Ukraine. contribute, to a larger extent than that previously described in other Ichthyosis Prematurity Syndrome (IPS) is an autosomal recessive ethnic populations, to the etiology of Rett in Egyptian patients. This is disorder characterized by premature birth, non-scaly ichthyosis and still under further investigations. atopic manifestations. The disease was recently shown to be caused by mutations in the gene encoding the fatty acid transport protein 4 P12.222 (FATP4) and a specific reduction in the incorporation of VLCFA into study of sLc29A3 gene in Rosai-Dorfman histiocytosis cellular lipids. associated with hearing impairment: the French experience. We screened probands from five families segregating IPS for mutations L. Jonard1,2, v. Couloigner3, S. Pierrot3, M. Louha1,2, S. Gherbi1,2, R. Couderc1,2, in the FATP4 gene. Four probands were compound heterozygous E. Garabedian1,4,2, F. Denoyelle1,4,2, S. Marlin1,2,5; for four different mutations of which three are novel. Four patients 1AP-HP, PARIS CEDEX 12, France, 2Centre de référence des surdités were heterozygous and one patient homozygous for the previously génétiques, Trousseau Hospital, Paris, France, 3APHP ORL UNIT HOSPITAL reported non-sense mutation p.C168X (c.504c>a). We identified NECKER, PARIS, France, 4APHP ORL UNIT HOSPITAL TROUSSEAU, Paris, novel nonsense mutation p.G35X (c.103g>t) in exon 2. Another three France, 5APHP MEDICAL GENETICS UNIT HOSPITAL TROUSSEAU, Paris, sequence variants were predicted to result in missense mutations. France. p.Q300R (c.899g>a) missense mutation in exon 7 has been reported SLC29A3 is implicated in a syndromic form of genodermatosis: previously. Missense mutations p.V477D (c.1430t>a) in exon 10 and H syndrome. The major features encounters in H syndrome are p.R504H (c.1511g>t) in exon 11 appeared to be novel. All patients had Hearing loss, Hyperglycaemia, Heart anomalies, Hypertrichosis, clinical characteristics of IPS and a similar clinical course. All variants Hyperpigmentation, Hepatomegaly and Hypogonadism. More were excluded as common variants or polymorphisms by comparing recently, SLC29A3 mutations have been described in families to databases (dbSNP 131) and by the analysis of 200 Scandinavian presenting syndromes associating generalised histiocytosis to control chromosomes.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 442 Conclusions: Missense mutations and non-sense mutations in FATP4 P12.227 are associated with similar clinical features suggesting that missense Identification of seven new RAI mutations in smith-magenis mutations have a severe impact on FATP4 function. The results syndrome patients without 17p11.2 deletions broaden the mutational spectrum in FATP4 associated with IPS for C. Dubourg1,2, F. Bonnet-Brilhault3, A. Toutain4, C. Mignot5, A. Jacquette5, molecular diagnosis of and further functional analysis of FATP4. A. Dieux6, M. Gérard-Banluet7, C. Bendavid2, C. Barthélémy3, A. Verloes7, V. David1,2; P12.225 1Génétique Moléculaire, CHU Pontchaillou, Rennes, France, 2UMR 6061 investigation of association between 5-Htt gene and response CNRS, Institut de Génétique, Université de Rennes I, Rennes, France, to antidepressant drug (citalopram) in iranian major depressant 3Psychiatrie, Tours, France, 4Génétique, CHU, Tours, France, 5Génétique, CHU patients La Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6Génétique, CHU, Lille, France, 7Génétique, S. Sahraian, S. Hemati, H. NajmAbadi, K. Kahrizi, K. Kahrizi; CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France. Genetic Research Center,university of welfare and rehabilitation sciences, Smith-Magenis syndrome (SMS) is a mental retardation syndrome Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. with sleep disturbance, self injurious behaviours, and dysmorphic Background: The serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene is known as features. It is estimated to occur in 1/25 000 births and is associated the responsible gene for interindividual variation and the genetic with interstitial deletions of chromosome 17p11.2 in 90% of cases. RAI susceptibility for psychiatric diseases, such as bipolar mood, mutations are the second main molecular etiology, this gene being schizopherenia and major depression. A common polymorphism in its located in 17p11.2 in the SMS locus. upstream regulatory region is caused by difference in the number of We evaluated 33 non-related individuals referred for molecular analysis GC rich, repetitive elements. Deletion or insertion in the 5-HTTLPR due to a possible SMS diagnosis, none of these patients carrying creates short (14 repeats), and long allele (16 repeats). Transcription any 17p11.2 deletions. Polymerase chain reaction and sequencing of the L allele is 2 times more than the S allele. Since the serotonin strategy identified mutations in retinoic acid induced 1 gene (RAI1) in and its transporter are involved in mood control, they can be targeted 7 cases (21%): two non sense mutations (p.Arg80X and p.Gln433X), by antidepressant medications, and specially the selective serotonin four heterozygous frame shift mutations leading to protein truncation, reuptake inhibitor: Citalopram. and a missense mutation (p.Arg1172Cys). When parental samples Materials and methods: In this study the response of 80 patients were available, we could show that these mutations were de novo. suffering from major depression disorder, to Citalopram, and its Patients had developmental delay (7/7), facial dysmorphy (7/7) and association with their genotypes has been investigated. On the other extremities abnormalities (4/7), major sleep disturbance (6/7) with hand we estimated the allele frequency in Iranian population by an inverted rhythm of melatonin release, behavioural problems (6/7) analyzing the genotype of 100 normal samples. Our method included including self aggressiveness, and overweight (6/7). Neither visceral PCR followed by running on agarose gel. anomalies nor seizures were observed. Result: frequency of each allele in normal Iranian population is near to All mutations occurred in exon 3 of RAI1 which codes for more than 0.5 (L: 0.48 and S: 0.52). 69% of the patients with allele L (L/L or L/S) 98% of the protein, as other mutations previously reported, but there is respond to Citalopram, while just 44% of the S/S patients did not need no hot spot and mutations are scattered all along this third exon. to change the drug. Several polymorphisms were also observed. Conclusion: our study confirms the hypothesis that the L allele is associated with better response to antidepressant drug (P value=0.033. P12.228 CI: 95%). But we could not prove any association between the S allele, the rare parkinsonian phenotype of machado-Joseph Disease and risk of major depression (add ratio: 0.923). (mJD/scA3): Analysis of Parkinson’s disease associated loci in two unrelated mJD patients P12.226 C. Bettencourt1,2,3, C. Santos4, P. Coutinho1,5, P. Rizzu6, J. Vasconcelos7, T. Laboratory diagnosis of smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome in Hungary Kay8, T. Cymbron1,2, P. Heutink6, M. Lima1,2; I. Balogh1, E. Dzsudzsak1, K. Hadzsiev2, O. Torok1, J. Kappelmayer1, A. Olah V1; 1Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Porto, Portugal, 2University of 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2University of Pecs, Pecs, the Azores, Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 3Banco de Tejidos para Investigaciones Hungary. Neurológicas (BTIN), Madrid, Spain, 4Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Introduction. Smith-Lemli-Opitz (SLO) syndrome is a severe Barcelona, Spain, 5Hospital São Sebastião, Feira, Portugal, 6VU University monogenic autosomal recessive syndrome associated with mental Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Hospital of Divino Espirito Santo, retardation and multiple congenital anomalies. The responsible gene is Ponta Delgada, Portugal, 8Hospital of D. Estefania, Lisbon, Portugal. the 7-sterol reductase (DHCR7). Both life expectancy and quality of life Machado-Joseph disease (MJD/SCA3) is an autosomal dominant are severely affected by the disease. DHCR7 mutations show a large neurodegenerative disorder of late-onset, which is caused by a CAG inter-ethnic variability. Our goal was to set up a diagnostic scheme repeat expansion at exon 10 of the ATXN3 gene (14q32.1). Clinical that includes both biochemical and molecular genetic methodology heterogeneity observed in MJD, however, is not completely explained to diagnose SLO and to detect mutations responsible for SLO in by the repeat size. Although Parkinsonism seems to segregate within Hungarian patients. some MJD families, only a few MJD patients develop parkinsonian Patients and methods. Ten Hungarian patients were analyzed. features and, therefore, the clinical and genetic aspects of these Serum 7-DHC and cholesterol levels were measured using an UV rare presentations remain poorly understood. The main goal of this spectrophotometry method and using an enzymatic colorimetric work was to investigate genetic variants, previously associated with method, respectively. For mutation detection, the entire coding region Parkinson’s disease (PD), in two MJD patients of Azorean background, of DHCR7 gene was sequenced. displaying the rare parkinsonian phenotype. Patient 1 is a 40 year- Results. All patients had elevated 7-DHC level (reference range <0.15 old female (onset at 30 years of age), initially presenting as a pure mg/L), ranging from 71.4 to 300.0 mg/L. Cholesterol levels were parkinsonian phenotype (similar to the phenotype previously reported generally low (between 0.3 and 2.7 mmol/L). The cholesterol/7DHC ratio for her mother). Patient 2 is a 38 year-old male (onset at 33 years of was abnormal in all cases. 9 patients were compound heterozygous age), presenting an ataxic phenotype with parkinsonian features (not for two causative mutations, while one patient was homozygous for a seen either in other affected siblings or in his father). Both patients null allele. One splicing, one nonsense and 8 missense mutations were presented an expanded ATXN3 allele with 72 CAG repeats. Screening found. The detected alterations are known to be causative, except the of mutations and polymorphisms in PD associated loci, namely PARK2, previously unidentified c.374A>G (p.Y125C) which mutation lies in a LRRK2, PINK1, DJ-1, SNCA, MAPT, APOE, and mtDNA tRNAGln phylogenetically conservative position. The closest known pathogenic T4336C, revealed the absence of PD mutations in the analyzed loci. mutations affect amino acid positions 119 and 138. Both patients, however, presented PD associated polymorphisms in Conclusions. Using biochemical and molecular genetic methods, DJ-1 and APOE genes. Additional analysis in larger MJD series would the molecular diagnosis of ten Hungarian SLO patients could be be necessary to better ascertain the putative influence of these loci in established. In addition to the known missense, nonsense and splicing the MJD phenotype. mutations, a novel, most likely pathogenic mutation was identified.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 443 P12.229 P12.231 A new spastic paraplegia locus/gene (SPG47) Allele-specific gene expression for evaluation of SMN functional C. Tesson1, M. Salih2, S. AlRasheed3, M. Al Balwi3, C. Goizet1, A. Alswaid3, A. efficiency Durr1,4, A. Brice1,4, G. Stevanin1,4,5; S. Radovic1, G. Dubsky de Wittenau1, N. Mandel2, M. Morgante1, R. I. Lonigro3; 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, NEB, Paris, France, 2Department 1University, Udine, Italy, 2University, Krems, Austria, 3University and A.O.U., of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3Department of Udine, Italy. Pediatrics, King Abdulaziz Medical City, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4APHP, Dpt Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive of Genetics and Cytogenetics, GHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Ecole neurodegenerative disorder and a leading genetic cause of infantile Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, France. mortality. In SMA, the SMN1 is deleted or destroyed by mutation, while Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are rare inherited neurological the neighbouring, nearly identical SMN2 fails to generate adequate disorders. Our objective was to map the responsible gene in a large levels of full-length SMN protein. SMN2 copy numbers is inversely consanguineous family of Saudi-Arabian origin excluded for linkage to correlated with the severity of the SMA phenotype. Total and SMN- FL most autosomal recessive loci. A genome-wide scan was undertaken RNA production was analyzed in peripheral blood of a reduced cohort of using 6090 SNP markers covering all chromosomes. The genome- 24 subjects: 5 with homozygous deletion of SMN1, 11 healthy deletion wide search identified a single candidate region on chromosome 4, carriers and 8 individuals from general population carrying 2 copies exceeding the multipoint LOD score threshold of +3 (Zmpt=4.6). Two of SMN1, by using a new and highly accurate method that assesses additional Saudi Arabian families tested with microsatellite markers allele-specific gene expression. We used base pair exchanges in covering the candidate interval also showed linkage to this new locus exon7 and exon8 to distinguish between transcripts deriving from (Zmpt=2.4 and +3.0). Patients from the smallest linked family carried SMN1/2 genes. SMN1 and SMN2 resulted transcriptionally equivalent the same homozygous haplotype as in the originally mapped kindred since observed proportions of total RNA transcripts deriving from the and allowed to narrow-down the interval to 3.3 cM containing 24 genes. two genes were in line with the respective allelic copy numbers across Mutations in the coding region of 23 candidate genes were excluded different genotypes. However, they are not functionally equivalent and only one missense variant affecting a strongly conserved amino- since the production efficiency of SMN- FL RNA of SMN1 and SMN2 acid was identified in patients and was absent in >500 Caucasian and varied between 55-90% and 5-17%, respectively. Furthermore, the North-African controls. Phenotypic presentation in 10 patients was production of FL RNA is highly correlated (P<0.001) with SMN1 suggestive of a relatively pure and early onset HSP, rarely associated copy numbers increase, while correlation with SMN2 copy numbers with mental deterioration or thin corpus callosum at cerebral MRI. The is heterogeneous supporting that SMN2 alleles are not functionally mapping of a novel AR-HSP locus further demonstrates the extensive equivalent. Finally, two asymptomatic subjects bearing homozygous genetic heterogeneity of this condition. deletion of SMN1 showed significantly higher levels (P < 0.01) of FL RNA respect to affected individuals. P12.230 An accurate evaluation of allele-specific gene expression will mutations in REEP1 cause sPG31 with Alteration of significantly improve patients classification, follow-up and basic mitochondrial Functions research . C. Goizet1,2, C. Depienne1,3, G. Benard2, A. Boukhris1, E. Mundwiller1, G. Solé2, E. Fedirko3, D. Hannequin4, P. Charles3, I. Feki1, J. Pinel5, A. Ouvrard- P12.232 Hernandez6, S. Lyonnet7, E. Ollagon-Roman8, J. Yaouanq5, A. Toutain9, B. study of the involvement of the poliovirus receptor (PVR) in Fontaine1, D. Lacombe2, A. Durr1,3, R. Rossignol2, A. Brice1,3, G. Stevanin1,3,10; childhood spinal muscular atrophy and postpolio syndrome 1Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, NEB, Paris, France, 2Université Victor S. Bernal1,2, E. Also-Rallo1,2, R. Martínez-Hernández1,2, L. Alías1,2, M. Baena1,2, Segalen, Bordeaux, France, 3APHP, Dpt of Genetics and Cytogenetics, GHU J. Gámez3, M. J. Barceló1,2, M. Baiget1,2, E. F. Tizzano1,2; Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4CHU, Rouen, France, 5CHU, Rennes, France, 1Department of Genetics, Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2CIBERER 6CHU, Grenoble, France, 7Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, U-705, Barcelona, Spain, 3Department of Neurology, Hospital Vall d’Hebron,, 8, Hôpital de la Croix Rousse, Lyon, France, 9CHU, Tours, France, 10Ecole Barcelona, Spain. Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, France. Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) constitute a clinically and neuromuscular disorder caused by mutations in the SMN1 gene. The genetically heterogeneous group of neurodegenerative disorders highly homologous copy, SMN2, is considered a phenotypic modifier characterized at least by slowly progressive spasticity of the lower (when more copies, less severe) but is unable to prevent the disease. extremities. Mutations in the SPG31 gene, REEP1, were recently This correlation is not absolute and patients with the same number associated with a pure dominant form of the disease. We sequenced of SMN2 copies may manifest different SMA types (I, most severe, II all exons of REEP1 and searched for rearrangements by MLPA or intermediate, and III the less severe) suggesting possible modifier in a large panel of 175 unrelated HSP index patients from kindreds genes in SMA. Postpolio syndrome (PPS) refers to manifestations with dominant inheritance, with either pure (n = 102) or complicated that appear many years after acute poliomyelitis infection and occurs (n = 73) forms of the disease, after exclusion of other known HSP in approximately 50% of cases. Despite the clinical course of PPS is genes. We identified 12 different heterozygous mutations, 11 of which relatively slow, PPS can present with multiple symptoms and signs were novel, in 12 different families, with either a pure or a complex including fatigue and weakness. Given that SMA and poliomyelitis phenotype; three mutations affected the splicing of the gene, two share some characteristics as motor neuron diseases, we proposed were exon deletions, four were missense mutations and three were to investigate the involvement of the poliovirus receptor (PVR) in small deletions or point mutations introducing premature stop codons. 95 healthy individuals, 94 PPS, and 126 patients with different SMA The overall mutation rate in our clinically heterogeneous sample types but the same SMN genotype (homozygous absence of SMN1 was 4.5% in French families when taking into account HSP cases and three SMN2 copies). We analysed seven tagSNPs of the PVR with other known genetic entities. The phenotype was restricted gene (rs1042640; rs1058402; rs17714931; rs203709; rs203710; to pyramidal signs in the lower limbs in most patients but X had a rs3538129; rs714948). In SMA chronic patients, the presence of the T complex phenotype associating cerebellar ataxia, tremor, dementia allele of the rs714948 polymorphism was significantly associated with or a Silver. Interestingly, we evidenced, for the first time, abnormal a milder phenotype (type III) (chi square test p=0.041). Furthermore, mitochondrial network organization in fibroblasts of one patient in there were no significant differences in the genotype distribution of addition to mitochondrial energy production impairment in his muscle the PVR SNPs between SMA or PPS patients and healthy individuals. biopsy. Our results indicate that SPG31 is a relatively frequent form of Further investigations are warranted to unravel a possible effect of the HSP, with variable phenotype and incomplete penetrance associated PVR receptor in SMA. Supported by FIS 08-0729. with altered mitochondrial dynamics and functions.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 444 P12.233 P12.235 A leaky splicing mutation affecting smN1 exon 7 inclusion Genetic deficiency of tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase is explains an unexpected mild case of spinal muscular atrophy associated with skeletal dysplasia, cerebral calcifications and M. Vezain1, B. Gérard2, S. Drunat2, B. Funalot3,4, S. Fehrenbach5, V. N’Guyen- autoimmunity Viet5, J. Vallat6, T. Frebourg1,5, M. Tosi1, A. Martins1, P. Saugier-Veber1,7; E. Lausch1, A. Janecke2, M. Bros3, S. Unger1,4, B. Zabel1, A. Superti-Furga1,4; 1Inserm U614, Faculty of Medicine, Rouen University, Institute for Biomedical 1Centre for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Research and Innovation, Rouen, France, 2Department of Genetics, Robert- Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics II and Division of Human Genetics, Debré Hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 3Department of Neurology, University Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Department of Dermatology, Hospital, Limoges, France, 4Department of Genetics, University Hospital, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Limoges, France, 5Department of Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France, Germany, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 6Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Rouen, France, 7Department of Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. Genetics, University Hospital, Rouen, France, Rouen, France. Vertebral and metaphyseal dysplasia, spasticity with cerebral Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive calcifications, and strong predisposition to autoimmune diseases are neuromuscular disorder with symptoms usually appearing during the hallmarks of the genetic disorder spondyloenchondrodysplasia early childhood. The disorder is due, in most cases, to homozygous (SPENCD). We mapped a locus in five consanguineous families to deletions of the SMN1 gene or, in rare cases, to small hemizygous chromosome 19p13 and identified mutations in ACP5, which encodes SMN1 intragenic mutations. Here we describe the identification and tartrate-resistant phosphatase (TRAP), in 14 affected individuals and characterization of c.835-3C>T,a novel SMA-causing mutation detected showed that these mutations abolish enzyme function in the serum in the intron 6 of the single SMN1 allele of a type IV SMA patient. and cells of affected individuals. Phosphorylated osteopontin, a protein This patient carries only 2 copies of SMN2, the partially functional involved in bone reabsorption and in immune regulation, accumulates SMN1 paralog. We demonstrate both ex vivo, using minigene splicing in serum, urine and cells cultured from TRAP-deficient individuals. assays, and in vivo, by comparative multiplex RT-PCR analysis of Patient-derived dendritic cells exhibit an altered cytokine profile and patient RNA, that c.835-3C>T is a deleterious splicing mutation that are more potent than matched control cells in stimulating allogeneic T induces a modest but unequivocal exclusion of exon 7 from the SMN1 cell proliferation in mixed lymphocyte reactions. These findings shed transcripts. We suggest that this effect may be due to the creation of new light on the role of osteopontin and its regulation by TRAP in a high-affinity binding site for the splicing repressor protein hnRNP the pathogenesis of common autoimmune disorders. Pharmacologic A1 overlapping the splice acceptor site of exon 7. Importantly, the modulation of osteopontin may thus provide a novel therapeutic angle “leakiness” of this splicing mutation explains the exceptionally mild for diseases like systemic lupus erymathosus and multiple sclerosis. phenotype of an ambulatory 70-year-old SMA patient. Our findings support the current therapeutic strategies aiming at correcting exon P12.236** 7 splicing in SMA patients, and bring clues about the level of exon 7 Tartrate resistant acid phosphatase deficiency causes a bone inclusion required to achieve a therapeutic effect. dysplasia with autoimmunity and a type i interferon expression signature P12.234 T. A. Briggs1, Y. J. Crow1,2; characterising the pro-survival function of the survival of motor 1Manchester Academic Heath Science Centre, University of Manchester, neuron (smN) protein. Manchester, United Kingdom, 2On behalf of affiliated researchers and clinicians R. S. Anderton1,2, B. P. Meloni1,3, F. L. Mastaglia1,2, S. Boulos1; worldwide, Manchester, United Kingdom. 1Centre for Neuromuscular and Neurological Disorders/Australian Rare Mendelian disorders demonstrating overlap with common Neuromuscular Research Institute, Perth, Australia, 2School of Medicine and diseases are of interest because of the insights they can provide into Pharmacology, University of Western Australia., Perth, Australia, 3Department complex-disease pathogenesis. To this end, we studied ten individuals of Neurosurgery, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital, Perth, Australia. showing features consistent with the immuno-osseus dysplasia Purpose: Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), a neurodegenerative spondyloenchondrodysplasia (SPENCD). Of particular note was disorder primarily affecting motor neurons, is the most common the diverse spectrum of autoimmune phenotypes observed in these genetic cause of infant death. This incurable disease is caused by the patients, including systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), Sjögren’s absence of a functional SMN1 gene which leads to a critical reduction syndrome, haemolytic anaemia and thrombocytopenia. Haplotype data in full length SMN protein. The SMN protein has been linked to indicated the disease gene to be on chromosome 19p13 and linkage numerous cellular functions, including snRNP assembly and survival analysis yielded a combined multipoint lod score of 3.6. Sequencing of in motor neurons. However, exactly how SMN protein imparts its cell the ACP5 gene, encoding tartrate resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP), survival function is still unknown. This study aimed to characterise the identified biallelic mutations in each of the patients studied, and in pro-survival function of SMN and the relationship between the anti- vivo testing confirmed a loss of expressed protein. All eight patients apoptotic protein Bcl-xL and SMN. assayed demonstrated elevated serum interferon alpha activity. methods: To assess the relationship between SMN and Bcl-xL in vitro, SLE patients frequently demonstrate an increased expression of type recombinant adenoviral vectors were used to over-express proteins. I interferon stimulated genes. To determine if a similar ‘interferon This relationship was also assessed in vivo using a transgenic mouse signature’ was present in SPENCD patients, we undertook whole- model over-expressing SMN. The pro-survival mechanisms used by genome microarray analysis, followed by confirmatory qPCR. We SMN were also assessed in an Akt/PI3 kinase inhibition model. Cell identified 18 genes which were greater than four-fold over-expressed, homogenates and mouse tissue were analysed using western blot 15 of which are recognized as interferon stimulated genes. analysis and real-time RT-PCR, to determine protein and transcript Our findings, recently published in Nature Genetics1, reveal a levels respectively. previously unrecognised link between TRAP activity and interferon Results: We found a significant relationship between Bcl-xL and SMN metabolism, and highlight the importance of type I interferon in the proteins. We found Bcl-xL expression was significantly reduced in genesis of autoimmunity. SMA patient fibroblasts. Over-expression of SMN could increase Bcl- 1. Briggs et al. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase deficiency causes xL levels by 6 fold, while Bcl-xL over-expression significantly increased a bone dysplasia with autoimmunity and a type I interferon expression SMN protein and transcript levels. Over-expressed SMN protein also signature. Nat Genet. 2011. 43(2): 127-131. protected against Akt/PI3 kinase pathway inhibition, and blocked caspase-3 activation by preventing calpain mediated cleavage of P12.237 procaspase-3. This study has determined how SMN reduces caspase-3 mutational analysis of the NPHs1, NPHs2, PLce1 and Wt1 activation and links the Bcl-xL protein to SMA pathogenesis. genes in Greek children with clinical diagnosis of steroid resistant nephrotic syndrome(sRNs) E. Fylaktou1, S. Megremis1, A. G. Mitsioni1, A. Mitsioni2, K. Stefanidis2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, E. Kanavakis1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1; 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s Hospital, Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 445 Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pediatrics Nephrology, “P. A. Kyriakou” P12.239 Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. mutations in the 5‘UtR of ANKRD26, the Ankirin Repeat Domain Several genes are implicated in the pathogenesis of autosomal 26 Gene, cause an Autosomal-Dominant Form of inherited recessive SRNS. The exons and intron/exon boundaries of the genes thrombocytopenia, tHc2 NPHS1 (nephrin, 29 exons), NPHS2 (podocin, 8 exons), PLCe1 C. Marconi1, T. Pippucci1, A. Savoia2,3, S. Perrotta4, N. Pujol-Moix5, P. Noris6, G. (phospholipase C epsilon 1, 29/31 exons) and WT1 (Transcription Castegnaro1, A. Pecci6, C. Gnan2, F. Punzo4,7, S. Gherardi8, G. Loffredo9, D. De factor Wilm’s Tumour-1, exons 8&9) were directly sequenced in 38 Rocco3, S. Scianguetta4, S. Barozzi6, P. Magini1, V. Bozzi6, L. Dezzani6, M. Di (30 sporadic, 8 familial) SRNS patients (3months-18years). Two Stazio2, M. Ferraro4, G. Perini8, M. Seri1, C. L. Balduini6; congenital NS patients had pathological NPHS1 genotypes: one 1Medical Genetics Unit, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department had three mutations (p.Cys217fsX in cis with p.P264R and trans to of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences and Public Medicine p.S366R), the other homozygous for p.S366R. Three sporadic SRNS Sciences,University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 3Laboratory of Genetics, Institute patients had pathogenic NPHS2 genotypes: p.R138Q homozygous, for Maternal and Child Health, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico p.R168H homozygous and p.R229Q/p.A295T compound ‘‘Burlo Garofolo,’, Trieste, Italy, 4Department of Paediatrics, Second University heterozygous. The novel p.A295T was predicted pathogenic in of Naples, Naples, Italy, 5Autonomous University of Barcelona & Platelet silico (SIFT http://blocks.fhcrc.org/sift/SIFT.html, polyphen http:// Pathology Unit, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph). PLCe1 gene analysis revealed three 6Department of Internal Medicine, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere homozygotes for the previously described p.R1246X (2 related/ Scientifico Policlinico San Matteo Foundation, University of Pavia, Pavia, familial, 1 sporadic). Six patients carried de-novo WT1 mutations, Italy, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, including 5 known: one case IVS9+5G>A, one case p.R394Q, one Netherlands, 8Department of Biology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, case p.D396N, two cases p.R394W. Mutation p.R366H in the sixth 9Department of Oncology, Azienda ‘‘Santobono-Pausilipon’’ Pausilipon Hospital, case was novel, predicted pathogenic in silico. Excluding the case Naples, Italy. with p.D396N who was phenotypically male (XY karyotype), all other THC2, an autosomal-dominant thrombocytopenia described so far in cases were phenotypically female, with XX karyotype in four although only two families, has been ascribed to mutations in MASTL or one p.R394W case had an XY karyotype. Heterozygous mutations ACBD5. We found that ANKRD26, another gene within the THC2 were found in several familial cases: 3 with the NPHS2 gene p.R229Q locus, and neither MASTL nor ACBD5, is mutated in eight unrelated mutation and 2 with the NPHS1 gene p.N188I mutation, although no families. ANKRD26 was also found to be mutated in the family di-genic inheritance was observed. In conclusion 14/38 cases were previously reported to have an ACBD5 mutation.We identified six characterized with pathogenic mutations in NPHS1, NPHS2, PLCe1 different ANKRD26 mutations, which were clustered in a highly or WT1, indicating that molecular investigation of these genes is useful conserved 19 bp sequence located in the 5’ untranslated region. to support definitive diagnosis and management of pediatric SRNS. Mutations were not detected in 500 controls and are absent from the 1000 P12.238 Genomes database. Available data from an animal model and Functional characterization of mutations in tHAP1 causing Dr. Watson’s genome give evidence against haploinsufficiency as the dystonia 6 pathogenetic mechanism for ANKRD26-mediated thrombocytopenia. A. Erogullari1, A. Osmanovic1, A. Dendorfer2, A. Rakovic3, N. Uflacker3, D. The luciferase reporter assay suggests that these 5’UTR mutations Braunholz1, M. Albrecht1, M. Gil-Rodríguez1, G. Gilessen-Kaesbach1, C. Klein3, might enhance ANKRD26 expression. ANKRD26 is the ancestor K. Lohmann3, F. J. Kaiser1; of a family of primate-specific genes termed POTE, which have been 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für Pharmakologie, recently identified as a family of proapoptotic proteins. Dysregulation Lübeck, Germany, 3Sektion für Klinische und Molekulare Neurogenetik an der of apoptosis might therefore be the pathogenetic mechanism, as Klinik für Neurologie, Lübeck, Germany. demonstrated for another thrombocytopenia, THC4. Further Dystonias represent a group of heterogenous movement disorders, investigation is needed to provide evidence supporting this hypothesis. characterized by involuntary twisting, repetitive movements and abnormal postures. Dystonia 6, a monogenic form of primary (isolated) P12.240 dystonia, is associated with mutations in the THAP1 gene; however, Identification of novel TAAD loci on 2q37 and 7p15 in a large its molecular pathophysiology is not well understood. THAP1 is a Dutch family: further evidence of disease heterogeneity and transcription factor with a sequence-specific DNA-binding zinc-finger support of a bi-or multigenetic inheritance model domain at the N-terminus (THAP-domain) and a putative nuclear A. F. Baas1, M. Harakalova1, d. C1, I. Nijman2, W. Kloosterman1, S. Lieshout1, localization signal (NLS) towards the C-terminus. Recently, we M. Mokrey2, J. Medic1, R. van ‘t Slot1, J. Deckers3, J. Roos-Hesslink3, G. Pals4, demonstrated that THAP1 specifically binds to the TOR1A-promoter C. Wijmenga5, D. Lindhout1, E. Cuppen1; and represses TOR1A-expression. The TOR1A gene is involved in 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Laboratory, Utrecht, primary dystonia 1. Netherlands, 3Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4VU Medical Center, By screening a large cohort of 700 patients with dystonia, we identified Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5UMC Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. several new mutations located within the THAP-domain as well as Background: It is estimated that 20% of the non-syndromic thoracic mutations resulting in truncated THAP1 proteins. To investigate the aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) cases is inherited in an functional consequence of the missense mutations, we performed autosomal dominant pattern with variable expression and reduced luciferase-reporter gene-assays demonstrating that missense penetrance. With mutation analysis of the currently known TAAD mutations within the THAP-domain result in a decreased or almost genes; TGFBR1, TGFBR2, ACTA2 and MYH11, less than 20% of the abolished THAP1-mediated repression of TOR1A expression. In familial TAAD cases are solved, indicating that there are more TAAD contrast, amino acid exchanges within the C-terminal region of THAP1 genes to be found. did not influence its activity. methods and results: We have characterized a large Dutch family Secondly, we analyzed the intracellular localization of GFP-tagged in which TAAD was inherited in a seemingly autosomal dominant wildtype THAP1, THAP1 with truncating mutations, and a missense inheritance pattern, with reduced penetrance and variable expression. mutation within the NLS (I149T) via confocal laserscanning No segregating alterations in the known TAAD genes were identified microscopy. Mutations in the NLS, its complete or partial loss, resulted by routine diagnostic testing. Genome-wide linkage analysis followed in an impaired transport of THAP1 protein into the nucleus. by fine-mapping exposed two novel TAAD loci on chromosome In summary, our data provide evidence that missense mutations in 2q37.1 and chromosome 7p15.3-7p14.3. The coding sequence of all the DNA-binding THAP1-domain as well as mutations leading to a protein-coding genes within these loci was analysed using a targeted partial or complete loss of the NLS sequence both result in a disturbed massively parallel sequencing approach, by two independent exon- transcription factor activity of THAP1. centric enrichment methods. However, the causal mutation was not identified. conclusions: The identification of two novel TAAD-loci within one family that do Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 446 not contain any of the known TAAD genes and do not overlap with polymorphism in exon 1 was significantly more frequent in patients formerly reported loci, emphasizes the heterogeneity of the disease with FSGS. and suggests an interaction of two or more genetic factors in the Conclusions: TRPC6 gene mutations are a rare cause of FSGS/MCD development of TAAD within this family. In general, this assumption in adult patients in Czech Republic. The C43T polymorphism could would explain the reduced penetrance and variable expression in have some influence on FSGS. familial TAAD. In the reported family, causative alterations may be Supported by grant project IGA NS 9779-4 and research project ZZ present in non-coding regulatory sequences. MSMT 0021620806. P12.241 P12.243 myelination delay in mct8 mutated patients: role of mct8 and Different genetic alterations cause similar clinical symptoms of mct10 in thyroid hormone transport in human oligodendrocytes contiguous tsc2-PKD1 gene syndrome. C. Vaurs-Barriere1, Y. Capri1, A. Cizeron1, S. Mirafzal1, C. Gonthier-Guéret1, E. C. -. Vidales1, I. Zubillaga1, R. Simon2, A. Camacho2, A. Jauch3, P. Kozlowsky4, C. H. Friesema2, T. J. Visser2, O. Boespflug-Tanguy1,3; E. Gean5, M. García Barcina6, E. Dominguez7; 1GReD UMR INSERM U931 CNRS 6247, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 2Erasmus 1Genetica Molecular, Policlinica Gipuzkoa, San Sebastian, Spain, 2Neurologia, Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3AP-HP, Centre de Référence « Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Leucodystrophies », Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France. Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, We have identified mutations in the Monocarboxylate Transporter 8 Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 5Genetica Clinica, Hospital Sant (MCT8) gene, which encodes a thyroid hormone (TH) transporter, Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 6Genetica, Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain, in patients initially presenting a Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-Like Disease 7Diagnostico Molecular, CIBIR, Logroño, Spain. (PMLD) phenotype related to an early diffuse hypomyelination. In Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a genetically determined disorder contrast with classical PMLD patients, MRI follow-up of those patients with an estimated incidence of 1 in 6000 live births. The main features demonstrated an improvement of the white matter signal suggesting of TSC are benign tumors called hamarthomas frequently found in a severe delay in myelination rather than a permanent myelin defect. brain, skin and kidney. Convulsions, seizures and mental retardation TH are known to play a major role during the central nervous system are also common features of the entity. (CNS) development not only in neurons but also in oligodendrocytes, A TSC2-PKD1 contiguous gene syndrome caused by complete or the myelinating cells of the CNS. Nevertheless, the way TH enters partial TSC2 and PKD1 genes has been reported in patients with those cells remains unidentified. Different TH transporters have been typical TSC and polycystic kidney disease symptoms. TSC2 is located described expressed in the CNS but only at the blood-brain barrier in adjacent to PKD1, the gene for autosomal dominant polycystic kidney endothelial cells (OATP1C1, MCT8) and in neurons (MCT8, LAT1/2). disease (ADPKD), in tail to tail orientation. Large deletions in TSC2 Another newly identified transporter, MCT10 would be expressed in are relatively common (5.6%) and substantial fraction of them (50%) CNS white matter. extends into PKD1 gene. The myelination delay observed in MCT8 patients suggests that MCT8 In five TSC patients with renal cysts we performed analysis for large may play a role in oligodendrocytes maturation. Using the human mutations using commercial and home-made sets of Multiple Ligation- MO3.13 oligodendrocyte cell line, we found that (1) in proliferating cells, dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) probes for TSC2-PKD1 genes both MCT8 and MCT10 are expressed; (2) MCT8 and MCT10 each and direct sequencing for TSC1-TSC2 genes. Cytogenetic and FISH ensure 40% of T3 transport, suggesting that at least a third transporter assays were performed on metaphases derived from a culture of may be implicated; (3) during MO3.13 early differentiation, MCT8 and peripheral blood lymphocytes. MCT10 are differentially regulated, MCT8 becoming the predominant Two of five patients are carriers of large multi-exon deletions. A transporter. Those results demonstrate for the first time that MCT8 heterozygous deletion in TSC2 from exon 1-15 was found in a third and MCT10 are implicated in TH uptake in oligodendrocytes at least in patient but no visible alteration in PKD1. Another patient demonstrated proliferative progenitors and during early differentiation, when TH have a partial deletion in the joining region between TSC2 and PKD1 that been demonstrated promoting oligodendrocyte differentiation. was only detectable by FISH analysis. The last patient we examined was negative for all mutational screening. P12.242 Here we describe several patients with manifestation of TSC and mutational analysis of the tRPc6 gene in adult patients with ADPKD, suggesting contiguous gene syndrome but with substantial steroid-resistant idiopathic nephrotic syndrome differences in their genetic alterations. J. Reiterova1, P. Lněnička2, L. Obeidová2, J. Tekrová1, V. Tesař1; 1Department of Nephrology of 1st Medical Faculty and General Teaching P12.244 Hospital of Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology mutational analysis in tsc1 and tsc2 genes in patients with and Human Genetics of 1st Medical Faculty and General Teaching Hospital of tuberous sclerosis complex Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. I. Maleva1, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1, V. Sabolic Avramovska2, M. Kuturec2, E. Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) and minimal change Sukarova-Angelovska3, G. D. Efremov1; disease (MCD) are frequent cause of nephrotic syndrome (NS). 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former TRPC6 mutations are the cause of idiopatic NS in about 2-7 % of Yugoslav Republic of, 2Faculty of Medicine, Clinic of Pediatrics , Department steroid-resistant patients. Eleven different TRPC6 gene mutations of neurology, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 3Faculty were identified. These mutations lead to a late onset kidney disease of Medicine, Clinic of Pediatrics , Department of endocrinology, Skopje, and a variable rate of progression to end stage renal disease. The aim Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. of the study was the identification of mutations/polymorphisms in adult Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant disorder patients with steroid-resistant FSGS/MCD. characterized by the development of multiple hamartomas in many Patients and methods: 40 patients (22 females, 18 males) with organs, with an incidence of 1 in 6,000 to 1 in 10,000 live births. TSC steroid- resistant FSGS/MCD were studied. The mean age of the is caused by mutations in tumor suppressor genes TSC1 and TSC2. onset of NS was 39±20.7 years.200 healthy Czech individuals formed Mutations in TSC2 are about five times more common than mutations control group with mean age 58.4±19.5 years. High resolution melting in TSC1 in sporadic cases, whereas the ratio is 1:1 in large families method (HRM) was established for all 13 exons of the TRPC6 gene. with multiple generations affected. Mutations in TSC1 and TSC2 are Suspected samples were analysed by direct sequencing on ABI Prism very heterogeneous and no hotspots have been reported, making 3130 Genetic Analyzer. the molecular diagnosis of the disease extremely difficult. Here, we Results: No TRPC6 gene mutation was identified. Two polymorphisms have studied eight patients from the Republic of Macedonia with a were described: in exon 1 C43T (P15S) with prevalence 32.5% of clinical diagnosis of TSC and their parents. The methodology included heterozygotes and in exon 4 C1211T (A404V) with prevalence 20% MLPA analysis for the detection of gross gene rearrangements and of heterozygotes (resp. 1% of T/T homozygotes). The prevalence sequencing analysis of all exons and exon/intron boundaries of the of heterozygotes in control group was only 16.5% for C43T and TSC1 and TSC2 genes. We have detected five mutations, of which 20.5% for C1211T (resp. 2.5% of T/T homozygotes). T allele of C43T four in TSC2 and one in TSC1 gene. The TSC2 defects included Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 447 two gross deletions (deletion of exon 1 and upstream sequence patient disabling. Patients aged older than 30 yr had RP of the III- and deletion of exons 1-15), one small deletion (c.4318delC) and IV degrees with symptoms of the secondary optic atrophy including one missense mutation (c.772A->T). The TSC1 mutation was small severe abnormality of visual fields down to its disappearance, deletion (c.1431_1434del|AGAA). All mutations were de novo events visual acuity decreasing down to photoperception and loss of and have been previously reported. The mutational spectrum among colour perception. Complex ophthalmic investigation and trophic our patients suggests that the best approach for detection of mutations medication(antioxidative, neuroprotective medicines, vitamin-mineral in TSC patients would be MLPA analysis of TSC genes for the compex) were regularly applied. detection of gross rearrangements, followed by sequencing analysis for the detection of point mutations. P12.247 intracellular localization of the type 1 VWD candidate VWF gene P12.245*** variants complete exon sequencing of Usher syndrome genes as a E. Berber1, C. Brown2, D. Lillicrap2; diagnostic tool in a therapeutic perspective 1Istanbul Arel University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, S. Marlin1, C. Bonnet1, M. Grati2, M. Parodi1, M. Niasme-Grare1, D. Zelenika3, Canada. L. Jonard1, B. Delobel4, H. Dollfus5, A. David6, J. Vigneron7, D. Bonneau8, L. Von Willebrand Factor (VWF) is a multimeric glycoprotein that Faivre9, C. Francannet10, D. Lacombe11, V. Drouin Garraud12, S. Sigaudy13, A. maintains hemostasis in the vascular system. VWF is secreted mainly Frances14, R. Couderc1, C. Petit15, F. Denoyelle1; from endothelial cells either constitutively or stored for regulated 1Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 2NIDCD, Bethesda, NY, United release in Weibel Palade Bodies (WPB). Partial quantitative deficiency States, 3CEA, Evry, France, 4Hôpital St Antoine, Lille, France, 5Hôpital of VWF is defined as Type I von Willebrand disease (VWD). Clinical Hautepierre, Strasboug, France, 6CHU, Nantes, France, 7Maternité Pinard, diagnosis of Type I VWD is complicated due to incomplete penetrance Nancy, France, 8CHU, Angers, France, 9CHU, Dijon, France, 10Hôpital Hotel and variable expressivity of VWF. Deficiency in the biosynthestic Dieu, Clermont Ferrand, France, 11Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, pathway or increased clearance of plasma VWF might be responsible 12Hôpital Charles Nicole, Rouen, France, 13Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, for the decreased VWF levels. The purpose of the study is to explore France, 14Hôpital intercommunal de Font-Pré, Toulon, France, 15Institut Pasteur, the effect of four VWF mutations (p.M771I, p.L881R, p.P1413L, Paris, France. p.Q1475X), that were reported as candidate mutations in Type I VWD Usher syndrome (USH) combines sensorineural deafness with patients on the intracellular localization of VWF in a heterologous cell blindness. It is inherited in an autosomal recessive mode. Early system. p.M771 and p.L881 and p.P1413 are located in D’, D3 and A1 diagnosis is critical for adapted educational and therapeutic choices, domains, respectively, implicated in multimerization and WPB storage. and for genetic counseling. To date, nine causative genes have been p.Q1475 is located in A2 domain. The candidate mutations were identified for the three clinical subtypes (USH1, USH2 and USH3). generated on VWF cDNA expression vector by in vitro site directed Current diagnostic strategies make use of a genotyping microarray mutagenesis. Intracellular localization of the variants were analyzed that is based on the previously reported mutations. The purpose of this in the transiently transfected HEK293 cells by immunoflourescence study was to design a more accurate molecular diagnosis tool. antibody staining and confocal scanning laser microscopy. Diffuse We sequenced the 366 coding exons and flanking regions of the nine staining was observed for the recombinant p.M771I and p.Q1475X known USH genes, in 54 USH patients (27 USH1, 21 USH2 and 6 VWF variants. However, similar intracellular pseudo-WPB storage was USH3). Results: Presumably pathogenic mutations were detected observed as wild type recombinant VWF for the VWF variants having in 48 patients (89%). In addition to biallelic mutations in one of the p.L881R and p.P1413L changes. This study demonstrated that while USH genes, presumably pathogenic mutations in another USH gene p.M771I and p.Q1475X mutations impair intracellular localization of were detected in seven patients (13%), and another patient carried the recombinant VWF, p.L881R and p.1413L mutations did not affect monoallelic mutations in three different genes. Notably, none of the the pseudo-WPB storage in HEK293 cells. USH3 patients carried detectable mutations in the only known USH3 gene, whereas they all carried mutations in USH2 genes. Most P12.248 importantly, the currently used microarray would have detected only screening of SOX10 and MITF regulatory regions in 30 of the 81 different mutations that we found, of which 39 (48%) were Waardenburg patients novel. V. Baral1,2, B. Duriez3, Y. Watanabe1,2, M. Goossens1,2,4, T. Attie-Bitach5, V. Based on these results, complete exon sequencing of the currently Pingault1,2,4, N. Bondurand1,2; known USH genes stands as a definite improvement for molecular 1IMRB INSERMU955, Creteil, France, 2Université Paris-Est, Faculté de diagnosis of this disease. Médecine, UMR-S 955, Creteil, France, 3Institut Jacques Monod, UMR7592 CNRS, Université Paris Diderot-Paris 7, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Groupe P12.246 Hospitalier Henri Mondor, Service de biochimie et génétique, Creteil, France, Ophthalmic status of patients with Usher syndrome 5INSERM U781 et département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker, Paris, France. M. O. Mkheidze1, O. K. Janvareva2; Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a rare auditory-pigmentary disorder 1Medical Academy for Postgraduate Studies, St.Petersburg, Russian that exhibits varying combinations of sensorineural hearing loss and Federation, 2Medical Centre of St.Petersburg University, St.Petersburg, pigmentation defects. Four subtypes are clinically defined based Russian Federation. on the presence or absence of additional symptoms. WS2, which is Usher syndrome (USH) is a relatively rare genetically heterogeneous defined by the absence of additional features, results from mutations autosomal recessive disorder with three clinical subtypes (USH I, II, within the SOX10 and MITF genes. However, 70% of WS2 remain III). It is due to some mutations in any of 10 genes (MYO7A, CDH23, unexplained, suggesting that other genes could be involved and/or PCDH15, SANS, USH1C, USH1G, USH2A, GPR98, DFNB31, that mutations within the known genes escape screening performed CLRN1). The frequency of USH was estimated to be 1/12,500 so far. The crucial role of SOX10 and MITF during melanocyte (Germany), 1/23,000 (USA), 1/28,000 (Norway). Here we reported on development and the identification of several of their regulatory 24 patients with USH aged from 6 to 38 yr. Nobody had clinical signs regions prompted us to search for mutations within some of these of vestibular dysfunction. Severe sensorineural deafness symptoms regions in 30 WS2 unexplained cases. In case of MITF, we tested of the III-IV degrees were observed in all patients in their first year of the involvement of the well known melanocyte-specific (M) promoter life. Ophthalmic status included decrement in visual acuity, reduction region and a distal regulatory region (MDE) located 14.5 kb upstream of the peripheral visual field, defective dark adaptation, nyctalopia, from exon 1M. In case of SOX10, sequence conservation analysis disturbance of colour vision in their 4th- 5th year of life. Typical key led to the identification of at least 5 segments directing expression findings of fundus disturbance for retinitis pigmentosa (RP) including in overlapping populations of neural crest derivatives. Previous bone spicules were found. Among children and youth aged from 5 to functional studies revealed the role of at least two of them (U1 and 25 years RP signs were clearly diagnosed as the disease process of U3) during melanocyte development. No deletion was identified upon the 1-II degrees. This stage was characterized by satisfactory visual QMF-PCR analysis of the MITF promoter and the 5 SOX10 regulatory acuity (0.7-0.5) and uninjured visual fields which did not result in regions. So far, sequencing of U1, U3 and the 2 MITF regions led to Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 448 the identification of 2 variations not previously reported in dbSNP: 1 in the dominant form of WMS. We identified an in frame deletion of 24 close proximity to the MDE sequence, and 1 within U1. Their functional nucleotides within a LTBP motif (exon 41, 5074_5097del) of FBN1. In consequences should be tested in the near future. the mean time, we identified three distinct mutations in ADAMTS10 (A Disintegrin-like And Metalloproteinase domain (reprolysin type) P12.249*** with ThromboSpondin type 1 repeats) responsible for the autosomal Identification and functional analysis of SOX10 missense recessive form of WMS. mutations in different types of Waardenburg syndrome Following this initial study, we have collected the samples of 17 A. Chaoui1,2, Y. Watanabe1,2, R. Touraine3, V. Baral1,2, M. Goossens1,2,4, V. additional WMS families. We identified ADAMTS10 mutations in 2/17 Pingault1,2,4, N. Bondurand1,2; patients comprising 3 novel mutations (2 missense and one nonsense 1IMRB INSERMU955, Creteil, France, 2Université Paris-Est, Faculté de mutations) and FBN1 mutations in 5/17 including 5 novel missense Médecine, UMR-S 955, Creteil, France, 3CHU-Hôpital Nord, Service de mutations. The screening of ADAMTS10 is still in progress for 3 cases Génétique, Saint Etienne, France, 4AP-HP, Groupe Hospitalier Henri-Mondor, and the screening of FBN1 is still in progress for 5 cases. Recently, Service de Biochimie et Génétique, Creteil, France. three homozygous mutations in ADAMTS17 have been identified in 3 Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is an auditory-pigmentary disorder WMS cases. We therefore decided to screen ADAMTS17 in 2 cases that exhibits varying combinations of sensorineural hearing loss and unlinked to ADAMTS10 and FBN1. Finally we analysed the microfibrils pigmentation defects. Four subtypes are clinically defined based of fibroblasts of WMS patients by EM and showed no major changes on the presence or absence of additional symptoms. In particular, in their microfibrillar structure. the absence of additional features characterizes WS2, whereas Our clinical and genetic findings suggest that ADAMTS10, ADAMTS17 the association with Hirschsprung disease defines WS4. WS is and FBN1 play a critical role in crystalline lens and connective tissue genetically heterogeneous with six genes already involved, including formations. SOX10. Since 1998, about 50 heterozygous mutations or deletions of this gene have been described in patients presenting with WS2 P12.251 or WS4, with or without myelination defects of the peripheral and c.3402delc (p.Ala1135GlnfsX13) is the most frequent mutation central nervous system (PCWH). The mutations characterized so far among Venezuelan Wilson disease patients. are mostly truncating mutations, removing part of the protein. Only 3 I. Paradisi, L. De Freitas, S. Arias C.; missense mutations were described. Here, we report the identification Venezuelan Institute for Scientific Research (IVIC), Caracas, Venezuela, of new SOX10 missense mutations in 11 patients, associated with Bolivarian Republic of. a variety of phenotypes ranging from WS2 to PCWH, and describe Wilson disease is an infrequent autosomal recessive disorder of copper the functional consequences of each of these mutations on the main transport, characterized by accumulation of intracellular copper, with SOX10 characteristics and functions. Altogether, our functional assays consequent severe hepatic and neurological disturbances; the gene, highlight deleterious effects of all the mutations tested. Some mutants ATP7B, encodes an ATPasa Cu(2+)-transporting beta polypeptide. To present with partial cytoplasmic and/or subnuclear redistribution, date, more than 380 mutations have been reported in many different some lose their DNA binding and/or their transactivation capacities on populations, but a few ones show high frequencies in some areas; various tissue specific target genes. Intriguingly, several mutants were the most prevalent mutation in Europe is H1069Q, with frequencies redistributed in nuclear foci. To our knowledge, such redistribution was over 65%; in Sardinia, c.-441_-427del accounts for 61.5% of mutated not described so far during functional studies of patients’ mutations chromosomes; mutation M645R is present in 55% of patients in Spain, identified in other SOX genes. Whether it is a cause or a consequence and mutation R778L is very frequent in Asians. Deletion c.3402delC of the mutant pathogenicity remains to determine, but it could help at exon 15 has been reported in worldwide populations with very low identify new SOX10 function and mode of action. frequencies (usually below 2%), and is not present in Asians; the only exception are Brazilian patients, with a mutation frequency of 31%. In P12.250 Venezuela, DNA analysis in 21 independent Wilson disease families screening of ADAmts10, FBN1 and ADAmts17 in a cohort of 17 gathered during the last 24 years revealed 10 different mutations in the patients with Weill marchesani syndrome ATP7B gene; 80% of patients with detected mutations were compound C. Le Goff1, C. Mahaut1, N. Dagoneau1, L. Zylberberg1, C. Baumann2, N. heterozygotes, but mutation c.3402delC had a frequency of 21.4% and Blank3, E. Bongers4, A. David5, D. De Brasi6, L. Faivre7, R. Fischetto8, D. a very wide distribution in the country. Haplotype analyses using 5 Judge9, S. G. Kant10, G. Kosztdanyi11, A. Medeira12, W. Newman13, M. Rio1, T. intragenic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) apparently did not Rosenberg14, M. Tischkowitz15, J. Tolmie16, M. Van Haelst17, A. Munnich1, V. support a single ancestral origin for the mutation, despite all remote Cormier-Daire1; ancestors of the families came from Venezuela. Either a high mutation 1Department of Genetics, Université Paris Descartes, Unité INSERM U781, rate or gene conversion both in Brazil and Venezuela might suggest an Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Department of Genetics, Amerindian origin for it, but neither SNPs frequencies nor the specific Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3University of Heidelberg, Internal Amerindian marker D9S1120*275 in Venezuelan carriers seem to medicine, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Department of Human Genetics, Radboud support this hypothesis. University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Genetics, Nantes, France, 6Dipartimento di Pediatria, Università “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 7Centre P12.252 de Génétique, Hôpital d’Enfants, Dijon, France, 8U.O. Malattie Metaboliche molecular basis of tricho-Hepato-Enteric syndrome: e Genetica Medica, A.O.U. Policlinico Consorziale, Bari, Italy, 9Division of characterization of mutations in TTC37 Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, DC, A. Fabre1,2,3, C. Martinez-Vinson4,5, B. Roquelaure1, C. Missirian1,2, N. André1,2, United States, 10Dept of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,, A. Breton6, A. Lachaux7,8, E. Odul9, V. Colomb10,5, J. Lemale11, J. Cézard4,5, O. Leiden, Netherlands, 11Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Goulet10,5, J. Sarles1,2, N. Levy1,2,3, C. Badens1,2,3; Pécs, Hungary, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Santa Maria, 1APHM, Marseille, France, 2Université de la méditerranée, Marseille, France, Lisboa, Portugal, 13Unit of Medical Genetics, St Mary’s Hospital,, MAnchester, 3Unité INSERM 910, Marseille, France, 4APHP, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, United Kingdom, 14National Eye Clinic, Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, France, 5Centre de référence pour les pathologies intestinales rares, Paris, 15Department of Human Genetics, McGill University,, Montréal, QC, Canada, France, 6Hôpital des Enfants, Toulouse, France, 7Hôpital mère-enfant, Lyon, 16Department of Medical Genetics, Ferguson Smith Centre, Yorkhill Hospital, France, 8Faculté de médecin de Lyon, Lyon, France, 9Gazi university, Ankara, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 17Dept. of Medical Genetics, University Medical Turkey, 10APHP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, 11APHP, Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France. Weill-Marchesani syndrome (WMS) is a rare disorder characterized The Tricho-Hepato-Enteric (THE) syndrome is an autosomal recessive by short stature, short and stubby hands and feet, stiff joints and condition marked by early and intractable diarrhea, hair abnormalities, dislocation of microspherophakic lens which causes severe myopia, IUGR, facial dysmorphy and immune defects. Mutations in TTC37 glaucoma or cataract. Despite clinical homogeneity, two modes of which encodes the putative protein Thespin, have recently been inheritance have been reported: autosomal dominant and autosomal associated with THE syndrome. Here, we extend the pattern of TTC37 recessive. We first showed that Fibrillin 1 (FBN1) is responsible for mutations by the description of 13 novel mutations in 10 patients Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 449 with a typical THE syndrome and report their potential effects on the MBL2 gene, three single nucleotide polymorphisms (nucleotide transcription. Different types of mutation were observed: frameshift substitutions) cause independently low serum levels of MBL at codon mutations splice site altering mutations or missense mutations. Most 52 (arginine with cysteine, allele D), at codon 54 (glycine with aspartic of them are predicted to create a premature stop codon or to alter acid, allele B) or at codon 57 (glycine with glutamic acid, allele C). Y/X splicing, including missense mutations. The effects of splice sites promoter polymorphism in codon -221 has a significant effect on the mutations and missense on sequence transcripts were analysed by MBL serum levels. direct sequencing of RNA transcripts from lymphoblastoid cells, for 5 Polymorphisms in exon 1 and promoter region were typed by single mutations. The tested samples exhibited abnormal sequences due to base primer extension assay (SNaPshot) in 91 Slovak patients with the modification of splicing. In particular, we observed skipping of exon cystic fibrosis and 100 healthy controls. Concentrations of MBL 23 and exon 25, leading to transcripts and possibly deleted proteins, protein were determined in 34 patients by a Sandwich enzyme-linked suggesting that these exons are encoding important functional regions immunosorbent assay. Spirometric and microbiological data were in the protein. Quantitative expression was investigated on transcripts collected from medical records. lacking exon 25 from lymphoblastoid cells and from hair root cells No association was found for the MBL2 structural variants and and showed that levels of expression were not significantly reduced severity of cystic fibrosis lung disease. But significant association as compared to heterozygous or normal controls. This sustained the was observed between MBL2 variants and protein levels and positive hypothesis that the deleted proteins are expressed but are functionally implications between MBL2 genotypes, immunoglobulin G and atopy. altered. These findings provide correlation between MBL2 genotypes and Further mutational effect studies will lead surely to better characterize protein level, but variant alleles are not associated with poor diagnosis the localisation and functional properties of Thespin. in Slovak CF patients. P12.253 J12.02 Identification of a novel canine chondrodysplasia mutation A novel heterozygous mutation in a spanish family with Best’s K. Kyöstilä1,2, H. Lohi1,2; vitelliform macular dystrophy 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, T. Piñeiro-Gallego1, A. Campo2, S. Campos2, D. Valverde1; Helsinki, Finland. 1Departamento de Bioquímica, Xenética e Inmunoloxía. Universidade de Vigo, Skeletal dysplasias are a heterogeneous group of disorders Vigo, Spain, 2Servizo de Oftalmoloxía, Complexo Hospitalario Universitario de affecting the bone and cartilage tissues. Chondrodysplasias are Vigo, Vigo, Spain. characterized by disturbed endochondral ossification which often Best’s vitelliform macular dystrophy (BVMD, OMIM#153700) is a results in disproportionate short stature or dwarfism. We report here dominantly inherited, juvenile onset form of macular degeneration with the identification of a recessive canine chondrodysplasia mutation in variable expresivity, which is characterized by abnormal accumulation a gene that represents a new candidate for human chondrodysplasias. of deposits of lipofuscin-like material in the subretinal space and a The novel mutation was identified in Norwegian Elkhounds which have reduced Arden ratio of the electro-oculogram (EOG). been previously described to suffer from a generalized disturbance in the Mutations in the gene VMD2 are associated with BVMD. The gene endochondral ossification process. Our pedigree analysis suggested a VMD2 is expressed in the plasma membrane of the retinal pigment recessive mode of inheritance for the disorder. We genotyped nine epithelium and encodes the besthrophin-1 protein. Besthrophin-1 is a cases and nine controls using Illumina’s canine SNP chip of 22K SNPs transmembrane protein with underdetermined function although it has to map the disease locus. Genome-wide association analysis revealed been proposed to act as a Cl− channel activated by intracellular Ca2+ a 2 Mb disease associated locus on CFA17. Mutation screening of a and/or as a channel regulator. plausible causative gene revealed a homozygous nonsense mutation We report a non consanguineous Spanish family with BVMD. Family in all affected dogs, predicted to result in a premature stop codon in members were examined ophtalmologically to assess their phenotype. the encoded protein. Segregation of the mutation was studied further After exclusion of the known mutations using the Vitelliform Macular in 157 unrelated population controls none of which were homozygous Dystrophy (BEST-VMD) mutation array (Asper Biotech), direct for the mutant allele. A genetic test has been developed and is offered sequencing of the eleven exons of VMD2 was performed to find to the breed to help identify carrier dogs. Furthermore, we have possible mutations. initiated screens in human patients with related phenotypes. We The affected sisters were heterozygotes for a novel VMD2 gene hope our findings will improve the understanding of the endochondral missense mutation p.I73L, (c.217A>C) in exon 3 and the father and ossification processes and related molecular pathways in health and paternal grandmother were heterozygous for the same mutation. This disease. mutation was no present in their clinically unaffected mother. The father and the eldest sister presented typical lesions of Best’s disease. The J12.01 paternal grandmother presented central areolar atrophy consistent Detection of polymorphisms in the mannose-binding lectin gene with the late stage of Best’s disease. and their influence on the phenotype in Slovak patients with In conclusion, a novel heterozygous mutation in VMD2 gene causative cystic fibrosis for Best’s disease was found, proving that mutational screening is a E. Tóthová Tarová1, H. Poláková2, H. Kayserová3, P. Celec4,1, M. Zuzulová5, E. useful tool in the molecular diagnostic of bestrinopathies. Neščáková6, &. Kádaši1; 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius J12.03 University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology characterization of a novel mutation in the GJB2 gene in and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Cystic congenital sensorineural hearing impairment Fibrosis Center, University Hospital with Policlinic in Bratislava, Bratislava, M. Rivera-Vega1, D. Castro1, A. Totomoch1, L. Gonzalez1, P. Berruecos1, S. Slovakia, 4Institute of Pathophysiology, Faculty of Medicine of Comenius Cuevas2; University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Institute of Laboratory 1Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico, 2Hospital General de Medicine, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Department of Mexico, Universidad nacional Autonoma de Mexico, Mexico D.F., Mexico. Anthropology, Faculty of Natural Sciences of Comenius University in Bratislava, The hearing impairment is the most frequent sensory defect worldwide. Bratislava, Slovakia. More than half of children have a genetic origin and correspond to Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal inherited disease non-syndromic hearing loss (NSHL). Autosomal recessive is one of among Caucasians. The cause of death in 90% of the CF patients the most frequent pattern of inherited hearing impairment. Mutations in is respiratory insufficiency due to chronic inflammation caused by the GJB2 gene, encoding the conexin 26 gap-junction protein, are the bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Burkholderia cepacia). principal cause of NSHL. Currently, more than 100 different recessive Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) protein is an important mediator mutations have been found in the GJB2 gene; 35delG is a hot-spot component of the innate immune defense system. It has been shown in the white population, 235delC in East Asian and 167delT in the that MBL variant alleles causing low MBL serum levels are associated Ashkenazi Jewish. In the present study we ascertained 20 unrelated with an increased risk of different types of infections. In exon 1 of Mexican families with NSHL with an autosomal recessive inheritance Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 450 and identified the novel homozygous GTG/GCG mutation (V63A) in J12.06 the GJB2 gene. We also found a high prevalence of heterozygous. In Analysis of 3‘-UtR region polymorphic variant +3379A/t of this work we report a novel mutation in the GJB2 gene in NSHL. human angiopoietin-1 (Ang1) in sickle-cell disease (scD) patients. J12.04 G. Ananina, F. Menaa, M. J. da Silva, M. Nueldo, M. A. Bezerra, F. F. Costa, M. Genotype-phenotype correlation in compound heterozygote B. de Melo; patient with severe salt wasting form of cAH CBMEG, Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. V. Anastasovska, M. Kocova; SCD is a genetic disorder relatively common among Afro-descendants Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. and caused by a missense mutation in the beta polypeptide chain Eleven common pseudogene-derived mutations in the CYP21A2 gene, of hemoglobin. SCD shows distinct clinical evolutions in different encoding the 21-hydroxylase enzyme, account for approximately 95% patients. Vasoocclusion induced by irregularly shaped sickle cells of all mutations causing congenital adrenal hyperplasia(CAH). and subsequent endothelial activation may play the central role Here we present a patient with a salt wasting (SW) form of the disease. in the pathophysiological process. Ang1 regulates blood vessel As a newborn he presented with a severe clinical symptoms: vomiting, development, remodeling, and maturation. Recently Ang1/Ang2/Tie- failure to thrive, complete virilisation. Biochemical work up showed low 2 system has emerged as a non-redundant regulator of endothelial sodium, high potassium, and elevated 17OHProgesterone level (>75 activation. The T/T genotype of the polymorphic variant +3379A/T in nmol/L) confirming CAH. Karyotype was 46.XX. Uretrocistography the 3∋-UTR region of human Ang1 was reported as associated with confirmed male urethra with small uterus and sinus urogenitalis. stroke risk reduction in Chinese Han population. As stroke is one of No testicular tissue was seen on ultrasound. We performed direct the major complications of SCD, we designed the present study to molecular detection of eleven CYP21A2 mutations by allele created find out allele and genotype frequencies of this variant in a group of restriction sight method (ACRS). SCD patients from Brazil, with the objective of investigating its possible Our patient was compound heterozygote for three severe mutations: involvement in stroke risk. IVS2, Q318X, R356W and one mild V281L mutation in the CYP21A2 We analyzed 92 SCD patients (S/S and S/C hemoglobin genotypes). gene. Although the compound heterozygotes for different CYP21A2 The allele frequencies of the +3379A/T variant were: 0.71 of A allele, mutations usually have a phenotype compatible with the presence 0.29 of T allele. HWE test showed marginally significant deviation from of the milder gene defect, SW clinical presentation was probably a equilibrium: p=0.044 (Pearson’s goodness-of-fit chi-square, df=1), result of the influence of the other three severe mutations. His mother p=0.034 (likelihood ratio chi-square, df=1), p=0.06 (Exact test). was homozygote for V281L and Q318W and heterozygote for R356W, The observed allelic frequency of A allele is different from that without any signs or symptoms of the disease, while the father was previously reported for CEPH (0.47) and YRI (0.23; low coverage heterozygote for IVS2. Interestingly, the brother harbored none of panel) populations of the HapMap project. As the next step, we plan to the tested mutations. It is likely that these complex findings probably increase sample size of SCD patients with and without stroke incidents resulted from small or large gene conversions, multiple mutations and include control individuals in order to evaluate the association of events or peculiar recombination events due to the tandem-repeat stroke risk with different genotypes. organization of the gene cluster. The genotype-phenotype correlation observed in the patient and his J12.07 mother suggest that the genotype cannot be completely predictive of the role of sNPs in 5’Hs4 beta globin LcR in modifying the phenotype. thalassemia phenotype in iranian patients M. Neishabury1, S. Zamani1, A. Azarkeivan2, H. Darvish1, S. S. Abedini1, F. J12.05 Zamani1, H. Najmabadi1,3; molecular genetic characteristics of spinal muscular atrophies 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation in Belarus Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Thalassemia Clinic, Research S. Miasnikov1,2, N. Gusina1, I. Naumchik1; Center, Iranian Blood Transfusion Organization (IBTO), Tehran, Islamic 1National centre of research and applied medicine «Mother and child», Minsk, Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad and Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Belarus, 2International Sakharov Environmental University, Minsk, Belarus. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Proximal spinal muscular atrophies (SMAs) are autosomal recessive 5’HS4 core region of beta globin LCR was analysed in 100 Iranian diseases characterized by degeneration of the anterior horn cells of individuals with normal hematological indices and 100 patients with the spinal cord, resulting in symmetrical limb muscle atrophy and beta0 mutation in both alleles. Coinheritance of three SNP alleles in weakness. Carrier frequency is 1 in 40-60. Critical region involved in 5’HS4 was observed in a normal individual in heterozygous state. pathogenesis of SMA is 5q11.2-q13.3. We have recently observed and reported the same coinheritance in a We performed analysis of common mutations of two main genes - carrier individual with unexpected thalassemia intermedia phenotype. SMN1 and NAIP. The presence of exons 7 and 8 of the SMN1 gene Despite it’s presence in the normal population, the role of this rare was determined using PCR and restriction enzyme digestion. For polymorphic pattern in altering the clinical picture of our reported detection of gene NAIP deletion exons 4, 5 and 12 were amplified patient cannot be ruled out as it may only exert its influence when using triplex PCR. at least one beta globin allele is affected. Furthermore, There was Group of 59 probands was included in this study. Deletions was a statistically significant difference in the frequency of G allele in detected in 39 probands: both exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 gene and exons the polymorphic palyndromic TGGGG(A/G)CCCCA region of 5’HS4 4 and 5 of NAIP gene - 10 patients (26%), exons 7 and 8 of SMN1 between the normal population and thalassemia patients with two gene - 23 (59%), exon 7 only of SMN1 gene - 5 (13%) and exons affected alleles. This suggests a linkage disequilibrium between the G 4 and 5 only of NAIP gene - 1 (3%). Carrier status was established allele in the palyndromic region of 5’HS4 and thalassemia mutations. using MLPA method. All parents were heterozygous carriers of same mutation that was indentified in kids. Prenatal DNA-diagnosis of SMA J12.08 was performed in six cases. Four fetuses were found homozygous New case of inherited congenital central Hypoventilation carriers of mutations. syndrome in a family of the young girl with fatal central apnea K. Mosse, N. Mosse; National Center of Research and Applied Medicine “Mother and child”, Minsk, Belarus. Congenital Central Hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS (MIM 209880)) is a rare disorder, characterised by absence of adequate autonomic control of respiration with decreased sensitivity to hypercapnia and hypoxia. Children with CCHS have normal ventilation while awake but persistent alveolar hypoventilation and/or apnea during sleep. The paired-like homeobox gene (PHOX2B) was identifed as the gene Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 451 underlying CCHS, with a heterozygous expansion of +5 to +13 alanines material and methods. Clinical investigations: Iranian patients with in a 20 alanines stretch being present in about 90% of patients. Other BrS and or familial history of SCD were examined by standard ECG, mutations are found in a minority of cases. 24-hour HM, and procainamide challenge test (PCT). Genetic analysis: Here, we report the results of mutation screening in a family having a All coding exons of SCN5A gene were sequenced. young girl with fatal central apnea. DNA test revealed that the proband Results. Forty unrelated probands with BrS were studied. Mean age is a heterozygous carrier of +6 alanine expansion in the PHOX2B was 39 y.o., and M:F ratio was 13:1. Family history of SCD was 45.2%, gene. Expansions of that size are always resulted in severe clinical and acute ventricular events were registered in 73.8% probands. Half symptoms with continuous ventilatory dependence. of cohort had spontaneous Brugada type-1 ECG, the rest became More than 90% of PHOX2B expansions occur de novo in CCHS positive on PCT. probands, with only 5-10% of unaffected parents showing somatic Twenty-two probands were fully screened for SCN5A mutations. mosaicism for the gene defect seen in child. Analyses performed for Sequencing of the rest is in progress now. We found 3 SCN5A both parents of the affected girl identified the same size expansion mutations: A735V, Y1434X, and del_KPQ1505-1507 (14% of probands in asymptomatic father which means the rare case of parental with complete screening). Familial analysis of delKPQ carriers reveals transmission of the disease. Carrier father presented a mutant peak of some patients with LQTS and BrS both. lower intensity (35%) than the wild-type, which is highly suggestive of conclusion. In this study we detected SCN5A mutations in 14% of BrS somatic mosaicism explaining his asymptomatic status. probands with completly sequenced gene of interest. The mutation rate This is the first case of CCHS analysis in Belarus, showing germinal in Iranian BrS cohort is in accordance with data published worldwide. expansion leading to central apnea and ventilatory phenotype in Deletion KPQ can produce different phenotype, and exact mechanism proband, and somatic mosaicism without any clinical symptoms in her of clinical expression is to be clarified. Further molecular investigations father. are required to elucidate genetic background of BrS in Iran. J12.09 J12.11 Double heterozygosity in GJB2 heterozygots of autosomal screening of LRtOmt gene mutations (DFNB63 locus) in iranian recessive non-syndromic hearing impairment: assessment of patients with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss GJB6 gene S. Ashoori1, E. Farokhi1, N. Yazdanpanahi2, F. Taghizade1, D. Kooshavar1, H. D. Kooshavar1, E. Farrokhi2, M. R. Noori-Daloii1, M. Hashemzadeh Taghizade1, R. Heshmatifar1; Chaleshtori2; 1cellular and molecular research center,shahrekord university of 1Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, medical sciences, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad 2Shahrekord University of Medical Science, Cellular and Molecular research university,Flavarjan branch, Esfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. center, Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. Background: Prelingual hearing loss occurs in 1 in 1000 newborns and Hereditary non-syndromic hearing loss is inherited in autosomal is inherited in more than 60% of cases. Approximately more than 80% recessive pattern in about 80% of cases. Up to 50 percent of all of inherited cases are nonsyndromic. Nonsyndromic hearing loss is so autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing impairment cases in heterogene and more than 100 loci are known to be related to it. different populations are caused by mutations in the GJB2 gene which Objectives: To determine LRTOMT gene mutation profile and frequency encodes the gap-junction (GJ) protein connexin (Cx) 26. However 10 in Iranian patients. to 50 percent of patients with GJB2 mutations have only one mutant Methods: 114 patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss from allele. GJB6 encoding Cx30 is expressed in the same inner-ear Hormozgan province in south of Iran were recruited for this study. DNA structures as GJB2, with which are normally co-assemble into GJs in was extracted using Phenol-Chloroform method. The screening of the cochlea. This study aims to determine whether variations in GJB6 the LRTOMT gene in exons 3,5 and 9 was performed using PCR and can be the second mutant allele causing the disease in the GJB2 direct sequencing. heterozygous cases studied. Results: These three sequenced exons (3 , 5 and 9) were studied We examined 44 unrelated GJB2 heterozygous autosomal recessive using Chromas software and no mutation was detected in these three non-syndromic hearing loss subjects for any sequence variations in exons, in the samples studied. GJB6, using polymerase chain reaction followed by direct sequencing. Conclusions: Screening of 3 exons (3,5 and 9) of LRTOMT gene Sequence analysis showed a heterozygous substitution of c.173C>T revealed no mutations, however we recommend to study the whole in GJB6 in one of the cases which leads to the change of p.Pro58Leu gene coding region in more samples. in amino acid sequence. So this allelic variation in GJB6 can be considered as the second J12.12 mutant allele in patients with only one GJB2 mutant allele. Further mutational analysis of mFN 2 in hereditary motor and sensory examinations on control cases and co-segregational family studies are neuropathy patients from Bashkortostan Republic (Russia) in progress to confirm the detected variation as the second mutation I. Skachkova1, I. Khidiyatova1, R. Magzhanov1, A. Ahmetgaleeva2, E. responsible for the disease. Khusnutdinova1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, J12.10 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. the prevalence of scN5A mutation in iranian Brugada syndrome Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) is a clinically and patients genetically heterogeneous disorder of peripheral nervous system. The S. Saber1, K. Banihashemi2, M. Houshmand3, M. Balali1, S. Dadgar1, O. Aryani1, HMSN frequency in Bashkortostan Republic (BR) is 10,3:100000. A. Fazelifar4, M. Haghjoo4, Z. Emkanjoo4, A. Alizadeh4, M. Eftekharzadeh5, E. V. We examined HMSN patients from BR and detected spectrum and Zaklyazminskaya6; frequency of specific mutations in mitofusin 2 (MFN2) gene - cause 1Special Medical Center,Genetic Ward, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IECF, the axonal subtype of CMTIIA. The MFN2 gene (1p36.22) codes a Ministry of Science, Research and Technology,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of protein mitofusin 2 - an important factor in the fusion of mitochondria. Iran, 3National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Molecular-genetic investigation of HMSN in 165 unrelated families Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Rajaie Cardiovascular Medical and Research Center, showed 9 different nucleotide changes in the MFN2 gene. Four of Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Tehran Arrhythmia Clinic, Tehran, Islamic them haven’t been described previously. Four nucleotide changes are Republic of Iran, 6Petrovsky Russian Research Center of Surgery, RAMS,, supposed to be disease causing mutations: c.776G>A (p.Arg259His) Moscow, Russian Federation. (0,6% among all HMSN types in total of patients sample) and c.2113 Background. Brugada Syndrome (BrS) is an autosomal dominant G>A (p.Val705 Ile) (1,2%) - previously described mutations, c.775C>T disorder characterized by right bundle branch block (RBBB) and ST- (p.Arg259Cys) (0,6% in total sample of patients, 2,1% - among elevations in V1-V3, apparently normal heart and high risk of sudden patients of Tatar ethnic origin) and c.2171T>C (p.Ley724Pro) (0,6% in cardiac death (SCD). The SCN5A gene encodes the main cardiac total sample, 2,1% - among Bashkirs) - new mutations, not detected sodium channel. Mutations of this gene were detected in 10%-30% of among healthy family members and controls (n=80). Five revealed patients with BrS. nucleotide changes appeared to be gene polymorphic variants: Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 452 c.892G>A (p.Gly298Arg), c.957C>T (p.Gly319Gly) and c.1039-222t>c J12.15 - described polymorphisms, c.175+28c>t and c.2204+15t>c - new Partial duplication of the PMP22 gene in a patient with hereditary nucleotide changes in gene introns. It is found that the contribution neuropathy with liability to pressure palsies of HMSN IIA type to general structure of HMSN among patients from I. Banchs1, C. Casasnovas2, L. De Jorge1, A. Carvajal3, V. Volpini1; BR is 5,1%. The received data will contribute to optimize medical and 1CDGM. Idibell, 08907 L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 2Unitat de genetic consulting of HMSN families in our region. Neuromuscular. Neurology Department. Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, 08907 L’Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain, 3Neurology Department. Hospital J12.13 Universitario Virgen de las NIeves, Granada, Spain. molecular study of Leber‘s hereditary optic neuropathy in INTRODUCTION: Hereditary neuropathy with liability to pressure Brazilian patients palsies (HNPP) is an autosomal-dominant disease. Motor and sensory E. L. Sartorato, P. M. A. D. Miranda, M. S. A. Fernandes, S. M. Silva-Costa, A. nerve dysfunction due to compression at common entrapment sites T. Maciel-Guerra; is the characteristic clinical presentation. Electrophysiological findings Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas - São Paulo, Brazil. show a distinctive background polyneuropathy, independent of Leber Hereditary Optic Neuropathy (LHON) is a mitochondrial disease superimposed entrapment neuropathy. It is characterized by diffuse characterized by sudden loss of vision in both eyes, due to optic sensory nerve conduction velocity (NCV) slowing. Spite of distal motor nerve degeneration. Currently, 17 main LHON associated mutations latencies are prolonged, there is a minor reduction of motor nerve were published, three of which account for 95% of the cases (primary conduction velocities. Up to 84% of HNPP are due to the 1.5 Mb mutations) and fourteen different mutations account for only 5% of deletion at 17p11.2-12 containing the PMP22 gene. This gene codifies the total (secondary mutations). There is no official data about the for the membrane glycoprotein, Peripheral Myelin Protein 22. frequency of LHON mutations in Brazilian patients. Screening of LHON PATIENT: A previously healthy 31-years-old male presented with mutations is important for confirmation of clinical diagnosis, provide dropped food due to left peroneal neuropathy with clinical improvement prognostic information and more appropriate genetic counseling. after 3 months. At 17-years-old he presented an episode of dropped Therefore, the aim of this study was to define the LHON mutations wrist. Electrophisiological studies revealed the typical HNPP findings. frequency in Brazilian patients. We evaluated 55 patients with LHON METHODS: We performed the genetic testing of the CMT1A/HNPP diagnosis or acquired optic neuropathy of unknown origin. Primary region using allelotyping studies and MLPA technique. mutations (G11778A, T14484C and G3460A) and secondary mutations RESULTS: An exon 3 duplication of PMP22 gene instead of the were screened. Primary mutations were screened by the method of common deletion was found. enzyme restriction and secondary mutations by direct sequencing. DISCUSSION: The HNPP phenotype presented in this patient with a Primary mutations were found in 19 patients. The frequencies found partial duplication could be explained because of a frameshift change were 67% for the G11778A mutation (13 cases), 28% for the T14484C resulting in a loss of function of the new truncated protein mutation (5 cases) and 5% for the G3460A mutation (only 1 case). The CONCLUSION: HNNP is a genetically heterogeneous disease and G11778A mutation was more frequent, as well as in others parts of the can be due to partial duplications in PMP22 gene world. However, the frequency of T14484C mutation was higher while the G3460A mutation frequency was lower. No secondary mutation J12.16 was found. The absence of these mutations can be attributed to the Low-density lipoprotein receptor mRNA level in freshly isolated presence of mutations in regions not analyzed in this study. Analyze human familial hypercholesterolemia leukocytes does not molecular allowed us to confirm LHON diagnosis in 38% patients correlate with plasma serum cholesterol level studied. T. Y. Komarova, A. S. Golovina; Institute of Experimental Medicine, St-Petersburg, Russian Federation. J12.14 Aims. Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common (1:500) Novel coding variations in c20ORF54 in an iranian BVVL patient monogenic disease caused by low density lipoporotein (LDL) M. Ansari Dezfouli1, S. Nafisi2, E. Elahi1; catabolism lowering due to dysfunction of the specific LDL receptor 1School of Biology, College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic (LDLR). We aimed to investigate if the LDLR mRNA level in freshly Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic isolated peripheral venous blood leukocytes was inversely correlated Republic of Iran. with plasma level cholesterol in patients with heterozygous FH. Brown-Vialetto-Von Lear (BVVL) is a rare progressive neurological Methods. Total RNA was prepared from 1-2 millions of freshly isolated disorder typically characterized by pontobulbar palsy and associate viable white blood cells and approximately 100 ng of cDNA was with bilateral nerve failures usually involving the seventh and ninth used in real-time PCR TaqMan mRNA quantitation test. LDLR gene to twelfth cranial nerves. Fifty eight cases have been reported in expression was normalized against ubiquitine C gene expression and the literature. Clinical symptoms often begin with weakness and plotted versus blood plasma total cholesterol figures. muscular atrophy and progress to mental and movement disorders. Results. We found LDLR mRNA level to be highly variable in FH blood In last phases of disease, patients are unable to do daily activities and leukocytes ranging from 0.2 to 1.8 times content of LDLR mRNA in the they suffer from respiratory and swallowing problems. BVVL is more control individual. We found that most possible mechanism of LDLR common in females, with a sex ratio 1:3. However, clinical symptoms gene dysfunction in common deltaG197 (also known as G218del or are more sever and more rapidly progressive in males. The age at FH-Lithuania mutation) variant heterozygous leukocytes is due to onset of clinical presentations is variable, sometimes even between mRNA level lowering and not to defects in the intracellular protein affected members of the same family. Heredity pattern in multi-case maturation and transport. Patients taking up high dose of statins families is variable. Although most families exhibit autosomal recessive usually demonstrate the elevated level of LDLR mRNA. inheritance, X-linked and autosomal dominant inheritance with variable Conclusions. We found no inverse correlation between LDLR mRNA expression have also been suggested. In 2010, the C20ORF54 gene level in peripheral blood FH leukocytes and plasma cholesterol level. was identified to be the BVVL causing gene in all patients examined by So far, quantitation of LDLR mRNA in leukocytes cannot be used for autozygosity mapping; mutations were recessive. The protein product prediction of disease severity and efficacy of hypocholestorolemic of C20ORF54 may be a membrane transporter for riboflavin in the drug treatment in heterozygous FH. small intestine. Here, we report identification of a new BVVL affected individual born to consanguineous parents. Mutation screening of J12.17 C20ORF54 gene identified two novel coding variations. Detection of two CFTR large rearrangements in Russian cF patients T. A. Vasilyeva, E. E. Timkovskaya, N. V. Petrova; Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. To date more than 1800 mutations have been identified in the CFTR gene [http:www.genet.sickkids.on.ca].They involve coding, splicing Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 453 and regulatory regions of the gene. To date 48 large rearrangements patients from two major cities in North-West Russia: St. Petersburg in CFTR gene are found, some of them involves deletions spanning and Petrozavodsk. several introns and exons Methods: We used venous blood of 60 Petrozavodsk FH patients Two new large rearrangements were found in Russian CF patients. to extract DNA and different methods of molecular biology including In family A a routine detection of CFTR mutations revealed that an PCR, SSCP-analysis, molecular cloning in Escherichia coli, and affected child had a homozygous F508del genotype, a father had DNA sequencing. Data were compared with mutation spectra in 100 a heterozygous F508del genotype, whereas a mother didn’t have St.Petersburg FH patients. F508del mutation. Intragenic CFTR markers analysis showed that Results: 1. R3500Q APOB mutation that is frequent variant in European an affected child “had lost” maternal alleles of polymorphic markers populations does not occur in FH patients from both cities. IVS6aGATT, IVS8CA, M470V (intron 6a, intron 8, exon 10), therewith 2. None of FH patients from Petrozavodsk carried mutation FH-North he had the two alleles at locus IVS1CA, IVS17bCA (intron 1, intron Karelia in the LDLR gene, that is typical for the residents of eastern 17b) inherited from the both of parents. Finland but found only once in St. Petersburg. In family B neither of CFTR mutant alleles was identified. During 3. C139G and G197del LDLR gene mutations that are recurrent in St. intragenic CFTR markers analysis it turned out that an affected child Petersburg FH do not occur in Petrozavodsk sample. failed to have paternal alleles at polymorphic loci IVS1CA, IVS6aGATT, 4. We have identified new mutation c.192del10/ins8 in two unrelated IVS8CA, M470V, but he had two alleles at locus IVS17bCA in intron patients from Petrozavodsk. This mutation represents a complex 17b inherited from the both of parents. Analysis of STR markers at loci rearrangement in the 5 ‘part of the LDLR gene third exon. D13S141 and DFNB1 on chromosome 13 proved genetic relationship Conclusion: New mutation c.192del10/ins8 results in shift of the within the family. reading frame and creates a premature stop codon in the LDLR gene Segregation analysis of intragenic CFTR polymorphic markers in CF fourth exon. Therefore, this mutation is a likely cause of FH in both families revealed that deletion of maternal CFTR gene overlapped heterozygous patients. a region from intron 6a to exon 10 at least, and deletion of paternal CFTR gene embraced an area from intron 1 to exon 10. J12.20 GJB2 caused hearing loss in Armenia is infrequent J12.18 E. A. Bliznetz1, T. Manoukyan2, T. F. Sarkisian3, T. G. Markova4, A. V. First reported splice site mutation (c. 1935+3A>c) of the FGD1 Polyakov1; gene in a patient with Aarskog-scott syndrome 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, I. Arroyo Carrera1,2, M. J. García García1, A. Izquierdo Martín1, R. Martín 2”ARABKIR” Joint Medical Center & Institute of Child and Adolescent Health, Fernández1, P. Lapunzina Badía3,2, A. Orrico4; Yerevan, Armenia, 3Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, 1San Pedro de Alcántara Hospital, Cáceres, Spain, 2Centre for Biomedical Yerevan, Armenia, 4National Research Centre for Audiology and Hearing Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain, 3Section of Medical Rehabilitation, Moscow, Russian Federation. Genetics, University Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 4Medicina Molecolare, Mutations in Connexin 26 gene (GJB2) are responsible for more Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. than half of all cases of prelingual nonsyndromic recessive deafness Introduction: Mutations in the FGD1 gene have been shown to (PNSRD) in Caucasians. The carrier frequency of the c.35delG cause Aarskog-Scott syndrome (AAS) (OMIM 305400), an X-linked mutation in GJB2 gene was found to be as high as 1-4% in the European congenital disorder characterized by distinctive genital and skeletal populations. The aim of this study was to estimate GJB2 caused cases abnormalities with a broad spectrum of clinical variability. To date, 29 fraction and mutation spectrum in 70 Armenian patients with PNSRD. distinct mutations, including a complete deletion, have been reported, Three pathologic genotype were detected are c.[35delG]+[35delG] in and only one of them is a splice site mutation. We present the clinical 10 patients, c.[35delG]+[-3202+1G>A, also known as IVS1+1G→A] in data of this Spanish patient. 6 patients and [c.35delG]+[p.Glu120del] in one patient. Therefore, the Clinical case: Male, born at term, birth weight 3,050 g, length 50 portion of GJB2 caused deafness is to be 24%. The c.35delG and cm, OFC 34 cm. Unremarkable family history. Referred for clinical IVS+1G>A mutations frequencies were most high and were found to investigation because of a delay in global growth and dysmorphic be 79% and 18% in all chromosomes with mutations. features: frontal bossing, widow´s peak, hypertelorism, large and depressed nasal bridge, short nose, midfacial hypoplasia, long J12.21 philtrum, brachydactyly and shawl scrotum. At 13 months-old weight Neonatal respiratory failure in saudi‘s full-term newborn infants 8.595 kg (3rd centile), height 72.5 cm (6th centile), OFC 45.5 cm (19th associated with ABCA3 gene mutations centile). Patent ductus arteriosus without hemodinamic effects. At 5 M. A. Al Balwi1,2,3, I. Al Abdulkareem2,3, S. Al Saif4,2, M. Al Fawaz3, A. Al years, 4 months-old weight 16.8 kg (14th centile), height 103 cm (5th Masoud3; centile), OFC 49 cm (3rd centile), bone age 3 years-old. Normal/border 1King Abdulaziz Medical City, Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, line developmental outcome. Mutational analysis of the FGD1 gene: c. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 2King Saud bin Abdulaziz University for Health Sciences, 1935+3A>C. His mother is carrier of the mutation. This mutation alters College of Medicine, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 3King Abdullah International Medical the donor splice site of the eleventh intron, possibly resulting in an Research Center, Molecular Biology, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4King Abdulaziz improperly spliced mRNA. Medical City, Department of Pediatrics, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Summary: We present the first example of an aberrant splicing Neonatal Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS) is commonly occurs in mechanism of FGD1 as the cause of AAS. The clinical phenotype of the preterm babies and may also seen in term babies with Surfactant protein patient is indistinguishable from other patients supporting the evidence B or protein C deficiency. ABCA3 (ATP-Binding Cassette, Subfamily of no genotype-phenotype correlation derived from comparison of A, Member 3) maintains pulmonary surfactant homeostasis through patients with different mechanisms of mutation. transport of phospholipids and proteins to the lung alveolar surface. Recently, ABCA3 mutation was described in pediatric interstitial lung J12.19 disease patients, including those with chronic pneumonitis of infancy, study of mutation spectra in patients with familial desquamative instititial pneumonitis and non-specific interstitial hypercholesterolemia from two major cities in North-West pneumontitis. ABCA3 mutation is typically inherited in an autosomal Russia: st. Petersburg and Petrozavodsk recessive pattern. The incidence and prevalence of neonatal RDS A. S. Golovina, T. Y. Komarova; due to ABCA3 mutations are unknown worldwide. In Saudi Arabia, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. consanguinity were common within the population community and Introduction: Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a common we anticipated that in RDS related to ABCA3 mutations were under monogenic disease leading to premature coronary and cerebral diagnosed due to the lack of ABCA3 studies. Here, in this study we atherosclerosis. FH is caused by mutations in the low density investigate and report the ABCA3 mutations findings in seven full-term lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) gene or in the APOB gene coding for the newborn babies diagnosed with RDS in our institute. Genomic DNA LDLR major ligand -apolipoprotein B-100. Aim of the present study was extracted from patients’ blood and sequenced bi-directionaly for was to compare spectra of mutations leading to FH development in all ABCA3 exons using ABI 3130xl Genomic Analyzer. We identified Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 454 novel nonsense and missense mutations in our patients that not of selected patients with clinical symptoms of neuropathy. DNA described previously. Molecular characterization will help in offering resequencing analysis of exons 2 and 3 of MPZ gene revealed families having such disorders a chance to do prenatal/preimplentation mutations in 2 of 50 (4%) probands with CMT. Missense mutation genetic diagnosis. Thr124Met was observed in one patient having a clinically suggestive CMT2 phenotype characterized by late onset (>33 years) with papillary J12.22 abnormalities (Argyll-Robertson pupils), deafness and chronic cough. The significance of detailed molecular analysis in prenatal In the second case we identified new mutation IVS1-2A>C associated diagnosis of congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia with the severe motor and sensory neuropathy phenotype: early onset N. S. Osinovskaya, T. E. Ivaschenko; (during the first decade), muscular hypotonia, walking difficulties, Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian distal weakness, sensory loss. This substitution was also identified in Federation. proband’s father and her two children (boys of 2.5 years and 4 months). A case of prenatal diagnostics in high risk family of congenital adrenal New mutation was not detected in healthy members of the family and hyperplasia (CAH) is presented. Formerly the detection of two normal subjects which supports the hypothesis that it is responsible for mutations in CYP21A2 gene was diagnosed as CAH. However it is the CMT1B phenotype. These cases illustrate the importance of family not always correct. It is necessary to take into account the number of studies in this disease, and establish genotype/phenotype correlation. copies of the gene that is under consideration. In the examined family index case was a boy with a neonatal J12.25 simple virilizing form of the disease with the splice mutation of mutation in GJB2 in iranian children with hearing loss referred intron 2 (CYP21A2 gene) in homozygous. The farther had a second for cochlear implantation normal allele (not inherited by the patient) carrying the Q318X Dup S. Morovvati1, H. Rabiee2, F. Mirzaei1; variant (inherited by the fetus). Real-time PCR method was used to 1Research Center for Human Genetics, Baqiyatallh University of Medical determine the copy number variation of CYP21A2 gene. The severe Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Research Center of Molecular point mutation Q318X was detected in “normal” chromosome with a Biology, Baqiyatallh University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic duplicated gene. The other fetal allele carried the splice mutation of of Iran. intron 2 of CYP21A2 gene inherited from the mother. So, the fetus had Background: Mutation in GJB2 or Connexin 26 Gene is the most two mutations, but 3 copy of CYP21A2 gene. Thus our final conclusion common mutation found in children with nonsyndromic hearing loss. was the fetus would be healthy. Cochlear implantation (CI) is one approach to rehabilitation in such The correct definition of the Q318X variant as a severe mutation of a patients. Present study was designed for genetic assessment of single functional gene or a gene-duplicated nondeficient allele is very children who were referred for CI. important for genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis. methods: Genetic analysis was performed on 42 Iranian children with nonsyndromic hearing loss who were referred for genetic consultation J12.23 and CI. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood and the LmNA-associated congenital muscular dystrophy in Russian coding sequence of the GJB2 gene was PCR amplified and the families products purified and directly sequenced. T. B. Milovidova, E. L. Dadali, O. A. Schagina, A. V. Polyakov; Results: We found two homozygous and four heterozygous 35delG Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutations in six of the patients (14.3%). The response to CI was better Mutations in LMNA gene cause a variety of diseases affecting striated in the homozygous than in the heterozygoous patients.conclusion: muscle including autosomal Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy Mutation screening in GJB2 gene is a useful predictor of post- (EDMD), LMNA-associated congenital muscular dystrophy (L-CMD), implantation speech perception. and limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B (LGMD1B). Here, we describe two novel LMNA gene mutations identified in two unrelated J12.26 patients with congenital muscular dystrophy from Russia. A novel GLA mutation H186P causatively linked to the Anderson- Two unrelated Russian families with myopathy of onset in the first Fabry disease year of life were investigated by us. Clinical features of patient 1 were: M. Valentina1, F. Orsini1, P. Merlini1, F. Notarangelo2, M. Demola2, C. diffuse wasting with predominance in proximal upper and distal lower Lauricella1, A. Colosimo1, F. Marra1, E. Araldi1, S. Veronese1, M. Gambacorta1, limbs, the spinal stiffness with head drop, thoracic hyperlordosisl, knee F. Mauri1, D. Ardissino2, N. Marziliano1; contractures and distal contractures in upper limbs. Clinical features of 1A.O. Niguarda CA’ Granda, Milano, Italy, 2Cardiology Unit , University Hospital patient 2 with compromised perinatal history were: full-blown muscular of Parma, Parma, Italy. hypotonia and psychomotor retardation. This patient died in seven Background: The Anderson-Fabry Disease is an X-linked (Xq22) month. heritable disorder due to mutations in the GLA gene that causes Mutation analysis was performed by direct DNA sequence on PCR a reduced or absent activity of the lysosomal enzyme alpha- fragments of each exons and exon-intron junctions of LMNA gene galactosidase A. The enzyme defect leads to the intracellular amplified from genomic DNA. In result previously not described and plasma accumulation of neutral glycosphingolipids, primarily deletion Glu31del in exon 1 was found in both families. Also previously globotriaoslyceramide. not described change Ser334Asn in exon 6 of LMNA gene was found This progressive accumulation of glycosphingolipids leads to the in patient and his mother from second family. However these both systemic disorder. This study demonstrates that the novel missense alterations were not found in 240 chromosomes of healthy persons. substution p.H186P is a pathogenic GLA gene mutation. Thereby the cause of congenital muscular dystrophy was de novo Methods: A 54-year-old male patient with unexplained concentric left mutation Glu31del in exon 1 of LMNA gene. The mutations Ser334Asn ventricular hypertrophy and recurrent ventricular tachycardia, come to had modificating effect for clinical severity of patient 2. our attention. The screening of classical genes linked to hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) tested negative. We thus additionally tested J12.24 the GLA gene. mutation analysis of mPZ gene in patients with charcot-marie- Results: Bidirectional sequencing of the GLA gene showed that the tooth disease in Belarus patient was hemizygous for a single base sequence change in the T. Asadchuk, K. Mosse, N. Rumyantseva; codon 186 (p.H186P). The peripheral leukocytes showed a decreased Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. GLA activity. Clinical and physical examination of the patient revealed The myelin protein zero (MPZ) gene is expressed in the compact the presence of cornea verticillata and angiokeratoma on the back. layer of the Schwann cells. Mutations in MPZ gene lead to the CMT1B Conclusion: Data in this study contribute to Fabry mutation database disease, and 77% of them are localized in exons 2 and 3, coding for with a new mutation (p.H186P), confirming the reported heterogeneity the extracellular domain, indicating the importance of this domain for in Fabry disease genotypes. The potential pathogenic effect of this proper functioning of the MPZ protein. novel mutation is likely due to conformational change in the enzyme At the first stage CMT1A and CMT1X were excluded in a group structure leading to a less stable enzyme with a loss of activity.Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders 455 J12.27 J12.29 Receptor expression-enhancing protein 1 gene (sPG31) Association Of tNF-ALPHA Gene Polymorphisms And mutations are rare in italian patients with hereditary spastic Inflammatory Bowel Disease In Iran paraparesis T. Dadaei, A. Farnood, N. Naderi, M. Habibi, H. Balaei, M. Zali; A. Magariello1, L. Citrigno1,2, A. Patitucci1, A. L. Gabriele1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Shahid Beheshti Conforti1, C. Ungaro1, M. Caracciolo1, W. Sproviero1,3, A. Gambardella1,3, M. M.C, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Muglia1; Background and Aims: Assessment of tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) 1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Piano Lago di Mangone (CS), Italy, gene polymorphisms in other countries, has shown an association with 2Department of Neurosciences, Psychiatric and Anesthesiological Sciences, inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Considering the genetic variety in University of Messina,, Messina, Italy, 3Institute of Neurology, University ‘Magna different ethnic groups, the aim of present study was to investigate Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. association of five important single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) Hereditary spastic paraparesis (HSP), is a large group of inherited, [-1031(T→C), -863(C→A), -857(C→T), -308(G→A) and -238(G→A)] heterogeneous neurologic disorders caused by the degeneration in the promoter of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF-α) gene with of corticospinal axons.. Mutations in the SPG4 and SPG3A genes, inflammatory bowel disease in Iran. which encode for spastin and atlastin, respectively, are responsible Methods: Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and restriction fragment for approximately 40% and 10% of cases of ADHSP, respectively. length polymorphism (RFLP) methods were used in this study to The SPG31 gene also known as the receptor expression- enhancing genotype DNA samples from 156 Ulcerative colitis (UC) patients, 50 protein 1 gene (REEP1), has been suggested to be the third most Crohn’s disease (CD) patients and 200 sex and age matched healthy common cause of ADHSP, and accounts for 2.3%-8% of patients. controls. We report an investigation carried out on forty-five unrelated Italian Results: The frequency of the mutant (-1031C) allele of the TNF-α HSP patients. All of the patients fulfilled the Harding criteria for the gene was significantly increased in Iranian Patients with Crohn’s diagnosis of HSP. After giving informed consent, exhaustive REEP1 disease compared to healthy controls (26.0% vs 15.5%, P= 0.018, mutation screening was performed on all of the patients by PCR and OR= 1.92; 95% CI: 1.14-3.23). No association was observed between direct sequencing. No mutations in the coding region of REEP1 gene other evaluated SNPs and Crohn’s disease in Iranian patients. None of were identified suggesting that the REEP1 mutation frequency may be the mentioned SNPs were more frequent in Ulcerative Colitis patients very low in Italian patients. Different studies carried out in European compared to healthy controls. population indicate that mutations in REEP1 account for up to 8% of Conclusion: TNF-α gene polymorphisms could partly play a role in autosomal dominant HSP cases. The low frequency of REEP1 gene disease pathogenesis in Iranian Crohn’s patients. mutations detected in our population could be limited by factors such as PCR-based approaches that are sensitive to point mutations, as J12.30 well as small deletions and insertions. A REEP1-specific multiplex β-thalassemia mutations in the Iranian Kurds ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay is necessary to S. M. Khorshidi; exclude multi-exonic REEP1 deletion/duplication. Furthermore, the tabriz university, tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. study of additional samples may increase the mutation detection rate. β-Thalassemia is the most common heredity disease in Iran and most part of the world. this disorder characterized by reduced (β+- J12.28 thalassemia) or absence (β°- thalassemia) of the β- globin chain High incidence of W24X GJB2 mutation among macedonian synthesis in Hemoglobin tetramer. Since the Iranian population Gypsy patients with nonsyndromic hearing loss is a mixture of different ethnic groups, it is necessary to determine E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, M. Cakar2, G. D. Efremov1; the frequency and distribution of these mutations in our country. 1Research Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Macedonian Therefore, in this study we determined the spectrum and the frequency Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav of β-Thalassemia mutations in the population of Sunni Muslim Kurds Republic of, 2Audiology Center, Otorhinolaryngology Clinic, Medical Faculty, in western Iran to set up a prenatal diagnostic laboratory.Genomic Skopje, Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of. DNA was extracted by standard method. Mutations were studied in Hearing impairment affects 1 in 650 newborns, making it the most 120 chromosomes by Polymerase Chain Reaction- Amplification common congenital sensory impairment. Despite extraordinary genetic Refractory Mutation System (PCR-ARMS), and direct Sequencing heterogeneity, mutations in one gene, GJB2, encoding the connexin methods. We found fifteen β- thalassemia mutations, and IVS-II-1 26 protein involved in inner ear homeostasis, are found in up to 50% of (G>A) mutation was the most common mutation with a frequency of patients with autosomal recessive nonsyndromic hearing loss (NSHL). 35%. Other mutations were FSC8/9 (+G) 15.7%, IVS-I-1(G>A) 8%, The spectrum of mutations in GJB2 varies considerably between FSC8 (-AA) 6.75, FSC 5(-CT) 6.7%, IVS-I-110 (G>A) 6% , FSC 36/37 different ethnic populations. 35delG predominates in Caucasians, (-T) 4.2% , FSC 44 (-C) 3.4% , IVS-I-5 (G>C) 3.4% , IVS-I-6 (T>C) 176delT in Ashkenazi Jews, 235delC in Japanese, while W24X in 3.4% , Codon 39 (C>T ) 1.7% , Codon 15(TGG>TAG) 1.7% , IVS-I-128 Indian and R142W in African population. (T>G) 1.7% , and +22 3’UTR (G>A) 0.8% , Codon 127(CAG>CGG) The aim of our study was to determine the prevalence and spectrum 0.8%+ 0.8%( one normal and one mutant allele).This report was of GJB2 mutations, including the (GJB6-D13S1830) deletion, in the first comprehensive study in Kurdistan and western Azerbaijan Macedonian Gipsy patients with NSHL. Thirty unrelated patients (17 provinces in Iran and could provide a reference for prenatal testing sporadic and 13 familial) of Gipsy origin, with profound deafness and genetic counseling in this population. were analyzed. Molecular studies were performed using Single strand conformation polymorphism analysis, direct sequencing of GJB2 gene J12.31 and specific PCR analysis for del(GJB6-D13S1830) mutation. mutation detection of GJB2 and GJB6 and genetic linkage GJB2 mutations were found in 21 (70%) of the Gipsy patients, in analysis of 3 common DFNB loci (DFNB4, DFNB3, DFNB59) in 9 homozygote (11), compound heterozygote (6) or heterozygote state large pedigrees with hearing loss in the southern Khorasan in (4). Among these the predominant mutation was W24X mutation iran with allelic frequency of 70.3%, followed by R127H and 35delG with N. Jalilian1, M. A. Tabatabaiefar1, F. Alizadeh1, A. Ahmadi2, M. R. Noori-Daloii1; allelic frequency of 16.2% and 10.8% respectively. In one patient a 1Departmetn of Medical Genetics,School of Medicine,Tehran Univ. of compound heterozygosity of W24X and Cd120delGAG was detected. Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Center for Genetic None of the patients carry del(GJB6-D13S1830). Counseling,Welfare and Rehabilitation Organization, Birjand, Islamic Republic These findings indicate that as in the other Gypsy deaf populations the of Iran. predominant GJB2 mutation is W24X as the major cause of autosomal Hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder. The autosomal recessive NSHL and should be tested in each routine diagnostic recessive non-syndromic form (ARNSHL) accounts for 72% of approach in Macedonian Gypsy deaf population. monogenic HL. DFNB1 is the most common cause of ARNSHL in many populations (50%) including Iran (20%).Most of the research on HL in Iran has focused on this locus. The fact that many loci are Metabolic disorders 456 involved together with the heterogeneity of the status, necessitate 17.8%, respectively while in the control group it was 37.9%, 45.4% and studying further loci in various Iranian ethnic groups. Nine large deaf 16.7%. The frequency of the G allele was 57.8% in patients and 64.4% pedigrees originating from the Southern Khorasan province of Iran in controls and of the A allele it was 42.2% in patients and 35.6% in were selected. The families analyzed for GJB2, exon II, mutations. controls, similar to the ones reported by the HapMap Project for CEU Affected heterozygous for GJB2 mutations were analyzed for two and ASW populations. There is no statistically significant difference GJB6 deletions (D13S1830, D13S1854). Pedigrees negative for in the genotype distribution between patients and controls although p GJB2 mutations were then subject to linkage analysis for DFNB4, value is equal to 0.053; the alleles are in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium DFNB3 & DFNB59 loci. Individuals were genotyped for STR markers in both groups. These results suggest that there is no population using touch-down PCR-PAGE. Three out of the 9 families showed subdivision in and between the studied groups and our population is GJB2 mutations. One family carried homozygous c.35delG mutation. suitable for further studies, as the association of the CYBA -930A/G The other pedigree carried two different mutations; One patient was polymorphism with severity in sickle cell anemia. heterozygous for c.231G>A while another carried a heterozygous c.380 G>A mutation. The second alleles were not detected. The 3rd J12.34 pedigree showed to carry heterozygote mutation of p.V27I+E114G/wt Identification of genetic causes of Hearing loss in deaf GJB2 . GJB6 deletions were not detected among the GJB2 heterozygous carriers in iranian population population. None of the remaining families showed linkage to the 3 A. Kashef; other loci studied. Our study showed that GJB2 mutations accounts GRC (Genetic Research Center), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. for about 33% of affected families. These results could provide further Hereditary hearing loss is the most common neurosensory disorder insight into the etiology of HL and may lead to better genetic diagnostics in humans. Half of the cases have genetic etiology with extraordinary & counseling. This study proceeds with more loci and more families. genetic heterogeneity. Mutations in one gene, GJB2, are the most common cause for autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing J12.32 loss (ARNSHL) in many different populations. GJB2 encodes a gap cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis (sterol 27-Hydroxylase junction channel protein (connexin 26), and is located on DFNB1 locus Deficiency) - A Case Report from Iran on chromosome 13q12.11 which also involve another connexin gene, F. Hadipour1, Z. Hadipour2, P. Sarkheil2, M. Rohani3, Y. Shafeghati1; GJB6. Co-expression of GJB2 (connexin 26) and GJB6 (connexin 30) 1Sarem Cell Research Center & Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women in the inner ear is thought to be prerequisite for the maturation of the Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Department, cochlea. Mutation screening of GJB2 revealed that a high number of Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tehran Medical deaf patients carrying only one mutant allele. Science University, Department of Neurology of Rasoul Akram Hospital, In this study, using PCR-based direct sequencing; we searched for Tehran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. second mutant allele which leads to deaf phenotype. We assessed Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a rare genetic metabolic disorder one hundred patients with ARNSHL through Iranian population bearing of cholesterol and bile acid metabolism that results in systemic and first mutation in their coding exon (exon-2) of GJB2, for mutations in neurologic abnormalities. Mutations in the gene CYP27A1 were non-coding exon of GJB2, promoter region (as the most important been known as cause of disease, more than 50 mutations have cis-regulatory elements) of GJB2 and GJB6, and 4 known deletions been implicated. Typically, the disease begins in infancy with chronic through DFNB1 locus. Passing the first step of study, to date we have diarrhea. Cataracts become evident in childhood or adolescence, and identified the second mutant allele in splice site of exon-1 of GJB2 xanthomata develop in the second and third decades of life. Significant which is known as -3170G to A in 10 probands of 43. neurologic impairment also occurs; this often includes seizures, Our findings confirm the results of last study on GJB2 mutations dementia, and extra pyramidal dysfunction and typically begins in through Iran, which showed -3170G to A mutation as the most common the third decade of life and progresses until death, often in the sixth after 35delG in Iranian population. Therefore, it is important to check decade of life if the condition goes untreated. The presentation and GJB2 non-coding exon-1 in patients’ heterozygote for GJB2 mutation. course widely varies, and treatment can dramatically alter the natural history, especially with early initiation. case Report We report here an Iranian family with two affected sibs who are suffering from Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis. Cardinal P13 metabolic disorders features were: Motor dysfunction, ataxia, spastic paresis. In the physical examination we found Xanthomas of the Achilles tendon and, ataxia, and cataract bilaterally. MRI of the brain showed diffuse cerebral atrophy and increased signal intensity in the cerebellar white P13.01 matter on T2-weighted images. Cerebrotendinous Xanthomatosis, mutation spectra of the AAAs gene in iranian families with was confirmed by Molecular Analysis in this family. The result was a Allgrove syndrome homozygous splice- mutation in intron 2 of the CYP27A1 gene. V. R. Yassaee1, Z. Soltani1, B. Malekafzali A.2; 1Genomic Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, J12.33 Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Dept. of Dermatology, Boali Hospital, Faculty Analysis of the CYBA -930 A/G polymorphism (rs9932581) in of Medicine, Tehran Branch, Islamic AZAD University, Tehran, Islamic Republic sickle cell anemia patients and controls. of Iran. M. B. Melo1, G. P. Gil1, M. B. Oliveira1, G. Ananina1, M. J. Silva1, D. Stancato1, Allgrove (OMIM#231550) or Triple-A syndrome is a rare, autosomal M. N. N. Santos1, A. S. Araújo2, M. A. Bezerra3, F. F. Costa1; recessive disorder characterized by the triad of familial Adrenal 1University of Campinas, Campinas - SP, Brazil, 2Hemope, Recife - PE, Brazil, insufficiency, Achalasia, and Alacrima. Approximately one-half of all 3Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife - PE, Brazil. patients with Triple-A syndrome have been shown to have mutations Oxidative stress is a mechanism that might help to explain the in the AAAS gene on chromosome 12q13, which result in loss or non- phenotypic heterogeneity in the severity of sickle cell anemia (SCA) function of the encoded protein. complications, due to vascular damage. The NADPH system is Five unrelated families clinically diagnosed as Allgrove syndrome were considered to be the most important source of super-oxide anion (*O-) evaluated for sequence variations in the AAAS gene. Blood samples 2 in vascular cells such as smooth muscle and endothelial cells. The were collected after informed and written consent was received. CYBA gene (16q24) encodes the essential subunit of the NADPH Isolated DNA derived from subjects was amplified using intronic oxidase p22phox and has several allelic variants, some of them in the primers. The entire sequence of the AAAS gene including regulatory promoter region associated with higher transcriptional activity, as the region, coding regions and exon-intron boundaries were analyzed for -930A/G (rs9932581). Once there is no data regarding the frequency any alteration by PCR and direct sequencing. of this variant in the Brazilian population, it was determined in 135 In six probands of five families, four previously reported and two SCA patients and 66 controls through direct sequencing. In the SCA novel mutations were identified. Two heterozygote and homozygote group, the GG, AG and AA genotype frequency was 33.3%, 48.9% and mutations in exon 9 and the regulatory region respectively were Metabolic disorders 457 detected in one of the probands. In addition, SNPs analysis using with RIN2 defect. In metabolic cutis laxa syndromes the clinical and SNPs plot’s presented several previous reported variations in Allgrove laboratory features might partially overlap, however there are some families. distinct, discriminative features. We offer a practical approach to the This is the first report of Triple-A syndrome from an Iranian population. differential diagnosis of metabolic cutis laxa syndromes. Collectively, our study findings indicate that mutations scattered across the AAAS gene and upstream regulation elements. Various ethnic P13.04 groups should develop a mutation database for their own rare genetic A new cDG1h case with a severe neurological and disorders. However, mutation databases should screen common gastrointestinal presentation mutated alleles initially. H. S. Sorte1, L. Mørkrid2, O. K. Rødningen1, M. A. Kulseth1, A. Stray-Pedersen1, Our families present the typical triad of symptoms and the mutation D. Undlien1, G. Matthijs3, V. Race3, T. Fiskerstrand4, G. Houge4, R. Lyle1, T. spectrum is similar to the other population studied. Further study is Prescott1; required for phenotype-genotype correlation in the Iranian population. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, P13.02 3Center for Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Center Identification of Two Novel Mutations of ASPA Gene in Patients for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, with canavan Disease from turkey Bergen, Norway. E. Karaca1, A. Gezdirici1, S. Yilmaz1, M. Ozen1, A. Yuksel2; Congenital disorders of glycosylation type 1 (CDG1) are autosomal 1Istanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical School Department of Medical recessive conditions characterized by a distinctive serum transferrin Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem University, Istanbul, Turkey. glycoform pattern. The molecular basis is known for CDG1a - CDG1q. Canavan disease (CD) is a childhood, progressive, autosomal recessive CDG1h (OMIM #608104) is associated with mutations in ALG8 and neurodegenerative leukodystrophy, characterized by macrocephaly, nine cases have been published previously. Presentation of CDG1h lack of head control, developmental delays by the age of three to varies from isolated protein-losing enteropathy to severe combined five months, severe hypotonia, failure to achieve independent sitting, neurological and gastrointestinal disease. ambulation, or speech. It is prevalent in Ashkenazi Jews with two We present a female, the second child of healthy consanguineous predominant mutations in affecting aspartoacylase (ASPA) gene. Its parents, born at 39 weeks with BW 2210g, OFC 33cm, L 48cm. frequency in other populations is low with one predominant mutation, Hypotonia was present neonatally and initial feeding difficulties (914C->A). persisted. At eight months findings included: very significant global We describe here three Turkish patients from two families. Two of them delay, OFC at the 2,5%, growth retardation, horizontal nystagmus, are siblings from first cousin parents. They had clinical features of poor poor eye contact, prominent chin, excess nuchal skin, wrinkling around head control, developmental delay, lack of visual tracking, progressive ankles and knees. No specific abnormalities were noted on cerebral macrocephaly, limb spasticity and seizures which supported Canavan MRI. Serum isoelectric focusing was indicative of a CDG1. At age disease as a preliminary diagnosis. Neuroimagings were also nine months, acute viral gastroenteritis was complicated by massive compatible with CD. In addition, they had facial dysmorphic features protein-losing enteropathy with rapidly ensuing lethal multi-organ including low set ears, up turned nostrils, long filtrum and retrognathi. failure. Sequence analysis of ASPA gene revealed a novel homozygous donor SNP analysis using Affymetrix genome-wide human SNP array 6.0 splice site mutation (c.432+1G>A) in exon 2 of ASPA gene in both revealed two known CDG1 associated genes, MPI and ALG8, within patients. homozygosity regions in the proband only. Exome sequencing (Agilent The third patient was 6 month-old boy from first cousin parents of 38Mb exome capture and 2x75bp Illumina sequencing) detected Turkish ancestor. He was referred to our clinic because of progressive homozygosity for the ALG8 variants p.S267P and p.F270L. Sanger macrocephaly, nystagmus and poor sucking. Cerebral magnetic sequencing confirmed parental heterozygosity. Both variants were resonance imaging (MRI) and MR spectroscopy strongly suggested interpreted as pathogenic based on conservation and three previously CD. Sequencing of ASPA gene revealed no abnormality while multiplex reported mutations predicted to affect the same intraluminal protein ligation dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis showed a domain. novel large homozygous deletion in exon 1. In conclusion, our findings This case illustrates the severe CDG1h phenotype, and reinforces the showed two mutations not previously reported in patients with CD clinical utility of homozygosity mapping followed by targeted exome suggesting new insights for the role of ASPA gene in this disease. sequencing in rare recessive disorders. P13.03 P13.05 metabolic cutis laxa mutational Analysis of Uroporphyrinogen iii synthase Gene in M. Mohamed1, T. Gardeitchik1, J. Smeitink1, B. Lace2, S. Jagadeesh3, E. iranian Families with congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria Grycki4, E. Berry-Kravis5, J. Häberle6, B. Albrecht7, U. Kornak8, B. Chan Lim9, D. M. Moghbeli1, A. Arabi1, M. Maleknejad2, B. Naghibzadeh1, M. R. Lefeber1, R. Wevers1, E. Morava1; Abbaszadegan1; 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Riga Stradins 1Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Bu-Ali Research University, Riga, Latvia, 3Fetal Care Research Foundation, Mylapore, Chennai, Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic India, 4Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 5Rush University Medical Republic of Iran, 2Department of Pediatric, Musabne jafar Hospital, Mashhad Center, Chicago, IL, United States, 6University Hospital for Children, Zurich, University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Quchan, Islamic Republic of Iran. Switzerland, 7University Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 8University Hospital Porphyrias are rare metabolic hereditary diseases originating from Charite, Berlin, Germany, 9Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea, defects in specific enzymes involved in heme biosynthesis pathway. Republic of. Congenital Erythropoietic Porphyria (CEP) is the rarest autosomal Cutis laxa is a rare skin disorder characterized by wrinkled, redundant, recessive porphyria resulting from deficiency of uroporphyrinogen III inelastic and sagging skin due to defective synthesis of elastic fibers cosynthase (UROS), the fourth enzyme in heme biosynthesis, leading and other proteins of the extracellular matrix. Wrinkled, inelastic skin to an excessive production and accumulation of type Ι porphyrins in occurs in many cases as an acquired condition. Syndromic forms of bone marrow, skin and several other tissues. Clinical manifestations cutis laxa, however, are caused by diverse genetic defects, mostly are presented in childhood with severe cutaneous photosensitivity, coding for structural extracellular matrix proteins. Surprisingly a blistering, scarring and deformation in hands and loss of eyebrows number of metabolic disorders are associated with inherited cutis and eye-lashes in face. Less than 200 cases CEP reported to date. laxa. Since the discovery of the COG7 defect, linking cutis laxa to Two families with 3 CEP patients and members of their family in Iran glycosylation, several inborn errors of metabolism with cutis laxa have were studied for the first time showing severe clinical symptoms been described. In spite of the evolving number of cutis laxa-related including anemia, hepatosplenomegaly and severe photosensitivity diseases, a large part of the cases remains genetically unsolved. along with scarring. A missense mutation in UROS gene was identified Here we report on the clinical and metabolic features of 5 novel patients in this family. A T to C change at nucleotide 34313, leading to a with ATP6V0A2-CDG, 4 children with PYCR1 defect and a young adult substitution of Leucine by Proline at codon 237, which observed in Metabolic disorders 458 the homozygous state in 3 patients and heterozygous state in their Hospital, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Institute parents. This family was conseled for any future prenatal diagnosis. for Cardiovascular Research, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, Our data from Iranian population emphasize the importance of codon Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Université de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada. 237 alone in performance of UROS and advantages of molecular Our proband, born to consanguineous British Pakistani parents, genetic techniques as a diagnostic tool for detection of clinically presented at 3½ months of age with pallor and poor feeding. asymptomatic heterozygous mutation carriers as well as CEP within Investigations revealed megaloblastic anemia/pancytopenia with families. normal serum B12, folate and homocysteine levels. Within one week, he developed intractable seizures and cerebral folate deficiency was P13.06 diagnosed. Brain MRI showed cerebellar and cerebral atrophy. His Long term follow-up and treatment in nine boys with X-linked symptoms improved dramatically on folinic acid. His biochemical creatine transporter defect profile was consistent with reduced activity of dihydrofolate reductase J. M. van de Kamp1, P. Pouwels1, F. Aarsen2, L. ten Hoopen2, D. Knol1, J. de (DHFR), a critical enzyme for synthesis of DNA precursors. DHFR has Klerk2, I. de Coo2, J. Huijmans2, C. Jakobs1, M. van der Knaap1, G. Salomons1, been studied extensively as target of anti-neoplastic, antimicrobial and G. Mancini2; anti-inflammatory drugs, but no cases of DHFR deficiency have been 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University previously described. Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Mapping identified multiple regions of homozygosity including a The creatine transporter (CRTR) defect is a recently discovered cause 3Mb region encompassing DHFR. Sequence analysis identified of X-linked intellectual disability which is associated with cerebral homozygous c.238C>T (p.Leu80Phe) mutation in the proband. creatine deficiency. Treatment with creatine monohydrate has not Same homozygous mutation was identified in the proband’s affected proved effective. Supplementation with creatine precursors L-arginine deceased sibling and in an unrelated child with similar clinical features. and glycine might increase endogenous cerebral creatine synthesis. This mutation alters a highly conserved residue and was absent in The effect of this treatment is still controversial. 146 ethnically matched controls. It results in normal expression, but We followed nine boys aged between 8 months and 10 years with significantly reduced enzyme levels and activity. Protein modelling molecularly confirmed CRTR defect with repeated 1H-MRS and suggested that the Phe residue could disrupt cofactor binding and/or neuropsychological assessments during 4-6 years of combination destabilize the protein. treatment with creatine monohydrate, L-arginine and glycine. Our proband continues to be severely neuro-developmentally delayed Treatment did not lead to a significant increase in cerebral creatine and was found to have cerebral tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency content as observed with H1-MRS. After an initial improvement of unresponsive to folinic acid. DHFR is important for maintenance of locomotor and personal-social IQ subscales, no statistical significant BH4:BH2 ratio in vascular endothelium and our findings suggest clinical improvement was recorded. Unrelated to the treatment, we that DHFR may also facilitate BH4 salvage in the brain. The affected noticed an age-related decline of IQ subscales in boys affected with children had normal development until three months, indicating the the CRTR defect. possibility of better outcome with earlier diagnosis and treatment. P13.07 P13.09 Cystic fibrosis and tuberculosis Decreased iNsR autophosphorylation due to novel p.Leu795Pro I. M. CIUCA1,2, L. Pop1,2, Z. Popa3, L. Tamas4,2, S. Turcu1,5, I. Popa1; mutation in β-subunit in a patient with Donohue syndrome 1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and T. Hovnik1,2, J. Kovač1,2, K. Trebušak Podkrajšek1, N. Bratanič2, T. Battelino2; Pharmacy V Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 3Cystic Fibrosis Center, Timisoara, 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Children’s Hospital, UMC Ljubljana, Romania, 4Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, Romania, 5Great Ormond Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes and Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom. Metabolic Diseases, University Children’s Hospital, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Background: Cystic fibrosis patients are predisposed to acquire Slovenia. significant respiratory pathogens. Mycobacterium tuberculosis is Donohue syndrome (former leprechaunism) is a rare, recessively a common pathogen in our area, having an important morbidity in inherited disorder of extreme insulin resistance due to mutation in the children. Associated CF complication like underweight, diabetes insulin receptor gene (INSR). The pathogenesis of insulin resistance is mellitus and liver disease are well-known risk factors for tuberculosis. due to a cellular defect in insulin binding, receptor autophosphorylation The hypothesis of a frequent co-morbidity of tuberculosis(TB) in CF and tyrosine kinase activity on insulin-stimulated biological activity. We children occurred. The aim of the paper was to evaluate the frequency have identified a newborn patient with Donohue syndrome caused of TB in children with CF in the presence of risk factors. Methods: by the novel homozygous missense mutation (p.Leu795Pro). The Thirty-eight patients followed in our CF Center were considered for mutation is located in the extracellular portion of the β subunit of a prospective five years study. For the retrospective information we the insulin receptor. We aimed to functionally characterize the post- used data records of CF Centre. Diagnosis criteria for tuberculosis binding defect of the insulin receptor signaling in cultured fibroblasts were: positive Mantoux test, BAAR positive and/or bacteriological from patient, patient’s mother and control individual. confirmation, additional to clinical and radiological signs. Results: Functional characterization showed that novel INSR gene mutation in Regarding TB only one patient (2.6%) with CF had all the criteria insulin receptor β subunit is causing a syndrome of extreme insulin diagnosis. Tuberculin skin test was positive in 4 patients (10.5%), resistance due to decreased insulin receptor autophosphorylation 3 of them being vaccinated. Despite the mandatory vaccination rather than insulin binding impairment. for TB in our country, merely in 84% from patients the vaccination was documented. Interestingly, almost 16% of patients (6 pts) were P13.10 considered and treated as TB cases, before being diagnosed with Familial Hypercholesterolaemia testing at the Bristol Genetics CF. One patient had active TB, bacteriological confirmed (del F508 Laboratory homozygous, Pseudomonas positive and poor nutritional status). L. Yarram1, M. Greenslade1, S. Burton-Jones1, G. Bayly2, M. Balasubramani2, Conclusion: We could not find a correlation between tuberculosis and M. Williams1; CF children, despite the presence of distinctive risk factors. Although 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Pathology Sciences, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, TB is a quit common condition in our area, CF children seemed to be United Kingdom, 2Clinical Biochemistry, Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, United protected against it. Further studies need to be done to evaluate this Kingdom. hypothesis. Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant disorder with UK incidence of approximately 1/500. FH is caused by mutations P13.08** in the low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), apolipoprotein B-100 Identification and characterization of a novel inborn error of (APOB) and proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) metabolism caused by Dihydrofolate reductase deficiency genes. S. Banka1, H. J. Blom2, J. N. Pelletier3, J. Walter1, J. Urquhart1, G. I. Rice1, Y. A comprehensive FH testing service is offered at the Bristol Genetics Crow1, S. Jones1, W. G. Newman1; Laboratory; including 1) ARMS PCR to detect 20 common mutations, 1Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (MAHSC), St. Mary’s 2) sequencing of LDLR (promoter + 18 exons) 3) MLPA of LDLR and Metabolic disorders 459 4) extended gene screening of PCSK9 (12 exons) and APOB (codons P13.12 3375-3570) by sequencing. First report of safety and tolerability of agalsidase alfa in Fabry Cases are referred through lipid clinics; genetic testing is offered disease patients formerly treated with agalsidase beta in a to ‘definite’ and ‘possible’ FH cases (Simon Broome criteria in clinical trial setting accordance with NICE). 156 index and 55 cascade cases have been P. Fernhoff1, O. Goker-Alpan2, M. Holida3, K. Nedd4, B. A. Barshop5, R. reported to date. 46 different mutations have been identified, including Mardach6, J. Ibrahim7, Y. Lien8, B. Rever9, R. Hillman10, N. Weinreb11, E. Boyd12, a compound heterozygote for p.[Asp589fs]+[Lys311Thr]. A mutation A. Desai13, R. Forte14, E. Crombez15, R. Martin15, D. Amato15; was identified in 44% of index cases; of these 47% were detected 1Emory University School of Medicine, Decatur, GA, United States, 2Lysosomal using ARMS, 49% by LDLR sequencing and 4% using MLPA. Research & Treatment Unit, Springfield, VA, United States, 3University of Iowa Genetic testing enables a definitive diagnosis, and defines the patient Health Care, Iowa City, IA, United States, 4Infusion Associates, Grand Rapids, group requiring more aggressive treatment to lower cholesterol. MI, United States, 5University of California, San Diego, CA, United States, Cascade testing for at risk relatives, provides an accurate risk outcome 6Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 7St Joseph’s Children’s for cases where cholesterol measurement alone can be unreliable. Hospital, Paterson, NJ, United States, 8AKDHC, Tucson, AZ, United States, Case studies demonstrating the clinical utility of molecular genetic 9Central Coast Nephrology, Salinas, CA, United States, 10University of Missouri, testing for FH and an audit of the service to date will be presented. Columbia, MO, United States, 11University Research Foundation for Lysosomal Storage Disorders, Coral Springs, FL, United States, 12Fullerton Genetics P13.11 Center, Asheville, NC, United States, 13Stuart Oncology Associates, Stuart, Enzyme replacement therapy with agalsidase alfa (Replagal) FL, United States, 14North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, NY, United slows the progression of renal dysfunction in male patients with States, 15Shire HGT, Cambridge, MA, United States. Fabry disease: results of an integrated analysis introduction: The FDA accepted a Treatment Investigational M. West1, R. Schiffmann2, A. Mehta3, D. Amato4, N. Nair4, D. Zahrieh4, P. New Drug protocol (tIND; HGT-REP-059) allowing early access to Huertas4; agalsidase alfa (agalα) for patients with Fabry disease (FD) during 1Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada, 2Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, the agalsidase beta (agalβ) supply shortage. This analysis describes TX, United States, 3Royal Free Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Shire HGT, safety and tolerability over 3 months in 70 FD patients switched from Lexington, MA, United States. agalβ to agalα. introduction: Progressive kidney dysfunction is common in men with methods: This ongoing, multicenter, open-label tIND collected Fabry disease (FD). To estimate the effect of agalsidase alfa (agalα) 3-month data on adverse events (AEs), serious AEs (SAEs) and other enzyme replacement therapy on estimated glomerular filtration rate clinical parameters from FD patients treated previously with agalβ. (eGFR), pooled data were analyzed post hoc from three similarly 117 patients enrolled, of whom, 59.8% (n=70) had prior treatment designed, prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trials (RCTs with agalβ, but not agalα. Excluded were patients who were pregnant, TKT010/TKT005/TKT003). breastfeeding, hypersensitive to agalα, received any investigational methods: 18-54-year-old males with FD received ≥1 infusion of drug (≤30days before entering the tIND) or were on concomitant agalβ agalα (0.2mg/kg; n=59) or placebo (n=58) every other week (EOW) therapy. Patients received intravenous agalα (0.2mg/kg every other for 6 months (analysis population). The Modification of Diet in Renal week). Disease (MDRD) equation was used to calculate eGFR in the analysis Results: 70 patients received study drug (ages 5-84 years, population at baseline and ≥3 follow-ups and in a subpopulation with male:female 39:31). Among 68 patients with available data, mean prior chronic kidney disease (CKD) stages 2-3 (defined as eGFR 30−80mL/ agalβ therapy duration was 4.8 years (range 0.3-12.3). 76 treatment- min/1.73m2). Change in eGFR was calculated using a random slopes emergent AEs (TEAEs) occurred in 30 patients. Most AEs were mild/ and intercepts model. This longitudinal analysis allows for serial moderate in severity (93.3%; 28/30 patients). No deaths occurred. The measurements to exhibit within-patient correlations. table summarizes possible/probable treatment-related AEs, infusion- Results: Each RCT demonstrated numerical improvements in mean related AEs, most common TEAEs (≥3% agalα-treated patients), change in eGFR (agalα vs placebo). Pooled data showed statistically treatment-emergent SAEs and AE-related permanent discontinuations. significant overall treatment differences (P=0.022), with kidney function Adverse event profile of 70 agalsidase alfa patients formerly treated deteriorated with placebo but not with agalα (although 95%CIs crossed with agalsidase beta. 0; Table). Agalα-treated conclusions: The results of this post hoc analysis of pooled RCT data Adverse event (AE) patients, % (n) support the hypothesis that agalα at a dosage of 0.2mg/kg EOW slows Treatment-emergent AEs 42.9% (30) the progression of kidney dysfunction in male patients with FD. Possibly/probably treatment-related AEs 22.9% (16) eGFR rate of change during the 6-month treatment period. Infusion-related AEs 20.0% (14) All studies All Most common treatment-emergent AEs (≥3% of eGFR tKt010 tKt005 tKt003 studies all agalα-treated patients) analysis population cKD 2/3 -- Dizziness 4.3% (3) Placebo -- Headache 4.3% (3) 39/37 8/7 12/14 59/58 21/20 n/agalα n -- Vomiting 4.3% (3) eGFR: agalα, -8.53 1.72 11.60 0.21 5.98 Treatment-emergent SAEs 5.7% (4) mean (95%ci), (-19.08, (-29.54, (0.57, (-7.90, (-4.78, -- Cerebrovascular accident 1.4% (1) mL/min/1.73m2/y 2.08) 33.02) 22.57) 8.27) 16.69) -- Adverse reactions to antibiotic and skin 1.4% (1) eGFR: placebo, -14.87 -17.11 -8.01 -13.26 -16.69 abscesses mean (95% ci), (-25.32, (-46.44, (-20.12, (-21.48, (-27.51, -- Transient ischemic attack 1.4% (1) mL/min/1.73m2/y -4.47) 12.17) 4.06) -5.10) -5.88 -- Diarrhea, vomiting, nausea, extreme fatigue, 1.4% (1) eGFR: treatment & dehydration 6.40 18.88 19.60 13.47 22.67 difference (agalα (-8.48, (-24.02, (3.28, (1.98, (7.38, Permanent discontinuations due to AEs 0 - placebo)a, mean 21.22; 61.72; 35.93; 24.96; 37.91; (95%ci; P-value), P=0.398) P=0.359) P=0.019) P=0.022) P=0.005) mL/min/1.73m2/y conclusions: Following 3-month evaluation of 70 FD patients a Positive values favor agalα. previously treated with agalβ, agalα was generally well tolerated. These data support that agalα may provide a clinical option for FD patients who switch therapies.Metabolic disorders 460 P13.13 for a treatment protocol to offer velaglucerase alfa (velaα) ERT (then, multicenter, open-label treatment protocol (HGt-GcB-058) of an investigational drug) for patients in need. velaglucerase alfa enzyme replacement therapy (ERt) in type 1 methods: A US multicenter treatment protocol enrolled GD1 patients Gaucher disease: safety and tolerability (>2 years old; no prior anaphylactic reaction to ERT). Treatment-naïve G. M. Pastores1, B. Rosenbloom2, N. Weinreb3, O. Goker-Alpan4, R. Mardach5, (“naïve”) patients received velaα 60U/kg every other week (EOW); M. Lipson6, J. Ibrahim7, G. M. Cohn8, D. Zahrieh8, P. K. Mistry9; “switched” (previously on imiglucerase) patients received the same 1NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 2Tower Hematology dose as their prior imiglucerase regimen (15-60U/kg EOW). The Oncology, Beverly Hills, CA, United States, 3University Research Foundation present analysis evaluates the safety profile of first 3 in-clinic infusions for LSDs, Coral Springs, FL, United States, 4LSD Research and Treatment of velaα. Switched patients were monitored during these 3 infusions; Unit, Springfield, VA, United States, 5Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, if therapy was well-tolerated, their physicians could recommend home United States, 6Permanente Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, United States, therapy infusions thereafter. 7St Joseph’s Children’s Hospital, Paterson, NJ, United States, 8Shire HGT, Results: From Sep 2009-Jun 2010, 211 patients were treated Cambridge, MA, United States, 9Yale University School of Medicine, New (baseline: age 6-89 years [8<18 years]; 101 male:110 female; 72 Haven, CT, United States. splenectomized; 6 naïve; 205 switched patients). The majority of Background: Type 1 Gaucher disease (GD1), an inherited deficiency possibly or probably drug-related AEs were infusion-related. The AE of lysosomal glucocerebrosidase, is the most common lysosomal profile in switched patients was similar across the velaα dose range storage disorder. In 2009, the FDA approved a treatment protocol to (15-60 U/kg). Fifty-four (26.3%) switched patients have received ≥1 offer velaglucerase alfa (then, an investigational drug) to GD1 patients home velaα infusion. affected by the imiglucerase supply disruption. Adverse events (AEs) during the first 3 in-clinic infusions methods: A US multicenter treatment protocol enrolled GD1 patients Naïve Switched (>2 years old, treatment-naïve [naïve] or previously on imiglucerase N = 6 N = 205 [switch], with no prior anaphylactic reaction to ERT. Naïve patients Description n (%) n (%) received velaglucerase alfa 60U/kg every other week (EOW); switch patients received the same dose as their prior imiglucerase regimen Experienced ≥1 AE 2 (33.3) 51 (24.9) (15-60U/kg EOW). Experienced ≥1 possibly/probably drug- 1 (16.7) 25 (12.2) Results: From Sept 2009 through Jun 2010, 211 patients commenced related AE velaglucerase alfa treatment (baseline: age 6-89 years [8 patients Experienced ≥1 infusion-related AE 1 (16.7) 18 (8.8) <18 years old]; 101 male:110 female; 72 splenectomized; 6 naïve; Experienced ≥1 severe or life-threatening AE 0 4* (2.0) 205 switch). . One serious AE was considered possibly drug-related Experienced ≥1 serious AE 0 1† (0.5) (migraine) [Table]. Median (range) velaglucerase alfa treatment Discontinued due to an AE 0 1‡ (0.5) duration for naïve and switch patients was 106 (27-232) and 182 (1- Deaths 0 0 365) days, respectively. Mean hemoglobin and platelets improved in naïve patients (n=4; 1.7g/dL and 62.3 109/L) and remained stable for *3 severe AEs were considered drug-related (2 patients with fatigue; switch patients. 1 patient with pain in the extremities) †Severe cerebrovascular accident (considered unrelated to Adverse events (AEs) treatment) Naïve Switch ‡Discontinued due to a grade 2 infusion-related AE (nausea) N=6 N = 205 Description n (%) n (%) conclusion: In this clinically heterogeneous GD1 patient population, Experienced ≥1 AE 3 (50.0) 89 (43.4) velaα was generally well-tolerated during the first 3 in-clinic infusions. Experienced ≥1 possibly/probably drug-related AE1 (16.7) 35 (17.1) This experience suggests early transition to home therapy with velaα Experienced ≥1 infusion-related AE 1 (16.7) 27 (13.2) is a treatment option based upon individual patients’ responses and Experienced ≥1 severe or life-threatening AE 0 11 (5.4) recommendations of their treating physicians. Experienced ≥1 serious AE 0 7* (3.4) P13.15 Discontinued due to an AE 0 3 (1.5) clinical and genetic testing of further three patients with GsD i Deaths 0 0 from Hungary *1 serious AE was considered possibly drug-related (migraine). G. Miltenberger-Miltenyi1,2, S. Vale Pereira2, J. Bókay3, L. Balogh3, G. Fekete4, L. Szőnyi3; conclusion: A clinically heterogeneous group of GD1 patients were 1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de successfully transitioned to velaglucerase alfa, which was generally Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Laboratório de Diagnóstico de Medicina Molecular well tolerated, supporting this enzyme replacement therapy as a (GenoMed), IMM, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 31st Department treatment option for GD1. of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 42nd Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. P13.14 introduction: Glycogen storage disease type I (GSD I) comprises a multicenter, open-label study of velaglucerase alfa enzyme group of rare, autosomal recessively inherited disorders with impaired replacement therapy (ERt) in type 1 Gaucher disease (GD1): glucose homeostasis due to deficiency of glucose-6-phosphatase Safety evaluation of the first three infusions from the HGT- activity. The most common form of GSD I, GSD Ia, caused by mutations GcB-058 treatment protocol in the G6PC gene leads to decreased or absent enzyme activity G. M. Pastores1, B. Rosenbloom2, N. Weinreb3, O. Goker-Alpan4, R. Mardach5, causing fasting hypoglycaemia, hepatomegaly, growth retardation, M. Lipson6, J. Ibrahim7, G. M. Cohn8, D. Zahrieh8, P. K. Mistry9; fasting lactic acidosis, hyperlipidaemia, and hyperuricaemia. The 1NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 2Tower Hematology second most common type, GSD Ib, is caused by mutations in the Oncology, Beverly Hills, CA, United States, 3University Research Foundation G6PT1 gene and shows usually neutropenia and recurrent infections. for LSDs, Coral Springs, FL, United States, 4LSD Research and Treatment In a previous study we reported phenotypic variability in 12 Hungarian Unit, Springfield, VA, United States, 5Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, GSD I patients. In this study we studied further three Hungarian United States, 6Permanente Medical Group, Sacramento, CA, United States, children with GSD I. 7St Joseph’s Children’s Hospital, Paterson, NJ, United States, 8Shire HGT, methods: Clinical diagnosis of all three children was GDS Ia. Liver Cambridge, MA, United States, 9Yale University School of Medicine, New biopsies were performed in all three cases. Genetic screening was Haven, CT, United States. carried out by PCR and sequencing of the G6PC and the G6PT1 Background: GD1, an inherited deficiency of lysosomal genes. glucocerebrosidase, is the most common lysosomal storage disorder. Results: All children were clinically diagnosed as GSD Ia. In two In 2009, disruption of imiglucerase supply resulted in an FDA request children we found three mutations in the G6PC gene, of which one Metabolic disorders 461 is novel. In the third child we found a homozygous mutation in the P13.18 G6PT1 gene. Hereditary Hemochromatosis in Russian children conclusions: Our results confirm the phenotypic variability of GSD N. Averiyanova1, S. Polykova1, N. Jourkova1, O. Kondakova1, A. Asanov1,2, V. I and point out the importance of genetic screening the G6PT1 gene Pinelis1; in GSD Ia cases where no mutation in the G6PC was detected. 1Scientific Center for Children’s Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Moreover, genetic testing might substitute liver biopsy. The novel Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutation together with the other mutations found in the Hungarian GSD Hereditary Hemochromatosis type 1 (HH-1) is an inherited disorder of I patients can contribute to genotype-phenotype association studies. iron metabolism that results of mutations in the HFE gene. The most common mutations in HFE gene are C282Y, H63D and S65C. Since P13.16 allele and genotype frequencies of these three variants of the HFE Egyptian glycogen storage disease type III - identification of six gene vary in different population, the determination of their prevalence novel AGL mutations in Russian children is important because genetic diagnostic in early E. M. Fateen1, T. Podskarbi2, Y. S. Shin2, M. Okubo3; stage can help to prevent the development of serious complications 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Molecular Genetics and Metabolism in these patients. There are two groups of children: 63 patients with Laboratory, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, biochemical signs of iron overload (BSIO, iron level was more 23,6 Tokyo, Japan. mkmol/l and transferrin saturation higher 40%) and 43 patients with Background: Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) is caused by somatic diseases without iron overload. All samples of DNA were mutations in AGL which encodes for a single protein with two enzyme genotyped by PCR followed by RFLP analysis. The H63D homozygote activities: oligo-1,4-1, 4-glucantransferase (transferase) and amylo- was identified in 14.2%, compound heterozygotes H63D/C282Y and 1,6-glucosidase. Activity of both enzymes is lost in most patients H63D/S65C in 4.8% and 3.2% of patients with BSIO. The frequency with GSD III, but in the very rare subtype IIId, transferase activity is of H63D heterozygote was in 3.5 times higher, than in control group deficient. Since the spectrum of AGL mutations is dependent on the (P=0,0004). We did not find patients with homozygote of mutations ethnic group, we investigated the clinical and molecular characteristics C282Y and S65C. However the frequencies of heterozygote mutations in Egyptian patients with GSD III. of C282Y and S65C in patients with BSIO were higher than in control methods: Clinical features were examined in five Egyptian patients. group. Thus our data have shown that the main genotypes were AGL was sequenced and AGL haplotypes were determined. homozygote H63D/H63D and compound heterozygotes H63D/C282Y Results: Six novel AGL mutations were identified: a large deletion and H63D/S65C in children with syndrome of iron overload. Taking (c.3481-3588q1417del1525 bp), two insertions (c.1389insG and in account that biochemical signs of iron overload syndrome could c.2368insA), two small deletions (c.2223-2224delGT and c.4041delT), be observed in children with different somatic diseases therefore and a missense mutation (p.L620P). p.L620P was found in a patient molecular-genetic study is necessary to confirm HH-1. with IIId. Each mutation was located on a different AGL haplotype. conclusions: Our results suggest that there is allelic and phenotypic P13.19 heterogeneity of GSD III in Egypt. This is the second description of a Polymorphisms of interleukin-8 (rs2227543, rs4073) and -18 large deletion in AGL. p.L620P is the second mutation found in GSD (rs1946518, rs187238) genes and diabetic retinopathy IIId. Clin Chem Lab Med 2009;47:1233-8. I. Cilenšek1, A. Hercegovac2, R. Terzić2, M. Globočnik Petrovič3, D. Petrovič1; 1Institute of Histology and Embryology, Medical faculty, Ljubljana, Slovenia, P13.17 2Department of Biology and Human Genetics, Tuzla, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the novel A175D mutation in sLc40A1 gene causes Ferroportin 3Eye Clinic, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Disease in an italian family Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is caused by alterations of the retinal P. Fici1, E. Marasco1, C. Fazio1, A. Aquilano1, D. Bastia1, M. Cenci2, F. Azzaroli3, microvasculature leading to the breakdown of the blood-retina barrier M. Seri2, V. Mantovani1,2; and pathological angiogenesis. In DR and other angiogenesis- 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA) S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, associated diseases, increased levels of cytokines, inflammatory cells, Bologna, Italy, 2Unit of Medical Genetics S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, growth factors, and angiogenic factors are present. DR is one of the Italy, 3Unit of Gastroenterology S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy. primary causes of visual loss worldwide.We evaluated possible roles Background. Type 4 haemocromatosis is a rare disorder of of interleukin-8 gene polymorphisms (1633T/C-rs2227543, 251A/T- iron homeostasis, characterized by intracellular iron overload, rs4073) and interleukin-18 gene polymorphisms (-607C/A-rs1946518, hyperferritinemia and various levels of transferrin saturation, -137G/C-rs187238) in the development of DR in Caucasians with type associated to mutations in ferroportin gene (SLC40A1), the sole 2 diabetes. 271 patients with DR and 113 without DR were enrolled known iron exporter in mammals. Loss of function mutations cause in this cross-sectional study. We did not observe an association ferroportin disease (FD) (type 4a), whereas gain of function mutations between either interleukin-8 gene polymorphisms (rs2227543, rs4073) cause a haemocromatosis clinically indistinguishable from that due to or interleukin-18 gene polymorphisms(rs1946518, rs187238) and HFE gene (type 4b). DR in Caucasians with type 2 diabetes. We did not find statistically Aims and Methods. Aim of this study was to investigate the SLC40A1 significant differences in interleukin-8 serum levels between diabetics gene in 86 patients with iron overload, in whom the mutation screening with the TT and AA genotype and those with other genotypes. The of HFE gene were negative and other primary causes of iron overload interleukin-18 serum levels between diabetics with the CC genotype were excluded. All exons and 5’UTR region of SLC40A1 gene were of the rs1946518 polymorphism and those with other genotypes (AA, analyzed by dHPLC and DNA sequencing. Phylogenetic analysis, AC) were not significantly different. Moreover, we did not observe a prediction analysis (Polyphen) and homology modeling study (Swiss statistically significant effect of the tested polymorphisms of either Prot) were performed for the novel detected variants. interleukin-8 or interleukin-18 genes on serum levels in diabetics. In Results and Conclusions. We detected the novel heterozygous conclusion, our study indicates that the examined polymorphisms missense variant c.524C>A (p.A175D) in three subjects of one of interleukin-8 (rs2227543, rs4073) and interleukin-18 (rs1946518, Italian family. The mutation co-segregated with the affected family rs187238) genes are not genetic risk factors for diabetic retinopathy. members and it was absent in 322 normal chromosomes. Interspecies Therefore, they may not be used as genetic markers for diabetic comparison of ferroportin protein sequence showed that alanine 175 retinopathy in Caucasians with type 2 diabetes. is strongly conserved. Software prediction and molecular modeling analysis indicate that its substitution with the negative charged aspartic P13.20 acid 175 could modify the channel charge distribution, impairing Lesch-Nyhan syndrome in Russian patients the iron outing. This results indicate that the A175D is a novel loss E. Y. Zakharova, G. E. Rudenskaya, L. A. Bessonova; of function mutation in SLC40A1 gene associated with ferroportin Medical Genetics Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. disease. A functional study for investigating in vitro the mutated iron Lesch-Nyhan syndrome (LNS) is an X-linked error of purine exporter efficiency is underway. metabolism: hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosiltransferase (HPRT) deficiency produced by numerous HPRT1 gene mutations. Metabolic disorders 462 The disease is associated with uric acid overproduction leading to early gout with renal and/or articular symptoms and neurological cONcLUsiONs About 50% of patients with white matter abnormalities manifestations depending on the degree of enzymatic deficiency. In remains without diagnosis even in a reference center after an total HPRT absence classic LNS with severe movement disorders and exhausting investigation, therefore a specific protocol for studying self-injurious behavior develops. Partial HPRT deficiency, or Kelly- and categorizing these patients is crucial not only for an academic Seegmiller syndrome (KSS) produces phenotypes with less severe or scientific purpose but it is mandatory for any clinician who wants or no CNS involvement. While somatic symptoms are treated with to offer for such patients the correct therapeutics when it is available. allopurinol, there is no treatment for neurological symptoms. Mutations de novo make up 30 per cent of cases, most of patient’s mothers P13.22 are heterozygous carriers. Enzymatic and molecular diagnostics are Against All Odds: treating Niemann-Pick type c in Brazil in current use the latter being more reliable for carrier and prenatal C. M. Lourenco1, V. Van der Linden2, E. Ribeiro3, R. Boy4, M. Santos5, W. testing. First Russian DNA-confirmed cases, three SLN and one Marques Jr1; KSS, are presented. In SLN patients age 3, 5 and 8 years three novel 1University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Hospital Barão de Lucena, HPRT1 mutations, Gly179Arg, c.606+1insT and IVS1+5G-A, were Recife, Brazil, 3Albert Einstein Hospital, Fortaleza,, Brazil, 4State University of detected. Mutation Gly15Ser found in a 14-year-old boy with somatic Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 5Pequeno Principe Hospital, Curitiba, KSS was described earlier with the same phenotype. All mothers and Brazil. two patients’ sisters proved to be carriers; in one family prenatal DNA BACKGROUND: Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC) is a rentless testing was performed. Despite typical presentation, the diagnosis in neurodenerative disorder characterized by a defect in cholesterol all patients was significantly delayed, SLN was considered cerebral esterification causing lipid storage; Substrate Reduction Therapy (SRT) palsy and KSS was regarded as juvenile arthritis. That is, the disease has been proposed as a treatment for NPC and other neurolipidoses is underestimated in practice. All boys with severe motor delay based on the effects of iminosugars in the brain. OBJECTIVE: To and hyperkinesias, even without self-injurious behavior, should be report the follow-up of a cohort of Brazilian NPC patients treated with screened for hyperuricemia. Juvenile gout in males also needs testing SRT for a period of 3 years for HPRT deficiency. MATERIAL/METHODS: 28 patients with clinical, biochemical and/or molecular diagnosis of NPC were evaluated with a clinical protocol/ P13.21 physical examination and complementary exams (abdominal Unravelling the leukodystrophies: clinical, biochemical and ultrasound, brain MRI,EEG,NCV/EMG) during 3 years of treatment molecular aspects of sixty Brazilian patients with white matter with the iminosugar N-butyldeoxynojirimycin (NB-DNJ) abnormalities RESULTS: All patients but two had started on NB-DNJ after the onset C. M. Lourenco1, C. Funayama1, M. Turcato1, C. Sobreira1, G. Simao1, A. of the neurological symptons. Most of the patients have the classical Santos1, A. Pessoa2, A. Weinmann3, L. Giuliani3, M. Wajner4, R. Giugliani4, W. childhood presentation of NPC disease, but there were 4 patients Marques Jr1; with perinatal presentation. Stabilization of mental deterioration 1University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2Albert Sabin Hospital, was seen in 18 patients with neurological symptons - although in Fortaleza, Brazil, 3Federal University of Mato Grosso do Sul, Mato Grosso do the remaining 8 patients NB-DNJ appeared to slow the neurological Sul, Brazil, 4Medical Genetics Service, Clinics Hospital of Porto Alegre, Federal progression of the disease, further neurological deterioration could be University of Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. seen. Electrophysiological studies did not demonstrate any peripheral iNtRODUctiON Leukodystrophies are a group of rare, heterogenous neuropathy. NB-DNJ was only discontinued in two patients for different genetic diseases, which affect myelin, the major constituent of brain reasons (worsening of tremor and difficulty to manage the diarrhea and spinal cord white matter. episodes, respectively). Aims Describe the clinical findings of sixty patients diagnosed with a CONCLUSIONS: SRT seems to be a reasonable and safe approach to genetic disorder of cerebral white matter and the approaches for the treat NPC patients. Nevertheless, there are patients that seem to have diagnosis. a poor response, regardless of the age of starting the treatment, so it is mEtHODs/PAtiENts All the patients were evaluated in the necessary to develop better biomarkers to follow treatment responses neurogenetics clinics by geneticists and neurologists. Clinical in NPC patients. anamnesis, physical exam, neuroimaging studies (CT scan and brain MRI with spectroscopy), ophtalmological and auditory evaluations, P13.23 neurophysiological studies (EEG, ERG, BAER and EMG/NCV), Analysis of RNase P in MHBD deficiency hormone and biochemical tests, muscle biopsy with respiratory chain A. J. Deutschmann1, K. Rauschenberger2, P. Traunfellner1, H. Steinbeisser2, A. mitochondrial analysis, screening for inborn errors of metabolism Amberger1, J. Zschocke1; (lysosomal enzymatic studies, peroxisomal and sterol panels, 1Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Institute of Human Genetics, cholestanol dosage, organic acids, sulfatides and aminoacids Heidelberg, Germany. chromatography, GAGs analysis) and, when indicated, nerve/skin Loss of function of the mitochondrial enzyme 17β-hydroxysteroid biopsy for EM studies, karyotype and molecular tests were performed dehydrogenase type 10 (HSD10, MHBD) causes an organic aciduria in the course the of investigation. with a neurodegenerative course and evidence of mitochondrial REsULts Diagnoses in our patient population are summarized in dysfunction. Several mutations in the HSD17B10 gene have been Table 1 identified. Interestingly, disease severity is not correlated to the Disease group Specific diagnoses (n) dehydrogenase activity. Recently HSD10 was found to be part of the X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy (4), MLD (3), ribonuclease P (RNase P) protein complex in mitochondria. RNase Krabbe disease (2), infantile Refsum disease P is an endonuclease consisting of three proteins (MRPP1, HSD10, (1), α-methylacyl-CoA racemase deficiency (1), MRPP3) and is responsible for the 5`-maturation of precursor transfer Inborn errors of Niemann-Pick disease type C (4), Aicardi-Goutières RNAs (pre-tRNAs) required for mitochondrial protein translation. metabolism syndrome (1), Canavan disease (1), neuronal ceroid We now analyzed whether HSD10 mutations found in patients interfere lipofuscinosis (2), holocarboxylase synthetase with mtRNase P assembly or function. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis deficiency (1), cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (1). of different pre-tRNAs sequences in HSD10 knock-down cells caused Hypomyelination VWM disease (7; ovarioleukodystrophy, 1), Van der accumulation of tRNA precursors. Western blot analyses of the three disorders Knaap disease (1), 4H syndrome (1) mtRNase P subunits in protein extracts from patient fibroblasts as well as HSD10 knock-down HEK and HeLa cells compared to control cells Mitochondrial MNGEopathy (1), Leigh syndrome (2). showed markedly reduced expression of both HSD10 and MRPP1. disorders Expression of MRPP3 was not affected. On RNA level MRPP1 Cockayne syndrome (1), leukoencephalopathy with expression levels were comparable to controls, indicating that HSD10 brainstem and spinal cord involvment and lactate Other disorders mutations cause reduced MRPP1 protein stability. Surprisingly, pre- elevation (1), ARSAL syndrome (1), 18q deletion tRNA levels in patients` fibroblasts did not differ from control cells. syndrome (1)Metabolic disorders 463 Taken together our results indicate that HSD10 mutations found in a significant increase of complex I activity. Notably, recent publications patients interfere with RNase P production, but this is not reflected in and our own clinical observations support beneficial effects of a high impaired mitochondrial tRNA processing in cultivated fibroblasts. It is dosage riboflavin regimen in ACAD9 patients. possible that additional factors contribute to mitochondrial dysfunction in HSD10 (MHBD) deficiency. P13.26 screening for mitochondrial deafness mutations in Hungarian P13.24 patients: experience of 7 years An APEX-based genotyping microarray for the screening of K. Komlósi1, A. Maász1, K. Hadzsiev1, P. Kisfali1, J. Bene1, K. Németh2, G. mutations in the LDLR gene Fekete2, B. Melegh1; R. Taslerová1, L. Kuntová1, L. Tichý1, P. Zapletalová1, L. Kopečková1, L. 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 22nd Dušková1, T. Freiberger2, L. Fajkusová1; Department of Pediatrics, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. 1University Hospital Brno, Centre of Molecular Biology and Gene Therapy, Sensorineural hearing loss is the most common phenotype of Brno, Czech Republic, 2Centre for Cardiovascular Surgery and Transplantation, mitochondrial diseases. Although in most cases interfamilial and Brno, Czech Republic. intrafamilial phenotypic variation is observed, the clinical presentation Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is an autosomal dominant inborn can be specific for a certain mutation. The mutations reported so far disease of lipid metabolism resulting in accelerated atherosclerosis affect mitochondrial tRNA and 12S rRNA genes. Our department and premature coronary heart disease. The early identification and performs mitochondrial DNA analysis since 1999 and mutation treatment of FH patients is extremely important. FH is associated screening of nuclear and mitochondrial deafness-genes since 2003. predominantly with mutations in the genes encoding the low-density Among 60 Hungarian patients affected by hearing loss we identified lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and its ligand apolipoprotein B (APOB). So one common syndromic deafness mutation and two rare SerUCN-tRNA far, more than 1000 sequence variants of the LDLR gene have been mutations in two families with non-syndromic hearing impairment. In described. However, only one APOB mutation is prevalent in Europe. a 12-year-old boy with seizures, bilateral hearing loss and ragged red Owing to time consuming and expensive classical DNA analysis fibers the A3243G heteroplasmic mutation was detected. In a 10 year- of the whole LDLR gene (DNA sequencing), we have proposed a old boy and his family with bilateral hearing loss but no palmoplantar new diagnostic tool, an APEX (Arrayed Primer EXtension)-based keratoderma we identified the A7445G SerUCN-tRNA mutation in genotyping DNA microarray called FH chip. The FH chip enables homo- and heteroplasmic forms independently of the hearing status, detection of 167 mutations in the LDLR gene and 1 mutation in the delineating our case from other pedigrees. Haplotype analysis APOB gene simultaneously containing point mutations and small DNA revealed a rare variant of the U4b haplogroup. In a 5-year old boy rearrangements detected in Czech FH patients and other European and three generations with bilateral hearing loss analysis revealed the and Asian FH populations. T7510C SerUCN-tRNA mutation in homoplasmic form, reported only in To date, more than 300 FH suspected patients were analysed by using 3 Caucasian families previously. FH chip. In approximately 25 % of all cases a mutation was found, According to the incidence of mitochondrial diseases the role of which corresponds to results obtained by DNA sequencing of the mtDNA mutations in hearing loss is expected to be higher as verified. LDLR gene. Among 60 patients we found two rare mutations both affecting the The FH chip is a rapid, reproducible, specific and cost-effective tool for SerUCN-tRNA. Since in some families maternal inheritance is not clearly genotyping and in combination with MLPA (Multiple Ligation-dependent revealed, screening for mitochondrial mutations should always be Probe Amplification) represents a reliable molecular genetic protocol considered in any family in which paternal transmission of the hearing for the large-scale screening of FH mutations in the Czech population. impairment can be excluded. This work was supported by grants MSMT 2B08060 and LC06023. P13.27** P13.25 Mutations in TTC19 cause mitochondrial complex III deficiency Exome sequencing, an efficient diagnostic tool for mitochondrial and neurological impairment in humans and flies. disorders D. Ghezzi1, P. Arzuffi1, D. Diodato1, C. Lamperti1, M. Zordan2, P. D’Adamo3, R. H. Prokisch1,2, T. Haack1, K. Danhauser1, B. Haberberger1, S. Eck2, P. Costa2, M. Zeviani1; Freisinger3; 1The Foundation “Carlo Besta” Institute of Neurology, Milan, Italy, 2Dept. of 1Technical University of Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, München, Biology, University of Padova, Padua, Italy, 3IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, University Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, of Trieste, Trieste, Italy. Germany, 3Technical University of Munich,, München, Germany. Deficiencies of Mitochondrial Respiratory Chain complex III (cIII) are Faulty energy supply due to defective oxidative phosphorylation is rare and can be caused by mutations in mtDNA-cytochrome b or in the biochemical signature of mitochondrial disorders a genetically nuclear BCS1L genes; nevertheless most of cIII-defective cases heterogenous group of rare, severe and highly invalidating human remain genetically undefined. conditions. Due to it’s clinical and genetic heterogeneity the diagnosis We identified a homozygous non-sense mutation in the tetratricopeptide of mitochondriopathies is challenging and usually relies on biochemical 19 (TTC19)-encoding gene in patients from two families, affected by analysis of biopsy material. Therefore, the majority of patients lack a progressive encephalopathy associated with profound cIII deficiency molecular diagnosis and there is an urgent need for new strategies to and accumulation of cIII-specific assembly intermediates. A second close the gap between biochemical definition and molecular genetic homozygous nonsense mutation was later found in a fourth unrelated correlate. patient. We experimentally demonstrated that the wild-type TTC19 Next generation sequencing strategies are currently revolutionizing protein is targeted to, and embedded in, the inner mitochondrial mutation detection both for the routine diagnosis of known mutations membrane. We then showed that TTC19 is part of two high-molecular and the identification of new genes for rare disorders. weight complexes, one of which co-migrates with cIII. Physical We demonstrate the efficacy of exome sequencing in combination with interaction between TTC19 and cIII was then demonstrated by co- a cellular rescue-assay to elucidate the genetic basis in biochemically immunoprecipitation. defined mitochondrial disorders. We report the identification of By in silico data mining, TTC19-like protein sequences were found mutations in known disease genes and the discovery of causative throughout the Metazoan radiation. We investigated a Drosophila mutations in ACAD9, a member of the acyl-CoA dehydrogenase melanogaster knockout model for TTC19 that showed low fertility, (ACAD) protein family. The pathogenic role of novel variants was strong bang sensitivity, severely reduced spontaneous motor activity, established by the correction of the biochemical defect on expression and impaired optomotor test, associated with cIII deficiency. Importantly, of the wild-type protein in patient’s fibroblasts. ACAD9 screening of the cIII deficiency found in the KO adult flies was not present in mutant 120 patients identified two additional index cases. larvae, that developed normally into adult individuals, suggesting the Riboflavin, the vitamin precursor of the FAD moiety, which is the existence of an alternative cIII assembly process in the developing catalytic cofactor of ACADs, is known to foster their assembly and stages of the fly. stability. Riboflavin treatment of mutant cell lines for 3 days resulted in In conclusion we provide evidence that TTC19 is a putative cIII Metabolic disorders 464 assembly factor in animals, and its absence determines severe excluded and next neurogenic atrophy in muscle biopsy was stated. neurological abnormalities in both human and flies. Molecular study of SCO2 gene revealed the same homozygous p.1541G->A mutation and allowed the final diagnosis. P13.28 Novel mutation in MPV17 gene in two sisters with P13.30 hepatocerebral mitochondrial depletion syndrome. A novel mitochondrial AtP6 frameshift mutation causing D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, A. Węglewska-Jurkiewicz1, M. Pronicki1, K. isolated complex V deficiency, ataxia and encephalomyopathy Tońska2, M. Kaliszewska2, E. Ciara1, D. Jurkiewicz1, S. Łuczak1, P. Kowalski1, A. Schaller1, D. Hahn2, B. Schröter3, B. Steiner3, A. Häberli2, J. M. Nuoffer2, S. M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, A. Tańska1, J. Trubicka1, M. Pelc1, J. Sykut- Gallati1; Cegielska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1; 1Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland, 2Institute for Clinical 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Institute of Genetics Chemistry, Bern, Switzerland, 3Division of Neuropediatrics, Luzern, Switzerland. and Biotechnology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Background: The process of ATP production by mitochondrial Mitochondrial DNA depletion syndromes (MDSs) are autosomal ATPase (F1F0-ATP synthase, complex V) is a rotary process driven recessive disorders characterized by tissue-specific reduction of by an electrochemical proton gradient across the inner mitochondrial mtDNA copy number leading to dysfunction of affected organs. They membrane. F0 that couples the proton gradient to ATP synthesis by usually develop in infants and small children, and are clinically classified F1, contains among others the subunits ATP6 and ATP8 that are as myopathic, encephalomyopathic and hepatocerebral forms. The encoded by mitochondrial DNA. Dysfunction of mitochondrial ATPase cases, where liver was the most or the only affected organ, usually die due to missense mutations in ATP6 is a frequent cause of severe of severe liver failure before 1 year of life. At least 10 nuclear genes mitochondrial encephalomyopathies. are known to be involved in the pathogenesis of particular MDS form. Purpose: To identify the biochemical and molecular defect in a 4 Here we describe two sisters presented with progressive liver failure year old girl with ataxia, microcephaly, developmental delay, mental (cholestasis, jaundice, elevated liver enzymes, hepatomegaly, iron retardation and elevated lactate suspected for a mitochondriopathy. accumulation), encephalopathy (hypotonia, nystagmus, periodical Methods: OXPHOS measurements were performed in patient’s stridor), poor feeding and lactic acidosis started from a very beginning skeletal muscle and skin fibroblasts. BN-PAGE with subsequent after birth, died in 12th and 7th month of life. immunoblotting was applied to study complex V assembly. Relevant Histological picture of liver biopsy of an older sister and autopsy in parts of the mitochondrial genome were sequenced. The function of the younger one was characteristic for hepatocerebral MDS. Severe the respiratory chain was analysed by high resolution respirometry. mtDNA depletion was detected in liver (89%) and muscle tissue (83%) Results: We found an isolated reduced complex V activity in the of the younger girl, but was not so evident in muscle sample of the patient’s muscle tissue and fibroblasts. Immunoblotting after 1D older one (60%, liver-NA). BN-PAGE revealed in addition to the complex V holocomplex Molecular analysis of selected genes associated with hepatocerebral increasing amounts of mitochondrial ATPase subcomplexes. Oxygen MDS (DGUOK, MPV17, POLG1) revealed a novel mutation c.191C>G consumption studies in patients fibroblasts demonstrated reduced (p.Pro64Arg) on two MPV17 alleles in both sisters confirming clinical ADP-stimulated respiration with pyruvate/malate or succinate as diagnosis of hepatocerebral MDS. We consider this molecular variant substrates. A heteroplasmic frameshift mutation was found in the to be pathogenic as it is located in conserved transmembrane domain ATP6 gene in patient’s muscle tissue and blood. The mutation was not of the protein. detectable in the mother’s DNA extracted from blood and buccal cells. It is the first report of mitochondrial depletion associated with MPV17 Conclusion: We describe a novel pathogenic frameshift mutation dysfunction in Polish patients. in ATP6 associated with ataxia and encephalomyopathy resulting The study was supported by MNiSW grant No.2857/B/P01/2010/39 in incomplete assembly and reduced activity of the complex V and CMHI No.S111/08 holoenzyme. P13.29 P13.31 the clinical variability of mitochondrial encephalomyopathy due A family case of Leigh syndrome caused by a novel mutation in to mutation in scO2 gene mtDNA J. Pilch1, E. Jamroz1, M. Kajor2, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk3, P. Kowalski3; Y. Itkis1, P. Tsygankova1, E. Zakharova1, S. Mikhailova2, G. Rudenskaya1; 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, 1Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian Poland, 2Department of Anatomopathology, Medical University of Silesia, Clinical Child Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. Katowice, Poland, 3Department of Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health A family case of Leigh syndrome with atypical manifestation caused Institute,, Warsaw, Poland. by a novel mtDNA mutation is presented. The family consists of a The cytochrome C oxidase (COX) - complex IV of the respiratory mother and her two sons: 7-year-old and 4-year-old boys. The delivery chain consists of 13 protein subunits encoded by mitochondrial (3) and of both brothers passed with no serious complications. Early motor nuclear (10) DNA. The low activity of complex IV is caused not only by development was normal. At age of 2.5 years, against the absolute mutations in genes coding particular subunits but also by mutations health, in both children a restrain of right hand was noticed. Since in other genes of both mitochondrial and nuclear DNA. One of them that time the disease has an undulating course with progressive is SCO2 gene. Mutations in this gene resulting in a defect in COX hyperkinesis, dystonia, dextral hemiparesis and dysarthria. Speech assembly, lead to a lethal infantile cardioencephalomyopathy. In the and mental development is delayed and worsenes. Expressive clinical picture dominate: muscular hypotonia leading with time to language is poor but receptive language is satisfactory. There were respiratory failure, limitation in extraocular movements, hypertrophic no seizures, vision or hearing problems. MRI of elder brother showed cardiomyopathy, lactic acidosis, decrease of COX activity in muscle symmetric lesion of basal ganglia, but MRI of junior brother revealed biopsy. the same damage only on the left side. MRI of mother showed similar The authors analyze clinical features in three infants with the mutation damage on the right side, however she has only moderate sinistral in SCO2 gene. As the first symptom all the children had muscular hemiparesis since the age of 5 years, when a clumsy left hand was hypotonia with hypo/areflexia. Progress of clinical symptoms leading noticed. to respiratory insufficiency was observed. At one of the children in Leigh disease was supposed. After SURF1 gene mutations were the following stage of the disease laryngeal stridor and symptoms of excluded, a search of mtDNA mutations in blood cells was performed. laryngomalacia were dominating. Cardiomyopathy appeared in the A novel substitution m.3945 C>A in ND1 gene was detected in children final stage of the disease suggesting mitochondrial myopathy. As in homopasmic state and in heteropasmic state in the mother. for the other two children in the initial stage, both clinical symptoms A nucleotide replacement leads to substitution of aminoacid Ile to Met. and neurogenic pattern in EMG suggested spinal muscular atrophy. In 212 control DNA samples the same substitution was not found. We The following symptoms: hyperlactatemia, ptosis, and changes in proposed this substitution being pathogenic. MRI in one of them, suggested mitochondrial cytopathy without Thus, this case demonstrates the clinical variability of Leigh syndrome cardiomyopathy. For all the children mutation in SMN1 gene was and proves the necessity of mtDNA sequencing.Metabolic disorders 465 P13.32 P13.34 clinical diagnosis and management of patients with clinical and molecular data of 24 patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type ii in Belarus mucopolysaccharidosis type Vi from Poland, Baltic states and A. Kulpanovich, I. Naumchik; Belarus National Medical Center «Mother and child», Minsk, Belarus. A. Jurecka1,2, L. Cimbalistiene3, N. Gusina4, K. Õunap5, A. Rozdzynska6, J. Mucopolysaccharidosis type II (MPS II, Hunter syndrome) is a Marucha1, V. Opoka-Winiarska7, B. Czartoryska8, A. Tylki-Szymanska1; multisystem, multiorgan X-linked recessive disorder with a variable 1Department of Metabolic Diseases, Endocrinology and Diabetology, The age of onset and variable rate of progression caused by deficiency of Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of the lysosomal enzyme iduronate-2-sulphatase. Molecular Biology, University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, 3Center for Medical Aims: To summarize the clinical features of patients with MPS II in Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital, Santariskiu Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, Belarus and to characterise the dynamic of the disease progression 4Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus, 5Department of Genetics, United for the improvement of the clinical diagnosis. Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 6Anthropometry Methods: We present the clinical observation of Hunter syndrome Laboratory, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, cases which were confirmed by laboratory biochemical methods. The 7Department of Paediatric Pulmonology and Rheumatology, Medical University clinical study includes the analysis of 139 phenotype features: facial of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 8Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and abnormalities, neurologic, ophthalmologic, auditory, cardiovascular, Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. respiratory, gastrointestinal, musculoskeletal symptoms etc. Background. Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (MPS VI; Maroteaux- Results: 18 patients (males) with MPS II from 14 unrelated families Lamy syndrome) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder caused by a were studied. Median age at diagnosis was 5 years 1 month (range: deficiency of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (ARSB). 1-23,5 years), median age at onset of symptoms was 3 months (range: Aim. We aimed to analyze the natural history and the spectrum of at birth â€“ 2,5 year). Interval from symptom onset to disease diagnosis mutations responsible for the disorder in Central and Eastern Europe. was 4 years 1 month (range: 1,9â€“23,3 years). Four patients were Material and Methods. We studied 20 unrelated MPS VI families (4 died, two of them at the first decade and two another at second decade Polish, 6 Lithuanian, 2 Estonian and 8 Belarussian), in whom clinical of life, median age of death was 12 years 1 month (range: 7â€“19,4 diagnosis was biochemically confirmed by demonstrating abnormal years). Basing on the analysis of facial abnormalities, neurologic, excretion of dermatan sulphate in urine and deficient activity of ARSB ophthalmologic, auditory, cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, in plasma or fibroblasts. musculoskeletal symptoms we defined the most significant phenotypic Results. Clinical heterogeneity was observed among our patients markers and pattern of early clinical diagnostics and developed and three major clinical phenotypes of the disease can be management of this disorder in Belarus. distinguished: severe (n = 6, 25%), attenuated (n = 9, 37.5%) and intermediate (n = 9, 37.5%). A remarkably large number of patients P13.33 in our cohort showed an attenuated phenotype of the Maroteaux- Prenatal cerebral cysts: presentation of the first prenatally Lamy syndrome, with regression later in life and prolonged survival. diagnosed Molybdenum cofactor deficiency (MOCD) We identified 97.5% of the ARSB mutant alleles, 6 of them novel S. N. van der Crabben1, F. C. Hofstede1, L. S. de Vries1, L. Pistorius1, M. (c.31091insCCTGAAG+delATACT, Q88X, T92K, W57C, G167R M. C. Wamelink2, M. G. M. de Sain- van der Velden1, P. G. J. Nikkels1, K. D. and 161_166insT). We also report 5 previously described mutations Lichtenbelt1; (R152W, Y210C, Y266S, G302R, Q97X) as well as 2 non-pathogenic 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2VU University Medical Center, polymorphisms (A33V, S384N). Amsterdam, Netherlands. Conclusions. 1. Three major clinical phenotypes of the disease Molybdenum Cofactor Deficiency (MOCD) is a rare autosomal could be distinguished among our patients: severe, attenuated and recessive metabolic disorder, caused by a disrupted function of sulfite intermediate. 2. When compared with data published in the literature, oxidase (SO) that requires MOC for proper functioning. a larger number of patients in our study presented with an attenuated case 1 phenotype. 3. The relatively attenuated phenotype may be associated After a full term pregnancy of healthy Caucasian non-consanguineous with the R152W mutation, which suggests a specific genotype- parents, a girl was born by emergency caesarean section. Amniotic phenotype correlation. fluid contained thick meconium . Six hours postpartum she developed seizures. Care was withdrawn five days after birth because of severe P13.35 brain damage. The microscopic abnormalities in the brain were molecular analysis of most common mutations in Phenylalanine compatible with severe peripartum asphyxia. hydroxylase gene in iranian population case2 S. Zare karizi1, M. Hosseini Mazinani2; Ultrasound examination in the second pregnancy at 34 weeks of 1Islamic Azad University Science and Research Campus, Tehran, Islamic gestation showed bilateral cerebral cysts, ventriculomegaly and Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, cerebellar hypoplasia. On suspicion of a SO deficiency or MOCD an Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. amniocentesis was performed, showing high S-Sulfocysteine in the Phenylketonuria (PKU) is the most prevalent disorder of amino acid amniotic fluid. Delivery was induced and a macrosomic girl was born metabolism. It is one of the most important preventable causes of with full cheeks and deep-set eyes. MOCD was confirmed in urine, mental retardation. Incidence of PKU in Iran has been estimated at plasma and amniocytes postnatally. Beyond the neonatal period she 1 in 3627 births. The aim of this study is to assess the prevalence developed seizures. Brain MRI showed progressive cerebral atrophy. of PKU mutations in Iranian population. For this purpose, 150 She died at the age of 3 ½ months. unrelated patients with classic PKU (300 alleles) were screened for 10 Sequence analysis of MOCS1 showed a homozygous splice site mutations (IVS10-11g>a, R252W, R261X, R261Q, IVS11nt1, R408W, mutation (c.418+1 G>A) in both cases and heterozygosity in their R408Q, L333F, 364delG and S67P) using polymerase chain reaction- parents. restriction fragment length polymorphism. The predominant mutations conclusion in this population sample are IVS10-11g>a, R261Q, IVS11nt1 and These sibs display the variable expression of MOCD, ranging from R252W with the frequency 21.7%, 9%, 6.7% and 4.7% respectively. severe asphyxia with neonatal convulsions to extensive cerebral In addition, 6 other mutations have been identified at relatively low deformations. Metabolic work-up, including measurement of frequencies (R261X (4%), 364delG (3.7%), L333F (2%), R408W, S-sulfocysteine, should be performed in a fetus with prenatal brain R408Q and S67P (0.33%)). cysts and newborns with unexplained asphyxia or brain damage to These informations provide a good basis for direct DNA diagnosis of make a timely diagnosis and offer parents the opportunity of prenatal PKU in this population. diagnosis or PGD in a future pregnancy.Metabolic disorders 466 P13.36 use, but it is more complicated and less reliable for prenatal testing. Osteoclasts derived from patients with NF1 display in vitro Recently pathogenetic treatment with miglustat was proposed which tolerance to zoledronate makes early diagnostics vital. We diagnosed NPC in five unrelated E. Heerva1, S. Peltonen2, J. Peltonen1; patients, in one of them the diagnosis was verified biochemically, in 1University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 2Turku University Hospital, Department of four others by DNA testing (in two cases only one of allelic mutations Dermatology, Turku, Finland. was detected). Four children age 5-9 years, three of Russian and one Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant neuro- of Azerbaijan ethnicity, had severe juvenile NPC with dementia and cutaneous-skeletal syndrome with an incidence of about 1/3000. Up to multiple neurologic signs in all and evident visceromegaly in two. Adult half of patients with NF1 have osteoporosis. Bisphosphonate drugs are NPC in a 18-year-old Byelorussian girl presented mostly with dementia used in osteoporosis, and the drug results in reduced small GTPase and psychiatric signs including acute psychosis while neurologic signs activity (including Ras) in osteoclasts, ultimately leading to slower and splenomegaly were mild and transient which, along with normal bone remodeling. As NF1 is associated with hyperactive Ras, our MRI, hampered diagnostics. The genotypes were: p.Pro1007Ala/?, aim was to evaluate in vitro effects of zoledronate in NF1 osteoclasts. p.Ser954Leu/c.3614delC, p.Ser954Leu/? (in Azerbaijan patient) and Bone mineral density (BMD) of 16 patients with NF1 was measured p.Ser954Leu/c.326dupT (in adult NPC). Mutation p.Pro1007Ala is and their osteoclast progenitors were isolated from peripheral blood. relatively common in European populations (along with p.Ile1061Thr); Control osteoclasts were obtained from 16 age- & sex-matched control mutation p.Ser954Leu was described previously in German and persons. Canadian patients in heterozygous or compound heterozygous state Osteoclast progenitors were differentiated into osteoclasts in vitro, like in ours; mutations c.3614delC and c.326dupT are novel. and were treated with 10E-6, 10E-7 and 10E-8 zoledronate. NF1- osteoclasts demonstrated a dose-dependent tolerance to zoledronate P13.39 compared to control osteoclasts. Three patients were taking Correlation between lipid profile / cardiovascular risk bisphosphonates at time of the study, but no differences in their cell and type of mutation in Portuguese patients with familial culture results were found. The in vitro results may reflect to long-term hypercholesterolemia effects of bisphosphonates in osteoporotic patients with NF1. A. C. Alves, A. M. Medeiros, M. Bourbon; Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal. P13.37 Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) is characterized by high levels second tier testing by tandem mass spectrometry reduces the of LDLc in plasma, accelerated atherosclerosis and increased risk of false positive rate in newborn screening (NBs) premature coronary heart disease. FH results from mutations in three G. Dimitar, D. Matern, D. Oglesbee, K. Raymond, S. Tortorelli, P. Rinaldo; genes involved in lipid metabolism: LDLR, APOB, PCSK9. It is known Biochemical Genetics Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine and that FH patients’ phenotype is heterogeneous varying with different Pathology, Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United conditions. States. The aim of this study was to analyse the biochemical profile of patients The primary goal of newborn screening is the early diagnosis of with genetically diagnosed FH in accordance with the mutations in asymptomatic newborns affected with treatable conditions. The desire different genes and the different types of mutations identified in the for the highest possible sensitivity has the innate risk of compromising LDLR gene to identify whether there is a correlation between these specificity thus not only adding to the cost of management of the variables in Portuguese patients. patients but also potentially increasing the risk of dysfunctional parent- Biochemical parameters, total cholesterol (TC), LDLc, HDLc, child relationships. Approaches to reduce false positive results include: triglycerides, ApoB and ApoA of 325 patients with FH were analyzed 1) utilization of as many as possible analytes and informative ratios; 2) by SPSS using ANOVA and Tukey. Definition of clinically validated cutoff target ranges; 3) Implementation Patients with mutations in the PCSK9 have LDLc and TC levels of second-tier tests (performed on the same specimen without further significantly higher than patients with mutations in the remaining patient contact). two genes. There is no significant difference in these parameters In recent years our laboratory has introduced in routine clinical between patients with mutations in LDLR and APOB genes, although practice the following second-tier tests: 1) profiling of methylcitric acid, all values are higher in patients with mutations in the LDLR. Patients methylmalonic acid and homocysteine for disorders of propionate and with nonsense mutations in the LDLR gene present values of TC, LDL methionine metabolism; 2) succinylacetone for Tyrosinemia type I (now and ApoB statistically higher than in patients with missense mutations. incorporated in the primary screening); 3) alloisoleucine for maple syrup The comparison between the other categories showed no significant urine disease; 4) steroid profiling for congenital adrenal hyperplasia changes in biochemical parameters. Patients with mutations in the (CAH); 5) Ethylmalonic acid, glutaric acid, 3-hydroxyglutaric acid and PCSK9 have a more severe phenotype than patients with mutations in 2-hydroxyglutaric acid for Glutaric acidemia type I and Type II. LDLR and APOB genes. Utilization of these methods has impacted our practice in three ways: The type of mutation (in different genes or different mutations in LDLR) First, the false positive rate of screening by MS/MS has declined to is important in determining cardiovascular risk in FH patients. 0.05 % with a positive predictive value of 64 % (2010 metrics); Second, problematic cut-off values have been optimized to reduce the risk of P13.40 false negative results; Third, we are able to screen for new groups susceptibility genes of metabolic syndrome and its symptoms of disorders, not previously included in the screening panel such as in children and adolescents with obesity remethylation disorders and different types of CAH. O. S. Glotov1, I. A. Makchrova2, E. U. Marochkina1, M. A. Glebova3, A. S. Glotov1, T. E. Ivashchenko1, V. S. Baranov1; P13.38 1Ott’s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, St-Petersburg, Russian Niemann-Pick disease, type c: phenotypes and NPC1 mutations Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State Pediatric Academy, St-Petersburg, in Russian patients Russian Federation, 3Saint-Petersburg State University, St-Petersburg, Russian G. E. Rudenskaya1, T. M. Bukina1, S. V. Mikhailova2, E. Y. Zakharova1; Federation. 1Medical Genetics Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian The prevalence of metabolic syndrome (MS) in developed countries, Children’s State Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. particularly in children, continuously grows. The aim of our study was Niemann-Pick disease type C (NPC) is an autosomal recessive to assess frequency of occurrence of polymorphisms of candidate neurovisceral metabolic disease, one of sphingolipidoses. NPC is genes TCF7L2, APOE, APOC3, LPL, REN, ADRB1, ADRB2, AGTR2, heterogeneous genetically and clinically. About 95% of cases are caused ACE, AGT, BKR2, NOS3, MTHFR in children with metabolic syndrome by numerous mutations of NPC1 gene. Juvenile NPC manifesting in and control group.304 children were enrolled in this study: 160-main 4-14 years, usually before 10 years, makes up about 65% of cases; group (patients with obesity) and 144-control group in the age of 5-17 infantile, early childhood and adult forms are infrequent. Genotype- years (mean age was 12±0,18). MS was diagnosed in accordance with phenotype correlations exist. Along with DNA testing detection of criteria, proposed by IDF in 2007. All polymorphisms were determined non-etherified cholesterol in skin fibroblast lysosomes is in current by PCR-RFLP and PCR-biochip methods. MS was diagnosed in 28 Metabolic disorders 467 (17,5%) children in the age of 11-17 years. We observed an increase of elevated TSH levels concomitant with low peripheral thyroid TCF7L2 C/T and T/T genotype frequency (58,2% and 33,0%; p<0,001) hormone levels. A reduced thyroid volume or absence of the thyroid in children with obesity, in comparison to healthy children. Significant gland was determined by ultrasonography or/and scintigraphy. This differences were found in ADRB2 C/G and G/G genotype distribution constellation of clinical findings warranted the diagnosis of congenital (52,5% and 18,6%; p=0,003) between obese patients and control hypothyroidism. group. Children with obesity possessed significantly higher AGTR2 We found 4 patients with moderate to severe CH who had monoallelic A/A genotype frequency (37,3%; p=0,019) in comparison to healthy mutations in TSHR. Observed mutations included one previously children, besides higher A/A genotype frequency was observed among characterized mutation (R450H) and three uncharacterized mutations boys (69,0%; p<0,001). NOS3 T/T genotype was more frequent in girls (L653F, L440I, and R531W). than in boys (55,1%; p=0,031). ACE D/D genotype was more frequent The results demonstrate that mutations in the TSHR gene can be in boys (57,0%; p<0,05). REN A/A and A/G genotypes were more responsible for clinical manifestation of congenital hypothyroidism frequent in boys (11,1 and 26,7%; p=0,021). During the selection of in a relatively small subset of children. So, additional investigations risk groups MS for children with obesity it is expedient to analyses for are needed for conformation of pathogenecy for this novel sequence a patient polymorphism of genes of TCF7L2, ADRB2, AGTR2. variations. P13.41 P13.43 Variation in DNA methylation influences metabolic syndrome- MicroRNA Expression Profiling in Patients with Tyrosinemia related phenotypes type i M. A. Carless, J. Neary, T. D. Dyer, D. L. Rainwater, A. G. Comuzzie, M. C. M. Ozen1,2, S. Sevli1, E. Soyucen3, E. Karaca1, A. Yuksel4; Mahaney, J. Blangero; 1Istanbul University Cerrahpasa Medical School Department of Medical Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio, TX, United States. Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Baylor College of Medicine Department of Metabolic syndrome is a complex disorder that is reaching pandemic Pathology and Immunology, Houston, TX, United States, 3Istanbul University proportions and is a strong predictor of diabetes and cardiovascular Cerrahpasa Medical School Department of Pediatrics, Istanbul, Turkey, disease. Currently little is known about the importance of epigenetic 4Bezmialem University, Istanbul, Turkey. variation in disease risk. We performed preliminary analysis Tyrosinemia type I is a tyrosine catabolism disease causing quantifying relative DNA methylation in 190 Mexican Americans, within tyrosine accumulation resulting from deficiency of the enzyme the San Antonio Family Heart Study, at 1,505 gene-centric CpG sites fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH), due to mutations in the FAH using an Illumina GoldenGate assay to identify epigenetic correlates gene. It usually presents with severe liver involvement in young infants. with metabolic syndrome-related phenotypes. Linear models were MicroRNAs are small regulatory RNAs that function in post- used to identify a number of consistent correlations across multiple transcriptional gene expression. miRNA deregulation was observed dimensions of metabolic syndrome for many CpG sites in highly in the variety of pathologic conditions but their role in the metabolic relevant genes. For example, CpG methylation within POMC was diseases are not known yet. correlated with fasting (p=0.031) and 2 hour (p=0.020) insulin, high We have studied 20 patients with clinical features of failure to thrive, density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C; p=0.002) and triglycerides hepatomegaly, liver failure, proximal renal tubular dysfunction, and (p=0.009) as well as with NCEP:ATPIII defined metabolic syndrome tyrosinemia which are classical phenotypes of Tyrosinemia Type I. (p=0.011). Deficiencies in POMC are strongly correlated with obesity All patients showed either very low or deficient FAH enzyme activity. and it is possible that methylation reflects another mechanism by which In order to identify possible miRNAs targeting FAH gene transcripts, decreased expression influences body weight. Methylation of CpG microRNA expression profiling is performed in Agilent microarray sites in other candidate genes such as RYK, RUNX1T1 and TGFBR3 platform representing 723 human and 76 human viral miRNAs in the were also correlated with various metabolic syndrome phenotypes fibroblasts of these patients. MicroRNA expressions were compared including fasting and 2 hour glucose, fasting and 2 hour insulin, body in the fibroblasts, leukocytes and sera of the Tyrosinemia patients. mass index, waist circumference, HDL-C, triglycerides and metabolic Computational algorithms are also used for prediction of putative syndrome. Of interest is the fact that methylation at each of these mRNA-miRNA interactions. Among them, hsa-miR-768-3p, hsa-miR- sites was associated with a more detrimental profile of phenotypes. 513a-5p, and hsa-miR-525-5p are most probable microRNAs targeting We are currently employing next-generation sequencing technologies the non-conserved sites on FAH mRNA. Verifications of alterations of and large-scale methylation arrays to look for genome-wide alterations the expression levels of the selected miRNAs are in progress. in DNA methylation that might contribute to metabolic syndrome in a Our data might suggest an active role for miRNAs in the tyrosine larger cohort of 1,200 individuals. catabolism pathway and characterizing miRNA profile in the tyrosinemia patients might help to delineate microRNAs having P13.42 distinctive role in the disease pathogenesis and also promising targets Identification of a new thyrotropin receptor germline mutations for future therapeutic studies. in children with congenital hypothyroidism E. Parshkova1, E. Khusnutdinova1, O. Malievskiy2, A. Kiyaev3, M. Bermisheva1; P13.44 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences., Analysis of UDP 1A9 gene in Polish population using ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian pyrosequencing Federation, 3Ural State Medical Academy, Regional Child Clinical Hospital, O. Zakerska1,2, M. Skrzypczak-Zielińska2, B. Malengowska2,3, A. Mikstacki4, B. Ekaterinburg, Russian Federation. Tamowicz4, M. Szalata2,3, R. Słomski2,3; The TSH receptor gene (TSHR) encodes a transmembrane receptor , 1The NanoBioMedical Centre, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, present on the surface of follicular cells which mediates the effects of 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, TSH secreted by the anterior pituitary. Is critical for the development and 3Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, function of the thyroid gland. It belongs to a subfamily of heptahelical Poznań, Poland, 4Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, G protein coupled receptors that have a common structure consisting Poznań University of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland. of seven transmembrane segments, three extracellular and three Interindividual diversity in anaesthetic drug metabolism is a major intracellular loops, an extracellular amino terminal domain, and an cause of adverse effects, in most cases correlated with the genetic intracytoplasmic carboxyl terminal tail. defect in the biotransformation pathway enzymes or receptors. Congenital hypothyroidism (CH) affects 1 in 3000 - 4000 newborns. One of the widely used anaesthetics is propofol. Interindividual In Bashkortostan the incidence is 1 in 3800 births. We examined the variability in propofol pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics may frequency of TSHR mutations among patients with permanent primary influence on the anaesthetic function of this drug. Over 99% of this congenital hypothyroidism and in the general population of Republic anaesthetic is biotransformated in the liver to several metabolites. Bashkortostan (Russia). The major pathway of metabolism is glucuronidation, catalysed by the In total, 82 children aged 8 months to 17.2 years with CH diagnosed microsomal enzyme UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, particularly the by neonatal screening were investigated. All patients had markedly isozyme 1A9 (UGT1A9), which belong to the superfamily of enzymes Metabolic disorders 468 encoded by the UGT1A gene complex on chromosome 2q37. Several The study includes 36 subjects (23 males and 13 females), divided in polymorphisms and mutations in this gene have been described. 4 age-matched groups: 9 subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus and The three crucial of UGT1A9 alleles, UGT1A9 *3 (p.Met33Thr), *4 hypertension (group 1), 9 subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus without (p.Tyr242X), *5 (p.Asp256Asn) are associated with decreased or hypertension (group 2), 9 subjects with hypertension without diabetes absence of enzyme activity, what determine increased risk of toxic (group 3) and 9 healthy subjects as a control group. effect. The aim of our study was to optimize a genotyping method Gene expression analysis was performed by Human Atherosclerosis to identify the most important in propofol toxicity UGT1A9 variants, RT2 Profiler PCR Array. It includes 84 genes related to the formation and to analyze the frequency of them in Polish population. 100 Polish of atherosclerotic plaques, 5 housekeeping genes and 3 control RNA patients under propofol anaesthesia were examined. The strategy fragments. Statistically significant up- or down-regulation is accepted used to identify polymorphisms in the UGT1A9 gene was nested PCR as at least 4-fold difference in expression as compared to the control amplification of exon 1 fragments including codon 33, 242 and 256, group. followed by pyrosequencing. We found a UGT1A9*3 allele frequency Altered expression of 27 genes was observed in all studied groups as of 5%, however the UGT1A9*4 and *5 alleles was not identified, while compared to the control group - 23 up-regulated, 4 down-regulated. It in others European, Asian and Afro-American populations this variants was accepted as non-specific. have been detected. In subjects with diabetes mellitus, 10 genes matched the criteria for increased expression: APOE, BAX, BCL2L1, LDLR, MMP3, MSR1, P13.45 NFKB1, PDGFB, SPP1 and TGFB2. No genes with decreased Dysregulation of epicardial, pericardial and subcutaneous expression were found. adipokines in obesity and coronary artery disease In subjects with hypertension increased expression was found for F. Atalar1, S. Gormez2, B. Caynak3, D. Gunay4, B. Akpinar5, U. Ozbek6, A. FAS. Decreased expression in hypertensive subjects was observed Buyukdevrim7; for SERPINB2. 1Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Child Health Institute, Growth- Conclusions: Subjects with hypertension and type 2 diabetes mellitus Development and Pediatric Endocrinology Department, Istanbul, Turkey, appear to present with non-specific changes in the expression of some 2Acibadem Hospital, Cardiology Dept, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul Bilim atherosclerosis-associated genes in peripheral blood. University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Cardiovascular Surgery and Florence The presence of type 2 diabetes increases the expression of 10 genes. Nightingale Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Florence Nightingale Hospital, The presence of hypertension increases the expression of FAS and Biochemistry Laboratory, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Istanbul Bilim University, Faculty of decreases the expression of SERPINB2. medicine, Dept of Cardiovascular Surgery and Florence Nightingale Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Istanbul University, Experimental Medical Research Institute, P13.47 Dept of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Emeritus, Istanbul University, Istanbul Enteropeptidase: a gene associated with a starvation human Medical School, Dept of Internal Medicine, Section of Diabetes, Istanbul, phenotype as a novel target for the treatment obesity and type ii Turkey. diabetes Epicardial adipose tissue (EAT), pericardial adipose tissue (PAT) and I. Harosh, S. Braud; subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT) are mediators of obesity and may ObeTherapy, Evry, France. also be involved in the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease (CAD). Many obesity related genes have been proposed as targets for the We aimed to investigate the association of EAT, PAT; as intra-thoracic treatment of obesity. However, these obesity genes did not provide visceral fat and SAT with obesity and CAD by the gene and protein efficient drug therapy for obesity treatment. This is mainly due to the expression analysis of related adipokines. redundancy of the biochemical pathway involved in obesity and the lack In patients with CAD(n=32) and without CAD(control group) (n=27) of specificity of the gene targets. It is therefore a challenge to identify subdivided by body mass index of <or=27 and >27kg/m2, the gene crucial gene(s) targets involved in energy metabolism associated with expression of seventeen adipokines were studied by qRT-PCR and “lean or starvation phenotype”. the serum level of the most abundant adipokines were analyzed by Congenital Enteropeptidase defficiency is an extremly rare pathology ELISA. which answer to all these criteria. Enteropeptidase catalyzes the Gene expression analysis revealed the aberrant mRNA conversion of inactive trypsinogen into active trypsin via the cleavage levels of angiotensin,FABP-4,CD68, leptin (LEP),leptin of the acidic propeptide from trypsinogen receptor(LEPR),VEGF,TNF-α,Il-6,Il-18,STAMP-2 in EAT,PAT and We have generated knock out transgenic mice for enteropeptidase SAT of patients with CAD and patients with CAD and obesity while which shows the same phenotype like in human. These data and the expression of RBP-4 and adiponectin were higher in controls.11β- in vivo preclinical data using per os small molecule for long term HSD1 expression was increased in patients with CAD and obesity in treatment (9 weeks) will be presented. EAT,PAT and SAT. In PAT of patients with CAD and patients with CAD and obesity,the expression of angiotensin2 receptor,PAI-1 and C3 were P13.48 higher than EAT and SAT.The expression of glucocoticoid receptor(GR) Lack of association of a fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) was higher in PAT and SAT of patients with CAD and obesity.Leptin gene variant to weight loss in a one-year intervention for obese serum level was significantly correlated with leptin gene expression children and adolescents (Obeldicks) in PAT (r=0.539;p=0.01),abdominal fat volume(r=0.484;p=0.03) and N. Knoll1, A. Volckmar1, A. Scherag2, C. Pütter2, M. Kleber3, J. Hebebrand1, A. subcutaneous fat volume(r=0.605;p=0.005)of patients with CAD.A Hinney1, T. Reinehr3; strong correlation was determined between 11β-HSD1 and LEPR,GR 1Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University andCD68 genes in EAT,PAT and SAT(p<0.05,respectively). of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Informatics, Biometry EAT,PAT and SAT adipokines exhibit a dysregulated mRNA profile in and Epidemiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Vestische both obesity and CAD. Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of Witten/Herdecke, Datteln, Germany. P13.46 Introduction: Recently, it was shown that obese carriers of the A allele Altered expression of genes associated with atherosclerosis of SNP rs324420 in FAAH lost more weight and improved associated in peripheral blood of subjects with hypertension and subjects phenotypes better than non-carriers during an intervention. We tried to with type 2 diabetes mellitus. replicate this finding in obese children and adolescents undergoing a N. A. Stoynev1, B. Rukova2, I. Dimova2, S. Hadjidekova2, D. Nikolova2, D. one year lifestyle intervention (Obeldicks progam). Toncheva2, T. Tankova1; Subjects and methods: 453 overweight and obese children and 1Department of Diabetology, Clinical Center of Endocrinology, Medical adolescents (10.8 ± 2.6 years, BMI-SDS 2.4 ± 0.5; 55% girls) University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical were genotyped for rs324420 (C/A) by restriction fragment length University, Sofia, Bulgaria. polymorphism (RFLP) analysis. Participants received a balanced diet, The aim was to identify atherosclerosis related genes specifically containing 55 En% carbohydrates, 30 En% fat and 15 En% proteins. associated with type 2 diabetes and with hypertension. Moreover, they took part in an exercise therapy once a week. Blood was Metabolic disorders 469 taken at baseline and after one year of intervention. Anthropometric mutant alleles with direct sequencing and MLPA analysis. In this work (height, weight, BMI and BMI-SDS) and plasma parameters (total we present high-resolution melting (HRM) as an effective, sensitive and cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol, triacylglycerides, cheap method for mutation screening of the PAH gene. PCR conditions glucose, insulin and HOMA) as well as blood pressure were measured. for all 13 exons of the gene were optimized for HRM analysis. Melt Results: Both BMI and BMI-SDS improved significantly among all profiles were acquired on a 96 well LightScanner instrument (Idaho subjects. The mean systolic blood pressure was also lowered and Technology) and melt data were normalized and temperature shifted. concentrations of HDL-cholesterol increased significantly. However, All of the known mutations within amplicons were detected by shifted none of the measured parameters were associated with FAAH melting curves, what indicates high sensitivity of the method. However, rs324420 genotypes. some polymorphisms in the ends of amplicons were not detected. Conclusion: We did not detect association of FAAH genotypes with Details of our work will be presented on poster. weight reduction in overweight and obese children and adolescents. Hence, the previous finding in adults could not be confirmed. As the P13.51 length (1 year to 3 month) and the set up (hypo caloric diet in adults mutational analysis of phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in versus physical activity plus balanced meals) of the interventions Slovenian patients with phenylketonuria: five novel mutations differed, these parameters might have influenced the different results. U. Groselj1, T. Hovnik1, J. Kovac1, M. Zerjav Tansek1, T. Battelino1,2; Funding: NGFNplus01GS0820, BMBF 01KU0903 1University Children’s Hospital, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. P13.49 Phenylkatonuria (PKU, OMIM 261600) is an autosomal recessive maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (mODY) in an italian family metabolic disorder arising from the deficiency of hepatic enzyme associated to a mutation disrupting the HNF-1 binding site at P2 phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). In the majority of all cases PKU promoter of HNF4A gene is caused by missense mutations in the PAH gene, which maps to E. Marasco1, P. Fici1, G. Storci1, A. Di Rocco1, G. Cavallari2, M. Seri3, M. chromosome 12, region 12q23.2. Bonafè4, V. Mantovani1,3; The average birth incidence of PKU in Slovenia is approximately one in 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, 8000. Currently, Slovenian national PKU register contains around 130 Bologna, Italy, 2Dep. General Surgery and Organ Transplants Bologna patients, 107 of them were included into our mutational analysis of PAH University, Bologna, Italy, 3Unit of Medical Genetics, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, gene. The entire coding region of the PAH gene spanning 13 exons Bologna, Italy, 4Department of Experimental Pathology, Bologna University, was PCR amplified and analyzed with denaturing high-performance Bologna, Italy. liquid chromatography (dHPLC). On all the identified PCR fragments Backgroud: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a we subsequently performed an automated sequencing analysis. heterogeneous group of disorders characterized by early onset of non- The cumulative mutation detection rate in this group of patients was insulin-dependent diabetes and autosomal dominant inheritance. At 95%. We have identified 32 different disease-causing mutations, least 9 MODY-causing genes have been identified. five of them novel: p.L15GfsX24, p.V45A, p.L62P, p.R157S and Aims and Methods: we aimed to investigate the promoter P2 of HNF4A c.56_60delACAGG. Twelve patients were found to be homozygous gene in 97 families with suspected MODY, that were negative for (two for the p.R158Q mutation and the rest for the p.R408W), all mutation in coding sequence of the most common MODY genes GCK, the other patients were compound heterozygotes. The single most HNF1A and HNF4A. The proximal P2 promoter was screened from frequent mutation in Slovenian PKU population is p.R408W in exon 12 -365 using dHPLC and sequencing. (34%), which is in concordance with previous European and regional Results: the -169 C>T was detected in a female patient (diabetes at age studies of PAH gene. 30-40 patients are likely to be BH4 responsive. 8) and her brother (diabetes at age 11), both displaying phenotype of dHPLC proved to be a fast and sensitive method for mutational HNF4A/MODY1. The variant was absent in 214 normal chromosomes. screening of the PAH gene. In combination with sequencing method, The substitution lies within a known binding site for HNF-1alpha in a it represents a reliable and cost-effective diagnostic tool for detection conserved nucleotide position. Evidence for the pathogenicity of this and identification of unknown molecular defects in patients with PKU. mutation was obtained in transient plasmid transfection assays with mutated and wild-type P2 promoter. Luciferase activity assay revealed P13.52 a markedly decreased activity of the mutant allele compared to the wild mutation analysis of phenylketonuria (PKU) in south western of type in cancer cell lines and in freshly isolated rat primary pancreatic iran islets. N. Ajami1, A. Foroughmand1, S. Kazeminezhad1, M. Aminzadeh2; Conclusion: our results indicate that the -169C>T mutation at the 1shahid chamran university, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Jundishapur HNF4A P2 promoter gene plays a causative role in MODY, due to an University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. impairment of the HNF-1alpha-dependent activation of HNF-4alpha introduction: Deficiency in hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase in adult beta-cell. This is the first time that the P2 promoter activity (PAH) causes phenylketnouria that is an autosomal recessive and is investigated in freshly isolated primary rat pancreatic islets. Our heterogeneous metabolic disorder. Molecular basis of this most finding highlights the need to include the P2 promoter in the molecular prevalent disorder is frequent mutations in phenylalanine hydroxylase screening of HNF4A gene. gene. PAH require tetrahydrobiopterin as a cofactor for conversion of phenylalanine to tyrosine. Loss of PAH activity results in accumulation P13.50 of phenylalanine in tissues and biological fluids that cause the formation mutation screening of PAH gene in slovak Pku patients using of secondary neurotoxic metabolites. To date more than 600 mutations high-resolution melting in the PAH gene have been identified and submitted to the PAH and E. Polak1, J. Radvansky1,2, L. Kadasi1,2; HGMD databases. The prevalence of phenylketonuria In Europe or 1Faculty of Natural Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular among the general Caucasian populations is about 1 in 10,000. In Iran Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Science, Bratislava, Slovakia. the incidence of PKU might be about 1.6 in 10,000. Phenylketonuria (PKU) is an autosomal recessive inherited disorder methods: This study enrolled 40 Iranian southwestern residents. DNA arising from a deficiency of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), extraction from peripheral blood leukocytes performed by Diatom DNA which catalyses the essential conversion of phenylalanine (Phe) to prep 100 kit. Using manually designed primers, PCR amplification tyrosine (Tyr). In the majority of cases, PKU is caused by mutations accomplished for the exons 6, 7, 10 and 11 of PAH gene. Then we used in the PAH gene, and it presents with different phenotypes which direct sequencing of amplified fragments for identification of mutations. are classified according to Phe tolerance. More than 500 mutations Analysis of DNA sequences performed by Mutation Surveyor software. have been described world-wide and the PAH enzyme has been fully Results: In this study, we observed eleven mutations, I224T, S231P, characterized. The incidence of the disease in the Slovak population R176X, c.592_613del22, R243X, R252W, R261Q, Y356X, IVS10- had been estimated to be 1:10 000 newborn. In our previous studies 11G>A, IVS11+1G>C and Q375R. The Q375R is a new mutation complete mutation spectrum among Slovak PKU patients has been in exon 11. V245V, Q232Q and L385L were three detected silent characterized. So far we are able to detect approximately 95% of mutations with high frequency.Metabolic disorders 470 Discussion: Khuzestan population comprises a heterogeneous P13.55 ethnic group in southwestern of Iran. With mutation detection rate mutation in the OTC promoter may cause symptoms of ornithine equal to 46.25%, 40% of patients were homozygous and 10% were carbamoyltransferase deficiency heterozygous that indicate high consanguinity. O. Luksan1, M. Jirsa1, M. Hřebíček2, L. Dvořáková2; 1IKEM, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Praha, Czech Republic, P13.53 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles Long-chain-3-hydroxyacil-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency - the University in Prague, and General University Hospital in Prague, Praha, Czech most frequent fatty acid oxidation disorder in Latvia: 7 cases Republic. Z. Krumina, Z. Daneberga, M. Kreile, R. Lugovska; Ornithine carbamoyltransferase deficiency (OTCD; OMIM311250) is Children’s University Hospital, Riga, Latvia. the most common inherited defect of the urea cycle. Mutation analysis Background: Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase of the coding regions of OTC, the enzyme catalyzing the synthesis of (LCHAD) deficiency is one of the defects of mitochondrial β-oxidation citrulline in the liver, fails in 20-25% of patients manifesting OTCD. In and the only one of all fatty acid disorders diagnosed in Latvia during such cases, the disease may be caused by gross gene rearrangements the last 13 years. or defects in regulatory regions of the gene. Objectives: To characterize clinical, biochemical and molecular data In our study we examined the 5’UTR, identified and functionally in 7 patients with LCHAD deficiency, found by selective screening in characterized OTC regulatory elements and estimated the Latvia. pathogenicity of a promoter variation c.-366A>G found in a female methods: Retrospective analysis of clinical and laboratory findings in patient with mild symptoms of OTCD. our patients. Three alternative transcription start sites located 95, 119 and 169 bp Results: Five patients presented during early infancy (2.5 months - upstream the iniciation codon were determined within the OTC 5’ UTR. 6.5 months) with vomiting, poor feeding, lethargy, hepatopathy and The human OTC promoter and enhancer elements were predicted nonketotic hypoglycemia. Three of them developed coma and seizures. from the homology with rat and mouse and functional functionaly One patient presented at the age of 21 months with hypoglycemic coma characterized using dual lucisferase reporter assay. Functional studies and seizures, psychomotor retardation and one patient was diagnosed revealed a moderate transcriptional activity of the promoter in both before clinical symptoms. Two patients were born preterm with severe liver and kidney derived cells. Significantly higher and liver specific intrauterine growth retardation. During metabolic crisis all patients had OTC expression was observed when promoter interacted with the typical acylcarnitine profile, increased level of 3 - hydroxydicarboxylic distal enhancer. The promoter variation c.-366A>G did not affect the acids in urine, elevated liver enzymes, moderate lactic acidemia and function of the promoter alone but it disrupted the interaction of the hyperammonemia. All patients had homozygous mutation 1528G>C promoter with the enhancer, which was observed as 50% decrease of in HADHA gene. Acute hepatopathy during prenancy was reported the transcriptional activity. in three cases. After infancy progressive retinopathy occurred in Our data indicate that full transcriptional activity of human OTC three patients, two patients had episodes of severe muscle pain and promoter depends on an upstream enhancer. The promoter - enhancer rhabdomyolisis during intensive physical activities or illnesses. interaction contribute to tissue specific expression of OTC in the liver One patient died at the age of 6.5 months before diagnosis was made, and the disruption can lead to the manifestation of OTCD. other died at the age of 10 years during acute gastroenterocolitis. Support: GAUK25116899910 conclusion: LCHAD deficiency is frequent fatty acid oxidation disorder in Latvian population. Newborn screening would be important P13.56 for early detection of all patients. ‘Full-blown’ Lowe syndrome without congenital cataracts in a patient with an OCRL p.Gln199X mutation and a silent variant, P13.54 p.Arg35Arg. Neurodegeneration in Cobalamin A Deficiency M. Ludwig1, M. Refke2, M. Draaken2,3, S. Pasternack2, R. C. Betz2, H. R. Gavrilova; Reutter2,4; Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States. 1Dept. of Clinical Biochemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Cobalamin (Cbl) A deficiency is rare cause of Cbl-responsive Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, methylmalonic academia. It results from defect in mitochondrial Cbl Germany, 3Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, reductase, encoded by MMAA. Treatment with B12 reduces the amount 4Dept. of Neonatalogy, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. of MMA. Liver or stem cell transplantation has been applied in some The oculo-cerebrorenal syndrome of Lowe is an X-linked recessive cases. Despite therapy patients suffer progressive neurodegenerative disorder characterized by the triad of congenital cataracts, mental course resulting in significant disability. The metabolic defect underlying retardation and incomplete renal Fanconi syndrome. Additionally, nerve degeneration is unknown but some authors propose synergistic various neurological signs may be present such as developmental toxic effect of methylcitrate, malonic acid, propionyl-CoA on respiratory delay, seizures, hypotonia, areflexia or behavioural disturbances. chain and tricarboxylic acid cycle resulting in brain damage. Patients show progressive growth retardation and may develop a An 11year old boy born to consanguineous marriage developed debilitating arthropathy. Although phenotype might vary, congenital normally until 3 years of age when he suffered a metabolic stroke cataracts have been assumed the first and obligatory sign. during an intercurrent viral illness. Brain MRI showed bilateral We report a 13 year old patient showing the complete phenotypic stroke-like lesions in the globus pallidus. He was diagnosed with spectrum of Lowe syndrome who was not classified as having the Cbl A deficiency based on elevated MMA responsive to vitamin B12 disease due to the absence of any ocular involvement. OCRL gene challenge and was found to have homozygous c.1034delT frameshift analysis revealed a Gln199X (c.760T; according to ENST00000371113) mutation in MMAA. Despite cyan-cbl carnitine and metronidazole mutation and a silent variant (c.G270A; p.Arg35Arg) in the patient. therapies, protein restriction and stem cell transplant within 1.5 years We suggested that the synonymous substitution might effect after his acute presentation he lost ability to walk and his speech correct splicing, however an in vitro model revealed only normally output decreased due to severe dystonia that started in left upper spliced transcripts. Moreover, RNA obtained from the patients’ EBV extremity but progressively generalized. Dystonia improved with deep transformed lymphocytes showed presence of both transcripts due to brain stimulation at 11 years. alternative splicing of exon 18a. Standard treatment of Cbl-responsive MMA has improved survival Taken together, the silent variant provided no clue for the milder but has not modified neurodevelopmental outcome. Stem cell phenotype in the context of a classic Lowe mutation (p.Gln199X). This transplantation did not alter disabling neurological deterioration in finding extends the phenotypic spectrum caused by OCRL mutations our patient but DBS improved dystonia. The mechanism underlying and illustrates that even in the absence of congenital cataracts Lowe progressive brain damage is uncertain but new therapies targeting syndrome has to be assumed, if all other features are present. proposed secondary mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction and antioxidants should be investigated.Metabolic disorders 471 P13.57** G allele of the E670G SNP in the PCSK9 gene was present at an Riboflavin responsive OXPHOS complex I deficiency caused by increased frequency in participating men in comparison to women. defective AcAD9: new function for an old gene LDL-C level was non-significantly higher in those with the AG in M. Gerards1,2, B. J. C. van den Bosch1,2, K. Danhauser3, V. Serre4, M. comparison to the AA genotypes (mean 165 mg/dl and 133 mg/dl van Weeghel5, R. J. A. Wanders5, G. A. F. Nicolaes6, W. Sluiter7, K. respectively, p=0,09). Schoonderwoerd8, H. R. Scholte9, H. Prokisch3, A. Rötig4, I. F. M. de Coo10, H. Neverthelater identification of another PCSK9 gene variants affecting J. M. Smeets1,2; LDL receptors density on cell surface and LDL-C level could provide a 1Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, unit Clinical Genomics, Maastricht, wider insight into a pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. Netherlands, 2School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Institute of Human Genetics, Technische P13.59 Universität München, Germany and Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz molecular diagnostic in patients with hepatocerebral Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 4INSERM U781 and Department of mitochondrial encephalomyopathies Genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Department of P. Tsygankova1, E. Zakharova1, S. Mikhailova2, L. Kolpakchi2; Clinical Chemistry, Laboratory Genetic Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical 1Research center for medical genetics, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Department 2Russian children clinical hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. of Biochemistry, Cardiovascular Research Institute Maastricht, Maastricht We present the results of molecular genetic investigations in a University, Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Center for Lysosomal and Metabolic group of 13 children with Alpers syndrome (A.S.) and mitochondrial Diseases, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, hepatocerebral syndrome (MHS). We performed sequence analysis of 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University Medical Center, POLG in patients with strong suggestion of AS. In one AS patient only Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC University one mutant allele revealed. Two infant patients with MHS phenotype Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Department of Neurology, Erasmus also had mutations in POLG gene (in heterozygous state). Depletion MC University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. of mtDNA was detected in blood only in patients with DGUOK and Mitochondrial complex I deficiency is the most common OXPHOS MPV17 genes mutations. Anatomopathological issue in the patient defect. Mutations have been detected in mitochondrial and nuclear with POLG mutations (A467T/ G268A) showed necrosis lesions in genes, but many patients remain unresolved and new genes are likely basal ganglia and brain stem (typical for Leigh syndrome phenotype). involved. In a consanguineous family, patients presented since early Our data confirm that test for POLG gene mutations is very important childhood with easy fatigability, exercise intolerance and lactic acidosis in patients with mitochondrial hepatopathy and not only in AS in blood. In muscle, subsarcolemmal mitochondrial proliferation and a phenotype. Complicating factors are search for a second mutant allele severe complex I deficiency were observed. Exercise intolerance and and helpless use of blood DNA for mtDNA depletion detection. complex I activity improved by supplementation with a high dosage phenotypes and genotypes in patients with AS and MHS of riboflavin. Homozygosity mapping revealed a candidate region on mtDNA chromosome three containing six mitochondria-related genes. Four mutant 1st mutant 2nd mutant phenotype depletion in genes were screened for mutations and a homozygous substitution gene allele allele blood was identified in ACAD9 (c.1594C>T), changing the highly conserved AS POLG p.W748S p.T885S N/A arginine-532 into tryptophan. This mutation was absent in 188 ethnically matched controls. Protein modelling suggested a functional AS POLG p.W748S p.L311P N/A effect due to loss of a stabilizing hydrogen bond in an α-helix and a AS POLG p.A467T p.G268A N/A local flexibility change. To test whether the ACAD9 mutation caused AS POLG p.W748S p.G848S N/A the complex I deficiency, we transduced fibroblasts of patients with AS POLG p.A467T ? - wild type and mutant ACAD9. Wild type ACAD9, but not mutant AS POLG p.A467T p.G268A - ACAD9, restored complex I activity. An unrelated patient with the AS POLG p.W748S c.3632del12 - same phenotype was compound heterozygous for c.380G>A and AS POLG p.R627Q R807H - c.1405C>T, changing arginine-127 into glutamine and arginine-469 into tryptophan respectively. These amino acids were highly conserved AS POLG p.W748S p.W748S - and the substitutions were not present in controls, making them MHS POLG p.G737R ? - very likely pathogenic. Our data support a new function for ACAD9 MHS POLG p.W748S ? - in complex I function, making this gene an important new candidate MHS DGUOK p.R105X p.R105X + for patients with complex I deficiency, which could be improved by MHS MPV17 p.R41W c.185delT + riboflavin treatment. P13.58 the E670G sNP in the PcsK9 gene in polish population with P13.60 acute myocardial infarction Assessment of three various screening tests for easy detection/ A. Banaszewska1, M. Piechota1, J. Dudziak2, K. Ziemnicki1, M. Slomczynski2, exclusion of common scO2 mutation among patients with R. Plewa1; cytochrome c oxidase deficiency 1Department of Animal Physiology and Development, Adam Mickiewicz S. Łuczak1, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. Małkowska2, J. Trubicka1, E. University, Poznan, Poland, 2J. Strus Hospital, Department of Cardiology, Ciara1, P. Kowalski1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, D. Jurkiewicz1, A. Tańska1, M. Poznan, Poland. Pelc1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, E. Pronicka1; The SNP at E670G within exon 12 is one of the main genetic alteration 1The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2The Institute of determining plasma low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) level Genetics and Biotechnology, University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. in human. SCO2 is one of the ancillary proteins necessary for correct assembling The aim of the study was to determine the incidence of the E670G SNP and functioning of cytochrome c oxidase (COX). It is involved in the polymorphism in PCSK9 in polish population with acute myocardial transport and incorporation of the copper ions to the CuA enzymatic infarction and investigate the contributions of this genetic variant to site on COXII subunit of the enzyme. Mutations in the SCO2 gene differences in plasma levels of LDL-C. (22q13) lead to serious damage of the protein resulting in severe COX The investigated group consisted of 72 individuals with a mean age of deficiency observed mainly in muscles, heart and brain. The common 62 years, and with a mean plasma LDL-C level of 137 mg/dl. For the substitution is g.1541G>A (p.E140K), which was identified at least on determination of the frequency of the E670G polymorphism a genomic one allele in all so far reported patients. DNA was amplified by standard PCR with primers specific for 12 exon. The aim of this study was to optimize conditions to determine the Each product was sequenced on an CEQ 8000 (Beckman Coulter). best method for screening of g.1541G>A mutation in COX-deficient Analysis of exon 12 sequence shows homozygous AA genotype in patients. 62 individuals and heterozygous AG in 10 subjects. Additionally, the In the study were selected three molecular techniques; two - based Metabolic disorders 472 on Real Time equipment (TaqMan probes and HRM), and one - on aldehyde oxidase, oxypurinol is detected in urine and serum of subjects gel electrophoresis (SSCP). In HRM method, melting curve analysis is with classical xanthinuria type I upon administering allopurinol. used for identification of mutations. Genotyping with Taqman’s probe We studied fifteen Japanese hypouricemic subjects with classical enables identification of specific mutation. SSCP identifies changed xanthinuria from fourteen different families at Jikei University School samples by comparison their electrophoretic mobility to control of Medicine. We report the spectrum of mutations identified to data. samples in polyacrylamide gel. Eleven subjects were xanthinuria type I, while three subjects were Preliminary studies provided reliable results from all mentioned xanthinuria type II. We could not verify a causative mutation of XDH methods. and MOCOS genes in one subject with xanthinuria. The percentage Advantages and disadvantages of every method will be evaluated, of xanthinuria type I in xanthinuria was 78.6 %. In xanthinuria type which will allow to choose the best of them. I, mutation C2567Del was identified most in eight alleles out of thirty Determination of the rapid genetic screening test for COX deficiency alleles, while C682T, leading to R228Ter, was identified in five alleles caused by mutations in the SCO2 gene let confirm a final diagnosis and out of thirty alleles. In xanthinuria type II, most frequent C1255T, will enable establishment of treatment decisions in affected children. leading to R419Ter, is identified in four alleles out of six alleles. Any The study was supported by the project no. N N407 115440. mutations did not dominate in XDH mutations of xanthinuria type I. P13.61 J13.01 spastic paraplegia due to cYP7B1 mutations (sPG5) : what can Glycogen-storage Disease type i b - case Report we learn about 27-hydroxycholesterol metabolism? I. I. Kavecan, J. Jovanovic Privrodski, M. Obrenovic, N. Konstantinidis, J. F. Mochel1,2,3, F. Lamari3,4, D. Rinaldi3, C. Goizet5,6, V. Ratziu7, A. Durr1,2; Tomic, D. Jojkic Pavkov; 1INSERM UMR S975, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Hôpital de La Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2AP-HP, Département de Génétique, Hôpital de La Glycogen Storage Disease type 1b due to glucose-6-phosphatase Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 3Unité Fonctionnelle Neurométabolique, Hôpital deficiency, is a type of glycogenosis due to glucose-6-phosphate de La Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, Unité Fonctionnelle de Biochimie deficiency. Glycogen-storage disease type Ib is autosomal recessive Métabolique, Hôpital de La Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Département de genetic trait caused by mutations at loci 11q23. The incidence was Génétique Médical, CHU de Bordeaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, estimated at 1: 100,000. 6Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, CHU de Bordeaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, This male patient was first-born child. This was controlled and non- Bordeaux, France, 7AP-HP, Service d’Hépato-Gastroentérologie, Hôpital de La complicated pregnancy. Parents are not consanguineous. The Salpêtrière, Paris, France. baby was born on term. Growth parameters were weight=3750 g; Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) constitute a clinically and length= 54 cm, head circumference 34 cm. Apgar score was 8/9. genetically heterogeneous group characterized by a progressive The proband developed hypoglycemia and sepsis very soon after ‘dying back’ degeneration of the cortico-spinal tracts. Mutations in birth. He developed hepatomegaly and splenomegaly confirmed with CYP7B1 were identified in SPG5 families presenting with a pure form ultrasound. His growth and development were delayed and he had of HSP (Tsaousidou et al, 2008; Goizet et al, 2009). CYP7B1 encodes repeated episodes of pyogenic infection. the cytochrome P450 7α-hydroxylase implicated in cholesterol Physical examination in the second year of life revealed growth metabolism, and plays a role in the alternate/acidic pathway for retardation, microcephaly, rounded “doll’s face” appearance, abnormal primary bile acid production. Increased levels of oxysterols, 27- and earlobes, divergent strabismus, gothic palate, long eyelashes, small 25-hydroxycholesterol were recently identified in the plasma of 4 SPG5 mouth, thin lips, hypertelorism and abnormal sole creases. He had patients (Schüle et al, 2010). Besides the potential consequences on a distended abdomen with an enlarged liver over 7 cm below the hepatobiliary functions of altered bile acids synthesis in SPG5, in vitro costal margin and enlarged spleen below 5 cm the costal margin. studies suggest that 27-hydroxycholesterol - an endogenous selective He had cryptorchismus. His motor and mental development were estrogen receptor modulator - may decrease bone mineral density, retarded, he had hypotonia. Laboratory findings revealed neutropenia, inhibit the cardiovascular protective effects of estrogens and increase hypoglycemia, hyperlactatemia, hypertriglyceridemia, hyperuricemia. oxidative stress in retinal pigment epithelial cells. Therefore, we Regular administration of G-CSF improved his health and decreased investigated 9 SPG5 patients from 6 families in order (i) to confirm that his hospital stay. plasma oxysterols can be used as biomarkers in HSP due to CYP7B1 Diagnosis of GSD Ib was confirmed after detection of homozygous mutations, and (ii) to explore the non-neurological manifestations that mutation c.1042_1043delCT on his SLC37A4 gene. may result from the altered oxysterols metabolism in SPG5 patients - i.e. bone homeostasis, hepatobiliary and cardiovascular functions, J13.02 retinal trophicity. Preliminary data suggest that the elevation of plasma Glut1 deficiency syndrome: clinical, biological and therapeutic 27-and 25-hydroxycholesterol in our SPG5 cohort is associated aspects with systemic complications, and in particular reduced bone density. S. Dumitriu, M. Puiu; Better delineating the non-neurological manifestations that may occur University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. in SPG5 should also shed light on the best therapeutic approaches The medical and personal history of a 5 year old boy in observation aiming at lowering 27-hydroxycholesterol levels. since he was 2 proves for the good communication between family and specialists. Glucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1- P13.62 DS) characterized by infantile seizures refractory to anticonvulsants, is molecular characterization in Japanese patients with classical associated with head growth, mental and motor development delays, xanthinuria. spasticity, ataxia, dysarthria, opsoclonus and other paroxysmal K. Ichida1,2; neurologic symptoms, often prior to meals. Andrei had been considered 1Department of Pathophysiology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life normal at birth. Birth weight and Apgar scores were normal. His first Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 2Division of Kidney and Hypertension, Jikei University seizure occurred at age 3 as myoclonic jerking of shoulders and arms, School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. nodding of the head, eyes rolling, hypotonia, impaired consciousness. Classical xanthinuria (OMIM #278300) is an inherited metabolic Seizures prevailed every morning. The delay was mainly in language disorder caused by a deficiency of xanthine dehydrogenase (XDH), and motor coordination. MRI showed moderate frontal atrophy. Fasting resulting in hypouricemia. Classical xanthinuria frequently presents EEG revealed mild to moderate slowing of background activity and with renal calculi and occasionally leads to renal failure. Classical multifocal and generalized high-amplitude irregular spikes and spike- xanthinuria is classified into two categories. Classical xanthinuria and-waves; most of discharges were clinically silent, occasionally type I lacks only XDH activity by XDH gene mutations, while the type they were accompanied by myoclonic jerks of shoulders and arms II results from dual deficiency of XDH and aldehyde oxidase due to or nodding of the head. EEG recording 1 h after breakfast showed mutations in the molybdenum cofactor sulfurase (MOCOS) gene. disappearance or marked reduction of epileptic activity. Specific Classical xanthinuria is easily differentiated by means of the allopurinol investigations confirming Glut-1DS like erythrocyte glucose uptake loading test. As allopurinol is converted to oxypurinol by both XDH and and mutation analysis of GLUT-1 are time consuming and expensive. Metabolic disorders 473 Starting from mother observations we performed pre- and postprandial IgE antibody were negative. ABPA was confirmed through cultures and EEG recordings in a boy with seizures aggravated by fasting and IgE specific. The evolution of these cases was towards severe mixed ameliorated by i.v. Glucose administration. This simple examination ventilator dysfunction with positive BD test. Conclusion: Bronchial provides a powerful tool to identify patients with possible Glut-1 DS. hyperresponsivity is a common phenomenon in CF, with variations from one patient to another, increases in time and was present at all J13.03 clinical situations from our study. Metabolic biomarkers in children with Autism spectrum Disorders J13.05 s. farshidi1, H. pouretemad2, e. pishyareh3, s. gafari1; Absence of ambiguous genitalia in a girl with salt wasting form 1hope gene fundation metabolic screening and research center, tehran, Islamic of 21-hydroxylase deficiency Republic of Iran, 2psychiatric department -Shahied Beheshti UMHSH, tehran, N. Mahdieh1, B. Rabbani2, A. Rabbani3, M. Haghi Ashtiani4; Islamic Republic of Iran, 3psychiatric departmen- Welfare & social sciences 1Ilam University of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Growth UMHSH, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and development Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder and thought to be Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Children’s Medical Center, Pediatric Center influenced by genetic factors. the prevalence of inherited metabolic of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic disorders are very high in Iranian (1/1000 birth) ,and their symptoms of Iran, 4Children’s Medical Center, Pediatric center of Excellence, Tehran may miss by wrong diagnosis . University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Objective: Evaluate plasma concentrations of abnormal metabolites of introduction: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is a group of amino acids & acylcarnitine by HPLC chromatography ( blood - urine autosomal recessive disorders, mainly known by causing ambiguous ) and MS/MS methodes in children diagnosed with autism Spectrum genitalia in girls. It is caused by mutations in cortisol biosynthesis Disorders. enzymes. 90-95% of the cases are occurred due to mutations in Criteria: CYP21A2 gene. There is a range of phenotypic variability because of Inclusion : different mutations of the gene. - Diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder based on clinical evaluation method and case presentation: We report here a newborn girl with - Age ≥ 24 months - no ambiguous genitalia but 21 hydroxylase deficiency. - gender: both Results: Biochemical assays of the patient showed high level of Exclusion : 17 hydroxyprogesterone. She enrolled to the hospital with no sign Acquired developmental disability or cerebral palsy. of virilization. CYP21A2 gene mutations were determined by direct children with deafness, dysmorphism, congenital malformations, short sequencing. stature, birth defects. Discussion: There is a need for detailed examination of newborns Method : Seventy two autistic children, 60 boys and 12 girl, between for CAH at diagnosis and pediatricians should be aware of the cases the ages of 2-7 years (2008-2010), and satisfying the DSM-III-R criteria with salt wasting crisis with no ambiguous genitalia. Molecular genetic (American Psychiatric Association, 1987) for the diagnosis of autism, analysis would confirm the mutation for the diagnosis. Genotype- were selected to participate in this study. phenotype discrepancy could be interpreted by the effect of modifying Plasma concentrations of aminoacids & acytylcarnitine were measured factors during pregnancy. in 72 children with autism and in 80 control children. • Results: J13.06 male:female ratio 5:1 congenital adrenal hyperplasia and mutation detection in iran 9 patient had positive metabolic evaluation ( confirmed by urine organic B. Rabbani1, N. Mahdieh2, A. Rabbani3, R. Bagheri4, E. Zaridust5, F. Sayarifar5, acids , molecular genetics tests M. Akbari1; 18% positive family history and in 70% consanguinity marriage. 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Ilam University • The most frequent diagnoses were fatty acid oxidation disorders and of Medical Sciences, Ilam, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Growth and development organic acid disorders research center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Conclusions: These results are similar to those of the comparison Republic of Iran, 4Growth and development Research center, Tehran University studies, although the overall prevalence IEM is higher in this study. of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Children’s Medical This is probably due to the effects of ethnicity and consanguinity and Center, Pediatric Center of Excellence, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, increasing ascertainment. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Background: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) accounts for one J13.04 of the important causes of ambiguous genitalia in girls. 90-95% of the Cystic fibrosis and bronchic responsivity causes around the world are due to CYP21A2 gene mutations. L. Pop1, I. Popa1, Z. Popa2, L. Tamas3, I. M. Ciuca1; methods: CYP21A2 gene is examined in patients affected with CAH 1Pediatric II Department, UMF V Babes, Timisoara, Romania, 2Cystic Fibrosis with allele specific PCR and multiple ligation probe amplification National Center, Timisoara, Romania, 3Biochemistry Department, UMF V (MLPA) methods. Direct sequencing is performed for those with rare Babes, Timisoara, Romania. and novel mutations. Background: The aim: the evaluation of bronhic responsivity (BR) in Results: To date, deletion and chimers include about 30% of the cystic fibrosis (CF) patients. Methods: Patients with CF (11 cases) CYP21A2 gene. IVS2-13A/C > G, Q318X, R356W, I172N, E6 Cluster, and patients with CF and bronchial asthma (4 cases), patients with 707_714del8 mutations defined the rest of deleterious mutations, CF and allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) - 2 cases . respectively. Spiromery tests used: metacholin (if FEV1≥ 80 %) and β2 agonist conclusion: Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is one of the (if FEV1≤ 80 %) of predicted value. Tests were considered positive: common causes of ambiguous genitalia in Iran. Newborn screening decrease of FEV1 with 20 % comparative to the control value (PC programs should be used since there are lots of consanguineous 20% FEV1) for methacoline test, respectively increase of FEV1 ≥ 15 %( marriages in the country. Carrier detection and prenatal diagnosis is in beta mimetic). In patients with asthma we effectuated prick tests performed in the country. and specific IgE antibody for Aspergillus fumigatus. Results: In the group with CF, 7 patients presented mixed moderate or severe J13.07 ventilator dysfunction; 4 of them had positive BD test and 3 had Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia - a case report negative test. Four patients of the same group had normal basal A. V. Popoiu, G. Doros, C. M. Popoiu, V. L. David, E. S. Boia; ventilometric parameters. Two of them presented positive test with Emergency Children Hospital Louis Turcanu, Timisoara, Romania. metacholin for medium BR. In the group of the CF and asthma two Introduction: Familial Hypocalciuric Hypercalcemia (FHH) is a rare presented moderate BR, one had normal ventilometric indexes and form of asymptomatic hypercalcemia. The vast majority of FHH is one presented mild obstructive ventilator dysfunction with positive caused by autosomal dominant loss-of-function mutations in the bronchodilatator (BD) test. In these patients prick tests and the specific gene CASR, which codes for the calcium-sensing receptor (CASR). Metabolic disorders 474 Loss-of-function mutations in CASR impair the feedback inhibition DeFineti software and Cochran-Armitage correction was applied. of parathyroid hormone secretion in response to a rise in the blood Genotype spread analysis indicated that ValVal genotype is more calcium concentration. Thus, higher than normal blood calcium levels frequent in the DR group (22.68%) compared with controls (17.14%). are necessary to inhibit release of parathyroid hormone, resulting There was a significant deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in hypercalcemia associated with normal or mildly elevated levels in the control group (X2=8.22,F=0.343). Presence of homozygous of parathyroid hormone. Material: We report the case of a 11 month 16Val allele seem to increase the risk for DR (OR=1.333), while the old female baby, admitted for the closure of a large persistent ductus 16Ala allele seems to be protective (OR=0.750), but he results are not arteriosus, who was accidentally discovered with a high blood calcium statistically significant (p=0.55). Corrected OR for both alleles are not level of 2,99 mmol/l ( normal values 2,10 -2,60), ionized calcium reaching statistical significance. 1,38 mmol/l (1,03 - 1,30), normal phosphatemia, having actually no This is the first study of Val16Ala polymorphism in DR from Romanian symptoms of hypercalcemia. The child presented moderate hypotrophy population. Although this is a small study that suggests there is no and dyspneea due to a large left-to-right shunt. The renalfuntion was association between Val16Ala polymorphism and DR, further studies normal. The calciuria was decreased 1,25 mmol/24h (1,75 -7,5 mmol/l). are necessary in order to clarify the role of SOD2 gene in DR. Urinary creatinine was low 0,45 mmol/24h (5 - 18). Parathormon levels were moderately increased 108 pg/ml (10 - 70 pg/ml). No genetic J13.10 testing was possible in that child. The child had an unevenfull closure clinical, Enzymatic, and molecular Diagnosis of of ductus arteriosus, and thrive well now. Conclusions: The benign mucopolysaccharidoses in iran, a Five Years Experience course of the disease require no medication for lowering the calcium Y. Shafeghati1,2, F. Hadipour2, Z. Hadipour2; levels, nor is parathyroidectomy indicated. 1Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. J13.08 mucopolysacchridoses are prevalent in our population, constitute Analysis of smPD1 gene in an iranian patient affected by a very important health problem and burden in this community. High Niemann Pick disease type B rate of consanguineuous marriages, one of the important predisposing H. Aryan, O. Aryani, M. Houshmand, E. Khalili, G. Aryan; factors. They are “Enzymopathies” and the result of homozygous Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. or compound heterozygous mutations in different genes which are Niemann-Pick disease, an inborn error of sphingomyelin catabolism, responsible to encode specific enzymes inside the cells. Each enzyme results from the deficient activity of the lysosomal hydrolase, acid catalyzes one of the different metabolic reactions that is necessary to sphingomyelinase (sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase; E.C.3.1.4.12). degrade intra-lysosomic glycosaminoglycans. Result of the mutation in Two allelic forms of this autosomal recessive disorder have been a coding gene may cause severe enzyme deficiency, intra-lysosomal delineated based on their distinct phenotypes. Type A Niemann-Pick accumulation of glycosaminoglycan macromolecules, and a specific disease is a severe neurodegenerative disorder of infancy characterized phenotype. Typical sequence of symptoms may include progressive by progressive psychomotor retardation, hepatosplenomegaly, and neurodevelopmental delay or regression, behaviour abnormality, death by three years of age. In contrast, Type B Niemann-Pick disease progressive dysmorphic-course facies, corneal clouding, hearing loss, is a nonneuronopathic disorder characterized by hepatosplenomegaly, visceromegaly, skeletal dysplasia, and dysostosis multiplex congenita. respiratory involvement, and survival into adulthood. The clinical We have studied 72 families in the past 5 years, that were referred course of patients with Type A disease is quite uniform, whereas the for evaluation and diagnosis of a dysmorphic, neurodevelopmental severity among Type B patients is more variable. In fact, some mildly regressive disorders with the MPS phenotype. The diagnosis in affected Type B patients may survive into the sixth decade of life. Our the index cases (after a detailed clinical, biochemical, radiological, case was a 6-year-old girl characterized by hepatosplenomegaly, imaging studies) confirmed by enzyme assay and in a few of the cases respiratory involvement, hyperlipidemia and thrombocytopenia who by molecular analysis. affected by Niemann Pick type B. Enzyme activity in peripheral We also determined to use Enzyme Replacement Therapy in some of blood lymphocytes for this patient was less than 10% of controls. our patients with type I, type II, and type VI, and also performed BMT, Whole SMPD1 gene sequencing analysis of this proband depicted in a few of them. a homozygote mutation in codon 36 which changes codon Valine The result of this experience on clinical, enzyme assay, and molecular to Alanin in exon 1. For confirmation of the mentioned mutation, we analysis would be presented in the congress. analyzed exon 1 of SMPD1 gene for her parents. Sequencing analysis Keywords: MPSs, Mucopolysaccharidosis, Macromolecular showed heterozygote state for this alteration Enzymopathies, Iran Experience J13.09 J13.11 mnsOD Val16Ala polymorphism in Romanian patients with type methylmalonic aciduria and Homocystinuria detected by joint 1 Diabetes and Retinopathy NmR and chromatography techniques: A case Report. A. Pop1, N. M. Panduru1, M. Ioana2, E. Mota2, M. Mota2, D. A. Ion3, M. Anghel4, N. Usurelu1, A. Nicolescu2,3, S. Garaeva4, V. Burgoci1, V. Sacara1, G. Postolati4, S. Radu4, A. Cimpoeru5, G. Pop1, C. Graunteanu2, D. Clenciu2, C. Cozma1, E. G. Redcozubova4, N. Simionescu2,5, V. Ciochina4, O. Toma5, C. Deleanu2,3; Cioboata2, I. Duta4, O. Tudose4, R. Ionica4, M. Truica4, C. Serafinceanu1, R. 1The National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Lichiardopol1, D. M. Cheta1; Moldova, Republic of, 2”Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Iasi, 1Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, Romania, 3”Costin D. Nenitescu” Institute of Organic Chemsitry, Bucharest, 2Craiova University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 3Carol Romania, 4The Institute of Physiology and Sanocreatology of Academy of Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, BucharestT, Romania, 4IDNBM Science, Chisinau, Moldova, Republic of, 5”Alexadru I. Cuza” University, Faculty N. C. Paulescu, Bucharest, Romania, 5Craiova University of Medicine and of Biology, Iasi, Romania. Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. Methylmalonic aciduria is a genetically heterogeneous metabolic Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the leading causes of blindness disorder due to abnormal activity of methylmalonyl-CoA mutase. and has an unclarified pathogenesis in which genetic predisposition We report on an 11 months boy, hospitalized for the second time in may play a role. Hyperglycemia increases oxidative stress which may intensive therapy with recurrent vomiting, dehydration, ketonuria, trigger the development of DR. SOD2 is a key enzyme which protects metabolic acidosis accentuated after high protein intake. The parents cells from oxidative damage. Functional polymorphisms in SOD2 are not consanguineous, their older boy died from unidentified similar gene may result in predisposition to DR. The aim of this study was metabolic conditions, age 10 months. to evaluate the possible association between Val16Ala polymorphism The blood and urine amino acids were examined by liquid (rs4880) in SOD2 gene and DR, in type 1 diabetes. chromatography. The elevated level of homocysteine (Hcy) [17.8μmol/l], We enrolled 189 unrelated Caucasian patients with type 1 diabetes cysteine, ethanolamine and ammonia in blood and only of Hcy in urine divided into a group A - patients with diabetes duration over 15 years had been detected. High concentration of Methylmalonic acid (MMA) in without DR (n=70) and group B - patients with DR (n=119). Genotyping urine[1631.4 mmol/mol creatinine] was detected by NMR spectroscopy was achieved by Taqman. Statistical analysis was performed using of urine. In addition, CT scanning showed spina bifida aperta L5-S5.Therapy for genetic disorders 475 The serum concentration of Hcy is elevated in both folate and Results cobalamin deficiencies, whereas MMA in serum or urine is a specific After one year we observed an increase in sleep quality in 20% of marker of cobalamin function. No mutation in MTHFR 677C-T in this cases and 30% of them enhanced the nutritional status. The majority patient was detected. The therapy with vitamin B [1mg/day], folic acid of patients increased the level of fitness during ADL. Moderate 12 [5mg/day] along the restricted protein diet reduced the level of MMA fatigue in effort decreased from 60% to 50 % .Initially 40% of them in urine [to180.0 mmol/mol creatinine], of Hcy in blood and urine and followed constant educational activities compared to 60 % finally. improved the development of the child. Hospitalizations due to exacerbations decreased from 60% to 45% Further actions: Tests for mutations in MTHFR/1298A, MTRR, MTR, compared to the last year. Good correlation (at the 0.01 level) was MMAA genes will be performed for this family. The NMR spectroscopy observed between mucus quantity and fatigue during ADL, educational for both urine and amniotic fluid of the mother may be proposed for activities and sleep quality. prenatal diagnosis. NMR spectroscopy of body fluids provided more Conclusions: analytic information in this case and may be used as screening method Combined airway clearance games and physical exercises are a very for diagnosis of inborn metabolic errors. good choice to optimize the quality of life in children with cystic fibrosis. Acknowledgement: This paper was supported by a research grant from CNCSIS RO, TE36. P14 therapy for genetic disorders P14.03 A pharmacogenetic analysis of Fabry patient responses to pharmacological chaperone treatment with At1001 (GR181413A, migalastat Hydrochloride) P14.01 E. R. Benjamin1, X. Wu1, C. Della Valle1, E. Katz1, R. Schiffmann2, J. P. Discussions over a case of congenital diaphragmatic hernia Castelli1, P. Boudes1, D. J. Lockhart1, K. J. Valenzano1; E. S. Boia1, M. C. Popoiu1, V. L. David2, M. Boia1, O. Adam2, P. Fuicu1, A. V. 1Amicus Therapeutics, Cranbury, NJ, United States, 2Baylor Research Institute, Popoiu1, M. Puiu1; Dallas, TX, United States. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by 2Emergency Children’s Hospital “Louis Turcanu”, Timisoara, Romania. mutations in GLA, the gene that encodes α-galactosidase A (α-Gal Background: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a birth defect A). The pharmacological chaperone AT1001 (GR181413A, migalastat associated with high mortality and morbidity during neonatal period. hydrochloride, 1-deoxygalactonojirimycin) is currently in Phase 3 It has become increasingly apparent that genetic factors like retinoid- clinical development as a potential therapy for Fabry disease. AT1001 related genes may be involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. The selectively binds and stabilizes α-Gal A, increasing total cellular need to increase the survival has pushed the limits of therapy to fetal levels and activity for some mutant forms (defined as “responsive”). surgery and endoscopic interventions. In severe cases, it is preferred Responsive mutant forms can be determined readily in male Fabry nowadays to perform a temporary fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion patients; however, this is more challenging in female patients due to in order to stimulate lung development. Case report: We present a the expression of wild-type and mutant forms of α-Gal A. We assessed case of a male preterm child with right CDH. The CDH was diagnosed whether pharmacogenetic information could aid in the identification of at 19 weeks of gestation and at 28 weeks a fetal endoscopic tracheal Fabry patients with responsive mutant forms of α-Gal A. Fabry disease- occlusion was performed. He was born by C-section at 32 weeks, associated mutant forms (473 in total) were individually expressed in birth weight of 3000 g. Even from birth the child suffered from severe HEK-293 cells; ~60% responded to AT1001 incubation. GLA mutations hypoxia and pulmonary hypertension necessitating tracheal intubation from the subset of mutant forms that responded to a clinically-relevant and mechanical ventilation. During the first 24 hours of life the SaO2 concentration of AT1001 (10 µM) were categorized as ‘eligible’; others remains under 80% despite the aggressive resuscitation, inotropic were considered ‘ineligible’. Phase 2 clinical trial results were then support, 100% O2, surfactant and Ilomedin administration. The patient retrospectively analyzed by grouping subjects, based on genotype, into died 36 hours after delivery because of severe pulmonary hypoplasia these two categories. Oral administration of AT1001 increased α-Gal A and pulmonary hypertension. Conclusion: Despite the modern and more frequently in males with ‘eligible’ (13/14) versus ‘ineligible’ (0/3) sometimes heroically treatment methods for CDH the final negative mutations. Importantly, AT1001 treatment decreased kidney interstitial outcome is sometimes inevitable. Accurate medical lung development capillary globotriaosylceramide by ≥50% more frequently in male and assessment is mandatory, before any attempt of surgical therapy. female subjects with ‘eligible’ (7/10) versus ‘ineligible’ (2/7) mutations. Sometimes pregnancy interruption should be considered as the best Thus, the α-Gal A response measured in vitro for each mutant form way to avoid sufferance. may identify Fabry patients who can respond to AT1001 and are more likely to benefit from AT1001 therapy. P14.02 combined strategies using airway clearence games and P14.04 physical exercise in young pacients with cystic fibrosis In vivo quantification of cerebral GABA receptors in fragile X A B. Almajan Guta1, C. Avram2, A. Rusu3, O. Cluci3, V. Almajan-Guta1, M. patients using [11C] flumazenil Positron Emission Tomography Oravitan2, L. Pop4; I. Heulens1, C. D’Hulst1, N. Van der Aa1,2, H. Van Esch3, M. Koole4, K. Porke5, 1University “Politehnica” Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2West University M. Van De Velde6, W. Van Paesschen7, F. Kooy1, K. Van Laere4; Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 3Speranta Special Care Center Timisoara, 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, Timisoara, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, 2Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Centre for Human Genetics, Timisoara, Romania. University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Nuclear Physiotherapy in cystic fibrosis techniques are often frustrating and Medicine, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of exhausting for the child. Neuropsychology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 6Department This study is aiming to demonstrate the need of respiratory clearance of Anaesthesiology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 7Department games and the importance of adapting these techniques to the CF of Neurology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. children in order to increase compliance to therapy and quality of life. Fragile X syndrome is the most common form of inherited mental Methods retardation. In the brain of fragile X animal models, we found a We conducted a 12 months prospective study on 20 patients with CF decreased mRNA expression of several subunits of the GABA A aged between 4 and 12 years, from Romanian National Cystic Fibrosis receptor. GABA receptors are the major inhibitory neurotransmitter A Centre. They followed the protocol consisting in airway clearance receptors in the mammalian brain. This ionotropic receptor plays a role games (flow-ball, TrainAir) and aerobic activities five times a week for in learning and memory, hyperactivity, insomnia, epilepsy, anxiety and 40 minutes. Children have been tested at inclusion and at the end of depression; processes that are disturbed in fragile X patients. This the study using the Questionnaire of life quality in CF. For data analysis indicates that a dysfunction of the GABA receptor is involved in the A we used Spearman’s rho. behavioural problems observed in the fragile X syndrome. The GABA ATherapy for genetic disorders 476 receptor is therefore a target for rational treatment of the syndrome. P14.07 In a set of experiments we already demonstrated that GABAergic One year-treatment with a combination of pravastatin and drugs are able to correct some of the symptoms in fragile X mice. zoledronate on six patients affected with Hutchinson-Gilford However, before therapy on patients can be initiated, it is required to Progeria: safety and efficacy. validate GABAergic abnormalities in human. As post-mortem studies A. De Sandre-Giovannoli1,2, S. Sigaudy1, P. Bourgeois1, P. Roll1,2, E. Jouve3, are not feasible, we set up a study to image and quantify the GABA G. Gorincour4, J. Gentet5, N. André5, J. Micallef3, P. Cau1,2, N. Lévy1,2; A receptor distribution in vivo. Using positron emission tomography 1Département de Génétique Médicale et Biologie Cellulaire, Hôpital d’Enfants (PET) with [11C]Flumazenil, a known GABA receptor antagonist, as a La Timone, Marseille, France, 2Inserm UMR_S 910, « Génétique médicale et A radioligand we determined the amount of GABA receptors in the brain. génomique fonctionnelle », Faculty of Medecine, Marseille, France, 3Centre A We found an overall significant decrease (6-17%) in GABA receptor d’investigation clinique - Unité de Pharmacologie Clinique et d’Evaluations A availability in fragile X patients. The decrease was most prominent in Thérapeutiques (CIC-UPCET), Hôpital La Timone, Marseille, France, 4Service specific brain regions, including cortical regions. This confirms that the de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital d’Enfants La Timone, Marseille, France, GABAergic system is involved in the pathophysiology of the fragile 5Service d’Oncologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital d’Enfants La Timone, Marseille, X syndrome and suggests that GABAergic drugs might ameliorate France. several symptoms of fragile X patients, improving their quality of life. Hutchinson-Gilford Progeria Syndrome (HGPS) is a rare and severe genetic disease, characterized by segmental premature aging and P14.05 accelerated atherosclerosis. It invariably leads to death in the teenage, creb1 is required for hydroxyurea-mediated induction of due in most cases to myocardial infarction. No validated treatment is gamma-globin expression in K562 cells available to date. A recurrent, de novo, dominant mutation of the LMNA M. Banan, E. Esmailzadeh, Z. Deilami, S. Farashi; gene, encoding Lamins A/C, causes most HGPS cases, through the Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. activation of a cryptic pre-mRNA splice site leading to the production Hydroxyurea (HU) can augment gamma-globin expression in K562 of a truncated Lamin A precursor called “progerin”. Progerin cannot cells. However, the transcription factors that are required for this be fully post-translationally processed, remains aberrantly prenylated upregulation have not been identified. Similarities between the HU and and accumulates in cells’ nuclei, where it exerts several toxic effects. sodium butyrate (SB) pathways suggest Creb1 as a potential candidate. Preclinical studies in vitro on patients’ cells and on animal models Reports indicate that in K562 cells, both HU and SB (1) activate p38 provided proof-of-principle that the combined use of pravastatin, a MAPK and (2) selectively induce Ggamma gene expression. In the statin, and zoledronate, an aminobisphosphonate, could improve case of SB, this induction seems to be mediated through a Creb1 several disease parameters, including growth, bone density and binding site present in the promoter region of the Ggamma (and not survival. These data allowed us to launch a phase II, open-label, single Agamma) gene. In this study, we have investigated the possible role of arm clinical trial, conducted in Marseille, France, on 12 European Creb1 in the HU pathway. We show that transient or stable knockdown children affected with Progeria. The trial aims to assess the safety and of Creb1 blocks HU-mediated gamma-globin induction in K562 cells. efficacy of a combination of pravastatin and zoledronate on several However quantitative ARMS-PCR (Amplification Refractory Mutation pathological parameters, including growth, bone density and turnover System) experiments suggest that HU does not solely induce as well as cardiovascular risk. Data obtained in six children treated for Ggamma expression in this cell line. Electrophoretic mobility shift one year showed that the association of pravastatin and zoledronate assays (EMSAs) indicate that HU treatment leads to increased levels is safe and can induce clinical beneficial effects in the mid-term. We of Creb1 complexes binding to the Ggamma promoter. Collectively, thus report the first therapeutic intervention that seems to favorably these results suggest that Creb1 is necessary for gamma-globin impact the natural course of this devastating disease, with potential induction by HU, a role which may in part be mediated through the wider impacts in the field of aging. Ggamma promoter Creb1 binding site. P14.08 P14.06 Association of Estrogen receptor α -351 XbaI A>G and -397 PvuII Hemangioma of infancy: treatment options t>c Polymorphisms with uterine leiomyoma in women from M. C. Stanciulescu1, E. S. Boia2, M. C. Popoiu2, V. L. David1, A. Goanta1, C. chaharmahal va Bakhtiari province; iran Bota1; f. taghizade mortezai, S. Miraj, E. Farrokhi, M. Hashemzade Chaleshtori, S. 1Emergency Children’s Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine Khyri; and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord Univ. of Med. Sci. Background: Hemangiomas of infancy (HOI) are the most common Shahrekord Iran, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. tumors in children. Even that HOI are not primarily genetic diseases, Background and Aims: uterine leiomyoma, or fibroid, is common there are several genes and loci implicated in the pathogenesis of estrogen-related gynaecological disease, and it is estimated vascular malformations and hemangiomas whit major influence over that one in four women during reproductive period will develop the clinical characteristics and evolution of hemangiomas: RASA1, this kind of benign neoplasia. We aimed to elucidate the association of KRIT, TIE2/TEK, ENG, SMAD4/MADH4. Material and method: This estrogen receptor a (ERα)-351 A>G (XbaI) and -397 T>C (PvuII) gene study is an analysis of all the cases with the diagnostic of HOI admitted polymorphisms with leiomyoma in a group of women from province in in our hospital from January 2008 to December 2010 Results: There southwest of iran. were a total number of 134 patients with age ranging from 2 months to methods: 156 women with clinically diagnosed uterine leiomyoma and 8 years. In 54.3 % of the cases were localized on the neck and head, 151 healthy,normal women were included in the study. Genomic DNA 22.7% on the torso, 13.86% on the limbs, 3, 24% on the genitals, and was obtained from peripheral leukocytes. ERα-351 A/G XbaI and -397 multiple in 5.9%. Surgical excision was the most common procedure T/C PvuII polymorphisms were assayed by the method of PCR-RFLP. followed by Aethoxysclerol injection. In 8 cases we used a new therapy: Results: Genotypes and allelic frequencies in each group were propranolol. The outcomes of treatment were good in the majority of compared. The genotype/allele frequencies of Era -351 A>G and the cases with no major complications, except one case of keloid -397 T/C polymorphisms in leiomyoma groups were not different from formation after the excision of a very large hemangioma. Conclusions: those of normal controls. The treatment of hemangioma varies according to affected area. In conclusion: We concluded that ERα -351 XbaI A>G and -397 PvuII most of the cases surgical excision is sufficient. For large hemangioma T>C related genotypes/alleles were not correlated with an increased and those located in esthetic areas the most promising treatment is risk of uterine leiomyoma in study population. now propranolol. Aethoxisclerol is used only when propranolol therapy has no results and the surgical excizion is prohibited. Feature research should be focused to correlate the treatment with the genetic factors influencing the clinical course of HOI.Therapy for genetic disorders 477 P14.09 core-rod myopathy, for which no therapy is available. The size of NEB towards lentiviral gene therapy for the treatment of Pompe limits the options of gene therapy development. Thus, our research disease has focused on methods correcting the mutation carrying transcripts. M. Stok, H. de Boer, T. P. Visser, A. J. J. Reuser, E. D. van Deel, D. J. Duncker, Recent advances in RNA reprogramming technologies have raised N. P. van Til, G. Wagemaker; the possibility to develop RNA therapies for correction of mutations Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. in NEB at the pre-mRNA level. Spliceosome-mediated RNA trans- The lysosomal storage disorder Pompe disease is due to a deficiency splicing (exon exchange), i.e. splicing between two separate pre- of the acid alpha-glucosidase (GAA) gene, and characterized by mRNA molecules, allows the replacement of mutant exons with wild progressive muscle weakness, in its most severe form lethal in the first type ones at the pre-mRNA level. Targeted exon exchange requires year of life due to cardiac and respiratory failure. Enzyme replacement the spliceosome and a target pre-mRNA, both provided by the cell, therapy is effective, but not beneficial to all patients and often results and a pre-trans-splicing RNA-molecule (PTM) which is produced from in antibody formation. We have used a hematopoietic stem cell ex vivo an expression vector transfected into the cells. PTMs can be designed lentiviral gene therapy approach in the Pompe mouse model using the to carry out three forms of exon exchange: 3’-, 5’- or internal exon native or a codon-optimized GAA transgene driven by the spleen focus replacement. We have developed PTMs for NEB 3’- and internal forming virus promoter. exon replacement. PTMs designed carry one or several wild type Using this strategy, sustained levels of GAA were achieved in leukocytes NEB exons to replace exons from target pre-mRNAs produced from and other affected tissues of Pompe mice. Using the native sequence, NEB minigene expression vectors in cell cultures. We have obtained glycogen storage was reduced significantly in heart and diaphragm, successful results from our 3’exon exchange and first internal exon with near normalization of heart morphology and function, but only to a exchange experiments. We are now focusing on further development limited extent in skeletal muscle. Challenge of the treated animals with of the internal exon replacement method, which would be the most the rhGAA protein demonstrated robust specific immune tolerance. useful one for correction of mutations in NEB transcripts. The use of the codon-optimized GAA gene (GAAco) resulted in even higher levels of GAA activity in all affected tissues, including skeletal P14.12 muscle and an almost complete reduction of glycogen storage. Using stem cell therapy of a genetic model of neurodegeneration with the GAAco construct, skeletal muscle function was maintained and cerebellar ataxia: the Harlequin mouse initial results also indicate reduced glycogen levels in brain tissue. M. Kumar1, Z. Csaba1, S. Peineau1, S. Mani2, P. Gressens1, V. El Ghouzzi1; Thus, ex vivo hematopoietic stem cell lentiviral vector mediated gene 1inserm u676, Paris, France, 2Center for Neuroscience IISc, Bangalore, India. therapy results in correction of the Pompe phenotype in the mouse The treatment of neurodegenerative disorders represents one of model and would be suitable for further clinical exploration. the critical goals of medical research today. Although progressive neurodegenerative diseases are commonly associated with ageing, P14.10 they also affect children and young adults. Cerebellar ataxias are rare increased t allele frequency in multidrug transporter ABcB1 neurodegenerative disorders, which can be thought of as a syndrome, (mDR1) gene in FmF patients of colchicine unresponsiveness which has many different causes, genetic or environmental. These S. Atik1, F. Ozen2, C. Silan3, A. Uludag1, F. Candan4, F. Silan1, S. Ozdemir5, O. diseases are progressive and very serious illnesses with no treatment Ozdemir1; available so far. A common feature in the early stages of these 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart diseases lies in mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress induced University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of by a deregulation of oxidative phosphorylation. Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Pharmacology, The Harlequin (Hq) mouse, where a spontaneous mutation in the AIF Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, gene results in a drastic reduction of its expression, gradually develops 4Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, a cerebellar ataxia associated with mitochondrial degeneration and a Sivas, Turkey, 5Department of Nuclear Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, complex I deficiency. Although all cerebellar neurons finally die after 6 Cumhuriyet University, Canakkale, Turkey. months, granule neurons are affected first with a gradual death starting The multidrug resistance gene-1 (MDR1, ATP-binding cassette around 2 months. transporter: ABCB1, P-glycoprotein: P-gp) encodes membrane We have designed an in vitro protocol combining media and selective proteins that playing a crucial role in protecting cells from xenobiotics, factors to push hES toward the neuronal lineage and make them chemicals and drugs. The TT genotype of 3435 codon in exon 26 differentiate into functional neurons expressing granular markers of of MDR1 gene causes to over-expression gene activity and efflux the cerebellum. We have also produced granule neuron progenitors many chemically diverse compounds across the plasma membrane. to attempt cell replacement in ataxic Hq mice. We show that We studied the association between C3435T polymorphisms (SNP) progenitors implanted in the cerebellum can differentiate into mature of MDR1 gene and colchicine-resistant FMF patients. Total genomic human neurons and integrate into the adult mouse cerebellum. Motor DNA samples from 52 FMF patients of colchicine unresponsiveness coordination was improved in cell-treated animals up to three months were used for Familial Mediterranean Fever (MEFV) and MDR1 after implantation. Our results bring a proof-of-principle that human genes profile analyses. Target genes were genotyped by multiplex embryonic stem cell-based therapies might be relevant for treating PCR based reverse hybridization stripAssay method. The preliminary neurodegenerative disorders. current results showed that increased T allele frequency (60%) in FMF patients of colchicine unresponsiveness. The distributions of the CC, P14.13 CT and TT genotypes in colchicine nonresponder FMF patients were Oxidative stress and sperm DNA quality in couples experiencing 17%, 46%, and 37%, respectively. Our results indicate that C3435T recurrent spontaneous abortions polymorphism in exon 26 of MDR1 gene is associated with colchicine M. B. Shamsi, K. Yadav, K. Kumar, D. Deka, R. Dada; resistance in nonresponder FMF patients during the common therapy AIIMS, New Delhi, India. protocol. introduction: Sperm has dynamic and critical role in embryogenesis that extends clearly beyond fertilization. Supraphysiological Reactive P14.11 Oxygen Species (ROS) levels damage both mitochondrial and nuclear Development of the exon exchange method for repair of mutant genome. During embryonic development, nucleotide alterations if nebulin transcripts unrepaired are lethal to accurate transmission of genetic information J. Laitila, K. Pelin; and affect the embryonic viability and post natal health. Nicks/breaks Department of Biosciences, Division of Genetics, University of Helsinki, and/or nucleotide modification caused by unregulated free radical Finland, Helsinki, Finland. concentration due to inefficient antioxidant machinery leads to sperm The nebulin gene (NEB) has 183 exons encoding transcripts up to DNA damage. This study was planned to understand the association of 26 kb in length. Mutations found in NEB are dispersed throughout seminal ROS, antioxidant capacity and sperm DNA damage in men of the gene, i.e. no mutational hot spots are evident. Mutations cause couples experiencing recurrent pregnancy loss following spontaneous autosomal recessive nemaline myopathy, distal nebulin myopathy and conception.Therapy for genetic disorders 478 material and methods: Male partners of 77 couples experiencing protein modulation, named ‘cysteine quantity correction’, as a treatment recurrent pregnancy loss and 41 fertile controls were included in study. strategy for CADASIL. In this approach we use antisense mediated Seminal ROS were measured by luminol induced chemiluminescence. exon-skipping to intervene in protein synthesis at the pre-mRNA level. Seminal total antioxidant capacity (TAC) was assessed by commercially By inducing the skipping of specific exons, we re-establish an even available kit. Sperm DNA integrity was quantified by single cell gel number of cysteine residues in the NOTCH3 protein’s ectodomain. Our electrophoresis (comet assay). Semen analysis was done according to hypothesis is that by this modulation the protein maintains function, but WHO 2010 guidelines. Mann-Whittney test was applied for statistical loses toxicity. With this approach, we can target ca. 70% of CADASIL significance. related mutations using the same set of antisense oligonucleotides. Results: Significantly increased ROS and reduced seminal TAC was Technically, we are able to induce the desired exon-skipping in our observed in patients (p=0.002; p=0.014 respectively) as compared to CADASIL cell models as shown by RT-PCR and sequencing analysis. controls. In patient group the number of sperms with DNA damage was Currently, we are evaluating whether the induced cysteine quantity higher (p=0.024). correction reduces CADASIL associated NOTCH3 accumulation in Discussion: Seminal oxidative stress is a major cause of sperm DNA vitro, using Western blot and immunocytofluorescence. damage. DNA damage leads to recurrent spontaneous abortions, Our hypothesis and preliminary, but promising, in vitro results will be childhood cancers, genetic and epigenetic defects in offspring. presented. Oxidative stress and sperm DNA damage assessment have better diagnostic and prognostic capabilities and should be included in P14.16 diagnostic workup of patients experiencing recurrent pregnancy loss. Production of K562 cells stably expressing mBD2 shRNAs S. Farashi, M. Banan; P14.14 Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. strategies for rehabilitation in a case with Russel-silver MBD2 (Methyl Binding Domain 2) has been shown to repress the syndrome human γ-globin gene in mouse models. We have previously shown that M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2; transient MBD2 knockdown (35%) using siRNAs results in induction of 1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, γ-globin expression (1.75 fold) in K562 cell line. In order to achieve 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Timisora, higher levels of knockdown and possibly g-globin induction, a lentivirus Romania. system was used for shRNA delivery. First, functionality of the system Russel-Silver syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, was verified by using a lentiviral transfer vector containing a GFP characterized by prenatal and postnatal growth retardation, expression-cassette. Next, five lentivirus transfer vectors containing characteristic facial appearance, slow regressive evolution, risk of MBD2 shRNAs were screened for target gene knockdown by qRT- delayed development and learning disabilities. We present the case of PCR in HEK 293T transient transfection assays. The two most effective a 1.7 years old girl, born from healthy, unrelated parents, hospitalized shRNAs gave >70% mRNA knockdown levels after normalization for for treatment and functional rehabilitation. The birth was premature, transfection efficiency. These vectors were subsequently packaged and by caesarean section at 36 weeks, after a pregnancy with early and used to transduce K562 cells. Upon infection and antibiotic selection, late dysgravidy, birth weight 1900g. Clinical and functional evaluation a cell population stably expressing MBD2 shRNAs was obtained. The at admission revealed hypotrophy, moderate motor retardation, amount of MBD2 knockdown and γ-globin expression was assessed characteristic facies, delayed developmental milestones, axial in these cells by relative qRT-PCR. In one cell line (shRNA-3), MBD2 hypotonia, dorso-lumbar kyphosis accentuated in sitting position, was knocked down by 73% and g-globin was induced 5-fold. In the symmetric muscle hypotrophy, balance disturbance, standing and other (shRNA-5), MBD2 was down-regulated by 51% and g-globin sitting only with help, walking only sustained with a broad base of increased by 11.75-fold. These results support those of the transient support, stability problems, mental development within ranges of RNAi experiments. Moreover, these cell lines can now be used for chronological age. Rehabilitation treatment was complex and involved delineating the mechanism of MBD2 repression. coordination of several team members. The main goals of the treatment were increasing the muscle tonus of the limbs, obtaining independent P14.17 standing, establishment of stability for ambulation, walking, motor skills Enzyme replaced therapy in mPs ii patients in Novosibirsk. acquisition, posture amelioration, increasing tonus of paravertebral, N. Fedoruk, A. Shorina; abdominal muscles, body alignment. Intensive rehabilitation program Pediatric department, Urgent Children’s Municipal Hospital №3, Novosibirsk, consisted of hydrotherapy and aquatic therapy in thermal water, Russian Federation. electrotherapy, general tonifiant daily massage, physical, occupational intention: To demonstrate clinical changes and objective and subjective and speech therapy. She showed significant improvement, after three improvement in health status in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis II weeks of intensive treatment walked a few steps independently, but (MPS II) after enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). falled frequently, improved appetite, gained weight, improved muscle materials and methods: Four patients with MPS type II (16, 13, 6, and tone, climbed stairs independently, with support. Treatment normally 5 years old) who had been treated with Elaprase intravenous infusion involves massive amounts of stimulation in order to improve muscle weekly over a 54-week period. The urinary GAG level decreased to the function and control. Assessment of these cases is best accomplished initial value. A multidisciplinary physicians checkup including 6-MWT, by a multidisciplinary team. ECG, computed tomographic scanning, US of the abdominal cavity, echocardiography, respiratory function test, clinical blood and blood P14.15*** serum biochemistry was performed before and after the therapy. cysteine quantity correction in cADAsiL using antisense Results: Two children aged 5-6 years showed a general improvement mediated exon-skipping. of movement abnormalities and lung function in contrast with adult S. A. J. Lesnik Oberstein, J. G. Dauwerse, D. J. Peters, M. H. Breuning, G. J. patients. A progressive arthropathy temporarily remitted in the 16 van Ommen, A. Aartsma-Rus; year old patient; there was no effect in the 13 year old. Mitral and Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. aortic regurgitation and/or stenosis commonly decreased after ERT. Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts US of the abdominal cavity did not show significant decreased and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) is the most prevalent type hepatosplenomegaly in the patient aged 13. of hereditary vascular dementia and is recognized as an important Idursulfase is generally well tolerated, although infusion reactions did cause of stroke and dementia in the young. CADASIL is caused by occur. characteristic missense mutations of the NOTCH3 gene which lead to conclusion: The response to ERT appears to depend on the severity an uneven number of cysteine residues in the protein’s ectodomain. of the This causes misfolding of the protein which leads to aggregation of individual’s condition and the age at which the treatment begins. NOTCH3 at the surface of vascular smooth muscle cells, a key factor Infusion reactions were observed in the older patients despite allergic in CADASIL pathophysiology problems which all children had before Elaprase treatment. Our We are currently testing a novel application for antisense-mediated experience demonstrates the first sign of ERT efficacy in most young Therapy for genetic disorders 479 patients and increases their ability to take part in normal daily activities. P14.20 inhibition of superoxide dismutase expression with progestins P14.18 as a mechanism for the treatment of familial amyotrophic lateral Expression of pdx1 promote derivation of beta cells from sclerosis. mesenchymal stem cells D. E. Benjamin; S. Talebi1, A. Aleyasin2, M. Soleimani3; Cenoxsys Corporation, Princeton, NJ, United States. 1National institute of genetic engineering ang biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (fALS) is a severe motoneuron Republic of Iran, 2Natinal institute of genetic engineering and biotechnology, disease, and mutations in superoxide dismutase (SOD1) are Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3tarbiat modares university, Tehran, Islamic responsible for at least 20% of cases. fALS is inherited in an autosomal Republic of Iran. dominant manner and disease severity is mutant gene dose-dependent. The Pancreatic cells transplantation is a promising approach for Knockout of the SOD1 gene does not result in motoneuron disease treatment of type1 diabetes that caused by insulin deficiency; in the mouse. Thus reduction of mutant SOD1 expression has been however, lack of suitable donors limits the application. Differentiated proposed as a mechanism for treatment of fALS. We aimed to identify mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can be therapeutic source for the compounds that selectively decrease cellular levels of SOD1. A library cure of type 1 diabetes. The aim of current experiment is to explore of known drug-like molecules was screened for the ability to decrease the possibility of derivation of insulin producing cells from bone SOD1 levels in several cell lines including Hek-293 cells and HeLa marrow MSCs by overexpression of pdx1 transcription factor. In this cells. Cells were seeded into 96-well plates and test compounds were study rat MSCs were isolated and identified by flow cytometry. Then, added 24 hours later. Several progestins (IC50: 100-300 nM) dose- MSCs were transduced by lentiviruses harboring pdx1 and pdx1- dependently decreased SOD1 levels following 96 hours of incubation. expressing cells selected by puromycin. The appropriate expression Total cell number, cell morphology, and total protein level was not of exogenous pdx1 was confirmed in level of mRNA and protein using affected in the transformed cell lines. However, in HeLa cells, all RT-PCR and immunofluorescent analyses. In addition to ectopic progestins exhibited significant cytotoxicity, as expected based on the expression of pdx1, differentiating medium containing nicotinamid and reported toxic effect of siRNA to SOD1 in specifically cancer-derived betamercaptoethanol ( Nico/betaME) used to efficient differentiation cells. Norethindrone, a progesterone analog, selectively decreased of MSCs into beta cells. Then, the expression of islet markers was SOD1 cellular levels by 80% (IC50: 92 nM). The progesterone investigated by quantitative RT-PCR. The immunoflurescent showed receptor antagonist mifepristone dose-dependently inhibited this a nuclear localization of pdx1. Pdx1-expressing MSCs transcribed effect, supporting a receptor mediated action. In the G93A mouse specific pancreatic endocrine markers such as endogenous Pdx1, model of fALS, 7 days intraperitoneal administration of norethindrone Ngn3, Glucagon and insulin regardless to using Nico/betaME, but the (100 µg/Kg) decreased spinal cord levels of mutant human SOD1 in quantitative RT-PCR showed a high increase in all markers except preliminary studies. Collectively, these results suggest that further insulin, in Nico/betaME treated cells compared to non-treated cells. investigation of progestins in the treatment of fALS is warranted. The beta cells derived from MSCs also expressed glucokinase and Glut2 indicating these cells have the glucose sensing ability. P14.21 In contrast, treated MSCs didn’t express P48; it implies these cells Differential response to VPA in smA therapy: Did we catch the have been committed to endocrine linage. In conclusion, MSCs as an bad guy? available resource can have impacted in cell based gene therapy of L. Garbes1, J. Schreml1, L. Heesen1, I. Hoelker1, T. Bauer2, C. Mueller2, J. type1 diabetes. Dimos3, R. Heller1, B. Wirth1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular P14.19 Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute Ptc124 incubation towards ribosomal readthrough of nonsense of Pharmacology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3iPierian mediated termination codons in the sLc6A8 and GAmt genes. Incorporated, South San Francisco, CA, United States. O. T. Betsalel, T. Veltkamp, W. Kanhai, C. Jakobs, G. Salomons; Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the number one genetic VU University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Metabolic killer during early infancy. It is caused by functional loss of SMN1, Unit, Amsterdam, Netherlands. resulting in progressive degeneration of spinal α-motor neurons. SMA A recently discovered chemical entity, PTC124 (Ataluren) was shown severity is mainly determined by SMN2 copy number. Consequently, to selectively induce ribosomal readthrough of premature but not a number of therapeutic approaches has been developed directly normal termination codons. In vitro experiments and subsequent targeting SMN2. We have shown that valproic acid (VPA), a short- treatment of mdx mice showed a promising improvement in the form chain fatty acid histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi), significantly of functional recovery (Welch et al. 2007). This led us to investigate increases SMN levels in vitro, ex vivo and in VPA-treated SMA patients. the effect of PTC124 on nonsense mediated premature termination in However, in a first pilot clinical trial with VPA only 1/3 of the patients two of the three cerebral creatine deficiency syndrome genes, namely exhibited markedly increased SMN levels, whereas the remaining the creatine transporter gene (SLC6A8) and the guanidinoacetate were non-responders. To identify the crucial factors accounting for this methyl-transferase gene (GAMT). We obtained PTC124 from Selleck observation, we established fibroblast lines from >30 SMA-patients Chemicals (Houston, Texas, USA) and incubated patient’s cell-lines undergoing VPA-therapy. Response to VPA was concordant between containing nonsense mutations with 17µM of PTC124 for 46 days blood and fibroblasts in about 65% of cases. By microarray analysis (SLC6A8, n=2) and 14 days (GAMT, n=3) and collected cells every we identified four significantly differentially expressed transcripts 7 days. We measured intra-cellular creatine content and formation between both patient-groups. Strikingly, non-responders lacked any of 2H3-13C2-creatine using a two-step derivatization procedure, differences in expression between mock- and VPA-treated cells, followed by quantification with GC-MS. With all cell-lines we found no suggesting a failure of HDAC inhibition. Indeed, the most differentially increase of function, indicated by low intra-cellular creatine content expressed gene is involved in fatty acid transport suggesting an altered (SLC6A8) (Rosenberg et al. 2007) and no formed 2H3-13C2-creatine VPA import/export. By employing different analytical and biochemical (GAMT) (Verhoeven et al. 2004) as compared to the wild-type cell- methods, we could identify striking differences in fatty acid uptake and lines. This led us to conclude that PTC124 (Selleck Chemicals) cannot metabolism, which most likely account for the observed differential induce ribosomal readthrough of the five tested nonsense mediated response to VPA. termination codons in the SLC6A8 and GAMT gene. However, since Our data sheds first light on the molecular mechanisms influencing we were unable to validate the obtained compound, these results VPA response and may not only have a major impact on the therapy could also have been caused by the initial inability of our PTC124 to of SMA but also on other diseases treated with VPA, like epilepsy or function correctly. migraine.Laboratory and quality management 480 P14.22 in conjunction with technical devices, such as microprocessor- Genotoxicity biomarkers in thalassaemic patients controlled cochlear-interface implants can start a new avenue for E. Ferro1, G. Visalli2, B. Baluce2, R. Civa3, G. Randazzo Papa4, M. A. La Rosa3, the development of strategies to restore hearing therefore they are D. G. D’Ascola5, B. Piraino3, L. Rigoli3, C. Salpietro3, A. Di Pietro2; offering a glimmer of hope for these afflictions. 1Department of Pediatrics, Department of Neuroscience, Hospital University, Messina, Italy, 2Department of Hygiene, Hospital University, Messina, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, Hospital University, Messina, Italy, 4A.S.P. N.5, Messina, Italy, 5Department of Thalassemia, Riuniti Hospital, Reggio Calabria, P15 Laboratory and quality management Italy. introduction: Iron plays a role in carcinogenesis through the generation of oxygen free radicals. In thalassemic patients that do not receive transfusions, abnormal iron absorption produces an increase P15.01 in the body iron. Regular blood transfusions lead to a greater iron Bacterial DNA interference with aged bone DNA amplification accumulation, therefore it is essential an iron chelation therapy. A. Ghasemi1,2, M. Tavallaei3, Z. Zafari1,4, N. Mahdieh1, A. Shirkavand1,5, H. Purpose: To evaluate the efficiency of iron chelating therapy to Bahmani3, A. Mohammadi3, M. S. Fallah1, S. Zeinali1,6; prevent genotoxicity in polytransfused thalassemic patients, we 1Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), Tehran, Islamic Republic analysed lymphocytic DNA damage by Micronucleus test (MNT) and of Iran, 2Azad University of Jahrom, Jahrom, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Human Comet assay. Genetic Research Center, Baqyatallah University, Tehran, Islamic Republic methods: The study includes 77 transfusions-dependent β of Iran, 4Khatam university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Biology Group, thalassemic patients and a control group of 20 no transfused subjects Faculty of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran, with thalassemia intermedia. The patients were divided in four 6Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotech Research Center, Pasteur Institute therapy groups: 25 were treated with Deferasirox (ICL670), 23 with of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Deferoxamine (DFO), 10 with Deferiprone (L1) and 19 with combined Introduction: Molecular human identification of remnants of human therapy (DFO+L1). body is of increasing usage in natural disasters, wars and forensic Results: The results are summarized in Table 1. Micronuclei laboratories. Bone and teeth are major source for genomic DNA due distribution is different in four groups (Kruskal-Wallis test, p=0.014). to their higher stability. DNA degradation and also contamination No significant differences were observed using the Comet assay for with PCR inhibitors could interfere with DNA amplification and the high intra-group variability. contamination with bacterial DNA might be a reason especially when All groups showed a significant difference compared with the control we work with aged DNA (aDNA). Here we report effect of bacterial group (Mann-Whitney U test, p<0.05) for MNT, except for the patients DNA contamination in DNA extracted from Iranian human remains with ICL670 therapy. from the war with amplification using real-time PCR. Discussion: In the examined sample, ICL670 is the most effective, Material and methods: DNA was extracted from aged bone (remained followed by the DFO and combined therapy. from 20-30 years before) and also E.coli. PCR based techniques were The Deferiprone would seem the least effective but needs a more used to amplify both human and bacterial DNAs separately using numerous patients group. different set of primers. aDNA was mixed with bacterial DNA and Table 1: The results for Micronucleus test and Comet assay amplification was performed using both set of primers. Result: Amplification of artificially contaminated aged bone DNA with NO icL670 DFO L1 DFO+L1 E. coli DNA didn’t showed any negative interference or inhibition by therapy bacterial DNA. Even in some samples, amplification was performed 18.4 ± mN 13.3 ± 6.4 14.5 ± 7.8 17 ± 6.2 24.1 ± 9.4 just in the cases of mixture aDNA with bacterial DNA. We tested this 15.2 with real-time PCR and conventional PCR results were confirmed by tail DNA 11.4 ± 8.5 14 ± 12.7 11.9 ± 7.9 14.4 ± 12.3 14.2 ± amplification of mixed DNA in 2-3 cycles before the aDNA. % 13.2 Conclusion: It seems bacterial DNA does not inhibit amplification of human aDNA. Even in some instance it might act as a biological indicator for the presence or absence of PCR inhibitor. J14.01 stem cell a new way in treatment hearing loss impairment. P15.02 M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, S. Kamrava1, M. Falah1, M. Farhadi1; Validation of two commercially available kits for clinical Rapid 1Department and Research Centre of ENT & Head and, Tehran, Islamic Aneuploidy Detection Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, S. L. Hume, B. Elyas, L. Podemski, S. Haase, K. Baptista-Wyatt, M. Hicks, M. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. J. Somerville, P. Scott; Deafness is a condition that has an enormous personal, social and University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. economical impact. Rapid aneuploidy detection (RAD), allows the rapid and efficient The options available to treat are very limited, and represented by detection of the common aneuploidies in at-risk pregnancies. RAD, prosthetic devices such as hearing aids and cochlear implants. There although widely used in Europe, is only beginning to emerge as a is a clear need for a therapeutic breakthrough that will help the millions front-line prenatal test in North America. Our experience with 161 of people affected, so studies in stem cell technologies have been samples demonstrated that AneufastTM v1 (Molgentix SL) required initiated in order to repair, regenerate or replace lost hair cells a high rate of reflex testing (10.2% of the chromosome pairs tested The auditory organs appear to contain cell with stem cell properties were non-informative or out-of-range representing 29% of all patient that can differentiate to hair cells and neurons. samples). In an effort to decrease cost and sample reporting time, Embryonic stem cells are one potential source. Neural progenitors we chose to validate Aneufast® v2, released in January 2011 and made from embryonic stem cells, transplanted into the inner ear, Elucigene’s Q*STRplusV2 (Gen-Probe). A series of 48 samples were they differentiated in to cells that expressed neuronal markers. The chosen: 24 with confirmed aneuploidies (karyotype and AneufastTM re growth of these neurons suggests that it may be possible to replace v1), 2 normal controls, and 24 normal samples that required audiotory neurons that have degenerated with neurons that restore reflex with AneufastTM v1. All samples were analyzed according to auditory function. manufacturer’s recommendations with 2 informative markers required Stem cell therapy to treat deafness is still some years in to the future for classification. Our results demonstrated that the amount of reflex because of; first, different cell types are potentially to be used, all of testing in the validation dataset is dramatically reduced: 5.7% of them having advantages and disadvantages. Second, in order to target chromosome pairs (20.8% of patient samples) for Aneufast® v.2 while such a small and secluded organ as the cochlea, difficult surgical Q*STRplusV2 required reflexing in 3.1% of chromosome pairs (12.5% techniques are to be used, some of which still need to be developed. of patient samples). The sensitivity and specificity of all three tests But we sure combination of stem cell, gene therapy and drug treatment was identical (sensitivity = 95.5%, specificity = 100%). Importantly, Laboratory and quality management 481 the Q*STRplusV2 kit, using the TAF9L microsatellite, determined the once scored 1.47/2.00 in 2004 (n=58), 1.67/2.00 in 2008 (n=15) and number of copies of the X chromosome present in the initial test while 1.51/2.00 in 2009 (n=18). In 2004, 22% of the participants obtained Aneufast® v2 required reflex to obtain the TAF9L ratio. Therefore, in 2.00/2.00, compared to 66% in 2009. This study demonstrated our experience, the Q*STRplusV2 kit has a lower overall time to report that interpretation improved over the years, in particular regarding and is more cost-effective. implications for all genetic counselling aspects, and that regular participation to EQA contributes to an improved quality of reporting. P15.03 twenty years of molecular Genetics External Quality P15.05 Assessment the italian External Quality Assessment in classical Z. Deans1, S. Abbs2; cytogenetics: state of the art 1Scheme Organiser, UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, Institute of Human G. Floridia, F. Censi, F. Tosto, M. Marra, V. Falbo, D. Taruscio; Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2Steering Committee Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Centro Nazionale Malattie Rare, Roma, Italy. Chairman, UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, GSTS Pathology, London, The Italian External Quality Assessment (IEQA) in classical cytogenetics United Kingdom. started in 2001 and is coordinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità, UK National External Quality Assessment Scheme (UKNEQAS) for (ISS). The IEQA covers both prenatal and postnatal diagnosis, Molecular Genetics has been providing a measure of the standard of including cancer cytogenetics. molecular laboratory services for the last twenty years. The scheme From 2001 to 2009 this activity has been funded by the Italian Ministry started in 1991 with a few laboratories participating in genotyping only of Health through research projects and participation to the IEQA external quality assessments (EQAs) for CF, HD and DMD. This has was free. Since 2010 laboratories pay a fee for each scheme and developed into a self-funding, not-for-profit organisation which now participation is not anymore restricted to public genetic services only offers 29 separate EQAs to over 120 participating laboratories. (Gazzetta Ufficiale Serie Generale n.199-28th August 2009). EQAs assess genotyping accuracy, result interpretation and clerical The IEQA is retrospective since laboratories submit images and reports accuracy of the reports. Samples are distributed and participants are of two cases they have already analysed; cases are selected according required to submit interpretative reports in the laboratory’s standard to a fixed schedule. In 2008 a web-based system was developed; all format. This ensures that the whole process is assessed, from sample EQA phases are managed through three different sections dedicated receipt to the issuing of the final report. Performance monitoring has to the Scheme Organizer, the participants and the assessors. identified errors in different steps of the process providing evidence Assessment takes into account technical, analytical and interpretative that this assessment of the process is essential in measuring the performance and two different groups of assessors are involved in standard of the laboratory. Web-based interpretative EQAs have been constitutional and cancer cytogenetics. A clear marking system has established for rarer diseases to reduce EQA costs for laboratories. been established and agreed by the Scheme organiser and assessors Wherever professional Best Practice Guidelines are available these in order to better identify the performance of laboratories. Following are used to establish the marking criteria for each EQA. assessment each participant receives a summary letter and an Six key areas are covered by these EQAs; core diseases, individual report with scores and comments. preimplantation genetic diagnosis, newborn screening, non-invasive Results of the VIth (2008-2009) and VII th trial (2010) will be showed prenatal diagnosis, molecular rapid aneuploidy testing (UKNEQAS for and discussed. Cytogenetics collaboration) and molecular histopathology for KRAS and EGFR testing (UKNEQAS ICC collaboration). P15.06 Performance is high in well established EQAs but pilot EQAs identify European external quality assessment for the improvement of a number of performance issues. As laboratories participate more KRAS testing regularly in EQAs then there is a marked improvement in performance E. Bellon1, M. Ligtenberg2, G. De Hertogh3, K. de Stricker4, A. Edsjö5, P. and the standard of laboratory output. Laurent-Puig6, J. C. Machado7, E. Rouleau8, P. Vandenberghe3, S. Vander Borght3, J. Van Krieken2, E. Dequeker1; P15.04 1Centre for Human Genetics, Biomedical Quality Assurance Research Unit, measuring the improvement of the interpretation in cystic Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Pathology, fibrosis laboratory reports Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, S. Berwouts1, E. Girodon2, M. A. Morris3, M. Schwarz4, M. Stuhrmann5, E. 3Centrum Moleculaire Diagnostiek, Leuven, Belgium, 4Odense University Dequeker1; Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 5Clinical Pathology Malmö, Malmö, Sweden, 1Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Department of Human Genetics, Biomedical 6U775 Bases moléculaires de la réponse aux xénobiotiques, Paris, France, Quality Assurance Research Unit, Leuven, Belgium, 2Groupe hospitalier Henri 7IPATIMUP Diagnostics, Porto, Portugal, 8Centre René Huguenin, St Cloud, Mondor-Albert Chenevier, APHP, Service de Biochimie et Génétique, Créteil, France. France, 3University Hospitals, Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Service KRAS mutational status in tumor cells has become an important of Genetic Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 4St Mary’s Hospital, Genetic determinant for the successful application of epidermal growth factor Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Medizinische Hochschule, Institut für receptor targeting therapy in patients with colorectal cancer. In an Humangenetik, Hannover, Germany. effort to ensure optimal, uniform and reliable community based KRAS Interpretation of genetic test results in laboratory reports is an ISO and testing throughout Europe, a KRAS External Quality Assessment OECD requirement. It should be performed according to the indication (EQA) scheme was set up. In total 76 laboratories from 14 different for testing and considering that the recipient may not understand all European countries participated and were divided among 6 regional implications of genetic test results. We assessed interpretation aspects schemes. For each scheme, one regional scheme organizer prepared for similar cases circulated through the Cystic Fibrosis (CF) External and distributed the samples, in accordance with agreements on the Quality Assessment (EQA) scheme in 2004 (n=232 laboratories), 2008 mutational status. The samples included unstained sections of 10 (n=202) and 2009 (n=203). The mock case described a newborn with invasive colorectal carcinomas with known KRAS genotype. The meconium ileus at birth; a molecular analysis was requested to confirm samples were centrally validated by a reference laboratory. From the the CF diagnosis. The presence of two mutations indeed confirmed 76 participating laboratories, 50 reported all 10 genotypes correctly the diagnosis. “Confirmation of diagnosis” was present in 90% of the (66%). Thirteen laboratories genotyped one out of 10 samples wrong reports in 2004, 95% in 2008 and 97% in 2009. “Recommendation for and 3 laboratories genotyped two or more out of the 10 samples genetic counselling” was included in 85%, 90% and 89% of reports wrong. Ten laboratories reported a technical error (no result) for one respectively. “Suggestion for prenatal or preimplantation diagnosis for or more samples. The average genotyping score for the KRAS EQA subsequent pregnancies” was mentioned in 54%, 67% and 75% of scheme is 9,49/10,00 (94,9%). There is an overall improvement in the reports respectively. The average interpretation score was 1.49/2.00 score of laboratories that participated also in the KRAS EQA scheme in 2004, 1.77/2.00 in 2008 and 1.85/2.00 in 2009. The score for of last year. Mistakes were made both in laboratories using commercial laboratories that participated in the three years (n=132) evolved from and “in-house” validated assays. In addition, we analysed tumor 1.52/2.00 to 1.80/2.00 and 1.90/2.00. Those that participated only percentage analysis and written reports for educational purposes.Laboratory and quality management 482 This EQA scheme is a useful tool to provide information about the they should participate in external quality assessment schemes and performance of a given laboratory compared to others, and to stimulate use reference materials regularly to adjust their own internal standards. optimalisation of lab procedures. P15.09 P15.07 Efficiency of neurogenetic testing during a 10-year period Evaluation of tripled repeat primed (tP)-PcR assay and sizing N. Teran, H. Jaklič, B. Peterlin; PcR assay of the FmR1 gene for the molecular diagnosis of the Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, fragile X syndrome Slovenia. I. De Clercq1, V. Debacker1, K. Eycken2, K. Claes1; Neurogenetic disorders have low prevalence (<1/10000) in the 1Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 2Abbott, Wavre, Belgium. general population. Specific genetic tests are used to help diagnose Fragile X syndrome is caused by the abnormal expansion of the neurological diseases depending on the type of mutation. In this study CGG repeat in the 5’ untranslated region of the FMR1 (Fragile X we analysed the diagnostic yield and estimated the costs of negative Mental Retardation 1) gene. Routine molecular analysis includes a results of neurogenetic testing. combination of PCR and Southern blot analysis. However, Southern We performed a retrospective review of the data in the database of the blot analysis largely constrains throughput and efficiency and requires molecular genetic laboratory of the Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC large amounts of high quality DNA. Ljubljana, involving a 10-year period (2000-2010). This study aims to evaluate if in a routine diagnostic setting Southern Overall, a mutation was identified in 30.9 % of the tested patients blot can be replaced by PCR based assays. We evaluated the FMR1 (n=443). In patients with muscle weakness (n=205) the mutation TP (triplet repeat primed)-PCR assay (Abbott) for rapid distinction detection rate was 38.4 % with an estimated cost of 55,781.95 EUR between normal and expanded FMR1 alleles and the FMR1 Sizing per negative result. In patients with neuropathies (n=99) the mutation PCR assay (Abbott) for accurate sizing of alleles. detection rate was 36.1 % with an estimated cost of 53,046.85 EUR We evaluated assay performance using DNA from 4 cell lines and 53 per negative test. In patients with chorea (n=100) a positive result archived samples (from 9 normal individuals, 1 case with a grey zone was obtained in 42.5 % (22,889.25 EUR per negative result). The allele, 13 pre- and 31 full mutation carriers with repeat expansions diagnostic yield in patients with congenital malformations was 8.9 %; ranging between 57-1300 CGG, 4 mosaic cases with alleles within the estimated cost per negative result was 70,931.25 EUR. For ataxias the pre- and full mutation range). The TP-PCR assay accurately (n=16) the mutation detection rate was 11.9 %; the estimated cost of distinguished normal from expanded alleles. The Sizing PCR assay negative result was 36,071.85 EUR. accurately sized premutation and full mutation alleles up to 335 CGG The diagnostic yield and costs per negative results varied among repeats. Interpretation of some mosaic cases was challenging with TP- the different diagnostic groups, reflecting utilization guidelines and PCR. selection criteria for neurogenetic testing. The results of this analysis In conclusion, the assays evaluated allow efficient workflows in a may assist the clinician when weighing the decision whether to test diagnostic context and lead to a final conclusion for the large majority or not. Guidelines including new testing strategies would contribute of the referred cases. A methylation-sensitive test is still required to appropriate and cost-effective use of molecular genetic testing in to unequivocally distinguish premutation from full mutation alleles general. with lengths in the transition zone (150-250 CGG), where correct interpretation depends on methylation status. P15.10 External quality assessment schemes for molecular testing on P15.08*** blood spots Discrepancies in reporting the cAG repeat lengths for A. Wittner, Z. Deans; Huntington‘s disease UKNEQAS Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle upon Tyne, United O. W. Quarrell1, O. Handley2, K. O’Donovan1, C. Dumoulin3, M. Ramos- Kingdom. Arroyo4, I. Biunno5, P. Bauer6, M. Kline7, B. Landwehrmeyer8; Newborn screening is performed in many countries by analysing dried 1Sheffield Children’s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Institute of blood spots to detect abnormal levels of chemicals as indicators of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, 3Insitut du Pathologie et Genetique, inherited blood and metabolic disorders. Confirmation of clinical Grosseleis, Belgium, 4Dept. Medical Genetics, Complejo Hospitalario diagnosis is often provided by molecular testing and DNA analysis Pamplona, Pamplona, Spain, 5ITB-CNR and BioRep, Milan, Italy, 6Medizinische is part of the cystic fibrosis (CF) and Medium chain acyl-CoA Genetik, University of Tübingen, Tubingen, Germany, 7National Institute for dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD) screening protocols of several Standards and Technology, Biochemical Science Division, Gaithersburg, MD, newborn screening programmes in Europe. United States, 8Dept of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics is an accredited, self-funding, not- Huntington’s disease results from a CAG repeat expansion in the first for-profit organization providing external quality assessment schemes exon of the Huntingtin gene; this is measured routinely in diagnostic (EQAs) for a wide range of molecular disorders since 1991. The laboratories. The European Huntington’s Disease Network REGISTRY scheme has offered “CF molecular testing on blood spots EQA” for project centrally measures CAG repeat lengths from fresh blood the last five years and introduced “MCADD molecular testing for the samples; these were compared with the original results from 121 common ACADM mutation c.985A>G on blood spots EQA” in April laboratories across 15 countries. We report on 1326 duplicate results: 2010. Three blood spot samples are distributed 4 times a year and there was a discrepancy of reporting the upper allele in 51% of cases; participants are required to analyse them according to their routine this reduced to 13.3% if acceptable measurement errors proposed by protocol and report the genotyping results. These are assessed for the American College of Medical Genetics were applied. Duplicate genotyping accuracy. To reflect the laboratory testing, the “MCADD results were available for 1250 lower alleles and discrepancies extended mutation screening on blood spots pilot EQA” was introduced occurred in 40%. Clinically significant discrepancies occurred in 4.0% last year. of cases with a potential unexplained mis-diagnosis rate of 0.3%. To further enhance these EQA schemes the development of artificial There was considerable variation in the discrepancy rate among 10 of blood spots has been initiated. Using simulated EQA material will the countries participating in this study. 348/1326 DNA samples were enable the distribution of samples with mutations/polymorphisms with re-analysed by an accredited diagnostic laboratory based in Germany, the potential to cause interference during analysis or interpretation. with concordance rates of 93% and 94% for the upper and lower alleles The laboratories thereby would be provided with a measure of the respectively. This became 100% if the acceptable measurement errors robustness of their testing protocol and would be assured of the were applied. The central laboratory correctly reported allele sizes for standard of their service. 6 standard reference samples, blind to the known result. Our study differs from external quality assessment schemes in that these are duplicate results obtained from a large sample of patients across the whole diagnostic range. We strongly recommend that laboratories state an error rate for their measurement on the report; Laboratory and quality management 483 P15.11 equal but RT-PCR-ELISA sensitivity is about a 100-fold more than of A quality management plan in a genetic testing laboratory in NASBA-ELISA. Also, leukemia cell detection rate in sample by RT- Romania PCR-ELISA and NASBA-ELISA is 4 and 400 cells, respectively. D. Vlad1, V. Dumitrascu2, C. Gug3, A. Cimporescu1, A. Matusz4, B. Barac2, R. Interpretation and Conclusions: Therefore, despite the NASBA Olariu5, F. Horhat6; technique have not need to thermal cycler PCR but have a low 1Emergency County Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 2Pharmacology Department, sensitivity than RT-PCR and it is not suitable method for quantitative Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, assessment. 3Medical Genetics Department, Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 4General Private Office, Timisoara, Romania, P15.13 5Parasitology Department, Victor Babes University of Medicine and Pharmacy, thrombophilic gene mutations and pulmonary Timisoara, Romania, 6Microbiology Department, Victor Babes University of thromboembolism in iranian patients Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. E. Sakhinia1, A. Poursadegh Zonouzi2, A. Firoozi3, N. Karimi Ansari3, Y. High quality genetic testing is very important for proper diagnosis and Heshmat3, A. Asghari Haghie3, M. Ghaffari4, K. Ansarin5; patient management.To provide the highest standard of analysis,strict 1Molecular Medicine Division, TDepartment of Biochemistry, Faculty of laboratory assurance procedures must be followed. Medicine, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22- Department of Cellular and In this study we developed a quality management plan that would Molecular Biology, Faculty of science, Azarbaijan University of Tarbiat Moallem enable us to assure the highest quality standards for genetic testing , Tabriz, I.R.Iran, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33- Tabriz Genetic Analysis laboratories.We choosed ISO15189:2007 because it was the more Centre (TGAC), Sheikh Alraeis Clinic, Specialized & Subspecialized Outpatient appropriate standard according to our activities. Clinic of Tabriz Medical Sciences University, Tabriz, I.R.Iran, Tabriz, Islamic We nominated a member of the laboratory team to coordinate the Republic of Iran, 44- Tuberculosis and Lung diseases Research Center, Tabriz plan,but involvement of all laboratory team to implement different parts University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 54- of the standard for the laboratory is very important.A detailed quality Tuberculosis and Lung diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical management plan will allow identification of possible deficiencies in Sciences, Tabriz, Iran., Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. laboratory. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) is a common vascular disease that It is necessary that laboratory services include an effective labelling(so includes deep venous thrombosis and pulmonary thromboembolism. that the specimens are easily tracked) and adequate physical It is one of the leading causes of mortality across the world; with storage,in addition to the consideration of safety and ethics in genetic an annual incidence range from 1-5 cases per 1000 individuals. laboratory work.Laboratory technicians are responsible for the good Various investigations examined the prevalence of thrombophilic quality of the patient’s samples and sent for testing to laboratory. gene mutations in patients who have suffered from a pulmonary The quality of the primary sample(s),to be collected using appropiate thromboembolism. We aimed to determine the association of specific materials in a standardized way,represent the basic factor that inherited thrombophilias with pulmonary thromboembolisms. A total of affect the quality of performance and delivery of testing services,the 85 subjects were included in this study: 53 patients who had been adequacy of oversight and quality assurance mechanism. affected with a pulmonary thromboembolism and 32 healthy controls The most significant percentage of errors that occurs in the laboratory in the North West of Iran. Total genomic DNA was extracted from 2 ml takes place at the preanalytical phase.That phase encompasses test EDTA anti-coagulated blood samples by a standard salting-out method selection,ordering and specimen collection,processing,handling,and and amplified by PCR using gene-specific primers. Amplification delivery to the testing site. Refractory Mutation System (ARMS-PCR) method was used in the In conclusion,quality indicators reduces errors related to test selection identification of PAI-1 (-675 I/D, 5G/4G), Factor XIII (Val34Leu), Beta- and requests,specimen submission,test performance,and reporting fibrinogen (-455G/A), Factor VII (Gln353Arg), Glycoprotein Ia (807C/T) and interpretation of results,leading to improved use of genetic and tPA (intron h D/I) gene mutations. Our data indicates that there laboratory services, including better health outcome for patients. were statistically significant differences in PTE patients compared with controls, when studying the frequency of these specific gene P15.12 mutations. In conclusion, we propose that compound thromboplilic Quantitative comparison of the sensitivity NAsBA-ELisA and gene mutations rather than a specific gene mutation can be a risk Rt-PcR-ELisA for measurement of the BcR-ABL genes fusion factor for the occurrence of pulmonary thromboembolisms; however, transcript in cmL patients further studies on a larger scale are required in order to gain a better A. Nazemi1, M. Hashemi2, M. Sadeghizadeh3, M. Forouzandeh3, G. Javadi4; understanding of the role of these gene mutations in pulmonary 1Islamic Azad University,Tonekabon Branch, Tonekabon, Islamic Republic of thromboembolisms. Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Islamic P15.14 Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Whole genome amplification in large biobanks Iran. N. Klopp1, T. Illig1, C. Korfhage2, H. Wichmann1; Chronic myeloid leukemia is characterized by neoplastic overproduction 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich-Neuherberg, Germany, 2QIAGEN of myelocytes and neutrophils. Detection of cells carrying BCR/ABL GmbH, Hilden, Germany. fusion is extremely important in monitoring response to treatment, Biobanks are a key resource for unravelling the molecular basis of remission and relapse in CML patients. Among the molecular diseases and the identification of new targets for disease therapy. One diagnostic techniques used amplification of BCR/ABL fusion transcript challenge of biobanks is to maintain huge collections of limited samples , RT-PCR is regarded to be most sensitive. sizes for future studies. In consequence, there is need for a high In this experimental study, we compared RT-PCR and NASBA quality amplification of limited amounts of nucleic acids. In this project techniques to determine quantitatively the number of bcr/abl transcripts. we focused on the standardization and qualification tools of whole In order to make an accurate comparison, the sequences of primers genome amplification (WGA) in the context of biobanks. A new simple and probes used in both techniques were the same. Fusion transcripts quantitative PCR based test system was developed, which enables the were synthesized and RNA was extracted from K562 leukemic cell line. standardization of the complete whole genome amplification process A serial dilution of both fusion transcript and RNA was prepared; then including (1) the quality and quantity of the template DNA and (2) the sensitivity of both techniques was determined. RT-PCR and NASBA resulting WGA products. For validation of the performance, the system reaction products were labelled using equal ratios of DIG-11-dUTP was tested in different laboratories using template DNAs of different and DIG-11-UTP respectively. Following denaturation , hybridization quality. Consistent results could be achieved in the quality system reactions were carried out with specific probes. The products were test of the WGA products reflecting the amount and the fragmentation incubated in streptavidin coated microplates. Then, the plates were degree of the initial template DNA. The system was also implemented washed, anti-DIG conjugated to peroxidase added and using ATBS as in the KORA-Biobank with SNP genotyping technology. The results substrate, enzymatic activity was determined by absorption at 405 nm. of the WGA test system were correlated with the concordance of The our results showed that specificity between two techniques is genome wide SNP genotypes from genomic template DNA and from Laboratory and quality management 484 the corresponding WGA products. Based on this result, a general collaborated to devise such a system. standardized protocol for WGA in biobanking will be developed. The initial premise for this work was that the measure should be Furthermore, the concept of this project is to make the WGA solution transparent and flexible to allow comparisons between laboratories available to other national and international biobanks. The development and to take account of developing technologies. The unit chosen for of the proposed, innovative and specialized tools and customized the measure was the final diagnostic report which is easily counted. solutions will help to expand and improve the used of biobanks. As reports vary in complexity a weighting system was required. The unit chosen to weight the reports was ‘an amplicon’ which is again P15.15 easily counted. The weights were then assigned to a band from A to G. microsatellite markers and multiplex ligation-dependent probe The basic unit, Band A, is sample reception and DNA extraction with a amplification (MLPA): Diagnosis tests for Williams-Beuren weight of one. Band G has a weight of 40. syndrome This system was piloted in 6 UK laboratories. The laboratories varied R. L. Dutra1, R. S. Honjo2, F. A. M. da Fonseca3, P. C. Pieri3, D. Bertola2, L. D. in size and testing repertoire to ensure a broad base for the trial. Kulikowski4, F. Jehee2, C. A. Kim2; Work is ongoing to align cytogenetic workload units with these 1Department of Genetics. LIM 36, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, molecular units and to validate the measure by comparing workload Brazil, 2Department of Genetics. Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, assigned to the external quality assessment schemes of UK NEQAS. Brazil, 3LIM 36, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 4Department of This allows comparison of many laboratories testing the same cases. Pathology, LIM 03, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. The mechanics of the system will be described in detail. Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS; OMIM 194050) is caused by a hemizygous contiguous gene microdeletion at 7q11.23. Supravalvular P15.17 aortic stenosis (SVAS), mental retardation, overfriendliness, and Automated melting analysis for quality assessment of high ocular and renal abnormalities comprise typical symptoms in WBS. resolution scanning data of multi-exon genes Although fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) is considered the M. Erali1, R. Palais2, D. C. Pattison1, N. H. Augustine3, H. R. Hill1,3,4, C. T. gold standard technique and the microsatellite DNA markers provide Wittwer1,3; efficient confirmation, Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 1ARUP Institute for Clinical & Experimental Pathology, Salt Lake City, UT, (MLPA) could also be used. MLPA is a new technique for measuring United States, 2Department of Mathematics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, sequence dosage, allowing large number of samples to be processed UT, United States, 3Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, simultaneously and thus significantly reducing laboratory work. We UT, United States, 4Department of Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Utah, assessed the performance of MLPA for the detection of microdeletions Salt Lake City, UT, United States. by comparing the results with those generated using microsatellite High resolution melting analysis for scanning multi-exon genes is markers. We studied 77 patients with clinical diagnosis of WBS using emerging as the most cost effective and rapid method to identify five microsatellite markers: D7S1870, D7S489, D7S613, D7S2476, sequence variants. A microfluidic liquid handler was used to prepare D7S489_A and commercial MLPA kit (SALSA P029). A total number pre-coated 96-well PCR plates with M13-tailed exon specific primers. of 77 patients were tested. Using five markers together, the result PCR was done in 96-well plates followed by high resolution melting was informative in all patients. The microdeletion was present in 64 analysis on the LightScanner. However, analysis of the data can be a (83.1%) patients and absent in 13 (16.9%) patients. Maternal deletions bottleneck in the process. Therefore, an automated analysis method were found in 56.3% of patients and paternal deletions in 43.7% of for high resolution melting was developed to scan multiple exons patients. The size of deletions was 1.55 Mb in 57/64 patients (89.1%) of genes and assess the quality of the data generated. A custom and 1.84 Mb in 7/64 patients (10.9%). Our results show a high degree program was developed to appropriately set normalization and overlay of concordance between MLPA and markers assays for all samples parameters, and calculate a Curve Spread value that provides an tested. We conclude that even though the microsatellite markers were estimate of the degree of variability among clustered melting curves. important for determine the parental origin, MLPA is a highly sensitive, The Curve Spread allows quality control of primer plates and master quick and cost-effective alternative and can provide helpful information mix lots, and provides a standard metric to identify variant sequences for clinical diagnose of WBS. as melting curves that do not cluster well with wild type samples. A higher Curve Spread value reveals a greater degree of variation and P15.16 allows unknown samples containing variants to be easily identified. A robust measure of workload for molecular diagnostic This software has been applied to the analysis of 70 clinical specimens laboratories suspected of having mutations in CYBB, variants of which are the S. A. R. Stenhouse1, R. Butler2, A. Curtis3, J. Deller4, K. Kelly5, G. Norbury6, R. major cause of X-linked chronic granulomatous disease. Standardized Mountford7; analysis eliminates user bias and automatically provides a Curve 1UK Genetic Testing Network, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Molecular Spread value that can be used as a guide for judging the quality of Genetics Society, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Clinical Molecular Genetics amplification and to set decision criteria for reflex testing to identify the Society, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 4UK Genetic Testing Network, London, specific sequence of variants. United Kingdom, 5Clinical Molecular Genetics Society, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 6Clinical Molecular Genetics Society, London, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Molecular Genetics Society, Liverpool, United Kingdom. Recognising a longstanding need for a robust workload measure for diagnostic molecular genetics a group from the CMGS and UKGTN