4 ESHG Plenary Lectures Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ESHG Plenary Lectures to, chromothripsis - a novel role for the ‘guardian of the genome’. In additi- on, our findings are of relevance for clinical management and personalized PL1.1 medicine, since TP53 germline mutations represent an “actionable” genetic The Regulome - the Next Frontier in Human Genetics variant. Regular cancer screening in TP53 germline mutation carriers can S. Mundlos; lead to a survival benefit. Furthermore, in patients with known Li-Fraumeni Berlin, Germany. Syndrome, administration of high-dose radiotherapy or DNA-damaging che- motherapy has to be thoroughly weighed against the potential of these mo- dalities of readily inducing secondary malignancies. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- PL2.2 me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- KLHL3 and Cullin-3 mutations cause Familial Hyperkalemic dates. Hypertension by impairing ion transport in the distal nephron PL1.2 H. Louis dit Picard1,2,3, J. Barc4, D. Trujillano5, S. Miserey-Lenkei6, N. Bouatia-Naji1,2, O. Oncogenomics of pediatric brain tumors: From molecular profiling Pylypenko6, G. Beaurain1, A. Bonnefond7, C. Simian3, E. Vidal-Petiot1,2, C. Soukaseum1,2, P. Bruneval1, X. Estivill5, P. Froguel7, J. Hadchouel1,2, J. Schott4, X. Jeunemaitre1,2,3; towards clinical Translation 1INSERM UMRS970 ; Paris Cardiovascular Research Center PARCC, Paris, France, P. Lichter; 2Descartes University - Sorbonne Paris-Cité, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Département de Heidelberg, Germany. Génétique, HEGP, Paris, France, 4INSERM, UMR 1087, Institut du thorax, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 5Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation and Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 6CNRS UMR144, Institut Curie, Paris, No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- France, 7CNRS-UMR8199, Lille Pasteur Institute, Lille, France. me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. PL1.3 Familial Hyperkalemic Hypertension (FHHt), also known as Pseudohypoal- Myocardial infarction: common disease, common variants, common dos+teronism type 2, is a r+are inherited disease which associates net positive mechanisms Na balance with renal K retention. Only a minority of cases are caused by H. Schunkert; mutations in the genes encoding With No lysine (K) kinases 1 aKndL H4L.3 Lübeck, Germany. We carried out linkage analysis combined with whole exome sequencing in two informative French families and identified mutations in the gene. This gene encodes for an actin-binding proteKinL HthLa3t recruit substrates for The primary manifestation of coronary disease occurs often suddenly and the Cullin3-based ubiquitin-ligase complex. Direct sequencinCgU oLf3 47 addi- unexpectedly in form of myocardial infarction. Thus, the prediction of silent tional cases revealed 11 inherited missense mutations in 16 fami- atherosclerotic alterations in coronary arteries is a highly relevant medical lies with dominant or recessive transmission. Analysis of the gene re- need. Recent genomic research identified numerous genetic variants that vealed de novo splice-site mutations clustered around exon 9 and observed associate with a higher prevalence of coronary disease. At present, associa- in younger and more severe cases. Three-dimCeUnsLi3onal structural modeling tion with coronary artery disease has been demonstrated at more than 40 showed that the mutated KLHL3 residues are located within conserved mo- chromosomal locations with risk alleles increasing relative risk by 8-25 % tifs at the surface of the molecule, whereas all mutations lead to a loss per allele. Moreover, genetic variants primarily affecting cardiovascular risk of 57 residues corresponding to a segment linking BTB and RING-binding factors such as hypertension or LDL cholesterol were shown to affect the domain+s o-f the protein. KLHL3 is highly expressed in the distal nephron like risk of coronary disease as well. the Na-Cl cotransporter (NCC) and its inhibition by RNA interference leads This enormous progress has been facilitated by genome-wide association to an increase of NCC expression at the cell membrane. We further showed studies. By nature, these studies focus on frequent alleles. Thus, the alleles that KLHL3 and NCC co-immunoprecipitate in HEK293T cells, suggesting that have been identified to increase the risk of coronary disease are also that KLHL3 directly mediates a negative regulation of NCC expression, pro- relatively frequent in our population, i.e. allele frequencies range between bably through ubiquitination. roughly 10-90%. As a consequence, virtually all individuals of our populati- In conclusion, we identifies KLHL3 and CUL3 as members of a new pathway on carry a variable degree of genetic predisposition. More recently, the focus regulating ion transport in the distal nephron and thus blood pressure. turned to rare variants with more profound effects. In this regard, the do- PL2.3 main of human genetics, i.e. family based research and counseling, received Duplications of BHLHA9 are associated with ectrodactyly and tibia more attention - once again. The presentation will address how this infor- hemimelia inherited in non-Mendelian fashion mation can be utilized for a better understanding of disease mechanisms as S. Lohan1,2, S. C. Doelken1, S. Stricker2, C. W. Ockeloen3, R. Soares Thiele de Aguiar4, K. well as for genomic prediction of coronary artery disease. Lezirovitz4,5, R. C. Mingroni Netto4, A. Jamsheer6,7, H. Shah8, I. Kurth9, R. Habenicht10, PL2.1 M. Warman11, K. Devriendt12, U. Kordaß13, M. Hempel14,15, A. Rajab16, O. Mäkitie17, M. Genome sequencing of childhood medulloblastoma brain tumors Naveed18, U. Radhakrishna19, S. E. Antonarakis19,20, D. Horn1, S. Mundlos1,2, E. Klopocki1,2; 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité – Universitätsmedizin links chromothripsis with TP53 mutations - a discovery with clinical Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, implications 3Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, J. O. Korbel1, P. Lichter2, S. Pfister2; Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, Departamento de 1European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany, 2DKFZ, Heidelberg, Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências, Universidade de São Paulo, Germany. São Paulo, Brazil, 5Laboratório de Otorrinolaringologia/LIM32, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 6Department of Medical Genetics, University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 7NZOZ Center for Somatic structural variations typically occur progressively during tumor Medical Genetics GENESIS, Poznan, Poland, 8Department of Orthopaedics, Paediatric development. Recent findings, however, suggest an alternative mechanism, Orthopaedic Service, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, Karnataka, India, 9Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Jena, Germany, 10Kath. Kinderkrankenhaus involving chromosome shattering and reshuffling (‘chromothripsis’), the Wilhemstift, Hamburg, Germany, 11Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Department underlying mechanistic basis of which is unknown. In the context of the of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Children‘s Hospital, International Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC) Pediatric Brain Tumor Boston, MA, United States, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Leuven University Hospital, Project (www.pedbraintumor.org), whole-genome sequencing of a Sonic- Leuven, Belgium, 13Institute for Human Genetics, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Hedgehog medulloblastoma (SHH-MB) brain tumor from a patient with a Greifswald, Germany, 14Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, germline TP53 mutation (Li-Fraumeni syndrome) revealed massive, com- Munich, Germany, 15Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, plex rearrangements resulting from chromothripsis. Integrating TP53 sta- Germany, 16Department of Genetics, Directorate General of Health Affairs, Ministry of Health, Muscat, Oman, 17Children‘s Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital, tus with genomic rearrangement data in additional medulloblastomas re- University of Helsinki, and Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 18Center vealed a striking association between TP53 mutation and chromothripsis for Arab Genomic Studies (CAGS), Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 19Department of Genetic in SHH-MBs. Unexpectedly, five seemingly sporadic SHH-MB patients with Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland, chromothripsis harbored TP53 germline mutation. Our analysis of additio- 20Division of Medical Genetics, Geneva University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. nal tumor entities substantiated a link between TP53 mutation and chro- mothripsis, beyond general genomic instability. Among these, we observed a strong association between somatic TP53 mutations and chromothripsis Split-hand/foot malformation (SHFM) is a congenital disorder characteri- in acute myeloid leukemia, and an increased occurrence of chromothripsis zed by severe malformations affecting the central rays of hands and/or feet. in Li Fraumeni Syndrome-associated malignancies other than medullobla- The combination of SHFM and long bone deficiency represents a distinct stoma. Our findings implicate p53 in the initiation of, or cellular wrewactwio.ne shegnt.iotyr tgermed SHFLD. Although six different loci/mutations (SHFM1-6) have www.eshg.orgESHG Plenary Lectures 5 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, St. Thomas’ Hospital, King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, been associated with SHFM the underlying cause in a large number of cases 7Respiratory & Inflammation Research Area, AstraZeneca, Loughborough, United is still unresolved. Kingdom, 8Health Sciences Research Institute, Warwick Medical School University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom, 9Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, We performed array CGH in a SHFM/SHFLD cohort which detected micro- University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. duplications on chromosome 17p13.3; a locus previously associated with SHFLD. Detailed analysis of 17 families revealed that this CNV serves as a susceptibility factor for a highly variable phenotype with reduced penetran- Hip osteoarthritis (HOA) is one of the most disabling and common joint dis- ce, particularly in females. Compared to other known causBeHsL 1H7Ap9 duplica- orders with a large genetic component which is, however, still ill defined. To tions appear to be the most frequent cause of SHFLD. A ~11.8kb minimal date, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in osteoarthritis (OA) and critical region was identified encompassing a single gene, , a puta- specifically in HOA have yielded only few loci, which is partly explained by tive basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factor. Whole mount in situ hybri- the heterogeneity in OA definition. Therefore, we here focused on radiogra- dization showed expression restricted to the limb bud mesenchyme under- phically measured joint space width (JSW), a proxy for cartilage thickness lying the apical ectodermalb rhildhgae9 (AER) in mouse and zebrafish embryos. and an important underlying intermediate trait for HOA. In a GWAS of 6,523 Mouse models suggest that a defect of the central AER leads to the SHFM phenotype. Knock-down of in zebrafish resulted BinH sLhHoAr9tening of the inPdividuals on JSW of the hip, we identified the G-allele of rs12982744 on pectoral fins indicating a role of this gene in limb development. In summa- chromosom−e10 19p13.3 to be associated wiPt h a 5% larger joint space width ry, we demonstrate microduplications encompassing associated ( = 4.8×10 ). The association was replicated in 4,442 ind−1Piv1 iduals from 3 with SHFLD and non-Mendelian inheritance characterized by a high degree UK-cohorts with an ovDeOraTl1l Lm eta-analysis value of 1.1×10 . The SN-4P was also strongly associated with a 12% reduced risk for HOA ( =1×10 ). The of non-penetrance with gender-bias. Our finding shows that rare CNVs can SNP is located in the gene, which is an evolutionarily conserved hi- serve as a susceptibility factor for congenital disease, a mechanism which may explain increased recurrence risk in conditions otherwise considered stone methyltransferase. Immunohistochemical staining of DODTo1tL1 lp rotein to be sporadic. during mouse limb buDdo td1elv elopment supports a role for DOT1L in chondro- PL2.4 genic differentiation and adult articular cartilage. Silencing oinf vitro inhibi- ted chondrogenesis. knock-down reduces proteoglycan and collagen A novel molecular and functional mechanism predisposing to content, and mineralization during chondrogenesis. In the ATDC5 ototoxicity chondrogenesis model system, DOT1L interacts with TCF and Wnt signal- E. Pohl1,2, N. Offenhäuser3, F. F. J. Kersten4, A. Üzümcü5, Y. Li1,2, A. K. Rzadzinska6, O. Uyguner5, G. Yigit1,2, B. Lorente6, G. Nürnberg7, M. Emiroglu8, H. Kayserili5, B. Karaman5, I. ling. These data are a further step to understand the role of Wnt-signaling del Castillo9, S. Basaran5, M. Y. Apak5, P. Nürnberg2,10, T. Moser11, C. Kubisch12, K. P. Steel6, P. during chondrogenesis and cartilage homeostasis. DOT1L may represent a P. Di Fiore3, H. Kremer4, B. Wollnik1,2; therapeutic target for osteoarthritis. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Center PL2.6 for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, Insights into tissue-specific mechanisms of gene regulation involving 3IFOM, Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare, Milan, Italy, 4Department of genetic variants and DNA methylation Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, M. Gutierrez-Arcelus1,2, S. B. Montgomery1,3, T. Lappalainen1,2, H. Ongen1,2, A. Yurovsky1,2, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, J. Bryois1,2, A. Buil1,2, T. Giger1, L. Romano1,2, A. Planchon1,2, E. Falconnet1,2, I. Padioleau1,2, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Welcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, Hinxton, United C. Borel1, A. Letourneau1,2, P. Makrythanasis1,2, M. Guipponi1,2, C. Gehrig1,2, S. E. Kingdom, 7Institute of Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Department Antonarakis1,2, E. T. Dermitzakis1; of Otolaryngology, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of Genetics and Genomics in 9Unidad de Genética Molecular, Hospital Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, 10Cologne Centre Geneva (iGE3), Geneva, Switzerland, 3Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States. for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 11InnerEarLab, Department of Otolaryngology, Göttingen University Medical School, Göttingen, Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. Multiple studies have demonstrated the importance of genetic variants af- fecting gene expression (eQTLs) and initial limited studies have identified While our knowledge about molecular mechanisms underlying Mendelian genetic variants affecting local DNA methylation levels (mQTLs). Moreover, forms of hearing loss tremendously increased over the last years, the gene- DNA methylation is known to be associated with gene silencing, and more tic basis and pathogenesis for drug induced hearing impairment remains recently with active gene expression when present within the gene body. Yet unclear. Aminoglycosides are the most commonly used antibiotics world- the mechanisms by which genetic variation and DNA methylation affect gene wide. Although highly effective, their use is restricted by side effects such expression and tissue specificity are not well understood. In this study, we as ototoxicity in a significant subset of patients. However, underlying pa- use a cohort of 210 newborn Caucasian individuals who we genotyped (2.5 thogenesis and pharmacogenetic risk variants are largely unknown. Here million SNPs) and for whom we measured mRNA levels through RNA-seq in we show that dysfunction of an actin remodeling protein (named here ARP) three cell-types derived from cord blood and umbilical cord: lymphoblasto- can result in a drug-inducible disturbance of actin dynamics and an irrever- id cell lines, T-cells and fibroblasts. For ~110 samples of each of the three sible hearing impairment in humans. By positional cloning, we identified cell-types, we have assayed DNA methylation levels in more than 400,000 a homozygous missense variant, p.L329P, in ARP as a cause of aminogly- CpG sites through bisulfite conversion and bead chips. We characterized the coside-induced hearing impairment in a large consanguineous family from tissue-specificity of eQTLs, allele-specific expression, mQTLs and eQTMs Turkey with 4 affected individuals. Complete ARP loss in knock out mice (methylation-expression associations). We identified genetic variants and leads to hearing loss associated with shortened stereocilia. We demonstrate a modest number of methylation sites affecting alternative splicing. Addi- that the protein is a component of the tip complex that regulates stereocilia tionally, we tested the contribution of different mechanistic models. We length and that it interacts with whirlin. The mutation severely impairs this provide evidence for synergistic interactions between SNPs and methylati- interaction in vitro. Extensive biochemical studies showed that myosinXVa on sites. We found a significant number of cases in which the SNP effect on can stabilize the ARP-whirlin interaction complex, and we show for the first gene expression is mediated through methylation. Finally, we describe the time that kanamycin has a negative effect on this complex formation, which mechanistic differences between patterns of methylation associated with is even more pronounced in mutant complexes, thereby explaining the de- increase and decrease of gene expression. Overall, our results provide in- velopment of hearing loss in affected individuals after aminoglycoside treat- sights into the genetics and epigenetics involved in gene regulation and tis- ment. Taken together, we link ototoxicity after aminoglycoside treatment to sue specificity, which is important for better understanding complex traits. actin dynamics and this finding will help in devising strategies to counteract PL3.1 this severe side-effect of aminoglycosides. Found in Translation: New Insights into the Pathogenesis and PL2.5 Treatment of Marfan syndrome and related disorders Genome-wide association and functional studies identify the DOT1L H. Dietz; Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States. gene to be involved in cartilage thickness and hip osteoarthritis M. C. Castano-Betancourt1,2, F. Cailotto3, H. Kerkhof1,2, F. M. Cornelis3, S. A. Doherty4, D. J. Hart5, A. Hofman6, F. P. Luyten3, R. A. Maciewicz7, M. Mangino5, S. Metrustry5, K. Muir8, M. J. Peters1,2, F. Rivadeneira1,2, M. Wheeler4, W. Zhang4, N. Arden9, T. D. Spector5, A. G. Dysregulation of TGF signaling has been implicated in many disease states Uitterlinden1,2, M. Doherty4, R. J. Lories3, A. M. Valdes5, J. B. Van Meurs1,2; including Marfan syndrome (MFS), a condition caused by deficiency of the 1Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Netherlands extracellular matrix protein fibrillin-1. Many manifestations of MFS can be Genomics Initiative-Sponsored by the Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging, attenuated in mouse models using interventions that antagonize TGF signa- Leiden, Netherlands, 3Laboratory for Skeletal development and Joint disorders, Division ling. TGF can initiate both canonical (Smad-dependent) and noncanonical of Rheumatology, K.U., Leuven, Belgium, 4Academic Rheumatology, University of Nottingham, City Hospital Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, 5Department of (prominently including the MAPKs ERK, JNK and p38) signaling cascades. Multiple lines of evidence will be presented that implicate ERK signaling as www.eshg.org www.eshg.org6 ESHG Plenary Lectures Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 the primary TGF-dependent event that drives disease including the ability tropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5)-mediated signaling. It has been po- of ERK antagonists to achieve phenotypic rescue. Despite this progress, our stulated that this increased mGluR5 signal may be responsible for many of understanding of how fibrillin-1 deficiency initiates altered TGF activity re- the clinical manifestations observed in fragile X syndrome. mGluR5 receptor mains incomplete, as does knowledge regarding events that culminate in antagonists have repeatedly been shown to rescue many phenotypes and tissue failure or that that account for the wide intrafamilial variability in endophenotypes in animal models of the fragile X syndrome. Comprehensi- the severity of vascular disease. In attempt to refine our mechanistic un- ve phenotype correction also occurs when treatment is administered later derstanding of disease pathogenesis (with a focus on aortic aneurysm), we in the adult KO mice. We examined whether a receptor subtype-selective have launched initiatives to identify environmental and genetic modifiers of inhibitor of mGluR5, AFQ056, improves the behavioral symptoms of FXS in MFS. Use of calcium channel blockers to mitigate hemodynamic stress resul- a randomized, double-blind, two-treatment, two-period, crossover study of ted in a marked acceleration of aortic growth and rupture in mice with MFS 30 male FXS patients aged 18 to 35 years. We detected no significant ef- and correlated with accentuation of ERK signaling. The deleterious con- fects of treatment on the primary outcome measure, the Aberrant Behavior sequences of this gene-by-environment interaction were abrogated using Checklist-Community Edition (ABC-C) score, at day 19 or 20 of treatment. ERK antagonists. In a separate study, we identified a single major protective In an exploratory analysis, however the patients with full FMR1 promoter modifying locus for MFS coincident with the map position for MAP3K4 (a methylation and no detectable FMR1 messenger RNA improved, as measu- major JNK and p38 kinase). Taken together, these data reinforce the concept red with the ABC-C, significantly more after AFQ056 treatment than with that noncanonical TGF signaling is central to disease progression. Insights placebo (P < 0.001). If confirmed in larger and longer-term studies, these regarding initiating events derived from our demonstration that a conge- results suggest that blockade of the mGluR5 receptor in patients with full nital presentation of skin fibrosis (scleroderma) is caused by mutations in methylation at the FMR1 promoter may show improvement in the beha- fibrillin-1 that specifically impair integrin binding to its RGD sequence. Mice vioral attributes of FXS. harboring a RGD to RGE mutation in fibrillin-1 (causing an obligate loss of PL4.1 integrin binding) show dense dermal fibrosis in association with increased Mendel Lecture expression of an integrin subtype (v3) known to activate TGFbeta and ERK, E. Eichler; and are protected from fibrosis by manipulations that mimic the interaction Seattle, WA, United States. between fibrillin-1 and other integrins (e.g. 51). When stimulated with TGF, scleroderma fibroblasts show unique and marked activation of ERK when compared to control cells. This effect is prevented by treatment with an inte- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- grin 1-activating or 3-blocking antibody. These data suggest that 3 integrin me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- not only augments TGF signaling, but also specifically influences the choice dates. between the Smad and ERK cascades (favoring ERK), perhaps through a di- PL5.1 rect potentiating interaction between αvβ3 and TβRII. RGE mice also deve- ESHG Award Lecture lop aortic aneurysm, providing an ideal system to test the hypothesis that P. Lichter; loss of matricellular integrin-ligand interaction is an inciting event in the Heidelberg, Germany. MFS aorta and to test integrin-targeted therapies. PL3.2 No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- P. de Vries, S. Struengmann; me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- UMnoivleercsuitlya rolfy C Tapaer gTeotwend, CThrielda t&m Aednoltess cinen Tt uPsbyecrhoiautsry S, Cclaepreo Tsoisw nC,o Smoupthle Axf r(iTcaS.C) dates. Until recently, no targeted treatments were available to individuals with ge- netic syndromes such as TSC. The evidence emerging from an increasing number of genetic disorders has, however, begun to challenge this irrever- sibility assumption, and is showing how an understanding of the neuro- biological mechanisms underlying a syndrome can lead to biologically- or molecularly-targeted treatments. Advances in the molecular biology of tuberous sclerosis have shown that TSC is an mTOR (mammalian Target Of Rapamycin) overactivation syndro- me, and phase III trials are currently underway for physical phenotypes of the disorder. The neuropsychiatric phenotype of TSC was presumed to be caused by the structural brain abnormalities and/or seizures seen in the disorder. However, over the last few years research has shown that there are also direct molecular pathways from genetic mutation to neurocognitive phenotypes. Molecularly-targeted treatments using mTOR inhibitors are showing great promise for the physical and neurological features of the disorder. Intriguin- gly, pre-clinical and early-phase clinical studies of neuropsychiatric pheno- types are suggesting that specific aspects of cognition or neurodevelopment might also be reversible, even in adults with the disorder. In this talk, we will follow the history of tuberous sclerosis complex from first description to molecularly targeted treatments. PL3.3 Targeted treatments in Fragile X syndrome S. Jacquemont1, A. Curie2, V. des Portes2, M. Torrioli3, G. Neri4, F. Gasparini5, B. Gomez- Mancilla6; 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Hospices Civils de Lyon, Université de Lyon and CNRS UMR 5230 (L2C2), Lyon, France, 3Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Cattedra di Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Roma, Italy, 4Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Istituto di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, 5Neuroscience Discovery, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland, 6Neuroscience Translational Medicine, Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by expansion of a CGG repeat in the 5‘ untranslated region of the fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) gene. This mutation is associated with hypermethylation at the FMR1 promoter and subsequent transcriptional silencing. The absence of FMRP (FMR1 protein) at the synapse has many consequences, including up-regulation of metabo- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Symposia 7 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ESHG Concurrent Symposia present sequential clonal expansions. Additional analysis of 100 single cells from a homogeneous primary tumor and its liver metastasis indicated that a single clonal expansion formed the primary tumor and seeded the meta- S01.1 stasis. In both primary tumors, we also identified an unexpectedly abundant Combined tests for rare variants subpopulation of genetically diverse ‚pseudodiploid‘ cells that do not travel B. Neale; to the metastatic site. In contrast to the prevailing models of gradual tumor Boston, MA, United States. progression, our data suggest that these tumors grew by punctuated clo- nal expansions, in which hundreds of chromosomal rearrangements were acquired in short bursts of evolution. Recently, we have also developed a No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- method to perform whole-genome sequencing of single cells. From this data me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- we can detection many classes of chromosomal mutations (point mutations, dates. indels and structural variants) at base-pair resolution in single cells. We are S01.2 using this tool to investigate several major areas of cancer biology including Statistical analysis of rare variants in genome-wide association invasion, metastasis and response to chemotherapy. studies of complex traits S02.3 A. Morris; Oxford, United Kingdom. Genomic instability in early stages of cancer development A. C. Bester, E. Ozeri-Galai, B. Kerem; Department of Genetics, The Life Sciences Institute, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. Chromosomal instability in early cancer stages is caused by stress on DNA S01.3 replication. The molecular basis for this replication perturbation was Homing in on causative genes in GWAS-identified risk loci using eQTL unknown. We showed the replication dynamics in cells in which a regulator information of S-the effect of other oncogenes and of micronutrients on the replicati- Y. Momozawa, V. Deffontaine, B. Charloteaux, F. Crins, A. Gori, C. Lecut, M. Mni, C. Oury, on dynamics and genomic instability. These results will be presented and C. Reenaers, E. Théâtre, E. Louis, M. Georges; discussed. University of Liege, Liege, Belgium. The perturbed DNA replication in early stages of cancer development in- GWAS have mapped hundreds of risk loci for tens of complex diseases, in- duces chromosomal instability preferentially at fragile sites. However, the cluding inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, for most risk loci the molecular basis for this instability was unknown. We showed that already causative genes amongst positional candidates remain unknown. under normal conditions, replication fork progression along the fragile site, To aid in the identification of causative genes, we have generated transcrip- FRA16C, is slow and forks frequently stall at AT-rich sequences, leading to tome data for nine IBD-relevant cell-types in more than 200 healthy indivi- activation of additional origins. Under mild replication stress, the frequency duals. We have mapped cis- and trans-eQTL in all cell types. We first quanti- of stalling at AT-rich sequences is further increased. Strikingly, unlike in the fied tissular overlap between eQTL as well as their tissue-specific degree of entire genome, in FRA16C additional origins are not activated, suggesting coincidence with IBD risk loci. that all potential origins are already activated under normal conditions. We We then used the ensuing eQTL information to pinpoint likely causative further studied the replication dynamics of another fragile site FRA16D. The genes in known risk loci as follows. It is becoming increasingly apparent results of this analysis will be presented and discussed. Altogether, our re- that a substantial proportion of inherited risk is due to regulatory variants sults provide a mechanism explaining the replication stress sensitivity of that alter the expression profile of the causative genes. In such cases, and fragile sites and thus, the basis for genomic instability during early stages independently of the number of risk variants involved, disease association of cancer. profile (i.e. the combination of p-values exhibited by all variants in a risk locus) and eQTL association profile are bound to be highly correlated in the S03.1 disease-relevant tissue. We have devised and characterized the behavior of Epigenetic regulation of the circadian clock metrics that measure such correlations. These metrics are made indepen- P. Sassone Corsi; dent of known disease-associated coding SNPs mapping to the risk loci of Irvine, CA, United States. interest. We have used these metrics to prioritize candidate genes in the 118 known risk loci associated with Crohn’s disease and/or Ulcerative Colitis. eQTL-informed high-throughput resequencing of candidates in large case- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- control cohorts to confirm their causality is in progress. Latest results will me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- be presented. dates. S02.1 S03.2 Copy number variation and selection during reprogramming Epigenetics in diabetes A. Nagy; A. El-Osta; Toronto, ON, Canada. Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Australia. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. dates. S02.2 S03.3 Investigating Genomic Heterogeneity in Breast Cancer by Single-Cell Epigenetics of the impact of early trauma on behavior across Sequencing generations N. Navin; J. Bohacek; Houston, TX, United States. Brain Research Institute, University/ETH Zürich, Zurich, Switzerland. As a tumor evolves from a single cell, it acquires complex somatic mutations The development and expression of behaviors in mammals are strongly and diverges to form distinct lineages of clones. This intratumor heterogenei- influenced by environmental factors. When favorable and positive, the- ty confounds basic research and clinical diagnosis, because tools do not exist se factors can facilitate appropriate responses and normal behaviors, but to resolve it. To address this problem, we developed a single-cell sequencing when aversive and stressful, they can lead to behavioral pathologies. Adver- method to profile genomic copy number in individual tumor cells. We used se and traumatic events early in life are particularly strong risk factors for this method to profile hundreds of single cells from two triple-negative (ER-, behavioral and psychiatric conditions such as depression, personality and PR- and Her2-) breast cancer patients. Analysis of 100 single cells from a conduct disorders, and antisocial behaviors. Such disorders can not only heterogeneous tumor revealed three distinct clonal subpopulations that re- affect the individuals directly exposed to trauma, but can also be transmit- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org8 ESHG Concurrent Symposia Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 S04.2 1 Dissecting Treacher Collins syndrome using the mouse as a model ted and similarly expressed in the following generations. The mechanisms organism underlying the etiology and inheritance of behavioral symptoms induced M. J. Dixon1, P. A. Trainor2, J. Dixon1; by traumatic stress early in life have been proposed to involve epigenetic 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Stowers Institute for Medical processes, but remain undefined. This talk will discuss novel developments Research, Kansas City, MO, United States. in transgenerational epigenetics, and introduce an experimental model of early traumatic stress in mice that provides initial evidence for the contri- bution of epigenetic processes to the inherited impact of stress on beha- Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is an autosomal dominant disorder of vior. This model shows that chronic and unpredictable maternal separation craniofacial development that occurs with an estimated incidence of 1 in causes depressive- and impulsive-like behaviors, social withdrawal and co- 50,000 live births. TCS is characterized by a combination of: bilateral down- gnitive defects in adult mice, and that these symptoms are transmitted to ward slanting of the palpebral fissures; colobomas of the lower eyelids with the following offspring. It provides initial evidence that these alterations are a paucity of eyelashes medial to the defect; hypoplasia of the facial bones; associated with persistent changes in DNA methylation in the promoter-as- cleft palate; malformation of the external ears; atresia of the external audi- sociated CpG island of several gen2e-4s, in the brain of the offspring and in the tory canals; and bilateral conductive hearing loss. TAC hOiFgh1 degree of inter- and germline of their stressed fathers . These findings suggest that epigenetic intra-familial variation in the clinical phenotype is observed. The majority of mechanisms contribute to the impact of negative e5n-8vironmental conditions TCS patients are heterozygous for a mutation in which introduces a early in life on adult behavior and its inheritance . Novel molecular can- premature termination codon into the encoded protein Treacle. Treacle is a dRiedfaetree nmceecshanisms thought to contribute to transgenerational epigenetic nucleolar phosphoprotein which co-localizes with upstream binding factor inheritance will also be discussed. (Ubf) and RNA polymerase 1 in nucleolar organizing regions where it func- Neurobiol Dis39 tions in ribosomal DNA (rDNA) gene trTacnosf1cription. Tcof1 1 Franklin, T. B. & Mansuy, I. M. Epigenetic inheritance in mammals: evi- To investigate the developmental basis of TCS, we have generated a mouse dence for the impact of adverse environmental effects. , model through germline mutation of . Haploinsufficiency of re- 61-65 (2010). sults in marked apoptosis in the neuroepithelium leading to a deficiency 2 FranklPinL, oTS. BO.n, eLi6nder, N., Russig, H., Thony, B. & Mansuy, I. M. Influence of of migrating neural crest cells and resulting in severe craniofacial malfor- early stress on s oecti aall .abilities and serotonergic functions across generations mations. We have further demonstrated that Treacle is required cell auto- in mice. ,B ei2o1l 8P4sy2c h(2ia0t1ry1)6.8 nomously for the formation and proliferation of neural crest cells andT cthoaf1t 3 Franklin, T. B. Epigenetic transmission of the impact of early stress Treacle elicits its role through regulating the production of mature riboso- across generations. , 408-415 (2010). Front Be- mes. Subsequently, we have demonstrated that haploinsufficiency of 4ha Wv eNiesus,r Io. sCci., 5Franklin, T. B., Vizi, S. & Mansuy, I. M. Inheritable effect of un- induces nucleolar stress and p53 checkpoint activation which results in p53 predictable maternal separation on behavioral responses in mice. stabilization and cyclin G1-mediated, cell-cycle arrest. Collectively, these , 3 (2011). Curr Opin Neurobiol20 perturbations underpin the tissue specificity of neuroepithelial apoptosis 5 Franklin, T. B. & Mansuy, I. M. The prevalence of epigenetic mechanisms in and neural crest cell hypoplasia characteristic of TCS. Importantly, chemical the regulation of cognitive functions and behaviour. , or genetic inhibitioTnco off1 p53 prevents cyclin G1-driven apoptotic elimination 441-449 (2010). Neurobiol Learn Mem96 of neural crest cells and rescues the craniofacial abnormalities associated 6 Franklin, T. B. & Mansuy, I. M. The involvement of epigenetic defeBcetsh ainv with mutations in PO. NLoRt1aDbly, recPeOnLtR e1vCidence has indicated that a subset Bmreaninta Rl erset1a9rd2ation. , 61-67 (2011). of TCS cases arise from mutations in two genes encoding subunits of RNA 7 Gräff, J. & Mansuy, I. M. Epigenetic codes in cognition and behaviour. Eur polymerases I and III, and , providing further evidence that J Neurosci 30, 70-87 (2008). TCS is a ribosomopathy. 8 Gräff, J. & Mansuy, I. M. Epigenetic dysregulation in cognitive disorders. S04.3 , 1-8 (2009). Human Facial Dysostoses S04.1 D. Wieczorek; Integrating clinical and genomic approaches to identify causative Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany. genetic loci for nonsyndromic orofacial clefting E. Mangold; Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Human facial dysostoses can be subdivided into mandibulofacial (MFD) and acrofacial dysostoses (AFD). Both are characterized by hypoplasia of facial structures derived from the first and second branchial arches. In addition to Formal genetic and epidemiological studies have indicated that the etiolo- facial findings AFDs include anToCmOaFli1esP oOfL tRh1eD extrePmOiLtRie1sC. gy of nonsyndromic orofacial clefts is multifactorial, with both genetic and Teth ael b.est known MFD is the Treacher Collins syndrome, a monogenic disea- environmental factors contributing to the phenotype. Improved understan- se caused by mutations of the , or genes (Dauwerse ding of the etiology of clefting may facilitate development of new preven- , 2011), which are involved in rRNA traEnFsTcUriDp2tion. MFD with microce- tative measures and therapeutic approaches, and could improve genetic phaly is another impoetr taaln.t form of MFD. Very recently, haploinsufficiency counselling for families at risk. of a spliceosomal GTPase encoded by the gene was identified in In this talk the latest genetic findings for nonsyndromic orofacial clefts will these patients (Lines , 2012). Other MFDs such as MFD type Toriello or be discussed as well as their biological and functional implications. Burn-McKeown syndrome are more rare and their molecular etiology has Most epidemiological and molecular genetic studies of nonsyndromic orofa- not been resolved so far. cial clefts have been performed in patients with nonsyndromic cleft lip with AFDs fall into two groups: i) AFDs with postaxial malformationDsH oOf DexHtremi- or without cleft palate (nsCL/P), which is the most common form of oro- ties, e.g. Miller syndrome, and ii) AFDs with preaxial inevto alvl.ement, e.g. Nager facial clefting. Nonsyndromic cleft palate only (nsCPO) is the second most syndrome. MilSleFr3 sBy4ndrome is caused by mutations within the gene, common subtype, and only limited research has been conducted into the involved in the pyrimidine biosyntheets aisl .pathway (Ng , 2010). Haploin- genetic factors underlying nsCPO. sufficiency of , a component of the pre-mRNA spliceosomal complex, For nsCL/IPR Fli6nkage and candidate gene studies have attempted to elucidate leads to Nager syndrome (Bernier , 2012). In other, much rarer AFDs the underlying genetic architecture, however, only the interferon regulatory the molecular etiology is still unknown. factor 6 ( ) gene has been identified as causative. Recent genome-wide S05.1 association studies (GWAS) have substantially extended our knowledge of Alzheimer’s disease the underlying risk factors. Four GWAS of nsCL/P have been conducted, and J. Williams; these have identified five new chromosomal loci. One locus, located in an Cardiff, United Kingdom. intergenic region of chromosome 8q24, has been implicated in all GWAS and constitutes a major susceptibility locus. Although there is considerable overlap between studies in terms of the regions identified (particularly for No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- the loci at 8q24 and 10q25), the causative variants still await identification. me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- With the exception of 8q24, each of the identified loci harbors candidate dates. genes. However, proof of causality is still lacking in all cases. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Symposia 9 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 S05.2 Schizophrenia Genetics M. O’Donovan; the interpretation of CNV’s in postnatal setting. However, the clinical inter- MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Psychological pretation of CNV’s in a prenatal setting is more challenging compared to a Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. postnatal setting, since the clinical information needed to interpret CNV’s is often incomplete, time is pressing and decisions taken are irreversible. In high risk pregnancies, e.g. (multiple) malformations detected on ultrasound, It has long been known that schizophrenia has high heritability, but as for the added value of array-CGH often is limited, since decisions with regard to other complex disorders, identifying the specific genes responsible has been pregnancy management are already taken based on the detected anomalies. a major challenge. However, through the technological revolution in geno- In contrast, array-CGH can have a major added value as a screening tool in mics, and by the deployment of very large samples through international low risk pregnancies, this has to be outweighed against the difficult issues collaboration, highly significant evidence for the involvement of around 15 such as CNV’s with reduced penetrance, variable expressivity and pleiotro- common genetic variants has emerged, each making a small contribution to pic effects, unclassified CNV’s, incidental findings etc. The huge demand for risk of the disorder. Replication studies suggest that of 81 independent vari- pre-test counseling raised by these difficulties cannot be met by most ge- ants surpassing p<10-5 in the largest schizophrenia GWAS, the vast majority netic centers. Also, one can question to what extent parents can take truly are likely to be true risk variants but it is also clear from multi-locus tests informed decisions, not only on taking a prenatal array-CGH test, but also that around a thousand or more risk variants exist. There is clear evidence taking decisions regarding pregnancy management if a variant is detected. that these common variants substantially overlap with risk variants for S06.3 bipolar disorder, and emerging evidence that they also overlap with those Get ready for the flood of fetal gene screening conferring risk of other disorders, in particular ADHD. The same develop- H. T. Greely; ments that have allowed GWAS have also identified a number of abnorma- Stanford, CA, United States. lities of chromosome structure with clear evidence for their involvement in schizophrenia and that these occur as de novo mutations in about 5% of cases. Although rare, the CNVs confer a substantial increase in risk of schi- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- zophrenia to carriers as well as to other neurodevelopmental phenotypes me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- including ADHD, Autism and Intellectual Disability. Although only a small dates. amount of the total genetic variation that contributes to schizophrenia and S07.1 bipolar disorder has been allocated to specific DNA variants, recent findings Pharmacogenomic biomarkers: growing promise and hype have strongly implicated specific aspects of neuronal function that are of W. Sadee; importance in the pathogenesis of psychosis. The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, United States. S05.3 Bipolar affective disorder S. Cichon; Genomic sciences supported by ultra-high throughput technologies begin Bonn, Germany. to change the landscape of medicine, disease prevention, and therapy. De- velopment of genomic biomarkers guiding drug therapies has moved to the forefront of translation into clinical practice. The US FDA’s Table of Pharma- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- cogenomic Biomarkers in Drug Labels (1) now contains >120 drug entries me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- where evidence of a genetic effect has been described. However, confidence dates. in the presented evidence and effect size with regards to drug response or S06.1 toxicity vary over a wide range - from definitive clinical recommendations Tailoring and implementing aCGH for prenatal diagnosis: experience to ‘for information only’. While strong genetic factors predictive of adverse from Hong Kong drug reactions move into clinical practice as biomarker tests, drug efficacy R. K. W. Choy; is typically multifactorial, with few tests capable of predicting outcomes - Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. companion biomarker tests for targeted cancer chemotherapy a possible exception. Yet accurate prediction of positive response to therapy has the potential to improve drug therapy substantially, while much of the genetic Microarray analysis has been recognized as a powerful diagnostic tool for variability in drug response genes has yet to be discovered. Our research fo- detection of chromosome copy number aberrations in infants and child- cuses on expression genetics, based on the premise that regulatory variants ren with congenital malformations and neurodevelopmental disabilities. (affecting transcription, RNA processing, and translation) are more preva- Although microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) lent than nonsynonymous SNPs that alter protein function directly. I will was made available at the same time as the postnatal setting, in the prena- present specific examples and highlight emerging opportunities and hurdles tal setting it has had a slower adoption rate. Based on the CNVs abnorma- to translation of genetics/genomics into therapeutic advances. Supported lity rate detected from the recent NICHD sponsored multicentre trial and by NIH U01 GM092655. meta-analysis reported, aCGH is a more sensitive diagnostic test and adds 1. http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/ScienceResearch/ResearchAreas/Pharmaco- incremental value to conventional karyotyping. There were also emerging genetics/ucm083378.htm evidences suggested that a targeted or lower resolution array appeared to S07.2 be more appropriate for the detection of majority of clinically relevant chro- Clinical pharmagenomics: perspectives and limitations mosome copy number abnormalities while maintaining a low rate of results M. Schwab1,2; with unknown clinical significant. Our laboratory has been offering „one- 1Dr Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany, stop“ prenatal screening and diagnostic service using low resolution targe- 2Department of Clinical Pharmacology, University Hospital, Tuebingen, Germany. ted array (aCGH; 4x44K) since 2009. In this study, we present a prospecti- ve follow-up survey of 500 pregnancies after prenatal screening and aCGH analysis with subsequent antenatal care in our unit. This is a prospective Variation in drug disposition and response among patients is a major con- follow-up study, using pregnancy outcome as the end point to investigate cern associated with many therapeutical agents used in all disciplines of the accuracy, efficacy, clinical advantages and shortcoming of prenatal dia- medicine. The clinical relevance of variability is most evident with drugs gnosis using targeted aCGH as compared to standard conventional chromo- that have a narrow therapeutic window (i.e., the dose used is close to the some analysis using microscopy and QF-PCR. A few cases neglected by aCGH dose probably resulting in drug-related toxicity in most individuals). With but subsequently identified to have chromosomal or genetic abnormalities increasingly information available from the Human Genome Project and the by other methods will be discussed. HapMap Project, pharmacogenomics aims to elucidate the genomic deter- S06.2 minants of drug efficacy and toxicity. For instance, variants in genes that Prenatal diagnosis: Challenges in the interpretation of high resolution are relevant for ADME processes such as drug metabolizing enzymes, drug genetic screening tests transporters and nuclear receptors have profound effects on patient outco- K. Devriendt; me. Recent clinically important examples are pharmacogenomics of tamoxi- Center for Human Genetics, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. fen, a well established drug for treatment of postmenopausal breast cancer, and pharmacogenomics of clopidogrel, an antiplatelet drug. However, it is unlikely that one single gene will affect exclusively disease or treatment out- High resolution genetic screening tests based on array-CGH are being in- come, and therefore a more comprehensive approach will be to consider troduced in the prenatal setting. They significantly increase the detection genetic polymorphisms in entire biological/ pharmacological pathways. Re- www.eshg.org of genetic variants with clinical implications. Several flow-charts wexiwst wfo.re shcegn.tolyr dgeveloped ‘-omics’ appoaches (e.g. genomics, transcriptomics, prote-10 ESHG Concurrent Symposia Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 S08.2 Risk Communication and Behaviour Change: Exploring the Chasm omics, metabonomics) will be helpful to identify further putative targets for T. Marteau; better prediction of drug response and will complement each other. Array London, United Kingdom. technologies (e.g. cDNA arrays, GWA), next generation sequencing and me- tabonomics have shown to be helpful for identifying novel genes, redefining disease diagnosis and predicting therapy response to specific drugs. Finally, There is a strong belief held by the public, health care practitioners and sci- non-genetic factors as well as epigenetics (e.g. methylation, miRNA) have to ence funders that using biomarkers and in particular genotypes, will mo- be considered more intensively in the future. Experimental as well as compu- tivate behavior change to reduce the identified risks. This paper will pre- tational approaches are required to obtain holistic, mechanistic information sent the result of a recently updated Cochrane Review which supports the on disease networks and drug response. Thus, only systems pharmacology conclusions of the original review (Marteau et al 2010) that communicating allows the integration of the systems-level understanding of drug response genetic risk information is unlikely to make much discernible impact upon with genome medicine to promote the idea of personalized medicine. the change in behaviour needed to reduce the high and rising rates of non- S07.3 communicable diseases attributable to smoking, diet and physical inactivity. Pharmacogenomics - Is it a hype really? This is in keeping with recent evidence from neuroscience and psychology H. J. Guchelaar; that highlights the finding that much behaviour taking place outside of awa- Leiden, Netherlands. reness. While the communication of genetic risk information is unlikely to form part of broader public health strategies to change health related behavior No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- in order to improve population health, genetic and other biomarker-based me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- risk information will continue to be given in some clinical contexts. The next dates. generation of research in this latter context could usefully take as its starting S08.1 points first, that there is nothing particularly motivating about biomarker Research about psychological issues related to genetic counselling rKiesky rineffoerrmenactieosn and second, that engagement in some programmes can and genetic testing: a personal view on past, present and future change health-related behaviour. G. Evers-Kiebooms; Department of Human Genetics, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. Marteau TM, French DP, GriffinCo ScJh, Prarenveo Dsat AtaTb, Sauset toofn S ySsRt,e Wmaattkicis Roenv Cie,w Asttw20o1o0d S, Hollands GJ. Effects of communicating DNA-based disease risk estimates on risk-reducing behaviours. . Notwithstanding the complex psychological risks faced by individuals at issue 10 Art. No.: CD007275. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD007275.pub2 increased risk for developing genetic disease or for having offspring with Evans JP, Meslin EM, Marteau TM, Caulfied T Deflating the genomic bubble. genetic disease, psychological issues related to genetic risk, genetic coun- Science 2011 33: 861-2. selling and genetic testing were hardly studied before 1980. Thereafter S08.3 the attention for the psychological dimension increased rather slowly and Psycho-onco-genetics: historical background and future challenges moreover most studies were descriptive and did not use adequate control E. M. A. Bleiker; groups . In several countries the success of the human genome project also The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. stimulated research on other than technical or medical aspects of the new genetics. Unfortunately more attention and funding went to ELSI (Ethical, Legal, Social issues) than to Psychological issues. ELSI instead of PELSI⋯ ‘Psycho-onco-genetics’ is the domain where psychology, oncology and gene- tics meet. A brief historical background of the three sciences is presented, The fact that the “teaching model” of genetic counselling dominated the followed by suggestions for future research. “counselling model” for many years, resulted initially in psychological Cancer is as old as mankind. In Western countries, first successful treat- research that was mainly focused on cognitive aspects of genetic counse- ments for cancer were given between 1900 and 1950. In the 1960s, the ta- ling (understanding of probabilistic information, recall of risks). Seymour boo decreased and a cancer diagnosis was more openly communicated to Kessler played an important role in drawing the attention on genetic coun- the patient. At that time, psychology and psychiatry entered oncology. By seling as a complex communication process and on the factors involved in the mid-seventies, the first psycho-oncological investigators studied issues processing emotionally laden information, coping with genetic disease and like anxiety and depression. Questionnaires assessing ‘quality of life’ were communication about genetic issues within the family. The first part of the developed in the 1980s andst 1990s, to measure physical, social, and emo- presentation is dedicated to a personal selection of research findings about tional wellbeintgh. In the 21 century, the screening of cancer patients for the impact of genetic counselling as well as about directiveness versus non- distress (‘the 6 vital sign’) is being advocated. Parallel to the developments directiveness. in cancer treatment and psycho-oncology, the field of genetics developed. The hypothesis that a disease like breast cancer could be inherited was for the first time reported by Paul Broca in 1866. In 1953, Watson and Crick The progress in diagnostic possibilities allowed the detection of more and were among the first to report on the structure of DNA, and more impor- more genetic diseases in adults or children, prenatally and even in the em- tant discoveries followed in the next decades. In the 1960s the first papers bryo. The second and major part of the presentation consists of a personal on genetic counseling for cancer appeared. A literature search on this topic looking back on research about psychological aspects of prenatal testing, revealed over 10.000 papers published since 1967, with a strong increase carrier testing and predictive testing. For each of the three types of genetic in the 1990s, when a number of genes associated with cancer syndromes testing two major dimensions will be considered: decision making about were identified. testing and the psychological impact of testing. Where applicable in the Concerns were raised about the possible negative psychosocial impact of context of predictive testing attention will also be paid to a third dimensi- genetic testing and preventive surgery for (breast) cancer. In general, results on: psychological issues involved in preventive health behavior or life style did not support this concern. However, a number of questions still need to changes that may be induced by a genetic test result. The focus in this part be answered. For example: are the currently used distress-questionnaires of the presentation will be on predictive testing, prenatal testing and pre- sufficiently sensitive to assess the specific problems encountered by the implantation genetic diagnosis for Huntington’s disease, with special atten- counselees? Are those who do not request counseling psychologically more tion for longitudinal studies evaluating the impact of the test result on the vulnerable? To what extent should counselors play an active role in the com- psychological wellbeing of the tested person and his or her partner and on munication of genetic test results to distant relatives of mutation carriers? subsequent family planning. What will be the best use of SNP’s in clinical practice, and how can we sup- port counselees with coping with these small elevated risks for cancer? How So far psychological research to delineate the challenges as well as the pit- can we improve psycho-education about reproductive decision making such falls of whole genome sequencing for predicting future health problems is as prenatal and pre-implantation genetic diagnosis? In addition, a number very limited. Based on relevant research in psychological decision making of questions need to be answered when commercial genetic testing will ar- and health psychology, mainly on risk perception, the consequences of in- rive in Europe, making genetic testing accessible without the intervention of formation overload and differences in coping style, a few comments will be a trained genetic counselor. formulated in the closing part of the presentation. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Symposia 11 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 S09.1 Opposing roles for IL-23 and IL-12 in maintaining occult cancer in an equilibrium state Unpublished results we recently obtained show that HSP110 is frequently M. W. Teng1,2, M. D. Vessely3, H. Duret1, N. McLaughlin1, J. E. Towne4, R. D. Schreiber3, M. mutated in human MSI neoplasms regardless of their primary location. J. Smyth1,2; Heat shock proteins (HSPs) are necessary for cancer cell survival. The 1Peter MaCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 2Sir Peter MacCallum Department HSP110DE9 mutant is the first HSP inhibitor produced endogenously by the of Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Department of Pathology cancer cell. It is generated from an aberrantly spliced mRNA and lacks the and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO, United States, HSP110 substrate binding domain. HSP110DE9 expression is observed at 4Inflammation Research, AMGEN Incorporated, Seattle, WA, United States. variable levels in MSI cancer cells and tightly correlates with the size of al- lelic deletions in a T17 DNA repeat located in HSP110 intron 8. HSP110DE9 impaired both the normal cellular localization of HSP110 and its interaction The detailed mechanism controlling the equilibrium phase of cancer im- with other HSPs, thus abrogating the chaperone activity and anti-apoptotic munoediting that results in immune-mediated dormancy of cancer remains function of HSP110 in a dominant negative manner. Forced overexpression to be delineated. Here, we investigate the length of the equilibrium phase of HSP110ΔE9 causes the sensitization of cells to anticancer agents such during immune control of methycholanthrene (MCA) induced cancers and as oxaliplatin and 5-fluorouracil regardless of their microsatellite status. extend these observations to aging, cancer prone p53 mutant mice. We also Importantly, these in vitro results have clinical significance, since MSI CRC demonstrate, for the first time, the critical and opposing roles of IL-23 and highly expressing HSP110DE9 due to large T17 deletions show significant- IL-12 in maintaining cancer cells in a state of immune-mediated dormancy. ly longer relapse-free survival and response to chemotherapy compared to Over a series of experiments, inhibition of IL-23p19 was shown to reduce those with a low ratio (Collura et al., Submitted). More generally, we suspect the malignant potential of lesions established by MCA inoculation, while HSP110 mutation to constitute a first step towards understanding of the inhibition of IL-12/23p40 enhanced tumor outgrowth. Furthermore, ago- clinical behaviour of colorectal, gastric and endometrial MSI tumours that nistic anti-CD40 antibody treatment mimicked the effects of anti-IL-23p19 have been reported to show an improved prognosis and possibly a different mAb treatment. Other cytokines such as IL-4, IL-17, TNF, and IFNαβ, which response to chemotherapeutic agents. are known to play important roles either in MCA tumorigenesis or in the S10.1 elimination phase of cancer immunoediting did not play critical roles in Estimation of the human mutation rate by whole-genome sequencing maintaining the equilibrium phase. Taken together, these data indicate op- L. Jorde1, C. D. Huff2; posing roles for IL-23 and IL-12 in determining the outgrowth versus dor- 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, mancy of occult neoplasia and suggest a potential long-term danger in using UT, United States, 2Anderson Cancer Research Center, Houston, TX, United States. IL-12/23p40 antibodies for treating human autoimmune inflammatory dis- orders. S09.2 Whole-genome sequences of related individuals in large pedigrees provide Paracrine and Autocrine Signals Induce and Maintain Mesenchymal new opportunities and challenges for disease-gene discovery. They also per- and Stem-Cell States in the Breast mit direct estimates of sex-specific human mutation rates. We have analyzed C. Scheel; whole-genome sequence data from 21 individuals in a 5-generation pedi- Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center, for Environmental Health, gree that was ascertained because of autosomal dominant transmission of Neuherberg, Germany. cardiac septal defects. We used our VAAST software package to identify the disease-causing mutation. VAAST incorporates pedigree information and the observed inheritance pattern with information about genetic variation The epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been associated with the in a control population and amino acid substitutioGnA TseAv4e rity under a unified acquisition of motility, invasiveness, and self- renewal traits. During both likelihood analysis framework The variant responsible for septal defects in normal development and tumor pathogenesis, this change in cell phenotype the family is a known missense mutation in the gene that had been is induced by contextual signals that epithelial cells receive from their mi- previously identified through traditional linkage analysis. In our whole- croenvironment. The signals that are responsible for inducing an EMT and genome analysis of the septal defect phenotype, the G-5ATA4 gene was high- maintaining the resulting cellular state have been unclear. ly significant (Bonferroni corrected p-value = 8.9x10 ), and no other gene We describe three signaling pathways, involving transforming growth factor reached statistical significance. To estimate the male-specific intergenera- (TGF)-beta and canonical and noncanonical Wnt signaling, that collaborate tional mutation rate, we identified novel single nucleotide variants (SNVs) to induce activation of the EMT program and thereafter function in an au- that were absent in a father but were present on the paternal chromoso- tocrine fashion to maintain the resulting mesenchymal and stem cell-like mes of one of the father’s offspring. We identified 12 de novo mutations in state. Importantly, the downregulation of endogenously synthesized inhibi- approximately 600 Mb of sequence d-a3ta, with estimated false-positive and tors of autocrine signals by epithelial cells enables the induction of the EMT false-negative rates of less than 1x10 . We estimated a male-specific, inter- program. Conversely, disruption of autocrine signaling by added inhibitors generational mutation rate that is approximately five times greater than the of these pathways inhibits migration and self-renewal in primary human female-specific mutation rate. This result agrees well with estimates based mammary epithelial cells and reduces tumorigenicity and metastasis by on phylogenetic comparisons. It is also consistent with our mutation rate their transformed derivatives. estimates based on a three-generation kindred in which two members of the Our results indicate that ongoing autocrine signaling is required for mainte- third generation have Miller syndrome. nance of mesenchymal and stem cell traits both in primary and transformed S10.2 mammary epithelial cells. At the same time, given the appropriate signaling Fragile genomes generate more de novo mutations context, these factors act in a paracrine manner that allow the derivation of E. Eichler; mesenchymal and stem cell-like cells in both primary and transformed po- Seattle, WA, United States. pulations of mammary epithelial cells that do not display these attributes. In the longer term, our observations may provide the basis for efficiently inducing differentiated epithelial cells to pass through an EMT and enter No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- into a SC state without relying on genetic alteration. Such an approach may me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- eventually be of great utility in the area of regenerative medicine. Acting in dates. the opposing direction, the tumor-initiating cells of certain carcinomas may S10.3 be forced to exit the mesenchymal, stem cell-like state by therapeutically De Novo Mutations in Neurodevelopmental disorders interrupting multiple autocrine signaling pathways required for their conti- G. A. Rouleau, J. Michaud; nued residence in this state. Centre of Excellence in Neurosciences of Université de Montréal, Centre Hospitalier de S09.3 l’Université de Montréal, Faculty of Medicine, Université of Montréal, Montreal, QC, Microsatelite instability and cancers: From biology to clinics Canada. A. Collura, A. Duval; Inserm, Team ‚Microsatellite Instability and Cancer‘, Paris, France. INTRODUCTION: Schizophrenia (SCZ), autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and intellectual deficiency (ID) are common, devastating and poorly treated Recently, we identified a mutated form of HSP110 (HSP110DE9) in a subset neurodevelopmental brain disorders. The wide spectrum of symptoms and of colorectal cancer (CRC), i.e. CRC displaying microsatellite instability (MSI) clinical variability in these disorders suggest a complex genetic etiology, (Dorard et al., Nat. Med. 2011). The human tumour phenotype referred to as which is consistent with the numerous loci thus far identified by linkage, MSI is frequent, being associated with inherited neoplasms (Lynch syndro- copy number variation and association studies. Although heritability in all me) and with 10-15% of sporadic colon, gastric and endometrial cancers. three disorders may be as high as ~80%, the genes responsible for much www.eshg.org www.eshg.org12 ESHG Concurrent Symposia Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 S12.2 Mouse models of lymphedema of this heritability remain to be identified. Based on the observed redu- T. Petrova; ced reproductive fitness, the relatively uniform world wide incidence, the Epalinges, Switzerland. increased risk of disease with increasing paternal age and thed peh neonvootypic complexity of each disease, we, and others, hypothesized that a fraction of this missing heritability may be the result of the occurrence of mu- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- tations affecting any of a large number of genes. In order to test this hypo- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- thesis we first sequenced over 400 synaptic genes in 148 subjects with SCZ, dates. 148 subjects with ASD and 96 subjects with ID. Many likely de novo mutati- S12.3 ons were identified - these plus relevant fduen ncotivoon al studies will be presen- Therapeutic trials in lymphedema ted. Next we sequenced the exomes of SCZ, ASD and ID probands, plus their K. Alitalo; parents, identifying numerous additional mutations (DNMs). In ad- Helsinki, Finland. ditiSoHnA, N1/K43 ,o f identified DNMsd aer en onvoonsense mutations, which is more than what is expected by chance. Interestingly, some of the identified genes, such as show deleterious mutations in patients from the three No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- disease cohorts, suggesting close biological overlap in these disorders. Our me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- study supports the notion that DNMs may account for some of the missing dates. heritability SCZ, ASD and ID while providing a list of genes possibly involved S13.1 in disease pathogenesis. Exome sequencing in sporadic autism spectrum disorders S11.1 J. Shendure; Genetic basis of primary microcephaly Seattle, WA, United States. C. G. Woods; Cambridge, United Kingdom. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- Primary Microcephaly can be inherited as a dominant and recessive disor- dates. der. Dominant genes are KIF11, and others to be reported. For KIF11 he- S13.2 mizygosity appears to be the mutational mechanism. Recessive genes are Autism genetics: at the crossroads of genomics and cognitive MICROCEPHALIN, WDR62, CDK5RAP2, CEP152, ASPM, CPAP, STIL and neuroscience CEP63, with others to be reported. The mutational mechanism is null muta- D. H. Geschwind; tions - non-sense, splicing and frame-shifting INDELS. The exception being Los Angeles, CA, United States. WDR62, where mis-sense mutations are found, but non-sense mutations additionally cause cerebral dysplasia. All the Primary Microcephaly genes encode proteins involved in mitosis. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- One is involved in the timing of entry into mitosis, others in the mitotic me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- spindle and the remainder in centrosome and centriole function during mi- dates. tosis. These processes are ubiquitous, but it remains unexplained why it is S13.3 only the brain that is affected. Furthermore, no unifying mechanism has yet Large-scale dissection of molecular networks and mechanisms emerged to explain how these particular mitotic apparatus proteins interact underlying Intellectual Disability Disorders to modulate brain growth. A. Schenck; S11.2 Nijmegen, Netherlands. Clinical aspects of primary microcephaly A. Verloes; Paris, France. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- S14.1 me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- Identification of cis- and trans-regulatory variation modulating dates. microRNA expression levels S11.3 S. Antonarakis; DNA repair and microcephaly Geneva, Switzerland. B. Wollnik; Köln, Germany. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- dates. me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- S14.2 dates. Interrogating the RNA heterogeneity within cellular compartmens S12.1 R. Guigo; Molecular classification of primary lymphedema Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain. P. Ostergaard; St. George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom. The unfolding of the instructions encoded in the genome is triggered by the transcription of DNA into RNA, and the subsequent processing of the resul- We have demonstrated that stringent phenotyping can be helpful in gene ting primary RNA transcripts into functional mature RNAs. RNA is thus the identification. Building on 12 years of experieentc ael in our Primary Lympho- first phenotype of the genome, mediating all other phenotypic changes at edema Clinic at St George’s Hospital, London, an updated classification of the organism level caused by changes in the DNA sequence. While current this condition has been proposed by Connell (2012, Clin Genet). This technology is too primitive to provide accurate measurements of the RNA new tool has been useful in our research department and we have had suc- content of the cell, the recent development of Massively Parallel Sequencing cess in identifying genes for Primary Lymphoedema using this rigorous Instruments has dramatically increased the resolution with which we can phenotyping combined with linkage analysis, Sanger sequencing and/or monitor cellular RNA. Using these instruments, the ENCODE project has sur- Whole Exome SequeGnJCc2ingG.A ITnA t2his talKkI, Fth11e classification pathway for Prima- veyed the RNA content of multiple cell lines and subcellular compartments. ry Lymphoedema will be presented together with the latest genes we have The results of these surveys underscore pervasive transription, as well as discovered such as , and . great RNA heterogeneity between and within cells. Comparison of RNA sur- veys with other genome wide epigenetic surveys_such as those of binding sites for Transcription Factors, or of Histone modifications_reveals a very tightly coupling between the different pathways involved in RNA processing, transcription and splicing in particular. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Symposia 13 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 S14.3 Transcribed dark matter: meaning or myth? C. Ponting; Over the past several years, a discovery of new genes causing osteogenesis Oxford, United Kingdom. imperfecta (OI) has provided exciting new insights into bone biology and the pathogenesis of brittle bone disease. At the same time, therapeutic studies in the area of osteoporosis have led to study of osteoporosis drugs in osteo- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- genesis imperfecta. Most have focused on the use of anti-resorptive approa- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- ches such as intravenous bisphosphonates. More recently studies focused dates. on anabolic therapies such as intermittent parathyroid hormone have been S15.1 performed in adults with OI. The different clinical and diagnostic endpoints LRP5 in bone for these studies will be reviewed and potential new therapies informed by M. Warman; pathophysiological discoveries on these new OI genes will be discussed. Boston, MA, United States. S16.1 To Tell or Not to Tell - How should we handle incidental findings obtained in the course of genome sequencing? No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- C. Netzer; me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- Universität Köln, Medizinische Fakultät - Uniklinik Köln, Institut für Humangenetik, dates. Köln, Germany. S15.2 Acromelic dysplasia and TGFbeta signaling V. Cormier-Daire Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have revolutionized gene- tic research within a few years and may very soon become part of routine ; clinical testing. There is a growing debate about the question whether inci- Paris, France. dental genetic findings about disease susceptibilities should be reported to The acromelic dysplasia group includes four disorders namely Weill-Mar- the patients or research participants in all cases, in special cases, or not at chesani Syndrome (WMS), Geleophysic Dysplasia (GD), Acromicric dysplasia all. The answer to this question is crucial for the informed-consent procedu- (AD) and Myhre syndrome (MS), all characterized by severe short stature, re and for the work-up of NGS data-sets. In this talk, some real-life examp- short extremities, restricted joint mobility, thick skin and pseudomuscular les of incidental genetic findings will be presented to illustrate the multiple build. They are distinct by additional features and their pattern inheritance. dimensions of the problem. Possible solutions will be discussed with the WMS is characterized by the presence of dislocation of microspherophakia audience. and has autosomal dominant or recessive mode of inheritance. GD is the S16.2 more severe one, resembling a storage disorder with a progressive cardiac Biobanks: should individuals be informed of findings from biobank valvular thickening, tip toe walking, tracheal stenso sis, bronchopulmonary studies? Can informed consent be realized? insufficiency and often an early dea th. AD ,has an autosomal dominant mode A. Cambon-Thomsen; of inheritance, distinct facial and skeleton feature (a hoarse voice and in- Toulouse, France. ternal notch of the femoral head).Finally MS is sporadic, characterized by prognathism, deafness, developmental delayF, BthNi1ckened calvarium, and large vertebrae with short and large pedicles. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- We first identified mutations in Fibrillin1( A)D AinM tThSe1 d0ominant form of me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- WMS and then mutations in A Disintegrin-like And Metalloproteinase do- dates. main with ThromboSpondin type 1 repeats 10 ( ) in the recessive S16.3 form of WMS. The function of AADDAAMMTTSS1L02 is unknown but these findings Informed consent in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis support a direct interactioFnB bNe1tween ADAMTS10 and FBN1. H. Strange, Z. Deans, A. Newson; We then identified mutations in in the recessive form of GD and ESRC Centre for Economic and Social Aspects of Genomics (Cesagen), Cardiff, United Kingdom. a hotspot of mutations in in the dominant form of GD and in AD (exon 41-42, encoding TGFβ binding protein-like domain 5 (TB5) of FBN1). The function of ADAMTSL2 is unknown. Using a yeast double hybrid screen, we Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) offers the opportunity for exciting identified LFaBteNn1t TGAFDβ ABMinTdSiLn2g Protein 1 as a partner of ADAMTSL2. We changes to prenatal screening and diagnosis. It can give definitive results found an increased level of active TGFβ in the fibroblast medium from pa- reliably at an early stage of pregnancy and without the miscarriage risk as- tients with or mutations and an enhanced phoshorylated sociated with invasive testing. NIPD is already used within the UK for fetal SMAD2 level, allowing us to conclude at an enhanced TGFβ signaling in GD sexing for women at high risk of sex-linked disorders, and in routine scree- and AD. Finally, a direct interaction between ADAMTSL2 and FBN1 was de- ning for fetal RHD in D negative pregnant women. It is also available in the monstrated suggesting a dysregulation of FBN1/ADAMTSL2/ TGFβ interre- USA and China as advanced screening test for trisomy 21. lationship as the undSeMrlyAiDng4 mechanism of the short stature phedne ontoyvpoes. While the technology advances quickly, there is a need to examine careful- To identify the gene responsible for MS, we performed exome sequencing ly how the introduction of NIPD into public clinics and the private sphere in 2 MS and selected as a candidate gene. We identified mis- might affect women and couple’s capacity for making informed decisions. sense mutations, all involving Isoleucine residue at position 500, in the MH2 The presentation starts by outlining reasons to safeguard a fully informed domain of SMAD4 in a total of 20 MS patients. In MS fibroblasts, we found decision-making process, as far as is possible. This is followed by high- decreased ubiquitination level of SMAD4 and increased level of SMAD4 sup- lighting three key areas in which the process of informed decision-making porting a stabilization of SMAD4 protein. Functional SMAD4 is required for might be affected by the introduction of NIPD. These are: prenatal screening canonical signal transduction through the oligomerization with phospho- programmes; direct-to-consumer testing; possible expansion to genome- rylated SMAD2/3 and SMAD1/5/8. We therefore studied the nuclear locali- wide sequencing. zation of mutant SMAD complexes and found that the complexes translocate Prenatal screening programmes: Against the background concern that pre- to the nucleus. We finally observed a decreased expression of downstream natal screening and testing programmes have become ‘routinised’, evidence TGFβ target genes supporting impaired TGFβ driven transcriptional control suggests that, with the apparent ease of NIPD and without any associated in MS. risk of miscarriage, healthcare professionals may regard informed decision- All together, our findings support a direct link between the short stature making as less important for NIPD. phenotypes and the TGFβ signalling. However, the finding of enhanced Direct-to-consumer testing: Any test that is partially carried out at home TGFβ signaling in Marfan phenotypes suggest the existence of yet unknown raises concerns about consent, pressure, and possible coercion by indivi- mechanisms regulating TGFβ action, possibly including tissue specific mo- duals and companies. Direct-to-consumer testing also presents logistical dulations. Finally, remembering the severity of GD, our ultimate goal is the challenges for making sure the results are communicated accurately and are design of drugs that can selectively inhibit this pathway. properly understood and interpreted by the recipient. S15.3 Possible expansion to genome-wide sequencing: Although not yet clinical- Osteogenesis imperfecta ly available, if NIPD were to be offered for whole genome sequencing, this B. Lee; Baylor College of Medicine and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Houston, TX, United would present a significant challenge to traditional models of informed con- States. sent procedures. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org14 ESHG Educational Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ESHG Educational Sessions ced them in the 1980‘s. Giving clients the opportunity to see and hear the therapy team talk about clients’ dilemmas remains a widely used practice in contemporary family therapy. ES1.1 Molecular Genetic Analysis in Complex Diseases M. Nöthen; The method has also been applied to other teaching, training and supervisi- Bonn, Germany. on situations because of the potential advantages such as presenting feed- back in a non-threatening manner and offering a multiverse of perspectives and new ideas and it is for these reasons that the presenter has applied the No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- approach to supervision with Genetic Counsellors. The presenter will ex- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- plain some of the background to this approach and the practicalities of its dates. application illustrated by reference to anonymised cases discussed in the ES1.2 supervision. Turning discovery into prediction C. van Duijn; ES5.1 Rotterdam, Netherlands. Array CGH and applications L. Feuk; Uppsala, Sweden. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- ES2.1 me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- Blistering Diseases dates. L. Bruckner-Tuderman; ES5.2 Freiburg, Germany. Next Generation Sequencing and Applications I. G. Gut; Centro Nacional de Analisis Genomico, Barcelona, Spain. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. Nucleic acid sequencing has been the workhorse of genome research from ES2.2 the very beginning in the late 80’s. Classical Sanger sequencing was used Ichtyosis for the Human Genome Sequencing project and was successively refined J. Fischer; and finally used with automated capillary gel electrophoresis separation. Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. The first sequence of the human genome was generated using exclusively this technology (Lander et al. Nature 2001, Venter et al. Science 2001). In 2005 nucleic acid sequencing saw a paradigm shift with the introduction ondf The epidermis forms the outermost, protective layer of the skin and func- the Genome Sequencer from Roche and was shortly followed by othenrd 2 tions as the essential barrier of the body against dehydration, mechanical generation sequencers from Illumina, LifeTechnologies and Helicos. 2 ge- insults, and the intrusion of microbes, toxins, and allergens. Ichthyoses neration sequencers rely on the preparation of random physically separated comprise a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders of arrangements of individual fragments of the input nucleic acid, followed bnyd keratinization/cornification characterized mainly by abnormal skin scaling cyclic base additions to the random array and high resolution imaging. 2 over the whole body; some patients present with severe symptoms, inclu- generation sequencers are combinndations of high-resolution imaging instru- ding a collodion membrane at birth. The main skin phenotypes are lamellar ments and microfluidic devices. 2 generation sequencers are the main tool ichthyosis and congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma. Most ichthyoses are used in large-scale projects such as the 1000 Genomes, the International inherited genetic disorders, in which gene defects (mutations) lead to an Cancer Genome Consortium (ICGC), the International Human Epigenome impaired epidermal permeability barrier. Genetic analyses have elucidated Consortium (IHEC) and will play an important role in the International Rare numerous associations between gene mutations and the presence of an Disorder Research Consortium (IRDiRC). nd ichthyosis phenotype. Here we will present an update on the main genetic However, development of sequencing methods has not stopped at 2 ge- forms of ichthyoses. neration. Several instruments have been introduced, that move beyond in ES3.1 their characteristics. Detection systems are shiftinrdg from optical detection How to get published in the European Journal of Human Genetics to electrical detection. I would characterise true 3 generation as a method G. B. van Ommen; that does not rely on a replication method, such as primer extension or oli- Leiden, Netherlands. gonucleotide ligation, for sequence determination, and delivers long clonal reads. Methods such as the GridION Sthystem from Oxford Nanopore Techno- logies fall into this category. Even 4 generation sequencing methods are No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- already showing on the horizon with developthments of the EU-funded FP7 me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- project READNA (www.cng.fr/READNA). A 4 generation sequencing me- dates. thod would allow the determination of nucleic sequences cell-by-cell within ES4.1 a histological section. The Family’s Experience of a Genetic Disorder ES6.1 S. McDaniel; Clinical and genetic heterogeneity of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis Rochester, NY, United States. M. Sabatelli; Department of Neurology, Pol. ‚A. Gemelli‘, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal neurodegenerative disorder ES4.2 involving upper and lower motor neurons. Within definite ALS, variants are Using systemic ideas in Genetic Counsellors’ group supervision recognized based on the age of onset, site of localization of first signs, rate T. O‘Neill; of progression of the disease, relative mix of upper and lower motor neuron North Manchester CAMHS, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation deficits and the presence of fronto tempora dementia (FTD). The question Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. of whether ALS is a single disease with variable expression or different di- seases with heterogeneous causes still remains unsolved. Most ALS cases are sporadic (SALS) while familial ALS (FALS) account for The presenter, a Consultant Family Therapist working in child and Ado- about 5% of total cases. Over the last 20 years the pathogenic role of ge- lescent Mental Health, will describe the use of a Reflecting Team format in nes such as SOD1 , TARDBP, FUS, C9ORF72, OPTN, ATXN2 , VCP , ANG and the supervision of Genetic Counsellors. Reflecting Teams have been used in UBQLN-2 has emerged and mutation in these genes have been identified in family therapy since Tom Andersen and his colleagues in Norwayw inwtrowdu.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Educational Sessions 15 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ES8.1 Huntington about 50-60% of FALS. A large hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansi- A. Durr; on in the first intron of C9ORF72, represent the most common mutation in Paris, France. FALS being respomsible of about 40% of cases. Near 50% of patients har- bouring C9ORF72mutation have FTD, compared to 30% of patients with TARDBP mutation and 9% of cases with unknown gene. Patients with FUS No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- and C9ORF mutations have shorter survival with respect to patients with me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- different mutations. . dates. Discoveries in the genetics of FALS are changing the scenario of sporadic ES8.2 ALS as well, making the distinction between familial and apparently spora- Myotonic dystrophy: complex repeats in a complex disorder dic ALS less clear than previously assumed. In fact mutations in the same ge- D. G. Monckton; nes involved in FALS may be identified also in a considerable proportion of University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom. patients with apparent sporadic disease. The same genes may act as either Mendelian genes in FALS or low-penetrance risk alleles in SALS. This chal- lenges the current indication for DNA analysis only in cases with a known Myotonic dystrophy is an autosomal dominant disorder presenting a wide family history of ALS. range of symptoms frequently including cataracts, heart conduction defects, ES6.2 insulin insensitivity and hypersomnia, along with muscular atrophy and Hereditery neuropathies myotonia. Disease severity is extremely variable and the disorder displays V. Timmermann; striking anticipation progressing from the mild late onset form to congenital Antwerpen, Belgium. disease in as little as three generations. The most common form of myotonic dystrophy, type 1, is caused by the expansion of a CTG repeat in the 3’-un- translated region of the DMPK gene. The CTG tract ranges from 5 to ~40 re- No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- peats in the general population. Patients inherit from 50 to 1,000+ repeats, me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- with longer alleles associated with earlier age at onset. The expanded repeat dates. is highly unstable and nearly always increases when transmitted from one ES7.1 generation to the next, explaining the anticipation observed. The expanded Next generation sequencing goes diagnostic: First experiences repeat is also unstable in the soma in a process that is age-dependent, tis- L. Biesecker; sue-specific and expansion-biased, with particularly large expansions in the National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States. affected tissues. Although the majority of DM1 patients present with a pure expanded CTG repeat array, recent evidence has revealed that a subset of pa- tients carry alleles with variant repeats. These variant repeats stabilise the Medicine is being challenged by the DNA sequencing revolution. Next gene- array and are associated with milder symptoms. Pathogenesis appears to be ration (NGS) has led to a precipitous drop in costs, making clinical sequen- primarily caused by the gain of function of the DMPK transcript containing a cing of the genome or exome comparable in cost to other diagnostic tests. large CUG tract that remains trapped within foci in the nucleus and disturbs The question before us is how we can harness this technology to benefit the function of two families of RNA splicing factors that leads to genome- patients. As well, we do not know which medical scenarios are appropri- wide dysregulation of alternative splicing. In particular, mis-splicing of the ate for NGS, nor how we should work with patients and their families to CLC1 chloride channel gene appears to be associated directly with myoto- communicate the results. To address these questions, research is needed to nia and mis-splicing of the insulin receptor gene with insulin insensitivity. develop an evidence base upon which we can create practice standards. We Exciting recent developments suggest that the RNA gain of function defect developed the ClinSeq™ pilot project to explore these questions. The goals of may be alleviated using antisense oligonucleotides paving the way for new this project are to enroll 1,000 subjects, initially focusing on cardiovascular treatments in this devastating disorder. disease, apply NGS technologies, and pilot approaches to consent, data ana- lysis, and return of results. The initial analyses of ClinSeq™ have shown that subjects have good abi- lities to understand the sequencing research through informed consent. They are eager to undergo sequencing and receive results, both for their own benefit as well as to benefit science. They are highly motivated, willing to engage in follow-up research to correlate genotype and phenotype. We began our analyses by screening 572 exomes for highly penetrant mutations for serious medical conditions. These included familial hypercholesterole- mia (n=9 identified), cancer susceptibility (n=8), cardiomyopathies (n=4), arrhythmias (n=4), malignant hyperthermia (n=2), and hereditary liability to nerve and pressure palsies (n=3). Most of these have been returned to the subjects with medical and genetic counseling. In total, we have detected and returned genetic test results for 30 patients. Most of these diagnoses were not suspected to be present by the patient or clinician before the sequen- cing. While this highly educated and affluent cohort of patients is not repre- sentative, there is a substantial desire for NGS results. Further analyses of additional categories of genes (e.g., recessive carrier status) will yield many more clinically relevant results. I will give examples of some of the results we have returned to illustrate the range of the disorders and the reactions of the subjects. These data should be useful to others in planning how to deploy MPS in clinical settings. ES7.2 BRCA1 and 2 diagnostics G. Matthijs; Leuven, Belgium. No abstract received as per date of publication. Please check the program- me planner at http://www.eshg.org/abstracts2012.0.html for possible up- dates. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org16 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C01.3 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Loss of function mutations in TGFB2 cause Loeys-Dietz syndrome D. Schepers1, M. E. Lindsay2,3, N. Ajit Bolar1, J. Doyle3, E. Gallo3, J. Fert-Bober4, M. J. E. Kempers5, E. K. Fishman6, Y. Chen3, L. Myers3, D. Bjeda3, G. Oswald3, B. Anderlid7, M. H. Yang8, E. M. H. F. Bongers5, J. Timmermans9, A. C. Braverman10, N. Canham11, G. R. C01.1 Mortier1, H. G. Brunner5, P. H. Byers8, J. Van Eyck4, L. Van Laer1, H. C. Dietz3, B. L. Loeys1,5; Mutations in the chromatin modifier gene KANSL1 cause the 17q21.31 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of microdeletion syndrome Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Department of Pediatrics, D. A. Koolen1, J. M. Kramer1, K. Neveling1, W. M. Nillesen1, H. L. Moore-Barton2, F. V. Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Elmslie2, A. Toutain3, J. Amiel4, V. Malan5, A. Chun-Hui Tsai6, S. W. Cheung7, C. Gilissen1, MD, United States, 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute and McKusick-Nathans Institute E. T. P. Verwiel1, T. Feuth8, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, H. Scheffer1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, A. P. M. de of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United Brouwer1, H. G. Brunner1, J. A. Veltman1, A. Schenck1, H. G. Yntema1, B. B. A. de Vries1; States, 4Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology, Bayview Proteomics Center, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St. George‘s, Radboud University Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Russell H. Morgan Department of London, United Kingdom, 3Department of Medical Genetics, CHRU Hôpital Bretonneau, Radiology and Radiological Science, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, Tours, France, 4Inserm U781 and Department of Genetics, Hôpital Necker-Enfants United States, 7Clinical Genetic Department, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Malades, Paris, France, 5Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 6The Children‘s Sweden, 8Departments of Pathology and Genetics, University of Washington School of Hospital, Section of Clinical Genetics and Metabolism, Denver, CO, United States, 7Medical Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 9Department of Cardiology, Radboud University Genetics Laboratories, Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Hospital, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Department of Medicine, Washington University Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Department of Epidemiology, Radboud University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, North Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. West Thames Regional Genetics Service (Kennedy Galton Center), Northwick Park Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom. The 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome is characterized by intellectuCaRl dHiRsa1- bIMiliPt5y (MIDA)P, ThySpToHto, nia, fKaAciNaSl Ld1ysmorphism, epilepsy, and congenital malfor- Loeys-Dietz syndrome (LDS) is an autosomal dominant connective tissue mations. The recurrent deledteio nno evnocompasses five known genes, , disorder with both features that overlap with and distinguish it from Mar- MAPT, K,A NSL1and , in addition to four putative genes. fan syndrome (MFS). In its most typical presentation, LDS is characterized We identified two atypical deletions encompassing only part of by the triad of hypertelorism, bifid uvula/cleft palate and widespread aor- and in two children with ID and typical features of 17q21.31 tic/arterial aneurysms and tortuosity. LDS is most often caused by hetero- microdeletion syndrome. MNAePxtT, we selected 16 individuals witKhA cNoSrLe1 fea- zygous loss-of-function mutations in genes encoding positive effectors of tures of the 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome. Sanger sequencing revealed transforming growth factor beta (TGFβ) signaling including either subunit no pathogenic changes in . However, sequence analysis of did of the TGFβ receptor (TGFβR1/2) and Smad3. Nevertheless, in aneurysmal rKeAvNeaSlL 1two heterozygous mutations, a nonsense mutation and a splice site aortic tissues a signature compatible with increased TGFβ signaling is con- mutation, both predicted to cause loss-of-function. sequently observed, engendering controversy regarding the mechanism of is a widely expressed gene encoding a member of the highly con- aortic aneurysmal disease. TGFβs comprise three multipotential cytokines, served NSL complex. This complex contains, amKoAnNgS Lo1thers, the H4K16 ace- encoded by three separate genes, that regulate multiple aspects of cellular tyltransferase KAT8. performance including, proliferation, differentiation, migration and synthe- To explore the effect of haploinsufficiency of KANSL1 on gene expression tic repertoire. Here, we report heterozygous deletions or loss-of-function levels, we performed whole transcriptome (mRNA) sequencing using EBV- mutations of the gene encoding the transforming growth factor beta 2 transformed cell lines of the individual with the splice site mutation (TGFβ2) ligand in eight families characterized by a phenotype within the and three individuals with the classical 17q21.31 deletion. Functional anno- MFS/LDS spectrum and demonstrate upregulation of TGFβ signaling in aor- tation clustering of genes that weKrAe NdSifLfe1rentially expressed in all samples tic tissue from affected individuals. Furthermore, haploinsufficient Tgfb2-/+ compared to controls reDvreoasloepdh eilnarichment of genes involved in neuronal mice demonstrate aortic rootF abnne1uC1r0y39sGm/+ by 8 month of ageT agnfbd2 biochemical processes. FKuArNthSeLr1 evidence that has a function in neurons is pro- evidence of increased canonical and noncanonical TGFβ signaling. Mice that vided by our studies in P . Tissue-specific knockdown of wah (fly harbor a mutant MFS allele ( ) in the context of haploinsuf- ortholog of ) in the mushroom bodies was sufficient to causeK Aa N2S5L%1 ficiency show a pronounced increase in TGFβ signaling and phenotypic wor- reduction in learning ability ( <0.05). sening in association with normalization of TGFβ2 expression and excessive In conclusion, our findings demonstrate that haploinsufficiency of expression of TGFβ1. Taken together, these data implicate compensatory is sufficient to cause the classical 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome phe- autocrine and/or paracrine events and excessive TGFβ signaling in the pa- notype. thogenesis of TGFβ vasculopathies. C01.2 C01.4 Mutations in the KIAA1267 gene cause the 17q21.31 deletion Identification of the cause of Blue Rubber Bleb Nevus Syndrome J. Soblet1, N. Limaye1, M. Cordisco2, A. Dompmartin3, O. Enjolras4, S. Holden5, A. D. Irvine6, syndrome phenotype C. Labrèze7, A. Lanoel2, P. N. Rieu8, S. Syed9, C. J. van der Vleuten10, R. Watson11, S. J. M. Zollino, D. Orteschi, M. Murdolo, S. Lattante, P. Chiurazzi, G. Marangi, G. Neri; Fishman12, J. B. Mulliken13, L. M. Boon14, M. Vikkula1; Catholic University, Rome, Italy. 1Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Dermatology, Hospital Garrahan, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 3Department of Dermatology, Université de Caen Basse Normandie, The chromosome 17q21.31 deletion syndrome is a genomic disorMdAePr Tu,s SuTaHl- CHU, Caen, France, 4Consultation des Angiomes, Hôpital Lariboisière, Paris, France, ly asKsoIAciAa1te2d6 7to a recurrent chromosome deletion, recently restricted to a 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Guy‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 6National 160-274 kb segment on 17q21.31, including only three geMneAsP, T Children‘s Research Centre and Department of Paediatric Dermatology, Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, and Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland, 7Dermatology Department, and . A question to be still addressed is whether this condition Hôpital Pellegrin Enfants, Bordeaux, France, 8Department of Pediatric Surgery, is a contiguous gene syndrome or a monogenic disorder. has been Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Department considered the major candidate gene, however no productive mutations of Dermatology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, United Kingdom, have been identified so far. Starting from the hypothesis that a single gene 10Department of Dermatology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, mutation in undeleted patients could affect either one gene residing within Netherlands, 11Department of Paediatric Dermatology, Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, the deletion intedrev anlo, voor another gene participating in a shared molecular Dublin, Ireland, 12Department of Surgery, Vascular Anomalies Center, Children‘s Hospital pathKwIAayA, 1w26e7 performed exome sequencing of one undeleted patient and Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 13Department of Plastic and Oral Surgery, Children‘s Hospital Boston, Harvard School of Dental Medicine and both parents. A heterozygous nonsense mutation within exon 6 of Harvard Medical Schoool, Boston, MA, United States, 14Center for Vascular Anomalies, tKhIeA A1267 gene (OMIM *612452) was identified adne dn ovvaolidated by San- Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCL, Brussels, Belgium. ger sequencing: c.C1816T, p.R606X. This result prompted us to sequence in a second undeleted patient, in which a heterozygous frameshift mutation introducing a premature stop codon was detected Blue rubber bleb nevus syndrome (BRBN) is a rare sporadic congenital dis- within exon 13: c.2785_2786 delAG, p.R929G fsX44. Both patients presented order (OMIM # 112200) characterized by multiple venous malformations with a full chromosome 17q21.31 deletion syndrome phenotype, including all over the skin, often on hands and feet. Patients can present with a few to intellectual disability, highly distinctive facial features, failure to thrive in hundreds of cutaneous and pathognomonic gastrointestinal lesions. These infancy, hypotonia, motoKrI AdAel1a2y6, 7and a friendly behavior. We consider that are most commonly in the small intestine, documented by endoscopy, colo- chromosome 17q21.31 deletion syndrome is a single gene disorder, caused noscopy, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Although several case re- by haploinsufficiency of . Knowledge of the major causal gene will ports have been published, the etiopathology of BRBN is still unknown. broaden the diagnostic spectrum of the 17q21.31 deletion syndrome, and Since inherited venous malformations (VMCMs) are caused by germline ac- will accelerate the understanding of its molecular pathogenesis. tivating TIE2 mutations and common sporadic venous malformations (VMs) www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 17 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 are due to strongly hyperphosphorylating somatic TIE2 mutations, we hy- positive response to VPA. pothesized that BRBN may also be part of the spectrum of TIE2-mediated Our data provide first evidence that monitoring VPA response in fibroblasts phenotypes. is indeed feasible to infer response in CNS neurons. Furthermore, CD36 was To test this, we screened the coding region of TIE2 by direct sequencing of identified as the crucial protein suppressing response to VPA. This is of ma- genomic blood DNA and cDNA from the resected lesions of 14 patients. In jor implication also for other diseases treated with VPA such as epilepsy or 16 tissues from 10 patients, we identified mutations leading to amino acid migraine. changes, absent in the blood DNA from patients as well as in cDNA from con- C02.1 trol tissuceiss. These changes occur at highly conserved residues, and are not KIAA1797/FOCAD encodes a novel focal adhesion protein with tumor found in dbSNP. In contrast to VMCMs and VMs, BRBNs predoimn inviatnrotly show suppressor function in gliomas double ( ) mutations, suggesting a phenotype-genotype correlation. They A. Brockschmidt1, D. Trost1, H. Peterziel2, K. Zimmermann3, M. Ehrler1, H. Grassmann1, P. cause ligand-independent receptor hyperphosphorylation . These Pfenning4, A. Waha5, D. Wohlleber6, F. F. Brockschmidt1, M. Jugold7, A. Hoischen8, C. Kalla9, results unequivocally demonstrate that BRBNs are caused by post-zygotic A. Waha5, G. Seifert10, P. A. Knolle6, E. Latz11,12, V. H. Hans13,5, W. Wick4,14, A. Pfeifer3, P. Angel2, R. G. Weber15,1; activating TIE2 mutations. 1Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Transduction and Growth C01.5 Control, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Pharmacology Serin diet relieves symptoms of Hereditary Sensory and Autonomous and Toxicology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathy type 1A caused by a c.992 C>T, p.(Ser331Phe), mutation Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Neuropathology, in SPTLC1 University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 6Molecular Medicine and Experimental Immunology, B. W. Rautenstrauss1,2, E. Wilichowski3, E. Holinski-Feder2, T. Hornemann4; University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Medical Physics in Radiology, German Cancer 1Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Munich, Germany, 2Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Germany, 3Georg-August-University, Göttingen, Germany, 4University Zürich, Zürich, Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 9Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Switzerland. Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart, Germany, 10Cellular Neurosciences, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 11Innate Immunity, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 12Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, United States, 13Neuropathology, Evangelisches Krankenhaus Bielefeld gGmbH, Bielefeld, Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies (HSAN) are a genetically Germany, 14Neurooncology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 15Human and clinically heterogeneous group of disorders associated with sensory Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. dysfunction. HSAN1 is a dominantly inherited sensorimotor axonal neuro- pathy. The patient has 3 healthy siblings and healthy parents. Symptoms: Coinciding with the start of ambulation motor disabilities; generalized hy- In a strategy tKo IAidAe1n7t9if7y novel genes involved in glioma pathogenesis by potrophy; reduced walking distance; unstable gait; multiple falls; no mental molecular characterization of chromosomal translocation breakpoints, we retardation; MRI studies of the brain were normal; reduced pain sensitivity: identified the gene, encoding a protein with an as yet undefi- recurrent traumatic and thermal injuries of feet, knees and hands; distur- ned function, to be KdIiAsrAu1p7t9e7d by a 7;9-translocation in a primary gliobla- bed wound healing; ulcerated fingertips; unnoticed fracture of a metatarsal stoma culture. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization detected bone; at the age of 9 years: bilateral lensectomy due to juvenile cataract; deletions involving KIAA i1n7 a9r7ound half of glioblastoma cell lines and cataract surgery: repetitive ulcerations of the cornea, poor healing tenden- glioblastomas investigated. Quantification of mRNA levels in human tissu- cy; complete retinal detachment (right eye); nerve biopsy: marked wasting es demonstrated highest expression in brain, reduced levels in of myelinated fibres, axonal damage; axonal motor and sensory neuropathy. all gliobla stoma cell lines and most glioblastomas, and similar levels in glial Finally a de novo c.992 C>T, p.(Ser331Phe), mutation in the SPTLC1 gene and neuronal cells by analysis of different hippocampal regions from muri- was identified. This mutation turns the sphingolipid synthesis to neurotoxic ne brain.Antibodies against KIAA1797 were generated aKnIdA Ash17o9w7ed similar lipids in this patient as well as in cell cultures. A serin diet (400mg/kg bo- protein levels in cortex and subcortical white matter of human brain, while dyweight) developed in an animal model (SPTLC1 mutation p.(Cys133Trp)) levels were significantly reduced in glioblastomas with deletion. resulted after 3 months in an overall improvement: ameliorated growth of By immunofluorescence of astrocytoma cells, KIAA1797 co-locailniz veidtr owith nails and hair; wounds of the skin show faster healing; gain of weight; coug- vinculin in focal adhesions. Physical interaction between KIAA1797 and vin- hassist could be reduced to only one treatment during the winter period; culin was demonstrated via co-immunoprecipitation. Functional as- sweating is reconstituted; ability to an extended period of upright standing. sKaIyAsA d1e7m97o nstrated a significant decrease in cKoIlAonAy1 7fo9r7mation, migration and This HSAN patient is an excellent example for effective translational medi- invasion capacity of LN1in8 vainvdo U87MG glioma cells carrying a homozygous cine and the first individual in Germany receiving a causal treatment for a deletion ectopicKalIlAyA e1x7p9r7essing compared to mock- Hereditary Sensory and Autonomous Neuropathy. transduced cells. In an orthotKoIpAicA 1x7e9n7ograft mouse model, U87MG C01.6 tumor lesiKoInAsA e1x7p9r7essing had a significantly reduced volume SMA patients show concordant responses to valproic acid from blood compared to tumors not expressing . In summary, the frequent- to neurons while nonresponsivness is facilitated by CD36 ly deletedK IAA1797 gene encodes a novel focal adhesion complex protein L. Garbes1, L. Hessen1, J. Schreml1, I. Hoelker1, T. Bauer2, C. Mueller2, J. Dimos3, M. Peitz4, with tumor suppressor function in gliomas, which we name “focadhesin”. O. Bruestle4, R. Heller1, B. Wirth1; Because genetic variation has been implicated in Alzheimer’s di- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Institute of Genetics and Center for Molecular Medicine sease, our data is also relevant for neurodegeneration. Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Institute of Pharmacology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3iPierian Inc., South San Francisco, CA, United States, C02.2 4Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, Life & brain, Bonn, Germany. Exome sequencing of late recurrence T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in children confirms second leukemia and exposes predisposition candidate genes Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is the number one genetic killer E. Waanders1, V. H. J. Van der Velden2, T. Szczepański2, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, J. de Ligt1, C. during early infancy. SMA is caused by functional absence of SMN1 leading Gilissen1, A. H. A. van Dijk1, S. V. Van Reijmersdal1, P. M. Hoogerbrugge1, A. Geurts van Kessel1, J. J. M. Van Dongen2, R. P. Kuiper1; to progressive degeneration of spinal α-motoneurons. Currently, no cure for 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Erasmus SMA is available. University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Therapeutic approaches are focusing on SMN2, since its copy number main- ly modifies disease severity. Previously, we have been able to show that the anti-epileptic drug valproic acid (VPA) increases SMN levels in vitro, ex Second hematologic malignancies in non-syndromic children without fa- vivo as well as in VPA-treated SMA patients. A pilot clinical trial with VPA mily history for cancer may be mistaken for relapses or therapy-related revealed that 1/3 of the patients responded positively to VPA treatment, malignancies. Recently, we identified 8 T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia while for 2/3 either no response or even the opposite effect was detected. (T-ALL) patients with two fully discordant consecutive leukemias based To elucidate mechanisms underlying VPA-nonresponsiveness, we collected on TCR-rearrangements and DNA copy number aberrations, strongly sug- fibroblasts lines from >30 SMA-patients undergoing VPA-treatment. We de- gesting predisposition (J.Clin.Oncol.2011). Here, we performed exome se- monstrated that response to VPA was concordant in about 65% between quencing on leukemic and complete remission samples from four of these blood and fibroblasts. Furthermore, by generating GABAergic neurons from patients in order to identify predisposing mutations. fibroblast-derived iPS cells, we showed that similar response to VPA is re- Per exome, we found ~25,000 variants. Known, synonymous, and intronic tained even in the CNS neurons. This is the first prove that response to a variants as well as variants called in <20% of the reads were excludePdT. EWNe, potential SMA drug is concordant between blood, fibroblasts and neurons. iFdBeXnWtif7ie d anPdH vFa6lidated between one and six somatic variants per leukemic Moreover, by transcriptome-wide µ-array we identified increased expres- sample, the majority of which affected known T-ALL genes, such as sion of CD36, a known LCFA-translocase, as the pivotal factor suppressing and . None of these were shared between two consecutive leu- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org18 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 kemic samples, which confirms that samples are clonally unrelated and thus ents, they do not appear to be sufficient and additional genetic and epigene- represent independent second leukemias. tic “hits” are necessary for tumorigenesis. To identify second somatic hits as With respect to genetic predisposTiYtiKo2n,, RwAeN foBcPu1s7e, d on rTeIcAuLr1rently affected downstream drivers of p53-mediated tumorigenesis, we performed geno- aTnYdK 2known T-ALL associated genes. In three patients we identified highly mTPic5 3and epigenomic profiling of primary soft tissue sarcomas, osteosarco- conserved missense variants in and , respectively. mas and matching constitutive samples of 1T0P L5F3S patients (6 with, 4 without belongs to the family of Janus kinases, which play a role in the pa- mutations). We also performed whole genome sequencing of a subset thogenesis of several hematologic malignancies. The TYK2 variant G761V is oTfP 5tu3mor/normal pairs with an inherited mutation. Although we ob- located in a highly conserved region of the pseudokinase-like domain, which served chromothripsis in a subset of tumor samples, it was independent of is frequently affected in the homologous JAK2 kinase in precursor B-cell leu- mutation status. Integration of the opb5se3rved genetic genomic and epi- kemias. genomic alterations into the extended p53 and p16/RB pathways ArTevMeaCleDd- In conclusion, we confirmed that consecutive leukemic presentations in pa- mKNu1ltAip, lCeD aKnNd2 sAh, aCrHeKd 1h, iPtsT E(iNrr, eMspDeMct2i/v4e of status or tumor type), in nu- tients with late T-ALL recurrences may be fully discordant and, thus, repre- merous p53 transcriptional targets and interacting proteins (e.g., , sent independent leukemia occurrences, most likely caused by predisposing ). Identification of recurrent somatic germline mutations. alterations in p53-network genes in independent LFS tumors is remarkable. C02.3 This indicates that p53 defects alone (due to inherited mutations) are not Somatic GATA2 zinc finger 1 mutations are exclusively associated sufficient and that additional hits in genes with p53-associated functions with bi-allelic CEBPA mutations in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and are not redundant but rather are a necessary part of LFS tumorigenesis. Re- disrupt the capacity of GATA2 to enhance CEBPA-mediated activation current somatic alterations cooperating with p53 in LFS tumors appear to of transcription cluster in a limited number of cellular pathways. P. A. Greif1,2, A. Dufour1, N. Konstandin1, B. Ksienzyk1, E. Zellmeier1, B. Tizazu1, J. Sturm1, C02.5 T. Benthaus1, M. Yaghmaie1,3, P. Dörge4, K. Hopfner5, A. Hauser6, A. Graf7, S. Krebs7, H. Leupaxin mediates cytoskeleton remodeling in prostate cancer cells Blum7, P. M. Kakadia1,8, S. Schneider1, E. Hoster1, F. Schneider1, M. Stanulla4, J. Braess1,9, S. Dierks, S. von Hardenberg, T. Schmidt, P. Burfeind, S. Kaulfuß; M. C. Sauerland10, W. E. Berdel11, T. Büchner11, B. J. Woermann12, W. Hiddemann1, K. Department of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany. Spiekermann1, S. K. Bohlander1,2,8; 1Department of Internal Medicine 3, Ludwig Maximilians Universität (LMU) München, München, Germany, 2Clinical Cooperative Group Leukemia, Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany, 3Present address: Hematology - Oncology and Stem Cell The focal adhesion protein leupaxin (LPXN) is overexpressed in prostate Transplantation Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic cancer (PCa). Recently, we showed that LPXN is involved in the progression Republic of Iran, 4Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, of PCa via deregulation of p120CTN. In the present study we analyzed the Kiel, Germany, 5Department of Biochemistry at the Gene Center, Ludwig Maximilians LPXN-mediated adhesive and cytoskeletal changes during PCa progression. Universität (LMU) München, München, Germany, 6Scientific Computing, Gene Center, After downregulation of LPXN expression we could show an unambiguous Ludwig Maximilians Universität (LMU) München, München, Germany, 7Laboratory for reduced adhesiveness of PCa cells PC-3 and DU 145. LPXN knockdown resul- Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, Ludwig Maximilians Universität (LMU) München, München, Germany, 8Center for Human Genetics, Philipps Universität, ted in a reduced cell surface area and reduced formation of focal adhesion Marburg, Germany, Marburg, Germany, 9Oncology and Hematology, St. John-of-God sites in these cells. Interestingly, we found decreased expression of small Hospital, Regensburg, Germany, 10Institute of Biostatistics and Clinical Research, GTPase RhoA and increased expression of Rac1. Furthermore, the expres- Universität Münster, Münster, Germany, 11Department of Medicine A - Hematology, sion pattern of several integrins was deregulated after LPXN knockdown, Oncology and Pneumology, Universität Münster, Münster, Germany, 12German Society of specifically β1-integrin expression was downregulated. Hematology and Oncology, Berlin, Germany. To identify a candidate protein that mediates the cytoskeletal changes af- ter LPXN knockdown, we performed a Yeast-two-Hybrid screen. The actin binding protein caldesmon (CaD) was identified as a putative interaction Cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia (CN-AML) with biallelic partner of LPXN. Co-immunoprecipitation and a proximity ligation assays CEBPA gene mutations (biCEPBA) represents a distinct disease entity with confirmed the interaction of LPXN with CaD. Furthermore, we demonstra- a favourable clinical outcome. So far, it is not known if other genetic alterati- ted that CaD expression is upregulated in PCa cells and that knockdown ons cooperate with biCEBPA mutations during leukemogenesis. To identify of CaD by RNA interference leads to an increased migration and invasion, additional mutations, we performed whole exome sequencing of five biCEB- whereas no changes in proliferation were detected. Interestingly, we found PA patients and detected somatic GATA2 zinc finger 1 (ZF1) mutations in 2 that knockdown of LPXN lead to a decrease in phosphorylated, inactive CaD out of 5 cases. Both GATA2 and CEBPA are transcription factors crucial for (pCaD) but total CaD levels remained unaffected. Subsequently, low levels of hematopoietic development. Inherited or acquired mutations in both genes pCaD resulted in reduced migration of PCa cells. have been associated with leukemogenesis. Further mutational screening Taken together our present results indicate that LPXN mediates cytoskeletal detected novel GATA2 ZF1 mutations in 13 of 33 biCEBPA positive CN-AML changes during PCa progression through the regulation CaD phosphoryla- patients (13/33: 39.4%). No GATA2 mutations were found in 38 CN-AML pa- tion. tients with a monoallelic CEBPA mutation and in 89 CN-AML patients with C02.6 wild-type CEBPA status. In Kaplan Meier survival analysis, the presence of Clinical Application of Next Generation Sequencing Technology for the GATA2 mutations did not negatively impact on the favourable overall survi- Detection of Clinically Actionable Mutations val and event free survival of biCEBPA patients. In reporter gene assays, all Y. Wen, E. Fang, Y. Li, G. Douglas, C. E. Carmack, M. M. Li; tested GATA2 ZF1 mutants showed reduced capacity to enhance CEBPA-me- Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. diated activation of transcription, suggesting that the GATA2 ZF1 mutations may collaborate with biCEPBA mutations to deregulate target genes during malignant transformation. We thus provide evidence for a genetically di- Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have significantly accele- stinct subgroup of CN-AML. The specific association of mutations affecting rated the identification of cancer-causing mutations. However, the clinical two interacting regulators of hematopoiesis suggests a novel concept for application of NGS technologies to detect cancer gene mutations has been leukemogenesis: The simultaneous mutational targeting of two transcripti- extremely limited. We have assessed the performance of a novel NGS tech- on factors that function in the same differentiation pathway in AML. nology that merges multiplex PCR with ion semiconductor sequencing in (P.A.G. and A.D. contributed equally to this work) our clinical diagnostic laboratory. The test interrogates 739 common mu- C02.4 tations in 46 cancer genes including many clinically actionable mutations Integrated genomic and epigenomic profiling of TP53 and non-TP53 concurrently. First, we studied 12 tumor samples including 4 archived FFPE, Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) tumors reveals multiple and shared hits 4 blood/bone marrow, and 4 cell line samples with known mutations to eva- in the p53 network luate the sensitivity and specificity of the test. We then studied 34 de-identi- R. Krahe, B. Zhang, X. Hu, J. W. Wong, C. D. Wilson, K. A. Baggerly, N. E. Navin, L. C. fied, archived FFPE tumor samples of unknown genotype to further evaluate Strong, L. L. Bachinski; the efficacy of the test. Using the technology, we successfully identified all Univ Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States. known mutations previously detected by Pyposequencing or Sanger se- quencing technologies. Multiple serial dilution studies showed that the test could detect mutations at frequencies as low as 5% with 99% confidence. Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS) is a prototypic, clinically and genetically hete- For the samples of unknown genotype, we detected 29 COSMIC mutations rToPg5e3neouTs Pin5h3erited canTcePr5 s3yndrome. Most cases (>70%) are due to domi- in 22 samples. Analysis of the variant call data showed that a minimum of nant, variably penetrant, germline muTtPa5ti3ons in the tumor suppressor gene 100X coverage is required in order to detect mutations at 10% frequency or . In and non- LFS, there is evidence for risk heterogeneity above; a minimum 300K final library reads are necessary in order to mini- within and between families. While mutations predispose LFS pati- www.eshmgiz.oe/r egliminate amplicon dropout. Our experience demonstrated that this www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 19 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C03.3 Mutations in distinct domains of BMP1 cause Osteogenesis Imperfecta targeted NGS test can effectively detect hundreds of cancer gene mutations with variable bone phenotypes with input DNA as low as ten nanograms, turn around time as short as two K. Keupp1,2, A. Nair3, O. Semler4, Y. Li1,2, H. Thiele5, P. Frommolt5, J. Becker1, C. Netzer1, N. days, and significantly lower cost compared to traditional Sanger sequen- Arkasu6, E. Schoenau4, P. Nürnberg5, M. Hammerschmidt7, T. Carney3, B. Wollnik1,2; cing. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Proteos, Singapore, C03.1 4Children’s Hospital, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Cologne Center for Arm to Leg Transformation in Humans associated with CNVs at the Genomics, Cologne, Germany, 6Gene Mapping Laboratory, Department of Medical PITX1 locus Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 7Institute of Developmental Biology, Cologne, Germany. M. Spielmann1,2, E. Klopocki1,2, F. Brancati3,4, P. Krawitz1, J. Hecht1,2,5, D. Ibrahim1,2,5, K. Dathe1, P. Ferrari6, S. Lohan1, U. Mennen7, S. Mundlos1,2; 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Using an innovative exome sequencing strategy, in affected individuals from 3IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo and CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 4Department of a consanguineous Turkish family with autosomal recessive Osteogenesis Biopathology, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy, 5Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Imperfecta (OI) associated with an increased bone mineralization density, Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Pediatrics, University we identified a causative homozygous missense mutation, p.Gly12Arg, in of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy, 7Jacaranda Hospital, Muckleneuk, Pretoria, the novel OI gene BMP1. The mutation is located within the signal peptide South Africa. and we provide evidence for an impaired secretion and alteration in post- translational modification of the mutant protein. To determine the under- lying molecular pathogenesis, we show that hypomorphic bmp1 zebrafish Here we report three non-related families in which affected individuals show mutants present with delayed osteogenesis, defects in bone formation, features of an arm-to-leg transformation. On X-ray examination, the distal recurrent fractures in fin rays, and osteopenia in vertebrae, which during humerus was broadened and the olecranon was missing thus resembling larval stages develops into a significant high bone mass phenotype in these the shape of the femur. The hands were medially deviated and in the wrist a mutants. Further screening of patients with OI identified a second homo- fusion of the triquetral and pisiform formed a structure similar in shape to zygous mutation, p.Asp284Val, in BMP1. Interestingly, the index patient of the calcaneus of the ankle. Furthermore, attachments of the tendons were this family presented with a classical severe form of OI with drastically re- abnormal. We mapped the condition to a 5 Mb region on the long arm of duced bone density. The mutation is located nearby the proteolytic domain chromosome 5 (5q31.1) but were not able to identify a coding mutation. of BMP1 suggesting a different pathogenic mechanism. Ongoing functional Next we screened the linkage interval for CNVs by custom high-resolution studies of both mutations will offer novel insights into the underlying patho- array CGH analysis which detected a microdeletion 400 kb 5’ of PITX1. A genesis and will show how different functional effects of BMP1 mutations similar deletion was identified in a second family. A third family did not lead to variable bone phenotypes in patients with OI. show the deletion but, suspecting a balanced structural variation, we per- Taken together, we present a novel genetic cause for a high mineralization OI formed whole genome sequencing in one individual. Using a bioinformatic phenotype, describe the functional mechanism, and provide evidence for a approach focused on the PITX1 genomic region we identified a translocation genotype-phenotype correlation in patients with BMP1 mutations. with the breakpoint located 3’ of the deletions detected in the other cases. C03.4 PITX1 is a transcription factor known to determine hindlimb identity. Based Increased sensitivity to DNA damage in a recessive form of Weaver on previous mouse work, the genomic rearrangements are likely to result in syndrome caused by functional loss of an E3 ubiquitin ligase a misexpression of PITX1 in the forelimb thus causing a partial arm-to-leg G. Yigit1,2, F. Percin3, Y. Li1,2, N. Bögershausen1,2, L. Basel-Vanagaite4, H. Kayserili5, Y. transformation. The structural variations identified are likely to remove ac- Alanay6, K. E. Brown7, E. Milz1,2, R. Wirth1, P. Prontera8, A. Küchler9, V. Cormier-Daire10, D. tive PITX1 forelimb suppressor or insulator elements and relocate forelimb Wieczorek9, B. Wollnik1,2; enhancer elements into the gene desert neighbouring the PITX1 gene. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Köln, Germany, 2Center for C03.2 Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Köln, Germany, 3Gazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, Microduplications Upstream of MSX2 are Associated with a 4Department of Medical Genetics, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Tikva, Phenocopy of Cleidocranial Dysplasia Israel, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Pediatric C. E. Ott1, H. Hein2,3, S. Lohan1,2, A. M. Hoogeboom4, N. Foulds5, J. Grünhagen1, S. Stricker1,2, Genetics Unit, Department of Pediatrics, Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey, P. Villavicencio-Lorini1,2, E. Klopocki1,2, S. Mundlos1,2,3; 7Chromosome Biology Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College School 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Research Group of Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 8CRR Genetica Medica, Development and Disease, Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Università ed Azienda Ospedaliera di Perugia, Perugia, Italy, 9Institut für Humangenetik, 3Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Berlin, Germany, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 10Département de Génétique, Unité INSERM 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, U781, Université Paris Descartes, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker Netherlands, 5Department of Human Genetics and Genomic Medicine, University Enfants Malades, Paris, France. Hospital of Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Hampshire, United Kingdom. Weaver syndrome is a rare congenital disorder mainly characterized by pre- and postnatal overgrowth, marked macrocephaly, learning disability and a Cleidocranial Dysplasia (CCD) is an autosomal dominant skeletal disorder typical facial appearance. Dominant mutations in EZH2 encoding a histone- characterized by hypoplastic or absent clavicles, increased headR UciNrcXu2mfe- lysine N-methyltransferase of the polycomb repressive complex have been rence, large fontanels, dental anomalies, and short stature. Although CCD recently reported to cause Weaver syndrome. We now present an autosomal is usually caused by mutations leading to haploinsufficiency of , the recessive form of Weaver-like syndrome in two affected siblings from a con- underlying genetic cause remains unresolved in about 25% of cases. Besides sanguineous Turkish family. Using a whole-exome sequencing strategy com- RUNX2, MSX2 is another transcription factor known to play important roles bined with determination of homozygous stretches of identified variants, during many developmental processes including tissue organogenesis, cra- we found a homozygous nonsense mutation in a novel gene encoding an E3 niofacial and MlimSXb2 development. ubiquitin ligase. The mutation is located within the N-terminal region of the Here we describe two unrelated individuals with microduplications protein leading to a complete loss of the ubiquitin ligase activity. To determi- upstream of on chromosome 5q35.2. One of the affected individuals ne the underlying molecular pathogenesis, we analyzed patients’ fibroblasts presented with a phenocopy of CCD. In addition to a classical CCD pheno- and could show that cells lacking this ubiquitin ligase activity have an in- type the other affected individual had a complex synpolydactyly of the hands creased sensitivity to DNA-damage and responded with prolonged activati- and postaxial polydactyly of the feet which have so far never been reported on of checkpoint kinase 1 and increased level of apoptosis. Our data link the in association with CCD or copy number variations (CNVs) on 5Mq3S5X.22. The molecular pathogenesis of overgrowth syndromes to altered DNA-damage microduplications overlap in a ~219 kb region that contains several highly response and increased cancer risk. Additional sequencing of a cohort of conserved non-coding elements which areM liksxe2ly to be involved in gene patients with Weaver syndrome for mutations identified novel de novo mu- regulation. Functional analyses using viRrauln oxv2erexpression in chicken cells tations in EZH2 and provided evidence for further genetic heterogeneity in demonstrated that the inhibitory effect of overexpression on minerali- Weaver syndrome. Exome sequencing is currently performed in one large zation can not be ameliorated by forced expression. dominant pedigree with Weaver syndrome as well as in unsolved sporadic Our results indicate that CNVs affecting non-coding regions upstream of a cases aiming to identify additional genes involved in altered control of grow- gene can cause developmental defects, and that the resulting phenotype can th and DNA-damage response in Weaver syndrome. be distinct from those caused by point mutations or CNVs encompassing the corresponding gene. TMaSkXe2n together, our findings reveal an additional mechanism for the pathogenesis of CCD, particularly with regard to the spa- tiotemporal regulation of . www.eshg.org www.eshg.org20 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C03.5 Mutations at a single codon in Mad Homology 2 domain of SMAD4 cause Myhre syndrome major protein for microtubuli assembly during mitosis. The patient’s phe- C. Le Goff1, C. Mahaut1, A. Abhyankar2, W. le Goff3, V. Serre1, A. Afenjar4, A. Brooks5, notype showed significant overlap with those reMpAoPrt4ed for Seckel syndrome N. Brunetti-Pieri6, P. Campeau7, A. Destrée8, M. di Rocco9, R. Hennekam10, D. Héron11, and Microcephalic Osteodysplastic Dwarfism type Majewski which are also S. Jacquemont12, S. Mansour13, S. Marlin14, R. McGowan15, H. Murphy16, M. Simon17, I. caused by defects in centrosomal proteins. The mutation creates a no- Stolte- Dijkstra18, J. Tolmie15, N. Van der Aa19, T. van Essen18, A. Verloes20, J. Casanova21, A. vel phosphorylation site in the KDM domain of the MAP4 protein which is Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; predicted to destabilise the microtubuli architecture. Immunofluorescence 1INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes Hôpital Necker Enfant Malades, Paris, analysis on a fibroblast cell line of the affected patient showed a higher rate France, 2St. Giles Lab of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, United States, 3INSERM, UMR_S939, Dyslipidemia, of centrosome duplications and confirmed this hypothesis. This result illu- Inflammation and Atherosclerosis in Metabolic Diseases, Paris, France, 4Service de strates the feasibility of our approach using exome sequencing to identify neuropédiatrie, centre de référence anomalies du développement, Hôpital Armand recessive genes for short stature. Trousseau, Paris, France, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Sophia Children‘s Hospital, C04.1 Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 6Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University High frequency of indels at the breakpoint junctions of MECP2 of Naples Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Napoli, Italy, 7Department duplication rearrangements strongly support replicative-based of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8Institut de Génétique Humaine IPG, Charleroi, Belgium, 9Unit of Rare Diseases, mechanisms Department of Pediatrics, Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 10Department of Pediatrics C. M. B. Carvalho1, M. B. Ramocki1,2, D. Pehlivan1, S. Cheung1, L. M. Franco1, J. W. H7-236 Academic Medical Center University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, Belmont1, H. Y. Zoghbi1,2, P. J. Hastings1, J. R. Lupski1; 11Unité de Génetique Clinique, Hôpital La Pité Salpétrière, Paris, France, 12Service de 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Texas Children’s Hospital, Génétique Médicale CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland, 13Clinical Genetics SW Thames Houston, TX, United States. Regional Genetics Service St George‘s, University of London, London, United Kingdom, MECP2 14Unité de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, Paris, France, 15Department of Medical Genetics, FergusonSmith Centre, Yorkhill Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, Copy number gain in Xq28 including is the most commonly identi- 16Dept of Genetic Medicine St Mary’s Hospital Central Manchester NHS Foundation Tr, fied subtelMomECePr2ic CNV in patients with developmental delay and associated Manchester, United Kingdom, 17Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC University clinical findings. To date, we have collected a cohort of 65 patients with CNV Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 18Department of Genetics, Clinical Genetics Section University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 19Department including . Previous analyses derived from high-resolution compara- of Medical Genetics University Hospital and University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, tive genomic hybridization arrays (aCGH) revealed the fMreEqCuPe2nt occurrence 20Département de Génétique, INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 21Lab of complex rearrangements within our patient cohort in 27% of cases. Here of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University Paris Descartes and INSERM U980, we studied 31 patients carrying duplications including in whom we Necker Medical School, Paris, France. were able to accomplish DNA sequencing for each of the rearrangement breakpoint junction. Surprisingly, DNA sequencing unveiled the presence of complexities in up to 50% of the rearrangements. All complex alterations Myhre syndrome (OMIM #139210, MS) is a developmental disorder cha- have at least one breakpoint within or flanking the low copy repeats (LCRs) racterized by pre and postnatal short stature, brachydactyly, facial dysmor- supporting our hypothesis that such LCRs stimulate those rearrangements. phism (short palpebral fissures, maxillary hypoplasia, mandibular progna- The most striking observation, however, was the high frequency (42%) of thism, short philtrum), muscular hypertrophy, joint limitation and deafness. small insertions and deletions (indels) observed at/or flanking the break- Other features include intellelectual disability behavioral disturbance, car- point junctions, none of which were found present in dbSNP (built 135) diac defects, and cryptorchidism. Skeletal manifestations include thickened suggesting that they were generated concomitant with the rearrangement. calvarium, cone-shaped epiphyses, shortened tubular bones, hypoplastic This observation strongly supports a role for replication-based mechanisms iliac wings, broad ribs and large vertebrae with short and large pedicles. All underlying such rearrangements as break-induced replication (BIR) was re- reported MS cases are sporadic supporting de novo dominant mutations. cently shown to increase the rate of frameshift mutatiMonEsC Pin2 yeast. In addi- Using exome sequencing in 2 MS cases, we selected mothers against DPP tion, SNP genotyping revealed absence of heterozygosity (AOH) within the homolog 4 (SMAD4) as a candidate gene based on its pivotal role in BMP and altered genomic region strongly suggesting that the duplication is TGFβ signalling. SMAD4 mutations were subsequently found in additional mainly an intrachromosomal event. In summary, our results add to a gro- 18 affected individuals. We identified only wing body of data documenting a role for a DNA replication mechanism in 3 distinct heterozygous missense SMAD4 mutations all affecting Isoleucine complex genomic rearrangements associated with genomic disorders. 500 which in located in the Mad Homology 2 (MH2) domain, near the mo- C04.2 noubiquitinated site Lys519. We further demonstrated a defect in SMAD4 How to deal with genomic imbalances in the imprinted region ubiquitination in patient fibroblasts and increased level of SMAD4 sugge- 11p15.5: Insights in the complex regulation of two imprinting sting a stabilization of SMAD4 protein in Myhre syndrome. These results domains were in contrast of those observed with SMAD4 loss of function mutations, T. Eggermann1, M. Begemann1, M. Gogiel1, A. Dufke2, I. Spier3, I. Spier3, S. Spengler1; identified juvenile polyposis syndrome and associated with SMAD4 insta- 1University Hospital, Aachen, Germany, 2University Hospital, Tübingen, Germany, bility. We further study the nuclear localization of mutant SMAD complexes 3University Hospital, Bonn, Germany. and found that the complexes translocate to the nucleus. We finally obser- ved a decreased expression of downstream TGFβ target genes supporting impaired TGFβ driven transcriptional control in MS. Duplications or deletions affecting the imprinting control regions 1 and/ C03.6 or 2 (ICR1/2) in 11p15.5 have been reported for both growth retardation Homozygossity mapping and whole exome sequencing identifies and overgrowth. However, due to the complexity of the 11p15.5 imprinting MAP4 mutations in short stature regions, the interpretation of copy number variations (CNVs) is difficult. C. T. Thiel1, D. Zahnleiter1, U. Trautmann1, A. B. Ekici1, A. Reis1, H. Doerr2, A. Rauch3; The clinical outcome in 11p15.5 CNV carriers is influenced by the size, the 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, breakpoint positions, their parental origin and the imprinting status of the 2Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, affected genes. We report on three carriers of different CNVs (two duplica- Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, tions and one deletion) restricted to the telomeric ICR1: two patients were Switzerland. referred with the diagnosis of Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS), in the third caseI GtFh2e clinical features were probably not associated with the imbalan- ce. Summarising our results and those from the literature, a central role of Shortness of stature is one of the most common paediatric concerns. 3 % of the gene and its telomeric enhancer elements for the clinical course of the general population present with a body height below -2 SD score. Howe- 11p15 disturbance carriers is obvious: whereas duplications or deletions of ver, only in a small number of cases there is a genetic diagnosis. To uncover H19 do apparently not affect the phenotype, imbalances of both IGF2 as well further underlying genetic mechanism we performed genome wide homo- as its enhancer can separately cause abnormal phenotypes depending on zygossity mapping using an Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array in 8 patients with idio- the parental origin. As a result, carriers of ICR1 duplication can even show a pathic short stature of consanguineous families. We identified runs of ho- normal phenotype. A similar pattern can be delineated for the centromeric mozygossity with an average size between 2.7 and 300.1 Mb not reported in ICR2: here the type of imbalances affecting the CDKN1C and the KCNQ1OT1 European populations. As the gene content averaged 874 genes we carried genes and their differentially methylated region influences the clinical out- out whole exome sequencing after Agilent sure select enrichment v3 with come. As a result, CNVs in 11p15.5 require an extensive workup to delineate 50 Mb. Runs were performed on a Life Tech5500xl platform. After MaMppAiPn4g risk figures for 11p15.5 associated syndromes. Additionally they allow pro- and SNP calling with LifeScope variants were annotated with ANNOVAR. found insights in the complex regulation of the imprinted factors localised This identified the homozygous missense mutation p.A391T in the in 11p15.5. gene not present in 300 controls or the 1000genomes project. MAP4 is a www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 21 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C04.3 Nonlinear and nonrandom genome organization of SNRPN, UBE3A, and GABRB3 in the normal human nucleus by three-color 3D- logical age. Our work might also help to explain the cause of an age-related fluorescence in situ hybridization reduction in the number of cell clones in the blood; such a reduction is one R. Kawamura1, H. Tanabe2, T. Wada1,3, S. Saitoh4, Y. Fukushima1, K. Wakui1; of the hallmarks of immunosenescence. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, C04.5 Japan, 2The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (Sokendai), Hayama, Japan, Clinically relevant mosaic findings in a total of 8,374 patients and 3Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 4Nagoya City University parents in constitutional genome diagnostics using genome wide high Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan. resolution SNP array analysis N. de Leeuw, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa, B. H. W. Faas, T. K. Rinne, M. J. E. Kempers, S. A. de Munnik, N. F. A. Leijsten, T. C. Machielsen, S. L. J. van Gessel, M. Wunderink, M. J. G. Banning, R. van Higher-order chromatin organization and spatial arrangement of genomic Beek, M. del Rosario, B. B. A. de Vries, D. F. C. M. Smeets, R. Pfundt; region within the nuclear space seems to play an important role in genome Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. function via epigenetic mechanisms in the human nucleus. The aim of this study was to search for the new evidence related to genomic organization and function. We investigated the spatial positioning of three target regions We routinely perform genome wide SNP array analysis as the first-line dia- containing the SNRPN, UBE3A, and GABRB3 genes mapped on chromoso- gnostic test fodre p naotiveonts with intellectual disability and/or congenital ano- me 15q11.2-q12 by three-color 3D-fluorescence in situ hybridization on the malies and in prenatal diagnosis in case of structural ultrasound anomalies. interphase nuclei of normal human cells. The three target regions were not In addition to (6.5%), rare inherited (9.1%) or X-linked (0.8%) copy arranged linearly in most of the cells analyzed, and GABRB3 was positioned number variations (CNVs), we observed a significantly increased percenta- closer to SNRPN than UBE3A at a high proportion differently from genomic ge of homozygosity in patients (6.1%) which subsequently led to the iden- map. In addition, the distances from SNRPN to UBE3A (SU) and from UBE3A tification of pathogenic mutations in recessive disease genes, uniparental to GABRB3 (UG) between the alleles in each cell were different in both di- disomies, or low-mosaic aneuploidies in several patients. A mosaic finding stances, and the SU ratio (longer/shorter SU distance between alleles) was was detected in 22 of 6,500 patients and in seven mothers of a total of 1,874 larger than the UG ratio (longer/shorter UG distance between alleles). Mo- parents. In November 2011, we switched from the Affymetrix 250K SNP reover, the distances between the regions were different between the SU and array to the CytoScan HD array platform which further enhanced the reso- UG regions on each chromosome in each nucleus. Thus, our results indicated lution, improved the detection of mosaic imbalances and also enabled us that SNRPN, UBE3A, and GABRB3 have a nonlinear and nonrandom curved to detect clinically relevant, mosaic, copy neutral allelic imbalances in an spatial positioning in principle, but there were some differences between additional three patients. The percentage of mosaicism (CNV, aneuploidy the alleles and between the regions in the nucleus. These observations of or allelic imbalance) often differed between tissue samples of mesodermal structural differences in normal human cells might be reflected the status of or ectodermal origin from each of these individuals. In two patients such gene as the SNRPN gene is known to have paternal-only expression. tissue-dependent differences were shown to change over time. C04.4 Genome wide SNP array analysis is a suitable and highly effective method to Age-related somatic structural changes in the nuclear genome of reliably identify mosaic abnormalities that appear to be relatively commodne human blood cells inno bvooth patients (1 in 300) and parents (1 in 270). Because of the significant- L. A. Forsberg1, C. Rasi1, H. R. Razzaghian1, G. Pakalapati1, L. Waite2, K. S. Thilbeault2, ly increased recurrence risk, it is crucial to know whether an apparently A. Ronowicz3, N. E. Wineinger4, H. K. Tiwari4, D. Boomsma5, M. P. Westerman6, J. R. imbalance in an affected child is in fact due to a mosaic aberration in Harris7, R. Lyle8, M. Essand1, F. Eriksson1, T. L. Assimes9, C. Iribarren10, E. Strachan11, T. the (unaffected) parent. P. O‘Hanlon12, L. G. Rider12, F. W. Miller12, V. Giedraitis13, L. Lannfelt13, M. Ingelsson13, A. C04.6 Piotrowski3, N. L. Pedersen14, D. Absher2, J. P. Dumanski1; 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck laboratory, Uppsala Modelling neurogenesis impairment in Down syndrome using university, Uppsala, Sweden, 2HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, induced pluripotent stem cells from monozygotic twins discordant for United States, 3Department of Biology and Pharmaceutical Botany, Medical University trisomy 21 of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, 4Section on Statistical Genetics, Department of Biostatistics, Y. Hibaoui1,2, I. Grad1, M. R. Sailani2, A. Letourneau2, S. Dahoun2, S. Gimelli2, M. F. Pelte3, F. Ryals Public Health Building, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Béna2, S. E. Antonarakis2, A. Feki4,1; AL, United States, 5Department of Biological Psychology, VU University, Amsterdam, 1Stem Cell Research Laboratory, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Geneva Netherlands, 6Hematology Research, Mount Sinai Hospital Medical Center, Chicago, IL, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and United States, 7Department of Genes and Environment, Division of Epidemiology, The Development, University of Geneva Medical School and Geneva University Hospitals, Norwegian Institute of Public Health, Oslo, Norway, 8Department of Medical Genetics, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Department of Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 9Department of Medicine, Stanford University University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Service de gynécologie obstétrique, HFR School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 10Kaiser Foundation Research Institute, Fribourg - Hôpital cantonal, Fribourg, Switzerland. Oakland, CA, United States, 11Deptartment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and University of Washington Twin Registry, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 12Environmental Autoimmunity Group, National Institute of Environmental Down syndrome (DS), caused by trisomy 21, is the most common chromo- Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health Clinical Research Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 13Department of Public Health somal disorder, with an incidence of 1 in 800 live births. Its phenotypic cha- and Caring Sciences, Division of Molecular Geriatrics, Rudbeck laboratory, Uppsala racteristics include intellectual impairment and several other developmen- University, Uppsala, Sweden, 14Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, tal abnormalities, for the majority of which the pathogenetic mechanisms Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. remain unknown. Here, we report the generation and the characterization of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) derived from monozygotic twins discordant for trisomy 21: Twin-N-iPSCs for the normal and Twin-DS-iPSCs Structural variations are among the most frequent interindividual genetic for the DS-affected iPSCs. We hypothesize that these samples were ideal differences in the human genome. The frequency and distribution of de to study the effect of the supernumerary chromosome 21, since the rest novo somatic structural variants in normal cells is poorly explored. Using of the genome is identical between the two samples. Karyotype and high- age-stratified cohorts of 318 monozygotic twins (MZ) and 296 single-born resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis, confir- subjects, we describe age-related accumulation of copy-number variation in med the chromoInso vmivaol constitution of these iPSCs. Transcriptome analysis the nuclear genomes in vivo and frequency changes for both megabase- and by mRNA-Seq showed alterations in the ex pInr evsistrioon of genes that impact kilobase-range variants. Megabase-range aberrations were found in 3.4% on DS features. differentiation of Twin-DS-iPSCs revealed an abnor- of subjects ≥60 years old; these subjects included 78 MZ twin pairs and 108 mal teratoma formation in NOD-SCID mice. , Twin-DS-iPSC-derived single-born individuals. No such findings were observed in 81 MZ pairs or neurospheres showed a reduced number of neuroprogenitor cells (NPCs). 180 single-born subjects who were ≤55 years old. Recurrent region- and ge- When NPCs were further induced to mature into neurons, we found struc- ne-specific mutations were observed. Longitudinal analyses of 43 subjects tural changes in the architecture and density of neural populations together whose data were collected 7-19 years apart suggest considerable variation with alterations in the expression of genes involved in lineage specification in the rate of accumulation of clones carrying structural changes. Further- in neurogenesis and brain development. Furthermore, we provide novel more, the longitudinal analysis of individuals with structural aberrations evidence that the increased expression and activity of the dual-specificity suggests that there is a natural self-removal of aberrant cell clones from pe- tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation regulated kinase 1A protein underlie these ripheral blood. In three healthy subjects, we detected somatic aberrations defects. In conclusion, these findings establish these iPSCs as a unique cellu- characteristic of patients with myelodysplastic syndrome. The recurrent lar model to study the detailed mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis of rearrangements uncovered here are candidates for common age-related de- DS and design new therapies. fects in human blood cells. We anticipate that extension of these results will allow determination of the genetic age of different somatic-cell lineages and www.eshg.org estimation of possible individual differences between genetic andw chwrowno.-eshg.org22 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C05.1 of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 13Unit of General RNAi-based functional profiling of loci from blood lipid genome-wide Practice, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 14Vaasa Central association studies Hospital, Vaasa, Finland, 15Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular H. Runz1,2, P. Blattmann3,2, C. Schuberth1, R. Pepperkok3,2; Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 16Department of Clinical Physiology, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Molecular Medicine Partnership Turku University Hospital, Turku, Finland, 17Institute of Health Sciences, University of Unit (MMPU), Heidelberg, Germany, 3EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany. Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 18Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 19Department of Human Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are powerful tools to unravel genomic loci associated with common traits and complex human disease. The exact functions and causative variants remain largely unknown for the However, GWAS only rarely reveal information on the exact genetic elements 95 genetic loci that are identified to associate with levels of TC, LDL-C, HDL-C and pathogenic events underlying an association. In order to extract functio- or TG. We identified new metabolic or genetic associations (p<5×10-8) for nal information from genomic data, strategies for systematic follow-up stu- 30 of the 95 lipid loci by further characterizing the loci utilizing extensive dies on a phenotypic level are required. Here we address these limitations serum metabolite profiles, including a broad panel of lipoprotein subclasses by applying RNAi to analyze >100 candidate genes within 55 loci identified and tens of other serum metabolites obtained via NMR spectroscopy, and a by GWAS as associated with blood lipid levels, coronary artery disease and/ dense set of 440,807 directly genotyped and imputed variants around the or myocardial infarction for a function in regulating cholesterol levels in previously identified lead SNPs in 8330 Finnish individuals. cells. The genes were knocked-down with siRNAs and the consequences on In the majority of the loci the more detailed metabolite measures appeared cellular free cholesterol (FC) and the efficiency of LDL-internalization into to better describe the underlying biology than the conventional lipids. In cells were quantified using automated microscopy and multiparametric four loci, including PLTP and LIPC, the directions of associations to small image analysis. We will show evidence that loss-of-function of a surprisingly and large HDL particles were the opposite, pinpointing the diversity of HDL high number of the trait-associated genes affected LDL-uptake, FC, or both. subclasses not captured in the routine measurement of HDL-C. Also, 14 loci For several genes without previously known lipid-regulatory roles the func- had associations beyond the individual lipoprotein measures, including the tional effects upon gene knockdown closely correlated with altered LDL- APOA1 locus where a marker known to associate with CAD was associated receptor levels. By providing strong evidence for disease-relevant functions with serum lactate (p=3.79×10-13). Additionally, in 27 loci we identified of lipid trait-associated genes our study demonstrates that quantitative, SNPs with a stronger association than the previously reported markers, and cell-based RNAi is a scalable strategy for a systematic, unbiased detection of twelve loci, including APOB and LIPC, had two or more independent associa- functional effectors within GWAS loci. tions across the metabolite measures. C05.2 Wide metabolite profiling combined with the dense set of SNPs provided Accumulation of common genetic variants influences lipid levels in insight into the metabolic and genetic architecture underlying the known patients with T2D and improves prediction of hypercholesterolemia lipid loci. Further understanding of these processes may open up new pos- S. M. Willems, A. Hofman, B. A. Oostra, C. M. van Duijn, A. Isaacs; sibilities to understand mechanisms involved in atherosclerosis and other Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, metabolic conditions. Netherlands. C05.4 Estimating the fraction of established metabolic trait loci with discernible pleiotropic effects A large proportion of type 2 diabetes (T2D) patients have dyslipidemia, an L. Marullo1,2, B. K. Cornes3,4, J. Dupuis5, J. B. Meigs3,4, A. Morris1,6, I. Prokopenko1,6; important cause of micro- and macrovascular complications. A recent GWAS 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United in the general population identified 95 common genetic variants associated Kingdom, 2Department of Evolutionary Biology, Genetic Section, University of Ferrara, with lipid levels. To obtain insight into the genetics underlying diabetic Ferrara, Italy, 3General Medicine Division, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, dyslipidemia, genotype scores approximating the additive effects of those MA, United States, 4Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, variants were calculated for each major lipid class (total cholesterol, TC; United States, 5Department of Biostatistics, Boston University School of Public Health, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, HDL; low-density lipoprotein chole- Boston, MA, United States, 6Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, sterol, LDL; and triglycerides, TG) in individuals with/without T2D in the University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. Rotterdam Study (n=7735) and Erasmus Rucphen Family Study (n=2313). Adjusted for age, sex and bmi, all four genotype scores were significantly as- sociated with lipid levels in both non-diabetics and diabetics. The genotype Genetic variation influences human quantitative trait levels and risk of me- scores for HDL, LDL, and TG were also used to predict hypercholesterolemia. tabolic disease. The patterns of trait association observed in genome-wide The area under the ROC curve (AUC) for the genotype scores was 0.68[0.66- association studies (GWAS) at individual cardio-metabolic risk-loci are high- 0.69] in non-diabetics and 0.72[0.68-0.76] in diabetics, which was better ly variable and allelic heterogeneity is often observed for association within than the predictive ability of age, sex and BMI (AUCnon-diabetics=0.65[0.64-0.66], and between traits. AUCdiabetics=0.69[0.65-0.73]). Combining the genetic scores with the non- The Cross-Consortia Pleiotropy Group was formed to investigate the pat- genetic risk factors improved the AUC in both non-diabetics and diabetics terns of multi-trait associations across the genome for cardio-metabolic (AUCnon-diabetics=0.69[0.68-0.71], AUCdiabetics=0.75[0.71-0.79]P). The non-gene- traits. We aimed to estimate the fraction of established GWAS loci associated tPic, genetic and coPmbined A=UCs for prediction of hypercholesterolemia were with more than one cardio-metabolic trait showing strong (r2>0.8), mode- all significantly higher in diabetics than in non-diabetics ( nongenetic_AUC=0.038, rate (r2>0.2) linkage disequilibrium (LD) or evidence of allelic heterogenei- genetic_AUC=0.028, combined_AUC 0.006). In conclusion, genotype scores derived ty between associated variants. from common lipid variants are associated with lipid levels not only in the We evaluated 271 SNPs representing associations from published GWAS general population, but also in patients with T2D and can, especially in dia- meta-analyses (Nov.2010) in Europeans of 20 quantitative and two disea- betics, improve prediction of hypercholesterolemia. These data suggest that se phenotypes from six cardio-metabolic trait consortia. We identified 106 the role of common variation may be modified in the context of diabetes. regions associated with multiple traits, defined as sets of adjacent variants C05.3 located less than 500kb apart. We used LD estimated from 1000 Genomes Detailed metabolic and genetic characterization of known lipid loci CEU data. T. Tukiainen1,2,3, J. Kettunen1,4, A. J. Kangas2, L. Lyytikäinen5, P. Soininen2,6, A. Sarin1,4, E. Across the 106 regions defined by SNPs of interest, we observed 49 (30%) Tikkanen1,4, P. F. O‘Reilly3, M. J. Savolainen2,7, K. Kaski8, A. Pouta9, A. Jula4, T. Lehtimäki5, M. containing the same SNP associated with more than one trait. Of these, 37 Kähönen10, J. Viikari11, M. Taskinen12, M. Jauhiainen4, J. G. Eriksson4,13,14, O. Raitakari15,16, V. contain SNPs associated with highly correlated traits, e.g. lipids and obesity. Salomaa4, M. Järvelin17,3,9, M. Perola4, A. Palotie1,18,19, M. Ala-Korpela2,7,6, S. Ripatti1,4; Of the remaining regions, 38 (23%) contain variants in strong LD and 30 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 2Computational (19%) contain variants in moderate LD, and 46 (28%) regions contain vari- Medicine Research Group, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, ants in only modest LD (r2<0.2). Finland, 3Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College, London, Our results highlight that a substantial proportion of metabolic trait loci in- United Kingdom, 4Department of Chronic Disease Prevention, National Institute of Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 5Department of Clinical Chemistry, University corporate complex patterns of multi-trait allelic heterogeneity, suggesting of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 6NMR Metabonomics Laboratory, Department of that statistical approaches that model epidemiological correlations between Biosciences, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland, 7Department of Internal phenotypes may increase power and resolution of gene-mapping efforts. Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, 8Department of Biomedical Engineering and Computational Science, Aalto University School of Science, Espoo, Finland, 9Department of Lifecourse and Services, National Institute of Health and Welfare, Oulu, Finland, 10Department of Clinical Physiology, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 11Department of Medicine, University of Turku, Turku, Finland, 12Department www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 23 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C05.5 Dysfunctional NO signaling due to a double mutation in GUCY1A3 and CCT7 identified by whole exome sequencing increases risk for present in the common ancestor of humans and African apes. We propose a myocardial infarction model where an ancestral human-chimpanzee pericentric inversion and the J. Erdmann1, K. Stark2, U. Esslinger2, F. Kaiser3, C. CARDIoGRAM1, H. Schunkert1, C. ancestral chromosome 2 fusion both predisposed and protected the chim- Hengstenberg2; panzee and human genomes respectively to the formation of subtelomeric 1Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 23 Klinik und Poliklinik für Innere Medizin II, heterochromatin. Our findings highlight the complex interplay between du- Universitätsklinikum Regensburg,, Regensburg, Germany, 3Universität zu Lübeck, Inst. plicated sequences and chromosomal rearrangements that rapidly alter the für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany. cytogenetic landscape in a short period of evolutionary time. C06.2 Genome-wide search for gender different genetic loci for human Myocardial infarction is a life-threatening disease, which results from sud- anthropometric traits: Methods and results from genome-wide meta- den atherothrombotic occlusion of a coronary artery. Most cases of MI occur analyses across 270,000 Individuals sporadically but in rare cases the disease accumulates in families. Here we T. W. Winkler1, J. C. Randall2,3, Z. Kutalik4,5, S. I. Berndt6, R. J. F. Loos7,8, C. M. Lindgren9, K. show by using exome sequencing in such family the identification of hetero- E. North10, I. M. Heid1,11; zygous mutations (p.Leu163Phefs*24 and p.Ser525Leu) in two functional- 1Public Health and Gender Studies, Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, ly related genes, GUCY1A3 and CCT7, in 7 and 11 out of 15 affected family Regensburg University Medical Center, Regensburg, Germany, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger members, respectively. Single-locus linkage-analysis revealed no significant Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Centre for Human LOD score, however two-locus linkage-analysis considering both mutations Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, revealed a significant maximum LOD score of 5.68. Moreover, a GWAS of 28K Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer MI or CAD cases and 75K controls identified a signal across the GUCY1A3 Institute, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, locus (P<1.74x10-8 for rs7692387). While GUCY1A3 encodes the alpha1 Bethesda, MD, United States, 7MRC Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic Science, subunit of soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC), CCT7 a member of the chapero- Addenbrooke‘s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 8Charles R. Bronfman Institute nin containing TCP1 complex (TRiC/CCT), which, among other functions, of Personalized Medicine, Child Health and Development Institute, Department of stabilizes sGC. This enzyme generates cGMP upon stimulation with nitric Preventive medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, oxide (NO) and thereby pacifies platelets among other functions. We sub- 9Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, sequently demonstrated that in-vitro sGC activity is severely impaired by University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 11Institute of Epidemiology the GUCY1A3 and CCT7 mutations. Platelets from double mutation carriers I, Helmholtz Zentrum München - German Research Center for Environmental Health, contained less sGC protein and consequently a reduced NO-induced cGMP Neuherberg, München, Germany. formation. Moreover, in mice deficient for the alpha1 sGC protein subunit thrombus formation in the microcirculation in-vivo upon local trauma was accelerated. In conjunction, we linked mutations in GUCY1A3 and CCT7; Recently, a sex-specific follow-up of a few genetic variants associated with encoding two functionally related proteins, to MI, associated a common va- human anthropometric traits, detected in sex-combined analyses, revealed riant in one of the genes to the same disease, and propose defective sGC significant difference between the sexes. dependent NO signaling as a mechanism leading to MI. To more systematically detect further sexually dimorphic loci, we conducted C05.6 sex-specific genome-wide association meta-analyses of 46 studies (60,586 Gene expression in an extended pedigree men, 73,137 women) and followed-up the results in 48 independent studies S. B. Montgomery, X. Li, K. Karczewski, K. Smith; (62,395 men, 74,657 women) within the GIANT consortium. Each study te- Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States. sted for association of 2.8M SNPs and 9 phenotypes: height, weight, body mass index (BMI), waist and hip circumference, waist-hip ratio (WHR), the latter three with and without adjustment for BMI. We have used RNA-sequencing to profile the transcriptome of 17 European- Opted to detect signals with association in only one sex, we controlled sex- descendent individuals in a three generation pedigree. Each individual has specific P-Values at 5 % false-discovery-rate (FDR) and as such selected a sequenced genome using Complete Genomics technologies. We assess the 348 independent signals. A follow-up yieldMedA P73 hKi1ts, HwSiDth1 7sBig4n, iPfiPcaAnRtG (<5% de novo mutation rate using this extended pedigree. Furthermore, we report FDR) replication sex-differenceG PR-Bv1a4lu/eCsO: B(aL)L 61, wLYoPmLeAnL-1s/pSeLcCif3ic0 Alo1c0i , wVEitGhFoAut patterns of linkage with expressed transcripts to describe the effects of rare any effect in men, including 3 novel (near ADAMTS9 ) and and common variants in this cohort. This provides us with an estimate of the 3 previously established (near PPARG ) functional de novo rate and further allows us to dissect the impact of struc- loci; and (b) one previously published locus (near ) with a less tural versus single nucleotide polymorphisms. Using techniques we have pronounced effect in men. Of particular interest is the region, well- previously reported (Montgomery, Nature, 2010), we assess allele specific known for its role in type 2 diabetes therapy, which showed a women-speci- expression (ASE) and now identify variants identical-by-descendent and the fic association with WHR adjusted for BMI. A second approach to search for subsequent heritability of ASE. sex-differences was particularly powered to detect signals with association C06.1 in both sexes and with opposite effect direction. This method, however, did The evolution of African great ape subtelomeric heterochromatin and not yield any signals. the fusion of human chromosome 2 Our results underscore the importance of sex-stratified analyses in order C. R. Catacchio1, M. Ventura1, S. Sajjadian2, L. Vives2, P. H. Sudmant2, T. Marques-Bonet3, to illustrate a sexually dimorphic genetic underpinning for anthropometric T. A. Graves4, R. K. Wilson4, E. E. Eichler2; traits. 1University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 2Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 3IBE, Institut de Biologia C06.3 Evolutiva (UPF-CSIC), Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 4Washington Analysis of structural variation in the Genome of the Netherlands University Genome Sequencing Center, School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States. (GoNL) project V. Guryev1, W. Kloosterman2, L. Francioli2, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa3, E. Lameijer4, A. Abdellaoui5, J. de Ligt3, V. Koval6, N. Amin6, F. van Dijk7, L. C. Karssen6, H. Mei8, K. Ye4; 1Hubrecht Institute and UMC, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center, Chimpanzee and gorilla chromosomes differ from human chromosomes by Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, the presence of large blocks of subterminal heterochromatin thought to be 4Leids University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 5VU University Medical Center, composed primarily of arrays of tandem satellite sequence. Due to the high- Amsterdam, Netherlands, 6Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7University copy repetitive nature of these sequences, like centromeric and secondary Medical Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 8Netherlands Bioinformatic Centre, Nijmegen, constriction on acrocentric chromosomes, the subtelomeric heterochroma- Netherlands. tin is not represented in the existing genome assemblies of the chimpanzee and gorilla. We use a combination of molecular cytogenetics, clone-based sequencing, and phylogenetic analysis to explore their sequence compositi- on behalf of Genome of the Netherlands consortium on and organization and show a complex organization composed of specific The Genome of the Netherlands (GoNL) is a national collaboration that aims sets of segmental duplications, which have hyperexpanded in concert with at characterizing genetic variations in the Dutch population of 250 families. the formation of subterminal satellites. These regions are highly copy num- Here we report on the pilot results of the structural variation analysis for 18 ber polymorphic between and within species and copy number differences families. Our analysis employs several methodologies for detection of diffe- involving hundreds of copies can be accurately estimated by assaying read- rent types and size ranges of variants. depth of next-generation sequencing datasets. Phylogenetic and compara- Using GATK Unified Genotyper, we identified 1,459,968 small indels of which tive genomic analyses suggest that the structures have arisen largely inde- 23% are novel compared to 1000 Genomes phase 1 data, and 86% overlap pendently in the two lineages with the exception of a few seed sequences with Pindel’s short indel calls. In silico functional analysis indicates that 819 www.eshg.org www.eshg.org24 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 are causing premature stop codons and frameshifts in 749 genes. de understand the underlying basis of the variations, we examined the effect of Ano cvoombination of 4 approaches, read depth (CNVnator, DWAC-Seq), read SNPs and genomic structural variations (SVs) on binding differences among pair (123SV, BreakDancer and GenomeSTRiP), split-read (Pindel), and individuals. We find that many binding differences are associated with SNPs assembly (SOAPdenovo, CLC) ensures detection of structural variants and SVs. Comparison of the binding data with gene expression data gene- of different types and size ranges. For example, we identified a 1.8 kb inser- rated by RNA-Seq revealed that differences in binding often correlate with tion absent in genome reference, but common in Dutch population (allele gene expression differences. Furthermore, comparison of the Pol II human frequency=42%), while rare (5%) in 1000 Genomes project. sites with binding sites identified in the chimpanzee suggests a high level Homozygous DNA segments were identified using PLINK and VCFtools. of divergence in binding relative to our closest evolutionary neighbor. Our We performed hundreds of PCR/Sequencing assays to determine false-po- results indicate that many differences in individuals occur at the level of TF sitive rate for each tool and to establish de novo mutation rate of indels and binding and provide insight into the genetic events responsible for these structural variants. differences. The set of wide size range, multi-type, high-quality SVs calls, together with C06.6 GoNL SNP set (reported separately) describes common genomic variants in Poly(A) binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) levels affect alternative the Dutch genomes. This variation catalogue is essential for understanding polyadenylation population history, interpretation of GWAS and analysis of other studies in- E. de Klerk1, A. Venema1, Y. S. Anvar1, J. J. Goeman2, J. T. den Dunnen1, S. M. van der volving West-European samples. Maarel1, V. Raz1, P. A. C. ‚t Hoen1; 1Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, C06.4 Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Medical Statistics and Duplications at PAK7 are a significant risk factor for schizophrenia Bioinformatics, Leiden, Netherlands. and bipolar disorder D. W. Morris1, P. Cormican1, R. D. Pearson2, B. P. Riley3, C. C. Spencer2, E. M. Kenny1, B. S. Maher3, B. Wormley3, G. Donohoe1, D. Tropea1, B. P. Coe4, E. E. Eichler4, A. McQuillin5, H. Gurling5, D. Blackwood6, F. A. O‘Neill7, S. GENE+ Consortium8, I. nternational The choice for a polyadenylation site (PAS) determines the length of the 3‘- Schizophrenia Consortium9, W. T. C. C. C2, W. T. C. C. C22, K. S. Kendler3, M. Gill1, P. untranslated region (3’-UTRs) of an mRNA. Inclusion or exclusion of regu- Donnelly2, A. P. Corvin1; latory sequences in the 3’-UTR may ultimately affect gene expression levels. 1Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, Poly(A) binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) is involved in polyadenylation 3Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, United States, 4University of of pre-mRNAs. A repeat expansion in PABPN1 causes oculopharyngeal mus- Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5University College London, London, United cular dystrophy (OPMD), a late onset and progressive muscle disorder. Kingdom, 6University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 7Queen‘s University Belfast, Belfast, United Kingdom, 8deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 9Broad Institute, Microarray expression profiling of mice overexpressing expanded-PABPN1 Boston, MA, United States. showed alternative PAS usage in 8% of the interrogated genes. We hypothe- sized that previously observed disturbed gene expression patterns in OPMD muscles may have been the result of an effect of PABPN1 on alternative PAS To identify novel rare risk copy number variants (CNVs) for schizophrenia usage. we performed a CNV analysis in 1,564 cases and 6,944 controls from Ireland To explore PAS usage on a genome-wide level, we developed a single mole- and the UK. Three novel and significant (p<0.01) CNVs from this analysis cule PAS sequencing method. We identified 2,012 transcripts with altered at chr2cen-q13, chr3p25.1 and chr20p12.2 were confirmed by quantitative PAS usage. In the far majority, alternative more proximal PAS were used. real-time PCR and taken forward for replication in a large independent da- This resulted in overall shortening of 3’-UTRs and increased expression for taset of European ancestry containing 7,123 cases and 62,694 controls. This most of the transcripts. confirmed association with schizophrenia for rare chr20p12.2 duplications We recapitulated these changes in PAS usage in myogenic cells by low over- (replication p=0.0008). In the combined sample there are 12 duplications in expression of expanded but not wild-type PABPN1. Since expanded-PABPN1 8,687 cases and 13 in 69,808 controls (p=4.3x10-6, OR=7.44). All cases had is known to be trapped in intranuclear inclusions, we investigated the effect a 132-146.5kb duplication involving the first two exons of the p21 Protein- of sh-RNA mediated downregulation of PABPN1. We found that reduced Activated Kinase 7 (PAK7) gene. Most case carriers of the duplication were Pabpn1 levels also resulted in shortening of 3’-UTRs. Our data suggest that severely affected with poor clinical outcome and limited response to con- PABPN1 is involved in PAS selection. We propose therefore that reduced ventional antipsychotic therapy. Based on evidence of overlapping genetic availability of functional PABPN1 in OPMD muscles results in use of alterna- etiology we examined 2,686 bipolar disorder cases and identified 4 duplica- tive, proximal PAS, leading to large-scale deregulation of gene expression. tion carriers (p=0.0002). Altogether, these data support PAK7 duplications C07.1 as a rare but significant risk factor for psychosis (p=2.14x10-7, OR=7.63). Exome sequencing; what are the lessons learned? PAK7 is one of a family of serine/threonine protein kinases, which are re- M. Kriek, E. Aten, G. W. E. Santen, Y. Sun, R. Al Momani, A. van Haeringen, S. A. M. J. Lesnik Oberstein, E. Bakker, M. H. Breuning, G. B. van Ommen, J. T. den Dunnen; gulated by the Rho family of small G proteins and are involved in multiple Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. intracellular signaling pathways. In mouse cortical neurons, we found that protocols that induce activity-dependent synaptic plasticity also modulated PAK7 expression suggesting that like other p21-activated kinases, PAK7 may Today, many scientific laboratories apply whole exome sequencing. Consi- play an important role in maintaining synaptic networks. Thus, our novel dering the number of published articles and abstracts at different meetings, finding may provide new insight into the pathophysiology of schizophrenia many groups are successful in identifying causative variants for Mendelian and bipolar disorder. disorders. However, at least as many cases currently remain unsolved and C06.5 exome sequencing comes with several disadvantages. It is labor intensive, Variation in transcription factor binding among humans it mostly misses variants outside the targeted regions and it generates se- M. Kasowski1, F. Grubert2, C. Heffelfinger1, M. Hariharan2, A. Asabere1, S. Waszak3, L. Habegger1, J. Rozowsky1, M. Shi2, A. Urban2, M. Hong1, K. Karczewski2, W. Huber3, S. quence data with a large variability in coverage across the regions sequen- Weissman1, M. Gerstein1, J. Korbel3, M. Snyder2; ced. Furthermore, to cope with the sheer number of variants encountered, 1Yale University, New Haven, CT, United States, 2Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United choices have to be made regarding the variants that deserve follow-up work. States, 3EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany. We have attempted to uncover the disease causing genes in 16 different ca- ses using exome sequencing. We were able to solve 9 of them (56%). Im- portant factors to success appear to be (1) phenotyping by expert clinical Differences in gene expression may play a major role in speciation and phe- geneticists, (2) an elaborate ‘diagnostic’ work-up, such as considering SNP notypic diversity. Although variations in gene expression among individuals array analysis to perform linkage in extended families, (3) a careful selection have been documented, the origins of these differences are not clear, and of sequencing design and (4) a reproducible and robust protocol for exome studies that directly measure differences in transcription factor binding si- sequencing and (5) finally, a proper pipeline for data analysis, both with re- tes among humans have not been performed. We have examined genome- spect to variant calling and annotation. wide variation in transcription factor binding in different individuals and a We consider factors of failure to be (1) suboptimal work-up or study design, chimpanzee using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively- (2) hidden causative variant (e.g. non-conserved missense), (3) genetic he- parallel sequencing (ChIP-Seq). The binding sites of RNA Polymerase II (Pol terogeneity of the disorder or a (4) non-genetic cause of the disorder. II) as well as a key regulator of immune responses, NFκB, have been mapped We will discuss several examples of cases for which we were (un)successful in ten lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from individuals of African, Euro- and what attempts were made to prove the pathogeneticy of the variants. pean, and Asian ancestry, including a parent-offspring trio. Using a strin- gent threshold, approximately 7.5% and 25% of the respective NFκB and Pol II binding regions exhibit differences between any two individuals. To www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 25 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C07.2 Unit, National Research Council of Italy, Milan, Italy. Exome sequencing in the clinic: diagnostic-driven analysis of exome sequencing data M. Nelen, C. Gilissen, K. Neveling, R. de Reuver, L. Vissers, N. Wieskamp, W. Buijsman, R. Familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is characterized by cardiac enlar- Derks, M. del Rosario, I. Feenstra, H. Ijntema, H. Brunner, H. Scheffer, J. Veltman; gement and heart failure associated with systolic dysfunction and impaired Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. contraction of the left ventricle, and about 30-50% of affected individuals have a familial form of DCM. The genetics of familial DCM are complex, with 31 autosomal and two X-chromosomal disease genes currently known, none Exome sequencing has great potential in genetic diagnostics, particularly if of which account for more than about 6-8% of cases. The causes of intra- used for strong heterogeneous diseases were diagnostic yield is currently familial variability in DCM have remained largely unknown. In this study, low. The analysis and interpretation of exome data in diagnostics has spe- whole-exome sequencing (WES) was used to investigate the causes for clini- cific challenges with respect to quality control, the possibility of incidental cal variability in an extended family with 14 affected subjects, four of whom findings, and allowing for easy and flexible interpretation. We now have im- showed particular severe manifestations of cardiomyopathy requiring heart plemented a routine diagnostic exome sequencing workflow. transplantation in early adulthood. Whole-exome and conventional sequen- Six heterogeneous diseases are interrogated by exome sequencing: Intel- cing identified the mutation p.K219T in the lamin A gene in all 14 affected lectual Disability (‘de novo’ strategy), Blindness, Deafness, Movement dis- patients. An additional variant in the gene for titin, p.L4855F, was identified orders, Oncogenetics, OXPHOS diseases (disease gene package). The patient in the severely affected patients. The age to heart transplantation was signi- and/or legal representative need to sign an IC before exome sequencing ficantly less for LMNA:p.K219T/TTN:p.L4855F double heterozygotes than can be requested by the clinical geneticist. It includes an agreement for se- for LMNA:p.K219T single heterozygotes by Kaplan-Meier analysis. There quencing their exome and subsequent reporting of all medically relevant was also a clearly different distribution of VO2 and ejection fraction between findings, including possible findings not related to the initial enquiry. Se- the two groups. Myocardial specimens of doubly heterozygote individuals quence variants detected can be analyzed using a diagnostic-oriented GUI showed increased nuclear length and myonuclear clustering compared with that automatically limits genetic findings to the relevant genomic loci for a samples from single heterozygotes. Our results show how WES can be used disease, and allows interpretation using predefined filter schemes. to address questions about clinical variability in human genetics. The LMNA The results of a cohort of 300 patients (including 100 ID patients) will be and TTN mutational status may be useful in this family for risk stratification presented. QC, cases, and pitfalls will be discussed. Data-analysis shows a in persons at risk for familial DCM. median coverage of 67x per exome. With the analysis still ongoing, disease C07.5 gene package analysis detects on average 378 variants with 2 to 18 private Trio-aware variant calling for accurate genotyping and de novo non-synonymous variants per patient. The ‘de novo’ approach for ID demon- mutation detection strates its potential with ~25% of the ID-patients having causal mutations L. C. Francioli1, K. V. Garimella2, K. E. Samocha2,3, F. Van Dijk4, B. M. Neal2,3, M. J. Daly2,3, E. identified in known ID-genes. Banks2, M. Swertz4, M. A. DePristo2, P. I. W. de Bakker1,2,5; This represents the first in-use approach to establish a genetic diagnosis of 1Departments of Medical Genetics and Epidemiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, patients by exome sequencing. Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, MA, United States, C07.3 3Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Next Generation Sequencing in Mainstream Diagnostic Genetic Netherlands, 5Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical Testing: Two years experience and over 1400 Patient Reports School, Boston, MA, United States. D. J. Cockburn1, H. Lindsay1, N. Camm1, R. Robinson1, R. Brown1, L. Mavrogiannis1, N. Jaggs1, J. Morgan2, G. Taylor2, S. Shepherd1, T. Lamb1, C. Watson2, R. Charlton1; 1Yorkshire Regional Genetics, Leeds, United Kingdom, 2Translational Genomics Unit, de novo Leeds, United Kingdom. Background Detection of mutations and accurate genotyping from pedigree NGS data is challenging, especially at low or intermediate depth of coverage. We have established Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) at the core of dia- Both require accurate and quantitative calibration of the evidence suppor- gnostic molecular genetic testing in Leeds. ting the individuals’ genotypes using all the available information, including The first service developed was for breast cancer gene screening, and their familial relationship and population allele frequency. around 1000 reports have been issued since the first in March 2010. Since Methods then, further NGS services have been developed systematically - some were We present here a new GATK module, Phase By Transmission, which uses a formerly analysed by Sanger sequencing and transformation has brought probabilistic model to compute the most likely genotype combination within considerable benefits including reduced costs and improved turnaround a trio given individual genotype likelihoods and a mutation probability pri- time. Enhanced productivity has provided scope to make continued deve- or. When analyzing multiple samples from the same population, it considers lopments and introduce new diagnostic services, widening benefits to new the evidence across daell nsoavmoples in its calculation. This module directly uses patient groups. The Leeds repertoire of NGS services so far includes breast variant calls (VCF) as input to easily integrate in NGS processing pipelines cancer (BRCA1&2), HNPCC (3 genes), phaeochromocytoma (9 genes), Mar- for genotyping, and mutation detection. fan syndrome (FBN1), Loeys-Dietz syndrome (TGFBR1&2), hypertrophic Results cardiomyopathy (4 genes), Li Fraumeni syndrome (TP53), Aicardi-Goutieres Genotyping accuracy was evaluated using concordance between whole-ge- syndrome (5 genes), and FAP1 (APC). All current services follow standar- nome SNP calls from 47 trios sequenced at 12x coverage and Immunochip dised protocols which are conducted in parallel and incorporate long-range data (170k loci). More than 35% of the discordant genotypes and more than PCR to target the genes of interest, robotics and automated library construc- D99e .9n8ov%o of the Mendelian violations in the SNP calls (when performed wit- tion. Sequencing is on the Illumina platform and results are processed using hout familial relationship) could be corrected. de NextGENe software. Data handling is facilitated by customised spreadsheets novo mutation detection was assessed using whole exome data in a co- which include quality checks and assist with assessment of variants. hort of 104 triosd see nqouveonced at 60x depth for which validation data for 94 Already, around two thirds of our molecular workload is based on NGS tech- mutations was available as part of an independent study. We reported nology (measured by UK workload units). But significant transformations in all 91 validated mutations and none of the 3 false positives from the diagnostic services are anticipated to continue, particularly in the fields of original study, and suggested an additional 32 candidates. molecular cytogenetics and whole exome analysis. C07.6 C07.4 The Diagnostic Mutation Database (DMuDB). Collecting, managing Doubly heterozygous LMNA and TTN Mutations Revealed by Exome and publicising clinical variant data. Sequencing in a Severe Form of Dilated Cardiomyopathy M. Cornell, A. Devereau; P. N. Robinson1, C. Viviani Anselmi2, P. Krawitz1, G. Lattanzi3, Y. von Kodolitsch4, A. NGRL Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. Perrot1, E. di Pasquale2, L. Papa2, P. Portararo2, M. Columbaro3, A. Forni5, G. Faggian6, G. Condorelli6, R. Roncarati7; 1Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a DMuDB was established by NGRL Manchester to collect and share genetic Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), Multimedica, Milan, Italy, 3National Research Council of variants identified by UK molecular diagnostic laboratories. To date over Italy, Institute of Molecular Genetics, and Laboratory of Musculoskeletal Cell Biology, 41,000 variants from 15,000 patient referrals have been submitted. The Rizzoli Orthopedic Institute, Bologna, Italy, 4Centre of Cardiology and Cardiovascular database’s remit has now expanded to accept members and data from Euro- Surgery, University Hospital Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 5Department of Cardiac Surgery, University of Verona, Verona, Italy, 6Department of Medicine, National Research pean Molecular Quality Network (EMQN) member diagnostic laboratories Council of Italy, Milan, Italy, 7Biomedical and Genetic Research Institute (IRGB), Milan worldwide on a subscription basis. Variant data in DMuDB have been generated as part of a clinical diagnosis rather than research. Therefore, access has been limited to those involved www.eshg.org www.eshg.org26 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 in genetic testing for patient diagnosis. However it is recognised that there early mouse blastomeres. We found that around 50% of distinguishable ex- may be benefits to the clinical community in allowing wider access. For ex- pressed alleles of individual genes showed differential allele specific expres- ample, the sharing of BRCA1 and BRCA2 data with the ENIGMA consortium sion. This shows that ASE is widespread at the earliest stages of mammalian could improve the classification of variants of unknown significance. The development. ASE is likely to occur as a result of sequence polymorphisms need to balance these benefits against the need for confidentiality needs to of cis regulatory elements, or this might occur in response to different local be recognised though. chromatin structures mediated by epigenetic modifications. We have been investigating the use of the Cafe Variome system to publici- C08.3 se diagnostic variants and allow discovery by interested third parties while Systematic assessment of the immune system by genetic mapping of controlling access. This has helped highlight issues that will need to be re- its quantitative dimensions solved for future sharing of variant data. At the same time, the Human Vari- S. Sanna1, M. Steri1, G. Sole1, C. Sidore2,3, M. F. Urru4, F. Busonero1, F. Reinier5, M. ome Project (HVP) is developing a worldwide model for sharing variant data Dei1, S. Lai1, F. Virdis1, A. Mulas1, M. Marcelli4, R. Atzeni5, A. Angius1,4, C. M. Jones5, D. collected using country nodes and distributing it to gene/disease specific Schlessinger6, G. R. Abecasis3, V. Orrú1, E. Fiorillo1, F. Cucca1,2; 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, CNR, Monserrato, Italy, 2Dipartimento di databases and to central databases, e.g., at NCBI and EBI. Scienze Biomediche, Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 3Center for Statistical Genetics, We discuss the issues raised in publicising and sharing data and how the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 4CRS4, GSP group,, Pula, Italy, DMuDB/Cafe Variome model relates to the HVP country node model of va- 5CRS4, AGCT group,, Pula, Italy, 6Laboratory of Genetics, NIA, Baltimore, MD, United riant data sharing. States. C08.1 The ENCODE effort combining RNA-seq and RT-PCR-seq allows to catalog thousands of novel lncRNAs Genome-wide association scans (GWAS) have identified hundreds of re- C. Howald1,2, A. Tanzer3, J. Chrast1, F. Kokocinski4, T. Derrien3, N. Walters1, J. M. Gonzalez4, gions associated with immune diseases, but identification of the specific A. Frankish4, B. L. Aken4, T. Hourlier4, J. Vogel4, S. White4, S. M. Searle4, J. Harrow4, T. causal variants and clarification of the underlying functional mechanisms Hubbard4, R. Guigo3, A. Reymond1; remain a great challenge. Better genetic and phenotypic resolution in GWAS, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, Genopode building, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Centre de integrating sequencing data and assessing the immune system’s various Regulacio Genomica, Grup de Recerca en Informatica Biomedica, Barcelona, Spain, components, can improve our understanding of such loci and lead to novel 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, United discoveries. Here we have used polychromatic flow cytometry to evaluate Kingdom. quantitative variation of 271 immune-related traits, representing levels of the majority of lymphocyte cell populations (T and B cells, Natural Killer cells, regulatory T cells, dendritic cells, and their subsets) as well as T cell Within the ENCODE consortium, GENCODE aimed to accurately annotate maturation, in 1628 volunteers of the SardiNIA project by polychromatic all protein-coding genes, pseudogenes and non-coding transcribed loci in flow cytometry. Heritability estimates showed that the genetic component the human genome through manual curation and computational methods. accounts for >40% of the phenotypic variation for most of the traits. Samp- Lower confidence transcribed loci were systematically experimentally eva- les were genotyped with Affymetrix arrays as well as MetaboChip and Im- luated by RT-PCR amplification followed by highly multiplexed sequencing munoChip, and ~14 Million variants were imputed from a reference panel readout, a method we coined RT-PCR-seq. 79% of all assessed junctions are of 1,656 haplotypes deriving from 828 Sardinian samples sequenced at 3x confirmed by this evaluation procedure demonstrating the high quality of average coverage. We performed a GWAS for each trait and observed, over- the annotation reached by the GENCODE gene set. We further took advan- all, 101 independent variants at 58 loci (1x10-202<P<5x10-8). Notably, our tage of the deep transcriptome profiling generated by the Illumina “Human results include the previously reported association at the Type 1 Diabetes Body Map” in 16 human tissues to uncover 5918 novel gene models that do associated IL2RA gene and mean CD25 levels on CD4+ memory T cells not overlap any loci depicted in GENCODE. They potentially represent new (P<10-11). Another five loci have been previously associated with immu- non-coding RNA genes or alternatively unannotated 5’ or 3’UTR portions of ne and non-immune pathologies, illustrating the relevance of the approach known genes, as the vast majority of these models was shown to have podoer for the identification of immune-related genetic factors in both health and cfaocdtiong potential using comparative genomics and mass spectrometry. We disease. experimentally validated using RT-PCR-seq, 73% of the new HBM models, C08.4 enriching the complexity of the human genome annotation of non-co- Zooming in on causal variants by eQTL meta-analysis in 5,311 ding RNA genes by more than 4000 novel genes. Our findings demonstrate samples the effectiveness of unbiased RNA-seq combined with targeted RT-PCR-seq T. Esko1, H. Westra2, M. J. Peters3, C. Schurmann4, H. Yaghootkar5, J. Kettunen6, M. A. to uncover new genome features. These two technologies were simulta- Christiansen7, J. Karjalainen2, R. Fehrmann2, G. te Meerman2, A. Hofman3, F. Rivadeneira3, neously similarly paired to unravel expressed pseudogenes by the GENCO- E. Reinmaa8, R. Jansen9, J. Brody7, S. A. Gharib7, A. Suchy-Dicey7, D. Enquobahrie7, A. G. Uitterlinden10,3, C. Wijmenga2, B. M. Psaty7, S. Ripatti6,11, T. Frayling5, A. Teumer12, A. DE consortium. Our RT-PCR-seq targeted-approach also has the advantage Metspalu1, J. B. J. van Meurs3, L. Franke2; of identifying novel exons of known genes, as we discovered unannotated 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, exons in about 11% of assessed introns. We thus estimate that at least 18% Netherlands, 3Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Ernst-Moritz- of known loci have yet-unannotated exons. Arndt University Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, 5University of Exeter, Exeter, C08.2 United Kingdom, 6University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7University of Washington, Allele Specific Expression Single cell RNA-Seq Analysis Seattle, WA, United States, 8Estonian Genome Center, Estonia, Estonia, 9University of K. Q. Lao1, F. Tang2, R. Tanzi3, C. Barbacioru1, E. Nordman1, S. Bao2, C. Lee2, X. Wang1, B. Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 10Netherlands Genomics Initiative-Sponsored by the B. Tuch1, E. Heard4, A. Surani2; Netherlands Consortium for Healthy Aging, Rotterdam, Leiden, Netherlands, 11Wellcome 1Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Welcome Trust, Cambridge, United Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 12Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Kingdom, 3Life Technologies, Monza, Italy, 4Institut Curie, Paris, France. Greifswald, Greifswald, Netherlands. Dissecting the relationship between genotype and phenotype is one of the Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have linked many genetic vari- central goals in biology. Cell development is driven and controlled by tem- ants in the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with complex poral and spatial changes in gene transcription,. Single cell RNA-Seq analysis traits. However because of linkage disequilibrium, it is often difficult to can be instructive concerning how individual cells respond to signals at cri- identify causal variants. Currently, GWAS are sometimes accompanied by li- tical stages of cell fate determination, or when they acquire aberrant phe- mited eQTL (expression quantitative trait locus) data to prioritize the genes notype. Essentially all cells within an individual organism share a virtually within the associated regions, however, a large reference panel is not yet identical genotype, but the individual transcriptomes reflect expression of publicly available. a subset of genes, which is determined by their epigenetic state, including Here, we report on a comprehensive cis-eQTL (distance between SNP and DNA methylation and histone modifications. If these two copies of a gene probe mid-point position < 250kb) meta-analysis of 5,311 samples (full- are expressed at different levels, the quantities of messenger (mRNA) from blood) from seven cohorts using imputed GWAS data. We identified cis-ef- individual alleles will differ. This is called allele specific gene expression fects for 12,500 unique probes (reflecting 8,600 unique genes) and 12,000 (ASE). ASE is potentially important for development, and during evolution independent SNPs, a number that is twice as large as those currently repor- when a new allele emerges from mutation, which might immediately affect ted in NHGRI GWAS catalog (of which 38% have a cis-effect in our analyses). development through changes in expression levels in a heterozygous cell. Genes for which we did not detect a cis-eQTL were generally very weakly However, the extent of ASE in individual mammalian cells and, has not so far expressed in blood. been examined. Here, we took advantage of recent advances concerning sin- Since many of the cis-eQTLs p-values were less than 10-100, we hypothe- gle cell RNA-Seq, to analyze allele specific gene expression within inwdiwvidwua.le shsgize.od rtghat the top eQTLs were enriched in causal variants.. By comparing www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 27 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 these extreme eSNPs with small-effect eSNPs, we observed highly significant 50% of the 5,004 genes that currently lack any known function. enrichment of SNPs mapping to splice sites, introns, UTRs, miRNA binding These results indicate that through the integration of many gene expression sites and especially transcription factor binding sites. Surprisingly, we found arrays biological knowledge can be obtained, even for those genes for which that less than 6% of the top eSNPs were coding while only 3% were non- currently nothing is known. synonymous, indicating that regulation of gene expression is predominantly C09.1 determined at non-coding regions. These results imply that a stronger focus The Skeletome project: towards a community-driven knowledge on investigating non-coding variants in future GWAS fine-mapping studies curation platform for skeletal dysplasias is justified. T. Groza, H. Ziamatin, R. Paul, J. Hunter, A. Zankl; C08.5 University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia. Mapping genetic and epigenetic factors influencing human hippocampal gene expression L. Priebe1,2, C. Wolf3, M. Alexander1,2, N. Karbalai3, K. Pernhorst4, H. Fröhlich5, O. Stegle6, The generation of a comprehensive description of all human diseases and its A. Kriegel7, T. Sander7, D. Czamara3, M. Mattheisen1,2,8, B. Pütz3, A. Hillmer9, A. Altmann3, interconnections in a universal, computer-readable format („the Phenome“) N. Kluck1,2, B. Schölkopf10, K. Borgwardt6, J. Schramm11, P. Hoffmann1,2, A. Becker4, M. M. is the next frontier in human genetics. Major hurdles include the enormous Nöthen1,2,12, B. Müller-Myhsok3, S. Cichon1,2,13; amount of information to capture and the non-standardised and often am- 1Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human biguous nature of current clinical terminology. The Skeletome project aims Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Statistical Genetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn to develop a comprehensive phenotype database for the skeletal dysplasia Medical Center, Bonn, Germany, 5Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT Algorithmic domain by tapping into the collective knowledge and patient data available Bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany, 6Machine Learning and Computational Biology around the world and making it accessible in a standardised format. To this Research Group, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany, aim, we have transformed the current Nosology of Genetic Skeletal Disor- 7Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 8Channing ders into an ontology. We then created a collaborative editing platform that Laboratory, Brigham and Women‘s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, allows the scientific community to collate their collective knowledge into United States, 9Genome Technology & Biology Group, Genome Institute of Singapore, an online encyclopaedia of skeletal dysplasias. Finally, we have created an Singapore, Singapore, 10Department for Empirical Inference, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany, 11Clinic of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn, online database that allows clinicians worldwide to submit detailed clinical Bonn, Germany, 12German Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders (DZNE), Bonn, information on patients with skeletal dysplasias and to share this data in Germany, 13Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Structural and Functional anonymised form and in a standardised manner with the scientific commu- Organization of the Brain, Genomic Imaging, Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany. nity. The systematic use of ontologies and other semantic web technologies ensures a high level of connectivity within the project and with existing biomedical databases, allowing complex querying and computer-assisted Several studies have investigated the effects of genetic variation on gene ex- reasoning. For example, we have implemented a diagnostic algorithm that pression (expression quantitative trait loci, eQTLs) in peripheral tissue, cell suggests diagnoses based on clinical features. The performance of this early lines, or post-mortem brain tissue. EQTL studies from pre-mortem, fresh- prototype already matches the diagnostic accuracy of non-expert clinicians. frozen brain samples would be highly interesting but are hampered by the We hope that the Skeletome platform will become the prototype of phenoty- restricted accessibility of such samples. At the University of Bonn, we have pic databases for other rare diseases. access to a unique sample of pre-mortem human hippocampus samples C09.2 originating from surgery of treatment-resistant epilepsy patients. To sy- Exome sequencing identifies PDE4D mutations as another cause of stematically determine eQTLs in a total of 148 hippocampus samples, we acrodysostosis generated whole-genome SNP (Illumina Human660W) and gene expression C. Michot1, C. Le Goff1, A. Goldenberg2, A. Abhyankar3, C. Klein1, E. Kinning4, A. Guerrot5, data (Illumina HumanHT-12v3). In addition to the conventional data ana- P. Flahaut6, A. Duncombe7, G. Baujat8, S. Lyonnet1, C. Thalassinos9, P. Nitschke10, J. lysis, we applied a new “hidden factor” analysis that identifies and corrects Casanova11, M. Le Merrer1, A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire12; 1INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2Department of Clinical for unknown confounding factors in the data and thus diminishes the false- Genetics, C.H.U. de Rouen, rouen, France, 3St. Giles Lab of Human Genetics of Infectious positive and false-negative eQTL rate (PEER, https://github.com/PMBio/ Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University,, New York, NY, United States, peer/wiki). Fifteen hidden factors were identified and used as co-variates 4The Ferguson-Smith Centre for Clinical Genetics Royal Hospital for Sick Children, for expression analysis. We detected 78 trans-regulating (>1Mb between Glasgow, United Kingdom, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, C.H.U. de Rouen, Rouen, SNP and probe) eQTLs that withstood Bonferroni correction for multiple France, 6Department of Medical Pediatrics, C.H.U. de Rouen, Rouen, France, 7Department testing. Moreover, 1,925 cis-regulating (≤1Mb distance) eQTLs remained of Ophtalmology, C.H.U. de Rouen, Rouen, France, 8INSERM U781, Université Paris significant after permutation-based Westfall-Young correction. In an addi- Descartes, Höpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 9Endocrinologie gynecologie diabetologie pediatrique, Paris, France, 10Plateforme de Bioinformatique , Université tional step, we extended our analysis to the systematic investigation of the Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 11Lab of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, University influence of DNA methylation on gene expression. Genome-wide methyla- Paris Descartes and INSERM U980, Necker Medical School, New York, NY, United States, tion measurement was performed using Illumina’s new HumanMethylati- 12INSERM U781, Université Paris Descartes Hôpital Necker Enfant Malades, Paris, on450 array which interrogates more than 485,000 methylation sites. To France. our knowledge, our study is the first to integrate genotype, expression and methylation data from pre-mortem brain tissue and will provide a valuable resource for the functional interpretation of genetic and epigenetic sites, in Acrodysostosis [MIM 101800)] is a dominantly inherited condition associa- particular those associated with brain diseases. ting 1) a skeletal dysplasia characterized by facial dysostosis, severe brachy- C08.6 dactyly with cone-shaped epiphyses, advanced bone maturation and short A gene co-regulation network based on 80,000 samples allows for stature 2) resistance to mutiple hormones 3) moderate to mild intellectual accurate prediction of gene function disability. Differential diagnoses include Albright hereditary osteodystrophy J. Karjalainen, R. Fehrmann, G. te Meerman, H. Westra, C. Wijmenga, L. Franke; and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism due to loss of function mutations in University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. GNAS (α-stimulary subunit of the G-protein). Recently, a recurrent mutation in the PRKAR1A has been identified in 3 individuals with acrodysostosis and resistance to multiple hormones ( High-throughput DNA microarray technology now provides us with a de- p.Arg368X). Studying ten unrelated acrodysostosis cases, we identified tailed view of the human transcriptome under different biological condi- de novo PRKAR1A mutations in 5/10 (p.Arg368X mutation in 4/10 and tions. The increasing amount of publicly available microarray data helps p.Tyr373His mutation in 1/10). We then performed exome sequencing in in identifying and predicting genes that contribute to the same biological 2/5 remaining cases and selected phosphodiesterase 4D (PDE4D) as a can- processes. To create a gene co-regulatory model of the human transcripto- didate gene. PDE4D encodes a class IV cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase, me, enabling the prediction of gene function, we analyzed 55,000 human, regulating cAMP concentration. We finally identified heterozygous PDE4D 17,000 mouse and 6,000 rat Affymetrix microarrays from the Gene Expres- mutations in 4/5 cases. All mutations occurred de novo in all 4 cases. Neit- sion Omnibus. We created an integrated three-species gene network with her PDE4D nor PRKAR1A mutations were found in one adult patient with 20,000 unique human genes and developed a principal component based characteristic skeletal features but no hormone resistance or facial dysosto- statistical algorithm to predict function for individual genes. sis. We benchmarked the algorithm against several pathway databases (inclu- Splitting our series based on the disease causing gene revealed interesting ding Gene Ontology, KEGG, BioCarta and Reactome) and observed that gene genotype-phenotype correlations. Indeed, the four patients carrying PDE4D function could be generally predicted very well. For over 75% of all 20,000 mutations shared characteristic facial features, namely midface hypoplasia genes we could predict at least one significant pathway association, function with the canonical nasal hypoplasia and moderate intellectual disability. No www.eshg.org or protein localization. Furthermore, predictions could be made wforw owve.re shg.org28 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 hormone resistance was observed in 3/4 patients with PDE4D mutations putative CNVs. Genes which were located in regions of rearrangements were while hormone resistance was consistently observed in the 5 patients car- prioritized by expression data in mice. Three de novo microduplications rying PRKAR1A mutations. Finally, our study further supports the key role were identified involving chromosomal region 1q41, 2q37.3, and 8q24.3. of cAMP signaling pathway in skeletogenesis. Mice expression data suggest GPR35 and EPPK1 as candidate genes for C09.3 the VATER/VACTERL association. Currently, both genes are systematically Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy and isolated digital clubbing sequenced in the complete sample to identify high-penetrance mutations are caused by mutations in the prostaglandin transporter encoding involving small sequence changes. gene SLCO2A1 C09.5 W. Seifert1, J. Kühnisch2,3, B. Tüysüz4, C. Specker5, A. Brouwers6, D. Horn2; Comprehensive clinical and molecular analysis of 12 families with 1Institute of Vegetative Anatomy, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Genetics and type I recessive cutis laxa Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 3Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, B. L. Callewaert1, C. Su2, T. Van Damme1, P. Vlummens1, F. Malfait1, O. Vanakker1, B. Germany, 4Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Istanbul Schulz2, M. Mac Neal2, E. C. Davis3, J. G. H. Lee3, A. Salhi4, S. Unger5, K. Heimdal6, S. De University, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Dept. of Rheumatology & Clinical Immunology, Centre Almeida7, U. Kornak8, H. Gaspar9, J. Bresson10, K. Prescott11, M. E. Gosendi12, S. Mansour13, for Internal Medicine, Kliniken Essen Süd, Essen, Germany, 6Dept. of Internal Medicine, G. E. pierard14, S. Madan-Khetarpal15, F. C. Sciurba16, P. J. Coucke1, L. Van Maldergem17, Z. Gelderse Vallei Hospital, Ede, Netherlands. Urban2, A. De Paepe1; 1Center for Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Primary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO) is a rare hereditary cHoPnGdDi- Health, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 3Department of Anatomy tion, which is characterized by digital clubbing, periostosis, arthropathy, and Cell Biology, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Department of Dermatology, Faculty of Medicine, Alger, Algeria, 5Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Un, pachydermia, and hyperhidrosis. Recently, mutations within the gene Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, encoding the prostaglandin E2 (PHGPEG2D) catabolizing enzyme 15-hydroxy- Norway, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Hospitals Civis De Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal, prostaglandin dehydrogenase were PfoTuGnSd1 tPoT cGaSu2seP PTHGOE.S HPeTreG, EwSe2 aPnTaGlyEzSe3d 8Charité, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, PPTHGOE pRa1tiePnTtGs ElaRc2kinPgT GmEuRt3atiPoTnGs EinR 4 SLCOfo2rA m1uStaLtCiOon3sA 1in SgLeCnOes4 Ain1voPlvTeGdR i1n Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 10Service de Genetique, CHU Saint-Jacques, prosPtaTgGlaRn2din metabolism namely: , , , , , Besancon, France, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, Chapel Allerton Hospital, Leeds, , , , , , , , , United Kingdom, 12Department of Pediatrics, General Hospital of Llerenda, Badajoz, and SLCO2. AIn1 three unrelated families we identified hetero- and homozy- Spain, 13Department of Clinical genetics, St George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 14Department of Dermatopathology University Hospital of Liège, Liege, gous mutations within the solute carrier organic anion transporter family Belgium, 15Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital 2AS1L (CO2A1 ) gene (MIM ID *601460, chromosome 3q21) as underlying of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 16Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care genetic cause for isolated digital clubbing and PHO, respectively. Mutations Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, in comprise a homozygous insertion c.830_831insT, resulting in a 17Centre de Génétique Humaine, Université de Franche-Comté, Besancon, France. premature stopcodon at p.Phe276fsX18; a homozygous missense mSLuCtOat2iAon1 c.1670T>C introducing an amino acid substitution p.Phe557Ser and a he- terozygous nonsense mutation c.754C>T resulting in p.Arg252X. Autosomal recessive cutis laxa type I (ARCL type I)F iBsL cNh4aractFeBriLzNe5d by ge- encodes the prostaglandin transporter (PGT), which is involved in carriSeLr-- neralized LcTuBtPis4 laxa with pulmonary emphysema and/or vascular compli- CmOe2dAia1ted re-uptake of PGE2 across the plasma membrane for metabolic cationsF.B RLaNr4elyF, BmLuNt5ationsL cTaBnP 4be identified in the or genes. clearance of prostaglandins. Consequently, in patients with mutatioSnLsC iOn2 A1 Recently, FBLN5 mutations have been implicated in a similar phenotype. Stu- , elevated PGE2 levels induce the PHO phenotype as well as isolated dying , aLTnBdP 4 in 12 families with ARCL typFeB LI,N w4eF fBoLuNnd5 digital clubbing. By phenotypic correlation of hitherto identified bi-alLleTlBicP 4 mutations in 2 probands, whereas 9 probands harbored mutations, we found an incomplete penetrance of isolated digital clubbing biallelic mutations in . No mutations were identified in . in heterozygous carriers, SsLuCgOge2sAt1ing a threshold effect of impaired PGE2 de- and mutations cause a very similar phenotype associated with severe gradation defining disease progression and severity. In summary, our study pulmonary emphysema, LiTnB tPh4e absence of vascular tortuosity or aneurys- establishes mutations in as further molecular determinant of PHO ms. Gastro-intestinal and genitourinary tractL iTnBvPo4lvement seems to be more and digital clubbing supporting the importance of PGE2 metabolism for severe in patients with mutations. Functional studies showed that bone, joint and skin physiology. most premature termination mutations in result in severely redu- C09.4 ced mRNA and protein levels. This correlated with increased transforming Comprehensive genome wide CNV screening in 47 individuals with growth factor beta (TGFβ) signaling. However, one mutation, c.4127dupC, VATER/VACTERL association escaped nonsense-mediated decay. The corresponding mutant protein A. C. Hilger1,2, M. Draaken1,2, T. Pennimpede3, L. Wittler3, C. Schramm1,2, G. Dworschak1,2, (p.R1377fsX27) caused altered binding to fibrillin-1 and loss of bindLiTnBg Pto4 E. Bartels1, H. Engels1, A. Zink1, F. Degenhardt1, E. Schmiedeke4, D. Schmidt1, S. Grasshoff- fibronectin, leading to an abnormal mFBoLrNp5hology of microfibrils in fibrLoTbBlaPs4t Derr5, S. Märzheuser6, S. Hosie7, S. Holland-Cunz8, S. Moebus9, M. M. Nöthen1,2, M. cultures, while retaining normal TGFβ signaling. We conclude that Ludwig10, H. Reutter1,11; mutations are more prevalent than mutations in ARCL type I. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Developmental mutations cause disease through both loss of function and gain of function Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, mechanisms. 4Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Center for Child and Adolescent Health, C09.6 Hospital Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Discriminative features in three cutis laxa syndromes; Geroderma Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Surgery, Campus Osteodysplastica, Cutis laxa type IIA, Cutis laxa type IIB Virchow Clinic, Charite University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 7Department of A. Kariminejad1, B. Bozorgmehr1, M. Kariminejad1, B. Fischer2, T. Thatjana Gardeitchik3, Pediatric Surgery, Klinikum Schwabing, Technische Universität München, München, E. Morava3; Germany, 8Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Germany, 9Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology, University 2Max Planck Institute, Berlin, Germany, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 10Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Nijmegen, Netherlands. Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 11Department of Neonatology, Children’s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. Geroderma osteodysplastica (GO), cutis laxa type IIA and IIB are autosomal recessive conditions with cutis laxa as the main clinical feature. It has been The term VATER/VACTERL association is used as an acronym for the com- difficult to differentiate these conditions solely based on clinical features. bination of at least three of the following congenital anomalies: vertebral In the past few years with the identification of genes responsible for these defects (V), anorectal malformations (A), cardiac defects (C), tracheoeso- phageal fistula with or without esophageal atresia (TE), renal malformati- conditions, it is easier to classify the patientPsY wCiRt1h cutiAsT lPa6xaV.0 SAo2me of the pa- ons (R), and limb defects (L). The causes of the VATER/VACTERL associati- tients initially diagnosed with Geroderma osteodysplastica, or wrinkGlOy RsAkin on are likely to be heterogeneous, with individual environmental or genetic AsyTnPd6rVo0mAe2 turnePdY oCuRt1 t o have mutations in , or gene. We present13 patients with genetically confirmed mutations in B, risk factors still being largely unknown. In the present study we aimed to and genes confirming GO, Cutis laxa type IIA and IIB re- identify copy number variants (CNVs) that contribute to VATER/VACTERL spectively. We elaborate on clinical features that are similar and different association. Molecular karyotyping, utilizing 1,134,514 SNPs SNPs (single in these three conditions, which can be helpful in differentiating between nucleotide polymorphisms), was performed to screen 47 individuals with these syndromes. VATER/VACTERL association and their parents for causative de novo events. These three conditions have cutis laxa of trunk, wrinkling of dorsum of hand To identify potential CNVs, the SNP fluorescence intensity were analyzed and feet, hyperlaxity, pes planus and congenital dislocation of hip and deve- with QuantiSNP using an Objective-Bayes Hidden-Markov model for calling www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 29 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C10.3 A common BIM deletion polymorphism mediates intrinsic resistance lopmental dePlYaCyR i1n common. and inferior responses to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in cancer Progeroid features, triangular face, pinched nose, loss of adipose tissue are A. M. Hillmer1, K. P. Ng2, C. T. H. Chuah3, W. C. Juan2, T. K. Ko2, N. Takahashi4, K. Sawada4, specific for A TmPu6Vta0tAio2ns. Loose redundant folds in trunk seen in the A. S. M. Teo1, P. N. Ariyaratne1, Y. Fei1, X. Y. Woo1, J. C. Allen Jr2, A. L. Ang3, H. T. Mya3, G. other two forms of cutis laxa, is not a common feature. F. How3, L. Y. Yang3, L. P. Koh5, B. Chowbay6, V. S. Nadarajan7, W. J. Chng5, H. Than3, L. C. Facial features of have bossing forehead, downslanting palpebral Lim3, Y. T. Goh3, P. Tan1, J. Seet8, M. K. Ang6, N. M. Chau6, Q. S. Ng6, D. S. W. Tan6, M. Soda9, K. Isobe10, M. M. Nöthen11, T. Y. Wong12, E. H. Tan6, Y. Yatabe13, H. Mano9, R. A. Soo5, T. M. fissures, midface hypoplasia, anteverted nares, short nose and small mouth. Chin5, W. T. Lim6, Y. Ruan1, T. S. Ong2; Additional features are late closure of fontanels and myopia. 1Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2Duke-NUS Graduate Medical Droopy, jowly face with a degree of malar hypoplasia and mandibular pro- School, Singapore, Singapore, 3Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 4Akita gnathism is specific for GO. Osteoporosis and bone fracture is a feature of University Graduate School of Medicine, Akita, Japan, 5National University Cancer this syndrome not a common finding in the other two. Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 6National Cancer Centre, Singapore, C10.1 Singapore, 7University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 8National University Hospital Health System, Singapore, Singapore, 9Jichi Medical University, Tochigi, Japan, 10Toho Genomic instability in 25,000 cancer samples: A limited number of University Omori Medical Center, Tokyo, Japan, 11University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, copy number aberration configurations 12Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 13Aichi Cancer Center, Tokyo, L. Franke, R. Fehrmann, G. te Meerman, J. Karjalainen, H. Westra, C. Wijmenga; Japan. Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, 9700 AB, Groningen, Utrecht, Netherlands. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI) elicit high response rates among individu- als with kinase-driven malignancies, including chronic myeloid leukemia Genomic instability is one of the hallmarks of cancer. However, so far geno- (CML) and epidermal growth factor receptor-mutated non-small cell lung mic instability has only been systematically investigated in a limited number cancer (EGFR NSCLC). However, the depth and duration of responses are of individuals. heterogeneous, suggesting the existence of genetic modifiers of response. To overcome this we reanalyzed Affymetrix gene expression data of a hete- Using paired-end DNA sequencing, we discovered a common intronic dele- rogeneous set of 25,000 human cancer samples. We observed that the far tion polymorphism in the gene encoding BCL2-like 11 (BIM). BIM is a pro- majority of expression variation among these samples could be attributed apoptotic member of the BCL2 family of proteins, and its upregulation is to physiological, metabolic and cell-type specific variation. However, by ap- required for TKIs to induce apoptosis in kinase-driven cancers. The poly- plying principal component analysis we could correct all samples for the- morphism switched BIM splicing from exon 4 to exon 3, encoding for BIM se differences. After correction we observed that most genes showed very isoforms lacking the pro-apoptotic BCL2-homology domain 3 (BH3). The strong dosage-sensitivity to copy number alterations, permitting us to re- polymorphism was sufficient to confer intrinsic TKI resistance in CML and construct aCGH-like copy number aberration profiles for each of the 25,000 EGFR NSCLC cell lines, a resistance that could be overcome with BH3-mime- cancer samples. tic drugs. Importantly, individuals with CML and EGFR NSCLC harboring the Subsequent analysis of the deletions and duplications revealed that a few polymorphism experienced significantly inferior TKI responses. Our results combinations of certain deletions and duplications occur very often, ir- offer an explanation for the heterogeneity of TKI responses, and suggest the respective of the particular type of cancer. This indicates the presence of possibility of personalizing therapy with BH3-mimetics to overcome BIM strong selective forces, resulting in the survival of those cancer cells with polymorphism-associated resistance. particular cytogenetic aberrations. The characteristics of these different cytogenetic aberration configurations C10.4 are very different: Different classes of genes are affected in different confi- The impact of a cancer family history on ovarian cancer risk in BRCA1 gurations, which suggests that therapeutic intervention might improve by and BRCA2 mutation carriers. J. Oosterwijk, N. Teixeira, M. Mourits, D. van der Kolk, A. van der Hout, L. Jansen, T. de tailoring this to the type of (cyto)genetic aberration configuration that is Bock; relevant for each individual cancer sample. UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. C10.2 Purpose: Deep intronic APC mutations explain a substantial proportion of BRCA1 BRCA2 patients with familial or early onset adenomatous polyposis To study the effect of a family history of breast/ovarian cancer on I. Spier1, S. Horpaopan1, S. Vogt1, S. Uhlhaas1, M. Morak2,3, D. Stienen1, M. Draaken1, M. Ludwig4, E. Holinski-Feder2,3, M. M. Nöthen1, P. Hoffmann1, S. Aretz1; tPhaet ileifnettism aen rdi sMk eatnhdo adgse: at diagnosis of ovarian cancer in and 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Medizinische mutation carriers. BRCA1/2 Klinik - Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der LMU, Munich, Germany, 3MGZ - Center of A prospective single center cohort study including Medical Genetics, Munich, Germany, 4Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical a consecutive series of 1846 women from 367 different families, Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. followed-up between 1996 and 2011. The occurrence and age of diagnosis of breast and ovarian cancer in all available family members was recorded. APC, Cox-regression analysis was applied to assess the correlation between age In up to 50% of patieMntUs TwYiHth colorectaMl aUdTeYnHomatous polyposis no germline rReelasuteldts p:enetrance of ovarian cancer and the presence and the age BatR CdAia2- mutation in the currently known genes causingFamilial Adenomatous gnosis of breast and ovarian cancer within the family. Polyposis (FAP) or , causing -associated polyposis (MAP), In total 263 ovarian cancer cases were diagnosed. Among cAaPnC be identified by routine diagnostics. To uncover aberrant transcripts mutation carriers, the risk of ovarian cancer was significantly higher with pointing to pathogenic deep intronic variants, we performed a systematic relatives with ovarian cancer before age 50: HR=2.34, (95% CI=1.18-4.64, mRNA analysis in 125 apparently unrelated mutation negative polypo- p=0.02) with first-degree affected relatives and HR=2.11 (95%B CRIC=A12.12- sis patients. 3.98, p=0.02) with first- or second-degrBeRe CaAff1ected relatives). Family histo- Overall, we identified 11 reproducible aberrant transcripts in 10 patients ries withB bRrCeAa2st cancer reduced ovarian cancer risk, especially in fa- (8% of whole study cohort; 30% of familial cases; 21% of patients with early mCoilniecslu: HsiRo=n0: .47 (95% CI=0.34-0.67) in and HR=0.29 (95% CI=0.17- onset manifestation). In eight of these patients two different out-of-frame 0.51) in , p<0.01). BRCA2 insertions between intact exons (pseudoexons) were found. Sequencing of Our findings indicate that family histories including early age the aberrant bands revealed a 167 bp insertion from intron 4 in five families ovarianB cRaCnAc1e/r2 may double the risk of ovarian cancer in mutation with a shared founder haplotype and a 83 bp insertion from intron 10 in carriers, while a family history with breast cancer decreases ovarian cancer three patients, caused by the heterozygous germline mutations c.532-941- risk in mutation carriers with more than 50%. These results may G>A, c.1408+731C>T, or c.1408+735A>T, respectively. All mutations are be important to apply in cancer risk algorithms used in genetic counselling. supposed to activate cryptic splice sites. On cDNA level complete skipping C10.5 of exon 9 was observed in two patients and a complex insertion/deletion Combined whole genomic, exomic and transcriptomic sequencing rearrangement in another patient. APC identifies genes recurrently mutated in Burkitt lymphomas In conclusion, we identified a few deep intronic hotspots and founder mu- J. Richter1, M. Schlesner2, E. Leich3, B. Burkhardt4, S. Hoffmann5, M. Szczepanowski6, tations contributing substantially to the mutation spectrum. cDNA ana- M. Kreuz7, D. Lenze8, S. Bernhart9, M. Rosolowski7, J. Hoell10, C. Lawerenz2, N. Jäger2, lysis and/or target seqAuPeCncinMg UoTf YceHrtain intronic regions should be consi- B. Hutter2, D. Langerberger5, O. Ammerpohl1, H. Binder11, A. Borkhardt10, B. Brors2, A. Claviez12, J. Pischimarov3, M. Deyling13, R. Eils2,14, M. Hansmann15, V. Binder10, N. Hornig1, dered as an additional mutation discovery approach in polyposis patients W. Klapper6, J. Korbel16, D. Kube17, R. Küppers18, P. Lichter2, M. Loeffler7, P. Möller19, in whom no germline or mutation was identified so far, in par- C. Pott20, A. Rosenwald3, S. Schreiber21, M. Schilhabel22, R. Scholtysik17, P. Stadler9, H. ticular in patients with autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance and/or Trautmann20, R. Wagener1, T. Zenz23,24, L. Trümper17, P. Rosenstiel22, M. Hummel8, R. early onset disease. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org30 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Siebert1; C11.1 1Inst.of Human Genetics, CAU, Kiel, Germany, 2DKFZ, Div.Theor.Bioinformatics, High frequency of potentially pathogenic SORL1 mutations in Heidelberg, Germany, 3Inst.of Pathology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, autosomal dominant early-onset Alzheimer disease 4Univ.Hosp.Münster/Giessen - Peadiatric Hematol. & Oncol., Münster/Giessen, Germany, C. Pottier1, D. Hannequin1, S. Coutant1, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1, D. Wallon1, S. Rousseau1, 5Transcriptome Bioinformatics, LIFE Res.Ctr for Civilization Dis., Leipzig, Germany, S. Legallic1, C. Paquet2, S. Bombois3, J. Pariente4, C. Thomas-Anterion5, A. Michon6, 6Hematopathol.Section, CAU, Kiel, Germany, 7Inst.for Med.Informatics Statistics & B. Croisile7, F. Etcharry-Bouyx8, C. Berr9, J. Dartigues10, P. Amouyel11, H. Dauchel12, C. Epidemiol., Leipzig, Germany, 8Inst.of Pathol., Charité Univ.of Med., Berlin, Germany, Boutoleau-Bretonnière13, C. Thauvin14, T. Frebourg1, J. Lambert11, D. Campion1; 9Bioinformatics Group, Inst.for Informatics, Leipzig, Germany, 10Dep.of Ped.Oncol., 1Inserm, U1079, Rouen, France, 2Inserm, U839, Paris, France, 3EA1046, Lille Nord Hematol.& Clin.Immunology, Heine-Univ., Düsseldorf, Germany, 11Interdisc.Ctr for University Hospital, Lille, France, 4Inserm, U825, Toulouse, France, 5University Hospital Bioinform., Univ.Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 12Dep.of Pediatrics, Univ.Hosp. Schleswig- Nord, Saint Etienne, France, 6UMR-S975 AP-HP, Paris, France, 7University Hospital, Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 13Dep.of Int.Med.III, Univ.of Munich, Grosshadern, Germany, Groupe Hospitalier Est, Bron, France, 8Angers University Hospital, Angers, France, 14Inst.of Pharmacy & Mol.Biotechn., Bioquant, Univ.of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Inserm, U888, Montpellier, France, 10Inserm, U897, Bordeaux, France, 11Inserm, U744, 15Senckenberg Inst.of Pathol., Univ.of Frankfurt Med.School, Frankfurt a.M., Germany, Lille, France, 12LITIS, EA 4108, Rouen, France, 13Nantes University Hospital, Nantes, 16EMBL, Genome Biology, Heidelberg, Germany, 17Dep.of Hematol.& Oncol., August- France, 14Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France. Univ., Göttingen, Germany, 18Inst.of Cell Biol., Univ.of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 19Inst.of Pathol., Med.Fac.,Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, 20Dep.of Int.Med.II: Hematol.& Oncol, Univ.Med.Ctre Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 21Dep.of Gen.Int.Med., CAU, Kiel, Germany, 22Inst.of Clin.Mol.Biol., CAU, Kiel, Germany, 23Dep.of Med.V, Univ.of Heidelberg, Performing exome sequencing in 14 autosomal dominant early-onset Alz- Heidelberg, Germany, 24Dep.of Transl.Oncol., NCT & DKFZ, Heidelberg, Germany. heimer disease (ADEOAD) index cases without mutation on known genes (APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2), we found that in 5 patients the SORL1 gene har- bored unknown nonsense (n=1) or missense (n=4) mutations. These muta- Germinal center (GC) derived B-cell lymphomas are the most frequent ma- tions were not retrieved in 1500 controls of same ethnic origin. In a repli- lignant lymphomas with Burkitt lymphoma (BL) being the predominant cation sample including 15 ADEOAD cases, two unknown non synonymous subtype in children. Within the German BMBF-funded International Cancer mutations (one missense, one nonsense) were retrieved, thus yielding to a Genome Consortium (ICGC) Network Project ICGC MMML-Seq we analyzed total of 7/29 unknown mutations in the combined sample. Using in silico four IG-MYC positive BL from children treated within the BFM-NHL trials. predictions, we conclude that these 7 private mutations are likely to have a Genome, exome, transcriptome, miRNAome and methylome sequencing was pathogenic effect. SORL1 encodes the Sortilin-related receptor LR11/SOR- performed using Illumina technology. LA, a protein involved in the control of Aβ peptide production. Our results We detected between 1751 and 3174 somatic mutations. There was a good suggest that besides the involvement of the APP and PSEN genes, further concordance between exome and whole genome sequencing. We identified genetic heterogeneity, involving another gene of the same pathway is pre- between 59 and 105 potentially protein changing somatic mutations, inclu- sent in ADEOAD. ding previously known changes in MYC and TP53. Sanger sequencing vali- C11.2 dated 20/25 new mutations. Combination of positional cloning and new generation sequencing A total of 16 genes were affected at least twice by potentially protein chan- identifies two novel genes in spastic paraplegia involved in lipid ging mutations, including known lymphoma-associated genes (e.g. FBXO11). metabolism Remarkably, two of the genes recurrently mutated, ID3 and SMARCA4, are G. Stevanin1,2,3, C. Tesson1,3, M. Nawara1, M. A. M. Salih4, R. Rossignol5, M. Zaki6, F. part of the BL index recently described by us and are strongly expressed in Lamari7, A. Bouhouche8, F. Santorelli9, A. Al Drees4, E. Giraud5, R. Schule10, S. El Malik4, M. BL (Hummel et al., NEJM, 2006). Analysis of the RNAome sequences con- M. Kabiraj11, M. Z. Seidahmed12, N. Bouslam8, M. Gaussen1, D. Zelenika13, L. Orlando1,3, G. Gyapay14, L. Schols10, A. Lossos15, A. Durr1,2, F. Mochel1,2, J. Lavie5, A. Benomar8, C. Goizet5, J. firmed the high expression of both genes in BL and provided evidence for Gleeson16, F. Darios1, A. Brice1,2; aberrant splicing. As we previously reported recurrent homozygous loss at 1Centre de Recherche de l‘Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière (INSERM / the ID3 locus (Scholtysik et al., Haematologica, 2010) we sequenced ID3 in UPMC UMR_S975, CNRS 7225) , Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 2APHP, Dpt of an extended series of 100 molecularly pre-characterized IG-MYC positive Genetics and Cytogenetics, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 3Ecole Pratique des GC-derived B-cell lymphomas. We identified ID3 mutations in 36/55 IG-MYC Hautes Etudes, Paris, France, 4King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 5Université positive BL but only 6/45 IG-MYC positive GC-derived other B-cell lympho- de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 6National Research Institute, Cairo, Egypt, 7APHP, ma (p<0.001). In the BL, ID3 mutation was associated with a BCL6+/BCL2- Service de Biochimie, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France, 8Hôpital des Spécialités, Rabat, Morocco, 9IRCCS Fondazione Stella Maris, Calambrone - Pisa, Italy, 10University phenotype, lower genomic complexity (all p<0.05) and a trend for a better of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 11Armed Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, prognosis. 12Security Forces Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 13Centre National de Génotypage, C10.6 Evry, France, 14Genoscope, Evry, France, 15Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Complex tumor genomes inferred from plasma-DNA and circulating Jerusalem, Israel, 16University of California, San Diego, CA, United States. tumor cells of patients with colorectal cancer E. Heitzer1, M. Auer1, E. Hoffmann1, C. Beneken2, M. Pichler3, S. Lax4, P. Ulz1, J. Waldispuehl-Geigl1, O. Mauermann2, C. Lackner5, G. Höfler5, F. Eisner3, H. Sill6, K. Pantel2, Hereditary spastic paraplegias are heterogeneous neurological disorders. S. Riethdorf2, T. Bauernhofer3, J. B. Geigl1, M. R. Speicher1; Known causative genes account for the majority of dominantly inherited 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Institute of Tumor cases, but for less than 40% of the recessive forms. We previously mapped Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 3Division of Oncology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 4Department of Pathology, General the SPG28 locus in a Moroccan family to chromDoDsoHmDe1 14. Capture and next Hospital Graz West, Graz, Austria, 5Institute of Pathology, Medical University Graz, Graz, generation sequencing of all exons of the SPG28 interval allowed us to iden- Austria, 6Division of Hematology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. tify a homozygous truncating mutation in the gene, encoding for a phosphatidic acid (PA)-preferring phospholipase ASP1G t4h9at was shown to se- gregate with the disease in patients. In 2 Saudi-Arabian families, genome With the increasing number of available predictive biomarkers the serial ac- wide linkage studies mappedC aY Pn2eUw1 disease locus, , to chromosome 4. curate monitoring of tumor genotypes, which are prone to changes, becomes Classical Sanger sequencing of the 22 assigned genes allowed us to identify more important in the clinical management of human cancer. Here we ana- a missense mutation in the gene, encoding for extra hepatic cyto- lyzed peripheral blood of 32 patients with advanced-stage colorectal cancer chrome P450 protein. The mutation segregates in patients in the 2 fami- (CRC) for mutant DNA-fragments in the plasma and circulating tumor cells lies, while 2 other mutations were identified in the same gene, including a (CTCs). We demonstrate that a subset of patients had a biphasic size distri- frameshift mutation in a kindred from Egypt. All mutations were absent in bution of plasma DNA fragments. This is accompanied by increased num- large series of healthy unrelated controls. bers of CTCs and elevated plasma-DNA concentrations and has implications The SPG28 and SPG49 mutations were associated with a decreased mi- for diagnostic tests, because tumor specific copy number changes can be tochondrial respiratory rate in patient lymphoblasts. Interestingly, these established directly from plasma-DNA. Our CTC analyses included massively 2 new genes are involved in the same metabolic pathway related to lipid parallel sequencing of a panel of 68 CRC associated genes and a comparison metabolism, paving the way for a better understanding of the mechanisms with the mutation status in the primary tumors and associated metastases. involved in these diseases. Our study underlies the power of next generation We demonstrate that CTCs have a tremendous heterogeneity characterized sequencing combined with linkage data in rare and genetically heteroge- by different copy number changes and mutations in cancer driver genes. neous disorders. Our analyses provide novel insights into tumor evolution and may extend current non-invasive approaches for disease monitoring. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 31 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C11.3 Exome sequencing reveals causal gene for spinocerebellar ataxia 19 A. Duarri1, J. Jezierska1, M. Fokkens1, M. Meijers1, J. Schelhaas2, G. Hageman3, B. Kuesters2, Cone-rod dystrophy (CRD) and retinitis pigmentosa (RP) are clinically and W. den Dunnen1, C. Verschuuren-Bemelmans1, B. van de Warrenburg2, H. Boddeke1, H. genetically overlapping heterogeneous retinal dystrophies. By using homo- Kremer1, R. Sinke1, D. S. Verbeek1; zygosity mapping in an individual with autosomal-recessive (ar) RP from 1UMCG, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University a consanguineous family, we identified three sizeable homozygous regions, Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Medisch Spectrum Twente, Enschede, togCe8tohrefr3 7encompassing 46 Mb. Next-generation sequencing in these three Netherlands. regions revealed a homozygous nonsense mutation (c.497T>A; p.Leu166*) in , located on chromosome 8q22.1. This mutation was not present in 150 ethnically matched control individuals, single nucleotide polymor- Spinocerebellar ataxia type 19 (SCA19) is characterized by a late-onset, phism databases or the 1000 Genomes database. Immunohistochemical slowly progressive, mild cerebellar ataxia, postural head tremor, myoclonic studies revealed C8orf37 locaCl8izoartfi3o7n at the base of the primary cilium of movements, and cognitive impairment. In 2002, we mapped the SCA19 di- human retinal pigment epithelium cells and at the base of connecting ci- sease gene to chromosome region 1p21-q21 in a Dutch family. This candida- lia of mouse phCo8toorrfe3c7eptors. sequence analysis of individuals with te region contained ~500 genes, but prioritized candidate gene sequencing retinal dystrophy which carried conspicuously large homozygous regions yielded no success. encompassing revealed a homozygous splice site mutation (c.156- In a further attempt to identify the disease gene, we performed exome se- 2A>G) in two siblings of a consanguineous family, and homozygous mis- quencing in two patients of the SCA19 family originally studied. After quali- sense mutations (ipn. Asrilgic1o77Trp and p.Gln182Arg) in siblings of two other ty control and other exclusion criteria, we validated 5 missense mutations in consanguineous families. The missense mutations affect highly conserved potentially interesting candidates. After screening 400 Dutch controls, only amino acids, and analyses predicted that both variants are likely one missense mutation remained unique for all SCA19 patients in the family pathogenic. Clinical assessment revealed CRD in four individuals, and RP (n=12). In addition, we screened the coding region of this candidate gene with early macular involvement in two individuals. The two CRD siblings in 200 Dutch ataxia cases and identified two more families with missense with the c.156-2A>G mutation also showed unilateral postaxial polydacty- mutations that had not been reported before. All of these mutations change ly. These results underline the importance of disrupted ciliary processes in highly conserved amino acids. the pathogenesis of retinal dystrophies and demonstrate the power of next- Immunohistochemisty in SCA19 autopsy cerebellum showed a significant generation sequencing combined with homozygosity mapping to identify loss of Purkinje cells and altered localization of the mutant protein. Analysis new disease genes. of mRNA and protein levels showed increased expression in patient cere- C11.6 bellum compared to controls. The different mutations alter the subcellular SUN protein interactions at the nuclear envelope and their role in localization of the SCA19 protein and lead to reduced protein stability. We Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy were able to rescue the mislocalization of the mutant proteins and increase P. Meinke1, F. Haque2, W. Schröder1, U. Felbor1, S. Shackleton2, M. Wehnert1; their protein stability by co-expressing auxiliary subunits. Whether these 1Institute for Human Genetics Greifswald, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, mutations induce a gain- or loss-of-function is now being investigated. Germany, 2University of Leicester, Department of Biochemistry, Leicester, United The identification of new SCA genes remains important as they advance our Kingdom. understanding of the disease etiology. C11.4 Defective presynaptic choline transport underlies hereditary motor- Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a rare neuromuscular disor- neuropathy der characterized by early contractures, slowly progressivLeM mNAusScuTAlarE wMeDa- K. E. S. Barwick1, J. Wright2, S. Al-Turki3, M. M. McEntagart1, A. Nair1, A. Al-Memar4, H. FknHeLs1s aSnYdN lEif1e-thrSeYaNteEn2ing cardiac arrhythmia that can turn to cardiomyopa- Modarres2, M. Reilly5, K. Dick1, A. Ruggiero2, R. Blakely2, M. Hurles3, A. H. Crosby1; thy. EDMD is genetically heterogeneous, patients can have , ( ), 1St. George‘s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2Vanderbilt University , or mutations. Onset, course and severity of EDMD can School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, United States, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, vary remarkably, even among patients with mutations in the same gene or Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4St. George‘s Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 5UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom. carrying the same mutation. Lamin A/C, emerin and nesprins have been shown to interact witShU SNU1N1 anSdU SNU2N2, resulting in a LINC termed complex that connects the nucleoskeleton with the actin cytoskeletonS UvNia1 the nuScUleNa2r envelope. Thus, the and genes have been considered as func- The neuromuscular junction (NMJ) is a specialized synapse with a complex molecular architecture that serves to achieve reliable transmission between tional candidates for EDMD association. We analyLzMedN AtheS TA FH La1ndS YNE1 the nerve terminal and muscle fibre. Using linkage analysis and whole-exo- geneSsY iNnE a2 cohort of 175 unrelated EDMD patients that had previously been excluded from carrying pathogenic mutations in , , , me sequencing of DNA samples from subjects with distal hereditary motor and , and in 70 EDMD patients with defined mutations in these genes. neuropathy (dHMN) type VII, we identified a mutation in the presynaptic The complete coding region including intron/exon boundaries of both genes choline transporter (CHT, SLC5A7), a critical determinant of synaptic acetyl- choline (ACh) synthesis and release at the NMJ. This dominantly-segregating, was amplified and usSeUdN f1or direct Sanger sequencinSgU. NA1s a reSsUuNlt2, mutations CHT mutation truncates the transporter just beyond the final transmembra- have been found in both patient cohorts. One paLtMieNnAt hasS cToAm pound het ero- ne domain, eliminating sequences in the cytosolic C-terminus known to me- zygous mutations in . Additional mutations in or h.ave been found in EDMD patients in combination with or mutationsand diate surface transporter trafficking. Our choline transport assays in both transfected cells and patient monocytes revealed significant reductions in are associated with increasedSU dNis1ease sSeUvNer2ity in these individuals Functio- nal analysis of mutants showed a weakening of binding to other LINC prote- hemicholinium-3 (HC-3)-sensitive choline uptake, findings most consistent ins. Our results indicate that and mutations can cause EDMD and with a dominant-negative mode of action. The paradigm hereditary disorder worsen the clinical features of the disease. of the NMJ is the congenital myasthenic syndrome, a genetically heteroge- neous neuromuscular disorder resulting from mutations in genes encoding C12.1 pre-, post- and synaptic NMJ proteins. The discovery of CHT dysfunction as- Mutated GPD1, encoding Glycerol-3-Phosphate Dehydrogenase 1, sociated with motor neuropathy is an unexpected finding which identifies a causes transient infantile hypertriglyceridemia with fatty liver and new biological basis for this group of conditions and widens the spectrum of hepatic fibrosis disorders that derive from impaired NMJ transmission. Our efforts compel L. Basel-Vanagaite1,2,3, N. Zevit4,2, A. Har Zahav2, L. Guo5, S. Parathath5, M. Pasmanik- Chor2, A. McIntyre6, J. Wang6, A. Albin-Kaplanski7, C. Hartman4,2, D. Marom4,2, A. consideration of mutations in CHT or its functional partners in relation to Zeharia4,2, O. Shoerman4,2, A. Simon8, G. Rechavi8,2, M. Shohat7,2,3, R. Hegele6, E. Fisher5, R. idiopathic forms of the disorder. Shamir4,2; C11.5 1Schneider Children‘s Medical Center of Israel and Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Mutations in C8orf37, encoding a ciliary protein, are associated with Israel, 2Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Petah autosomal recessive cone-rod dystrophy and retinitis pigmentosa Tikva, Israel, 4Schneider Children‘s Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tikva, Israel, 5New with early macular involvement York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 6University of Western K. Neveling1, A. Estrada-Cuzcano1, S. Kohl2, E. Banin3, Y. Rotenstreich4, D. Sharon3, T. C. Ontario, London, ON, Canada, 7Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 8The Chaim Falik-Zaccai5,6, S. Hipp2, R. Roepman1, B. Wissinger2, S. J. F. Letteboer1, D. A. Mans1, E. A. Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. W. Blokland1, M. P. Kwint1, S. J. Gijsen1, R. A. C. van Huet1, R. W. J. Collin1, H. Scheffer1, J. A. Veltman1, E. Zrenner2, A. I. den Hollander1, B. J. Klevering1, F. P. M. Cremers1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University The molecularbasis for primary hereditary hypertriglyceridemia has been of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 3Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, identified in fewer than 5% of cases. We describe a hitherto unreported au- Jerusalem, Israel, 4Goldschleger Eye Research Institute, Tel Hashomer, Israel, 5Western tosomal recessive condition manifesting as severe but transient infantile hy- Galilee Hospital, Naharia, Israel, 6Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. pertriglyceridemia and fatty liver followed by hepatic fibrosis. We identified the mutated gene responsible for this condition in 10 individuals originating www.eshg.org www.eshg.org32 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 from the same isolated highly inbred population. A single large continuous velopment is normal. The clinical course varies from fatal neonatal to more segment of homozygosity on chromosome 12q13.12 containing 35 OMIM benign forms with survival into the fourth decade of life. Cause of death is genes was identified in the affectGePdD i1ndividuals using SNP array-based ho- invariably heart failure due to a hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. mozygosity mapping. Candidate gene sequencing revealed a homozygous By exome sequencing of one individual with Sengers syndrome we discove- splicing mutation, c.361-1G>C, in , which encodes glycerol-3-phosphate red two nonsense mutations in the gene encoding mitochondrial acylglyce- dehydrogenase 1. This mutation is predicted to result in a truncated protein rol kinase (AGK). Genetic testing of AGK in additional individuals with con- lacking essential conserved residues including a functional site responsible genital cataracts and cardiomyopathy identified numerous loss-of-function for initial substrate recognition. Functional consequences of the mutation mutations in ten families, substantiating the causal nature of AGK deficiency were evaluated by measuring intracellular concentrations of cholesGtPerDo1l in Sengers syndrome. Western blot experiments confirmed the absence of and triglycerides as well as triglycGePrDid1e secretion in HepG2 (hepatocellu- full-length AGK in muscle from several individuals. Interestingly, absence of lar carcinoma) human cells lines overexpressing normal and mutant AGK causes decreased levels of the adenine nucleotide translocator in the cDNAG. PODv1erexpression of mutant resulted in increased secretion of inner mitochondrial membrane in patient’s skeletal muscle and a number triglycerides (P = 0.01), supporting the pathogenicity of the identified muta- of patients displayed reduced activities of several respiratory chain comple- tion. mutation may lead to hypertriglyceridemia by limiting the con- xes. The biochemical phenotype was not expressed in patient’s myoblast or version of glycerol-3 phosphate to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, and thus fibroblast cell cultures. Our findings suggest a distinct function of AGK in causing an increase in the amount of hepatic glycerol-3 phosphate available mitochondrial phospholipid metabolism essential for the assembly of inner for triglyceride synthesis. The transient nature of the hypertriglyceridemia membrane proteins. in the individuals described in this study is compatible with the fact that the C12.4 rates of triglyceride secretion by hepatocytes are higher in neonates than Molecular diagnosis in mitochondrial complex I deficiency using next- in adults. generation sequencing C12.2 H. Prokisch1, T. Haack1, B. Haberberger1, E. Frisch2, E. Graf1, J. A. Mayr3, U. Herberg4, J. Familial diarrhea syndrome caused by an activating GUCY2C mutation B. Hennermann5, U. Ahting6, W. Sperl3, E. Wilichowski7, G. F. Hoffmann8, M. Tesarova9, B. T. Fiskerstrand1,2, N. Arshad3, B. I. Haukanes2, R. R. Tronstad2, K. D. K. Pham2, S. Plecko10, I. Wittig11, T. M. Strom1, M. Schuelke2, P. Freisinger12, T. Meitinger1; Johansson2,1, B. Haavik2,1, S. L. Tonder2, S. E. Levy4, D. Brackman2, H. Boman2, K. H. 1TU Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Biswas3, J. Apold2, N. Hovdenak2, S. S. Visweswariah3, P. M. Knappskog2,1; Neuropediatrics and NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité University Medical 1University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, 2Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, Center, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University 3Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, India, 4HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 4Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University of Bonn, Huntsville, AL, United States. Bonn, Germany, 5Center for Metabolic Disorders, Charité University Medical Center, Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Clinical Chemistry, Städtisches Klinikum München, Munich, Germany, 7Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, University Medicine Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 8Department of Pediatrics, University Chronic diarrhea is a frequent health problem, but knowledge about under- Hospital, Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent lying etiological mechanisms is insufficient, and treatment is often ineffecti- Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University ve. Rare inherited diarrheas are usually severe recessive diseases. Here we Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 10Department of Neurology, Kinderspital describe the clinical picture and genetic cause of a novel autosomal domi- Zürich, Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 11Molecular Bioenergetics, Medical School, Goethe- nant disease in 32 members of a Norwegian family. Their chronic diarrhea Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 12Department of Pediatrics, Community Hospital Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany. is of early onset, relatively mild, and may in some patients be mistaken for irritable bowel disease. However, the diarrhea is combined with increased susceptibility to inflammatory bowel disease, ileus and oesophagitis. We Next-generation sequencing has become the core technology for gene dis- performed SNP-linkage analysis to identify a candidate region on chro- covery in rare inherited disorders. However, the ability to discriminate bet- mosome 12. This region contained GUCY2C, encoding guanylyl cyclase C, ween pathogenic and benign variants remains a challenge. We used complex an intestinal receptor for bacterial heat-stable enterotoxins. We identified I deficiency, one of the most common variants of mitochondrial diseases, as a heterozygous missense mutation (c.2519G>T) in GUCY2C in all affected an example to assess the power of exome sequencing in combination with family members. Exome sequencing was performed to rule out the possi- stepwise filtering of gene variants. bility of other rare variants in the candidate region. Functional studies of Ten unrelated individuals were selected for this study. The first filter cri- the mutant receptor in HEK293T cells showed markedly increased formati- terion was “The presence of known pathogenic variants”. This revealed ho- on of cellular cGMP in response to endogenous ligands and toxin (ST). This mozygous mutations in NDUFS3 and ACAD9 in two individuals. A second cri- may cause hyperactivation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator terion was “The presence of two potentially pathogenic variants in the same (CFTR) and consequently increased secretion of chloride and water into structural gene of complex I”, which discovered rare variants in NDUFS8 in the intestinal lumen, resulting in chronic diarrhea. In conclusion, increased two unrelated individuals and in NDUFB3, a hitherto unknown disease gene, guanylyl cyclase C signalling disturbs normal bowel function and seems to in a third. Expression of wild-type cDNA in mutant skin fibroblast cell lines have a pro-inflammatory effect, either through increased chloride secretion rescued complex I activity and assembly, thus providing a function valida- or additional effects of elevated cellular cGMP. The importance of genetic tion of their pathogenicity. Using the third criterion “The presence of two variants in the guanylyl cyclase C/CFTR pathway for conditions like Crohn’s potentially pathogenic variants in the same gene encoding a mitochondrial disease and irritable bowel syndrome should be further explored. protein” we discovered in two patients loss-of-function mutations in MT- C12.3 FMT. In three patients the molecular genetic correlate remained unclear Exome sequencing identifies nonsense mutations in AGK as a cause of and follow-up analysis is ongoing. Appropriate in silico filtering of exome Sengers syndrome sequencing data, coupled with functional validation of new disease alleles, T. B. Haack1, J. A. Mayr2, E. Graf3, F. Zimmermann2, B. Haberberger1, A. Superti-Furga4, J. Kirschner5, B. Steinmann6, M. R. Baumgartner6, I. Moroni7, E. Lamantea7, M. Zeviani7, R. is effective to rapidly identify disease-causative variants in known and new J. Rodenburg8, P. Chinnery9, R. Taylor10, J. Smeitink8, T. M. Strom1, T. Meitinger1, W. Sperl2, complex I-associated disease genes. H. Prokisch1; C12.5 1TU Munich, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Mitochondrial ribosome assembly defect underlies infantile-onset Paediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 32Institute of mitochondrial cardiomyopathy Human Genetics, Helmholtz- Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, 44Department of H. Tyynismaa, C. J. Carroll, P. Isohanni, R. Pöyhönen, L. Euro, U. Richter, T. Lahtinen, A. Neuropaediatrics and Muscle Disorders, University Medical Centers, Freiburg, Germany, Götz, A. Paetau, H. Pihko, B. Battersby, A. Suomalainen; 5Department of Neuropaediatrics and Muscle Disorders, University Medical Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Freiburg, Germany, 6Division of Metabolism and Children’s Research Center (CRC), University Children‘s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland, 7Division of Molecular Neurogenetics, The “Carlo Besta” Neurological Institute Foundation, Milano, Italy, 8Nijmegen Center for Mitochondrial Disorders, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Mitochondrial diseases display a progressive course, often manifesting and Netherlands, 9Mitochondrial Research Group The Medical School University of Newcastle deteriorating after infection or trauma. Here we investigated the molecular upon Tyne, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 10Mitochondrial Research Group Institute background of cardiomyopathy in siblings with combined deficiency of mi- of Ageing and Health The Medical School Newcastle University, Newcastle, United tochondrial respiratory chain complexes I and IV. The first patient died at six Kingdom. months of age of cardiomyopathy and cardiac failure manifesting after a re- spiratory infection. The second patient is a teenager with a clinically stable, currently asymptoMmRaPtLic4 4cardiomyopathy. Using whole-exome sequencing, Sengers syndrome is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder hallmarked by we found both patients to have a homozygous missense mutation in a no- cardiac and skeletal myopathy combined with congenital cataracts. Lactic vel disease gene, , which encodes for a protein component of the acidosis and exercise intolerance are frequently observed while mental de- www.eshmgit.oocrhgondrial large ribosome subunit. The mutation affected a conserved www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 33 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 amino acid, leading to MRPL44 protein instability and its reduced levels in establish a next- generation sequencing based screening approach for GPI patient’s heart, skeletal muscle and fibroblasts. Only a low level of assem- pathway diseases. bled large ribosome subunit was found in patient fibroblasts, whereas the We employed whole-exome sequencing of two siblings with HPMR and small subunit was present at normal level. Retroviral expression of wild-ty- identified compound heterozygous PIGO mutations. Screening of further pe MRPL44 in patient cells rescued all identified defects. The result suggests PIGV-negative patients detected compound heterozygous PIGO mutations in that MRPL44, which has no homologue in bacteria and has only emerged another affected individual. The characteristic facial appearance, develop- in the mitochondrial ribosome of eukaryotes, is essential for translation in mental delay, hypoplastic or even absent terminal phalanges including nails human mitochondria. Our findings also demonstrate that only a fraction of and hyperphosphatasia were present in all affected. In a cell based assay, mitochondrial ribosomes are required to assemble to maintain sufficient two of three PIGO mutations had a deleterious effect on PIGO function. Fur- respiratory chain function. In conclusion, we have identified a new genetic thermore, by Fluorescense-activated cell sorting analysis we demonstrated cause of infantile-onset mitochondrial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. that PIGO is essential for GPI anchoring of attached proteins such us CD 59 C12.6 and uPAR. Different sequencing strategies in the analysis of new ENU-derived Our findings extend the range of reported phenotypes associated with GPI mouse models for metabolic bone disease anchor synthesis defects B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, S. Sabrautzki2, S. Diener1, E. Graf1, T. Wieland1, A. Benet-Pagès1, S. C13.2 Eck1, B. Rathkolb2,3, J. Aguilar-Pimentel2,4, J. Calzada-Wack5, E. Wolf3, M. Ollert4, F. Neff5, M. Identification of de novo variants in 51 sporadic patients with Hrabé de Angelis2,6, T. M. Strom1,7; unspecific severe intellectual disability and 20 controls by exome 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, sequencing Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Helmholtz Zentrum München, T. Wieland1, D. Wieczorek2, E. Graf1, S. Endele3, T. Schwarzmayr1, B. Albrecht2, D. German Research Center for Environmental Health, Institute of Experimental Genetics, Bartholdi4, J. Beygo2, N. Di Donato5, A. Dufke6, S. Gkalympoudis2, M. Hempel7, D. Horn8, J. Neuherberg, Germany, 3LMU München, Chair for Molecular Animal Breeding and Hoyer3, P. Joset4, U. Moog9, A. Riess6, C. T. Thiel3, A. Tzschach6, A. Wiesener3, E. Wohlleber10, Biotechnology, Gene Center of the LMU München, München, Germany, 4Klinikum Rechts C. Zweier3, C. Meisinger11, H. Grallert12, A. Schenck13, H. Engels10, G. Rappold9, E. Schröck5, der Isar der TU München, Klinik und Poliklinik für Dermatologie und Allergologie am P. Wieacker14, O. Riess6, T. Meitinger1,7, A. Reis3, T. M. Strom1,7, A. Rauch4,3; Biederstein, München, Germany, 5Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, for Environmental Health, Institute of Pathology, Neuherberg, Germany, 6TU München, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Institute of Lehrstuhl für Experimentelle Genetik, München, Germany, 7Klinikum Rechts der Isar der Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 4Institute of TU München, Institute of Human Genetics, München, Germany. Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Institute of Clinical Genetics, Technische Universität, Dresden, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, Eberhard Karls Universität, Tübingen, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität Animal models are required to understand the molecular mechanisms of München, Munich, Germany, 8Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité, University Medicine metabolic bone disorders in which imbalances of bone metabolism and mi- of Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls-University, neralization lead to a variety of different phenotypes. Within a large-scale Heidelberg, Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms- genome-wide Munich ENU (N-ethyl-N-nitrosourea) Mutagenesis Project University, Bonn, Germany, 11Institute of Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 12Research Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum mutant mouse models for metabolic bone disease were identified using München, Neuherberg, Germany, 13Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University three blood parameters (total alkaline phosphatase activity (ALP), total Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 14Institute of Human Genetics, calcium (Ca), and inorganic phosphate (Pi) levels) which were commonly University of Münster, Münster, Germany. used as biochemical markers in patients with metabolic bone disease. Here, we describe three different sequencing strategies, (1) a candidate gene ap- proach, (2) whole chromosome sequencing, and (3) exome sequencing, to Due to the absence of morphological or positional clues, the etiology of seve- iPdheenxtify novePlh geexnes involved in phosphaPthee hxomeostasis and bone meta- re intellectual disability (ID) remains elusive in the majority of patients. We bolism. In two mutant mouse lines (BAP012, BAP024) we identified novel analyzed 51 children (32 girls, 19 boys) with severe non-syndromal ID and alleles ( c.148A>T, p. Lys50* and c.2197T>C, p.Csy733Arg) by their healthy parents for de novo SNVs and small indels by exome sequen- capillary sequencing of the candidate gene and extend the available mouse cing. 20 trios with children and/or parents affected by diabetes mellitus models for X-linked hypophosphatemia (XLH, OMIM 307800) to the num- type 2 were investigated as controls. Exomes were enriched with SureSelect ber of 9. In two mutant mouse lines (BAP0J0a4k1, BAP005) the disease causing Human All Exon 50 Mb kits and sequenced to an average read depth of 100. mutationsA swgre1re identified by linkage analysis, chromosome sorting and We detected de novo non-synonymous variants in 84% of patients. The whole chromosome sequencing (BAP004: c.1933T>C, p.Ser645Pro and number per individual varied between 0 and 4. The average number was BAP005: c.815A>G, p.Tyr272Cys). In 20 mutant mouse lines and one higher in the disease (1.4/individual) than in the control group (0.8/indivi- C3H wt line we performed exome sequencing using an exome capture kit dual). Specifically, the disease group showed a considerably higher number from Agilent on a HiSeq2000 genome analyzer from Illumina. We identified of nonsense/splice/indel variants (0.37/individual) than the control group in each mouse line between 3 and 42 SNVs (single nucleotide variants). We (0.1/individual). 16 patients showed de novo mutations in the known ID started with the evaluation of the different variants in mouse mutant and genes IQSE2, SATB2, SNC2A, SCN8A, SETBP1, SLC2A1, STXBP1, SYNGAP1, control cohorts and will present the data of the SNV evaluation. TCF4, and MECP2. We regarded at least 8 variants in 8 novel genes to be C13.1 disease causing because they fulfilled 4 of the following criteria: mutation Mutations in PIGO, a member of the GPI anchor synthesis pathway, type (nonsense/splice/frameshift), location in regions known for de novo cause hyperphosphatasia with mental retardation syndrome microdeletions, haploinsufficiency predictions, brain expression, and func- P. M. Krawitz1, Y. Murakami2, J. Hecht3, U. Krüger1, S. Holder4, G. Mortier5, B. delle Chiaie6, tional evidence. In summary, this study clearly demonstrates the power of M. D. Thompson7, T. Roscioli8, S. Kielbasa9, T. Kinoshita2, S. Mundlos1, P. N. Robinson10, D. exome sequencing in identifying a sizable fraction of disease causing muta- Horn10; tions in both known and novel genes. 1Charite, Berlin, Germany, 2Osaka University, Osaka, Japan, 3Berlin Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, Berlin, Germany, 4North West Thames Regional Genetics, De novo variants Harrow, United Kingdom, 5University Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 6University Ghent, Cases n=51 Controls n=20 Ghent, Belgium, 7University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 8University of Sidney, missense 54 14 Sidney, Australia, 9University Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands, 10Charité, Berlin, Germany. nonsense 5 0 splice 1 1 frameshift 13 1 synonymous 12 5 More than a hundred cell surface proteins are attached to the plasma mem- C13.3 brane by covalent attachment to a glycophosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor Dosage imbalance of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay factors is that is assembled in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and added to the C- associated with intellectual disability terminus of the proteins. Biosynthesis of GPI anchors involves more than 30 L. Nguyen1, H. Kim2, J. Mokry3, L. Shaffer3, J. Gecz1,4; different genes. Genetic defects in various components of the GPI pathway 1University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 2Havard University, Boston, MA, United have been identified in a number of phenotypically diverse diseases. States, 3Signature Genomics Laboratories, Spokane, WA, United States, 4SA Pathology, We have recently identified mutations in PIGV in individuals with hyper- Adelaide, Australia. phosphatasia mental retardation (HPMR) syndrome, an autosomal recessive form of mental retardation with facial dysmorphism, seizures, brachytele- phalangy, and persistent elevated serum alkaline phosphatase (hyperphos- Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) functions to degrade transcripts phatasia). However, not all patients with HPMR syndrome harbor mutati- bearing premature stop codon and is a crucial regulator of gene expression. ons in PIGV. The purpose of the current study was therefore to investigate We implicated NMD and the UPF3B gene as the cause of various forms of www.eshg.org the molecular etiology of HPMR syndrome in PIGV-negative patientws awndw to.e shg.org34 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 intellectual disability (ID) and various other psychiatric traits. In expanding gain insight into the pathogenic mechanisms underlying ID, we genera- our inquiry, we identified three patients with global developmental delay ted alphaPix/Arhgef6-deficient mice. Gross brain structure in these mice who carry deletions of the genomic regions encompassing the UPF2 gene, appeared to be normal, however, analysis of Golgi-Cox stained pyramidal another important member of the NMD pathway. We hypothesized that loss neurons revealed an increase in both dendritic length and spine density in of one allele of UPF2 and likely loss of other NMD factors impair NMD and the hippocampus, accompanied by an overall loss in spine synapses. Early- result in neurological phenotype. Using RNA-SEQ on lymphoblastoid cells phase long-term potentiation was reduced and long-term depression was from UPF2 del patients we identified 1009 differently expressed genes increased in the CA1 hippocampal area of alphaPix/Arhgef6-deficient ani- (DEGs). 38% of these DEGs overlapped with DEGs identified in UPF3B pa- mals. Knockout animals exhibited impaired spatial and complex learning tients. More importantly, 95% of all DEGs in either UPF2 or UPF3B patients and less behavioral control in mildly stressful situations, suggesting that share the same trend of de-regulation. This suggested that the transcripto- this model mimics the human ID phenotype. The structural and electrophy- me de-regulation in UPF2 and UPF3B patients is similar. To gauge into the siological alterations in the hippocampus were accompanied by a significant role of other NMD factors we performed a comprehensive search for copy reduction of active Rac1 and Cdc42, but not RhoA. In conclusion, we suggest number variations (CNVs) encompassing all known NMD factors in ID pati- that imbalance in activity of different Rho GTPases may underlie altered ents and controls. Our data indicate that CNVs, especially for UPF2, UPF3A, neuronal connectivity and impaired synaptic function and cognition in al- Y14, SMG6 and EIF4A3 are frequent in patients with neurological disorders phaPix/Arhgef6 knockout mice. and ID in particular. This tells that the changes in copy number of these fac- C13.6 tors, and as such dosage imbalance of NMD genes, are likely the causes or The functional spectrum of SRGAP3 in cognitive development predisposing factors to ID. Our data strengthen the importance of NMD in C. Bacon1, V. Endris1, E. Stoeckli2, R. Waltereit3, D. Bartsch3, G. Rappold1; normal learning and memory. 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, C13.4 3Department of Molecular Biology, Central Institute of Mental Health, University of A truncating mutation of CEP135 causes primary microcephaly and Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. disturbed centrosomal function M. S. Hussain1,2,3, S. M. Baig4, S. Neumann1, V. S. Peche1, G. Nürnberg2,3, M. Farooq4, I. SRGAP3 Ahmad2, T. Alef2, H. C. Hennies2,5, M. Technau1, J. Altmüller2, P. Frommolt2,5, H. Thiele2,5, A. A. Noegel1,3,5, P. Nürnberg2,3,5; Disruption in the gene has been associated with abnormal cognitive 1Institute of Biochemistry I, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Cologne Center function. srGAP3 is a member of the Slit-Robo GAP family and is implicated for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Center for Molecular in repulsive axon guidance and neuronal migration through Slit-Robo me- Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4HMG Lab. Health diated signal transduction, making it an ideal candidate for orchestrating Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering the formation of functional neural networkss rdGuArPin3g brain development. To (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan, 5Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. uncover the importance of srGAP3 in the usrnGdAePrl3ying neurodevelopmental processes required for normal cognition, a -/ -knockout mouse model was generated (Waltereit et al. submitted). mice exhibit a complex behavioural phenotype including impaired social interaction along with Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) is a rare congenital various neuroanatomical defects. To gain more insight into the molecular disorder of mental retardation, reduced brain and head size but usually processes underlying these defects, we identified novel binding partners of without defects in cerebral cortical architecture and other syndromic ab- srGAP3. This avenue led us to the discovery that srGAP3 and its novel inter- normalities. MCPH is heterogeneous wASitPhM 7 knoWwDnR l6o2ci: MCPH1-MCPH7. acting partnesrr GlaAmP3ellipodin co-localise to the leading edge of cell protru- The underlying genes code for centrosomal proteins. We collected 49 MCPH families from Pakistan. Sequencing of and , the two most fre- sions and that srGAP-/3- inhibits protrusion dynamics through lamellipodin. Additionally, hippocampal neurons exhibit excessive lamellipodia quently mutated genes, and exclusion of homozygosity for all known MCPH formation. To take the story further, we examined the role of srGAP3 in loci by typing of appropriate microsatellite markers resulted in 14 families axon guidance using commissural axon crossing in the spinal cord as a mo- with a putatively new disease locus. Out of these, we studied one family del system. We were able to show that axons were not normally positioned with two microcephalic children using homozygosity mapping and found after crosssriGnAgP, 3im plicating srGAP3 in axon repulsion from the floor plate. suggestive linkage for regions on chromosoCmEPes1 325, 4 and 9. We sequenced Taken together, our results have begun to uncover the underlying processes two positional candidate genes and identified a homozygous frameshift in which is playing a role during brain development, thus shedding mutation in centrosomal protein135 kDa ( ), located in the linkage light on the importance of this gene in cognitive processes. interval on chromosome 4. Post-hoc whole-exome sequencing corroborated C14.1 this mutation to be the causal variant. Immunostaining of CEP135 showed ASB10 variants are associated with open-angle glaucoma and strong signals in the developing neuroepithelium of the cerebral cortex du- silencing impairs ocular outflow ring embryonic stages E11.5 through E15.5. Fibroblasts obtained from one F. Pasutto1, K. E. Keller2, N. Weisschuh3, H. Sticht4, J. R. Samples2, Y. Yang2, M. Zenkel1, U. of the patients showed multiple and fragmented centrosomes, disorganized Schlötzer-Schrehardt1, C. Y. Mardin1, P. Frezzotti5, B. Edmunds2, P. L. Kramer2, E. Gramer6, microtubules, and reduced growth rate. Similar effects were reported after A. Reis1, T. S. Scott2, M. K. Wirtz2; knockdown of CEP135 through RNA interference; we could provoke them 1University Hospital of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Oregon Health & also by ectopic overexpression of the mutant protein. Our findings suggest a Sciences University, Portland, OR, United States, 3University Eye Hospital Tübingen, new locus, MCPH8, at HSA 4q12, further strengthen the role of centrosomes Tübingen, Germany, 4University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 5University in the cause of MCPH, and place CEP135 among the essential components of Hospital of Siena, Siena, Italy, 6University Eye Hospital of Würzburg, Erlangen, Germany. this important organelle in particular for a normal neurogenesis. C13.5 Dysregulation of Rho GTPases in the alphaPix/Arhgef6 mouse model The molecular events responsible for obstruction of aqueous humor outflow of X-linked intellectual disability is paralleled by impaired structural and the loss of retinal ganglion cells in glaucoma, one of the main causes of and synaptic plasticity and cognitive deficits blindness worldwide, remain poorly understood. We identified a synony- G. J. A. Ramakers1, D. Wolfer2, G. Rosenberger3, K. Kuchenbecker3, H. Kreienkamp3, J. mous variant, c.765C>T (Thr255Thr), in ankyrin repeats and suppressor Prange-Kiel4, G. Rune4, K. Richter5, K. Langnaese5, S. Masneuf2, M. R. Bösl6, K. Fischer5, H. J. of cytokine signaling box-containing protein 10 (ASB10) in a large family Krugers7, H. Lipp2, E. van Galen1, K. Kutsche3; with primary open angle glaucoma (POAG) mapping to the GLC1F locus. 1Neurons and Networks, Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, This variant affects an exon splice enhancer site and alters mRNA splicing Netherlands, 2Institute of Anatomy and Zurich Center for Integrative Human Physiology in lymphoblasts of affected family members. Systematic sequence analysis (ZIHP), Zurich, Switzerland, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg- in two POAG patient groups (195 US and 977 German) and their respective Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4Institute of Anatomy I: Cellular Neurobiology, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 5Institute of controls (85 and 376) lead to the identification of 26 amino acid changes in Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, 70 patients (70 of 1172; 6.0%) compared with 9 in 13 controls (13 of 461; Germany, 6Center for Molecular Neurobiology, Hamburg, Germany, 7Swammerdam 2.8%; P = 0.008). Molecular modeling suggests that these missense variants Institute for Life Sciences, Center for Neuroscience, Amsterdam, Netherlands. change ASB10 net charge or destabilize ankyrin repeats. ASB10 mRNA and protein were found to be strongly expressed in trabecular meshwork, retinal ganglion cells and ciliary body. Silencing of ASB10 transcripts in perfused Mutations in the ARHGEF6 gene, encoding the guanine nucleotide exchange anterior segment organ culture reduced outflow facility by 50% compared factor alphaPIX/Cool-2 for the Rho GTPases Rac1 and Cdc42, cause X-linked with control-infected anterior segments (P = 0.02). In conclusion, genetic intellectual disability (ID) in humans. We show here that alphaPix/Arhgef6 and molecular analyses provide evidence for ASB10 as a glaucoma-causing is primarily expressed in neuropil regions of the hippocampus. To study gene. the role of alphaPix/Arhgef6 in neuronal development and plastwicitwy wan.de shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 35 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C14.2 C14.4 Seven New Loci Associated with Age-Related Macular Degeneration First genome-wide meta-analyses of nonsyndromic cleft lip with or L. G. Fritsche1, W. Chen2,3, M. Schu4, B. L. Yaspan5, Y. Yu6, The AMDGene Consortium; without cleft palate identify six new risk loci including one subtype- 1University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 2University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, specific locus United States, 3University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United States, 4University School K. U. Ludwig1,2, E. Mangold2, S. Herms1,2, S. Nowak2,3, H. Reutter2,4, J. Becker1,2, R. of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, 5Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Herberz1,2, T. AlChawa1,2, E. Nasser1,2, A. C. Böhmer1,2, M. Mattheisen2,5,6, M. A. Alblas1,2, S. TN, United States, 6Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, United States. Barth1,2, N. Kluck1,2, J. C. Murray7, M. L. Marazita8, I. Ruczinski9, A. F. Scott10, T. H. Beaty11, F. Kramer3, T. F. Wienker12, R. P. Steegers-Theunissen13,14, M. Rubini15, P. A. Mossey16, P. Hoffmann1,2, C. Lange5,6, S. Cichon1,2,17, P. Propping2, M. Knapp12, M. M. Nöthen1,2; Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a prevalent disease of complex 1Department of Genomics, Life&Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Human aetiology and one of the leading causes of vision impairment in industria- Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 4Department of Neonatology, lized countries. To further our understanding of AMD genetics, 18 groups Children‘s Hospital, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Biostatistics, from 12 countries formed the AMDGene Consortium in 2010. Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 6Institute for Genomic This endeavor brought together 15 genome-wide association studies com- Mathematics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Department of Pediatrics, prising 7,650 advanced AMD cases and 51,812 controls of European and University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 8University of Pittsburgh, Center for Asian ancestry. The meta-analysis revealed SNPs at 32 genomic loci with Craniofacial and Dental Genetics, School of Dental Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, United P < 10-5 that were followed up in 18 additional studies consisting of 9,531 States, 9Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health, advanced AMD cases and 8,230 controls. In the joint analysis, a total of 19 Baltimore, MD, United States, 10Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 11Department of Epidemiology, Johns loci reached genome-wide significance (P < 5x10-8) which included all Hopkins University, School of Public Health, Baltimore, MD, United States, 12Institute of 12 previously established and the seven novel AMD loci COL8A1/FILIP1L Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, (4x10-13), IER3/DDR1 (2x10-11), SLC16A8 (3x10-11), TGFBR1 (3x10-11), 13Erasmus Medical Center, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, RAD51B (9x10-11), MIR548A2 (5x10-9), and B3GALTL (2x10-8). Pathway 14Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 15Department of analyses of the 19 loci indicated an over-representation of genes involved Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, Medical Genetics Unit, University of Ferrara, in complement activity, lipid metabolism and inhibition of angiogenesis the- Ferrara, Italy, 16Orthodontic Unit, Dental Hospital & School, University of Dundee, reby falling well into place with known AMD pathomechanisms. While the Dundee, United Kingdom, 17Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Structural and Functional Organization of the Brain, Genomic Imaging, Research Center Jülich, sensitivity analyses indicated that several loci had differences in disease risk Jülich, Germany. between males and females, or in European and Asian ancestry or disease subgroups, the overall predictive value of these variants displayed similar effectiveness in all samples examined (0.69 < AUC < 0.79). Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCL/P) is one of the Our findings can guide future biological and genetic AMD studies, allow bet- most common birth defects in humans. In the last years, the etiology of this ter classification of individuals at risk, and might ultimately lead to impro- phenotypically variable malformation, which involves both environmental ved disease treatment and prevention. and genetic factors, has been elucidated by the discovery of six genetic sus- C14.3 ceptibility loci in large genome-wide association studies (GWAS). To identify Meningococcal disease and age-related macular degeneration are additional loci we conducted the first meta-analyses using the two largest genetically related GWAS on NSCL/P that are available to date. Our analyses confirmed all pre- F. Martinon-Torres1,2, C. C. Khor3, V. J. Wright4, S. Davila3, K. S. Lim5, A. Binder6, W. B. viously identified loci, and identified six new susceptibility regions for the Breunis7, D. Inwald4, S. Nadel4, H. Betts4, E. D. Carrol8, R. de Groot9, P. W. M. Hermans9, J. A. Hazelzet10, M. Emonts10, C. C. Lim3, T. W. Kuijpers7, N. Martinon-Torres2,11, L. Fachal12,2, A. European population (1p36, 2p21, 3p11.1, 8q21.3, 13q31.1, and 15q22). Vega12,2, W. Zenz6, M. Levin4, M. L. Hibberd3, A. Salas2,13; Five of these loci were shown to also play a role in the Asian population. 1Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 2GENVIP Analyses of the phenotypic subgroups NSCLO (nonsyndromic cleft lip only) Research Group, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria de Santiago (IDIS), Santiago de and NSCLP (nonsyndromic cleft lip with cleft palate) revealed that a locus on Compostela, Spain, 3Genome Institute Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4Department chr. 13q31.1 was a strong susceptibility factor for NSCLP (rs8001641, P_NS- of Pediatrics, Division of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, CLO = 0.163, P_NSCLP = 6.51x10-11; RRhet_NSCLP = 1.63 (95% CI: 1.28 - 5Research Computing, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2.07), RRhom_NSCLP = 2.41 (95% CI: 1.84 - 3.16)). The present study is the 6Department of General Pediatrics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 7Division of Pediatric Hematology, Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Emma Children‘s Hospital first to identify a genome-wide significant locus that is specific for NSCL/P Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Institute of Child Health,University subtypes and emphasizes the power of genetic studies when detailed clini- of Liverpool, Alder Hey Children‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom, cal and / or phenotype information is available. 9Pediatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, C14.5 10Department of Pediatrics, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children‘s Hospital, University Medical Variants in RUNX3 contribute to susceptibility to psoriatic arthritis Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 11Pediatrics, Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, exhibiting further common ground with ankylosing spondylitis Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 12Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica- U. D. Hüffmeier1, S. Uebe1, M. Apel1, A. B. Ekici1, J. Bowes2, E. Giardina3, E. Korendowych4, SERGAS. Grupo de Medicina Xenómica-USC, CIBERER, IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, K. Juneblad5, R. McManus6, P. Ho2, I. N. Bruce2, A. W. Ryan6, F. Behrens7, B. Böhm7, H. Spain, 13Unidade de Xenética, Departamento de Anatomía Patolóxica e Ciencias Forenses Traupe8, J. Lohmann9, H. Wiechmann10, C. Gieger10, L. Klareskog11, O. Fitzgerald12, G. and Instituto de Medicina Legal, Facultade de Medicina, Universidade de Santiago de Alenius5, N. McHugh4, G. Novelli3, H. Burkhardt7, A. Barton2, A. Reis1; Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. 1Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Arthritis Research Background and aims: UK Epidemiology Unit, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Department of Biopathology, Centre Host genetic variation in complement factor H of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment in Multifactorial and Complex Diseases, (MCeFtHh)o sdhso:w very strong evidence of association with individual susceptibi- School of Medicine, University of Rome ‘Tor Vergata’ and Fondazione PTV ‘Policlinico lity to meningococcal disease (MD). Tor Vergata’, Rome, Italy, 4Royal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Bath, We performed a meta-analysis of two GWAS in Spain (ESIGEM- United Kingdom, 5Department of Public Health and Clinical Medicine, Rheumatology, University Hospital, Umeå, Sweden, 6Department of Clinical Medicine, Institute of network) and the UK totaling 894 MD cases and 5,645 controls,with replica- Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 7Division of Rheumatology, tion in a further 565 MD cases and 2,600 controls of West European descent. Department of Internal Medicine II, Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt/M., The MD cases were genotyped using the Illumina Human-610K Quad Bead Germany, 8Department of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, CRheispusl tfos:r UK and the Illumina Human-660W Quad Bead Chips for Spain. Re- 9Psoriasis Rehabilitation Hospital, Bad Bentheim, Germany, 10Institute of Epidemiology, pCFliHca tion genotyping was done using the SePq=uenom-MassArray platform. Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany, 11Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, P= We note strong evidence of association at the previously repAoBrCtAed4 Sweden, 12Department of Rheumatology, St. Vincent’s University Hospital, University locus oPn= Chromosome 1(rs1065489, 1.18 x 10-8 and rs11582939, College Dublin (UCD) School of Medicine and Medical Science and Conway Institute of Biomolecular and Biomedical Research, Dublin, Ireland. 1.95 x 10-8).The second most significant SNP was observed within (rs544830, P=2.93 x 10-6, per-allele OR=1.30).Strong statistPic=al associati- on of this locus with MD was corroboratedA bByC Atw4 o other neighboring SNPs Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is a common inflammatory joint disease distinct (rs550060, 4.48 x 10-6, per-allePle OR=1.29 andP rs497511, 4.55 Px 10-6, from other chronic arthritides and frequently accompanied by psoriasis vul- per-allele OR=1.29). These findings within were further replicated in garis (PsV). In a first genome-wide association study (GWAS), we were able AthBeC WA4e stern EPu=ropean collectiPo=n ( =8.72 x 10-5, =1.81 x 10-4, and =6.59 to identify several genetic risk factors. But even combined with previously x 10-5 respectively), leading genome-wide significant findings for all three identified factors, only a fraction of genetic contribution to disease is explai- ConcluSsiNoPns: ( 8.46 x 10-10, 5.2CF8H x 10-9A, BaCnAd4 P =2.36 x 10-9, respective- ly) when data from all MD sample collections were jointly analyzed. ned. Therefore we pursued further 16 lo-8ci from our GWAS with several SNPs As mutations in both and also confer susceptibility showing assoc-i5ation in the range of 5E (= genome-wide significance level) < p-value < 1E as well as one functional candidate. to macular degeneration, our observation points to shared mechanisms of 20 of 21 SNPs at 18 loci were successfully genotyped in independent Euro- pathogenesis between macular degeneration and MD. www.eshg.org www.eshpega.no croghorts of 1,748 PsA cases and 3,926 control probands, furthermore in 36 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 RUNX3 a group of 961 German PsV patients. Association to a variant was r-e0-6 minority (<1%) a primary metabolic cause was established. About 60 pati- plicated and resulted in a combined (GWAS +R rUeNplXi3cation) p-value of 1.52E ents were selected for further research studies, mainly comprising different in a Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel test and an OR of 1.20 (1.11-1.29). Further next generation sequencing approaches. So far, these dleed ntoov tohe identificati- analyses based on linkage disequilibrium at could pinpoint the most oPnD HoAf ,1 G4R aINdd2iAt,i oDnYaNl Cli1kHel1y mo lGecAuTlAaDr 2dBia gnoses, including both known and significant association to the initial SNP located in the first intron of one novel genetic defects. Pertinent diagnoses included mutations in isoform.In the smaller patient group of PsV-0 2p atients and corresponding and .This has increased the current dia- German control individuals, p-value wRaUs N2.X53E and OR 1.22 (0.96-1.56), in- gnostic yield to over 23%. Since several studies are pending, more diagno- dicating also a role in skin manifestation of psoriasis. ses are expected. The majority of selected individuals have an age above 40 Our analyses suggest that variants in contribute to susceptibility to years, providing useful information on natural progression and comorbidity PsA, a genetic factor already described to be associated with another spon- of these disorders. dylarthritis, ankylosing spondylitis. RUNX3 is a transcription factor involved C15.2 in CD8 lymphozyte differentiation and therefore a good candidate for PsA High yield of massive parallel exome sequencing in 25 families with and PsV as T-cell mediated diseases. autosomal recessive intellectual disability C14.6 R. Abou Jamra1, R. Buchert1, A. B. Ekici1, S. Uebe1, S. H. Eck2, H. Tawamie1, E. Graf2, F. F. Genome-Wide Association Analysis Identifies the MTHFR-CLCN6- Brockschmidt3,4, J. Schumacher4, M. M. Nöthen3,4, T. Strom2,5, A. Reis1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, NPPA-NPPB Gene Cluster as an Importance Influence on BNP Helmholtz Center Munich, Neuherberg, Germany, 3Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Levels - Implications for the Use of BNP levels in the Diagnosis and Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Therapeutic Monitoring of Heart Failure. Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische P. Surendran1,2, C. Vangjeli2, N. McCarthy2, S. Thom3, P. Sever4, E. O‘Brien5, N. Poulter4, J. Universität München, Munich, Germany. Mayet4, A. Hughes6, D. Shields1, A. Stanton2; 1University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 2Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland, 36Department of Cardiology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Cardiology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, To elucidate the genetics of autosomal recessive intellectual disability, we London, United Kingdom, 5Blood Pressure Unit, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, undertook systematic autozygosity mapping in 69 large, consanguineous 6Department of Cardiology, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, London, Ireland. families. We focused on 25 families with small candidate regions of 10 to 45 Mb. After enriching the exomes with the Agilent SureSelect Kit (13 exomes using the 38Mb and 19 using the 50Mb versions, whereas 7 were enriched Brain Natriuretic Peptide (BNP) levels provide insight into Left Ventricular using both for comparison), we undertook massive parallel sequencing on (LV) filling pressures, and are therefore increasingly used in the diagnosis Solexa or SOLiD. We were able to clarify the causes of intellectual disabili- and management of heart failure. ty in 12 families. We described one new intellectual disability gene, AP4S1, We conducted a genome wide association analysis to identify genetic vari- and characterized the AP4 deficiency syndrome. Furthermore, in seven fa- ants associated with BNP levels in 737 hypertensive caucasian individuals. milies we identified mutations (two in-frame deletions, two frameshifts, and 318,000 SNPs were genotyped and an additional 1,972,462 SNPs were im- three missense mutations) in EDC3, ENO2, c9orf4, FAR1, HMG20A, PPFIA1, puted from HapMap. Serum BNP levels were measured by immunoassay. LV and SPATA5. In silico analysis predicted pathogenic effects of the mutati- filling pressures were measured using the echocardiographic derived ratio ons, and frequencies in 280 ethnic matched controls were null. The func- of early diastolic transmitral flow velocity to mitral annular velocity (E/E’). tions of c9orf4 and SPATA5 are unknown, while all other genes are highly Linear regression analysis were adjusted for major cardiovascular risk fac- expressed in brain and functionally relevant. In addition, we clarified the tors. etiology in four further families by identifying pathogenic mutations in the 17 SNPs spanning 150kb of MTHFR-CLCN6-NPPA-NPPB (MCNN) gene clu- known genes AIH1, ALDH5A1, GPR56, and HGSNAT. As a consequence of the ster were significantly associated with BNP levels. Median BNP levels for AA enriching method, only 67% of the exons were properly covered (i.e. depth homozygotes, AG heterozygotes and GG homozygotes for the top--9hit SNP (a >5x at >80% of the nucleotides). To identify the mutations in the rest of the MTFHR gene SNP), were 25, 32 and 34, respectively (p=4.9X10 ). Despite families, ensuring complete and high coverage of all exons in the linkage re- no associations observed between these 17 SNPs and E/E’, carriers of gene gions, we designed targeted sequencing enriching sets (Agilent, SureSelect). cluster variants were much more likely to have BNP levels above the cut-off Sequencing on SOLiD is ongoing. regarded as diagnostic of heart failure (>100 pg/ml). Results showed tvheart- C15.3 isnudsividuals who are minor allele homozygotes (GG) had three times eleva- Brain malformation and clinical finding in autosomal recessive ted BNP levels when compared to major allele homozygotes (AA) (7% primary microcephaly: genotype - phenotype correlation 2%, p=0.01). This is the first study to demonstrate that genetic variants K. Kahrizi1, N. Hafezi-Nejad1, A. Tzschach2,3, M. Garshasbi1,4, S. Abedini1, H. Hu2, H. in the MCNN gene cluster influence BNP levels independently of LV filling Ropers2, H. Najmabadi1; pressures. Combining MCNN genotyping with BNP measurement is likely to 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, improve the sensitivity and specificity of algorithms that use BNP levels in Germany, 3Institut für Humangenetik Universitätsklinikum Tübingen Calwerstr, the diagnosis and management of heart failure. Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, C15.1 Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Identification and characterization of genetic disorders with ID in diagnostics and diagnostic related research M. H. Willemsen1, H. Rensen2, W. Wissink-Lindhout1, A. de Brouwer1, N. de Leeuw1, R. Background: Autosomal recessive primary microcephaly (MCPH) has un- Pfundt1, H. G. Yntema1, L. Vissers1,3, J. de Ligt1,3, J. A. Veltman1,3, H. B. Brunner1,3, H. van derlying genetic defects, of which some are defined to date. However, fewer Schrojenstein Lantman-de Valk1, H. van Bokhoven1, B. C. J. Hamel1, T. Kleefstra1,3; 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Pluryn, Care studies till now have tried to answer the questions regarding the genetic provider for people with intellectual disabilities, Oosterbeek, Netherlands, 3Nijmegen defect in MCPH gene family and the specified brain architecture changes. Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disease, Methods: From Iranian cohort of mentally retarded -Intellectual disability Nijmegen, Netherlands. (ID) - patients, 51 families with concomitant primary microcephaly in at least two members and modest neurological signs were selected and MRI was performed for the proband of each family. In the previous study, homo- The etiology of intellectual disability (ID) is unknown in about 50% of the zygosity mapping, coupled by sanger sequencing or next generation sequen- patients. Knowing the cause enables anticipation on associated health and cing (NGS) were used to define underlying genetic defects. behaviour problems, and is essential for adequate counseling regarding re- Results: Genetic defect was successfully defined in 13 out of 51 families. 4 currence risk and prognosis. In recent years, advances in genetic technolo- novel genes were identified using NGS, two of which were responsible for gies have provided great new opportunities for the identification of genetic syndromic (TMEM135, TAF2) and two for non-syndromic (CAPN10, ZBT- defects. We aimed to identify genetic causes of ID in a unique cohort of 254, BYO) primary microcephaly. 2 families had defects in recently identified mainly adult, patients with unexplained ID, selected from a large cohort of AP-4 complex (AP4M1, AP4E1). Remainings were previously known genes: individuals from Dutch residential settings. Our studies included a multidis- three WDR62, two CENPJ, one Microcephalin and one PDHX ciplinary clinical evaluation, followed by specific genetic diagnostic tests if Moreover, 19 out of 51 families showed different types of brain abnormali- indicated, and standard genome-wide array analysis and a metabolic screen. ties on MRI: Cerebellar hypoplasia in eight, small or hypoplastic corpus cal- In the diagnostic part of the study a genetic diagnosis was established in losum in six. Heterotopia, abnormal white matter, enlargement of ventricles 17.5%, comprising of 12% chromosomal abnormalities and 5% monoge- and thickening/thinning/agenesis of corpus callosum, each in one. netic defects, mostly fitting syndromes for which the causative genes were Conclusion: MCPH can be associated with neurological signs relevant to MRI identified recently, such as Pitt-Hopkins and Kleefstra syndrome. In a small changes despite spared architecture of the brain, but due to the underlying www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 37 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C15.6 Next generation sequencing of 105 genes associated with retinal basis of the disorder. Here we demonstrate new findings of imaging in both dystrophy: A new era for diagnostic testing recently identified genetic defects and MCPH genes. G. C. Black, B. Mullaney, J. O‘Sullivan, S. Bhaskar, G. Hall, J. Dickerson, S. Ramsden; C15.4 Genetic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom. The utility of exome sequencing in Primary Immunodeficiency Diseases and Immunodysregulative Disorders A. Stray-Pedersen1,2,3, H. S. Sorte2, O. K. Rodningen2, R. Lyle2, C. G. Gonzaga-Jauregui3, S. Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP) is a group of highly genetically heterogeneous re- K. Nicholas4,1, L. Noroski4,1, C. I. Hanson4,1, H. C. Erichsen5, T. G. Abrahamsen5,6, B. Flatø7, L. tinal dystrophies which lead to reduced vision and eventual blindness. RP T. Osnes8, K. R. Heimdal2, D. E. Undlien2,6, J. R. Lupski3, W. T. Shearer1,4; affects approximately 1:3500 people in the UK. Current diagnostic testing 1Section of Pediatric Allergy and Immunology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, is largely restricted to conventional Sanger sequencing of a small number United States, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United of genes. As a result of its heterogeneity, RP was an ideal candidate to use States, 4Allergy and Immunology, Texas Childrens Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, a targeted enrichment next generation sequencing approach, technologies 5Department of Pedicatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 6University of Oslo, not previously utilised in a diagnostic setting, as the basis for a diagnostic Oslo, Norway, 7Department of Rheumatology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, service. 8Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. We describe our approach to the validation of the entire workflow (assay design, sample preparation, bioinformatic analysis and scientific analysis) of a next generation sequencing targetted enrichment of 105 genes known Mutations in more than 200 different genes have been reported causing va- to cause RP or associated conditions. The process was validated using 50 rious primary immunodeficiency diseases (PIDs) including immunodysre- patients. The validation process included: developing criteria for transcript gulative/autoinflammatory disorders. Knowing the exact molecular genetic choice during assay design, documenting laboratory sample processing, diagnosis is valuable to direct protocols for immunoreconstitution, immu- defining minimum coverage criteria, assigning quality and coverage thres- notherapies, and prophylaxis, and may predict clinical outcomes. For combi- holds for SNP and indel calling, defining criteria for filtering of benign po- ned T- and B-cell deficiencies and for isolated B-cell deficiencies, phagocyte lymorphisms and assessing SNP concordance between next generation se- disorders and defects in innate immunity there are multiple genes known to quencing and Sanger sequencing. be causal, and patients with different immunodeficiencies may have over- We identified likely pathogenic mutations in 42% (21/50) of patients te- lapping immunological and clinical phenotypes. sted, 64% (9/14) in adRP, 32% (6/20) in sporadic and 37% (6/16) in spo- We examined the utility of high throughput next generation DNA sequen- radic patients. We have developed a diagnostic NGS testing strategy that will cing with exome capture in the diagnostic workup and research of PIDs, extend clinical testing to a wider range of RP referral types and improve de- including SCID, severe autoinflammatory disorder, severe congenital neu- tection rates across all patients. Furthermore we propose a model on which tropenia, hyper IgM syndrome, autosomal recessive agammaglobulinemia to base future validation of large scale next generation sequencing target and other immunodeficiency diseases with unknown etiology. Based on the enrichments in a diagnostic laboratory. clinical and immunophenotypical data, family history and knowledge frodme C16.1 nsiomvoilar PID cases, we varied between using candidate gene testing with re- Non-invasive prenatal detection of fetal autosomal aneuploidies using levant known PID genes, triotesting (patient + parents) in the assumed massively parallel sequencing: a collaborative study in Europe cases, or focused on genomic regions with unknown candidate genes in W. Hofmann1, M. Entezami2, K. Haug3, C. Blank3, M. Wüstemann4, B. Schulze5, G. Raabe- the assumed autosomal recessive cases when loss of heterozygozity or copy Meyer5, S. Lange-Freitag6, M. Schelling7, E. Ostermayer8, T. Burkhardt9, R. Zimmermann9, number variations had been found. M. Beck10, T. Schleicher10, Y. Kumar10, D. Schöner1, S. Grömminger1, M. Stumm2; Pathological variants were detected in both well known and less characte- 1LifeCodexx AG, Konstanz, Germany, 2Zentrum für Pränataldiagnostik und Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 3Praenatal-Medizin und Genetik, Düsseldorf, Germany, rized genes. We address the advantages and limitations of this approach i.e. 4Zentrum für Pränatalmedizin, Hannover, Germany, 5Praxis für Humangenetik, regarding detection of low grade mosaicism. Our project illustrates the ca- Hannover, Germany, 6Institut of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, pability of targeted exome sequencing to efficiently identify novel variants München, Germany, 7Praxis für Pränatale Diagnostik, München, Germany, 8Department in a large set of candidate genes, and reinforces the method’s clinical utility of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Technische Universität München, München, Germany, to identify causal variants of PIDs and other rare immunological disorders. 9Universitätsspital Zürich, Klinik für Geburtshilfe, Zürich, Switzerland, 10GATC Biotech C15.5 AG, Konstanz, Germany. NGS-panel targeting 150 cilia-related disease genes improves diagnostic testing for the broad spectrum of ciliopathies V. Frank, T. Eisenberger, C. Eitel, C. Decker, H. J. Bolz, C. Bergmann; Objectives: Recent advances in non-invasive prenatal diagnosis show that Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany. massively parallel sequencing (MPS) of maternal plasma DNA allows an ac- curate detection of common fetal aneuploidies. Here, we describe a large- scale clinical study, which will be finished in March 2012. The aim of the Cilia-related disorders (ciliopathies) are characterized by great clinical sMtuedthyo isd t:o validate the diagnostic accuracy of our non-invasive prenatal test and genetic heterogeneity. Literally all organs can be affected, frequent ci- based on MPS for detecting fetal autosomal aneuploidies. lia-related manifestations are cystic and polycystic kidney disease, retinal Maternal blood samples were collected from more than 500 degeneration, situs inversus, polydactyly, skeletal features, and defects of pregnant women prior to invasive prenatal procedures at 7 clinics located in the central and peripheral nervous system. These can occur isolated or as Germany and Switzerland. The extracted maternal plasma DNA was analy- part of syndromes, such as Bardet-Biedl, Joubert, Meckel, Jeune, Ellis-van- zed using Illumina sequencing platform HiSeq2000 in a multiplexed fashion. Crefeld, and Sensenbrenner syndrome. Variable expressivity and overlaps For data analysis a z-score equation was used to distinguish samples with between different entities often make it difficult to give a clear diagnosis. fetal aneuploidies from samples with a set of normal fetal chromosomes. Genotype-phenotype correlations are usually not convincing and mutations TRhees urletssu: lts of MPS analysis have been compared with the fetal karyotype in the same gene can cause very different phenotypes. Overall, it is more obtained from chorionic villi sampling or amniocentesis. the rule than the exception that multiple, often dozens of genes are to be We will present the results of the collaborative, blinded study in- considered to be disease-relevant in a patient with suspected ciliopathy. cluding sensitivity and specificity of the well-established non-invasive pre- Second-site modifiers are expected to exert an aggravating effect in an epi- natal test for detection of fetal autosomal aneuploidies. Furthermore, advan- static way. In this scenario, altered dosage of disease proteins may disturb cCeodn callugosiroitnhsm: s for bioinformatics for detection of these aneuploidies will cell homeostasis and network integrity contributing to early and more seve- be discussed. re disease expression. We designed a “ciliopathy panel” for next-generation MPS of maternal plasma DNA is a very promising approach sequencing (NGS) that allows the parallel investigation of about 150 cilia- for non-invasive detection of fetal aneuploidies. Their implementation in related disease genes in a time- and cost-efficient manner. We present fa- prenatal care of high risk pregnant women will decrease the use of invasive milies from a broad spectrum of cilia-related disease phenotypes in which procedures. However, future clinical studies are required to validate the use we have used our NGS-panel and identified convincing disease-related mu- of MPS for the detection of broader spectrum of fetal chromosomal abnor- tations in different genes corroborating our hypothesis. This novel genetic malities and fetal genomic imbalances. testing approach considerably improves genetic diagnostics of ciliopathies C16.2 and deserves increased attention in genetic counselling and the manage- Further development and larger validation of non-invasive prenatal ment of affected families. diagnosis for trisomy 21 using MeDIP real time qPCR P. C. Patsalis1, E. Tsaliki2,3, C. Spyrou2, G. Koumbaris2,1, A. Karagrigoriou4, K. Lamnisou3, V. Velissariou5, E. A. Papageorgiou2,1; www.eshg.org www.eshg.org38 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics,The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany, 4Departments of Medicine Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2NIPD Genetics Ltd., Nicosia, Cyprus, 3University of Athens, (Division of Cardiovascular Diseases), Pediatrics (Division of Pediatric Cardiology), and Athens, Greece, 4Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Molecular Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, Cyprus, 5Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology, Mitera Hospital, Athens, United States, 5Department of Maternal Fetal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, Greece. United States, 6Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, United States, 7Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 8Laboratory of Cardiovascular Genetics, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 9Institute of Genetic Medicine European Academy (EURAC), Nowadays, prenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome is performed using inva- Bolzano, Italy, 10Department of Clinical Sciences Luigi Sacco, University of Milan, Milan, sive procedures such as amniocentesis or chorionic villi sampling, which Italy, 11Mother-infant Department, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, are associated with a significant risk of fetal loss (1%). Many attempts have Italy, 12Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States, been made in the last two decades towards the development of a non-inva- 13Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States, sive prenatal diagnostic (NIPD) test. One of the most promising technolo- 14Institute for Integrative Genomics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, United States. gies is the application of the Methylated DNA Immunoprecipitation (MeDIP) Background real-time qPCR-based approach developed by Prof. Philippos Patsalis and his team. The MeDIP methodology was initially combined with high-reso- lution tiling oligonucleotide array, to identify DNA methylation differences Intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD) or stillbirth, accounts for 60% of perinatal between maternal and fetal DNA across chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y. mortality, and its incidence is 1:200 pregnancies. Despite extensive post- Thousands of Differentially Methylated Regions (DMRs) were generated and mortem investigations, nearly 50% of IUFDs remain unexplained. Since the best were used for the development and validation21 of the first universal 10-15% of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) cases carry functionally non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for trisomy 21 (NIPD ), using MeDIP real- relevant long QT syndrome (LQTS)- or Brugada syndrome (BrS)-associated time qPCR for chromosome 21. The team has recently described an impro- gMeentehtoicd vsariants, we hypothesized that sudden arrhythmic death may un- ved version of the diagnostic formula and a much larger validation study derlie some IUFD as well. (unpublished data). The improved version was created using old and new DMRs and taking into account the genomic position and copy number varia- Ninety-eKiCgNhtQ I1U FD casesK CwNitHh2 n egative dSCiaNg5nAostic work-up (gestational age tion of DMRs. An additional advantage of the new diagnostic formula is that at death >=15 weeks; average 26.3±8.6 w.) were collected. Molecular scree- it consists of only seven DMRs, simplifying the diagnostic assay and further ning of (LQT1), (LQT2), (LQT3, BrS1) genes was per- reducing the cost. In conclusion, the MeDIP real time qPCR-based approach formed using DHPLC and sequence analysis on genomic DNA extracted from is an accurate, reliable NIPD test for Down syndrome. It is simple, fast and frozen tissue. Each genetic variant identified was evaluated in ethnically- easy to perform in every genetic diagnostic lab worldwide as it does not mReastuchltesd controls and reference databases. Novel variants were expressed require expensive equipment, software or special infrastructure. in mammalian cells and studied using patch clamp technique. C16.3 Analysis of PCR-based monogenic preimplantation genetic diagnosis Four missense mutations, absent in >1,000 controls, were identified in 4 (PGD) by follow up of untransferred embryos - A multi-center study IUFD cases (4%). The genetic variants detected in KCNQ1 (-A283T,-R397W) J. Dreesen1, A. Destouni2, B. Degn3, M. W. Christensen3, F. A. G. Carvalho4, C. Moutou5, S. and in the 1b splicing-isoform of KCNH2 (-R25W) were associated with Sengupta6, P. Renwick7, S. Davies8, E. Kanavakis2, G. Harton9, J. Traeger-Synodinos2; markedly reduced IKs and IKr current respectively, consistent with in utero 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, LCQonTcSl tuyspieo n1s and 2. The mutation identified on SCN5A (-T220I), induced a si- 2Medical Genetics, Athens University, Athens, Greece, 3Centre for Preimplantation Genetic gnificant reduction in the late INa current, consistent with a BrS phenotype. Diagnosis, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 4Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 5Université de Strasbourg FRANCE & HUS - Service de la Biologie de la Reproduction, CMCO, Schiltigheim, France, This study represents the largest cohort of stillbirths in which a molecular 6UCL Centre for PG&D, Institute for Women‘s Health, London, United Kingdom, 7Guy‘s & autopsy was performed. The results of this study highlight that 4% of unex- St. Thomas‘ Centre for Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis and Genetics Centre, Guy‘s & plained fetal demise may be due to life-threatening arrhythmias secondary St. Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 8Embryogenesis Assisted to underlying cardiac channelopathies, as LQTS or BrS. Conception Unit, Athens, Greece, 9Reprogenetics,, Livingston, NJ, United States. C16.5 Metabolic reprogramming of the epigenome by intrauterine exposure to gestational diabetes PGD, an established reproductive alternative for couples with high-risk of N. El Hajj1, G. Pliushch1, E. Schneider1, M. Dittrich2, T. Müller2, M. Korenkov3, M. Aretz4, U. transmitting a monogenic disorder, currently involves PCR-based methods. Zechner5, H. Lehnen4, T. Haaf1; PCR protocols must be robust, sensitive and highly accurate, completely 1Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Maximilians University, Wuerzburg, Germany, precluding misdiagnosis. Misdiagnosis can be adverse (affected pregnancy/ 2Department of Bioinformatics, Julius Maximilians University, Wuerzburg, Germany, baby) or benign. The twelve adverse misdiagnoses reported to the ESHRE 3Teaching Hospital, Klinikum Werra-Meissner, Eschwege, Germany, 4Städtische Kliniken, Mönchengladbach, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, PGD-Consortium are likely an underestimate. This study assessed validity, Mainz, Germany. diagnostic value and accuracy of PCR-based PGD, through re-analysis of untransferred embryos from monogenic-PGD cycles. Data from 7 centres included: disease, embryology, assay type (singleplex/multiplex, one- or The offspring of women with gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) are at two-cell biopsy), genotype concordance at PGD and follow-up. Reasons for greater risk of developing metabolic disorders later in life. Epigenetic pro- discordance included ADO, contamination, mosaic embryo, other. Data from cesses such as DNA methylation are primary candidates when searching 1352 untransferred embryos was analysed for: sensitivity (Se), specificity for mechanisms that can stably modulate gene expression and metabolic (Sp), false negative (FN) and positive (FP) rates, Negative (NPV) and Posi- pathways due to fetal overnutrition. Umbilical cord blood and placenta tis- tive predictive value (PPV), diagnostic odds-ratio (OR). Impact of 1- versus sue were obtained from 88 newborns of mothers with dietetically treated 2-cell biopsy, and type of assay (singleplex versus multiplex) on PGD outco- GDM, 98 with insulin-dependent GDM and 65 without GDM. Bisulfite py- me was also assessed. In addition, frequencies of factors leading to discor- rosequencing was used to study the methylation levels of seven imprinted dant results (FP or FN) were estimated.Diagnostic outcomes were better for genes involved in pre- and postnatal growth, four genes involved in energy multiplex assays versus singleplex (OR 2116 versus 154), and for two-cell metabolism, one anti-inflammatory gene, one tumor suppressor gene and versus one-cell biopsy (OR 1036 versus 407). However, Sensitivity and NPV one pluripotency gene. In addition, we examined global DNA methylation of of singleplex/multiplex assays compared to one- or two-cell biopsy were not the ALU, LINE1 and alpha-satellite repeat families. The maternally imprin- significantly different, indicating that 2-cell biopsy is not essential for more ted MEST gene and the non-imprinted glucocorticoid receptor NR3C1 gene accurate clinical results. Inherent risks of PCR based PGD methods (ADO, as well as ALU repeats showed significantly decreased methylation levels contamination) accounted for 40.68% of discordant results, whereas mo- in both GDM groups, compared with controls, in both analyzed tissues. De- caisism (biological risk) accounted for 57.63%.This study demonstrates the creased blood MEST methylation was also observed in adults with severe validity, robustness and high diagnostic value of PCR-based PGD. obesity, compared with normal-weight controls. The fact that two of 14 ana- C16.4 lyzed genes and ALU repeats showed significant hypomethylation in new- Genetic basis of intrauterine fetal demise: the role of cardiac borns of GDM mothers suggests that the effects are minor (in the order of channelopathies several percentage points) but widespread. Epigenetic changes in children A. Ghidoni1,2, L. Crotti1,2,3, D. J. Tester4, R. Insolia1,2, W. M. White5, D. C. Bartos6, M. L. exposed to a hypergylcemic intrauterine environment provide a molecular Will4, E. J. Velasco6, J. J. Bair7, A. Besana8, A. Pfeufer9, D. L. Van Dyke7, J. Wick5, B. Brost5, B. Delisle6, I. Cetin10, F. Facchinetti11, A. L. George Jr.12,13,14, P. J. Schwartz1,2, M. J. Ackerman4; link between GDM and life-long predisposition to metabolic disorders. Over- 1Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 2Molecular all our results support the idea that adverse early life conditions can have Cardiology Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico S. Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Institute long-term effects on the epigenome and phenotypic consequences. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 39 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C16.6 C17.2 SPOC1 is involved in meiotic sex chromosome inactivation (MSCI) Haplotype phasing using next-generation sequencing reads C. Nelkenbrecher1, A. Bördlein1, S. Lukassen1, S. Wolfshöfer1, A. Fitzner1, A. Ekici1, H. O. Delaneau1,2, J. Zagury2, J. Marchini1; Scherthan2, A. Winterpacht1; 1Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Conservatoire 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany, National des Arts et Métiers, Paris, France. 2Bundeswehr Institute of Radiobiology affiliated to the University of Ulm, Munich, Germany. Next-generation sequencing is now widely used in many studies of human disease and population genetics. Sequencing is still relatively expensive so Meiotic sex chromosome inactivation (MSCI) and meiotic silencing of unsyn- many studies are collecting low-coverage data that necessitates the use of apsed chromatin (MSUC) are two barely understood mechanisms respon- phasing and imputation methods to call genotypes and haplotypes at po- sible for transcriptional silencing of unsynapsed chromatin during male lymorphic sites. Sequencing reads carry valuable phase information when meiosis. It has been shown that both mechanisms are essential for normal spanning two or more heterozygous sites. For example, in the Phase I 1000 spermatogenesis and fertility. Recently, we identified SPOC1 (PHF13) as a Genomes Project data we have found ~33% of the heterozygous sites are novel gene whose expression is negatively correlated with the survival time covered by phase informative reads. This information is not used by cur- in patients with ovarian cancer. SPOC1 associates dynamically with chroma- rent methods. We have extended SHAPEIT to incorporate the sequencing tin in cell lines (probably via H3K4me3 binding) and plays a role in chromo- read information and boost performance. To compare methods and inve- some condensation and cell division. We demonstrated that male Spoc1-/- stigate parameters such as coverage, read length and insert size we have mice show pronounced hypoplasia of the testis with progressive loss of carried out an extensive simulation study of sequence read level data using germ cells due to apoptosis in the pachytene stage. Here, we report data the SFS_code. For example, with 5x paired-end 100bp reads (500bp insert of microarray-based gene expression analyses performed with testis tissue size) using phase-informative reads increases the mean distance between from Spoc-/- strains and wild type controls. We identified a chromosome- phasing errors from 85.2kb to 94.0kb. The mean switch distance for BEA- specific dysregulation of transcripts with a highly significant disproportio- GLE was much lower at 63.5kb. By adjusting the distributions of read length nate number of X- and Y-linked genes overexpressed in Spoc1-/- tissue. The and insert size performance can be substantially improved. These results results were verified using qPCR. Together with the increased apoptosis rate indicate the likely benefit of future advances in sequencing technologies. On observed during pachytene stage the microarray data strongly suggest an real data we have achieved similar performance but have found necessary to essential function of SPOC1 in meiotic sex chromosome inactivation (MSCI). carefully account for poorly mapped reads and poor calibration of base qua- The formation of the XY-body, the double strand break (DSB) formation/ lities. Overall our results highlight the gains that can be achieved by using repair, as well as chromosome synapsis seems normal in the knockout testis, phase-informative reads when estimating haplotypes from next-generation which suggests a direct epigenetic effect SPOC1 on X- and Y-linked genes. In sequence data. conclusion, our data indicate that SPOC1 is a novel factor involved in MSCI, C17.3 and is essential for the epigenetic control of male germ cell development. Bayesian multivariate phenotype modeling for genome-wide C17.1 association studies. The MHC association to celiac disease can be mostly explained by six V. Iotchkova1, J. Marchini1, T. Spector2, C. Gieger3, W. Ouwehand4, N. Soranzo4; amino acids in the HLA-DQ heterodimer 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Twin Research & Genetic J. Gutierrez-Achury1, G. Trynka1, K. A. Hunt2, J. Romanos1, C. Wijmenga1, D. van Heel2, P. Epidemiology, King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Epidemiology, I. W. de Bakker3,4,5; Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 4Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, 1Department of Genetics - University Medical Hospital Groningen, Groningen, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Netherlands, 2Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London E1 2AT, London, United Kingdom, 3Brigham and Women‘s Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 4Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, The majority of genome-wide association studies have been carried out Cambridge, MA, United States, 5University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands. using a single binary or single quantitative trait as the phenotype of inte- rest. For many traits several potential phenotypes may be available so it is natural to ask the question of how best to test for association in the presence The major histocompatibility complex (MHC) containing the HLA genes of multiple phenotypes. We have developed a Bayesian model averaging ap- has been associated to immune-related diseases. However, pinpointing the proach with sparsity inducing priors that allow the set of phenotypes to be causal variants is challenging due to its characteristic genetic structure. To partitioned into an associated and un-associated set. In this way we combi- refine the association signal in HLA in celiac disease we genotyped >10,000 ne both model comparison and model selection. Additional properties are MHC SNPs in 12016 cases and 11920 controls using a custom genotyping that we allow for correlations between the residuals of both the associated array (Immunochip). and un-associated phenotypes and allow for multiple cohorts to be analysed We imputed classical HLA-A, B, C, DQA1, DQB1, DRB1, DPA1 and DPB1 alle- together. We have shown using simulated data that these methods lead to an les and polymorphic amino acids in these genes using a European reference increase in power to detect effects, over and above using single phenotype panel. Logistic regression and conditional analysis was used to identify in- analysis, and are able to accurately uncover the true set of associated phe- dependent associations. notypes. We will present results from a genome-wide association of eight The strongest association was to amino acid 55 in the DQβ1 protomer hematological parameters collected on the TwinsUK, KORA and UKBS Com- (x2=9528, df=3, -log(p)=2067), located near the binding groove. Adjusting mon Control collection. for the effects of position 55, we found additional associations to positions C17.4 57, 203 and 71 in the DQβ1 subunit and to positions 72 and 22 in DQα1. Case-control maximum weighted bipartite matching in genome wide The haplotypes formed by these six positions recapitulate the known risk- association studies conferring effects of the classical DQ2.5 (OR= 10.49), DQ2.2 (OR= 2.02), and A. Lacour1, C. Herold1, D. Drichel1, T. Vaitsiakhovich2, V. Schüller2, T. Becker1,2; DQ8 (OR= 4.4) alleles. After controlling for these HLA-DQ effects, we found 1German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 2Institute for 6 other associated variants within HLA-A and HLA-B class I, and in DRB1, Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. DPB1 and DPA1 in class II. Our results provide a structural basis for the well-known HLA-DQ associa- tions and confirm that six amino acids can explain the bulk of the observed Population stratification in samples of genome wide association studies give MPoHpCu laastsioonciatiSoanm.ple Cases Controls Male(%) Female(%) rise to large obliterations in the results of statistical tests. In order to correct for stratification effects we have implemented a pairwise case--control mat- Lambda gc ching that is based on the identity-by-state matrix. We obtain a ‚maximum Netherlands 2323 1150 1173 1035(44.6) 1288(55.4) 1 weighted bipartite matching‘ by making use of an improved Kuhn-Munkres Italy 2756 1486 1270 722(26.2) 2034(72.8) 1 „hungarian“ algorithm which solves the assignment problem of weighted bypartite graphs in polynomial time. Poland 1062 521 541 505(47.5) 557(52.5) 1 A quality control on the matched pairs as well as a rematching of residual Spain1 1793 1131 662 722(40.2) 1071(59.8) 1 sample elements makes sure that we do not loose power due to reducing Spain2 1793 1131 662 722(40.2) 1071(59.8) 1 the sample. In this way, the pairwise matching is extended to tiny clusters UK 16002 7728 8274 6153(38.4) 9849(61.6) 1.08 with at least one case and one control. Association P-values are obtained by Total 23936 12016 11920 9137(38.2) 14799(61.8) 1.04 within cluster case-control permutation. The matching can be performed both genome-wide and window-wise (‚lo- calized matching‘). The latter will be applied to the analyses of rare variants, where one would expect that the amount of stratification vary according to www.eshg.org www.eshg.org40 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genomic location. we also detected significant trans-eQTLs for other traits as well. For examp- As it turns out from simulation studies the statistical niveau is maintained: le, a SNP (rs174550) in FADS1_a gene known to affect lipid and glucose local window sizes of a few thousand SNPs are enough to guarantee iden- levels_showed significant association in trans with LDLR gene expression tification of strata. Thus, our method leads to an increase of power and si- levels (p-value: 4.27*10-14), and we furthermore observed a significant multaneously to a reduced false-positive rate in simulations compared to correlation between LDLR gene expression and phospholipid levels. When unstratified analyses. As a byproduct, our implementation strongly outper- relaxing the FDR to 0.5, we also observed trans effects on two additional forms common covariate approaches based on multidimensional scaling genes involved in cholesterol metabolism (INSIG1 and TLE3). in runtime, and makes genome-wide application possible. Our method for GWAS meta-analyses have revealed a substantial amount of previously stratified analyses is implemented in the genome-wide interaction analysis unknown biology. Our results indicate that a meta-analysis of eQTL datasets software INTERSNP. is equally promising, and can reveal downstream effects for genetic variants C17.5 that are associated with a wide range of complex traits. Variants in exons and in transcription factors affect gene expression C18.1 in trans Dominant missense mutations in potassium channel cause Cantú A. Kreimer1, I. Pe‘er2; syndrome 1Department of Biomedical Informatics, Columbia University, New York, NY, United J. J. T. van Harssel1, M. Harakalova1, P. A. Terhal1, S. van Lieshout1, K. Duran1, I. Renkens1, States, 2Department of Computer Science, Columbia University, New York, NY, United D. Armor2, L. Wilson3, E. Kirk4, C. L. S. Turner5, D. Shears6, S. Garcia-Minaur7, M. M. Lees3, States. A. Ross8, H. Venselaar9, G. Vriend9, H. Takanari10, M. Rook10, M. van der Heyden10, F. W. Asselbergs11, J. M. Breur12, M. E. Swinkels1, I. J. Scurr13, S. F. Smithson13, N. V. Knoers1, J. J. van der Smagt1, I. J. Nijman1, W. P. Kloosterman1, M. M. van Haelst1, G. van Haaften1, E. In recent years many genetic variants have been found to be associated with Cuppen1,14; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, gene expression (eSNPs). However, unrtarvaenlsing the causal variants and the Netherlands, 2Murdoch Children’s Research Institute and University of Melbourne, Royal regulatory mechanisms by which they act is still limited. Here we present Children’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond a computational framework to study -eSNPs, integrating SNPs that Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney are fully ascertained from sequencing data along with publicly available Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon RNA-seq for 50 Yoruban samples. We focus on pairs oifn e tSrNaPn slocated within and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom, 6Clinical Genetics Department, Churchill a source gene: anywhere along the span of a Transcription Factor (TF) or Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Institute for Medical and Molecular Genetics, La within any known exon. We map the source and its target onto a Paz University Hospital, Madrid, Spain, 8Department Clinical Genetics, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 9Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, CMBI, Protein-Protein Interaction (PPI) network and study their topological pro- NCMLS 260, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Department perties. of Medical Physiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, When considering pairs of exon-source with their corresponding eQTL tar- 11Department of Cardiology, Division Heart and Lungs, University Medical Center gets, the more likely their association, the closer they are within the PPI net- Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 12Department of Pediatric Cardiology, University Medical work and the higher the rank of target.t Trahnesse effects are significantly diffe- Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 13Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Michael’s rent than chance expectation, as demonstrated by randomly permuted data. Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 14Hubrecht Institute and University Medical Center These results suggest a mechanism for regulation by coding variation, Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. thereby pinpointing the causal SNPs. In addition, the more likely is the association of a TF source eSNP to its tar- get, the higher is its rank. These results pinpoint a causal SNP within a TF Cantú syndrome, also known as hypertrichotic osteochondrodysplasia, is and suggest a global property of TF sources as hubs in the PPI, even more so characterized by congenital hypertrichosis, characteristic facial features and than other TFs. The targets of eSNP TFs are enriched for proteins sorted to cardiac defects. Cantú syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder with a intracellular membrane bounded organelles. thus far unknown genetic cause. We used trio-based exome sequencing to detect candidate de novo variants in a selected patient with Cantú syndrome C17.6 and his healthy parents. We identified a de novo missense mutation in a sub- eQTL mapping in 5,300 blood samples reveals downstream pathways unit of a potassium channel. Subsequent sequencing of the candidate gene in non-hematological traits H. Westra1, T. Esko2, M. J. Peters3, C. Schurmann4, H. Yaghootkar5, J. Kettunen6, M. A. in additional cases was performed to confirm the initial findings. Sanger se- Christiansen7, J. M. Karjalainen1, R. S. N. Fehrmann1, G. J. te Meerman1, A. Hofman8, F. quencing revealed heterozygous missense mutations in the same gene in 13 Rivadeneira3, E. Reinmaa2, R. C. Jansen9, J. Brody7, S. A. Gharib10, A. Suchy-Dicey7, D. out of 15 cases. The mutations had occurred de novo in all 7 cases where Enquobahrie11, A. G. Uitterlinden12,8, C. Wijmenga1, B. M. Psaty7, S. Ripatti6,13, T. Frayling5, genetic material from both parents was available. In one male Cantú pati- A. Teumer4, A. Metsepalu2, J. B. J. van Meurs3, L. Franke1; ent, the mutation was inherited from an affected mother, providing further 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, support for causality of this gene in Cantú syndrome. We built a molecular Groningen, Netherlands, 2Estonian Genome Center and Institute of Molecular and model to gain insight on the effect of the mutations on protein structure. Cell Biology of University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Interfaculty Institute for Genetics All mutations affect residues in or close to the transmembrane part of the and Functional Genomics, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt University Greifswald, Greifswald, protein. Using patch clamp experiments we show that the mutations in the Germany, 5Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, potassium channel reduce ATP-mediated inhibition of this channel. Our University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 6Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland findings may have direct implications for the treatment of Cantú patients FIMM, FI-00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7Cardiovascular Health because the channel is a known pharmaceutical target. Research Unit, Departments of Medicine and Epidemiology, University of Washington, C18.2 Seattle, WA, United States, 8Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Groningen Bioinformatics Center, Groningen Biomolecular PNPLA1 mutations cause autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis in Sciences and Biotechnology Institute, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, golden retriever dogs and humans 10Center for Lung Biology Department of Medicine University of Washington, Seattle, J. Fischer1,2,3, A. Grall4,5, E. Guaguère6, S. Planchais4,5, S. Grond7, E. Bourrat8, I. Hausser9,10, WA, United States, 11Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, C. Hitte11,12, M. le Gallo11,12, C. Derbois13, G. Kim1,14, L. Lagoutte15,5, F. Degorce-Rubiales16, WA, United States, 12Netherlands Genomics Initiative-Sponsored by the Netherlands F. P. W. Radner17, A. Thomas18, S. Küry4,5,19, E. Bensignor20, J. Fontaine21, D. Pin22, R. Consortium for Healthy Aging, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 13Wellcome Trust Sanger Zimmermann17, R. Zechner17, M. Lathrop2,23, F. Galibert15,5, C. André15,5; Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom. 1Institute for Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 2Institut de Genomique, Centre National de Génotypage, Evry, France, 3Zentrum für Biosystemanalyse ZBSA, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 4CNRS, UMR 6061, Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France, 5Université Rennes 1, UEB, IFR 140, Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed many SNPs that are Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France, 6Clinique vétérinaire Saint Bernard, Lomme, associated with complex traits. The next challenge is to identify the functio- France, 7Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, Graz, nal consequences of these variants. To systematically map these downstream Australia, 8Hopital St Louis, Department de Dermatologie, Paris, France, 9Department of effects, we used expression quantitative trait locus mapping and meta-ana- Dermatology, University Clinic Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 10Electron Microscopy lysis to identify cis-eQTLs (distance between SNP and mid-probe position < Core Facility University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 11Centre National de la 5Mb) and trans-eQTLs in a cohort of 5,311 peripheral blood samples across Recherche Scientifique CNRS, Institut de Genetique et Developpement de Rennes, Rennes, France, 12Universite Rennes, Institut federatif de Recherche IFR 140, Rennes, France, seven independent cohorts. When confining our analysis to 4,500 SNPs that 13Institute de Genomique, Centre National de Genotypage CNG, Evry, France, 14Faculty are known to be associated with complex traits and diseases, we detected for Biology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 15Centre National de la Recherche over 1,000 SNPs (24%) with trans-eQTL effects (FDR 0.05) and over 600 Scientifique CNRS, Institut de Génétique et Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France, SNPs (14%) with both cis and trans-eQTL effects on at least one gene. 16Laboratoire d’Anatomie Pathologique Vétérinaire du Sud-Ouest LAPVSO, Lomme, Although we studied peripheral blood (?leukocytes) and identified many France, 17Institute of Molecular Biosciences, Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, Graz, plausible downstream effects for hematological and immune-related traits, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Concurrent Sessions 41 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Austria, 18Antagene, Animal Genetics Laboratory, Limonest, France, 19Centre Hospitalier Strasbourg, France, 3IGBMC; Inserm, U964; CNRS-UdS UMR7104, Illkirch, France, Universitaire CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 20Clinique vétérinaire de la Boulais, Cesson- 4Karlsruher Institut für Technologie (KIT), Institut für Toxikologie und Genetik (ITG) Sévigné, France, 21Clinique vétérinaire, Bruxelles, Belgium, 22Unité de dermatologie, Campus Nord, Hermann-von-Helmholtz-Platz 1, 76344, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, VetAgro Sup Campus Vétérinaire de Lyon, Marcy l’Etoile, France, 23Fondation Jean Germany, 5Cabinet dentaire, 34 rue Paul Cézanne,, Mulhouse, France, 6Service de Dausset-Centre d‘Etude de Polymorphisme Humain CEPH, Paris, France. Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 7Laboratoire Physiopathologie des syndromes rares héréditaires, Equipe EA 3949 INSERM-AVENIR, Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Médecine, 11 rue Humann, Strasbourg, France. Ichthyoses comprise a heterogeneous group of genodermatoses characteri- zed by abnormal desquamation over the whole body, for which the genetic causes of several human forms remain unknown. We used the spontaneous Inherited dental malformations constitute a clinically and genetically hete- dog model to perform a genome-wide association study in the golden re- rogeneous group of disorders. Here, we report on a severe unique dental triever breed, which is affected by a lamellar ichthyosis resembling human phenotype that results in dentin dysplasia associated with major microdon- autosomal recessive congenital ichthyoses (ARCI). We identified a new gene, tia in the primary dentition, oligodontia in the permanent dentition, teeth PNPLA1, in which a homozygous indel mutation leads to a premature stop shape/size abnormalities and thin enamel in a highly consanguineous fa- codon in all affected golden retriever dogs. We then found one missense and mily. Classical homozygosity mapping (GeneChip Human 250K SNP Affy- one nonsense mutation in the catalytic domain of the orthologous human metrix) revealed a unique zone on 6q27-ter containing 70 genes. The two gene in six ARCI patients from two families. Further experiments highligh- affected children were found to carry a homozygous mutation at the exon ted the importance of PNPLA1 in the formation of the epidermal lipid bar- 1 /intron border (c.84+1G>T) in the canonical-splice donor site of intron rier. In addition to the identification of a novel gene in human ichthyoses, 1 of SMOC2 gene coding for the SPARC related modular calcium binding 2 these results provide insights into the localisation and the function of this matrix protein. The parents of both affected children were heterozygous for yet uncharacterized member of the PNPLA protein family. this mutation. The SMOC family is well conserved through evolution. Smoc2 C18.3 gene is indeed expressed throughout mouse odontogenesis. Knockdown of Mutations in FKBP14 cause a variant of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome with smoc2 in zebrafish showed pharyngeal teeth that had abnormalities remi- progressive kyphoscoliosis, myopathy and hearing loss niscent of the human phenotype. Moreover, smoc2 depletion in zebrafish af- C. Fauth1, M. Baumann2, C. Giunta3, B. Krabichler1, F. Rüschendorf4, N. Zoppi5, M. Colombi5, R. Bittner6, S. Quijano-Roy7, F. Muntoni8, S. Cirak8, G. Schreiber9, Y. Zou10, Y. Hu10, fected also the expression of three major odontogenesis genes: dlx2, bmp2, N. Romero11, R. Carlier12, A. Amberger1, A. Deutschmann1, V. Straub13, M. Rohrbach3, D. and pitx2. Karall2, K. Rostasy2, B. Steinmann3, C. Bönnemann10, J. Zschocke1; The ultimate proof through whole exome sequencing failed to reveal the 1Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, mutation because of insufficient coverage of the GC rich region containing 2Department of Paediatrics IV - Neonatology, Paediatric Neurology and Inherited the disease causative mutation ! Metabolic Disorders, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Connective C18.5 Tissue Unit, Division of Metabolism and Children´s Research Centre (CRC), University Children’s Hospital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 4Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Mutations in ROGDI cause epileptic encephalopathy and amelogenesis Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 5Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical imperfecta (Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome) Sciences and Biotechnology, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 6Neuromuscular A. S. Schossig1,2, N. I. Wolf3,4, C. Fischer2, M. Fischer5, G. Stocker5, S. Pabinger5, A. Dander5, Research Department, Center of Anatomy & Cell Biology, Medical University of B. Steiner6, O. Tönz6, D. Kotzot1, E. Haberlandt7, A. Amberger1, B. Burwinkel8,9, K. Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 7APHP, Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital Universitaire Raymond Wimmer1, C. Fauth1, C. Grond-Ginsbach10, M. J. Koch11, A. Deichmann12, C. von Kalle12, C. R. Poincaré, Centre National de Référence des Maladies Neuromusculaires Garches- Bartram2, A. Kohlschütter13, Z. Trajanoski5, J. Zschocke1; Necker-Mondor-Hendaye, UVSQ, Garches, France, 8Dubowitz Neuromuscular Centre, 1Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, 9Department of Neuropaediatrics, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Dept. of Klinikum Kassel, Kassel, Germany, 10National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Child Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept. of Child Stroke/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 11Institut de Myologie, Unité de Morphologie Neurology, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Division of Bioinformatics, Neuromusculaire, Groupe Hospitalier-Universitaire Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 6Children‘s Hospital, Lucerne, 12Department of Radiology, Hôpital Raymond Poincaré, Université Paris Ile-de-France Switzerland, 7Dept. of Pediatrics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, Ouest, Paris, France, 13Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle 8German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Dept. of Obstetrics and upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Gynecology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 10Dept. of Neurology, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 11Dept. of Oral, Dental and Maxillofacial Diseases, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 12National Center for Tumor Diseases and German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 13University Hospital for Child We report on an autosomal recessive variant of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome and Adolescent Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. (EDS) characterized by severe muscle hypotonia at birth, progressive sco- liosis, joint hypermobility, hyperelastic skin, myopathy, sensorineural hea- ring impairment and normal pyridinoline excretion in urine. Clinically the Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome (KTS) is an autosomal recessive disease cha- disorder shares many features with the kyphoscoliotic type of EDS (EDS racterized by the combination of epilepsy, psychomotor regression and VIA) and Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy. Linkage analysis in a large enamel defects. The molecular basis has not yet been elucidated. Here we Tyrolean kindred identified a homozygous frameshift mutation in FKBP14 report that KTS is caused by mutations in ROGDI. Using a combination of in two affected individuals. Based on the cardinal clinical characteristics autozygosity mapping and exome sequencing we identified a homozygous of the disorder four additional individuals originating from different Eu- frameshift deletion c.229_230del (p.Leu77Alafs*64) in ROGDI in two affec- ropean countries were identified who carried either homozygous or com- ted individuals from a consanguineous family. Molecular studies in two ad- pound heterozygous mutations in FKBP14. FKBP14 belongs to the family of ditional individuals with KTS from two unrelated Austrian and Swiss fami- FK506-binding peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerases (PPIases). ER-resident lies revealed homozygosity for a nonsense-mutation c.286C>T (p.Gln96*), FKBPs have been suggested to act as folding catalysts by accelerating cis- and compound heterozygosity for the splice site mutations c.531+5G>C and trans isomerization of peptidyl-prolyl bonds and to act occasionally also as c.532-2A>T in ROGDI, respectively. The latter mutation was also found he- chaperones. We demonstrate that FKBP14 is localized in the endoplasmic terozygous in the mother of the Swiss affected individual in whom KTS was reticulum (ER) and that deficiency of FKBP14 leads to enlarged ER cisterns reported for the first time in 1974. ROGDI is highly expressed throughout in dermal fibroblasts in vivo. Furthermore, indirect immunofluorescence of the brain and other organs but its function is largely unknown. Possible in- FKBP14 deficient fibroblasts indicated an altered assembly of the extracel- teractions with DISC1, a protein involved in diverse cytoskeletal functions, lular matrix in vitro. These findings suggest that a disturbance of protein fol- have been suggested. Our finding that ROGDI mutations cause KTS indicates ding in the ER affecting one or more components of the extracellular matrix that the protein product of this gene plays an important role in neuronal might cause the generalized connective tissue involvement in this disorder. development as well as amelogenesis. FKBP14 mutation analysis should be considered in all individuals with ap- C18.6 parent kyphoscoliotic type of EDS and normal urinary pyridinoline excreti- Mutations in GRIP1 cause Fraser syndrome on, in particular in conjunction with sensorineural hearing impairment. M. J. Vogel1, P. van Zon1, L. Brueton2, M. Gijzen1, M. C. van Tuil1, D. Schanze3, A. C18.4 Kariminejad4, S. Ghaderi-Sohi4, E. Blair5, M. Zenker3, P. J. Scambler6, H. Ploos van Amstel1, Homozygosity mapping and candidate prioritization identify M. M. van Haelst1,7; mutations, missed by whole-exome sequencing, in SMOC2, causing 1Department Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, major dental developmental defects 2Clinical Genetics Unit, Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Kingdom, A. Bloch-Zupan1,2,3, X. Jamet1,2, C. Etard4, V. Laugel3, J. Muller3, V. Geoffroy3, J. Strauss5, V. 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, Pelletier6, V. Marion7, O. Poch3, U. Strahle4, C. Stoetzel7, H. Dollfus7,6; 4Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center Tehran, Tehran, Iraq, 5Dept. 1University of Strasbourg, Faculty of Dentistry, Strasbourg, France, 2Reference Centre of Clinical Genetics, Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, for Orodental Manifestations of Rare Diseases, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, 6Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health London, London, United Kingdom, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org42 ESHG Concurrent Sessions Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 7Section of Genomic Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. Fraser syndrome F(RFASS) 1is an FauRtEoMso2m al recessive malformation syndrome characFtReAriSz1ed by cFrRyEpMto2phthalmos, syndactyly and urogenital defects. Thus far, mutations in and have been identified as a cause of FS. Both and encode extracellular matrix proteins that are es- sential for the adhGersiipo1n between epidermal basement membrane and the underlying dermal connective tissues during embryonic development. Mu- tationGsR IinP 1murine , which encodes a scaffolding protein that interacts FwRitAhS F1ras1/FFRrEemM2 proteins, result in FS-like defeGcRtsIP i1n mice. We therefore te- sted for genetic variants in FS families that did not have mutations in and . In three unrelated families mutations were found to segregate with the disease in an autosomal recessive manner (donor sGpRlIiPce1 site mutation NM_021150.3:c.2113+1G>C in two families and a 4-bp deletion, NM_021150.3:c.1181_1184del in the third). RT-PCR analysis of the mRNA showed that the c.2113+1G>C splice mutation causes skipping of exon 17 leading to a frame shift and a premature stop of translatFioRnA.S1 TFRhEe MFS2 phenotype of the three probands presented here appears to be indi- stinguishable from the phenotype that results from mutations in or . This is in line with the assumption that Fras1, Frem2 and Grip1 are indispensable for the integrity oGf tRhIeP 1Fras1/Frem protein complex, and that lack of one of the components leads to a defective complex. We conclude that mutations in cause classic FS in humans. Our fin- dings expand the possibilities for diagnostic testing, carrier testing and ear- ly prenatal diagnosis for FS patients and their families. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 43 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P01.03 ESHG Posters Reasons to participate to a biobank study: a systematic review H. L. Nobile1,2, K. Thys2, E. Vermeulen3,4, M. M. Bergmann1, P. Borry2; 1German Institute for Human Nutrition, Potsdam-Rehbrücke, Germany, 2K.U.Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. P01. 01. Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and The implementation of cohort biobank studies is intrinsically dependent on Public policy the successful recruitment of participants. Studies have shown that the de- cision to enroll is only partly influenced by the information provided during recruitment and mainly relies on individual attitudes and motivations. Cost- P01.01 benefit analyses (which include the potential benefit of receiving informa- Access to assessment of familial cancer risk by people from minority tion about one’s health) also play a significant role in the decision-making ethnic communities process. Whether the (potential) participant’ perception of benefit corre- A. M. Allford1, C. Lewis1, N. Qureshi2, J. Kai2; sponds to what the researchers communicate in the informed consent pro- 1Genetic Alliance UK, London, United Kingdom, 2Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom. cedure is a question that has received increased attention in the last years. Empirical studies addressing individuals’ motivations to enroll have been Background: implemented in different biobank settings. For the scope of this review, we focus on the motivations expressed by apparently healthy and legally auto- Patients from minority ethnic groups diagnosed with, or are at nomous participants who actually took part to a biobank study. risk of, cancer with a genetic component appear less likely to access scree- To this end, three literature databases (PudMed, Embase and Web of Sci- nAiinmg: and other services to assess their higher level of risk than the main- ence) as well as Google Scholar have been searched with standardized stream population in the UK. keywords. To guarantee its systematic approach, the search had been done To explore why people from minority ethnic groups with a significant twice using the same strings by two different teams of authors. 157 articles family history of cancer are under-represented in NHS clinical genetics ser- considered relevant have then been read independently by four of the au- vices to inform interventions and service development to improve quality thors to decide on their inclusion in the review. The selected articles have oMfe ctahroed, sa: nd review and dissemination of findings at stakeholder and com- been analyzed and their content has been coded and organized by themes munity levels. independently by two of the authors. The outcome of this work is to provide Qualitative study using semi-structured interviews and focus a comprehensive overview of the reasons to participate to biobank studies groups with: patients with direct experience of familial cancer risk assess- as they appear in the literature up to now. ment; and community members from Black Caribbean, South Asian, and White Irish communities with, or at familial risk of breast and ovarian, bo- P01.04 wel, and prostate cancer; and clinical genetics and other key NHS staff. Tran- Respect of guidelines for breast and ovary surveillance and sRcersiuplttss :were analysed using constant comparison of data and processes for management in women with a BRCA mutation: a french study F. Coron1,2, A. Damette3, A. Cueff2, C. Populaire3, C. Rambaud1, C. Cassini1, A. Birot1, F. validation and feedback with respondents. Debomy1, S. Gauthier1, P. Fumoleau4, X. Pivot5, C. Loustalot2, J. Sautière6, M. Collonge- Data were generated with a purposeful sample of 58 respondents Rame3, L. Faivre1,2; (15 patients, 20 community members, 23 health and other professionals). 1Centre de génétique, Hopital d‘Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Service d‘oncogénétique, Some findings appeared common to all patients, but were amplified for Centre G.F. Leclerc, Dijon, France, 3Service d‘oncogénétique, Besançon, France, 4Service people from minority ethnic communities, for example in relation to the d‘oncologie, Centre G.F. Leclerc, Dijon, France, 5Service d‘oncologie, Hôpital Minjoz, challenges of sharing information and decision-making within families Besançon, France, 6Service de gynécologie, Besançon, France. about cancer and genetic risk. Factors further preventing people being em- powered to negotiate health services effectively, obtain appropriate referral or further assessment included: language barriers and cultural sensitivities Pilot follow-up studies in people with a genetic predisposition for cancers, relating to stigma; accessibility of family medical histories; and a non-direc- were created in France in 2009. In this context, a specific database was set tive emphasis in genetic counselling. up for the follow-up of these patients in two French regions. Observance of P01.02 surveillance recommendations for breast and ovary cancer in patients with Applying the Estonian Biobank to estimate the potential impact of a BRCA mutation was studied using the collected data. genomic testing The patients were at least thirty years old and had known their genetic sta- L. Leitsalu-Moynihan1, T. Haller1, K. Fischer1, K. Läll2, P. Ng1, A. Metspalu1,3,4; tus for at least 2 years. Concerning the breast, poor observance was defined 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2University of Tartu, Tartu, as an interval of more than 18 months between breast follow-up examina- Estonia, 3Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, tions. Concerning ovary cancer, poor observance was defined as not having 4Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia. ovariectomy after the age of 50 years. The 2 centers followed 248 women with a BRCA mutation: 232 from 30 to 50 years, and 116 over 50 years. Prophylactic mastectomy was performed in 11/232 women (5%); nine had The Estonian Biobank is a population-based biobank of the Estonian Geno- already had cancer, and two were asymptomatic. Breast follow-up data were me Center of the University of Tartu with genotypic, phenotypic, and health obtained for 101/232 women; 62% of patients followed the guidelines clo- information for over 51,000 participants aged 18 years and over. The age, sely and 84% had a follow-up MRI. Ovary follow-up data were available for sex, and geographical distribution of the cohort reflects the structure of the 73/116 women: only 6/73 of the women over 50 (8%) did not undergo ad- Estonian adult population. Besides promoting the development of genetic nexectomy. research, collecting health and genetic information from the Estonian popu- In conclusion, the vast majority of women with a BRCA mutation followed lation, the genome center aims to use the collected biobank data and results the recommendations concerning management of risk of ovarian cancer. of associated genetic research to improve public health. The health informa- 1/3 of patients had insufficiently regular breast surveillance. These results tion has been collected by medical personnel with access to the electronic show the importance of setting up pilot studies to improve the management health records. The health data are expanded periodically through linking to of people with a genetic predisposition for cancer. Data collection is conti- national registries as well as through follow-up. nuing. By having the genotypic and longitudinally collected health data for 5% of P01.05 the Estonian adult population it is possible to estimate the impact of the What do counselees know about (hereditary) breast cancer? - And genomic information on public health. We attempt to present what portion which role can an Interactive Personal Health Record (IPHR) have in of the population would benefit from a specific genomic test for an actio- this? nable disease by studying the population allele frequencies of the markers S. J. R. Joosten, E. van der Looij, L. Spruijt; associated with the disease and the impact of these markers in the context Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, of the predictive value. This analysis can be done for a large number of di- Nijmegen, Netherlands. seases. We present it for the type 2 diabetes, hypertension, lactose intole- rance, glaucoma, age related macular degeneration to demonstrate how a biobank with a comprehensive database can be applied to estimate the im- In order to enhance the realistic expectations and participation during gene- pact of genomic information. This approach is expected to be superior to the tic counseling we developed an IPHR. simulation studies. To study the effects of the IPHR we developed a study which will be conduc- ted in four phases. In the first phase of this study we studied how informed www.eshg.org www.eshcogu.noserlgees, referred for breast cancer (BC), are prior to their first consult at 44 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 the Cancer Genetic Clinic. year. From 2011 to 2013, 300 new CUGCs are planned to be established. A total of 49 counselees completed a questionnaire on topics about know- To ensure that all published documents reflect the state-of-the-art, all pu- ledge, risk perception (RP), Perceived Personal Control (PPC), and anxiety blished CUGCs are annually revised. for BC (Cancer Worry Scale). P01.08 The general risk for BC is overestimated by 63% of all counselees (mean Developing a genetics-genomics education framework for midwives: a 27.8%; SD 21.2), and the chance on having a BRCA1/2 mutation by 84% of consensus approach using individual/family stories the counselees with no mutation in the family (mean 44.2%; SD26.1). The E. T. Tonkin1, M. Kirk1, H. Skirton2; counselees also show a low baseline knowledge level (BKL)(46%). Analysis 1NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, University of Glamorgan, between different groups of counselees showed that the low educated coun- Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 2Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom. selees (LEC)have a poorer RP, and BKL than high educated counselees (HEC). 81% of the LEC overestimated the general risk for BC, and the LEC have a significant lower score on knowledge (38%) than HEC (62%)(p<0.001). Competence frameworks in genetics exist for UK health professionals and The counselees have no low scores on the PPC-questionnaire (mean score include a combined framework for nurses, midwives and health-visitors. As 10.5) and were not anxious (mean score 30). part of a review of this framework, the development of a set of competences Counselees, especially the low educated, have a poor RP and BKL prior to specifically for the midwifery profession was seen as essential. A national their first genetic consult. We expect that the implementation of the IPHR consensus meeting was held involving midwives in practice and manage- will have a positive effect on RP and BKL, which results in a more active role ment, educators, policy makers and lay representation (n=18). Electronic of the counselee. voting was used to capture opinions anonymously and stimulate discus- P01.06 sion. Group Genetic Counseling for Cardiomyopathy patients is well All but one attendee agreed that “good midwifery care is currently com- accepted promised by midwives’ level of genetic competence”. Individual/family and E. Otten1, E. Birnie1, A. V. Ranchor2, I. M. van Langen1; professional stories illustrating a range of experiences and conditions were 1Clinical Genetics section, Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, reviewed and the content mapped to the original framework. Attendees University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Health Psychology, looked for topics missing from the framework and considered whether any University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. of the existing statements should be re-focused. Eight themes [ongoing-care, advocacy, multi-professional team, listening, timeliness, client knowledge, broad knowledge and key indicators (of disease)] were identified and, fol- Background: Group Genetic Counseling (GGC) may have benefits for coun- lowing discussion, voted on. All themes were to be included within existing selees and counselors (more information, psychosocial support, increased statements. efficiency), although its use has not yet been reported in cardiogenetics. We Seven statements now set out the minimum level of competence that should therefore set up GGC sessions for cardiomyopathy index patients. be required of all midwives in the UK at the point of registration. With lear- Aim: To see whether the quality of care provided by GGC is acceptable to ning outcomes aligned to the stages of pre-registration training, and practice counselees. indicators, this framework will provide guidance to educators, practitioners Methods: GGC was offered in regional hospitals with few referrals of car- and managers. The importance of genomics within healthcare is explicit and diomyopathy patients to our academic center in the past years. Sessions anticipating that the implementation of new knowledge and technology will were led by two counselors: a clinical genetics expert and a group leader. impact the midwifery role, the team have endeavoured to ‘future-proof’ the Patients completed questionnaires before and after counseling, measuring framework. sociodemographics, Personal Perceived Control (PPC), State-Trait-Anxiety- P01.09 Inventory (STAI), Clinical Genetics Satisfaction Indicator, etc. Attitudes of health care professionals towards carrier screening for Results: 53 patients and 36 relatives attended a course of eight GGC sessions. Cystic Fibrosis. A review of the literature PPC scores (range 0-2) increased in 81% of patients, mean item score (SD): S. Janssens1, A. De Paepe1, P. Borry2; before 0.92 (0.54), after 1.29 (0.38). STAI scores (range 1-4) decreased in 1Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for Biomedical Ethics and Law, 51% of patients, mean item score (SD): before 1.89 (0.58), after 1.68 (0.49). Leuven, Belgium. Median score of the Clinical Genetics Satisfaction Indicator (range 1-5) was 4.93. Conclusion: This is the first report of GGC being used for cardiomyopathy Recently, commercial companies have started to offer preconceptional carri- patients. On average, personal perceived control increased and anxiety was er tests directly to consumers. This increasing commercial offer creates the lowered. Mean changes in PPC and STAI were comparable to reports for background which makes reflection necessary about the desirability to offer group and individual counseling in oncogenetics. Satisfaction scores were population carrier screening in the healthcare system. A positive attitude of high, patients reported their questions were answered during the sessions potential providers is vital to the success of a screening program. and they received no undesired information. Our study indicates GGC is well Therefore, a literature review of the attitudes of healthcare professionals, accepted. We will next investigate whether GGC is more efficient than indi- focused on the attitudes towards carrier screening for Cystic Fibrosis (CF), vidual counseling. was performed. P01.07 The databases Pubmed, Web of Science, as well as the interface Google Scho- Progress of the Clinical Utility Gene Card initiative lar, were searched for the period 1990-2011. Studies were selected if they A. Dierking, J. Schmidtke; were published in a peer reviewed journal in English and described the at- Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. titudes of potential providers toward carrier screening. Eleven studies were retrieved describing the attitudes toward carrier screening for CF. Studies reported attitudes toward the best time for screening, the best setting to of- As of January 2011, the Clinical Utility Gene Card (CUGC) project receives fer screening, the willingness to be involved in a screening program and the support by EuroGentest 2 and the European Society of Human Genetics. concerns about offering screening. Ten papers described a general attitude Based on this support the CUGC initiative can be continued, including the toward carrier screening. publication, in spring 2012, of the first set of guidelines having undergone We can conclude that health care providers are willing to be involved in a updating. carrier screening program, but there is need for appropriate education as CUGCs are disease-specific guidelines authored by international expert well as adequate support. The prospect of an increasing number of genetic groups. Based on the ACCE framework they are dealing with the risks and disorders for which screening becomes possible and the potential increa- benefits of the application of genetic tests in the clinical setting. Each do- sing demand for such screening in the future calls the need for further de- cument represents a balanced summary of the analytical and clinical vali- bate on the desirability of carrier screening, and relevant questions such as dity, the clinical utility and cost-benefit issues. CUGCs offer quick guidance the conditions screened, the providers involved, the information provision to all stakeholders, including clinicians, clinical geneticists, referrers, ser- and counseling. vice providers and payers. Each CUGC is peer-reviewed and published by P01.10 the European Journal of Human Genetics. CUGCs are also freely available on The views of CF patient’s parents on genetic testing the websites of EuroGentest, the European Society of Human Genetics and V. L. Izhevskaya1, L. Y. Ivanova2, E. A. Borzov1, I. V. Zhuravleva2, E. K. Ginter1; Orphanet. 1Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of The feedback from the scientific community and the CUGC download rates Sociology of Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. are promising: the European Journal of Human Genetics counted between 600 and 1,500 downloads, with an average above 1,000, per gene card and www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 45 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Mandatory newborn screening for CF is spent in Russia since 2006. To esti- netic disorders; to recognize when to refer a patient for genetic screening, mate patient’s parents opinion concerning genetic testing we have spent testing, and counseling; Attitude: to understand the potential for genetics to questioning 93 CF patient’s parents.Majority of parents (90 %) have learnt cRoensturlitbsute to the development of new approaches to prevention, diagnosis about hereditary character of their child disease from the pediatrician, only and treatment. 64 % of them have been referred to geneticist, and 49 % have been held DNA : 89 (45.6%) filled out questionnaires. When it came to Knowledge testing. However 90% respondents have consider, that they have understood of transmission, biology of the human genome, principals of population ge- the information about repeated genetic risk for CF. However only 51% of netics and Skills to perform a head/neck exam and when to refer, 54.2%, them could correctly specify the value of recurrence risk of CF, and only 37 39.7%, 82.4% and 69.1% disagreed respectively. Attitude, however, revealed % of them could correctly attribute a risk category. Majority of respondents tChoant c7lu1.s0i%on a:greed they understood the potential for genetics to contribute (82%) have consider that prenatal testing is very useful procedure and 65% to new approaches of disease. of them wanted to use it. Only 1.1 % of respondents have answered that they Although baseline knowledge and skills of the WVU SOD stu- didn’t want to terminate the CF foetus pregnancy. Acceptance of prenatal te- dents were lacking, the students recognized this new technology could po- sting was correlated with the age and educational level of woman, whether tentially contribute to new approaches in prevention, diagnosis and treat- or not she was referred for genetic counselling, and whether or not she has ment. received an explanation about repeated risk. P01.13 P01.11 Direct to consumer testing - a review of the available evidence Diagnostic and counselling dilemmas in newborn screening for cystic L. Goldsmith1, L. Jackson1, H. Skirton2; fibrosis 1Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 2Plymouth University, Taunton, United V. Krulišová1, A. Holubová1, M. Balaščaková1, V. Skalická2, T. Piskáčková1, J. Bartošová2, L. Kingdom. Fila3, V. Vávrová2, P. Dejmek4, M. Macek Jr.1, F. Votava4; 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University – 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Department of Pediatrics, As part of the EuroGentest2 project, we are developing European guidelines Charles University – 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Faculty Hospiatl Motol, Prague, Czech on direct to consumer testing for potential consumers and health professio- Republic, 3Department of Pulmonology, Charles University – 2nd Faculty of Medicine nals. We conducted a series of systematic reviews focussed on consumers and Faculty Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Department of Pediatrics, Charles (17 papers), health professionals (four papers) and current recommen- University – 3rd Faculty of Medicine and Faculty Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, Prague, Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. dations and position statements (11 documents) to inform this process. Findings indicate a low level of awareness of direct-to-consumer genomic testing in both users and some health professionals. Consumers appeared Introduction: Newborn screening (NBS) for cystic fibrosis (CF) has been motivated to purchase tests to obtain information to guide their own health implemented as a nationwide immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT)/DNA/IRT management while some wanted to avoid disclosure of genetic risk to health scheme in the Czech Republic since X/2009. DNA testing is associated with professionals. Potential users expressed concerns about privacy, reliability inherent drawbacks such as detection of infants with atypical mutations re- of genomic tests and the nature of results. Many consumers preferred to sulting in variable phenotypes. discuss the test with a health professional before and after testing, while Objectives: We evaluated a clinical status in individuals (from NBS and non- health professionals expressed concerns for the consumer such as misin- NBS group) carrying either R117H or D1152H allele in trans with another terpretation of results and increased anxiety due to perceived risks. In the CF-causing mutation and utilized these data for CF-NBS and genetic coun- review of policies, more potential harms than benefits were cited. An area selling. of concern was the overstatement of the actual predictive power or utility of Methods: The Czech CF registry and an “in house” clinical-genetic database the results. Strong recommendations were made about the need to involve were used. health professionals and to regulate test quality. We conclude that there is Results: Of 13 individuals with CF-causing mutations/R117H on a 7T back- public interest in direct-to-consumer genomic tests. However, while con- ground, 6 symptomatic adults (1 suffering from respiratory symptoms (RS), sumer autonomy may dictate freedom of choice in undergoing such tests, 1 from pancreatitis, 4 with azoospermia) and 1 child with RS were reported health services need to ensure that potential benefits are maximised and before implementation of CF-NBS. 1 adult with unknown clinical status was harms prevented. Further research into the impact of testing and the views identified due to cascade screening. 5 infants were identified in CF-NBS wi- of stakeholders is required to implement appropriate regulation, guidelines thout having CF symptoms. There has been no case with CF-causing mutati- and education. on/R117H on a 5T background yet. P01.14 Of 5 individuals with F508del/D1152H genotype, 2 children and 2 adults “It‘s our DNA, we deserve the right to test!” A qualitative analysis of suffer from RS and 1 adult from pancreatitis and azoospermia. These cases a petition for the right to access direct-to-consumer genetic testing were reported before implementation of CF-NBS and none from CF-NBS, so without the intermediate of a health care professional far. Y. Su1, I. C. Otte2, P. Borry3, H. C. Howard2; 1BGI, Beijing, China, 2University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 3KULeuven, Leuven, Conclusions: Although phenotype in individuals with CF-causing muta- Belgium. tion/R117H-7T genotype is usually mild, we follow consensus guidelines and monitor infants on a long-term basis. Albeit limited knowledge exists on phenotypes associated with D1152H, this mutation is considered to be As a relatively new model of genetic test provision, the offer of direct-to- CF-causing mutation and long-term follow up in a CF specialist is essential. consumer (DTC) genetic testing (GT) has fueled a number of scientific, ethi- Supported by CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022,MZ0FNM2005 cal and policy debates. Proponents of DTC GT claim that the benefits of such P01.12 services include, among others, increased access for consumers, increased Genetics and its Implications for Clinical Dental Practice and genomics education, and added support for consumer autonomy. A few stu- Education, Report of Panel 3 of the Macy Study: Are Dental Students dies have been published regarding the public’s view of these services but Prepared? none have specifically addressed the public’s desire for “unrestricted” ac- R. J. Crout1, G. T. Casto2; 1West Virginia University School of Dentistry, Morgantown, WV, United States, 2Indian cess to their genomic information. The goal of this study is to increase our River State College, Fort Pierce, FL, United States. understanding of the public’s views of accessing GT without the intermedi- ate of a health care professional. We have conducted an exploratory analysis Objective: of comments written by individuals who have signed a public online petition In the Report of Panel 3 of the Macy Study, funded by the NIH initiated by DIYgenomics.org to support “personal access to genetic infor- and the American Dental Education Association “Knowledge, Skills, and mation” (http://www.thepetitionsite.com/1/mydna/). Of the 522 individu- Attitudes Required for Oral Health Professionals to Care for Patients with als who have signed the petition to date, 240 individuals have also written Genetic Conditions” were outlined. The aim of this study is to investigate the comments; these were the focus of our content analysis. Preliminary results genetic knowledge, skills and attitudes of West Virginia University School of reveal that the main themes raised by the petitioners include: i) the notion DMeentthisotdrsy’s (WVU SOD) students utilizing this report as the source for the that each individual “owns” their DNA and ii) that individuals have the right specific questions. to access information about their DNA; iii) the notion that regulation of DTC : All dental students (195) were invited to participate by answe- GT falls outside of the realm of the government’s control; and iv) the belief ring 16, primarily Likert style questions (1= Strongly Agree to 5 =Strongly that involving health care professionals as intermediates provides no added Disagree). Questions included Knowledge: of genetic transmission; molecu- value for consumers. These results contribute to understanding the public’s lar biology of the human genome; principals of population genetics; Skills: view of DTC GT services and lay the foundation for further research. www.eshg.org to perform a head/neck exam with special attention to signs of mwajowr wge.-eshg.org46 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P01.15 Genomics and the prevention of antisocial behavior: A comparative ethical analysis The main reasons for testing were 1) testing all children in a family at the D. Horstkötter1,2, R. Berghmans1,2, G. de Wert1,2; same moment (4:13); 2) a possibility to prepare a child for future surveil- 1Maastricht University, CAPHRI, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Centre for Society and lance (3:13); 3) certainty about the future (3:13). According to the parents Genomics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. nCoonncel uosfi otnhe children showed changes of mental and physical health after testing. . Genetic testing for FAP at a young age is desired by some parents Current research in the genomics (and neurobiology) of antisocial behavior and is experienced as causing no harm. However, the effects of early genetic (ASB) trigger great hopes and expectation concerning the development of testing on children and their own experience should be evaluated in future new forms of early detection of children at risk and of targeted early preven- studies. tion. Children as young as preschoolers, toddlers and babies are considered a.mouravieva@erasmusmc.nl the most important target-group of such efforts. While scientific research P01.18 progresses continuously, it is of great importance to pro-actively consider Factors affecting the utilization of genetic counseling services among the social and ethical implications of potential applications. This presentati- Arab Israeli women on reflects on this development from an ethical point of view. R. A. Sharkia1, S. Allon-Shalev2; It investigates whether and when it may be justified to expect that early 1Beit-Berl College, Beit-Berl, Israel, 2Genetic Institute,Emek Medical Center, Afula, Israel. detection and prevention is mainly for the good of those identified and in- tervened upon, what are relevant caveats and dangers and how both are to be balanced. Issues that will be discussed encompass increased support, High rate of consanguineous marriages, underutilization of prenatal dia- empowerment and emancipation as well as dangers of stigmatization and gnosis services and low rate of pregnancy termination of an affected fetus labeling, surveillance and repression, privacy concerns, and possible negati- are the main risk factors leading to high prevalence of infant morbidity and ve impacts on children’s development and (self)perception. mortality in the Israeli Arab community. The purpose of genetic counseling However, unlike much other ELSI research, this presentation wants to avoid services is to allow the pregnant couple having informed decisions about any kind of gene-exceptionalism. That is, it will argue that from an ethical their pregnancy, by discussion of various diagnostic tests and preventive point of view it is of secondary interest whether future prevention practices measures, expected to decrease congenital morbidity rate. The aim of the are informed by either new genomical or traditional social/psychological study was to identify the factors affecting the utilization of genetic counse- findings. Instead, the ethical evaluation should focus on the characteristics, ling services in the „Triangle region“ of North Israel, among Arab pregnant specificities and conditions of use of any measure applied. To this end, the women who were referred by their doctors for genetic counseling. In mul- proposed ethical analysis of early prevention practices will be conducted in tivariate analysis, identified factors affecting women‘s utilization of genetic a comparative way. counseling service were level of income, access to service, abortions in the P01.16 past, attitudes towards genetic counseling and the level of religiosity. Easier Poster for ESHG: Comprehensive embryo screening. Results from two access of genetic counseling services, abortions in the past and woman‘s focus group studies positive attitudes toward genetic counseling were proved to be significant K. Hens, W. J. Dondorp, G. M. W. R. de Wert; predictors to utilizing genetic counseling services. On other hand, low le- Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. vel income and the more religious families were the main factors associated with none utilizing genetic counseling services. We recommend developing and strengthening wide-scale community-based genetic counseling service Genetic testing of embryos is done in two contexts. preimplantation gene- for the Arab population, preferably operated by professionals who are Arab tic diagnosis (PGD) is done when one or both of the prospective parents speakers, with the background support and encouragement of religious lea- are known carriers of a genetic disease, be it a Mendelian condition or a ders. chromosomal translocation. Preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) is the P01.19 screening of embryos from infertile or subfertile couples undergoing IVF to Genetic counseling role in historicist middle east cultures select the embryo which is most likely to lead to a successful pregnancy. A. Haghighatfard; The technique of PGS is not standard offered to couples, because it is still Islamic Azad university-science and reasearch branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. uncertain whether it really leads to improving implantation rates. However, with the introduction of microarray technology, and single cell whole geno- me sequencing, embryos could also be screened for Mendelian disorders, Genetic counseling is a process of communication and education that con- susceptibility genes and potentially non-medical traits. Hence, the aim of sidering expression and transference of genetic disorders. Achieving to this PGS may shift from choosing the best embryo for transfer in order to ensure communication is depended to knowledge about culture and traditions of a successful pregnancy, to choosing the embryo most likely to develop into society and psychological situation of consultant. This article is an inspec- a healthy child, to even selecting the ‘best child’. In order to understand the tion about social reactions against genetic counseling as a new branch of ethical questions arising from the introduction of comprehensive screening medical science in historic and historicist Middle East societies and their techniques in clinical practice, we have conducted two focus group studies. own cultures. One study, which was performed in October 2011, explored the opinions of Public belief to “paternal big family” and “God willing destiny” are two major top scientists in the field of embryo testing regarding the technical possibi- challenges of genetic counseling in Middle East. In case of paternal big fami- lities and associated ethical questions. The other study, performed in March ly Middle East people especially Arab tribes of Persian Gulf region believe 2012, was conducted with gynecologists and genetic counselors and explo- that familial marriage especially children of two brothers makes stable and red opinions about possible dilemmas and their solutions in IVF practice. honorable family. For example familial marriage rate in Saudi Arabia and This poster presents the major findings and conclusions of the two studies. Kuwait are 12 times more than Europe. In the other hand belief to “God wil- P01.17 ling destiny“ that is based on some Quran sentences made kind of religious Predictive genetic testing for Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP) historicism. In this ideology called “Taghdir”, no person can predict about in young children illness or healthy of newborn child because it is part of God desigens and A. A. Kattentidt, M. den Heijer, I. van Kessel, A. Wagner; theology. Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Now Middle East geneticists are facing with public distrust about genetic Objective counseling; also increasing rate of recessive genetic disorders patients and decreasing the gene pool diversity. In the absence of state programs for pu- . Predictive genetic testing for familial adenomatous polyposis blic education, “perceived personal control” has a completely different de- (FAP) is routinely offered to children at-risk from the age of 10 years on- finition from European societies. It seems so that spiritual influence of pio- wards. Because of absence of medical benefits, potential psychosocial harm neer Muslim clerics and their fatwa (religious decree) could help to improve and respect to the child’s autonomy, predictive testing for FAP at younger people‘s trust to genetic counseling. aPgaeti iesn rtes launctda nmte. tAhso ad sresult, there is a lack of experience in predictive testing P01.20 of cAhPilCdren at the young age. A comparison study of the practices of genetic counsellors between . We evaluated 13 children from 8 families, tested for France and Canada an mutation at the age younger then 10 years (the male to female ratio C. Cordier1,2,3, E. Le Boette4,2, M. Edmont2,5, H. Sobol6, M. Voelckel2,7; wReassu l1t.s6:1; mean age was 6,4 years (2-9 years); 7 APC-carriers and 6 non- 1Dept of Oncology and Haematology, Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 2French carriers). All parents were re-contacted and structural interviewed. Association of Genetic Counsellors, Marseille, France, 3Centre Paul Strauss, Strasbourg, . None of the contacted parents regretted the timing of genetic te- sting. Ten children were tested at the same moment with an oldewr swiblwing.e. shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 47 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 France, 4Dept of medical genetic, Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 5Dept of Methods genetic, University hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6Institut Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France, 7Dept of medical genetic, Timone‘s hospital, Marseille, France. Three types of focus groups were held (n=44): mono-disciplinary groups of GPs and midwives, respectively and multidisciplinary groups composed Genetic counsellors are Health Professionals with specialized training and of a diverse set of experts. Recurrent themes were identified after verbatim experience in the areas of clinical genetics and counselling. They did work transcription and content analysis. as members of a multi-disciplinary healthcare team that provides genetic Consecutively, a Delphi consensus procedure was conducted. A purposively services. In France, the profession of genetic counsellor is relatively recent selected heterogeneous panel (n=18) of experts participated. Educational (2005). This profession has been created due to the increasing number of nReeesdusl trsegarding genetics in general practice in terms of knowledge, skills genetic consultations but also face to the decrease of medical professional and attitudes, were rated and ranked in a Top 10. in this field. About Canada, the profession has been created, for the same reason, since 1985 by a genetic counsellor graduated in the United-states Four themes emerged from the focus group study: (1) genetics knowledge, and by the auspices of geneticists who exercise their profession in Canada. (2) family history, (3) ethical dilemmas and psychosocial effects in relation Members of different groups (French and Canadian) have received an elec- to genetics and (4) insight into the organisation and role of clinical genetics tronic survey based on their background, the role and the practice of the services. These themes reflected a shift in the role of genetics in primary profession of genetic counsellors in their own country. The questionnaire care with implications for education. was sent to the Association of Genetic Counsellors which transmitted it to The entire Delphi study panel completed all three rounds. Kendall’s coeffici- all the members. Data were collected during the year 2011. We are looking ent of concordance indicated significant agreement regarding the top ten to see if there are major differences in the practice of exercising the profes- gCeonnectliuc seidouncational needs (P<0.001). “Recognising signals potentially indi- sion, but also in the education and in the collaboration established between cative of a hereditary component of a disease” was rated highest. genetic counsellors and medical geneticist. P01.21 Results help to develop effective genetics educational strategies (including Genetic education in Brno, Mendel 190 input for case-based education). Enhancement of primary care providers’ R. Gaillyová1,2, I. Valášková1,2, P. Kuglík1,3, R. Veselská3, J. Relichová3, O. Dostál4, M. Macek competences in genetic patient care could actually become possible. jr.5; P01.23 1University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Developing best practice guidelines for provision of clinical genetic Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Experimental Biology, , service - Examples of testing for monogenic subtypes Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Mendel Museum, Masaryk T. Rigter1, L. Henneman1, U. Kristoffersson2, M. C. Cornel1; University, Brno, Czech Republic, 5Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles 1VU University Medical Center, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Community University and 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Lund University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund, Sweden. Introduction The Department of Medical Genetics at the University Hospital Brno (www. fnbrno.cz) has besides its core activities (comprising genetic counseling, : In 2010 the Council of Europe described that “The develop- molecular diagnostics, pre-graduate teaching of medical genetics at the ment of genetics in health care services has a major impact on the organisa- Masaryk and Mendel Universities in Brno) devoted itself to the popularizati- tion of health care, leading to shifting from curative to preventive services, on of medical genetics to the lay public(http://www.mendelmuseum.muni. from in-patients to out-patients treatment, from specialised genetic services cz/cz/lekarska-genetika/). to genetics as an integral part of general health services.” The responsibili- Since 2009 successful series of public lectures, conducted in association ties of expert geneticists, both in laboratory and clinic, will change. Because with our partner institutions, on various subjects of medical genetics are oMf etthhiso dshsifting, new guidance on genetic service provision is urgently nee- held at the premises of the St Augustine‘s Abbey - Mendel Museum, i.e. at ded in many countries. the place where in between 1843 -1884 Gregor Johann Mendel spent most : In Workpackage 8 within Eurogentest2 an expert meeting, que- of his professional live. stionnaire and online discussion forum were used to develop recommenda- Lecture series ,,Medical Genetics for the Public“ has been linked to the Gen- tions which describe the optimal practice and interaction between different Ethics project lectures within the Mendel‘s Refectory that are carried out parties involved, including: since 2006 (http://www.mendel-museum.com/eng/7lectures/lectures- • (genetic) patients and their families, the users of the services; ref6.htm). Within these series we have covered various domains of genetic • medical professionals such as primary care workers and other non-genetic counseling, diagnostic methods in medical genetics, significance of genetic sRpeescuialtlsists; diseases and our collaboration with patient organizations. This year‘s se- • genetic professionals from clinical and laboratory background. ries is dedicated to rare diseases and development of the CZ National Plan of this ongoing project include a “Temple of genetic services” depic- ec.europa.eu/health/rare_diseases/national_plans/detailed/index_en.htm. ting interactions between different stakeholders in genetic services. Also ex- Since 2010, this lecture cycle also takes place under the auspices of the periences with testing for monogenic subtypes have been discussed as best Czech Parliament (MP- J. Husák) and the Olga Havel Foundation (www.vdv. practices in an expert meeting. By describing practices of service provision cz; Ms. M. Cerná). from oncogenetics, cardiogenetics and MODY we hope to show that different In 2t0h12 the Mendel Museum and the Masaryk University will celebrate the fIimelpdlsi caastki ofnors :d ifferent approaches and have their own opportunities and 190 Johann Gregor Mendel´s birthday anniversary (July 20) through an threats when it comes to good genetic service provision. event known as “Mendel 190”, within which planned lecture series will be The tools that will be developed within this project could dedicated to his tribute. Associated events will be organized in Prague and at help health care stakeholders in different countries to improve genetic ser- Mendel´s birthplace (www.vrazne.cz). Supported by CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 vices for their citizens. to MM. P01.24 P01.22 An overview of the genetic testing offer in Europe: trends and forecast Creating an agenda for effective genetic educational strategies: Needs M. Jovanovic-Lassalle1, E. Dequeker2, B. Belloir1, A. Mondelaers2, M. Morris2, J. Cassiman2, assessment and prioritization in primary care S. Aymé1, the Orphanet consortium; E. J. F. Houwink1,2, L. Henneman1, S. J. van Luijk3, M. Westerneng1, C. van der Vleuten4, G. 1Orphanet - INSERM US14, Paris, France, 2Eurogentest, Leuven, Belgium. Dinant2, M. C. Cornel1; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Section Community Genetics, EMGO Institute for Health and Care Rese, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2School for Public Health and Primary Care, Department of General Practice, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands, Genetic testing services are now offered internationally, through both the 3Institute for Medical Education, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, public and private sectors. Physicians prescribing these tests and biologists 4Department of Educational Development and Research, Maastricht University, receiving samples need to know which tests are available, where they are Maastricht, Netherlands. performed and whether identified laboratories meet quality standards. To Purpose fulfill this need, www.orpha.net was launched fifteen years ago to set up a database of medical laboratories in the field of rare diseases. Data was coll- ected in 1 country in 1997, 15 in 2003, 26 in 2006 and 36 in 2011, with General practitioners (GPs) are increasingly expected to deliver genetics resources from the EC DG Public Health. In collaboration with the EuroGen- services in daily patient care. Education in primary care genetics is conside- test Network of Excellence, information on quality management has been red suboptimal and in urgent need of revision and innovation. added over the past six years. Information on genetic testing in Orphanet Aims of our study: exploring the role of genetics in primary care and the can be searched by disease name or by gene as well as by laboratory or by need for genetics education and prioritization of GPs’ genetics education. professional. The website can be freely queried and the complete dataset www.eshg.org www.eshg.org48 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P01.27 One disorder is not like another - the importance of taking a disorder- downloaded from www.orphadata.org. In September 2011, 1,056 laborato- centred approach to introducing high-throughput sequencing into the ries offering tests for 1,811 genes were registered. The test offer differed clinic greatly from one large country to another: from 1,449 genes (Germany) to S. Leonard, A. Soulier, S. Julia, A. Cambon-Thomsen; 541 genes (UK). In medium and small-sized countries, it ranged from 1 to UMR 1027, Inserm, Université de Toulouse - Université Paul Sabatier -Toulouse III, 355 genes. A comparison with the information available at Genetests for Epidémiologie et analyses en santé publique : risques, maladies chroniques et handicaps, the USA highlights the need for a worldwide coordination of cross-border Toulouse, France. healthcare, as 584 genes are only available for testing in the EU member states and not in the USA. The capacity to access genetic testing on an inter- national scale, however, both increases the availability of testing and raises Now that next generation sequencing has become a reality, it is time to ex- significant policy issues. amine how this technology will change the way medicine is practiced in P01.25 the clinic. A particular concern is that the rapid penetration of systematic Alignment and Assessment Problems in the Undergraduate Genetics technologies into genetic medical departments blurs established frontiers Curriculum: A View from the United States between research and clinics. The benefits and risks of using the technology M. Dougherty1,2, T. McElhinny3, B. Bowling4, J. Libarkin5; as part of the diagnostic toolkit for each disorder need to be considered in 1American Society of Human Genetics, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Linda Crnic relation to the characteristics of the patients themselves as well as the so- Institute for Down Syndrome, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, CO, cietal context in which the tests will be offered. It is vital to consider each United States, 3Department of Geological Sciences and Department of Zoology, Michigan patient group in their own right - the different motivations for testing and State University, East Lansing, MI, United States, 4Department of Biological Sciences, expectations for the process, and the meaning of results in terms of scree- Northern Kentucky University, Highland Heights, KY, United States, 5Department of ning, management, prevention and knowledge. During the course of the Eu- Geological Sciences and Center for Integrative Studies in General Science, Michigan State ropean Techgene project, which aimed to develop clinically applicable high University, East Lansing, MI, United States. throughput sequencing tests, a series of 7 semi-structured interviews was performed with clinicians and researchers dealing with one of four clinical areas: mental retardation, breast cancer, sensory disorders and neurodege- ‘Backward design’ is a model of curriculum development that relies on nerative disorders. Through these interviews areas of particular and specific identifying learning outcomes and defining what constitutes evidence of concern for each disorder, were highlighted. Proposals were then developed learning before planning the teaching. Although backward design is wide- to allow an approach to the introduction of NGS technologies into the clinic ly considered best practice, it is often overlooked by university faculty and in a manner which is tailored to the categories of disorder, to ensure that may help explain the inconsistency between faculty teaching behavior and we are properly prepared to meet the challenges of the new technology and the genetics concepts they claim are most important. This paper will review harness its potential for the greatest benefit for patients. the state of genetics instruction in the United States from the perspective of backward design, with particular attention to the goals and assessments P01.28 that inform curricular practice. An analysis of syllabi and leading textbooks A proposal: a family-driven social network model for clinical indicates that genetics instruction focuses most strongly on the structure data sharing and research in intellectual deficiencies and other and function of DNA and Mendelian genetics. At the same time, a survey neurodevelopmental disorders with specific genetic causes J. Mandel1,2,3, J. S. Beckmann4,5; of faculty indicates that other concepts, such as the application of genetics 1IGBMC, Illkirch, CU Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratoire de diagnostic génétique CHU to society or the environment, are viewed as equally or even more impor- Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Collège de France, Paris, France, 4Departement tant than certain foundational concepts. This disconnect suggests a need de Genetique Medicale Université de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Service de for more explicit goal setting prior to curriculum development. Preliminary Génétique Médicale CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland. analysis of existing assessments, specifically concept inventories developed for higher education, indicates that assessments are poorly aligned with faculty goals for instruction and need to be modified into more valid and CGH-array has led to a rapidly growing number of genetic diagnoses of intel- reliable measures of student conceptions. lectual deficiency (ID) associated or not to autism. High-throughput sequen- P01.26 cing will further accelerate the detection of mutations in ID-related genes. Considerations in the review of ethical guidelines pertaining to This will be useful for genetic counseling (when penetrance is known to be human genome research in Japan high). But the extraordinary genetic heterogeneity of ID will render extre- Z. Yamagata; mely difficult the determination, for each specific cause (recurrent CNV or University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan. mutated gene), of genotype-phenotype correlations and natural history, the estimation of penetrance and expressivity variation, and the organization of clinical trials, except for the most frequent causes (see recent work on Ethical guidelines for human genome research in Japan were formulated in 16p11.2 del or dup). Symptomatic treatments will be proposed, with little 2001, by three government ministries: the Ministry of Education, Culture, chance to evaluate whether their efficacy depends on the specific genetic Sports, Science and Technology; the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare; cause. It will be difficult to motivate busy MDs to establish and maintain and the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. the wide-ranging databases required for such studies. We propose genetic The present (2012) review has taken into consideration advances in geno- ID databases organized in a social network model, whereby clinical infor- me research such as the implementation of studies involving large amounts mation would be entered mostly by the patient’s family. 23andMe or Pati- of genomic information, diversification of the study design such as genome entsLikeMe have recently shown that such data can lead to useful research. cohort studies, and the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies. Contacts between families affected by the same genetic cause could be esta- The main aspects reviewed are the use of existing samples, method of collec- blished in an initially anonymous way as for Relative finder in 23andMe, tion and distribution of resources, the drafting of informed consent so that creating gene- or CNV-specific micro-networks to which interested profes- it will also be applicable to future genome research, and the disclosure of sionals could be associated, akin to disease-specific patients associations. genetic information. Anonymized data could be accessible to professionals for specific projects With respect to the use of existing samples, institutions that do not possess a approved by a comity composed of health or research professionals and of correspondence table can handle samples anonymized in a linkable fashion family representatives. Concerned families could then decide whether to in the same way that they handle those anonymized in a non-linkable fa- partipate in such projects. shion. In terms of collection and sale of samples, requirements and admi- nistrative procedures have been revised to enable the more effective use of P01.29 existing samples and other resources. Regarding the disclosure of genetic The legal landscape of stratified medicine information, the revisions adhere to the basic principle of disclosure with A. E. Hall1, H. Burton1, A. Pokorska-Bocci1, J. Hitchcock1,2; respect to the Personal Information Protection Law, but some disclosure- 1PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Lawford Davies Denoon, London, United related issues remain unresolved. Kingdom. New regulations have also been established for safety management measu- res related to the handling of genetic information, compliance rules for the outsourcing of genetic research, and education and training for researchers This paper examines the extent to which there is a ‘lack of fit’ between the and members of ethical review boards. existing framework of European legislation (and the devolved national le- gislation which rests thereon), and emerging applications of genomic know- ledge in stratified health care. For example, the advent of stratified medicines has enabled the co-development of therapeutic products and ‘companion www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 49 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P01.32 Ethical implications on disseminating complex genetic information to diagnostics’ which are used together to prospectively target individuals who relatives at risk through genetic factors, are at risk of disease. This has the potential to in- M. Nyman1,2; crease drug efficacy and safety whilst ensuring greater cost effectiveness. 1Department of Philosophy and History of Ideas, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark, Current legal and regulatory frameworks do not provide a clear route for 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, developing these linked applications and the safeguards, protections and Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark. incentives for developing packages of diagnosis, treatment and care some- times lack coherence. Other emerging technologies, such as the diagnostic algorithms that sup- Background: Genetic counselling focuses on providing patients with quali- port the process of stratification, may not be within the remit of existing fied professional assistance in understanding and responding to their inhe- legislative frameworks at all, or may be protected by non-patent intellectual rited risk. Genetic information is both individual but at the same time highly property rights, such as copyright. In other respects, the regulatory frame- familial. Decisions regarding how and by whom relatives at risk for the dis- work is predicated upon outdated assumptions, such that products and de- order should be informed are included in the counselling. vices can always be easily differentiated, or that the processes in bringing Aim: To examine how aspects of respect for autonomy are addressed by ge- a product, device or test to market will take place entirely within Europe, netic counsellors when patients have relatives deemed to be at risk. when increasingly this is a global exercise. Method: Data from empirical observations of genetic counselling, insight in In combination, these factors have the potential to negatively impact upon medical charts, and discussion with health care personnel regarding infor- clinical translation and national healthcare economics. This paper offers an mation s trategies for relatives was gathered and analysed through a struc- analysis of the existing regulatory gaps and inconsistencies within Europe in tured, philosophical-theoretical approach. how the context of stratified medicine, and suggests some proposals for reform. Results:When relatives are informed by a tested patient, the outcome of P01.30 their experience and perception of the information is influenced by Development of the Hellenic Neuromuscular Disorders (HNDR) they are informed. Registry Counselees are affected by their own diagnosis and may be challenged in N. Vogiatzakis, K. Kekou, K. Kosma, E. Kanavakis; disseminating complex genetic information correctly to relatives. Dept. of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, Greece., Athens, Greece. Problems particularly arise when lack of communication in families is pre- sent and when relatives are in conflict. Health care professionals are reluctant to contact relatives at risk directly, to Over the recent years, a growing number of patient databases are being respect their right to not know. created to accommodate patient data for various diseases. Registries acting Discussion:Existing procedures for informing relatives at risk may be inade- as a hub for information and social awareness, can prove very beneficial to quate. Complexities of genetic information, combined with tested patients’ the patients registered and society in general, especially since they help di- emotional reactions, reduce relatives’ access to relevant information, neces- sease organizations with government lobbying. They also provide valuable sary for making autonomous and rational choices about their future. information to scientists, helping them to perform research on a bigger sca- A more proactive role for health care professionals seem warranted, towards le, having access to accumulated medical and genetic data. For neuromus- increasing accurate information and knowledge of options, enabling patient cular disorders in particular, patient registries have played a significant role and relatives to make informed, autonomous decisions. facilitating clinical trials designed to test for new therapeutic strategies and P01.33 thus have promoted research regarding those types of diseases. This project The challenge of education in birth defects: managementof orofacial aims to create and coordinate the first national neuromuscular disorders re- clefts gistry in Greece. The main concept behind the HNDR is to organize a reliable L. A. Magna, M. C. S. Basso, L. G. Amstalden-Mendes, V. L. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; electronic database, containing clinical and personal data of all patients in State University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. order to provide important data for the study and research of neuromus- cular disorders in Greece. Ultimately, the goal is to connect the Hellenic re- gistry to the global network of patient registries that is universally being Cleft lip and/or palate (CL+/-P) has an incidence of 1/650-1000 live births. developed ensuring that patients who register in the HNDR can be retrieved It is often accompanied by comorbidities, needing multi professional assess- if their profile fits to a clinical trial. ment. It was investigated the knowledge on this matter in a random samp- P01.31 le of 292 students attending the last degree of Medicine, Nursery, Speech Incidental findings in genetic testing: current laboratory reporting Therapy and Odontology courses in a Brazilian University. It was used a pre procedures validated auto applicable questionnaire on information of both anatomy L. M. Jackson, L. Goldsmith, H. Skirton; and physiology of the motor oral apparatus, either of carriers and non-car- Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom. riers of CL+/-P, existing feeding resources, indication of particular feeding methods, and skills to give genetics orientations. The questionnaire form applied to the respondents was retrieved immediately it was filled in with Incidental findings from genetic testing are defined as those that have po- his/her answers. The results were treated by descriptive and analytical sta- tential health or reproductive importance and are discovered in the course tistical methods, adopting the 5% significant level. As a whole, there were of testing but beyond the aims of the initial test. Since genetic testing was no significant differences among the students from the different courses. initiated there has been a potential for incidental findings, but numbers are Student’s auto evaluation achieved 58.6% of them referring sufficient no- likely to increase with the emergence of array and sequencing techniques. A tion on anatomic alterations of CL+/-P, as well as 51.0% on functional ones. genetic incidental finding is unlikely to require immediate treatment; most It was observed the lack of systematization on the knowledge of the various often it will affect the relative risk of a patient developing a disease. This topics herein investigated, leading 96.2% of the respondents to not consider raises questions as to which genetic incidental findings should be returned them capable, in their particular health field, to deal with affected individu- to the patient, at what time and by whom. These issues are passionately de- als. Also, 48.3% referred knowledge on CL+/-P etiology, though only 8.6% bated in the ethical literature, however there is a paucity of empirical data and 9.9% were able to give genetics orientation for families of carriers of on which to base recommendations. The aim of this study was to determine CL+/-P and CP, respectively. A specific multi professional discipline, which current practice and ascertain the views of many different stakeholders as fits each particular course, would be an alternative to increase academic ca- to future management of incidental findings. In the first phase a systematic pacitation of health professionals. review indicated a dearth of empirical evidence on dealing with incidental P01.34 findings. In Phase 2 we surveyed staff of national health service genetics The psychological impact of pancreatic cancer surveillance in high- laboratories in the United Kingdom to determine how incidental findings risk individuals were reported. Our initial findings indicate a lack of consensus; no univer- F. Harinck1, T. Nagtegaal2, I. Kluijt2, C. M. Aalfs3, E. M. Smets4, J. Poley1, A. Wagner1, G. sally accepted set of guidelines were used and decisions were made on a Sidharta2, J. E. van Hooft3, H. M. van Dullemen5, R. Sijmons5, P. Fockens3, M. J. Bruno1, E. M. A. Bleiker2; case-by-case basis. This individualised approach may interfere with equity 1University Medical Center Rotterdam - ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2The of patient care. Findings will be used to shape the qualitative collection pha- Netherlands Cancer Institute - Antoni van Leeuwenhoek Hospital, Amsterdam, se of the study and generate guidelines concerning the reporting of genetic Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Amsterdam - Academic Medical Center, incidental findings. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Amsterdam- Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org50 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Background : The success of pancreatic cancer (PC) surveillance depends management are crucial in rare diseases field and web-based solution can to a large extent on the commitment of participants to adhere to the repea- be effective. tMede tfhoolldosw-up investigations. We aimed to investigate possible changes in P02. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology distress in high-risk individuals participating in a PC surveillance program. : Questionnaires were sent before and after PC-screening tests to high-risk individuals participating in a multicenter nationwide endoscopic P02.001 ultrasonography (EUS)-MRI-based PC-surveillance study. Distress was as- Seven items flowchart (7-iF) for the clinical indication to GCK genetic Rseesssueldt swith the Cancer Worry Scale, and the Hospital Anxiety and Depres- test sion scale. M. Pinelli1, F. Acquaviva1, N. Tinto2,3, E. Caredda4, D. Pirozzi2,3, S. Cocozza1, L. Sacchetti2,3, : Forty-seven individuals (87%) completed both pre- and post-sur- F. Prisco4, D. Iafusco4; veillance questionnaires (38% male, mean age= 52 yr., range 20-74 yrs.); 44 1DBPCM, Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy, 2DBBM, Università degli Studi participated in the PC screening and 3 declined. The expected burden of EUS di Napoli, Naples, Italy, 3CEINGE Advanced Biotechnology, S.c.a.r.l., Naples, Italy, was significantly higher than the actual experienced burden (p<.001). The 4Department of Pediatrics, Seconda Università degli Studi di Napoli, Naples, Italy. number of participants with clinical levels of anxiety and/ or depression was low (n=5) and remained stable over time. The possibility of developing cancer themselves (29% at both time points) and the chance that relatives We propose a simple diagnostic flowchart aiming to easily identify, among a would develop cancer (19% and 21%, respectively) were the most frequent- diabetic pediatric population, patients with the highest probability to carry lCyo rnecplourstieodn worries. The 3 decliners indicated that they were not fearful of a pathological mutation in the GCK gene. Heterozygous individuals for these the MRI or EUS, and had low levels of distress. mutations are affected by a monogenic diabetes, characterized by a mode- : The results of this prospective study indicate that: (1) the ex- rate increase in fasting glucose and HbA1c levels with, usually, no micro- or pected burden of EUS is higher than the actual experienced burden; and that macro-vascular complications and no need of pharmacological interventi- (2) mean levels of distress are not significantly influenced by participating on. The molecular diagnosis provides a perceptible impact on both patient’s in the PC screening program. This finding is of great importance for this quality of life (no need of treatment) and health care costs (less frequent high-risk group that might benefit from participation in a life-long repeated follow up visits, no stick for glyceamic controls or drugs to provide). PC-surveillance-program. The proposed 7-item flowchart (7-iF) takes into account the most recent P01.35 criteria for the etiological diagnosis of diabetes, including the autoimmune Focusing on patient needs and preferences may improve genetic pancreatic antibodies, the HbA1c and the familiarity. We validated this ap- counseling for colorectal cancer proach in one of the largest Italian pediatric diabetes outiclinic cohort. S. Salemink1, N. Dekker1,2, M. Kets1, E. van der Looij1, W. van Zelst-Stams1, N. Of 921 patients, 21 (2.3 %) received positive indication to GCK testing ac- Hoogerbrugge1,3; cording to the 7-iF. Seventeen underwent to genetic testing and 13 (76 %) 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Scientific carried a pathological mutations 5 were novel mutations. The flowchart had Institute for Quality of Healthcare, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Medical a specificity of 99% and a sensibility of 92%, basing on the estimated fre- Oncology, Nijmegen, Netherlands. quency of GCK-MODY2 in Italian diabetic patients. The proposed flowchart successfully identified diabetic patients with high risk to carry a pathological GCK mutation. The flowchart is extremely han- During genetic counseling, different items which counselors consider im- dily and can be implemented in any clinical setting. The flowchart is imple- portant are discussed. However, little is known about the needs and prefe- mented in a webtool http://www.geneticamedica.unina.it/diabsun/ rences of counselees. Therefore, counselees with a personal and/or family P02.002 history of colorectal cancer (CRC), who were referred for genetic counselincga Mutiple congenital anomalies in a male fetus with a 5.6 MB deletion of regarding CRC, received a slightly adjusted version of the QUOTE-GENE 10q25.1-q25.3 questionnaire prior to their first visit at the Hereditary Cancer Clinic. Re- H. Jafarieh, R. Jafarshad, M. Kariminejad, R. Kariminejad, A. Kariminejad; sponse rate was 60% (48/80 counselees). Participants rated the importance Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of 45 items discussed during counseling. Participants considered the items regarding information about their familial CRC risk (100%) and preventive options (98%) important or very important. Fewer participants considered We report on a 34-week-old male fetus with multiple congenital anomalies the items of general information on genetics as important. No major diffe- including hydrocephaly, hypoplastic olfactory bulbs, agenesis of diaphragm, rences were seen between participants in relation to individual characteri- coarctation of aorta, lung hypoplasia, hydronephrosis, hypospadias, short stics. Our data suggest that focusing on familial CRC risk and surveillance lower limbs, webbing of knees and deep gap between first and second toes. options may lead to better satisfaction with genetic counseling. The facial features were dysmorphic with: prominent forehead, hypertelo- P01.37 rism, low set and posterior rotated ear, dysplastic ears small mandible and E-learning in Romania - a chance for improving information about broad based nose. Radiological findings were: markedly thin ribs, flat ace- rare diseases tabular roof of pelvic, no talus or calcaneus ossification, hypoplastic pubic M. Gafencu1, G. Doros1, M. Puiu1, D. Dan2; ossification, asymmetric femoral size and narrow thorax. Parents are first 1Univ. of Medicine and Pharmacy V. Babes Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2RoNaRD, ANBRARo, Zalau, Romania. cousins with history of two spontaneous abortions. Cytogenetic analysis, performed by array-CGH revealed a 5.6 Mb region deletion of chromosome 10q25.1-q25.3. Chromosomal studies of both parents were normal confir- more than 95% of patients ming the abnormality to be of de novo origin. dInot rnoodtu hctaivoen a- Bcoamsepd loente n deiwag sncoiesnisti foicr ddaot an outp r teoc e6i%ve o afd teoqtaul aEtUe cpaorpeu alantid- To the best of our knowledge this phenotype with major anomalies which otrne aartme aefnfetc. ted by rare diseases. In Romania, had lead to intrauterine fetal demise (IUFD) has not been reported before Aim - with this deletion. The unique presentation of our case notably, agenesis of All statistics showed that patients are open to use electronic re- diaphragm is a very rare finding and not reported previously in 10q deletion sources in a same way that specialists do. This paper focuse on web cases. It should be taken into consideration that most cases with agenesis of solution that helps rare disease patients to learn about their disease and diaphragm had normal chromosomes based on karytoype, and it is possible doctors to know how can they get assistance. Material - Our e-university that minor chromosomal abnormalities were missed with routine cytoge- www.edubolirare.ro want to pbrloevniddeed in lfeoarrmnaintigo n on rare diseases and care netic techniques. of patients suffering from these diseases and for all the interested doctors. The training method used is - a modern concept imple- P02.003 mented in the University of Tromso - Norway by the combination of classical Delineation of a novel, recognizable microdeletion syndrome on face to face with modern Internet-based learning. Results - The project plat- 13q12.3 in three unrelated patients with intellectual disability D. Bartholdi1,2, A. Stray-Pedersen3, S. Azzarello-Burri1, M. Kibaek4, M. Kirchhoff5, B. form offers a wide range of short courses and informations: Legal regulati- Oneda1, O. Rødningen3, A. Rauch1, S. Kjaergaard5; ons on patients rights, E-Learning courses, and scientific information about 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zürich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, diseases. This virtual platform give quality training programs, presented in 2University Children‘s Hospital, UKBB, Basel, Switzerland, 3Department of Medical -anM aotstrt aocft irvaer, ee ndciosueraasgeisn gn coot nctuinrureedn ttleya bcheinnegf iptr ofrgormes ss, pae lcifiefilco ntgre laetamrneinngt,, Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 4Department of Pediatrics, Odense skills needed for diagnosis antdh meraen oangelym eexnits to mf reaarseu driesse ases. Conclusions University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 5Department of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital of Copenhagen, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. and for other several hundred allowing patients to improve quality of life. Access to information about diagnosis and disease www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 51 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Proximal deletions of the long arm of chromosome 13 have been repor- type correlation of 20pter monosomy is still a challenge. ted only rarely. Here we present three unrelated patients with intellectual We report a 9-year-old girl with subtelomeric 20p microdeletion. She was disability carrying novel heterozygous interstitial deletions encompassing referred to the genetic counseling because of learning difficulties. During 13q12.3. The proximal and distal breakpoints are similar and the deletions the further evaluation: short stature, hypoplastic fingernails, submucous span about 1.4 Mb, comprising at least 11 RefSeq genes. cleft palate with cleft uvula, flat foot, tendency to infections and large fon- The patients present with moderate intellectual disability, secondary micro- tanelle after birth were noted. No specific facial dysmorphic features were cephaly and short stature as the leading symptoms. In addition, they experi- observed. The diagnosis of deletion of 20p13 was established by MLPA, and enced pronounced feeding difficulties in early infancy and later on eczema/ delineated by arrayCGH, as 46,XX.arr20p13(1-1150000)x1 dn with the size atopic dermatitis. They display strikingly similar facial features such as full- of 1.15 Mb. ness of the periorbital region, a flat malar region, a characteristic nose with Our report is the second, giving the detailed molecular and clinical charac- a bulbous nasal tip and hypoplastic alae nasi, a smooth philtrum and thin teristics of pure, smallest deletion 20p13. In this presentation we have deli- upper lip. neated the phenotype of this aberration, providing possible candidate genes Heterozygous deletions of 13q12.3 overlapping about 1 Mb of the distal and giving data supporting genotype-phenotype correlation. part of the deletions in our patients hBav3eG AbLeTeLn described in healthy carri- The study was partially supported by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Sci- er parents of patients with Peters-Plus syndrome (an autosomal recessive ence and Higher Education (Contract No 0605/B/P01/2009/37). disorder caused by inactivKatAiToNn AoLf 1thLe INC00426 gene)H. MWGeB t1herefore propo- P02.006 se that the critical region of the K13AqT1N2A.L31 microLdIeNlCe0ti0o4n2 s6yndrome contains The clinical overlap between 22q11.2 deletion syndrome and CHARGE only three genes, namely, , and . So far, little is syndrome: they are more alike than often anticipated known about the function of the and genes in humans. N. Janssen1, L. H. Hoefsloot2, S. C. Saitta3,4, D. M. McDonald-McGinn3, E. H. Zackai3,4, HMGB1, however, is an evolutionarily conserved chromatin-associated pro- D. A. Driscoll3,4, R. Derks5, W. S. Kerstjens-Frederikse1, B. S. Emanuel3,4, C. M. A. van tein which has been implicated in various disease processes. Ravenswaaij-Arts1; 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Radboud University In summary, we suggest that microdeletion 13q12.3 represents a clinically Nijmegen Medical Centre, Groningen, Netherlands, 3The Children’s Hospital of recognizable condition characterized by intellectual disability, microcepha- Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Perelman School of Medicine at the ly, short stature, a disposition for atopy and characteristic facial features. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Radboud University The critical region encompasses about 300kb with 3 genes assigned to it. Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. P02.004 Proximal and distal 15q25.2 microdeletions - genotype-phenotype delineation and confirmation of two neurodevelopmental CHARGE syndrome is a highly variable congenital malformation syndrome susceptibility loci that shows considerable clinical overlap with other syndromes. The most S. C. Doelken1, K. Seeger2, P. Hundsdörfer2, W. Weber-Ferro3, E. Klopocki1,4, L. Graul- striking co-occurrence of clinical features is seen with the 22q11.2 deletion Neumann1; syndrome, including congenital heart defects, cleft palate, ear abnormali- 1Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, ties, hearing loss, growth deficiency, developmental delay, renal abnormali- Germany, 2Klinik für Pädiatrie mit Schwerpunkt Onkologie/Hämatologie, Otto-Heubner ties, hypocalcaemia and immune deficiency. Centrum für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Klinikum Neukölln, Berlin, Germany, 4Max-Planck We further explored the clinical similarities between the two syndromes Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. by studying patients clinically diagnosed with CHARGE syndCrHoDm7e, but who were shown to carry a 22q11.2 deletion (n=6). Subsequently we analysed the 22q11.2 deletion features in our large patient cohort of mutation Cooper and coworkers have recently reported distal 15q25.2 microdeletions carriers (n=834). In 29 patients (3.5%) typicCaHl D272q11.2 deletion features, as a potential novel CNV locus for neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric like hypocalcaemia, thymus anomalies and severe immunological problems, disorders with variable outcome. Previously, more proximal microdeletions weTrBe Xm1entioned. This promptCeHdD u7s to study in 20 patients clinically of 15q25.2 have been described by Wat et al. as a susceptibility locus for diagnosed as 22q11.2 deletion syndrome but without deletion or mutation cognitive deficits, congenital diaphragmatic hernia, and Diamond-Blackfan of . We found truncating mutations in five of these patients. anaemia (DBA). Our results demonstrate that the clinical diagnosis of these tCwHoD 7h ighly va- We present two new 15q25.2 deletion patients and compare them to the 18 riable syndromes is challenging. They should therefore be included in a patients reported in the literature. Our patient 1 with a deletion overlapping commToBnX d1ifferential diagnosis and we strongly recommend analysis both, the distal and proximal 15q25.2 deletions, presented with mild lear- in patients with a 22q11.2 deletCiHonD p7 henotype without a deletion or mutati- ning deficits, portal vein thrombosis, iron deficiency anaemia, short stature, on of . Conversely, a genome-wide array for 22q11.2 deletions in clini- and Noonan syndrome aspect. DBA is thought to be caused by reduced copy calC CHHDA7R GE pTaBtiXe1nts without a mutation is recommended. The results numbers of RPS17, which is normally present in four copies (two on each also show that there is strong clinical evidence that the molecular pathways allele) in the proximal 15q25.2 region. We demonstrate a 50% reduction in of and are linked. copy number of RPS17 in our patient 1 by quantitative real-time PCR. Loss P02.007 of two copies of RPS17 might be responsible for at least some of our patients The co-occurrence of abnormal movement and 22q11.2 Deletion features. As the clinical spectrum of DBA includes individuals without DBA Syndrome: more than a coincidence? who have other DBA-associated congenital anomalies, patients with proxi- A. Jacquette1, K. NGuyen2, S. Whalen1, T. Lenglet3, B. Degos3, D. Grabli3, A. Eusebio4, J. mal 15q25.2 deletions should be monitored for development of anaemia Azoulay4, N. Philip2, D. Héron1, M. Vidailhet3, P. Charles1; 1Département de génétique, centre de référence des déficiences intellectuelles, Hôpital and DBA-associated malignancies. de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Département de génétique médicale, Hôpital de La Patient 2 with the more distal 15q25.2 deletion presented with severe psy- Timone, Marseille, France, 3Département de Neurologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, chomotor retardation, microcephaly and epileptiform signs. He carries two France, 4Service de Neurologie et pathologie du mouvement, Hôpital de La Timone, additional microdeletions, the 1q21.1 recurrent microdeletion and a hemi- Marseille, France. zygous deletion on the X-chromosome encompassing OPHN1. We contribute to the genotype-phenotype delineation for 15q25.2 microde- letions and further expand the characterization of these two novel microde- We report five patients who present co-occurrence of abnormal movement letion syndromes. and 22q11 Deletion Syndrome (22q11 DS). P02.005 Three of them (mean aged 35 years) were addressed to neurologic depart- Microdeletion in chromosome band 20p13 associated with moderate ment for extra pyramidal features leading to diagnosis of early onset Par- developmental delay and minimal facial dysmorphism kinson Disease (PD) with good responsiveness to L-Dopa therapy and dopa- M. Krajewska-Walasek, A. Jezela-Stanek, M. Kucharczyk, M. Pelc, A. Gutkowska; minergic denervation on DAT Scan. The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. The fourth patient presented myoclonic tremor. Facial appearance and learning difficulties led to diagnosis of 22q11 DS. For the fifth patient, 22q11 Deletion Syndrome was established for several years The subtelomere screening studies in the patients presenting with mental and myoclonic tremor appeared during evolution. disability and developmental delay has let to only few reports of cases har- To date, three cases of extra pyramidal features without relation with neuro- boring pure subtelomeric terminal deletions in the 20p13 region. Clinical leptic therapy, one Tourette syndrome and one myoclonic tremor have been findings reported for these cases suggest that the phenotypic consequences reported in 22q11 DS. of this chromosomal imbalance are very variable, in many cases however, Is it more than a coincidence? the clinical data are rather limited. Hence, to establish the genotype-pheno- Pathophysiology and signaling pathways involved are unknown. Among the www.eshg.org www.eshg.org52 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 commonly deleted region, which spans over 40 genes, COMT (catechol-O- which contribute to obesity and behavioral problems presented in the aunt. methyltransferase) polymorphism could represent a good candidate based Despite of controversial results related to candidate regions for 3p-deletion upon its pharmacological involvement in L-Dopa pathway (sequencing is in syndrome, this is the biggest deleted region among reported few familial progress). cases, encompassing all candidate genes responsible for ID with apparent Parkinson disease or other abnormal movement may be occasional features clinical consequence of 3p-deletion. Supported by FP7-CHERISH-223692, of 22q11 DS. DFG-LI 820/38-1. Geneticists as well as neurologists and physicians caring patients with P02.010 22q11 DS should be aware of this possible association. A familial case of developmental delay/intellectual disability, variable Genetic testing may be relevant in cases of early onset PD and preexisting psychiatric disorders and optic atrophy due to a novel 1.5 Mb deletion learning and behavioral problems and/or facial dysmorphism. on 3q29 Pathogenesis and etiology remain to be explained. E. Biamino1, E. F. Belligni1, C. Molinatto1, E. Di Gregorio2, A. Calcia2, A. M. Fea3, P. P02.008 Cannizzo3, A. Brusco2, G. B. Ferrero1, M. Silengo1; 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 2Department of Genetics, De novo microdeletion 2p14-p15 in a boy with developmental delay, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Turin, and Medical Genetics Unit, San Giovanni facial dysmorphisms and sensorineural hearing loss with dysplasia of Battista Hospital, Turin, Italy, 3Istituto di Fisiopatologia Clinica, Clinica Oculistica, the inner ear University of Turin, Turin, Italy. B. Krabichler1, D. Karall2, F. Rottensteiner3, A. Hirst-Stadlmann4, J. Zschocke1, C. Fauth1; 1Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Clinical Department of Pediatrics IV, Division of Neuropediatrics and Inherited Metabolic Diseases, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Clinical Department We report on a family segregating a 3q29 deletion centromeric to the classic of Pediatrics, Marienklinik and Private Pediatric Practice, Bozen, Italy, 4Clinical “Chromosome 3q29 deletion syndrome” (OMIM #609424). The proband, a Department of Hearing, Speech and Voice Disorders, Innsbruck Medical University, 4 yr. old girl, presented with severe global developmental delay and autism. Innsbruck, Austria. Family history was positive for psychiatric/ophthalmologic disorders. Array-CGH analysis (Agilent, 44K) revealed a 1.5 Mb deletion on chromoso- me 3q29 (194,529,547-195,888,674 bp, hg18). The deletion, confirmed by a During the past years interstitial microdeletions of various segments of the real-time PCR assay, was inherited from the mother, affected by mild depres- short arm of chromosome 2 were recognized as a cause of mental retarda- sion, and was also present in the maternal uncle (anxiety/depression), two tion. However, most of these deletions have no recurrent breakpoints which maternal aunts (schizophrenia), the maternal grandmother (microcephaly, hampers precise genotype phenotype correlation. In this situation thorough depression and visual deficit), and her brother (schizoaffective disorder). clinical characterization of patients with overlapping deletions and compre- The deletion encompasses 14 genes, including the OPA1 gene, who- hensive database search for gene centred information may give insight into se haploinsufficiency causes autosomal dominant optic atrophy type 1 the contribution of single genes to the clinical phenotype. (OMIM#165500). Complete ophthalmologic evaluation performed in three Recently, Wohlleber et al. (2011) described two patients with small inter- deleted subjects of the family (mother, uncle, grandmother) confirmed the stitial microdeletions 2p14-15 who presented with mild mental retardation presence of a variable degree of optic atrophy. Among the deleted genes, and dysmorphisms. We report on a third patient with a de novo 2p14-15 HES1, which encodes for a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, is es- microdeletion. The boy presented at the age of 22 months with muscular sential for neurogenesis. This gene has been suggested to have a role in the hypotonia, developmental delay, absent speech development and facial dys- determination of autistic spectrum disorders and could be related with the morphisms (high forehead, sparse eyebrows, short palpebral fissures, hy- psychiatric diseases observed in the family. pertelorism, thin vermillion of the upper lip, deep set ears). Measurements In conclusion, we detected a novel 3q29 deletion associated with optic atro- (height, length, OFC) were in the lower normal range. He had bilateral deaf- phy and variable neuropsychiatric manifestations, ranging from mild de- ness with dysplasia of the semicircular canals and was supplied with coch- pression to schizophrenia. lear implants. Molecular karyotyping (HumanCytoSNP-12 array, Illumina, P02.011 Ca) revealed a de novo 2.9 Mb mMiEcIrSo1deletion 2p14-p15 encompassing 12 EMX2 haploinsufficiency and ambiguous genitalia in a retarded boy genes. This deletion overlaps with those previously described, but, in addi- J. Piard1, B. Mignot2, F. Arbez-Gindre3, D. Aubert4, Y. Morel5, V. Roze6, P. Jonveaux7, L. Van tion, affects the homeobox gene . The latter has recently been shown Maldergem1; to be strongly expressed in the semicircular canals of the developing inner 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, Besancon, France, 2Dept of Pediatrics, Besancon, France, ear in chicken and therefore is a good candidate for dysplasia of the inner 3Dept of Pathology, Besancon, France, 4Dept of Pediatric Surgery, Besancon, France, 5Molecular Endocrinology & Rare Diseases, Lyon, France, 6Dept GBHBDR, Besancon, ear in our patient. This case contributes to further delineate the 2p14-p15 France, 7Dept of Cytogenetics & Molecular Biology, Nancy, France. microdeletion phenotype. P02.009 Molecular cytogenetic characterization of a family with 3p deletion We report a 28 month-old boy, born to unrelated parents of French ancestry, and 3p duplication cases presenting at birth with 46, XY disorder of sex differentiation (DSD): po- D. T. Babikyan1, H. Mkrtchyan1, S. Midyan1, M. Nõukas2, K. Männik2, A. Hovhannesyan1, A. Gasparyan1, T. Liehr3, A. Kurg2, T. F. Sarkisian1; sterior hypospadias, micropenis (1.2 cm) bifid scrotum, atrophic testes(one 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Institute of undescended), a left hypoplastic ectopic kidney on ultrasound, and no use- Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Jena University Hospital ful mullerian duct residue on genitoendoscopy. Hormonal data supported , Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. a diagnosis of testicular dysgenesis: low antimullerian hormone at daSyF 21,, uWnTd1e,t Seocxta9b le b aMsAalM tLeDst1osterone at minipuberty, slightly stimulated bSyR HYCG D(1a,3x15 nmol/L), and normal gonadotrophins. No significant alteration of 3p deletion syndrome is a rare disorder involving developmental delay and sequences was found, nor rearrangement of or and dysmorphic physical features. Most cases are de novo. Here we report . As the decision was taken to rear him as a male, surgery was limited to a family with 3p-deletion syndrome and a rare 3p-duplication case. Two Onlay uretroplasty. Testis biopsy showed atrophic testicular tissue with wi- brothers with intellectual disability (ID) presented fully similar features of dely spaced seminiferous tubules and rare spermatogoniae. When referred 3p-deletion syndrome, including developmental delay, muscular hypoto- at 28m for developmental delay, no language,d ber unxoivsom and clumsiness were nia, epichantal folds, flat and long philtrum, micrognathia, dolychocepha- observed, alongside with a sEmMaXll2 headB (AOGF3C -3SD). Array-CGH E(AMgXil2ent 180 ly, microcephaly, and hypertelorism. From family histories of non-consan- K) then indicated a 3.85 Mb 10q25.3-q26.12 microdeletion encom- guineous parents, a paternal aunt showed ID, delayed speech, and obesity. passing 28 genes, including and . We postulate that haplo- Karyotype analyses showed the deletion of 3p not only in affected sibs but insufficiency is responsible for the masculinization defect observed in our also in their healthy father. Characterization of the rearrangement extent patient, similar to what has been described in the mouse by Chung in 1998 was performed by InfiniumHD whole-genome genotyping assay (Huma- and Miller in 2009. There are only a few descriptions of 10q25.3 microde- nOmniExpress BeadChip arrays). The analysis of brothers showed identical lEeMtiXo2n and DSD in medical literature, all but one before the array-CGH era. 3p25.3 terminal hemizygous deletion of 10.9 MB. The deletion encompasses Our patient represents thus the second case. We recommend considering 49 RefSeq genes, including proposed 1,5 Mb minimal terminal deletion with haploinsufficiency in case of 46, XY DSD with testicular dysgenesis left causative CRBN and CNTN4 genes, and two others proposed as major candi- without a definite molecular diagnosis. dates for ID: CHL1 mapped at 3p26.3 distally and SRGAP3 mapped at 3p25.3 proximally to minimal terminal region. FISH mapping using whole chromo- some paint, MCB and subtelomere probes detected balanced translocation 46,XY,t(3;8)(p25.3;p23.3) in father and a partial 3p25.3 terminal trisomy in the paternal aunt. The duplicated region contains GHRL and PPARwG wgewne.se shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 53 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.012 5q31 Microdeletions: Definition of a Critical Region and Analysis of LRRTM2, a Candidate Gene for Intellectual Disability red in third trimester. Molecular karyotyping made using array CGH me- E. Wohlleber1, A. M. Zink1, W. Kleffmann1, J. A. Lee1,2, J. Senderek3, E. Mangold1, U. Moog4, thod with CytoSure Syndrome Plus(v2)4x44K microchips and scanned with G. A. Rappold5, H. Engels1; Agilent Microarray Scanner. Obtained data were analyzed using Cytosure 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Analysis Software,v.2.0.8. and revealed a heterozygous 7.183 Mb deletion of Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of Cell Biology, Eidgenössische 8(q11.1-q11.23) region containing PRKDC, RB1CC1, SNAI2 genes. For veri- Technische Hochschule (ETH) Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 4Institute of Human Genetics, fication of the array results, FISH analysis was performed with Bluegnome Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Department of Human Molecular region spesific probes and confirmed the deletion in the region. We conclu- Genetics, Ruprecht-Karls-University, Heidelberg, Germany. ded that 8q11.1-q11.23 region may contain candidate genes for the related clinical findings. P02.017 Microdeletions in 5q31 have been reported in only few patients to date. Recognizing adult Aarskog-Scott syndrome carrier females based Apart from intellectual disability / developmental delay (ID/DD) of varying on craniofacial measurements using interaction variables and a degrees, which is common to all reported patients, the clinical spectrum is surrogate covariance matrix very wide and includes short stature, failure dtoe nthorviov e, congenital heart de- L. Wolf1,2, L. Basel-Vanagaite3,4,5, L. Karlinsky1, M. Shohat3,4,5, J. Allanson6; fects, encephalopathies and dysmorphic features. 1FDNA Ltd., Herzlyia, Israel, 2The Blavatnik School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv Here, we report a male patient with a 0.9-Mb deletion of 5q31.2, the University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Schneider Children‘s Medical Center of Israel and Rabin smallest microdeletion of 5q31 reported thus far. His clinical presentation Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 4Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5Felsenstein includes mild DD, borderline short stature, postnatal microcephaly and mild Medical Research Center, Petah Tikva, Israel, 6Dept. Genetics, Children’s Hospital Eastern dysmorphic signs including microretrognathia. In conjunction with data of Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada. seven reported overlapping microdeletions, analysis of our patient enables the tentative delineation of a phenotype map for 5q31 deletions. In contrast to the mild phenotype of small microdeletions affecting 5q31.2 only, carri- Aarskog-Scott syndrome is an X-linked recessive syndrome caused by FDG1 ers of larger microdeletions affecting subbands 5q31.1 and / or 5q31.3 are mutations and characterized by dysmorphism, shawl scrotum, short stature more severely affected with congenital malformations, growth anomalies and brachydactyly. We demonstrate that carrier females are distinguishable and severe encephalopathies. LRRTM2 based on craniofacial measurements. We evaluated 20 adult females, out of A 0.24-Mb smallest region of overlap (SRO) in 5q31.2 is delineated which which 16 are obligatory carriers, 1 is a molecularly verified carrier, and 3 are contains only two genes. We propose as the most promising candi- verified non-carriers. First, we compute the likelihood to be sampled from d.ate gene for ID/DD in this SRO dueL tRoR iTtsM e2xpression pattern, its function as the matched control population for each of 21 craniofacial measurements. a key regulator of excitatory development and its interaction with NLeRuRrTexMin2 The combined likelihood scores demonstrate a moderate recognition rate 1 However, mutational analysis of in 330 patients with ID/DD re- with Area Under ROC Curve (auc) of 0.74. In order to improve the recogni- vealed no sequence alterations, excluding intragenic mutations in tion rate, we consider the interaction variables that correspond to all pairs as a frequent cause of ID/DD in patients without microdeletions. of measurements. Since the individual measurements of the control popu- P02.013 lation became unavailable once the statistics of each measurement were A second case of 7p22.1 microduplication: clinical and molecular computed, we cannot directly estimate the distribution of the interaction characterization variables. Instead, we employ a second data set of 21 adult female Navajos, E. Preikšaitienė1, J. Kasnauskiene1, Z. Ciuladaite1, B. Tumiene1, P. Patsalis2, V. Kučinskas1; for which five cranio-facial measurements that are common with the ones 1Dept. Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of the Aarskog-Scott syndrome carrier dataset are available per-person. Em- of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, ploying only these five measurements and correcting for the correlations Cyprus. among the derived interaction variables, we are able to obtain an improved recognition rate (auc of 0.78). This is significantly higher than the recogniti- on rate obtained from these five measurements without considering the in- The use of high-resolution microarray technology for investigation of pati- teraction variables (auc of 0.65). Therefore, our results highlight the utility ents with intellectual disability and/or congenital anomalies provided the of interaction variables in evaluation of facial features and support the usage possibility to identify new microdeletion/ microduplication syndromes and of surrogate correlation matrices when such data are unavailable. discover the dosage sensitive genes, which are implicated in the manifesta- P02.018 tion of various genetic conditions. Microduplication of the 7p22.1 region, Factors of mortality and morbidity in congenital abdominal defects 1.7 Mb in size, has very recently been reported, representing tdhee nsomvaollest V. L. David1, E. Tuluc2, C. M. Popoiu3, M. Puiu3, E. S. Boia3; interstitional 7p duplication, associated with specific facial features and 1Emergency Children’s Hospital „Louis Turcanu“, Timisoara, Romania, 2Emergency speech delay. We report on a new case of even smaller 7p22.1 mi- Children’s Hospital „Sf. Maria“, Iasi, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy croduplication, 1Mb in size in position 5337072:6316915 (NCBI build 36), „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania. detected in a 14.5 years of age patient with mild intellectual disability and similar facial dysmorphism, including macrocephaly, ocular hypertelorism, low set ears and other features. To our knowledge, this is the second report Congenital abdominal wall defects are one of the most common malforma- of 7p22.1 microduplication, characterized by array CGH, however more than tions. The purpose of this study is to assess the main factors that may in- 60 cases of 7p duplications detected by routine karyotyping and differing in fluence the outcomes of the treatment of omphalocelle and laparoschizisul. their size and position have been r eported to date. Many of them share deve- Between 1999 and 2010, 96 patients (53 boys and 43 girls) were admitted lopmental delay, typical craniofacial and skeletal abnormalities as common in the Pediatric Surgery Departments of two of the major pediatric hospitals clinical features. We suggest that7p22.1 might be a critical region, repre- in Romania. There were 62 with laparoschizis and 34 with omphalocelle. senting a novel clinically recognizable microduplication syndromACeT cBa used Primary closure of the abdominal defect was possible in 49 cases of laparo- by overexpression of dosage sensitive genes within this chromosomal alte- schizis (79%) and 21 cases of omphalocelle (60%). Complications occurred ration. There are 15 RefSeq genes included in this duplication. gene in 57 patients with infectious one being the most prevalent. Overall morta- is a strong candidate gene for the disturbance of craniofacial development. lity rate was 62,5 %, 69% for laparoschizis and 50% for omphalocelle. In Further cases with similar duplications will contribute to the delineation of table 1 and 2 are summarized the main prognostic factors assessed by us. a potential new microduplication syndrome of 7p22.1. Conclusions: The main predictors for complications are: low APGAR score, P02.014 masculine gender, incongruence between abdominal cavity and the hernia- Phenotypic Evaluation of 8q11.1-q11.23 Deletion In a Mental ted bowel, postoperative anemia, thrombocytopenia and renal insufficiency Retardation Patient during postoperative course. The main predictors for an unfavorable outco- E. Gumuslu1, N. Cine1, D. Sunnetci1, B. Kara2, R. Akkoyunlu1, S. Eren1, H. Savli1; me are: low birth weight, low APGAR score, masculine gender, incongruence 1Kocaeli University Medical Genetics Department, Kocaeli, Turkey, 2Kocaeli University between abdominal cavity and the herniated bowel, associated malformati- Department of Pediatrics, Kocaeli, Turkey. ons, postoperative anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal insufficiency, pulmona- ry infections and sepsis during the postoperative course We report on a 17 years old male patient with mental retardation, speaking disability and dysmorphic features. He has hyperextansibility, deep set eyes, upslunting palpebral fissures, prominent dysplastic ears, short philtrum, prognatism, narrow and highly arched palate, broad thumb, short and thick hand fingers and macrotestis. Family members of the patient was evaluated www.eshg.org genetically, and we found that his mother has 3 spontaneus abortwus wocwcu.-eshg.org54 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Mann-Whitney U Wilcoxon W Z p with two affected children, a 1.5-year-old girl (index case) and a 9-year-old Sex 894,000 1674,000 -1,884 0,050 boy (whom we did not examine personally). Both children had typical pre- Gestational age 813,500 2088,500 -,554 0,579 sentation: uncomplicated pregnancy aond delivery, normal condition in first Birth weight 878,000 2418,000 -1,306 0,192 weeks of life, unexplainable fever >38C, leukocytosis and severe motor and APGAR 444,500 1572,500 -2,578 0,010 mental delay with variable neurological signs since 1-1.5 months, stabili- Prenatal diagnostic 1032,000 1812,000 -1,175 0,240 zation and partial improvement with time, multiple petrificates and white Natural birth/ C section 1089,000 2742,000 -,234 0,815 matter lesions on CT/MRI. Along with intrafamilial likeness few differences Presentation 1110,000 1890,000 -,029 0,977 Maternal age 683,500 1673,500 -,745 0,456 in MRI and clinical signs were seen. There were no characteristic skin chil- Heredo-colateral 73,000 128,000 -,590 0,555 bains. The boy’s previous diagnosis was ‘cerebral palsy duTeR EtoX 1congenital Alcohol/ cigarettes 99,500 144,500 -,223 0,823 CMV infection’, and risk for the second child was mistakenly considered Type of the defect 814,500 2467,500 -2,675 0,007 low. AGS was first recognized in the girl. Homozygosity for mutation Size of the defect 778,500 1306,500 -,358 0,720 c.342G>A (p.Arg114His) was detected. The mutation is most common in Eu- Herniated organs 1056,000 1836,000 -,478 0,632 ropean populations and is supposed to have common origin due to founder Chromosomal aberrations 1075,500 2728,500 -,561 0,575 effect [Crow et al, 2006]. Evidently, ours is the first AGS Russian case which Cardiac malformations 981,000 1761,000 -1,411 0,158 shows its underestimation in practice. AGS should be considered in ‘CNS Intestinal atresia 1105,500 2758,500 -,078 0,938 Scheletale malformations 1069,500 1849,500 -,547 0,584 congenital infection’ with negative virusological tests. Renal malformations 1093,500 2746,500 -,388 0,698 P02.020 Malformations overall 883,500 2536,500 -1,786 0,717 A novel heterozygous ALX4 gene mutation in a familial case Surgical intervention 1090,500 1870,500 -,374 0,709 presenting parietal foramina and a mild frontonasal dysplasia Age at operation 264,000 792,000 -1,058 0,290 phenotype Surgical procedure 794,000 1497,000 -1,941 0,052 D. R. Bertola1, M. G. Rodrigues2, C. R. D. C. Quaio1, C. A. Kim1, M. Passos-Bueno2; Reinterventions 818,500 1521,500 -1,500 0,134 1Instituto da Criança - HC/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Instituto de Biociências - Concomitant operations 908,000 2183,000 -,216 0,829 Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. Anemia 846,000 1626,000 -2,299 0,021 Thrombocytopenia 850,500 1630,500 -2,299 0,022 ALX4 Renal insufficiency 855,000 1635,000 -2,588 0,010 Hidro-electrolitic disturbances 922,500 1702,500 -1,641 0,101 encodes a transcriptional regulator involved in cell-type differentiati- Positive cultures 880,500 1660,500 -2,080 0,038 on and deAvLeXlo4pment during embryogenesis, playing an important role in the processes of cranial development. We will illustrate the clinical heterogenei- Mann-Whitney U Wilcoxon W Z p ty of the -related craniofacial malformations by describinAg LtXh4e first fa- Sex 846,000 1512,000 -2,056 0,040 milial case segregating a heterozygous mutation and with an intermediate Gestational age 660,000 2145,000 -1,631 0,103 p(AhLeXn4otype between isolated parietal foramina and the severe -related Birth weight 586,000 2297,000 -3,404 0,001 frontonasal dysplasia with alopecia and genital abnormality phenotype APGAR 307,000 1633,000 -3,718 0,000 -related FNDAG). Prenatal diagnostic 1062,000 1728,000 -,270 0,787 The proband, the second child of non-consanguineous parents, has had nor- Natural birth/ C section 1038,000 1704,000 -,444 0,657 mal cognitive development and his craniofacial features included hypertelo- Presentation 1074,000 2904,000 -,118 0,906 rism, telecanthus, epicanthus, broad nasal bridge, notch at the tip of his long Maternal age 555,500 1731,500 -1,936 0,053 Heredo-colateral 56,000 92,000 -1,421 0,155 nose and fronto-parietal alopecia. These features strongly resembled his Alcohol/ cigarettes 56,000 462,000 ,000 1,000 mother. He also presented with bilateral cryptorchidism and broad thumbs. Type of the defect 876,000 2706,000 -1,864 0,062 Cranial and limbs X-rays disclosed onlAyL pXa4rietal foramina in both the patient Size of the defect 760,000 2245,000 -,224 0,822 and his mother. Herniated organs 873,000 1539,000 -1,810 0,070 The coding region sequencing of the gene disclosed a novel heterozy- Chromosomal aberrations 1080,000 2910,000 ,000 1,000 gous mutation on the proband and his mother: p.Asp326fs (c.1080-1089_ Chromosomal aberrations 882,000 1548,000 -2,171 0,030 delGACCCGGTGCinsCTAAGATCTCAACAGAGATGGCAACT; cDNA reference: Cardiac malformations 1056,000 2886,000 -,317 0,751 NM_021926.3; protein reference: NP_068745.2). This mutation was consi- Intestinal atresia 912,000 1578,000 -2,219 0,026 Scheletale malformations 1056,000 2886,000 -,525 0,600 dered causative of the phenotype based on the facts that it is a frameshift Renal malformations 966,000 1632,000 -1,709 0,087 mutAatLiXo4n with generation of a stop-codon and it segregates only in the affec- Malformations overall 860,000 2690,000 -1,727 0,050 ted individuals within this family.We have, then, eAxLpXa4nded the phenotype of Surgical intervention 972,000 1638,000 -1,949 0,051 the -related craniofacial anomalies by describing a patient harboring Age at operation 178,000 958,000 -1,603 0,109 a heterozygous loss-of-function mutation in the gene AthLXat4 presents a Surgical procedure 705,500 1371,500 -2,786 0,005 mild frontonasal dysplasia associated with parietal foramina. This illustrates Reinterventions 883,500 2368,500 -,649 0,517 the broad phenotypic spectrum associated to mutations in gene, ran- Concomitant operations 853,500 2284,500 -,612 0,540 ging from isolated parietal foramina to a severe frontonasal involvement. Postoperative bowel occlusion 986,000 2526,000 -,045 0,964 Anemia 978,000 2808,000 -,896 0,370 P02.021 Thrombocytopenia 828,000 1494,000 -2,251 0,024 A homozygous novel WDR72 mutation in two siblings with Renal insufficiency 810,000 1476,000 -2,764 0,006 amelogenesis imperfecta and short stature - coincidence or expansion Hidro-electrolitic disturbances 1020,000 1686,000 -,528 0,597 of the clinical spectrum? Positive cultures 900,000 1566,000 -1,644 0,100 A. Kuechler1, E. Prott1, B. Schweiger2, J. Hentschel3, I. Kurth3, A. Schuster4, D. Wieczorek1, Blood transfusion 1008,000 1674,000 -,631 0,528 H. Luedecke1; Fever 972,000 1638,000 -1,018 0,309 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany, 2Institut Enterocolitis 966,000 1632,000 -1,709 0,087 für Diagnostische und Interventionelle Radiologie und Neuroradiologie, Pneumonia 540,000 1206,000 -4,825 0,000 Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany, 3Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Sepsis 642,000 1308,000 -3,848 0,000 Jena, Germany, 4Endokrinologikum Ruhr, Bochum-Wattenscheid, Germany. Wound infections 1074,000 2904,000 -,118 0,906 Overall complications 630,000 1296,000 -4,003 0,000 P02.019 Amelogenesis imperfecta (AI) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous Aicardi-Goutières syndrome type 1 in a Russian family group of inherited defects of enamel formation. In isolated AI (no additio- G. E. Rudenskaya1, E. Y. Zakharova1, E. S. Ilyina2; nal segregating phenotype), mutations in at least 6 genes are known so far, 1Medical Genetics Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian State Pediatrics Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation. causing dominant, recessive or X-linked AI and allowing the identification of the molecular etiology in ~40% of affected families. We report on two siblings (11 year-old female and 7 year-old male), born to consanguineous Aicardi-Goutières syndrome (AGS) is a rare early-onset hereditary encepha- Turkish parents, with mild proportionate short stature, normal OFC, mild lopathy with some features of congenitaTlR vEiXru1s infection which often leads developmental delay and amelogenesis imperfecta. Both parents have nor- to misdiagnosis. AGS is genetically heterogeneous, five genes are known and mal teeth, but mother, maternal grandmother and great-grandfather are/ genotype-phenotype correlations exist. mutationTs RpEroXd1uce AGS typdee were also of short stature. Affymetrix GenomeWide SNP6.0 Array analysis 1no, av osevere neonatal-onset form making up 25% of AGS cases. Inheritance is excluded pathogenic copy number changes but showed that both siblings autosomal recessive but few cases due to heterozygous mutation share large homozygous regions. One of those regions is located on chro- are known. We diagnosed AGS type 1 in a non-consanguineous family mosome 15q21.3 and contains the WDR72 gene. Mutations in WDR72 are www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 55 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 SMAD3 a very rare cause of autosomal-recessive hypomaturation type of isolated loss-of-function mutation c.1170_1179del (p.Ser391AlafsX7) in exon 9 in all AI. The WDR72 protein is critical for dental enamel formation but its ex- affected familTyG mFBemR1b/e2rs, confirming the diagnosis of AOS. mutati- act function is still unknown. By now, only 6 different truncating mutations ons should be considered in patients of all ages with LDS-like phenotypes have been published. WDR72 sequence analysis in both siblings revealed and negative molecular tests, especially in the presence of early- homozygosity for a novel stop mutation in exon 10 (c.997A>T, p.Lys333X) onset osteoarthritis. Molecular diagnosis allows early identification of pati- explaining the AI phenotype. Patient reports with AI and mild short stature ents and relatives at risk of major cardiovascular complications. due to a brachyolmia were found in the literature. But a spine X-ray perfor- P02.024 med in the girl excluded brachyolmia. Therefore, it remains unclear whether Neuroleptic susceptibility in Angelman syndrome the short stature in the two siblings is due to the mutant WDR72 or segrega- A. Jacquette1, A. Afenjar2, D. Héron1, P. Charles1; tes as an independent trait in this family. 1Département de génétique, centre de référence des déficiences intellectuelles, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 2Service de Neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, P02.022 France. Identification of a new mutation in exon 1 of androgen receptor gene in a Turkish patient with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome V. Topçu1,2, H. Ilgın Ruhi1, Z. Şıklar3, H. G. Karabulut1, M. Berberoğlu3, B. Hacıhamdioğlu3, S. Savaş Erdeve3, Z. Aycan4, G. Öçal3, F. A. Tükün1; We report four patients with Angelman syndrome (Ube3a microdeletion 1Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, confirmed in 15q11 locus) who present severe extra pyramidal syndrome 2Zekai Tahir Burak Women’s Health Education and Research Hospital, Department after neuroleptic medication. of Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University School of Medicine, Department of Symptoms resolved with discontinuation of treatment. Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey, 4Dr. Sami Ulus Obstetrics Those observations suggest high susceptibility to antipsychotic agents in and Gynecology, Children’s Health and Disease Training and Research Hospital, this population and could be move closer to description of two Angelman Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey. patients who develop in adulthood extra pyramidal features consistent with Parkinson Disease with spectacular improvement with L-Dopa therapy (Harbord 2001). We report a 22 months old girl with the diagnosis of complete androgen in- It could be useful to perform DAT-Scan in Angelman patients. sensitivity syndrome (CAIS). From her medical history, we learned that she In the same way, in the mouse model (maternal loss of Ube3a ), number of had been operated because of left inguinal hernia. Its pathological exami- neurons in the substantia nigra is significantly reduced and motor deficits nation revealed immature testis without malign transformation. Ultrasono- could be attributed to the dysfunction of the nigrostriatal pathway (Mulher- graphy and MRI had shown testis in right inguinal channel, but no wolffian kar et al, 2010). derivatives. In laboratory, basal testosterone was 57,6 ng/dL, stimulated Furthermore the dysregulation of CaMKII could be responsible of neurologi- testosterone was 264 ng/dL, stimulated DHT was 30 ng/dL. Accordingly, cal phenotype and could be improved by Levodopa. stimulated T/DHT ratio was calculated as 8,8. Her basal LH was 2,22 mIU/ In this population, if neuroleptic medication turns out necessary, we suggest mL, basal FSH was 0,94 mIU/mL. Direct sequence analysis of the androgen to use atypical neuroleptic with different pharmacokinetic pathway with receptor (AR) gene showed c.88G>A mutation in exon 1 causing p.val30met less affinity to Dopaminergic receptors D2. in N-terminal domain of the AR. It m2a3y disru2p7t receptor activity in two ways. Those results could improve our understanding of pathophysiological me- Firstly, val30 residue is too close to FQNLF -primary androgen dependent chanisms involved in Angelman syndrome and lead to finalize new thera- motif which stabilizes hormone-receptor complex via N/C interaction. Alt- peutic strategies. hough both amino acids are hydrophobic in nature, methionine is a bigger P02.025 molecule than valine. Hence, it may distort the delicate three dimensio- A case of mosaic paternal uniparental disomy 15 identified by SNP- nal structure of the protein and interfere with receptor activity. Secondly, array analisys. c.88G>A creates a noncanonical star23t codon.2 7Translation initiation from this A. Fabretto1, A. Skabar2, M. S. Rocca1, M. D. Perrone1, P. Gasparini3, V. Pecile1; noncanonical start codon removes FQNLF motif and disrupts N/C inter- 1S.C. Medical Genetics - Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”- action. There are very few missense mutations in exon 1 shown to cause Trieste, I, Trieste, Italy, 2S.C. Neuropsychiatry - Institute for Maternal and Child Health CAIS, and p.val30met mutation has never been reported before. - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”- Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy, 3Institute for Maternal and Child P02.023 Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo” – Trieste, University of Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy. First report of aortic aneurysm in infancy in a new family with Aneurysms-Osteoarthritis Syndrome due to a SMAD3 mutation: further delineation of the clinical phenotype Angelman syndrome (MIM 105830) is a complex neurodevelopmental dis- A. Wischmeijer1,2, G. Tortora1, L. Van Laer3, N. A. Bolar3, G. Van Camp3, E. Fransen3, order caused by loss of function of the imprinted UBE3A gene in 15q11-q13 D. Pacini4, G. Gargiulo5, M. Bonvicini6, M. Ritelli7, M. Colombi7, L. Garavelli2, M. Seri1, B. region. Approximately 7% of cases are due to paternal uniparental disomy Loeys3; (UPD). Our case is the first child of healthy non consanguineous Italian ma- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, ting. He was born at term after uneventful pregnancy. At birth no anomalies Bologna, Italy, 2Clinical Genetics Unit, Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova IRCCS, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Antwerp University Hospital, University of were referred, birth weight = 3540g (50° centile). Growth curve was normal Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Cardiac Surgery, Policlinico S. Orsola- and at 6 yrs his paramethers were: weight = 37Kg (>>97°), height = 125cm Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Pediatric and Grown-Up Congenital (50°-75°) and OFC = 52cm (50°-75°). He had normal motor development Cardiac Surgery, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, (sitting = 6m, walking = 10m). He was evaluated for absence of speech. All 6Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Policlinico S. Orsola-Malpighi, University of audiological investigations were normal. He had friendly personality. No fa- Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 7Division of Biology and Genetics, Department of Biomedical cial dysmorphysms were evidenced and no seizures were referred, although Sciences and Biotechnology, Medical Faculty, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. sleeping EEG showed anomalies. Molecular karyotype analysis using “Hu- SMAD3 manCyto-12 BeadChip” ILLUMINA, revealed a paternal UPD 15 mosaicism. Data analyzed with GenomeStudio 2011.1 (cnv Partition 3.1.6) and Penn- Recently, mutations in the gene were found to cause a new autoso- CNV, showed a 80% percentage of mosaicism, which was calculated from B mal dominant aneurysm condition similar to Loeys-Dietz Syndrome (LDS), allele frequencies. Results confirmed by UPD study. Is the first time that we mostly with osteoarthritis, called Aneurysms-Osteoarthritis Syndrome can describe a somatic paternal UPD 15 mosaicism. UPD 15 patients nor- (AOS). mally have milder phenotype with a better prognosis, and our case is a very Our proband is a 3-year old boy who underwent correction of an inguinal mild condition with mainly severe speech delay and truncal obesity. If we hernia at 3 months and substitution of the ascending aorta for pathologic compare with other cases due to somatic mosaicisms of the imprinting cen- dilation at 12 months of age. He also presents LDS-like facial features and ter, our case could clinically overlap although maybe is still milder. Our work elongation and kinking of the thoracic aorta on MRI. Family history reveals suggests that maybe many cases of AS could have been undiagnosed. aortic dilation in his mother, death due to aortic dissection of an 18-year old P02.026 maternal aunt, surgical replacement of the ascending aorta because of an- Array-based genome-wide genotyping in patients with anorectal eurysm in a maternal uncle at 19 years of age, postpartum death of the ma- malformations and intellectual disability and/or malformations of ternal grandmother at 24 years and surgical intervention because of thora- the brain cic aortic aneurysm in a brother of the proband‘s grandmother at 54 years. G. C. Dworschak1, M. Draaken1,2, A. Hilger1, C. Schramm1, E. Bartels1, E. Schmiedeke1,3, Other clinical findings in affected individuals include pes planus, striae, easy S. Grasshoff-Derr4, S. Märzheuser5, S. Hosie6, S. Holland-Cunz7, A. M. Zink1, H. Engels1, D. bruising, dural ectasia, degeneTraGtFivBeR 1d isc d iTseGaFsBeR, 2h iatus h,e rnia, premature, Schmidt1,5, P. Hoffmann1,2, M. M. Nöthen1,2, M. Ludwig8, H. Reutter1,9; loss of teeth. No radiologic evidenSceM oAfD o3steoarthritis was present in the fa- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of mily. Molecular testing of the and genes involved in LDS www.eshg.org resulted negative, but analysis of disclosed the novel heterwozwygowus.e shg.org56 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Genomics - Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Center for Child and Adolescent Health, Hospital Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 4Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, borns with MCA and 40 newborns with isolated CL/P using whole genome Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Surgery, Campus Virchow Clinic, Charite University Agilent 180k (hg18) microarray with mean resolution of 16kb. Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Surgery, Klinikum Schwabing, We have found 19 CNVs, including 17 deletions and 2 duplications ranging Technische Universität München, München, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric Surgery, in size from 27 kb up to ~16Mb. The prevalence of aberrations in the group University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 8Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 9Department of Neonatology, with MCA was 25% whereas in the group with isolated CL/P it reached 21%. University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. All CNVs found (except 4 deletions exceeding 5Mb) were unique and did not encompass any known microdeletion/microduplication syndrome regions. Novel candidate genes (T brachyury, SLFN12) were suggested in the group Anorectal malformations (ARM) occur in about 1 in 2,500 live births. Similar with isolated CL/P, whereas in the MCA group one of the interesting findings to most congenital defects, ARM can occur as an isolated malformation or was del2q35 (STK36 gene). Our results demonstrate that high resolution associated with other defects or syndromes. To date, no causative genetic or array CGH is a powerful diagnostic tool in newborns with MCA and isolated non-genetic factor has been unequivocally identified in humans. Since intel- CL/P. It can also help in recognition of genes involved in pathogenesis of lectual disabilities (ID) are frequently associated with chromosomal aber- congenital anomalies. rations, we suggested that a cooccurrence of ARM and ID will make it more The research is funded by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Science and likely to detect causative CNVs (copy number variations). Higher Education NN407459438. Molecular karyotyping, utilizing 1,134,514 SNPs (single nucleotide poly- P02.029 morphisms), was performed to screen 30 non-isolated ARM patients with ID 1p22 microdeletion represents a novel contiguous gene syndrome and/or malformations of the central nervous system. To identify potential associated Diamond-Blackfan anemia CNVs, the SNP fluorescence intensity was analyzed with QuantiSNP using an K. Kurosawa1, M. Tominaga1, N. Furuya1, K. Enomoto1, T. Saito1, J. Nagai1, M. Masuno2, S. Hamanoue1, M. Shiomi1, H. Kigasawa1; Objective-Bayes Hidden-Markov model for calling putative CNVs. 1Kanagawa Children‘s Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 2Kawasaki University of Preliminary results revealed probably causative deletions in five patients Medical Welfare, Kurashiki, Japan. encompassing chromosomal regions: 6q14.3-q16.3 (16.5 Mb; 51 RefSeq genes), 13q31.2qter (28.5 Mb; 85 RefSeq genes), 17q12-q21.2 (2.1 Mb; 81 RefSeq genes), and two regions on chromosome 22q11.2 (2.54 Mb; 43 Ref- Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA) is characterized by a profound normo- Seq genes and 2.52 Mb; 43 RefSeq genes, respectively). In one patient we chromic and macrocytic anemia with normal leukocytes and platelets, con- identified a 7.9 Mb duplication on chromosome 3q26.32-q27.2 harboring genital malformations, and growth retardation. The phenotype varies from 56 RefSeq genes. All findings were confirmed by quantitative PCR. These a mild form to a severe form of fetal anemia resulting in hydrops fetalis. DBA observations support the previously described association of microdeleti- is associated with an increased risk of hematological malignancy and solid on 22q11.2 and the occurrence of ARM and/or ID suggesting this region to tumors including osteogenic sarcoma. Other genetic forms of anemia, such harbor genes, which contribute to both phenotypic features. Studying larger as Fanconi anemia, need to be considered and ruled out as appropriate. The cohorts is likely to detect additional CNVs that might give further informati- mutations of nine genes encoding ribosomal proteins have been recognized on on chromosomal regions and genes involved in the etiology of ARM and/ to be responsible for DBA. Most of the mutations are detected by sequence or ID. analysis except for the RPS19. We present a patient with mild intellectual P02.027 disability, chronic normochromic anemia, mild neutropenia, normal plate- Specific transglutaminase 1 mutation profiles in bathing suit lets, and multiple congenital malformations including characteristic facial ichthyosis and self-improving collodion ichthyosis appearance, finger-like thumbs, atrial septal defect, growth retardation, B. Hartmann1, E. Bourrat2, C. Blanchet-Bardon2, C. Derbois3, S. Cure4, J. Fischer1,3; and vaginal atresia. The detection of chromosomal aberrations in cells after 1Institut für Humangenetik, Freiburg, Germany, 2Department of Dermatology, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France, 3CEA, Institut de Génomique, Centre Nationale de Génotypage culture with a DNA interstrand cross-linking agent (MMC) failed to deter- (CNG), Evry, France, 4CEA, Institut de Génomique, Centre Nationale de Séquençage mine the diagnosis as Fanconi anemia. Bone marrow examination revealed (CNS), Evry, France. hypoplastic, but showed normal balanced hematopoiesis. Microarray CGH analysis revealed 7.9 Mb deletion at 1p22.1-p22.3, involving ribosomal pro- tein L5 (RPL5), and transcriptional repressor protein GFI1. RPL5 is respon- Bathing suit ichthyosis (BSI) and self-improving collodion ichthyosis (SICI) sible for Diamond-Blackfan anemia, and GFI1 is responsible for autosomal are two minor variants of generalized autosomal recessive congenital ich- dominant severe congenital neutropenia, where both genes are adjacent to thyosis (ARCI). BSI is characterized by scaling of the skin in a bathing suit each other. These results indicated that the 1p22 microdeletion represents a pattern, mainly limited to the trunk, whereas SICI is characterized by com- novel contiguous gene syndrome associated Diamond-Blackfan anemia, but plete disappearance of the skin lesions. We report genotypic and phenotypic overlapping with clinical features of Fanconi anemia. data from a series of 9 patients born as collodion babies, who developed BSI P02.030 or SICI due to mutations in the transglutaminase-1 gene (TGM1), including 3 Array CGH with normal karyotype. Utility in pediatrics diagnosis. previously unreported missense mutations. All our BSI or SICI patients car- M. Perez Sanchez1, A. Mora Guijosa1, S. Roldán2, J. Barrionuevo Porras2, A. González ried at least one specific missense mutation in TGM1 concerning an arginine Ramírez3; 1Servicio de Análisis Clínicos. Hospital Virgen de las Nieves., Granada, Spain, 2Servicio de at position 307 or 315. In two patients the disease evolved in two phases Pediatría. Hospital Virgen de las Nieves., Granada, Spain, 3FIBAO. Hospital Clínico San (BSI to SICI or BSI to ARCI). The other 7 patients exhibited a stable BSI phe- Cecilio., Granada, Spain. notype after shedding of the collodion membrane. This study highlights the possibility of variable evolution of the phenotype of patients with identical mutations in the same gene. Combined with data from the literature, this Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) has pro- confirms the hypothesis that only a restricted spectrum of TGM1 mutations vides a relatively quick method to scan the genome for gains and loses of is susceptible to lead to a BSI and/or SICI phenotype. This phenotypic varia- chromosomal material. This new methodologies have led to identification bility also depends on other genetic and external factors. of novel genomic disorder in patients with developmental delay/mental P02.028 retardation and/or multiple congenital anomalies (DD/MR/MCA), with a Application of high resolution array CGH in newborns with multiple significant increase in diagnostic yield . congenital anomalies and isolated cleft lip/palate In this study we present the result of array CGH obtained in 150 children K. Szczaluba1, K. Derwinska1, R. Smigiel2, A. Kutkowska-Kazmierczak1, J. Klapecki1, J. with normal karyotype but DD/MR/MCA. The array CGH 60K from agilent Castaneda1, Z. Dudkiewicz1, E. Obersztyn1, E. Bocian1; 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, platform was performed. Poland. In 34 patients (22,66%) was detected a chromosomal deletion or duplicati- on previously described like pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs),. In 15 cases (10%) was necessary the analysis of parental samples, showing that Molecular karyotyping by array CGH has now been widely used for genetic 6 anomalies (40%) had occurred de novo and was classified as pathogenic analysis in the setting of both multiple (MCA) as well as isolated congenital and in 9 cases (60%) appeared to be inherited from an unaffected parent. In birth defects. The technique has the potential of providing diagnosis in up to a total of 40 patients (26,66%) was possible to detect a pathogenic CNVs . 27% of newborns with MCA and accompanying dysmorphism and a signi- Recent studies suggest that when aCGH is performed with an apparently ficant number of neonates with isolated anomaly [i.e. cleft lip/palate(CL/P), normal karyotype, the diagnostic yield increases by an additional 8-17%. heart defect], where it can also identify new candidate genes. In our study we have obtained a 26,66% of children with pathogenic CNVs To assess the frequency of array-detected copy number variations (CNVs) in that is higher than the results obtained by other authors. This increase at the neonates with congenital birth defects we screened two cohorts of 33 new- detection rate probably is due to the array type utilized. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 57 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.033 An autosomal recessive form of atrophoderma vermiculatum: Clinical As a conclusion, array CGH can be implemented routinely after a normal and genetic characterisation chromosome result when a phenotype of DD/MR/MCA is present, but is K. Mäbert1, T. Naeem Khan2, M. Jameel2, S. Mahmood Baig2, N. Dahl1, J. Klar1; also appropriate for patients with autism and apparently balanced trans- 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Human locations. Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan. P02.031 Human body asymmetry spectrum - dysmorphic and genetic perspectives for five rare disorders V. N. Plaiasu1, D. Ochiana1, G. Motei1, D. Stambouli2, E. Neagu3, L. Barbarii3; Atrophoderma vermiculatum (AV) is a rare, benign skin disorder characte- 1IOMC Prof.dr.Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 2Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, rized by the occurrence of pitted atrophic and depressed scars in a reticular Bucharest, Romania, 3National Legal Medicine Institute “Mina Minovici”, Bucharest, pattern. AV usually begins in childhood by symmetric reticular or honey- Romania. combed atrophy of the cheek. The genetics behind AV is unclear as most cases appear to be sporadic and the few cases with mendelian inheritance seem to follow an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Human body asymmetry is a diagnosis with a large spectrum of features, We have identified a consanguineous Pakistani family segregating auto- with a multifactorial aetiology: physiological, osseal, neurological, genetic. somal recessive AV. In total, the extended family contains four affected in- There are many aspects to discuss involved in asymmetry: situs anomalies, dividuals, three affected siblings and their first cousin. Parents to affected asymetric cell division, laterality, asymetric embriopathy, hemiasymetries, individual were healthy. Affected individuals are born with normal skin. asymetric vascular syndromes, somatic mosaicism. Symptoms starts at approximately one year of age by tear shedding pro- Asymmetric entities are classified in non-syndromic and syndromic, conge- voqued by sunlight, breeze and cool air, followed by the development of nital or acquired, total or limited. Left-right asymmetry has important impli- characteristic skin changes. The facial skin shows pit like areas of atrophy cations for human health and development. distributed most prominently over the cheeks, extending to the chin, upper We report our clinBieccaklw eixtphe-Wrieiendceem oaf nsno msyen drarorem eentities with body asymme- lip, forehead and nasal ridge. The atrophic pits are separated by ridges of try: Proteus syndrome normal looking skin. 1) an infant with Klippel-Trenaunay-Weber synd (rMomIMe: 130650) We have recently initiated homozygosity mapping and exome sequencing to 2) a newborn with probably (MIM: 176920) identify the mutation behind autosomal recessive AV. The results from these 3) three cases with Conradi-H ü(MneIrMm: a1n4n9 0sy0n0d)rome efforts will be presented. 4) a girl with short stature, left-right asymmetry and radiologic signs of P02.034 skeletal dysplasia, with clinical diagnosis of diploid-tetraploid mixoploidy Two cases with different microaberrations of the long arm of (MIM: 302960) chromosome 15 and autism 5) a six years old female patient with D. Avdjieva-Tzavella1, S. Hadjidekova2, B. Rukova2, D. Nesheva2, R. Tincheva1, D. (92,XXXX/46,XX), demostrated by cytogenetic studies in blood cultures, Toncheva2; with asymmetric overgrowth, abnormal skin pigmentation, mental retarda- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, University Pediatrics Hospital, Medical University, tion, the first child of a family with primary subfertility. Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria. Different mechanisms involved in the development of asymmetry in these disorders are discussed: mutations of imprinted genes, mosaicism for a somatic activating mutation, pathogenic gene for vascular and tissue over- Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder of the immature brain growth, random X-inactivation in affected tissues in heterozygous female, with unknown origin that manifests in early childhood. The exact aetiology mosaicism versus chimerism. of autism remains speculative, although it is likely to result from a complex The diagnostic were given according to the associated clinical features. Cli- combination of multiple non genetic and/or genetic factors. Advances in nical delineation of the cases with congenital growth asymmetry remains high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) microarray tech- essential until pathophysiological mechanisms are elucidated. Other labora- nology have revealed sub-microscopic aberrations that lead to identification tory tests like chromosomal analysis, biochemical studies, molecular assay, of many disease-causing genomic copy number variants (CNVs) in autism. applied on different tissues, help in the differential diagnosis. Numerous reports have implicated duplications or deletions of proximal P02.032 chromosome 15q as significant risk factors for autism and autism-related ATP6V0A2-related cutis laxa: Case report and review of the literature C. Daumer-Haas1, M. Lindner1, B. Fischer2, U. Kornak3; disorders. 1Pränatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany, 2Institut für Medizinische Genetik und We report two autistic children with 15q11-13 rearrangements. We have Humangenetik, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany, 3Institut used genomic array CytoChip Oligo (BlueGnome, Cambridge, UK), format für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 2x105K, version 1.1. and BlueFuse Multi software, version 2.2. The 2x105K Germany, Berlin, Germany. array detects 35 kbp imbalances on the backbone and has tiling of 20 probes over 137 OMIM disease loci. In the first case a de novo cryptic deletion of 2q36.3 region spanning 1,456 Mb and amplification of (15)(q12q13.1) re- We report on a 2-3/4 year-old Afghanian male patient diagnosed with gion spanning 3,473 Mb were found in 12 years old girl with autism, severe ATP6V0A2-related cutis laxa whom we first saw postnatally and who has mental retardation and dysmorphic features. The second case showed dele- come for routine follow-up consultations. The parents are double first cou- tion of 15q11.2 region spanning 494, 905 bp in a boy with idiopathic autism. sins. The boy initially presented with excessive skin wrinkling, microcepha- FISH experiments with BAC clone confirm the CytoChip results. ly with a sloping forehead, large anterior fontanelle, dysmorphic facial fea- These data strongly support the implication of 15q11-13 rearrangements as tures (hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, broad nasal bridge, a predisposing factor for autism. long philtrum, micrognathia as well as low-set posteriorly rotated and pro- P02.035 truding ears), myopia, atrial septum defect and small penis. At the age of 2 The clinical and genealogical diagnosis of autosomal dominant months, an inguinal hernia occured. Meanwhile the furrowing of the skin spinocerebellar ataxias in Yakutia has markedly improved. Our patient has fortunately not shown any signs M. A. Varlamova, E. E. Gurinova, I. A. Nikolaeva, A. L. Suhomyasova, N. R. Maksimova; of developmental delay which is often present in patients with ATP6V0A2- Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian related cutis laxa. All these findings are consistent with the clinical diagno- Academy of Medic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. sis of Wrinkly skin syndrome, the clinically mild phenotype of this disorder. Molecular genetic analysis revealed a homozygous c.1A>T mutation of the ATP6V0A2-gene. This is a yet undescribed pathogenic mutation presumably According to genetic-epidemiological investigations of Yakut population in leading to an impairment of initiation of translation. The 20 exons of the Republic Sakha (Yakutia), the frequency of hereditary diseases in Yakuts are gene encode the a2-subunit of the V-type H+-ATPase complex. Immunolabe- very high. Most common AD disease in Yakuts is a spinocerebellar ataxia. ling with an antibody against the N-terminal domain of ATP6V0A2 demon- 80% of SCA are SCA 1 type. The high incidence of the SCA1 in Yakutia (38.6 strated loss of the a2-subunit in the patient’s fibroblasts. per 100000), compared to 1-2:100000 in the world population. The ATP6V0A2-related cutis laxa is a rare autosomal recessive disorder first The aim of study was to establish of the spectrum of genetic form of AD SCA described in 1973 by Dr. Gazit. Up until now approximately 60 cases of AT- in Yakutia. P6V0A2-related cutis laxa have been reported. (OMIM # 278250). A computer database of patients with cerebellar syndrome was established. We compare the phenotype and findings of our case to previously published 83 families with SCA1 and 9 familial and 66 sporadic cases of undifferen- cases. tiated SCA identified by clinical and genealogical research. Differential dia- gnosis was performed on the five forms of AD SCA: SCA2, 3, 6, 17 and DRP- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org58 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Preto, Clinics Hospital of Ribeirao Preto, Neurogenetics Division, São Paulo, Brazil, 5Acıbadem University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, LA. The expansion of CAG-repeats in the genes SCA 2, 3, 6, 17 in the studied Istanbul, Turkey. sample while was not found. In four patients from one of the Yakut families the expansion of CAG-repeat in the gene of DRPLA (DRPLA) were discovered. In the proband`s DNA mole- Bannayan-RilePyT-REuNvalcaba Syndrome (BRRS) is a rare autosomal dominant- cular analyses of the DRPLA gene showed two alleles of 23/64 CAG-repeats, ly-inherited hamartoma syndrome with distinct phenotypic features. Mu- in the mother`s DNA - 19/61, in the sibs`s DNA - 19/61 and 19/63 repeats tations in the gene have been identified in PTENP hTaEmNartoma tumor (normal range ≤ 36). This is a first description of family with genetically syndromes. Our aim was to determine the correlation of phenotype-geno- established DRPLA reported in Yakutia. Most members presented with ata- type relationships in a BRRS case. We have evaluated a mutation in a xia and chorea and some of these developed dementia late in the course patient with vascular anomalies and the phenotyPpTicE fNindings of BRRS. We of the disease. These clinical symptoms of Yakut patients with DRPLA are described an eight-year-old girl with the clinical features of BRRS, specifi- identical with the cases on another patients with DRPLA. cally with vascular anomalies. The mutation in the gene was identified P02.036 by DNA sequencing. In our patient, we defined a de novo non-sense R335X Jervell and Lange-Nielson Syndrome: Homozygous missense mutation (c.1003C->T) mutation in exon 8, which results in a premature termination in KCNQ1 in a Turkish family codon. Due to vascular anomalies and hemangioma, the patient’s left leg was S. G. Temel1, O. Bostan1, H. Cangul2, E. Cil1; aPmTEpNutated one year after hemangioma diagnosis. In conclusion, BRRS pati- 1University of Uludag, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Pediatric Cardiology, Bursa, Turkey, ents with macrocephaly and vascular anomalies should be considered for 2University of Birmingham, Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, School of mutation analysis and special medical care. Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Birmingham, United Kingdom. P02.039 Bardet-Biedl Syndrome with disorder of sex development: A new case report from Tunisia Long QT syndrome is one of the most common cardiac ion channel disease R. Louati, T. Rebai, N. B. Abdelmoula; which its morbidity and mortality rate can be lessened with an early dia- Medical University, Sfax, Tunisia. gnosis and proper treatment. It is a cardiac repolarization abnormality that is characterized by prolonged OT interval and propensity for ventricular ta- chycardia (VT) of the torsades de pointes type are the charecteristics of the Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a ciliopathy causing multivisceral abnorma- disease. This syndrome represent high risk of presyncope, syncope, cardiac lities. It is a rare and heterogeneous genetic condition characterized by obe- arrest and sudden death. Jervell and Lange-Nielson syndrome (JLNS) is one sity, mental retardation, dysphormic extremities, retinal dystrophy, hypogo- of the inherited form of long QT syndromes. It is inherited recessively and nadism and renal anomalies. Prevalence rates are estimated of 1:140000 to characterized by profound sensorineural deafness and prolongation of the 1:160000 in North America and Europe, respectively but in Asian, Austra- OT interval, thus representing abnormal ventricular repolarizasiton. JLNS lian and African continents, there are only case reports and small serials. has been shown to occur due to homozygous and copmpound heterozygous To date, mutations in 18 different loci are responsible for BBS phenotype. mutations in KCNQ1 or KCNE1. There was one clinical report on JLNS in Here, we report a new case of BBS from Tunisia characterized by sexual am- Turkey; however, it was not confirmed by a molecular study. We identified biguity without renal abnormalities. The patient who is 24 years old was a homozygous mutation in KCNQ1 in a 3.5-yr-old female child with JLNS, referred to our genetic counselling because of aspermia. Patient history re- who visited the hospital due to recurrent syncope and seizures and had con- veals bilateral orchiopexy one year ago. Physical examination showed poor genital sensorineural deafness. Her electrocardiogram revealed a markedly visual acuity, strabismus and gaze nystagmus (with retinal degeneration), prolonged QT interval. The sequence analysis of the proband revealed the obesity, tetramelic postaxial polydactyly, superficial dilatation of veinules, presence of homozygous missence mutation (c.728G>A, p.R243H). Hete- dental problems, short neck, low hairline at the nape of the neck, impaired rozygous mutation in KCNQ1 was identified on the maternal, paternal and coordination and ataxia and moderate mental deficiency. At sexual level, the sister side. Even if with a high dose β-blocker therapy the patient has twice patient had a female voice, small empty scrotums that look like labia majora VT attacks, because of this reason the implanted cardiac defibrillator (ICD) with a severe microphallus. Cytogenetic evaluation reveals a 46,XY male for- was planned and implanted. We suggest early genetic diagnosis for proper mula. Tetramelic polydactyly which is described in our patient and in some management of the disease and genetic counseling. other members of his family seems to be associated to BBS chromosome 3 P02.037 locus. Molecular diagnosis will lead to familial genetic counseling as well Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome Type 1 - family case report as to surveillance of the patient who need a multidisciplinary medical care C. C. Albu1,2, D. F. Albu1,2, E. Severin1; especially to detect renal abnormalities which is the main life-threatening 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alco San features and the other complications including hypertension and Type 2 Clinic, Bucharest, Romania. diabetes. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome P02.040 Phenotype /(Epi-) Genotype correlation in 265 cases of Beckwith- INTRODUCTION: The is a rare, autosomal do- Wiedemann syndrome minant disorder, characterized by corneea defects, iris defects and glauco- A. Mussa1, A. De Crescenzo2, S. Russo3, L. Calzari3, N. Chiesa1, C. Molinatto1, G. ma. More than 50% of pacients become blind because of glaucoma compli- Baldassarre1, D. Melis4, D. Milani5, M. Badeschi5, L. Tarani6, A. Selicorni7, M. Silengo1, L. cations. Other associated developmental defects involve thAex teenetfhe ladn-dR ifeagciearl Larizza3,8, A. Riccio2, G. B. Ferrero1; bsyonndesr.ome 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Turin, Torino, Italy, 2Genetics and Biophysics MATERIAL AND METHODS: We present a family with Institute A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Naples, Italy, 3Laboratory of Cytogenetics and on four generations. Complete ophthalmic examination (biomi- Molecular Genetics, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, University Federico II, Torino, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Ca‘ Granda croscopy, gonioscopy, oculo-orbitar ultrasound, corneal topography) and Foundation, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 6Genetica Clinica, Dipartimento general examination of the patients showed ocular and non-ocular mani- di Pediatria, Università „La Sapienza“ di Roma, Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, Italy, festations. The craniofacial and oral examination involved cephalometric 7Pediatric Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of Milano Bicocca, S. radiographs and orthopantomograms. All the patients were screened for Gerardo Hospital MBBM Foundation, Monza, Italy, 8Medical Genetics, Department of mutations in PITX2 and FOXC1 by DNA Analysis. Medicine, Surgery and Odontoiatry, Milan, Italy. RESULTS: DNA Analysis of all the patientsA rxeevneafeleldd -aR mieugteart isoynn odfr tohme ePITX2 gene. CONCLUSIONS: We present a family with type Beckwith-Wiedemann synnedvruosm flea m(BmWeSu)s is characterized by cancer predis- 1 on four generations, a very rare disorder with clinical and genetic varia- position and a variable association of overgrowth, macroglossia, abdominal bility. defects, renal anomalies, , ear malformations, hypoglycemia, P02.038 hemihyperplasia, and organomegaly. BWS molecular bases are heteroge- Muscle hemangiomatosis as a severe presenting feature in a neous as several mechanisms lead to unbalanced transcription of genes re- patient with PTEN mutation: Expanding the phenotype of vascular gulated by 11p15 chromosomal region Imprinting Center IC1 and IC2. We malformations in Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcaba syndrome searched for epigenotype-phenotype correlations in 265 BWS patients with Y. Soysal1, T. Acun2, C. M. Lourenço3, W. Marques Jr4, C. Yakıcıer5; diagnnostic criteria and proven molecular defecnt. Patients’ characteristics 1Afyon Kocatepe University, Afyonkarahisar, Turkey, 2Zonguldak Karaelmas University were compared among molecular snubclasses: KvDMR1 hypomnethylation Department of Biomedical Engineering, Zonguldak, Turkey, 3University of São Paulo, (IC2, =153), H19/IGF2 hypermethylation (IC1, =27), chromosome 1n1p15 Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao Preto,Clinics Hospital of Ribeirao Preto, Neurogenetics paternal uniparental disomy (UPD, =65), CDKN1c mutation ( =10), and Division, São Paulo, Brazil, 4University of São Paulo, Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao Multiple Differently Methylated Region Methylation Defect (MDMD, =9). The table summarizes the differences among groups. Each showed different www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 59 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 growth patterns: neonatal macrosomia in IC1 patients, postnatal ovdeiragsrtoawsis- ma gene (IKBKG; MIM 300248, Xq28). A.Garrod reported the first probable trhec itni IC2/CDKN1c/MDMD patients, and hemihyperplasia in UPD patients. case of incontinentia pigmenti in 1906. Subsequently, Bloch and Sulzberger Exomphalos was more common in IC2/CDKN1c patients, whereas further defined the condition in 1926 and 1928, respectively, as a clinical and umbilical hernia were associated with IC1 defects, consistent wniteh- syndrome with unique features of typical cutaneous manifestations. IKK vourgs afnlaommmegeualsy and polyhydramnios. Renal defects were typical of UPD/IC1 -gamma is the regulatory subunit of the inhibitor kappa kinase (IKK) com- patients, and uretheral malformations of IC1 cases. Ear anomalies and plex and is required for the activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB were associated with IC2/CDKN1C/MDMD genotype. Macro- (NF-kB). NF-kB is central to many immune, inflammatory, and apoptotic pa- glossia, almost always present, was less common in UPD. Wilms’ tumor was thways. The incidence of BSS is believed to be 1 case per 40,000. Here we re- associated with IC1 defects and never observed in IC2 patients. Hepatobla- ported on 5 female patients with BSS aged from 4 to 20 yr. Proband mothers stoma was typical of UPD and other tumors were randomly scattered among (3/5) had multiple male miscarriages. All patients had hypopigmented, molecular subclasses. In BWS is definable a clear phenotype-epigenotype atrophic patches, conical forms of their teeth and some ophthalmologic fin- IC2 UPD IC1 CDKN1C MDMD p correlation allowing tailored follow-up and cancer screening procedures. dings. Two patients had strabismus and nystagmus due to congenital ectopy n % n % n % n % n % 153 57,7 65 24,5 27 10,2 10 3,8 10 3,8 of the macula and optic nerve atrophy. Their visual acuity was insufficient and rehabilitation process was difficult without positive prognosis. Three 42,5% 43,1%2177,8% 40,0% 40,0% <0,001 patients had vitreoretinal abnormality as congenital hyperplastic persistent 64 41,8% 21,5% 29,6% 4 40,0% 7 70,0% 0,002 vitreous body complicated with traction retinal detachment. These pro- Neonatal macrosomia 65 15,7% 28 13,8%1037,0% 4 0,0% 4 0,0% 0,005 bands have been observed formerly as the patients suffered from retrolental Postnatal overgrowth 45,8%517487,7% 8 44,4% 10,0% 30,0% <0,001 fibroplasias. Vitrectomy with scleral buckle was performed with successful Polydramnios 5204 32,7% 9 6,2% 3,7% 80 80,0% 0 10,0% <0,001 Hemihypertrophy 70 30,7% 20,0%115255,6% 1 20,0% 3 30,0% 0,004 anatomical results and preservation visual function Exomphalos 26,1% 4 24,6%11348,1% 0,0% 1 40,0% 0,021 P02.043 Rectum diastasis 47 28,1% 13 33,8%1866,7% 2 10,0% 3 40,0% <0,0001 Molecular analysis of patients with Bohring-Opitz syndrome Umbilical hernia 40 30,7% 16 35,4% 33,3% 0 10,0% 4 40,0% NS A. Bohring1, S. R. Braddock2, A. Destree3, D. K. Grange4, L. Graul-Neumann5, M. Organomegaly 43 92,2%422467,7% 92,6% 1 60,0% 4 90,0% <0,001 Hannibal6, N. J. Leonard7, P. Muschke8, G. G. Oudesluijs9, A. Pickart10, P. Thierry11, D. Hypoglycemia 7467 49,7%23 26,2% 9 22,2% 51 50,0% 54 50,0% <0,001 Wieczorek12, P. Wieacker1, A. Röpke1; Macroglossia 1741146,4% 29,2% 25 22,2% 66 60,0% 49 40,0% 0,002 1Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Ear pits/ creases 15,0% 17 6,2% 6 14,8% 20,0% 10,0% NS Germany, 2Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital and Clinics, Columbia, MO, Naevus flammeous 11,1%212933,8%16037,0% 20,0% 0,0% <0,001 United States, 3Institut de Pathologie et de Genetique, Charleroi, Belgium, 4Department Heart defects 23 4,6% 4 7,7% 64 22,2% 2 10,0% 1 0,0% 0,005 of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children’s Hospital, Renal abnormalities 17 0,0% 3,1% 6 22,2% 2 0,0% 0 0,0% <0,001 St. Louis, MO, United States, 5Charié, Campus Virchow-Klinikum, Berlin, Germany, 6State Ureteral abnormalities 7 0.0% 45 6.2% 0.0% 1 0.0% 0 0.0% 0.004 of Alaska Genetics and Birth Defects Clinic, Anchorage, AK, United States, 7Department Wilms’’ tumor 0 2.0% 2 1.5% 3.7% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% NS of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 8Institut für Hepatoblastoma 0 2.0% 3.0% 0 7.2% 0 0.0% 0 0.0% NS Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 9Department Other malignancies 3 1 1 0 0 of Clinical Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, Benign tumors 3 2 2 0 0 10Children`s Hospital of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, United States, 11Departement de P02.041 Pediatrie, Hopital Paul Morel, Vesoul, France, 12Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome - clinical findings in Polish patients Duisburg Essen, Essen, Germany. with IC2 (KvDMR) hypomethylation in 11p15 region D. Jurkiewicz, M. Kugaudo, A. Tańska, E. Ciara, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, J. Trubicka, S. Łuczak, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, P. Kowalski, M. Pelc, A. Jezela-Stanek, K. Bohring-Opitz symdrome (BOS) is a rare condition comprising distinct facial Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; features including bulging forehead over the metopic suture, frontal nevus Department of Medical Genetics, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, flammeus, exophthalmos, retinal abnormalities, hypertelorism, upslanting Poland. palpebral fissures, and cleft lip and/or palate, intrauterine growth retarda- tion, severe failure to thrive, flexion deformities of the upper limbs, lower limb deformities, severe developmental delay, and death often early in child- Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is characterized by overgrowth, hood. Recently, ASXL1 nonsense mutations were identified in 7/13 suspec- macroglossia, abdominal wall defects and a high risk of childhood tumors. ted BOS cases as the cause of the syndrome [Hoischen et al., 2011]. Here we BWS is caused by various 11p15 genetic or epigenetic defects leading to report on 10, clinically undoubtful cases with BOS. All of them fulfilled the defective expression of imprinted genes. The genes in 11p15 region are or- diagnostic criteria proposed by Bohring et al. [2006] and all carry a private, ganized into two imprinted domains controlled by two Imprinting Centers: previously undescribed heterozygous nonsense/frameshift ASXL1 mutati- IC1 (H19DMR) andC IDCK2N (1KCvDMR). The most common defect in BWS (~50%) on. As far as parental DNA was available for analysis, the mutations were is loss of methylation at IC2. Paternal UPD of 11p15, gain of methylation at shown to be de novo. Thus, our data further support ASXL1 as the main cau- IC1, mutations in gene encoded on 11p15 and chromosomal re- se of BOS and confirm exon 13 (NM_015338) as mutational hotspot in this arrangements also result in the BWS phenotype. Some specific phenotype- syndrome. In addition, our data show that in clinically well characterized (epi)genotype correlations are observed in BWS. However, there is a mar- cases the detected mutation rate may be 100%. Further carefully performed ked phenotypic variability within molecular subgroups. genotype-phenotype studies are necessary to specify the most appropriate We present fourteen Polish patients with BWS and IC2 hypomethylation. A key symptoms and to differentiate between BOS and other phenotypically molecular analysis was performed by methylation sensitive multiplex liga- overlapping syndromes or to prove genetic heterogeneity. tion-dependent probe amplification (MS-MLPA) in a group of thirty five un- P02.044 related BWS patients. The analysis demonstrated loss of methylation at IC2 Clinical Spectrum and Natural History of Bohring-Opitz (BOPS) (BOS) in 40% of investigated patients. All the patients presented clinical features syndrome, in the three first Italian Patients typical for BWS, although in various degree. The study underlines correlati- G. Scarselli1,2, P. Fiorini3, F. Scarano4, L. Di Medio1, P. Magini5, M. Seri5, M. Della Monica4, E. on between IC2 hypomethylation and the presence of BWS features such as: Lapi6, S. Guarducci6, G. Scarano4, E. Gambineri7, M. Giovannucci Uzielli1,7; macroglossia (14/14 cases), characteristic face (14/14 cases), abdominal 1Genetic Science, Firenze, Italy, 2University of Florence - Pediatric Neurology Unit, wall defects (12/14 cases) and anterior ear lobe creases and/or posterior Firenze, Italy, 3Intensive Therapy Unit - Ospedale Anna Meyer, Firenze, Italy, 4U.O.C. helical pits (12/14 cases). An interesting finding is a relatively high preva- Genetica Medica Ospedale of Benevento, Benevento, Italy, 5Medical Genetics - Dept. of Science Gyn-Obst. - University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Ospedale Anna Meyer, Firenze, lence of cryptorchidism (5/9 male patients). The further investigations of Italy, 7Science of Mother and Child Health Dept - University of Florence, Firenze, Italy. the genetic background of BWS in Polish population are under way. The study was financed by National Science Centre, project no. 1149/B/ P01/2011/40 (NN407114940). Bohring-Opitz Syndrome; BOPS (#605039), also known as C-like syndrome, P02.042 is a very rare malformation disorder, reported until now in about twenty, Ophthalmic status of the patients with Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome unrelated, subjects. The delineation of BOS was made by Bohring, in 1999, M. O. Mkheidze1, O. K. Janvareva2; 1Medical University named after I.I Mechnikov, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, on the basis of a complex phenotype characterized by IUGR, feeding pro- 2Medical Centre of St.Petersburg University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. blems, severe intellectual ad motor disability, trigonocephaly, frontal nevus flammeus, exophthalmus, cleft palate, flexion of elbows and wrists, hirsu- tism. More recently (2011) Hoischen , sequencing the exomes of 13 unre- Bloch-Sulzberger syndrome (BSS) or Incontinentia pigmenti (MIM 308300) lated subjects with BOS, identified mutations of ASXL1 gene, in 7 of them, is an X-linked dominant syndrome with cutaneous, neurologic, ophthalmo- suggesting the genetic heterogeneity of this disorder. Here we report the www.eshg.org logic, and dental manifestations. It is caused by mutations in the IKwKw-gawm.-eshfogllo.owr-ugp study of three, unrelated, Italian subjects with BOS, and we briefly 60 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.047 6p24.2 microdeletion involving TFAP2A without classic features of underline the natural history steps, and the major clinical aspects useful for branchio-oculo facial syndrome. the diagnosis at different ages. The first two children (a female and a male) C. P. Barnett1, S. Yu2; are still alive, respectively aged 3 and 7 years; the third patient (a female) 1Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital/SA Pathology, North Adelaide, Australia, 2SA passed at age 22. Only the male is able to walk. Absolute lack of language in Pathology at Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia. all patients. Extremely similar, clinical phenotype at birth, with characteri- stic face, frontal nevus flammeus, severe myopia, BOS “attitude”. The face was decidedly less typical in the third patient since the age 15. Severe men- Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOF, MIM 113620) results from haploin- tal retardation in cases 1 and 3: the male interacts by using cards with ima- sufficiency of TFAP2A on 6p24.2. The cardinal features of BOF are pseudo- ges and alphabetical letters.Sequencing analysis of ASXL1 gene in the first cleft of the upper lip, brachial sinus/post auricular linear skin lesion, au- and second child, revealed new mutations, respectively c.2407_2411del5 ricular/lip pits, lacrimal duct obstruction, short stature and intellectual [p.Q803TfsX17] and c.2893C>T[p.R965X]. We are looking for biological disability. Other features described include coloboma of the iris/retina and samples of the third patient to screen the ASXL1 gene. preaxial polydactyly. Here we describe a mother and daughter with a dele- P02.045 tion at 6p24.2 involving TFAP2A but with a clinical presentation that would Unusual presentation of combined saggital-metopic synostosis not have led to a diagnosis of BOF. represents the second case of the Boston-type craniosynostosis The proband was seen at 3-months of age. She was growth restricted at birth syndrome (1985gm at 37 weeks gestation). Examination revealed a non-dysmorphic A. Janssen1, M. J. Hosen2, P. Jeannin1, P. J. Coucke2, A. De Paepe2, O. M. Vanakker2; infant with no evidence of a branchial sinus, linear skin lesion or pseudo- 1Department of Paediatrics, Jan Palfijn Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Center for Medical cleft of the lip. A blocked left lacrimal duct was diagnosed in the first few Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. weeks of life. Numerous investigations were performed because of growth restriction and poor feeding. Hearing was normal and renal ultrasound re- vealed mild pelvicalyceal dilatation. Array CGH revealed a 593 kb deletion at Background. Craniosynostosis, caused by early fusion of cranial sutures, can chromosome 6p24.2-p24.3 involving TFAP2A. include premature fusion of the saggital (scaphocephaly) or metopic suture The infant’s 26-year-old mother was also found to carry the deletion. She (trigonocephaly). Though often occurring as isolated findings, their co-exi- has a mild intellectual disability and good general health. She had lacrimal stence in a craniosynostosis syndrome is infrequent and mostly sporadic. duct obstruction until 11 years of age, requiring surgical intervention. She Case description. The male proband presented with premature fusion of the had normal hearing and normal kidneys and was of normal stature. Close saggital and metopic suture. Imaging revealed also coronal synostosis and examination of her branchial region and lips/philtrum was normal. multiple endocranial hypoplastic areas. Radiographs demonstrated bilate- This case adds to the growing list of atypical presentations of “classical” sin- ral agenesis of the middle phalanges in the feet. Family history revealed the gle gene disorders which have only come to light in the array CGH era. father, his sister and half-sister, to have scaphocephaly with 3-4 syndactyly. P02.048 The paternal grandfather did not have a phenotype, though the great grand- BRESEK/BRESHECK syndrome and IFAP syndrome are allelic disorder father had bilateral 3-4 syndactyly. Molecular analysis revealed a mutation caused by mutation in MBTPS2 (p.P148L) in the MSX2 gene, which has been associated with the Boston- S. Mizuno1, M. Naiki2, K. Yamada3, Y. Yamada3, R. Kimura3, M. Oshiro4, N. Okamoto5, Y. type of craniosynostosis in a single family (Warmer et al., 1993). Segregation Makita6, M. Seishima7, N. Wakamatsu3; analysis confirmed non-penetrance in the grandfather. 1Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 2Nagoya University Conclusion. In this four-generation family with various expression of sca- Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan, 3Institute for Developmental Research, Aichi Human Service Center, Kasugai, Aichi, Japan, 4Japanese Red Cross Nagoya Daiichi phocephaly and severe trigonocephaly, molecular analysis revealed a mis- Hospital, Nagoya, Japan, 5Osaka Medical Center and Research Institute for Maternal sense mutation in MSX2, previously described in the Boston craniosynosto- and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 6Asahikawa Medical University, Hokkaido, Japan, 7Gifu sis family. Besides unique features such as incomplete penetrance, limb University Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan. abnormalities and the cranial sutures involved, our patients share with the original family autosomal dominant inheritance with anticipation and the endocranial hypoplastic areas. Though these findings are diagnostic clues BRESEK/BRESHECK syndrome is a multiple congenital malformation cha- for MSX2-related craniosynostosis, the initial patients in this family pre- racterized by brain anomalies, retardation, ectodermal dysplasia, skeletal sented with isolated scaphocephaly and syndactyly. MSX2 analysis should deformities, ear or eye anomalies, and kidney dysplasia/hypoplasia, with therefore be considered in patients with scaphocephaly, especially if a posi- or without Hirschsprung disease and cleft palate/cryptorchidism. The syn- tive family history for craniosynostosis or syndactyly is present. drome is quite rare, but the combination of ectodermal dysplasia, vertebrae P02.046 anomaly and Hirschsprung disease is unique to this syndrome. Unusual Phenotype of Brachydactyly in a Patient with a GDF5 Splice Here, we report the fourth male patient presenting with brain anomaly, Mutation mental and growth retardation, ectodermal dysplasia, vertebral (skeletal) M. Rieger1, S. Mundlos2, S. Reif1, F. R. Kreuz1, J. Plaschke1, S. Krüger1, A. Bier1; anomaly, Hirschsprung disease, ear anomalies (low-set and large ears), 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Institut für Medizinische cryptorchidism, and kidney hypoplasia; these manifestations fulfill the cli- Genetik und Humangenetik der Charité, Berlin, Germany. nical diagnostic criteria of BRESHECK syndrome. Since all the patients with BRESEK/BRESHECK syndrome are male, and X-linked syndrome of ichthyo- sis follicularis with atrichia and photophobia (IFAP) syndrome sometimes Brachydactyly (BD) is characterised by shortening of digits due to abnormal associates with some of the features of BRESEK/BRESHECK syndrome, such development of phalanges and/or metacarpals. BD has been classified on an as mental retardation, vertebral and renal anomalies, and Hirschsprung di- anatomic basis into five types (A to E) with several subgroups. This group sease, we analyzed the causal gene of IFAP syndrome, MBTPS2, in our pati- of inherited hand and foot malformations usually follows an autosomal do- ent and identified an R429H mutation. minant inheritance. This mutation has been reported to cause the most severe type of the IFAP In recent years, mutations affecting the GDF5, a signal protein of the bone syndrome, including neonatal and infantile death. These results demonstra- morphogenic protein family, have been shown to result in skeletal malfor- te that the R429H mutation in MBTPS2 causes BRESEK/BRESHECK syndro- mation syndromes like brachydactyly type A2 (BDA2), brachydactyly type me. C (BDC), proximal symphalangism, multiple synostoses syndrome 2 and Since the original description of IFAP syndrome did not include structural acromesomelic dysplasias of the Hunter-Thompson, Grebe and DuPan ty- abnormalities, and photophobia, which is one of the triad of IFAP Syndrome, pes. is hardly diagnosed in severely intellectually disabled patients as present Here we report on 21-year-old male with hypoplasia of all middle phalanges, case, we propose BRESEK syndrome remains as a clinical entity for diagno- shortening of all metacarpals except of the 2nd metacarpal, normal height, sis of congenital anomaly syndrome. scoliosis, shortening of his arms‘ length and Madelung deformity. Complete P02.049 analysis of the growth/differentiation factor 5 (GDF5) gene identified hete- Detailed analysis of IGF2 isoforms in patients with imprinting defects rozygosity for a novel splice mutation in intron 3 (c.631+2T>G). U. Martiné1, C. Rudloff1, D. Langer1, F. Bohne1, W. Jessen1, C. Eider1, N. Bachmann2, C. Until now, no splice mutations have been described for GDF5. The pheno- Bergmann2, T. Eggermann3, B. U. Zabel4, T. Enklaar1, D. Prawitt1; type of our patient could not be classified as one of the well-known types 1Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center, Mainz, of BD, since there are overlapping features of several skeletal malformation Germany, 2Bioscientia Institute for Medical Diagnostics GmbH, Ingelheim, Germany, syndromes. Hence, our findings extend the spectrum of phenotypes caused 3Institute of Human Genetics RWTH, Aachen, Germany, 4Center for Pediatrics and by mutations in the GDF5 gene. Adolescent Medicine, University Medical Center, Freiburg, Germany. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 61 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 As part of the network „Imprinting Defects“ we aim to understand the re- coxa vara. Although none of the patient had pericarditis, sister of one of the gulatory mechanisms of the human organism to achieve monoallelic gene patients with same findings died due to cardiac problems at 34 years old. A expression and how this is altered in patients with the imprinting defects novel frameshift mutation including 1 bp homozygous deletion (c.1068delA) Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) and Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS). They in PRG4, predicting early truncation of the protein (p.Thr358fs), was found. mostly show epigenetic alterations within two clusters of imprinted genes This is the first report of PRG4 mutation in Turkish family with CACP and within the chromosomal region 11p15.5. Altered methylation at additional supports the hypothesis that only termination mutations cause phenotype imprinted gene loci can be found in a significant proportion of BWS and since all previously reported PRG4 mutations are predicted to produce a SRS patients with unknown molecular cause or pathogenic consequence. premature termination. One designated effector gene involved in BWS and SRS growth defects is P02.052 IGF2. It is hyperactivated by loss of imprinting in most BWS patients and A novel missense mutation (c.1442C>A) in the BRAF gene caused silenced in most SRS patients with 11p15.5 epimutations. The IGF2 gene Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome: Case report is transcribed from five promoters, each of which drives the transcription F. Hazan1, E. Karaca2, S. A. Koker3, H. A. Korkmaz3, T. Mese4, H. Onay2, F. Ozkinay2; of the coding region with an individual first exon. They differ in allele- and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, tissuespecificity. In addition an alternative splice site lies within the second 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatrics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey, 4Department coding exon present in all promoter isoforms. We analysed the distribution of Pediatric Cardiology, Dr. Behçet Uz Children‘s Hospital, Izmir, Turkey. of IGF2 splice-isoforms and promoter usage in selected human fetal tissues and in primary fibroblasts of BWS and SRS patients as well as in patients with multi locus hypomethylation, a patient with an unrelated overgrow- Cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome (CFCS) is a multiple congenital anomaly th phenotype and normal controls to determine disease associated isoform disorder characterized by craniofacial features, cardiac defects, ectodermal usage. In addition we established genetically engineered HEK293 cells with anomalies and neurocognitive delay. CFCS is caused by mutations in BRAF, isoformspecific IGF2 overexpression and analysed the potential of enhanced MEK1, MEK2, KRAS genes encoding proteins of the RAS/ MAPK signaling IGF2 thresholds in triggering tumorigenesis by critically altered Akt/mTOR pathway. In more than 70% of CFCS patients, BRAF gene mutations are and Erk1/2 pathways. detected. BRAF is an oncoprotein and somatic mutations occur in BRAF in P02.050 approximately 8% of all human cancers. The most common germline BRAF Investigation of notch3 in cadasil in 10 patients in Iran mutations have been identified in 7 out of 18 exons (6, 11-16). In this case M. Balali1, O. Ariani1, S. Saber1, V. Ghodsinejadkalahroudi1, M. Houshmand1,2; 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic report, we present a ten-year-old boy who had characteristic craniofacial Engineering and Biotechnology, Dep. of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of features of CFCS, short stature, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, café au lait Iran. spots, developmental delay and severe mental retardation. A novel, de novo missense mutation (c.1442C>A) leading to A481E aminoacid substitution in exon 12 of the BRAF gene was detected by sequence analysis. This mutation Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with sub cortical infarcts and was not detected in both parents. leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL is an inherited cerebrovascular disease It is considered that the novel mutation defined in the case presented cau- due to mutations of the Notch3 gene at the chromosome locus 19p13. The ses CFCS with severe mental retardation and the sequence analysis of exons symptoms of CADASIL are attributed to mutations in this gene. . Allelic va- 6, 11-16 of BRAF gene is recommended in the first step for the molecular riants of Notch3 . In addition to the clinical workup for genetic testing for diagnosis. this mutation can be used in familial or sporadic ischemic disorders of un- P02.053 determined cause to assist in confirming a diagnosis. our lab‘s CADASIL DNA Copy number variations shape human brain: The contribution of the Sequencing Test will detect approximately 85% of the mutations resulting array-CGH in the understanding of the genetic bases of congenital in the phenotype of the disease. CADASIL experts recommend that people brain malformations and cognitive disorders under 65 with the following characteristics should be tested: Depression, E. Chabchoub1,2, A. Mlika3, A. Attig2, R. Zemni2, R. Ben Mefteh2, M. Kessentini4, H. memory loss, behavior change, migraine, and/or stroke-like symptoms, Kamoun4, R. Mrad5, J. R. Vermeesch1, P. De Cock6, J. P. Fryns1; 1Centre for Human Genetics - University Hospitals of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, such as recurrent stroke at a young age (<29 years old) when associated 2Department of Genetics and Research Unit 04/UR/08-05 “Molecular Immunogenetics” with prominent white matter disease/diffuse white matter hyperintensities – Faculty of Medicine, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of Paediatrics – Faculty of Medicine, on MRI. • Lack of significant vascular risk factors. It is important to note that Sousse, Tunisia, 4Department of Genetics – University hospital Hedi Chekir and Faculty of because there is no treatment for CADASIL, a similar counseling protocol Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 5Department of Congenital and Hereditary Diseases - University to Huntington‘s disease should be followed for presymptomatic patients. It Hospital Charles Nicolle & Faculty of Medicine, Tunis, Tunisia, 6Department of Paediatric is understood that presymptomatic genetic testing for CADASIL can have Neurology and Centre for Developmental Disorders – University Hospitals of Leuven, potential benefit and clinical utility. Often under appreciated, however, are Leuven, Belgium. the types of possible adverse outcomes and, the severity and duration of the problems. The American Academy of Neurology has published recommen- dations and practice guidelines Copy number variants (CNVs) are genomic segments which are duplicated We have checked eighteen patients since then (referred to our lab or dia- or deleted among different individuals. gnosed by Dr. Aryani). Six of the eighteen cases were affected by CADASIL Following the recent technological advances leading to the development of and the others were normal molecular cytogenetic techniques and the emergence of the array compara- P02.051 tive genomic hybridization (aCGH), CNVs has gained considerable interest Eleven patients with Camptodactyly-Arthropathy syndrome in a as a source of genetic variation likely to play a role in phenotypic diversity kindred Turkish family caused by homozygous deletion in PRG4 gene and disease. E. Gül1, S. Yılmaz2, K. Bilguvar2, Ö. Kasapçopur1, M. Günel2, B. Tüysüz1; Several new genomic disorders caused by CNVs of genes whose dosage is 1İstanbul University, Cerrahpasa Medical Faculty, İstanbul, Turkey, 2Yale University, critical for the physiological function of the central nervous system (CNS) Departments of Neurosurgery and Genetics, New Haven, CT, United States. have been recently identified. We applied aCGH in a group of patients presenting CNS anomalies to map novel loci involved in brain malformations. Here, we describe some evi- The camptodactyly-arthropathy-coxa vara-pericarditis syndrome (CACP) is dence that CNVs are responsible for congenital CNS anomalies ranging from an autosomal recessive condition characterized by the association of conge- size anomalies to structural brain malformations and neural migration dis- nital or early onset camptodactyly and noninflammatory arthropathy with orders illustrated, respectively, in patients with microcephaly, agenesis of synovial hyperplasia. Progressive coxa vara deformity and/or noninflamm- corpus callosum, and pachygyria. atory pericardial or pleural effusions have been observed in some patients. Here, we discuss the mechanisms mediating these rearrangements and sug- CACP is caused by mutations in Proteoglycan 4 (PRG4) gene, encodes a pro- gest candidate genes for the respective disorders within the mapped loci. tein that presents in synovial fluid and at surface of articular cartilage and P02.054 acts as lubricating glycoprotein in protecting joints. We describe two sib- Report of one case of cerebro-oculo-nasal syndrome lings at age of 2 and 9, and two patients who are their second cousins at ages M. Trabelsi, F. Maazoul, M. Chaabouni, L. Kraoua, I. Ouertani, L. Ben Jemaa, R. Mrad, H. between 14 and 35. It was noticed that 7 distant relatives of these patients Chaabouni; share same findings. Swelling of wrist and elbows were earliest symptoms Service des Maladies Congenitales et Hereditaires, Tunis, Tunisia. of the disease, even in first years of life. The age of arthropathy onset was 1 years, and camptodactyly began around 4 years old. Severe hip and verte- bral involvement were developed during at the age of 20’s. Patients had mild Cerebro-Oculo-Nasal syndrome (CONS) is characterized by structural ano- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org62 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Method malies of the central nervous system, by ocular alterations ranging from tional methods. anophthalmia/microphthalmia to normal eyes, and by proboscis-like nares. It was first reported by Richieri-Costa and Guion-Almeida in 1993 in two pa- HTS has been used to analyse point mutations in 68 CMT families from a tients with clinical anophthalmia, abnormal nares, central nervous system defined epidemiological population. This has been performed by designing anomalies, and mental retardation. a panel containing the known CMT genes, enriching for CMT gene areas. In this report, we present an additional sporadic case of this syndrome. A Compared to exome sequencing, sequencing a panel of genes means more 1-month old boy from non-consanguineous parents with a pregnancy com- sRaemsuplltess at shorter time at a lower cost, and fewer problems with unrelated plicated by a gravid diabetes had unilateral anophthalmia, hypertelorism, findings. single nostril orifice and asymmetric mouth. He also had a faun-like ear and three preauricular appendages. Additional findings were umbilical hernia To our knowledge this is the first report to sequence all the presently known and abnormal dermatoglyphics. CNS malformations will be explored by MRI. genes related to CMT with HTS for a large population based material. These Other investigations including cardiac and abdominal ultrasonographies results will establish the CMT gene frequencies in the Norwegian population were normal. Karyotype showed a de novo mosaic reciprocal translocation which probably might be transferred to other populations. between chromosomes 2 and 3: 46,XY,t(2;3)(p22;p12)[10]/46,XY[46]. The results will be presented at the meeting. Until now about twenty cases of Cerebro-Oculo-Nasal syndrome were re- P02.057 ported. Despite marked variability, CONS is so unique that differential dia- The clinical presentation of a newborn girl with isodicentric gnosis is extremely limited because of its characteristic nasal configuration. chromosome 22 Indeed, our patient presents also proboscis-like nares. Orofacial clefting was L. Mämecke, C. Hoefers, M. Hagemann, K. Hoffmann, D. Wand; variable among reported cases, it was absent in our patient. All cases repor- Institut für Humangenetik, Halle, Germany. ted so far have been sporadic suggesting that the syndrome may be due to a new dominant mutation. Characterization of chromosomal breakpoints is planned. We assessed a ten days-old girl with bilateral praeauricular skin tags, downs- P02.055 lating palpebral fissures, micrognathia, deep-seated ears and an anal atresia Congenital myopathy caused by a novel missense mutation in the with vaginal fistula. We suspected cat eye syndrome (CES) which was con- CFL2 gene firmed by subsequent ophthalmologic evaluation describing coloboma of C. W. Ockeloen1, J. Gilhuis2, R. Pfundt1, E. Kamsteeg1, P. Agrawal3, A. Beggs3, A. Dara iris, choroid and retina. Accordingly, cytogenetic analysis identified an extra Hama-Amin4, A. Diekstra1, N. V. A. M. Knoers5, M. Lammens6, N. Van Alfen7; bisatellited marker chromosome in all metaphases of a lymphocyte culture 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, (47,XX,+idic(22) (pter-q11::q11→pter)). The finding was confirmed by FISH Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Neurology, Reinier de Graaf Group, Delft, and MLPA analyses. Further clinical studies revealed an open foramen ovale Netherlands, 3Program in Genomics and Division of Genetics, The Manton Center for and a ductus arteriosus as well as biliary atresia. Jung Min Ko et al. (2010) Orphan Disease Research, Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Neurology, Haga Hospital, The Hague, Netherlands, reported a patient with the same partial tetrasomy of chromosome 22q11.1, 5Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht University Medical Centre, Utrecht, but with milder clinical features. Netherlands, 6Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, CES is a complex malformation syndrome with a significant clinical varia- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 7Department of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen bility ranging from severely affected children to phenotypically unaffected Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. parents carrying the same cytogenetic abnormality. Accordingly, only 40% of the CES-patients present the classical triad of symptoms iris coloboma, anal anomalies, and praeauricular pits or tags. In addition, CES may be as- Nemaline myopathy and myofibrillar myopathy are heterogeneous myopa- sociated with cardiac defects, hepatic, renal and skeletal abnormalities and thies that both comprise early-onset forms. We present two sisters from a mental retardation. consanguineous Iraqi Kurdish family with predominant axial and limb gird- The cause of this clinical variability remains to be determined. The classical le weakness. Muscle biopsies showed features of both nemaline myopathy CES is present in most cases and characterized by supernumerary bisatel- and myofibrillar myopathy. We performe CdF hLo2m. ozygosity mapping in CbFoLth2 lited and isodicentric marker chromosome containing duplicated material siblings using an Affymetrix 250K Nspl SNP array. One of the overlapping of chromosome 22. The phenotype does not correlate with the size of the homozygous regions harboured the gene Because a mutation in marker chromosome. It may be speculated whether mosaic conditions, the was identified in a familyC wFLit2h nemaline myopathy, we performCFeLd2 sequence genetic background and/or epigenetic factors affect the phenotypic presen- analysis of the gene and a novel homozygous missense mutation in exon 2 tation. However, life threatening problems to consider are severe cardiac, (c.19G>A, p.Val7Met) of was identified in both siblings. encodes renal and/ or biliary defects. the protein coCfiFliLn2-2, which plays an important role in regulation of sarco- P02.058 meric actin filaments. To our knowledge, this is the second family in which Chromosome 9p deletion syndrome and sex reversal: Novel findings a mutation in causes an autosomal recessive form of congenital myo- and redefinition of the critically deleted regions pathy with feCaFtuLr2e s of both nemaline and myofibrillar myopathy. Given the R. Onesimo1, D. Orteschi2, M. Scalzone1, A. Rossodivita1, L. Nanni1, G. Zannoni3, G. clinical variability and the multitude of histological features of congenital Marrocco4, D. Battaglia1, C. Fundarò1, G. Neri2; myopathies, sequence analysis should be considered in patients pre- 1Department of Pediatrics, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy, 2Institute senting with an autosomal recessive form of congenital myopathy. of Medical Genetics, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy, 3Institute of Pathology, Catholic University School of Medicine, Rome, Italy, 4Department Pediatric P02.056 Surgery, San Camillo De Lellis, Rome, Italy. Charcot-Marie-Tooth families analysed with High-Throughput Sequencing H. Høyer1,2,3, Ø. L. Busk1, Ø. L. Holla1, L. Strand1, C. F. Skjelbred1, G. J. Braathen1,2,3, M. B. Russell2,3; Deletions of the short arm of chromosome 9 are associated with two distinct 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, clinical entities. Small telomeric 9p24.3 deletions cause genital anomalies Skien, Norway, 2Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University in male subjects, ranging from disorder of gonadal sex to genital differen- Hospital, Lørenskog, Oslo, Norway, 3Campus AHUS, Akershus University Hospital, tiation anomalies, while large terminal or interstitial deletions result in 9p- University of Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Oslo, Norway. malformation syndrome phenotypeD.M TRhTe critical region for non syndromic Background 46,XY sex reversal was assigned to a 1Mb interval of chromosome 9p, ex- tending from the telomere to the genes cluster. The 9p- syndrome was assigned to band 9p22.3p24.1, but a phenotypic map has not been esta- Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) is the most common inherited neuropathy, af- blished for this condition, probably because of the lack of detailed molecu- fecting 1 per 1,214 persons in the general population. 47 CMT related genes lar and/or phenotypic characterization, as well as frequent involvement of are known to cause CMT by altered gene dosage (20-50 %) or point muta- additional chromosome rearrangements. Here we describe a unique patient tions. with a small isolated 9p terminal deletion, characterized by array-CGH and Genetic analysis to discover point mutations have traditionally been per- FISH, who shows a complex phenotype with multiple physical anomalies, formed with Sanger sequencing, a time consuming and expensive analysis. resembling the 9p- syndrome, disorder of sex development with gonadobla- Most genetic laboratories choose to sequence only the most frequently in- stoma, congenital heart defect and epilepsy. The observed deletion includes volved genes, meaning that more than 50% of the patients remain genetic the 46, XY sex-reversal critical region, excluding the region so far associated undiagnosed. with the 9p- syndrome. Genotype-phenotype correlations are tentatively High-Throughput Sequencing (HTS) opens for the possibility to sequence established comparing our patient to seven other previously reported males many genes at the same time, fast and to a low cost compared with tradi- with isolated terminal 9p deletions, finely defined at a molecular level. Our www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 63 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 observations expand the 9p deletion clinical spectrum, and add significantly monogenic disorders - 302 (20%), pregnant women at genetic risk - 101 to the definition of a 9p- syndrome critical region. (6.5%). P02.059 The 19 registered nosologies that according to the list of the International Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with luxations, CHST3 type (Recessive Registry EUROCAT: anencephaly - 2 (0,2%), spina bifida - 16 (2.1%), ence- Larsen syndrome): Further clinical characterization and report of a phalocele - 2 (0.2%), hydrocephalus - 43 (5.6% ), microtia - 4 (0.5%), cleft novel mutation palate, cleft lip - 71 (9.3%), congenital heart diseases - 78 (10.2%), atre- P. M. Tamhankar1, H. Shah2, K. M. Girisha3; sia of the esophagus - 14 (1.8%), reduction deformities of limbs - 2 (0.2%), 1Genetics Research Center, IRR, Mumbai, India, 2Pediatric Orthopedic Service, polydactyly - 8 (1%), diaphragmatic hernia - 31 (4%), renal agenesis and Department of Orthopedics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India, 3Genetics Clinic, dysgenesis - 94 (12.3%), herniated umbilical cord - 6 (0.7 %), gastroschi- Department of Pediatrics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal, India. sis - 8 (1%), Down’s syndrome - 178 (23.4%), multiplex birth defects - 110 (14.5%). Thus, the register will allow determining the frequency and structure of the Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia with luxations, CHST3 type (OMIM1C4H30S9T53) congenital malformations and hereditary diseases, to monitor the dynamics is an autosomal recessive chondrodysplasia predominantly affecting joints, of the load of hereditary and congenital disorders in the population of the spine and epiphyses. Mutations in carbohydrate sulfotransferase 3 ( ) Republic of Kazakhstan. (OMIM603799) have been identified to cause this condition. WCe HdSeTs3cribe P02.062 the clinical features of three patients in a large highly inbred Indian fami- New TUBB3 gene mutation in a woman with CFEOM3 and brain ly with a novel homozygous mutation g.G144S (p.431 G>A) in . All abnormalities of them had thickened mitral valves and short metacarpals. We emphasize A. Drielsma1,2, I. Pirson1, P. Jissendi3, M. Pandolfo4, M. Abramowicz2; thickened mitral valves, short metacarpals, hallux valgus and bifid epiphy- 1IRIBHM - Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium, 2Department of Medical sis of distal phalanx of thumbs are additional features of this condition that Genetics, Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Neuroradiology, should be looked into while evaluating patients with multiple joint disloca- Hôpital Erasme-ULB, Brussels, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, Hôpital Erasme- tions. ULB, Brussels, Belgium. P02.060 Advances in Cohen syndrome diagnosis using Next Generation Sequencing Congenital fibrosis of extraocular muscles type 3 (CFEOM3) is a cranial dys- R. Tita1, L. Dosa1, V. Bizzarri1, M. Baldassarri1, E. Lapi2, R. Tenconi3, S. Buoni4, L. Zelante5, innervation disorder characterized by ophthalmoplegia and ptosis, thought M. F. Bedeschi6, B. De Vries7, S. R. Lalani8, A. Selicorni9, F. Brancati10, R. Grasso11, S. to result from defect in axonal guidance. Isolated CFEOM3 results from Kuzbari12, P. Sarda13, P. Blancet13, M. A. Mencarelli1, I. Longo1, M. Bruttini1, F. Ariani1, F. mutations in microtubules-associated KIF21A and TUBB3 genes. CFEOM3 Mari1, A. Renieri1; caused by TUBB3 gene mutation may also be associated with facial wea- 1Medical Genetics, Department of Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2UO kness, congenital contractures, intellectual deficiency, progressive polyneu- Medical Genetics, AOU Meyer, Florence, Italy, 3Via Agnusdei, 26, Padova, Italy, 4Child ropathy and brain anomalies as dysgenesis of the corpus callosum, anterior Neuropsychiatric Unit, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Medical Genetics Service, IRCCS „Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza“, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy, 6UOD Genetica commissure, internal capsule, corticospinal tracts and basal ganglia. Other Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milano, Italy, mutations of the same gene are reported in patients without CFEOM who 7Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, present a wide range of cortical dysplasia including neuronal migration dis- Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College orders associated with pontocerebellar hypoplasia. of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 9Clinical Genetics, l‘Ospedale Nuovo di Monza, We report on a 26 years old woman who suffered from severe congenital Monza, Italy, 10CSS-Mendel Institute, Rome, Italy, 11IRCCS MEDEA, Bosisio Parini, Lecco, strabismus, ophthalmoplegia, unilateral ptosis and psychomotor retardati- Italy, 12Banque d‘ADN, Laboratoire de Biochimie Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, on. CFEOM3 was diagnosed during strabismus surgery. She also has mini- France, 13Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire, Montpellier, France. mal pyramidal syndrome with conserved muscular strength but fatigability and slowness. Electroencephalogram, somatosensory evoked potentials and intelligence were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging showed dysplastic Cohen syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by de- and hypoplastic vermis, dysmorphic and small corpus callosum, hypopla- velopmental delay, visual impairment, typical facial gestalt (wave-shaped/ stic right cerebral hemisphere and peduncle, absent anterior commissure, down-slanting palpebral fissures, short-upturned philtrum, prominent in- asymmetric caudate nuclei and dilated ventricles. cisors, beak-shaped nose, low-hairline), intellectual deficit (ID) and neutro- Therefore, we sequenced TUBB3 gene in this patient and found a de novo penia. The conventional mutation screening, performed by DHPLC and/or heterozygous missense mutation. This mutation affects a highly conserved Sanger sequencing, is time-consuming and has relatively high costs because amino acid, is predicted to be damaging by Polyphen2 software and was not of the absence of hot-spots and to the high number of exons of the causative reported in patients with CFEOM3 (Tischfield, 2010) nor cortical dysplasia COH1 gene. Thus, we designed a Next-Generation Sequencing protocol en- (Poirier, 2010) until now. Our finding will help to determine the genotype- abling detection of variants in the whole coding region. We used a method phenotype correlation of the TUBB3-related spectrum. coupling selective amplification to the 454 Roche DNA sequencing platform P02.063 (Genome-Sequencer-junior). This technology allowed us to identify the se- Unknown CNVs in cohort of 52 Bulgarian patients with learning cond mutation in patients previously analysed by DHPLC and MLPA and to disability and congenital malformations diagnose new patients. Overall the clinical picture of our cohort of 23 pati- S. Hadjidekova1, D. M. Avdjieva-Tzavella2, B. B. Rukova1, D. V. Nesheva1, T. Radka2, T. Radka2, D. Toncheva1; ents indicates that the key features of the syndrome are ID, typical facial ge- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2State stalt, narrow hands/feet with tapering fingers, myopia and/or retinopathy University Pediatrics Hospital “Queen Evdokia”, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. that are present in 100% of cases. Neutropenia, joint hyperlaxity and micro- cephaly are present in more than 80%. Truncal obesity and social behaviour are present in about 70%. Interestingly, we identified mitral insufficiency in Introduction. The increasing resolution of DNA-microarrays and the techni- about 20%. In one case aortic and tricuspidal insufficiency was also present. ques optimization allow detection of larger (> Mb) aberrations and a large Cardiac anomalies have not been previously reported in patients with docu- number of small CNVs, whose clinical significance in some cases is unknown. mented COH1 mutations. Overall, after the use of a combination of the most The interpretation of CNVs with unknown clinical significance remains still sensitive available molecular techniques, the phenotype of Cohen syndrome a challenge. due to COH1 mutations is quite homogeneous. We thus recommend to re- Materials and methods. Oligo array-CGH was applied in 52 patients with de- quest COH1 analysis only for patients with the core phenotype. velopmental delay and multiple congenital anomalies in order to unravel P02.061 the underlying genetic abnormalities. We have used BlueGnome CytoChip Monitoring of Congenital Malformations and Hereditary Pathology oligo 2X105K microarray, v1.1, with 35kbp backbone resolution. G. Abildinova, A. Nagimtayeva, R. Nazyrova, M. Utsiyeva; Results. A total of 247 CNVs were detected, of which 15 pathogenic (7 dele- National Research Center for Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. tions, duplications 8), 124 normal (62 deletions, 62 duplications) and 108 with unknown clinical significance (68 deletions, 40 duplications). Discussion. Due to insufficient data for the Bulgarian population we made In order to study the frequency of congenital and hereditary diseases de- an individual assessment of each variant. In our study 19 variations in veloped a computerized data base „Genetic Registry“. The register contains chromosomal loci 2q37.3, 10q11.22, Xp22 were found in over 5% patients, information about 1,500 patients and fetuses with birth defects, genetic which gave us a reason to suppose that they were probably not pathogenic. disorders, their complex inspection and diagnosis. The structure of the re- Twenty-five of the variations occurring in patients with established large www.eshg.org gister: birth defects - 759 (51%), chromosomal abnormality - 338 (w22w.5%w).,e shg.org64 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 M. C. Gil-Rodríguez1, J. Wierzba2, A. Polucha3, B. Puisac1, M. Arnedo1, E. Teresa-Rodrigo1, D. Winnicka3, M. Hernández1, A. Vicente-Gabas4, C. Baquero4, J. Limon2, F. J. Ramos1,4, J. pathological aberrations associated with specific phenotype. Therefore, we Pié1; have assumed that probably they have no pathogenic nature. Thirty-five of 1Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Medical University of Gdansk, Gdansk, Poland, 3Children´s University Hospital, Lublin, Poland, 4Hospital Clinico Universitario the other variants do not contain OMIM genes. „Lozano Blesa“, Zaragoza, Spain. Conclusion. So from total 108 unknown CNVs as potentially pathogenic re- main to be seen only 29 variations. Of these, only one aberration in Xq22.1 can be directly related to patient’s clinical phenotype. This gave us a reason to accept this deletion as potentially pathogenic. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a dominant inherited diNsoIPrdBeLr cha- racterized by facial dysmorphism, growth and cognitive impairment, limb Acknowledgements: Grant 02/76-21.12.2009, National Science Fund, Bul- malformations and multiple organ involvement. Mutations in gene garia. etiologically account for 60% of CdLS patients. This gene encodes a key re- P02.064 gulator of the Cohesin complex, which controls sister chromatid segregati- Congenital myasthenic syndromes: impact of genotype-phenotype on. TS affects about one in 2000 live born females and results from complete correlation on strategy and efficiency of genetic testing A. Abicht1,2, M. Dusl2, C. Gallenmüller2, V. Guergueltcheva2,3, U. Schara4, A. Della Marina4, or partial absence of one of the X chromosomes, frequently accoNmIpPaBnLied by E. Wibbeler4, S. Almaras2, V. Mihaylova2, M. von der Hagen5, A. Hübner5, A. Chaouch6, J. S. cell-line mosaicism. Müller6, H. Lochmüller6; Here, we report a patient with CdLS due to a mutation in the gene 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum (MGZ), Munich, Germany, 2Friedrich-Baur-Institut, (c.1445_1448delGAGA) and mosaic TS (mos 45,X/46,XX karyotype). This Ludwig Maximilians University, Munich, Germany, 3Clinic of Neurology, University patient showed the classical and predominant phenotype of CdLS, although Hospital Alexandrovska, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Paediatric Neurology, without limb reduction. She was also clinically diagnoseNdI wPBitLh TS because of University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Children‘s Hospital, Technical University Dresden, two typical recognizable features: the peripheral lymphedema and the web- Dresden, Germany, 6Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon bed neck. Molecular characterization showed that the mutation was Tyne, United Kingdom. present in all the tissues analyzed from different embryonic origins (meso- derm and ectoderm); while FISH analyses reveaNleIdP BthLat the percentage of cells with monosomy X was low and tissue-specific. Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are clinically and genetically he- terogeneous disorders characterized by a neuromuscular transmission de- These fiNndIPinBgLs indicate that, ontogenically, the mutation appeared before the mosaic monosomy X. Moreover, the recent identification of fra- fect. Even though CMS are genetic disorders they are highly treatable, and meshift mutations in colon cancer cells associated with chromosome the appropriate drug treatment depends on the underlying genetic defect. aneuploidy suggests that it could affect faithful chromosome segregation. This highlights the importance of genetic testing in CMS. In recent years, the The coexistence in several patients of both these rare disorders raises the molecular basis of CMS has constantly broadened and disease-associated issue of whether there is indeed a cause-effect association. We hypothesize mutations have been identified in 14 genes encoding proteins of the neuro- that the NIPBL mutation might be responsible for the loss of one of the X muscular junction. In the dawn of novel sequencing strategies we report on chromosomes in this patient. our 14-year experience in traditional Sanger-based mutation screening of a P02.067 large cohort of 680 independent patients with suspected CMS. In addition to Costello syndrome - a long way to diagnosis most known CMS-causing genes, we analyzed the functional candidate genes Y. Mehraein, M. Pfob, M. Eggert, S. Müller, O. Steinlein; LRP4, VACHT, and CNTN1. In total, we identified disease-causing mutations Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. in 299 patients (44%) of patients in various known CMS genes, confirming the high degree of genetic heterogeneity associated with the disease. Apart from four known founder mutations, and a few additional recurrent mutati- Costello syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder associated with ons, the majority of variants are private, found in single families. Genotype- postnatal growth retardation, facial dysmorphic features, intellectual defi- phenotype correlations reported previously in the literature were extended cit as well as skin and cardiac abnormalities. Only a small number of cases and refined. Based on these results, we propose an algorithm for genetic with Costello syndrome has been identified so far. The majority of cases is testing in CMS. caused by de novo mutations in the ras family oncogene (HRAS - localized P02.065 in 11p15.5). Here we report a case that took a long time to be diagnosed Management of Pain and Fatigue in The Joint Hypermobility correctly. Syndrome (Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome, Hypermobility Type): Principles The 26 months old girl presented with respiratory and feeding problems, and Proposal for a Multidisciplinary Approach postnatal growth retardation with relative macrocephaly, typical facial dys- M. Castori1, S. Morlino1, C. Celletti2, M. Celli3, F. Camerota2, P. Grammatico1; morphism, cardiac arrhythmia, deep creases of hands and feet, loose abun- 1Medical Genetics, Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, San Camillo- Forlanini Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, dant skin and sparse curly hair. Conventional chromosome analysis revealed Sapienza University, Umberto I Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3Department of Pediatrics, a normal female karyotyp 46,XX. Previously performed testing including ar- Sapienza University, Umberto I Hospital, Rome, Italy. ray-CGH, muscle biopsy, enzyme histochemistry, quantitative Western blot, FAMILION screening for various heart related ion channel mutations and amino acid screening in liquor were without pathological findings. Joint hypermobility syndrome (JHS), or Ehlers-Danlos syndrome hyperm- Due to the patient`s phenotypical characteristics we initiated the molecular obility type (EDS-HT), is a underdiagnosed heritable connective tissue dis- analysis of the HRAS gene. After more then two years of diagnostic procedu- order characterized by generalized joint hypermobility and a wide range res Costello syndrome could finally be confirmed by a heterozygous mutati- of visceral, pelvic, neurologic and cognitive dysfunctions. Deterioration of on c.34G>A, p.G12S, in exon 2 as a de novo mutation. Equal contribution of quality of life is mainly associated with chronic pain and fatigue. Except for the first and the second author. the recognized effectiveness of physiotherapy for some musculoskeletal fea- P02.068 tures, there are no standardized guidelines for the assessment and treat- Two cases of craniofrontonasal dysplasia ment of pain and fatigue. In this work, a practical classification of pain pre- Š. Vejvalková1, A. Křepelová1, M. Vlčková1, H. Krásničanová2, M. Havlovicová1; sentations and factors contributing in generating painful sensations in JHS/ 1Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics Charles University, 2nd Faculty of Medicine and Universit, Praha 5 Motol, Czech Republic, 2Pediatric Clinic, Charles University, 2nd EDS-HT is proposed. Pain can be topographically classified in articular limb Faculty of Medicine and Universit, Praha 5 Motol, Czech Republic. (acute/subacute and chronic), muscular limb (myofascial and fibromyalgia), neuropathic limb, back/neck, abdominal and pelvic pain, and headache. For selected forms of pain, specific predisposing characteristics are outlined. Craniofrontonasal dysplasia (CFND) is an X-linked craniofacial disorder Fatigue appears as the result of multiple factors, such as muscle weakness, with an atenuated manifestation in males, in which affected females show respiratory insufficiency, unrefreshing sleep, dysautonomia, intestinal mal- distinct picture of skeletal malformations incuding striking hypertelorism, absorption, reactive depression/anxiety and excessive use of analgesics. A synostosis of coronal suture, syndactyly and preaxial polydactyly but wit- set of lifestyle recommendations to instruct patients as well as specific inve- hout intelectual deficit. stigations aimed at characterizing pain and fatigue are identified. Available We report 2 new cases - the first girl without positive family history shows treatment options are discussed in the set of a structured multidisciplinary typical craniofacial features with aditional nonfrequent signs - hypoplasia approach based on reliable outcome tools. of corpus callosum, asymetrical mammils, axilar pterygium and slight hy- P02.066 poplasia of pectoral muscle on the left side combined with synpolydactyly Cornelia de Lange syndrome with mutation in NIPBL and mosaic of left thumb. Turner syndrome in the same individual Mutation analysis revealed a new non published mutation c.161>A (change p.Pro>Gln in codon 54) in exon 2 of EFBN1 gen. The father didnot show hy- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 65 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 FGFR2 pertelorism and later was excluded as a carrier of causal mutation. between and renal and vesicoureteral abnormalities in human em- Second case - newborn girl expresed craniostenosis of coronal suture with bryonic development. typical hypertelorism, hypoplasia of corpus callosum and suspection from P02.071 hearing loss (patological TEOAE). First suspection from craniofacial dys- Ventricular septal defect in crouzon syndrome: case report morphism was on prenatal ultrasound screening where picture of cloverleaf N. Unal1, F. Hazan2, A. Aykut3, T. Mese1, H. Onay3, F. Ozkinay3; skull was seen. 1Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, izmir, Turkey, Mutation analysis revealed known causal mutation c.451G>A in exon 3 of 2Department of Medical Genetics, Dr. Behcet Uz Children‘s Hospital, izmir, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Ege University Faculty of Medicine, izmir, Turkey. EFBN1 gen. The father has significant hypertelorism, MG findings in father and other family members are not available yet. P02.069 Crouzon Syndrome (CS) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disease, which Identification of a novel EFNB1 mutation in a patient with is characterized by clinical triad of cranium deformity, facial anomalies and Craniofrontonasal Syndrome and right hallux duplication A. GEZDIRICI1, O. F. Karatas1, H. Ulucan1, E. Yosunkaya1, M. Seven1, A. Yuksel2, M. Ozen1; exophthalmia. Crouzon Syndrome is caused by the mutations in the FGFR2 1Cerrahpasa Medical School Dep. of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif gene. Same gene mutations are observed in Apert, Pfeiffer and Jackson-Weiss University, Istanbul, Turkey. syndromes as well. Cardiac anomalies are detected in 10 % of the patients with Apert Syndrome. According to the literature, cardiac anomalies have been reported in only three patients with CS, but there is no report on car- Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS) is a rare X-linked dominant disorder diac anomalies, neither in patients with Pfeiffer nor the ones with Jackson- characterized by a more severe manifestation in heterozygous females Weiss syndrome. We describe here a 10 year old CS patient with ventricular than in hemizygous males. Typical manifestations involve hypertelorism septal defect. A heterozygous 868G>C (Trp290Arg) mutation was detected with telecanthus, widow’s peak, frontal bossing, craniosynostosis, a bifid bKye ys ewqourednsc:e analysis in the FGFR2 gene. The patient’s mother with si milar or broad nasal tip, wiry hair, and grooved fingernails. Besides, anterior craniofacial features had the same mutation. cranium bifidum, axillary pterygia, joint abnormalities, cleft lip and palate, Crouzon Syndrome, FGFR2 gene, ventricular septal defect unilateral breast hypoplasia, diaphragmatic hernia, asymmetErFicN lBo1wer limb P02.072 shortness, and agenesis of the corpus callosum are within the rare manife- A CSF1R mutation in a family with hereditary diffuse stations of CFNS. Most CNFS patients have mutations in the located leukencephalopathy with spheroids at chromosome Xq13.1. This gene encodes a member of the ephrin family K. Platzer1, S. Biskup2,3,4, H. Freitag5, C. Ganos6, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, Y. Hellenbroich1; protein, Ephrin B1, which interacts with Eph tyrosine kinase receptors. It 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 3Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Tübingen, Germany, functions in the formation of tissue boundaries. Here, we report a 7-month- 4German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen, Germany, 5Röntgenpraxis im old female patient who has brachycephaly, frontal bossing, hypertelorism, Tesdorpfhaus, Lübeck, Germany, 6Movement Disorders Group, Department of Neurology, telecanthus, downslantinEgF pNaBlp1 ebral fissures, broad nasal rdoeo tn oavnod bifid University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. nasal tip. She also had large anterior fontanelle and broad right hallux. To CSF1R confirm CFNS diagnosis, was sequenced and a novel c.402 T>C heterozygous mutation in exon 2 was detected. This change is not re- Mutations in the colony stimulating factor 1 receptor gene ( ) have ported in the SNP databases. Isoleucine is a highly conserved amino acid and recently been shown to cause hereditary diffuse leukencephalopathy with its replacemdeen nto tvoo threonine in codon 134 may result in a conformational spheroids (HDLS), an autosomal-dominant disease leading to progressive change in the protein. Parents were normal both clinically and genotypically, cognitive and motor dysfunction. We describe a family from Northern Ger- confirming mutation in the patient. This mutation was not previous- many with an apparently autosomal-dominant early onset frontotemporal ly reported for CFNS. dementia syndrome. Multiple MRI scans of a 38 year old clinically presy- P02.070 mptomatic woman showed slowly progressive bifrontotemporal cortical Can FGFR2 mutations explain craniosynostosis with atrophy and asymmetric hyperintense white matter lesions. Her father and hydroureteronephrosis? paternal grandfather both suffered of early onset and rapidly progressing C. Vanlerberghe1, C. Collet2, E. Closset3, S. Petit4, S. Manouvrier1,5, C. Vincent-Delorme1; dementia and peNrsOoTnCaHli3ty change starting in their late 40s, leading to death 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Jeanne de Flandre hospital, CHRU, Lille, France, within a decade. An underlying CADASIL in the family was excluded as mole- 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Lariboisière hospital, APHP, Paris, France, 3Department of Maternal and fetal pathology, Jeanne de Flandre hospital, CHRU, Lille, cular analysis of showed no pathogenic mutation. Next-generation- France, 4Department of Anatomopathology, Centre de Biologie-Pathologie, CHRU, Lille, sCeSqFu1eRncing of nine known early-onset dementia genes identified the very France, 5Nord de France University, Lille, France. likely heterozygous disease causing mutation c.2381T>C (p.I794T) in the Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) -gene in the female index patient. FGFR2 P02.073 mutations are well known in Danon disease - different phenotypic expression a family with syndromic craniosynostosis. We report the first case of mutation as- hypertrophic cardiomyopathy sociated with craniosynostosis and bilateral hydroureteronephrosis. A. V. Popoiu, G. Doros, C. Popoiu; Children‘s Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. During the second pregnancy of unrelated parents, a megacystis and a me- gaureter were detected by ultrasound examination at 10 weeks-of-gestation (WG). Subsequently craniosynostosis of the metopic, sagittal and coronal The rare X-linked dominant lysosomal disorder called Danon disease, is the sutures was seen at 26 WG. Chromosomes on amniotic fluid were normdale. consequence of the mutation of the lysosome - associated membrane pro- Tneorvmoination of pregFnGaFnRc2y was performed at 28 WG. Pathology confirmed teine 2 gene (LAMP2), affecting myocytes and skeletal muscles by accumu- the renal malformation and a trigonocephaly. Molecular analysis found a lation of intracytoplasmatic autophagic vacuoles. The characteristic clinical heterozygous mutation that had been previously reported in triad of the Danon disease include mental retardation, severe hypertrophic Crouzon, Pfeiffer and Jackson-Weiss syndromes. cardiomyopathy, skeletal myopathy. We describe a case of Danon disease, belonging to a family with known hy- In vitro Rare renal malformations have been previously clinically reported with pertrophic cardiomyopathy with 3 affected generation. The grandmother syndromic craniosynostosis. studies have shown that FGFRs are ex- and mother are known with mild hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A sister pressed in the ureteric buInd vainvod in the metanephric mesenchyme of the de- and brother of the affected mother, were both diagnosed with hypertrophic velfogpfri2n g kidney. Exogeneous FGFs affect growth and maturation of both or- cardiomyopathy and died at 24 years of age, respectively at 36, despite a gans in cultured tissues. FGFR s2tudies on mice demonstrated that the loss pacemaker implantation. of often lead to multiple ureteric buds, renal dysplasia and obstructed The son was diagnosed at the age of 14 years with mild mental retardati- hydroureter. Therefore FtGheF R1 sFiGgnFaRl2ing pathway is critical at early and on, limb-girdle dystrophy, severe hypertrophic obstructive cardiomypathy, later stages of kidney development. WPW syndrome. He presents a massive concentric ventricular hypertrophy Other stuFdGieFsR s2howed and overexpression in renal cell car- of 45 mm, and 2 years later atrial flutter occurred. The parents refused heart cinoma. A case of bladder papillary carcinoma with Apert syndrome and a transplantation or myomectomy and a defibrilator was implanted. The pa- germline mutFatGiFoRn 2has also been previously reported. tient has 2 healthy sisters, were the genetic counseling is of greatest impor- tance. Thus, we think that loss-of-function mutation in this case could ex- Conclusion: The LAMP2 mutation was proved as an important cause of plain the whole phenotype. This report highlights the probable relationship massive cardiac hypertrophy with high mortality in the absence of heart www.eshg.org www.eshg.org66 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 transplantation. The variable phenotypic expression with a usually milder q34.13. Reports of additional patients with aberrations in this region will be clinical presentation in females is the case in our patients too. needed to establish karyotype-phenotype correlations and to gain informa- P02.074 tion on the contribution of individual genes for the clinical manifestations. Darier Disease - a family case report P02.077 D. F. Albu1,2, C. C. Albu1,2, E. Severin1; Interstitial deletion of 3p22.1p24.1 including haploinsufficiency 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania, 2Alco San of the MLH1 gene in a boy evaluated for developmental delay, short Clinic, Bucharest, Romania. stature and physical anomalies B. Maas1, C. Sutter1, J. Janssen1, A. Jauch1, K. Hinderhofer1, S. Karch2, U. Moog1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2University Children‘s Hospital, INTRODUCTION: Keratosis follicularis, also known as Darier disease or Da- Heidelberg, Germany. rier-White disease, is an autosomal dominantly inherited genodermatosis Introduction: characterized by greasy hyperkeratotic papules in seborrheic regions, nail abnormalities, and mucous membrane changes. Molecular karyotyping is a well established method in the The disease was first reported independently by Darier and White in 1889. evaluation of children with developmental disorders and/or physical ano- MATERIAL AND METHODS: We present a family with Darier Disease on malies leading to the diagnosis of a relevant chromosomal imbalance in 10- three generatsioknins. rash, 15% of cases. However, unanticipated findings may be a major challenge. We Dermatological examination and complete general examination of the pati- present the case of a boy with developmental delay and multiple physical ents showed lesions on the hands and nails and lesions affecting aCnaosem Raleiepso irnt :w hom array analysis revealed a concomitant diagnosis of a tu- the mucous membranes. mor disposition syndrome. Skin Biopsy, histopatologically examination of the skin and DNA Analysis A boy of 4 years of age was evaluated for short stature, psy- was necessary to confirm the diagnosis. chomotor retardation, hypotonia and physical anomalies (e.g. hypospadias, RESULTS: A skin biopsy show characteristic degeneration of cells in the epi- pectus excavatum). Physical examination also showed facial dysmorphism dermis (acantholysis) and abnormally increased keratinisation (hy perkera- (flat fadcee ,n doovow n-slanting palpebral fissures), inverted nipples and hypere- tinisation). mia of fingertips and toes. Array analysis (Affymetrix® CytoScan HD) sho- DNA Analysis of all the patients revealed mutations in the ΑΤΠ2Α2gene. wed a 9.5 Mb interstitial deletion on chromosome 3p22.1-p24.1 not CONCLUSIONS: We present a family with Darier Disease on three generati- detectable by G-banding anMalLyHsi1s . The deletion was confirmed by FISH ana- ons, a rare disorder with variable penetrance, clinical and genetic variability lDyissisc uwsisthio pnr:o bes specific for 3p22.3. The deleted region comprised about 60 in the same family. refseq genes among which (confirmed by MLPA). P02.075 Overlapping interstitial deletions of 3p22-p24 so far have been Clinical manifestation of congenital bilateral, profound sensorineural rarely reported and most often predate molecular karyotyping. They are hearing loss and adult-onset retinitis pigmentosa is not always Usher associated with global devMelLoHp1m, ental delay, CHD, short stature and mild syndrome dysmorphic features. In the present case, based on haploinsufficiency of A. Singer; the mismatch repair gene a diagnosis of Lynch syndrome (HNPCC) Genetic Institute, Ashkelon, Israel. wCoans callussoi oenst:a blished and surveillance guidelines were discussed with the parents. This case illustrates that any chromosomal imbalance has to Usher syndrome is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by a be evaluated carefully for alterations potentially affecting cellular key pa- combination of congenital hearing impairment and retinitis pigmentosa thways as deletions of tumor suppressor genes with implications for health (RP). Three types of Usher syndrome are known and differ by the time of management. onset of the symptoms, severity and progressiveness of deafness and addi- P02.078 tional vestibular dysfunction. Several genes are known to be associated with After a long diagnostic journey: Duplication 17q25.1 in a child with the disease. Patients with type II Usher syndrome have congenital bilateral multiple disabilities sensorineural hearing loss that is mild to moderate in the low frequencies D. Wahl1, U. Heinrich2, M. Gabert2, G. Buheitel3, I. Rost2; and severe to profound in the higher frequencies, intact vestibular respon- 1Practice for genetic counselling and psychotherapy, Augsburg, Germany, 2Centre for ses, and bilateral retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 3II. Children‘s Hospital We describe a 30 years old female whose parents are first cousins of Mo- of the Central Clinic, Augsburg, Germany. roccan origin. She has congenital deafness and has been referred by her ophthalmologist because of recently diagnosed RP. A clinical diagnUoSsHis2 oAf, UGPshRe9r8 synd DroFmNeB 3ty1p)e II has been suggested. However a molecular workup About 20% of the children with syndromic appearence show submicro- including testing of the three genes known to cause the disease ( FA- scopic duplications and deletions, which are detectable by high resolution M161Aand were all negative. Array CGH-diagnostic platforms. We give an account of a meanwhile nearly A founder mutation (c.1355_6delCA, p.Thr452SerfsX3) in the RP gene eight years old disabled girl, who had already been presented to a genetic has been later described in Moroccan-Jews. Our patient was found to counsellor as a new born child because of prematurity (34th weeks of ge- be homozygous to the founder mutation and her parents were heterozygous station), microcephalus, atrial septal defect, stenosis of the left bronchus, to this mutation. Information was given to the family during genetic coun- sickle feet, muscle weakness, dysmorphic features and feeding problems. A seling explaining that Usher syndrome was ruled out and a plausible expla- chromosomal analysis was performed and showed a normal female karyo- nation would be that she is expressing two independent diseases. Recently type. In the further course of her development, the girl showed profound she was tested for mutation in the TMC1 gene associated with autosomal psychomotor retardation, speech delay, mental retardation, recurring infec- recessive deafness and was found homozygous for the c.1939T > C delete- tions and early behavioural problems. On the occasion of the second presen- rious mutation. tation at the age of 2 ½ years to the genetic counsellor the first array-CGH was performed using a low-resolution BAC array (resolution 0,44 Mb). The P02.076 result was interpreted as normal. Because of the persisting impression of a Interstitial 9q34.11-q34.13 deletion in a patient with severe syndromal clinical picture the parents continued presenting her daughter to intellectual disability, hydrocephalus and cleft lip/palate A. Tzschach, U. Grasshoff, K. Schäferhoff, M. Bonin, A. Dufke, M. Wolff, K. Haas-Lude, A. the genetic counsellor. An Angelman-Syndrome as well as a Rett-Syndrome Bevot, O. Riess; were excluded. Finally the Array-CGH-examination was repeated using a University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. higher resolution (resolution 25 to 100 kb) and revealed a 830 kb duplicati- on 17q25.1 that is thought to be causal. The results of the parental analysis will be presented. This case emphazises the benefit of applicating a high re- Interstitial deletions of chromosome bands 9q34.11-q34.13 are rare. We solution array after a normal result with a low resolution array. report on a 16-year-old female patient with severe intellectual disability, P02.079 congenital hydrocephalus, cleft lip and palate, talipes equinovarus, epilepsy, 22q13.3 deletion syndrome - report of three cases kyphoscoliosis, convergent strabismus, severe short stature, dystrophy and S. Bichev1, R. V. Vazharova1, I. Bradinova1, S. Andonova1, A. Savov1, V. Bojinova2, E. facial dysmorphic signs. Array analysis revealed a 3.7 Mb interstitial deleti- Simeonov3, I. Kremensky1; on in 9q34.11-q34.13. The deletion harbors more than 60 genes, including 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2USBALNP „Saint Naum“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3University Hospital „Alexandrovska“, Sofia, Bulgaria. SPTAN1, DYT1/TOR1A, ABL1, ASS1, LAMC3, POMT1, DOLK and GLE1, mu- tations in which have previously been associated with monogenic disorders. This is the first patient with a deletion of this size and position in 9q34.11- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 67 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Phelan-McDermid syndrome (22q13.3 deletion syndrome) is characterized ted with short stature, brachycephaly, arched eyebrows, left-sided ptosis, by neonatal hypotonia, global developmental delay, absent to severely de- short neck, and finger-like thumbs. layed speech, and normal to accelerated growth. Most individuals have mo- We compare the phenotypes of our two patients with distinct mutations af- derate to profound intellectual disability. Other features include large fleshy fecting the RPL5 gene. hands, dysplastic toenails, and decreased perspiration that results in a ten- P02.082 dency to overheat. Behavior characteristics include mouthing or chewing Diencephalic-mesencephalic junction dysplasia: A novel recessive non-food items, decreased perception of pain, and autistic-like affect. brain malformation Phelan-McDermid syndrome results from terminal or interstitial deletion M. S. Zaki1, S. N. Saleem2, W. B. Dobyns3, J. Barkovich4, H. Bartsch5, A. Dales5, M. Asharti6, of chromosome 22q13.3. On rare occasion an apparently balanced chromo- A. Grijalvo-Perez7, J. G. Gleeson7; some rearrangement or a mutation disrupts SHANK3. We performed MLPA 1National Research Centre, Dokki,, Egypt, 2Radiology Department, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt, 3Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children‘s Research Institute, Seattle, and whole genome array CGH analysis in 68 patients with mental retardati- WA 98195-6320., Seattle, WA, United States, 4Department of Radiology and Biomedical on/congenital anomalies. Imaging, University of California, San Francisco, 94143, USA, San Francisco, CA, United In three patients the analysis revealed the presence of interstitial deletion of States, 5Multimodal Imaging Laboratory (MMIL), Department of Radiology and 22q13.3 chromosome region encompassing SHANK3 gene. In two of them Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, 92093 USA, San Diego, CA, United this finding was combined with duplication of 20p chromosome. The seve- States, 6Diffusion Tensor Image Analyses and Brain Morphometry Center, Children’s rity of the clinical presentation varies among the three patients. All of them Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Radiology, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, have abnormal behavior phenotype (autistic like). The impact of the additio- Philadelphia PA 19104 USA, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7Neurogenetics Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Neurosciences and Pediatrics, Rady nal finding of 20p duplications to the clinical features will be discussed. Children’s Hospital, University of California, San Diego, 92093 USA, San Diego, CA, P02.080 United States. A unique case of familial Diamond-Blackfan anemia H. S. Sorte1, Y. Y. Sheng2, O. K. Rødningen1, R. Lyle1, B. Zeller3, A. Stray-Pedersen1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ullevaal, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 3Department of We describe six patients from three unrelated consanguineous Egyptian Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. families with a novel characteristic brain malformation at the level of the diencephalic-mesencephalic junction (DMJ). Diagnostic testing including high resolution karyotyping and extended metabolic screening were nor- Diamond-Blackfan anemia (OMIM #105650) is a rare, autosomal dominant mal. Brain MRI demonstrated a dysplasia of the DMJ with a characteristic condition characterized by congenital erythroid aplasia with normal leuko- “butterfly”-like contour of the midbrain on axial sections. Additional ima- cytes and platelets. Half of the patients have associated malformations of ging features included variable degrees of supratentorial ventricular dilata- upper limb and craniofacial region and are growth retarded. DBA cases are tion and hypoplasia to complete agenesis of the corpus callosum. Diffusion mostly sporadic, only 10-25% are familial. DBA is genetically heterogeneous. tensor imaging showed diffuse hypomyelination and lack of an identifiable Causal variants have been identified in nine ribosomal genes, and diagnostic corticospinal tract. All patients displayed severe cognitive impairment, post- tests are clinical available for only a limited number of them. natal progressive microcephaly, axial hypotonia, spastic quadriparesis and We present a 6 year old boy with classical DBA. He was diagnosed in early seizures. Autistic features were noted in older cases. Talipes equinovarus, childhood with severe anemia, is currently transfusion dependent and on non-obstructive cardiomyopathy and persistent hyperplastic primary vi- steroid treatment. He has short stature and dysmorphic facial features. His treous were additional findings in two families. One of the patients required paternal grandfather had DBA and died of liver sarcoma, 26 years old, after shunting for hydrocephalus, however, this yielded no change in ventricular androgen treatment. The boy’s father is asymptomaticR.PS26 size suggestive of dysplasia rather than obstruction. We propose the term Exome sequencing (Agilent 38Mb exome capture and 2x100bp Illumina se- diencephalic-mesencephalic junction dysplasia (DMJD) to characterize this quencing) detected a novel heterozygous deletion in (c.6_9del). The autosomal recessive malformation. deletion leads to a framshift, and will most likely causReP aS 2p6remature stop- P02.083 codon and induce nonsense mediated decay. S#anger sequencing showed De novo duplication 15q22.21-24.1 in patient with mental that the variant was paternally inherited. Variants in are estimated retardation, congenital heart defect and dysmorphic features to cause 2.6% of the DBA cases (DBA10; OMIM 613309). A molecular dia- O. Liaugaudienė, L. Cimbalistienė, Ž. Čiuladaitė, J. Kasnauskienė, E. Preikšaitienė, V. Kučinskas; gnosis should enable prenatal diagnostic testing, however predicting the Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, diagnostic outcome of an affected fetus is challenging in this family. Vilnius, Lithuania. This case illustrates the force of targeted exome sequencing to efficiently identify novel variants in a large set of candidate genes, and demonstrates its clinical utility to identify causal variants in rare dominant disorders. We report on a 25 years old female referred for evaluation because of in- P02.081 tellectual disability, atrioventricular communication, muscle weakness, Two patients with Diamond-Blackfan anemia: a novel point mutation neurogenic urinary incontinence and dysmorphic features (long trunk, in RPL5 and a microdeletion encompassing RPL5 low forehead with hypertrichosis, strabismus, depressed nasal bridge, full R. Floettmann1, G. Strauss2, E. Klopocki1, L. M. Graul-Neumann1; cheeks, retrognathia, high narrow palate, malposition of one central inci- 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Clinic for Pediatrics, Oncology & Hematology, Charité- sor, malocclusion of teeth, brachydactyly of the fingers, small and flat feet). Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. Proband’s mother had a congenital heart defect. The propositus was born in a normal delivery but with lower birth-weight (2800 g). In infancy she had poor suck reflex, considerable hypotonia and severely retarded psychomo- Diamond-Blackfan anemia (DBA; MIM #105650) is a rare congenital red tor development. de novo blood cell aplasia with an increased risk of malignancy. DBA exhibits an Initial karyotype analysis revealed normal female karyotype. Array-CGH autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance with incomplete penetrance. (400K) showed and FISH confirmed a tandem interstitial 9.0 Mb Approximately 50% of affected individuals show congenital malformations. duplication of 15q22.21-24.1. T ChLeN d6u, pNlCicHa4te, dK BrTegBiDo1n3 i,s M gAePn2eK-r1ic.h, encom- DBA has been associated with mutations in nine genes that encode riboso- passing more thaMnE 1G4F01 g1e, nZeNsF. 6A0t 9le, aTsItP 1IN1, oPfA dQuRp5licated genes are associated mal proteins, amongst others RPL5. Mutations in RPL5 and RPL11 are more with known diseases, including The other frequently associated with additional congenital malformations compared relevant genes ( D) EaCrIeP iHnEvRol.ved in brain de- to the other genes. velopment and functioning. Proband’s phenotype is similar to previously We present two patients with DBA: patient 1 carries a missense mutati- reported overlapping duplication (22,23 Mb) in on in RPL5 inherited from the unaffected mother. The mutation c.625C>T The abnormal phenotype could be determined by overdose of duplicated (ENST00000370321;p.Arg209Cys) has not been reported in the literature genes, the disturbance of genes regulatory sequences, or the excess gene- to date but was predicted as disease causing by the prediction tool Mutati- tic material which may disorganize chromatin conformation affecting the onTaster (www.mutationtaster.org). The girl was hypotrophic at birth, and expression of distance genes. Given its large size, high gene content and de presented with triphalangeal thumbs as well as unilateral renal agenesis. novo origin, the observed duplication is considered as pathogenic and re- She did not show any facial dysmorphism or cardiac anomalies. sponsible for the clinical phenotype manifesting in our patient. In patient 2 array CGH analysis detected a de novo 594kb microdeletion on chromosome 1p22.1 encompassing RPL5. The girl was also hypotrophic at birth, and was additionally diagnosed with complex cardiac malformations. All developmental milestones were delayed. At age three years she presen- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org68 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.084 The influence of donor DNA level in blood of simultaneous pancreas kidney allograft recipients as a diagnostic factor for rejection was identiFfBieNd1. None of theF BpNat1ie-nts had a history of systemic involvement A. K. Sarnecka1,2, M. Zagozda1,2, M. Serwanska-Swietek2, A. Rydzewski1,2, W. L. reported with syndromal EL. We additionally identified 2 heterozygous mu- Olszewski1,2, M. Durlik1,2; tations in . A de novo mutation c.4043G>A ;p.(Cys1348Tyr), that 1Mossakowski Medical Research Center, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, has not been r eported previously, was detected in a 4 year-old child with 2Central Clinical Hospital, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Warsaw, Poland. EL; other features of MFS were not (yet) obvious. The mutation c.2415T>G; p.(Cys805Trp)was identified in a 13-year-old girl with EL not fulfilling MFS diagnostic criteria. She inherited the mutation from a parent who had a hi- Grafted organ releases into circulation system some cells, DNA and proteins story of bilateral lens extraction in childFhBoNo1d and AnDo AfuMrTthSeLr4 clinical signs of which are partially destroyed by the recipient’s phagocytes but they can be MFS. Furthermore, there was a family history of aortic (abdominFaBl)N a1neu- detected in spleen dendritic cells. The aim of our research was to study the rAyDsAmMs.T OSLn4e child with EL neither had a nor mutation. possible effects of microchimerism in pancreas and kidney rejection. In our These results emphasize thAeD imAMpoTrStLa4nce of mutation analysis of and previous studies, we looked for the presence of donor-specific STR loci in in patients with ectopia lentis, especially in young children since the recipient blood. In this study we have examined plasma and mononu- paFtBieNn1ts with mutations in do not need the extensive screening clear whole blood cells of recipients to assess the amount of SRY gene in exams (especially regarding cardiovascular complications) as patients with sex-mismatched combinations and phospholipase A2-HUMPLA2A1(AAT)n a mutation. in the same sex recipients after simultaneous pancreas and kidney trans- P02.087 plant, in relation to the patients probes before grafting by the use of the Translation initiation factor EIF3A haploinsufficiency appears to Real-time PCR method. Recipient’s blood and donors spleen samples were be a neutral variant despite de novo occurrence in a patient with collected before transplantation and at different times after grafting. Geno- developmental delay mic DNA was isolated from blood and tissues. The amount of DNA in diffe- M. Appelbäck1,2, O. Bruland1, M. Mork3, S. Berland1, G. Houge1,2; rent samples after tx was calculated by using the comparative Ct method 1Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital, with GAPDH as internal control. We observed increase donor’s DNA level in Bergen, Norway, 2Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, recipient’s blood already on day 1 after grafting (STR loci). The quantitative Norway, 3Department of Child Neurology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, indication of donor DNA in recipient’s blood (SRY gene) was possible in 7 Norway. day after graft. In case of HUMPLA gene, our results showed that the relative amount of that gene was higher in mononuclear blood cells than in plas- ma 14 days after transplantation. Donor DNA is present either in passenger In a 5 year old boy with idiopathic dcoe nngoevnoital hypothyroidism detected at cells or recipient’s phagocytes. An open question remains whether it may be birth, mild developEmIFe3nAtal delay, normal stature (25 centile) and microce- incorporated into recipient cell genome. phaly (1 cm < 2.5 centile), a 0.1 Mb duplication was found seemin- gly disrupting the gene of which was later confirmed by molecular P02.085 Molecular diagnosis of common mutations in COL7a1 Gene among investigations anEdI Fs3uApposed pathogenic. In another patient a routine SNP- array test revealed a 1.4 Mb 10q26.11 deletion affecting 12 protein coding Iranian patients suffering from Epidermolysis Bullosa A. KaKavand Hamidi1, M. Mahdavi1, H. Dehganpour1, N. Hatamnejadian1, M. genes, including . This patient was a 15 year old girl with mild ID, short Moghaddam1, B. sedaghati khayat1, P. Tousi2, M. Yusefi2, A. Ebrahimi1; stature (2.5 centile) and normal head circumference (25-50 centile). The 1Parseh Medical Genetics Center,Shahid Beheshti uni skin research center, Tehran, deletion turned out to be mdea tneornvoal, and the mother wEaIsF 3coAmpletely healthy Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid Beheshti university skin research center, Tehran, and could report of average or above-average school performance. Our in- Islamic Republic of Iran. itial assumption that the disruption of the gene was likely to be pathogenic, given the importance oEf IeFI3FA3A for e.g. normal translation and ERK signal transduction, had to be revised. The dissimilar phenotypes Background: The dystrophic forms of Epidermolysis Bullosa (DEB), a group additionally support the hypothesis that deletions EarIFe3 nAeutral. This is of heritable blistering disorders, show considerable phenotypic variability, especially evident in the lack of microcephaly in the girl with the 10q26.11 and both autosomal dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance can be deletion and the lack of short stature in the boy with the disruption. recognized. DEB is derived from mutations in the type VII collagen gene P02.088 (COL7A1), An atypical Williams-Beuren deletion encopassing ELN and LIMK1 It has been reported that most mutations detected in the recessive disease genes form are nonsense mutations or small insertions or deletions leading to fra- B. Demeer1, S. Chenichene2, G. Morin1, A. Receveur3, H. Copin3, A. De Broca4, O. Godefroy5, me shift and premature translational termination, which tend to produce D. Sanlaville6, P. Saugier-Veber7, M. Mathieu-Dramard1; severe phenotypes. In contrast, missense mutations causing amino acid 1Genetics Department, Amiens, France, 2Cardiology, Pediatrics Department, Amiens, substitutions, which result in variable phenotypes, predominate in the do- France, 3Cytogenetics Department, Amiens, France, 4Neurology, Pediatrics Department, minant form of dystrophic Epidermolysis Bullosa. Amiens, France, 5Neurology Department, Amiens, France, 6Genetics Department, Lyon, France, 7Molecular Biology Department, Amiens, France. Methods: DNA specimens (Genomic DNA from the patient) from 50 affected patients, clinically diagnosed, were subjected to mutation analysis by PCR using designed primers for hotspot exons of COL7a1, followed by sequen- Williams-Beuren syndrome is a multisystemic developmental disorder cing of the PCR products. caused by hemizygous deletion of a segment on chromosome 7q11.23, Result: Studying COL7a1 hotspot exons, 73, 74, 75, showed that 11 out of spanning 1.55 Mb or 1.8 Mb, and encoding 28 genes. A few individuals have 50(27%) of probands have mutation. Among these mutations 2 cases were smaller deletions of the region. with phenotype ranging from supravalvular compound heterozygotes, the other 2 cases were deletions and the rest aortic stenosis syndrome to classic Williams-Beuren Syndrome. were missense substitutions. A novel mutation has been identified within We report a family with dominant supravalvular stenosis. The mother pre- all mentioned mutations above. sents supravalvular aortic stenosis, distinctive facies and shows strong an- P02.086 xiety; she also have history of school difficulties and impulsivity and short Molecular findings in patients with isolated ectopia lentis - results of attention span. Her youngest son have supravalvular aortic stenosis, invol- FBN1 and ADAMTSL4 mutation analyses vement of the pulmonary branch, and mesenteric, coeliac and renal steno- A. Laner1, E. Mangold2, T. Martin3, A. Riess4, A. Stegerer1, E. Holinski-Feder1, T. Neuhann1; 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, sis; her eldest son have supravalvular pulmonary and aortic stenosis. They Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, both had surgery for bilateral inguinal hernia, normal calcemia, no classical Homburg, Germany, 4Abteilung Medizinische Genetik, Institut für Humangenetik, WBS facial dysmorphism when seen at the genetic department, and attenti- Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. on deficit and hyperactivity. The youngest daughter was diagnosed at birth with severe supravalvular aortic and pulmonary stenosis, and facial dys- morphism. Calcemia was normal. Her karyotype and FISH of thEeL 7Nq11.23 re- Ectopia lentis (EL) can occur as an isolateAdD cAoMndTiStLio4n or as a feature of syn- gion were nLeIgMaKti1ve. QMPSF analysis of the 7q11.23 region found an atypical dromFaBlN d1iseases, such as Marfan syndrome (MFS). Isolated ectopia lentis deletion, confiErLmNed by array-CGH (Agilent 244k), of the entire gene and has been associated with mutations in (autosomal-recessive) part of the gene cosegregating with the familial phenotype. Although and (autosomal-dominant). ADAMTSL4 the loss of an allele produces the cardiovascular pathology of WBS, the We have analyzed 8 patients from 6 families presenting with isolated EL. phenotypic consequences of losingL IoMthKe1r alleles within the WBS chromo- 4 patients had homozygous mutations in : 2 unrelated pati- some region are much less clear. Based on study of patients with atypical ents (14 and 34 years) carried the common mutation c.767_786del20, deletion and mouse models, loss of gene has a possible putative effect p.(Gln256Profs*38); in two siblings (4 and 5 years), the homozygous mu- on impaired visuospatial abilities. tation c.1162dupG; p.(Ala388Glyfs*8), which has not been yet rwepworwted.e, shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 69 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.089 Emanuel syndrome: breakpoint determination. Z. Gencik-Guillier, A. Lott, H. Gabriel, A. Gencik; in these disorders is crucial to estimate the recurrence risk in affected fa- diagenos, Osnabrück, Germany. milies. For illustration of the (epi)genetic complexity, we present several familial and sporadic SRS and BWS cases with rare disturbances in 11p15.5. Fur- The constitutional translocation between chromosomes 11 and 22 is the thermore, we refer to Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) as a suitable te- most common non- Robertsonian translocation in humans. Clustered break- sting approach for future detection of genes involved in the regulation of points involving chromosome regions 11q23 and 22q11 have been reported genomic imprinting and further epigenetically regulated regions involved in unrelated families. Balanced translocation carriers are clinically normal. in BWS and SRS. Their offspring have a risk to herit a supernumerary der (22)t(11;22) chro- P02.092 mosome, which results in a rather very constant phenotype. This very rare A new case of genome-wide paternal uniparental disomy emphasizing genomic syndrome was named Emanuel Syndrome. the need of multilocus-testing in imprinting disorders We report a case of a boy with classical features of Emanuel Syndrome: M. Begemann1, S. Spengler1, M. Gogiel1, L. Soellner1, U. Göretzlehner2, T. Eggermann1, G. mental retardation, microcephaly, failure to thrive, some organ malforma- Strobl-Wildemann3; tions, ear anomalies, and dysmorphic features with a typical round face, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2Frauenklinik Kreiskrankenhaus Ehingen, Ehingen, Germany, 3MVZ Humangenetik Ulm, prominent forehead and deep round eyes. After array CGH and caryotyping Ulm, Germany. of patient and his parents and sibs, we also analysed the chromosomal re- structuration with a breakpoint - specific PCR to determine its precise loca- lization and to confirm that the breakpoint lies in the region of the recurrent While non-mosaic genome-wide paternal uniparental disomy (UPD) is not translocations, with a variation of only several nucleotides, if compared to consistent with life and leads to hydatidiform mole, UPD of single chro- other Emanuel Syndrome patients. The mechanism of the recurrent translo- mosomes is a well-known cause for a group of congenital diseases usually cation may be explained by the fact that it lies in a region with a palindromic called imprinting disorders (IDs). Chromosomes associated with IDs are 6, nucleotid sequence. 7, 11, 14, 15 (Transient Neonatal Diabetes Mellitus, Silver-Russell syndro- P02.090 me, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, upd(14)-syndromes, Prader-Willi ECO Syndrome Without ICK Mutation: Genetic Heterogeneity? syndrome, Angelman Syndrome). The clinical outcome of a UPD depends K. Ludwig1, R. Salmaso1, E. Cosmi2, L. Garavelli3, B. Campos-Xavier4, M. Clementi5, M. on the transmitting parent. Whereas maternal and/or paternal UPD of the Rugge1, A. Superti-Furga4; 1Department of Medicine (DIMED), Surgical Pathology & Cytopathology Unit; aforementioned chromosomes have clinical consequences, others are not University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Department of Woman and Child Health, Section associated with clinical phenotypes (if not carrying a recessive mutation). of Maternal and Fetal Medicine, University of Padova, Padova, Italy, 3Clinical Genetics Therefore it can be argued that UPDs of other chromosomes are underdia- Unit - Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Pediatrics - IRCCS Santa Maria Nuova gnosed and are detected only by chance. We here present a 19-year old wo- Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, University of Lausanne (www. man carrying a mosaic genome-wide paternal UPD that was coincidentally skeldys.org), Lausanne, Switzerland, 5Department of Pediatrics, Clinical Genetics Unit, identified in a multi-locus screening for aberrant methylation. The patient University of Padova, Padova, Italy. was initially diagnosed as BWS due to a mosaic upd(11p15)pat but presen- ted additional clinical findings including nesidioblastosis, fibroadenomas, hamatomar of the liver, hypoglycemia and ovarian steroid cell tumour. So Endrocrine-cerebro-osteodysplasia (ECO) is a recently described neonatal far, only single cases with similar clinical and molecular findings mainly dia- lethal recessive disorder characterized by multiple congenital anomalies gnosed in early childhood have been reported. Based on these data it can involving the endocrine, central nervous and skeletal system. Six affected be concluded that the mosaic genome-wide paternal UPD (also known as individuals from a single consanguineous Old Order Amish family have androgenic/biparental mosaicism) in our patient explains the unusual BWS been reported so far. All affected individuals carried a homozygous missen- phenotype. These findings emphasize the need for multilocus testing in se mutation in the ICK gene. We report a single case, offspring of non-con- imprinting disorders to efficiently detect cases with disturbances affecting sanguineous parents, with multiple congenital anomalies equalling those more than one chromosome. of ECO syndrome. Malformations included micromelia, ulnar deviation of P02.093 hands, brachydactyly, midface hypoplasia, midline cleft-lip and -palate, ho- Eight alterations in the genes FOXG1, TCF4 and CDKL5 in a cohort of loprosencephaly and absence of the adrenal glands. The external phenotype 70 patients with seizures and intellectual disability was indistinguishable from that of the published cases of ECO syndrome. I. Stefanova1, C. Runge1, S. Purmann1, G. Uyanik2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1; Molecular analysis failed, however, to identify mutations in the ICK gene. 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Institut für We therefore think that ECO syndrome might be genetically heterogeneous Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. and not a “private” condition. Consequently the diagnosis of ECO syndrome should be considered in prenatal/neonatal cases of multi-system disorders involving the endocrine glands, the cerebrum and skeletal system. To date many genes have been identified to be associated with epilepsy, in- P02.091 tellectual disability (ID) and other features such as dysmorphism, movement Recurrence risk and (epi)genetic complexity in Silver-Russell and disorders, microcephaly or brain malformations. CDKL5, TCF4, SLC9A6, Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome ARX and FOXG1 are important genes belonging to this group. The conditions N. Bachmann1, A. Bohring2, K. Mohnike3, M. Zenker4, R. Pfäffle5, H. J. Bolz1, D. Prawitt6, C. caused by mutations in these genes are especially relevant differential dia- Bergmann1; gnoses to Rett and Angelman syndromes. The incidence of these conditions 1Bioscientia, Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Institute for Human is unknown. In addition, there is only insufficient data available concerning Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4Institute for Human Genetics, University of the phenotypic variability, caused by haploinsufficiency of these genes. Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 5Hospital for Children and Adolescents, University of In a cohort of 70 patients with seizures or EEG abnormalities and ID, we Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 6Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of sequenced the genes CDKL5, TCF4, SLC9A6, ARX and FOXG1. Further we Mainz, Mainz, Germany. performed MLPA analysis for CDKL5, TCF4, ARX and FOXG1. We found he- terozygous pathogenic alterations in eight patients (11,4 %). Four patients showed alterations in FOXG1 (one frameshift, two missense mutations and Silver-Russell (SRS) and Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) are growth one deletion) and two in CDKL5 (one splicesite mutation and one deletion). disorders mainly caused by defects in the epigenetically regulated region Two patients had the same recurrent missense mutation in the TCF4 gene. 11p15.5, containing the imprinting control regions 1 and 2 (ICR1 and ICR2). We present detailed clinical and molecular data of our patients. We compare SRS is characterised by severe intrauterine and postnatal growth retardati- the results to the literature and discuss on novel insights into the pheno- on, contrary to BWS which presents as an overgrowth disorder associated types of patients with FOXG1, TCF4 and CDKL5 mutations. with embryonal tumors. While the most frequent known aberration in SRS Our study contributes to the delineation of the phenotypes of these rare is an ICR1-hypomethylation (>30%), most BWS cases (50-60%) are caused conditions. Further investigations with new molecular techniques such as by an ICR2-hypomethylation. In addition, a variety of other genetic and epi- next generation sequencing will identify much more patients. The evaluati- gNeLnRePt2ic- alterations in 11p15.5 are known to result in deficient epigenetic on of the clinical findings in these patients will help to define more precisely regulation. the incidence and phenotypic variability in these disorders. mutations have recently been identified as a rare heritable cause for methylation defects resulting in BWS in children of unaffected female homozygous mutation carriers. Even though familial cases of BWS and SRS are rare, the identification of heritable factors affecting genomic imprinting www.eshg.org www.eshg.org70 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.094 Screening of SCN1A and MDR1 polymorphisms in epilepsy A. Ebrahimi1, M. Houshmand2, S. Zainali3, S. Tonekaboni4, M. Moghaddasi5, M. Fallah3, cost-effective method by merging several methods in the characterization M. Ataei2, G. Modaber2, N. Hatamnejadian1, B. Sedaghaty Khaiat1, M. Moghaddam1, S. of the facial dysmorphology, in particular a method relying primary on face Sarabi1, M. Hosseini6; image capture and manipulation to diagnose genetic diseases. 1Parseh Medical Genetic Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute P02.097 of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of A Patient with 3q26.33q27.3 monosomy presenting with intellectual Iran, 3Kawsar Human Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, disability, facial dysmorphism and diaphragm evantration 5Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Dept.Science, Y. Sahin1,2, P. Şimşek Kiper1,3, E. Utine1,3, K. Boduroğlu1,3; Islamshahr Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, 3Clinical Genetics Unit, Ankara, Turkey. A Patient with 3q26.33q27.3 monosomy presenting with Genetic variability in drug metabolism affects the treatment with Anti Epi- intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism and diaphragm evantration leptic Drugs (AEDs). Allelic variations in genes include SCN1A and MDR1, encoding AEDs target and drug transport proteins, may affect efficacy and We herein describe a 7-year-old female patient who was referred us for tolerability of antiepileptic drugs. This study designed to evaluate frequency facial dysmorphism, intellectual disability and diaphragmatic eventration. of ABCB1 and SCN1A selected SNPs in genotype and haplotype combinati- The patient was born 2050 grams, to nonconsanguineous parents, as their on in Iranian population who were affected by Idiopathic Refractory Epi- first liveborn by normal delivery, at term. Prenatal history revealed oligo- lepsy (IRE).About 81 healthy normal samples and 34 probands, clinically hydramnios and intrauterine growth retardation. Postnatally the patient diagnosed as one type of IRE, were selected. The genotype of two SNPs in had irregular respiration and tachypnea. She had a delay in both motor and SCN1A (rs2298771, rs7601520) and one in MDR1 (rs1045642) were de- mental developmental milestones. Fluoroscopy detected eventration of the termined in two groups by ARMS-PCR, PCR- RFLP and confirmed by direct right diaphragm. Perfusion scintigraphy of the lungs demonstrated segmen- sequencing. tal perfusion defects bilaterally. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed hy- The data analysis shows no statistically significant difference and so the pre- poplasia of corpus callosum and cerebral atrophy. On physical examination dicted haplotype frequencies including three SNPs did not show significant difference between patients and control group. body weight was 17.7 kgr (3-10th cenrdtile), head circumference was 46 cm (<-2SD), and height was 106 cm (<3 centile). She had facial dysmorphic P02.095 features including thin lips, broad base to nose, low set ears, bilateral epi- Whole exome sequencing to identify genes involved in epileptic canthi. The patient was clinically suspected to have a chromosomal disorder. encephalopathy The patient had a normal karyotype; however, array-CGH analysis (Agilent C. G. F. de Kovel, E. Brilstra, R. van ‚t Slot, S. van Lieshout, B. P. C. Koeleman; UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. 8X60K Array) revealed a 4.3 Mb deletion in 3q26.33q27.3. Previously six ca- ses of microphthalmia or anophthalmia in association with deletions/rear- rangements of chromosome 3q involving 3q26.33q27.3 have been reported. The described region was estimated to be 6.7 Mb and was assumed to have Epileptic encephalopathy is a severe condition occurring often at a very an anophthalmia gene at 3q26.33-q28 locus. Our patient did not have any young age. Patients suffer from epileptic seizures, and, presumably as a con- eye malformation. Therefore, the previously descibed sequence, show developmental retardation. region suspected to harbor the anophthalmia gene may be further narrowed When no external cause is prevalent, the condition is assumed to be genetic. down to the 3q27.3-q28 region with the findings of the present patient. In some families, multiple sibs are affected. A few genetic causes for epilep- tic encephalopathy are known, but many cases cannot be explained. Probab- P02.098 ly, there is high genetic heterogeneity. Clinical and genetic characteristics of the chest and pleuropericardial In order to identify more genetic causes for this disorder, we have collected manifestations in Armenian children with Familial mediterranean patients with healthy parents. Five families had multiple affected sibs, whe- fever reas ten patients had no affected relatives. We performed exon sequencing G. G. Amaryan1, H. S. Hayrapetyan2, T. F. Sarkisian2; 1Arabkir Medical Center, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Center of Medical Genetics, Yerevan, to look for genetic causes, assuming a recessive model, either homozygous Armenia. or compound heterozygous in the multiplex families, while in the sporadic cases a de novo mutation is an additional possibility. So far, we have identified X-linked mutations in CDK16 and GABRE as pos- Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an autosomal-recessive disease cha- sible candidates in male patients. Further analysis of the remaining families racterized by febrile aseptic polyserositis. FMF, as ethnic disorder for Me- may identify more candidate mutations. To confirm their pathogenicity, we diterranean sea ancestors region, is widespread in Armenians. Chest pain will combine our results with those of other research groups. attacks are 2-nd manifestation after febrile abdominal attacks.Objective; to P02.096 investigate clinical and genetic characteristics of the chest manifestations Establishment of Diagnostic Decision Support System (DDSS) in (pleuritis and pericarditis) in children with FMF. Results: We performed Clinical Diagnosis of Genetic Diseases: The FaceGP DDSS Methodology clinical and genetic (MEFV gene mutations) investigations in 715 children and Its Applications (438 boys, 277 girls, mean age 8,64±0,17). Chest pain attacks (pleuritic or/ K. Kuru1, Y. Tunca1, M. Niranjan2; and pericardial in origin), mainly unilateral, short lasting, with dyspnea, su- 1Gulhane Military Medical Academy (GATA), Ankara, Turkey, 2University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom. perficial, painful inspiration, often developed recurrent pleurisy (81.7%), pericarditis (13.8%). Pleurisy as 1st manifestation was observed in 23.1% of patients. In 1% of cases lung atelectasis and asthma attacks were obser- ved. We detected the most frequent mutations of MEFV gene. Frequency of A face develops under the influence of many genes. Thus, facial appearance V726A mutation in Armenians is higher (22.3%) than in other populations can be a significant clue in the initial identification of genetic anomalies asso- with high level of FMF: Jews (3.0%), Turks (2.9%). Risk of leurisy in contrast ciated with especially cognitive impairments. It may be possible to diagnose to other serosities was associated mainly with V726A/M694V compound- a good number of syndromes correctly by using computer-assisted face ana- heterozygous genotype (81,6%) and was 2.3 time higher than in M694V- lysis. For dysmorphic syndromes -with - known genetic causes, cyto- and/or homozygotes (71.9%) and M694V-heterozygotes (68,9%) with benign cli- molecular genetic analysis is the appropriate route of investigation in order nical course. Recurrent pericarditis was revealed in 13.8% and associated to confirm a diagnosis. In this study, in terms of helping non experienced with M694V-homozygotes in compare to patients without M694V mutation. practitioners in diagnosing process as well as supporting experts in their Conclusions: Taking into consideration our data about more frequent asso- decisions, we established a methodology to ease the process and we refer ciation of V726A mutation with pleurisy, we suppose that the prevalence to our method as FaceGP DDSS. In the methodology, digital facial image pro- of V726A compound-heterozygous genotype might be considered as a risk cessing methods are used to reveal facial features with disorders indicating factor for development of the pleurisies. Pericarditis as rare FMF manifesta- genotype-phenotype interrelation. A great number of genetic disorders indi- tion, was associated with M694V mutation and considered as unfavorable cating a characteristic pattern of facial anomalies can be typically identified FMF prognosis. by analyzing specific features with the aid of facial image processing me- thods such as PCA in order to determine reference values (eigenfaces) and P02.099 train the system. Distance algorithms such as Euclidean, Mahalanobis are Feingold syndrome type II in a family with deletion 13q31q32 used to construct the correlation of the input image with the trained images comprising the microRNA 17~92 cluster in matching. Some image enhancement methods such as histogram equali- P. Villavicencio Lorini1,2, E. Klopocki1,2, M. Trimborn1, S. Mundlos1,2, D. Horn1; zation and median filter are implemented on detected degraded images to capture better features. This study proposes a novel computer-assiwstewd wan.de shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 71 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. of the entire FLNA coding region and MLPA. Results: we here present the neurological findings, selected MR images and Feingold syndrome is characterized by developmental delay/intellectual results of FLNA mutation analysis for three new male patients. Patient A disability, microcephaly, short stature, characteristic shortening of midd- at the age of 4 years presented with a severe global developmental delay, le phalanges II/V and various congenital defects of the heart, kidney and dolichomicrocephaly, muscular hypotonia, complex cerebral malformations gastrointestinal tract. In the majority of patients this syndrome is caused including polymicrogyria and PVNH in MR imaging and was hemizygous for by mutations of N-MYC. Recently, germline deletions of microRNA 17~92 a FLNA missense mutation inherited from his mother. A severe and com- cluster have been identified to be responsible for the Feingold syndrome plex phenotype was also identified in 37 year old patient B with intractable phenotype in three patients. This variant is called Feingold syndrome type seizures, skeletal features within the OPD spectrum and severe obstructive II. Here we report on a family with a 4.5 Mb deletion of the chromosomal lung disease, resulting from a mosaic frameshift FLNA mutation. In contrast, region 13q31.3q32.1 comprising the microRNA 17~92 cluster. This deleti- a mosaic FLNA splice site mutation was observed in the 63 year old father on was identified by array CGH and confirmed by FISH. The index patient (patient C) of two daughters with PVNH. MR imaging confirmed for him very and his mother show the typical phenotypic pattern of Feingold syndrome subtle PVNH; he has a University degree, under antiepileptic medication is including developmental delay/intellectual disability in combination with without seizures and otherwise healthy. microcephaly, short stature and the digital abnormalities. N-MYC mutations Discussion: FLNA mutations in males are rare and should also be considered were excluded in the index patient. The 13q31.3q32.1 deletion emerged de in patients with more complex phenotypes including PVNH as shown in pa- novo in the affected mother of the index patient. To clarify whether pheno- tients A and B. Furthermore, mosaic Filamin A mutations may be clinically typic features could be caused by a single copy loss of other involved genes silent, but still be associated with a high recurrence risk as demonstrated in the deleted chromosomal region we compared the clinical findings of our in patient C. patients with those of reported patients carrying 13q31q32 deletions. Inte- P02.102 restingly, we could not find any further remarkable clinical feature which is De novo FMR2 (AFF2) deletion encompassing exons 2 and 3 in a boy not belonging to the phenotypic spectrum of Feingold syndrome in the here with a mild intellectual disability reported family. Our findings confirm deletions of the microRNA 17~92 clu- A. Behboudi1,2, T. Zagoras3, L. Samuelsson3, C. Jiang1, E. Kaerrstedt3, M. Stefanova3,2; ster as a further cause of Feingold syndrome. 1Systems Biology Research Centre – Tumor biology, School of Life Sciences, University of Skövde, Skövde, Sweden, 2Department of Medical and Clinical Genetics, Institute of P02.100 Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 3Department of Clinical Heterotopic bone formation not related to POH/FOP disease: a new Gentics, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden. entity. E. F. Belligni1, E. Biamino1, E. Di Gregorio2, A. Calcia2, C. DeFilippi1, A. Brusco2, G. B. Ferrero1, M. Tartaglia3, M. Silengo1; 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Genetics, Alterations of the Fragile Mental Retardation 2 gene (FMR2, synonym AFF2) Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino, and Medical Genetics Unit, San Giovanni can result in a mild to moderate intellectual disability (ID), speech delay, Battista Hospital, Italy, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Haematology, Oncology and hyperactivity, and autistic behaviour. The well-known underlying molecular Molecular Medicine Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. mechanism of this condition, also referred to as FRAXE, is a (CCG)n trinu- cleotide repeat expansion which leads to silencing of the FMR2 gene. Addi- tionally, deletions within the FMR2 gene were described in handful number We present a peculiar case of multiple and massive congenital periarticu- individuals with ID. lar calcification in a normally developed female, aged 2 years, the first child Here we report on a de novo 131 kb deletion of FMR2 gene in a 2-years- of Italian non consanguineous parents. Since her first month, she presen- old boy with a mild developmental delay, behaviour changes, hypotonia, ted progressive diffuse joints limitation. Skeletal survey and a CT scan at and discrete facial dysmorphism. The deletion, detected by SNP-array ana- 8 months assessed shoulder, elbow, wrist, hip, knee and ankle joints fixed lysis (Affymetrix 250 K Nsp I), spans between the base pairs 147454718- by periarticular calcifictions. Ectopic bone tissue was present between the 147586323 (NCBI36). The aberration and its de novo origin were confirmed occipital skull base and C3 vertebral body. At 10 months, total body MRI by MLPA. RNA analysis on the patient showed a 994 bp deletion of AFF2 showed respiratory and deglutitory muscles calcification, with progressive transcript, resulting in the complete loss of exons 2 and 3. cranio-caudal involvement. On physical examination at 2 yr., diaphragma- In conclusion, this case report further confirms the role of FMR2 gene dele- tic breathing underlaid gradual respiratory deterioration. Her posture was tions as a FRAXE phenotype underlying mechanism. RNA analyses demon- forced in flexion of elbows, knees and ankles, and movements of the head strate that the deletion within the FMR2 gene ceases the transcript produc- were completely abolished. tion. She also had brachydactyly of hands and feet, camptodactyly of the hands, P02.103 very short fingers of feet. Her eyes are deep-set, the philtrum is short and Detection of serum anti-neuronal antibodies in patients with Fragile smooth, but she has no other striking dysmorphisms. X syndrome Neurocognitive milestones were properly achieved. M. Lisik, A. Pyrkosz, E. Gutmajster, A. L. Sieron; Extensive metabolic workup gave normal results: serum and urine calcium Department of General, Molecular Biology and Genetics, Katowice, Poland. levels were normal, as well as serum and urine phosphorum, sodium, potas- sium, magnesium, cratinine, PTH, 1-25-OH-Vit D, 25-OH-VitD levels. Molecular analysis of ACVR1 and GNAS genes ruled out both Fibrodysplasia Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common form of familial meFnMtaRl1 retar- Ossificans Progressiva (FOP) and Progressive Osseous Heteroplasia (POH), dation and known cause of autism. The mutation responsible for FRAXA is a two distinct severely disabling heritable disorders of connective tissue cha- large expansion of the trinucleotide CGG repeats at 5’ end of the gene racterized by progressive heterotopic ossification. resulting in the transcriptional silencing of the gene. There are close simila- Exome sequencing: pending. rities between autism profiles in idiopathic and comorbid autism (FXS). P02.101 Aim: The aim of the study was to investigate the frequency of serum anti- Filamin A associated periventricular nodular heterotopia in males neural antibodies in a group of 23 Fragile X males. U. Hehr1,2, M. Lange3, B. S. Kasper4, N. Di Donato5, F. Mueller1, G. Schuierer6, J. Winkler7; Material and methods: Serum anti-neuronal antibodFieMsR w1ere measured by 1Center for Human Genetics Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 2Department of Western blot technique (Anti-neuronal Antigens EUROLINE-WB EUROIM- Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 3Department of MUN) in 23 patients with FXS (full mutation in the gene), aged bet- Neurosurgery, University Hospital Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 4Epilepsy Center, ween 10 and 32 years, in comparison to 19 healthy-matched males Department of Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 5Institute Results: We detected the presence of antibodies in the serum of 10 FXS ma- of Clinical Genetics, Technical University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 6Institute of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Regensburg and District Medical Center les and in 1 from the reference group. FXS males had significantly higher Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 7Department of Molecular Neurology, University percent of elevated levels of serum anti-neuronal antibodies (43,48%) than Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. healthy controls (5,26%). Conclusion: Serum anti-neuronal antibodies were found in a subgroup of FXS patients. Autistic symptoms in FXS may be, in part, caused by autoim- Introduction: Filamin A (FLNA) associated periventricular nodular hete- mune factors. Further wide-scale studies are necessary to shed light on the rotopia (PVNH; MIM 300049) is an X linked dominant inherited neuronal role of anti-neuronal antibodies in autistic syndromes migration disorder with high perinatal lethality of hemizygous males. Oc- The work was in part financed from Institutional grant KNW-2-021/10 casional reports of older male patients were associated with hemizygous awarded to MZL hypomorphic FLNA alleles or somatic mutations. Methods: neurological examination, cerebral MR imaging, sequence analysis www.eshg.org www.eshg.org72 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.104 Offspring of a fully mutated fragile-X male patient: a premutated female baby rism, broad nasal bridge, nose bifid, hypoplastic midface, sparse eyebrows. L. Van Maldergem1,2, B. Haddad3, D. Amram2, C. Touboul3, E. Flori4, V. Biancalana5; She underwent reconstructive surgery of the nose at 19 years. The rest of 1Centre de Génétique Humaine, Besançon, France, 2UF Génétique Clinique, Centre the family members harbour similar clinical characteristics. There are few Hospitalier Intercommunal, Créteil, France, 3Dept Gyn-Obst, Centre Hospitalier reports of frontonasal dysplasia with dominant autosomal inheritance, prac- Intercommunal, Créteil, France, 4Dept Cytogenetics, University Regional Hospital, tically all of them have an autosomal recessive pattern. In the present family Strasbourg, France, 5Laboratory of Genetic Diagnosis, University Regional Hospital, we confirm the automosal dominant inheritance in frontonasal dysplasia, Strasbourg, France. linkage analysis is necessary to identify the gene responsible of the disease. P02.107 Severe FX deficiency caused by a 4-bp deletion compound A 28 y-old male originating from eastern Algeria with a diagnosis of Fragi- heterozygous with a large deletion in 13q34 le X mental retardation established at the age of 12 y during evaluation of J. Najm1, C. W. Tan2, M. C. Morel-Kopp2, J. Teo3, Q. Chen2, C. M. Ward2, U. Felbor1; severe learning disabilities married his second-cousin. He required special 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medicine Greifswald and Interfaculty Institute education in France and is currently working in a shelter. After an arrange- for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Ernst Moritz Arndt University Greifswald, ment has been decided by his family, his second-cousin who was educated in Greifswald, Germany, 2Northern Blood Research Centre, Kolling Institute, University of Algeria was married to him. Although he suffers moderate mental retarda- Sydney and Department of Haematology and Transfusion Medicine, Royal North Shore tion, his wife is of normal intelligence. A pregnancy developed soon thereaf- Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 3Department of Haematology, Westmead Children’s Hospital, ter. A male with the full mutation is expected to transmit alleles of premuta- Sydney, Australia. tion size to his daughters, based on an experience of less than ten reported cases. This is why prenatal testing is still recommended for a female fetus of a fully mutated genitor. Fetal DNA was extracted from cultured amnio- We report the case of a newborn who presented with major bleedings due cytes and submitted to Southern blotting and (CGG)n PCR analysis. While to severe FX deficiencyF. XThe infant was the first child of unrelated caucasian the father is mosaic for a methylated full mutation in lymphocytes (around parents. FX levels were markedly reduced (<1%). Both parents had border- 20% of the cells are not methylated), his wife has two normal alleles. The line low FX levels. The gene of the patient and her parents were examined female fetus harbored a normal allele and a 105 CGG repeats premutation. by direct sequencing. The analysis revealed a homozygous 4-bp deletion in She was therefore predicted to be unaffected with Fragile X syndrome and exon 2 of the girl. This deletion leads to a frameshift and subsequently to a the pregnancy was pursued. Repeat ultrasound examination of the fetus was premature stop codon. The father is a heterozygous caFrXrier of this patho- normal. After an uneventful pregnancy, the woman gave birth to a healthy genic mutation, whereas the mother’s sequence for exon 2 was wild type, female baby. Reproduction in Fragile X males is exceptional. This case re- raising the possibility of a large deletion involving the gene on one ma- port gives further support to this unusual reverse instability mechanism as ternal FaXllele, which she could have passed on to the child. Subsequent SNP a common one. analysis showed that the patient was homozygous for a variant in intronF 2X P02.105 of the gene, whereas the father was heterozygous and thFeV mIIotheFr Xcarried A rare case of Fraser syndrome followed 9 years alive the homozygous wild type allele at this position. As MLPA aFnVaIlIysis of the M. Bembea1,2, C. Jurca1,2, D. Bembea1, K. Kozma1,2, S. Bembea1, A. Jurca1; gene is currently unavailable and dFeXletions involving both and genes 1Medicine and Pharmacy Faculty, Oradea, Romania, 2Municipal Clinical Hospital, have been reported, MLPA analysFiVsI wI as performed for the gene, which Oradea, Romania. is located in closeF Xproximity to the gene. This analysis revealed a comple- te heterozygous deletion of the gene which is likely to also involve at least part of the gene including exon 2, in both the mother and the child. BACKGROUND: Fraser syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder Together, these findings account for severe FX deficiency in the patient. (just over 250 cases reported) characterized by cryptophthalmos, syndacty- P02.108 ly and uro-genital anomalies (as major criteria). Survival of affected subjects Efficacy and safety of biphosphonates in a Romanian pediatric clinical seems to be up to 25% by 1 year of age and up to 15% at 1-10 years. CASE trial with genetic disorders affecting bone mineralization PRESENTATION: A girl with Fraser syndrome was followed from birth to V. Dumitrascu1, D. Vlad1, C. Gug2, S. Sipos1, A. Bucur3, C. Vlad4, A. Matusz5; the time of death (at 9 years of age). Parents were young, healthy, unrela- 1Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, “Victor Babes” University of Medicine ted but originating in the same relatively isolated village. The patient had and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Genetics, “Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Public Health, “Victor a healthy brother (4 years older), and a brother with Dandy-Walker mal- Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 4Dentissimo Dental formation (2 years younger). On examination she presented major criteria Care, Timisoara, Romania, 5European General Practice Research Network Romanian for Fraser syndrome: bilateral criptophtalmos, syndactyly - both hands and National Representative, Timisoara, Romania. both feet, clitoromegaly, associated with multiple other anomalies. Brain Background: imaging (ultrasound, CT, MRI) revealed no abnormalities. She had clinical progression of multi-sensory impairment, along with learning difficulties Most genetic disorders with increased bone fragility (conge- and physical disabilities. No cytogenetic anomalies were found and there nital rickets, osteogenesis imperfecta), include close to normal growth and were no molecular studies conducted. DISCUSSION: Fraser syndrome has autosomal dominant inheritance. Previous randomized controlled trials a very low frequency. The syndrome can be caused by mutations in two ge- revealed that the majority of children and adolescents with mild and mo- nes, FRAS1 (4q21) and FREM2 (13q13.3). This case posed multiple medical derate forms of disease have low areal bone mineral density (BMD) at the problems determined by multi-sensory involvement and physical and men- lMumetbhaord ssp:ine and that cyclical treatment with biphosphonates has benefi- tal retardation. A speculative element of the case presented consists of the cial effects. familial association of a brother with Dandy-Walker malformation; Fraser In a two years longitudinal study, we prospectively followed up 35 syndrome is associated in 20% of cases with Dandy-Walked malformation. pediatric patients recruited from a Romanian primary care setting between CONCLUSION: The case presented could contribute to a better understan- November 2009 and November 2011. Inclusion criteria: positive family hi- ding of this rare syndrome, given phenotypical characteristics and survival story - presence of at least one fracture or dentinogenesis imperfecta, child- up to 9 years of age. rReens >u l1ts0: yr of age. Patients were randomized to either risedronate (N=18) or P02.106 alendronate (N= 17) and study visits occurred every 3 month. Frontonasal dysplasia; characterization of a family with an evident The main efficacy variable was the change in lumbar spine (L1- L4) pattern of an autosomal dominant inheritance. areal BMD Z -score; risedronate increased it by 0.76, whereas patients recei- J. M. Valdes-Miranda1, M. Martin-DeSaro1, S. A. Cuevas-Covarrubais2; ving alendronate therapy experienced an increase of 0.45 (p >0.05). Regar- 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital General ding safety,the incidence of gastrointestinal side effects due to alendronate de Mexico, Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. was higher (47%) when compared with the risedronate group (28%). These rCeosnucltlsu ssiuogngse:s t that the skeletal effects of oral alendronate are weaker but still lead to an increase in lumbar spine areal BMD. Frontonasal dysplasia is due to disturbance in the development of fronto- In a single dose, pharmacokinetic study, data showed that nasal, medial nasal and maxillary prominences, structures derived from the biphosphonates were well tolerated and reduced fracture rates in a popu- neural cresta. It is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease that lKaetiyo nw-boardsesd: cohort study of children with genetic disorders affecting bo ne presents large hypertelorism, broad nasal bridge, bifid hidden skull, nose mineralization. bifid and cleft lip/palate. By far, most cases show an autosomal recessive Abbreviationgesn: etic disorders, bone mineralization, pediatric patients,bi- pattern. In the present study, we describe a family in three generations with phosphonates. 15 affected members with frontonasal dysplasia and alopecia. The proband BMD - bone mineral density was a woman of 22 year old with high forehead, mild alopecia, hypertelo- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 73 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.109 Audiological analysis in deaf patients homozygous for the splice site mutation IVS1+1G>A in GJB2 gene Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez syndrome (GLHS), also known as cerebellotri- F. M. Teryutin1,2,3, N. A. Barashkov1,2, L. U. Dzhemileva4, O. L. Posukh5,6, A. V. Soloviev2, V. G. geminal-dermal dysplasia, is a rare, possibly underdiagnosed neurocuta- Pshennikova2, L. M. Vasilieva3, E. E. Fedotova3, S. A. Fedorova1,2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1,4; neous syndrome of unknown origin. GLHS is characterized by the triad of 1Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian rhombencephalosynapsis, trigeminal anesthesia and partial alopecia of the Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Ammosov North- scalp; however, only rhombencephalosynapsis and partial alopecia have Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Republican Hospital #1 been recognized as consistent features and are obligate diagnostic criteria. - National Medical Centre, Ministry of Public Health of the Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Rhombencephalosynapsis is defined as agenesis of the cerebellar vermis Russian Federation, 4Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 5Institute of Cytology and and fusion of the cerebellar hemispheres, the superior cerebellar peduncles Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian and the dentate nuclei. Inconsistent features of GLHS include characteristic Federation, 6Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. craniofacial features (brachy-turricephaly, midface hypoplasia, down-slant of palpebral fissures, hypertelorism, lowset posteriorly rotated ears), stra- bism, short stature, cognitive impairment, ataxia and muscular hypotonia. Congenital deafness is one of the most frequent sensory disorders which 27 patients have been published to date, all of them sporadic cases. accounts for about 1 in 1000 newborns, and approximately half of all cases We report one further male patient, 6 years of age, to expand awareness have a genetic etiology. 15-20 cases of congenital/early onset hearing im- of this rare disorder. He presented with short stature, hypospadias, atrial pairment (HI) in 14000 - 15000 live births (~1:900-1:750 newborns) are septal defect, mild muscular hypotonia and motor coordination problems, detected per year in the Sakha Republic (Yakutia) located in Eastern Siberia strabism, bilateral parietal alopecia, craniofacial dysmorphic signs, and con- (Russian Federation). In recent study we registered a large cohort of Yakut genital hypothyroidism also present in his brother. He showed a normal co- patients homozygous for the IVS1+1G>A mutation (70 unrelated deaf sub- gnitive development. Chromosome analysis, FISH for 22q11 microdeletion jects in total) [Barashkov et al., 2011]. and SNP-array analysis yielded no relevant results. A MRI of the brain per- We collected audiometric data on 40 patients with genotype IVS1+1G>A / formed for the evaluation of short stature showed rhombencephalosynapsis IVS1+1G>A. Audiograms from available medical documents were analyzed and thus led to the diagnosis of GLHS. retrospectively for each ear separately. All 40 patients (80 ears) underwent P02.112 otoscopic examination, tympanometry, and audiometric testing. Analysis of Gómez-López-Hernández syndrome: description of an additional case the audiological characteristics obtained from 40 subjects with genotype with typical phenotypic features and normal cognitive function IVS1+1G>A / IVS1+1G>A revealed significant association of this genotype S. Munk-Schulenburg1, D. Bartholdi1, R. Munk2, K. Schenck-Kaiser1, A. Busche1, J. with severe to profound HI (85% of severe to profound versus 15% of Fischer1; mild to moderate, p<0.05) with mostly symmetrical bilateral hearing loss 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Clinic Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2St. Josefskrankenhaus Freiburg, Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Freiburg, Germany. (29 out of 40 examined patients, p<0.05). Moreover, detailed audiological analysis showed a variability in hearing thresholds on different frequency ranges among subjects homozygous for IVS1+1G>A mutation.The study Gómez-López-Hernández syndrome (GLHS) also named cerebello-trigemi- was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (¹09-04-01123-à, nal-dermal dysplasia is a rare neurocutaneos syndrome with unknown etio- ¹11-04-01221-à), Federal Programs «Scientific and educational staff for in- logy. Based on current data, only 27 patients have been described so far, all novative Russia» ¹02.740.11.0701 for years 2010-2012, ¹16.740.11.0190 sporadic cases. GLHS is characterized by the triad of rhombencephalosynap- and ¹16.740.11.0346 for years 2009-2013, and the State Scholarship of the sis, trigeminal anesthesia and bilateral parietal or parieto-occipital alopecia. Academy of Sciences of the Sakha Republic (Yakutia). Bilateral alopecia is already present in the neonatal period and is highly sug- P02.110 gestive of GLHS. Trigeminal anesthesia seems to be very variably in its ex- Variability in the level of erythrocyte glucose uptake in two patients pression and can be easily missed. Rhombencephalosynapsis is a consistent with the same SLC2A1 mutation neuroimaging sign, comprising fusion of the cerebellar hemispheres with N. Ishihara1, J. Natsume1, K. Yanagihara2, Y. Azuma1, T. Nakata1, T. Negoro1, K. Watanabe1,3; agenesis of the cerebellar vermis. Further features described so far include 1Department of Pediatrics, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya, short stature, hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, brachy-tur- Japan, 2Department of Developmental Medicine, Osaka Medical Center and Research ricephaly, craniosynostosis, midfacial hypoplasia, mild mental retardation, Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 3Department of Medical Science, dyspraxia, ataxia and corneal opacities. Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, Aichi Shukutoku University, Nagoya, Japan. Here we report on an additional patient with typical GLHS. The seven year old girl presented with trigeminal anesthesia with distinctive corneal lesi- ons and visual impairment and mild parietal alopecia. Rhombencephalo- Purpose: Glut1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1-DS) is a treatable epileptic ence- synapsis was diagnosed in retrospect. Other phenotypic features were bra- phalopathy diagnosed by hypoglycorrhachia, impaired erythrocytes glucose chy-turricephaly, low set and dorsally rotated ears, strabismus convergens, uptake, and heterozygous mutations in SLC2A1 gene. Here we report two down-slanting palpebral fissures, hypoplastic end phalanges and interrup- patients with the same SLC2A1 mutation and different results in the ery- ted transverse palmar creases. Cognitive function was normal (IQ 104). throcyte glucose uptake to reveal clinical heterogeneity in Glut1-DS. Based on literature and our additional case we propose that the presence Patient 1: A 15-year-old girl, born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. of partial alopecia, trigeminal anesthesia and rhombencephalosynapsis is Atypical absence seizures and dystonic posturing were seen since 2 years required for the diagnosis of GLHS. Intellectual impairment is reported in of age, and astatic episodes after a long walk has seen since 10 years of age. patients but seems not to be a consistent feature of GLHS. Hypoglycorrhachia and decreased erythrocyte glucose uptake were obser- P02.113 ved. She was diagnosed with Glut1-DS and started on the ketogenic diet. Calcaneonavicular coalition in patients with Gorlin syndrome Patient 2: A 17-year-old girl, born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. B. S. Kristiansen1, A. Jelsig2, A. Gerdes2, L. B. Ousager1; Since 4 years of age, she showed myoclonus, ataxia, and loss of conscious- 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Odense, Denmark, ness with drooling. Such events were mostly seen in the late afternoon, and 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. recovered with eating. Hypoglycorrhachia was observed while erythrocyte glucose uptake was normal. She has not started ketogenic diet yet, and her developmental status is severely retarded. Both patients had the same mu- Basal cell nevus syndrome (BCNS), also known as Gorlin syndrome, is an tation in SLC2A1 (R330X). Discussion and conclusion: This is the first report infrequent autosomal dominant disorder characterized by a predisposition of a patient with normal erythrocyte glucose uptake caused by the R330X to neoplasm’s and other developmental abnormalities. mutation. There is variability in the level of erythrocyte glucose uptake even Key features are jaw keratocysts, calcification of the falx or ectopic calcifica- in patients with the same SLC2A1 mutation. Factors causing the variability tion, palmar/plantar pits and multiple basal cell carcinomas (BCC). A large remain to be clarified. proportion of affected patients have a recognizable appearance with ma- P02.111 crocephaly, bossing of the forehead, coarse features and facial milia. Gorlin Gomez-Lopez-Hernandez Syndrome - a further case report syndrome is caused by mutations in PTCH gene. Complete penetrance and A. L. Burgemeister1, A. Seitz2, S. Karch3, D. Choukair3, A. Bockius4, U. Moog1; variable expressivity are seen. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, Calcaneonavicular coalition is one of the most common types of tarsal coali- 2Department of Neuroradiology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Center tion and may be a fibrous, cartilaginous or bony union of the two bones. for Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Pediatric Neurology, Heidelberg University Calcaneonavicular coalition was seen in three patients from two different Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 4Pediatric Practice, Dieburg, Germany. families, with known pathogenic PTCH mutations (c.2287dupG and c.1142- 1145delATGT). Family A: An affected father and his two affected daughters all had classical www.eshg.org www.eshg.org74 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.116 Severe growth retardation in an 8.5 year old boy with dup clinical manifestations of Gorlin syndrome. In addition, they had pain and 2p16.2→p22.1 reduced range of motion in their feet. Unilateral calcaneonavicular coalition A. Frühmesser1, A. Blassnig-Ezeh2, B. Simma2, B. Krabichler1, C. Fauth1, J. Zschocke1, D. was seen in the father and bilateral coalition in one of his daughters. Kotzot1; Family B: A father and son with classical manifestations of Gorlin syndrome. 1Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, The son was diagnosed with bilateral calcaneonavicular coalition at the age 2Department of Pediatrics, LKH Feldkirch, Academic Teaching Hospital of Innsbruck Medical University, Feldkirch, Austria. of 38. One major criteria of Gorlin syndrome is the ectopic calcifications and con- genital skeletal malformations. To our knowledge there have not been any reports of tarsal coalition in individuals with Gorlin syndrome in the current So far, interstitial duplications of the short arm of chromosome 2 have been literature. Although tarsal coalition is a common condition, this may be ma- reported rarely and there is no specific phenotype. Here we describe an 8.5- nifestation of Gorlin syndrome. year-old boy with severe growth retardation (110 cm (<< P3)) associated with delayed bone age (age 3 years for wrist and 5 years for forehand at P02.114 a chronological age of 8 years 3 months), moderate intellectual disability Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome: a case report (IQ 79 tested by nonverbal intelligence test), and facial dysmorphisms in- A. Cieślikowska, M. Kugaudo, M. Krajewska-Walasek, K. Chrzanowska; Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, cluding relative macrocephaly (54 cm (P75)) with a high, prominent, and Poland. broad forehead, and a large anterior fontanel. Hormone values for fT3, fT4, TSH, HGH (basic and stimulated), ACTH, Cortisol, LH and FSH were within normal ranges, whereas IgF1 and IgFBP3 were normal in the lower ranges. The first description of the Gorlin-Chaudhry-Moss syndrome (GCMS) was Cardiac ultrasound and cerebral imaging were normal. SNP-microarray ana- published in 1960. Two sisters with craniosynostosis, hypertrichosis, hypo- lysis with the Illumina CytoChip-12v2.1 revealed a duplication of approxi- plastic labia majora, dental defects, eye anomalies, and normal intelligence mately 14.6 Mb carrying 63 genes, with breakpoints between rs2540240 were presented. Two other female unrelated cases have been documented. (39,791,569 bp) and rs2540229 (39,797,559 bp) in 2p22.1 and between The inheritance is still not clear, both, autosomal recessive and X-linked rs843622 (54,401,986 bp) and rs1682139 (54,410,054 bp) in 2p16.2, re- dominant inheritance (lethal in males) were proposed. In 2011, Aravea et spectively, and a formation in maternal meiosis. al. reported two sisters with some similarities to GCMS. However, they had Comparison of our patient with cases from the literature and the DECIPHER neither craniosynostosis nor hearing loss, but had additional manifestati- database allowed the identification a region of around 4 Mb carrying 48 ge- ons not previously depicted in GCMS: aplasia cutis, ossification defect of the nes, where one or more genes relevant for growth might be located. So far, skull and early mortality. none of these genes has been associated with growth retardation. We report a two-year-old girl born to apparently unrelated parents. She ful- P02.117 fils the clinical criteria of GCMS with the following main clinical features: MTHFR 677T is a determinant of the degree of hearing loss among microsomia, hypertrichosis, midface hypoplasia, brachycephaly, coronal Polish males craniosynostosis, low frontal hairline, coarse hair, small ears, short and A. Pollak1, M. Mueller-Malesinska1, U. Lechowicz1, A. Skórka2, L. Korniszewski1, A. downslanting palpebral fissures and hypoplastic labia majora. Other fea- Sobczyk-Kopciol3, A. Waskiewicz4, G. Broda4, K. Iwanicka- Pronicka1, M. Oldak5, H. Skarzynski1, R. Ploski6; tures included loose skin, umbilical hernia, high arched palate, microdontia, 1The Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department somewhat hypoplastic and hyperkeratotic toe nails. Radiological evaluation of Paediatrics, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 3Department showed hypoplasia of the distal phalanges of the left hand. Karyotype and of General Biology and Parasitology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, metabolic screening were normal. Our patient, similarly to the patients de- Poland, 4Department of Cardiovascular Diseases Epidemiology, Prevention and Health scribed by Aravea et al. has not got hearing loss, the feature observed in the Promotion, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 5Department all first three patients with GCMS. of Histology and Embryology Center of Biostructure Research, Medical University of We would like to bring this condition to the attention of clinical geneticists. Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University in Warsaw, Poland, Warsaw, Poland. Future case reports can stimulate detailed clinical and molecular investiga- tions into aetiology of GCMS with all implications for genetic counseling . P02.115 Hearing impairment (HI) is the most common sensory handicap. Whereas Mutation-based growth charts for SEDC and other COL2A1 related dysplasias congenital HMI hTaHsF oRften a genetic basis the etiology of nonsyndromic post- P. A. Terhal1, P. van Dommelen2, G. Mortier3; lingual HI (npHI) usually remains unidentified. Our purpose was to test 1Department of Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Life Style, TNO, Leiden, whether the C677T (rs1801133) polymorphism affecting folate me- Netherlands, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium. tabolism is associated with the occurrence or severity of npHI. We studied rs1801133 genotypes in 647 npHI patients (age < 40, sudden sensorinural loss excluded, HI characterized as mean of better ear hearing thresholds for In a large international collaCbOoLr2aAti1ve study we have constructed a growth 0.5-8kHz) and 3273 adult controls from background popMuTlaHtiFoRn. Genotype chart for patients with molecular confirmed congenital spondylo-epihyseal distribution among patients and controls was similar but among male ca- dysplasia (SEDC) and other related dysplasias. The growth chart is ses (N=302) we found a dose dependent correlation of 677T with based on longitudinal height measurements of 79 patients with glycine sub- degree of HI (mean thresholds in dB: 38.8, 44.9 and 53.3, for CC, CT and stitutions in the triple-helical domain of COL2A1. In addition, measurements TT genotypes, respectively; P=0.0013, Pcor.=0M.0T17H)F. RA mong male patients of 27 patients with other molecular defects, such as arginine to cysteine rs1801133 TT significantly increased risk for severe/profound HI (OR=4.88, substitutions, splice mutations and mutations in the C-terminal propeptide P=0.001). Among controls the known effect of 677T on homocystei- have been plotted on the chart. Height of the patients progressively deviate ne concentration was more pronounced in men than women (PM<0T.H0F0R004 for from that of normal children: compared to normal WHO charts, the mean genotype-sex interaction) suggesting that in Poland folate deficiency is more length/height is -2.6 SD at birth, -4.2 SD at 5 years and -5.8 SD at adult age. prevalent in males. In conclusion, we report a novel effect of 677T The mean adult height (male and female combined) of patients with glycine among males with npHI. The functional significance of rs1801133 suggests substitutions in the triple-helical region is 138.2 cm, but there is a large va- these patients may benefit from that folate supplementation. riation. Patients with glycine to cysteine substitutions tend to cluster within P02.118 the upper part of the chart, while patients with glycine to serine and valine Screening for miRNA and common mutations in deaf Brazilian substitutions are situated between +1 SD and -1 SD. Patients with carboxy- patients terminal glycine substitutions tend to be shorter than patients with amino- S. M. da Silva-Costa, F. T. A. Martins, R. M. Alves, A. M. Castilho, E. L. Sartorato; terminal substitutions, while patients with splice mutations are relatively UNICAMP, Campinas, Brazil. tall. However, there are exceptions, and specific mutations can have a strong, GJB2 GJB6 or the reverse, a relatively mild negative effect on growth, The observation of significant difference in adult height between affected members of the Mutations in the genes coding for connexin 26 ( ) and connexin 30 ( ) same family indicates that height remains a multifactorial trait even in the are the main cause of autosomal recessive nonsyndromic sensorineural hea- presence of a mutation with a strong dominant effect. ring loss (AR-NSNHL). Lately, mutations in a noncoding microRNA (miRNA) gene, miR96, a member of the miR-183 miRNA cluster that is expressed in tGhJBe 2inner ear sensory epithelium, werGeJ lBin6ked with progressive hearing loss in humans and mice. In the present study, we screened mutations in the gene and two deletions in the gene in 566 unrelated Brazilian patients, with moderate to profound NSNHL. Besides these common muta- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 75 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 GJB2. tions we included the investigation of mutations in miR-183 genes family. Recurrent deletions in the proximal region 7q11.23 are common in pati- We have found 13 different mGuJBta2tions in Thirty-four patients were ho- ents with Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS). However, only a few patients mozygous for the most frequent mutationG, J3B52delG. Seventeen patiGeJnBt6s were with a microdeletion including the HIP1 gene, located in the distal region compound heterozigotes for gene mutations and 33 patients GhJaBv2e been of 7q11.23, have been reported. These patients show a neurodevelopmen- identified carrying mutation in only one allele. Deletions in gene tal and epilepsy syndrome. HIP1 encodes huntingtin interacting protein-1 have been found in 6 patients, four of them carried mutation in gene which is normally expressed in the brain. HIP1-knockout mice develop a in the other allele. Screening microRNA cluster (miR-96/182/183), we have progressive neurologic phenotype with tremor and gait ataxia. Therefore, identified nine single-nucleotide polymGJoBr2p hisms and two novel variant se- HIP1 haploinsufficiency has been proposed to lead to cognitive and beha- quences located outside the mature miR-96 sequence. Our findings have vioural dysfunction in these patients. We present a 4 year old girl with mo- showed a mutation spectrum of the gene in Brazilian patients with tor and speech delay, mild ataxia, and behavioral problems including im- nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss and demonstrate the high genetic pulsivity, aggression and mild autistic features. She showed facial dysmor- heterogeneity for the deafness. phism, including a short nose with anteverted nares, downturned corners P02.119 of the mouth, and a full lower lip, reminiscent of patients with WBS. Array- Identification of two new alpha globin gene mutations in patients CGH analysis revealed an intragenic 14-23kb deletion in the distal region suspected of having alpha thalassemia 7q11.23, which leads to loss of exons 5 to 8 of HIP1. The deletion detected M. Hamid1,2, G. Shariati3,2, A. Saberi3,2, M. Mohammadi2, B. Keikhai4; in this patient overlaps with a recurrent distal deletion in 7q11.23 in the 1Molecular Medicine Division, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, patients reported by Ramocki et al. (2010). Those patients had similar cli- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Narges Medical Genetics & PND Laboratory, No. 18, nical features, including intellectual disabilities, neurobehavioral problems East Mihan Ave, Kianpars, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical and in addition epilepsy. However, no information about facial dysmorphism Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences, Ahvaz, was reported. Our patient appears to be the first with HIP1 haploinsuffici- Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Pediatric Hematology & Oncology, Research Center of Thalassemia & Hemoglobinopathy , Ahvaz Jondishapur University of Medical ency. Further, our observation supports HIP1 to be a good candidate gene in Sciences Ahvaz, Iran, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. patients with developmental delay, behavioral and gait abnormalities and the facial dysmorphism described. P02.122 Alpha thalassemia disorder is a hereditary anemias caused by quantitative Zimmermann-Laband syndrome: a case report reduction of the alpha chain of hemoglobin, which the majority is caused by D. Gün, N. Koçak, T. Çora, B. Kocabıyık, H. Acar; deletion in alpha globin gene cluster and, small group by point mutations. Selçuk University, Selçuklu Medical Faculty,The Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, Turkey. We report two novel point mutations observed in two male from south of Iran with lur ethnic origin, detected during screening for hemoglobinopa- thies. The patients were initially selected for their hematological indices Zimmermann-Laband syndrome (ZLS) is an extremely rare malformation as belonging to a group suspected for alpha thalssemia. The patients who syndrome. It is characterized by dysplastic or absent nails, hypoplasia of the did not reveal the most common alpha thalassemia deletions (3.7kb, Med, distal phalanges, scoliosis, hirsutism, gingival fibromatosis and mental re- 4.2kb, 20.5kb) by gap-PCR, were subjected for alpha2 and alpha1 globin tardation. Although the genetic basis of ZLS is unknown, previous studies in gene DNA sequencing. Sequence analyses identified Cd 31 A>G and Cd 99 cases suggested that the gene responsible for ZLS is located at chromosome A>T located in alpha 1 globin gene, which the Cd31 was missense and Cd 99 3. ZLS is believed to be inherited as an autosomal dominant inheritance. In was nonsense mutation. Based on the red cell indices and phenotype, these contrast, there were evidence of autosomal recessive inheritance for ZLS. In mutations seem to be associated with a mild alpha-thalassemia (alpha-thal) the present report, a 15 year-old female was referred to our department due phenotype. to intellectual disability. There was no relationship between the patient’s P02.120 parents. We performed cytogenetic analysis by using GTG-banding. The SPG 23: autosomal recessive spastic paraplegia with pigmentation patient‘s karyotype was 46, XX, and no abnormality was found in any chro- anomalies: further definition in a large Algerian pedigree with mosome. Clinical examination show that she had thick eyebrows, bulbous pseudodominance. soft nose, large upper lip, large floppy ears, high palate, hypoplastic nails, M. Hureaux, M. Irabe, J. Piard, L. Van Maldergem, J. Bresson; CHU Besançon, Hôpital St Jacques, Center of Human Genetics, Besançon, France. short distal phalanges, hypertrichosis, pektus excavatum and an operati- on scar on her back due to scoliosis operation. The patient was evaluated for gingival fibromatosis, were identified as minimal gingival fibromatosis. Other system examinations and laboratory investigations were normal. Pa- Autosomal recessive hereditary spastic paraplegia includes at least fifteen tient was diagnosed as a Zimmermann-Laband syndrome. This is the first discrete entities differentiated by age at onset of symptoms and presence our experience for this syndrome. of distinctive features (pure and complicated forms). Among them, SPG23 has been characterized by presence of skin and/or scalp hypopigmentation. P02.123 Three autosomal recessive pedigrees have been reported until now, while Holoprosencephaly overview at the Hospital for Rehabilitation of one is a sporadic case and the other doesn’t exclude autosomal dominant Craniofacial Anomalies in Bauru, Brazil inheritance. Hypopigmented macules or scalp hair are present, alongside to A. L. B. da Rocha, C. C. Legnaro, R. G. Quiezi, A. Richieri-Costa, L. D. Goes, I. Taíra, C. Bessão, L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo; spastic paraparesia of variable age at onset. At present, only one pedigree Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias Craniofaciais da Universidade de São Paulo, has been subject to a linkage study indicating a locus at 1q24-32 (interval Bauru, Brazil. 25cM). We present a four-generation Algerian family were the index patient, a 34 y-old female with onset of SP at the age of 18y has multiple hypopigmented Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is one of the most common congenital malforma- macules and white forelock. Her maternal grandfather is affected as well in tions in humans and it is characterized by the incomplete separation of the the context of an endogamic population. She married her first cousin and cerebral hemispheres into distinct right and left halves. Structural chromo- gave birth to a normal baby male with white forelock and hypopigmented somal anomalies previously compiled from chromosomal HPE predicted at macules. Four other remote cousins are affected, all of them born to consan- least 12 different HPE loci. Point mutations in the four major genes, SHH, guineous parents. ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF, were identified in 20% of our HPE patients. The Hos- We suggest that the pedigree is compatible with either pseudo dominance pital for Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies in Bauru, Brazil has 248 or AD inheritance with incomplete penetrance. In conclusion, we confirm patients registered as HPE. From this total, 137 were classified as classical SPG23 as a discrete entity and give further support to an autosomal recessi- HPE and 111 were classified as microform of HPE phenotype. We performed ve mode of inheritance. mutational analysis in the SHH, SIX3, TGIF, ZIC2, GLI2, PTCH, and GAS1 ge- P02.121 nes in 149 patients. We found 9 mutations on SHH, 7 on SIX3, 1 on TGIF, 5 on A Microdeletion at the 7q11.23 Locus including HIP1 in a Girl with ZIC2, 5 on GLI2, 4 on PTCH, and 5 on GAS1 genes. Two patients presenting a Developmental Delay, Behavioural Problems, Gait Abnormalities and double mutation involving SHH and GAS1 genes, and GLI2 and PTCH genes Facial Dysmorphism were identified. Further analysis on 20 new patients for SHH, TGIF and SIX3 F. Kießling1, K. Hackmann2, C. Heine1, S. Syrbe3, D. Mitter1; genes showed a new mutation on SHH (p.Q46P) which was inherited from 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institut the mother. No specific genotype-phenotype correlation according to type für Klinische Genetik, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Klinik und Poliklinik für Gastroenterologie und Rheumatologie, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. or location of the mutations was observed. There were no clinical features unique to individuals with a mutation compared with those without a de- tected mutation. Identification of new genes related to HPE and the inter- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org76 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 action between their products will result in a more rationale understanding Results: 6 mutations (G716R, G741R, G768R, I730N [novel mutation], I736T of the genetic mechanisms involved. Grants: Fapesp Proc n° 2011/07012-9; and R719Q) were identified in 11 families (59 relatives-30 carriers). Taking 2006/60973-9 in account our data and data from literature, a total of 21 pathogenic mu- P02.124 tations have been identified within this domain. They were distributed in Validation of “triplet repeat” disease detection and quantitation using 143 families (470 relatives). 424 relatives were affected or possibly affected micro-fluid technology based platform (11 with DCM and the rest with HCM) and 382 were mutation carriers. We J. Ramic, N. Lojo-Kadric, K. Radic, K. Bajrovic, L. Kapur-Pojskić; observed an early onset of disease (27±18 years, 56% males). Thirteen of 21 Institute for genetic engeneering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. mutations were associated with a severe adverse event affecting at least one member in 52/143 families: sudden death occurred in 96 patients and at least 56% were younger than 45 years old, heart failure death in 35, cardiac Classical molecular genetic diagnosis of Huntington disease and simi- transplantation in 18 and fatal stroke in 6. lar diseases caused by unstable repetitive sequences relies mainly on the Conclusion: Mutations located within the beta-myosin converter domain Southern blotting method. Specifically in the case of Huntington disease that presented an early onset of disease. A significant proportion of mutations we used as a model, which is transmitted in an autosomal-dominant inhe- were associated with the occurrence of a serious adverse event and left ven- ritance, increased number of CAG triplet repeat is a genetic cause for the tricular dysfunction. redundant synthesis of the targeted product. In the normal genotype, the P02.127 numbers of repetitions ranges from 6-26, and with increasing numbers of Epidemiological and genetic assessment of hypospadias repetitions also increase the degree of disease. Development of PCR tech- D. Stoicanescu1, M. Stoian1, A. Belengeanu1, M. Cevei2; nology has evolved and the possibility of faster and more reliable diagnosis 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of diseases of this type. Analysis of the PCR product from conventional gel of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine & Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania. electrophoresis is generally accepted, but it is not always possible to preci- sely determine the exact number of CAG repetitions that characterize this disease. In the present study we compared the process of PCR-based analy- Hypospadias is one of the most common birth defects. In several countries, sis using micro-fluid technology based platform (Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer, the incidence appears to be increasing, possibly due to increased repor- Agilent Technologies, USA) potentially produce more accurate data on qua- ting of minor degrees of hypospadias, but severe cases were also reported. litative and quantitative aspect of the mutation. Some reports have linked its high rate to prematurity and low birth-weight. P02.125 The etiology is still unknown in many cases, pedigree analyses indicating Ischemic stroke in a case with moderate hyperhomocysteinemia a heterogeneous pattern of inheritance. A genetic predisposition has been M. Cevei1, D. Stoicanescu2; suggested. The aim of this study was to perform an epidemiological study 1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine&Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2University of focused on this type of pathology, in newborns from Timisoara, Romania, Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. for a period of three years, between 2008 and 2010 and to highlight the etiological aspects of hypospadias. Methods: data selection, family history, clinical, laboratory, cytogenetic and molecular study. Major and minor con- Increased concentration of homocysteine is a risk factor for stroke, periphe- genital defects present in examined patients were recorded. The determined ral vascular disease, myocardial infarction, and venous thromboembolism. incidence was 0.36% of male newborns. Glanular and distal penile locations It seems that hyperhomocysteinemia affects not only the blood coagula- prevailed. At birth, mean values were 2982 g weight and 46 cm for height. tion system, but also the vascular wall structure. MTHFR gene encodes a Frequently associated anomalies were genital, skeletal, nervous system and co-substrate for homocysteine remethylation to methionine, but it is also different minor anomalies. A brotherhood with hypospadias was noted. involved in transsulfuration to cystathionine. We present the case of a 42 8.3% of mothers had previous miscarriages or malformed births. Cytoge- years old man hospitalized for treatment and functional rehabilitation in netic investigation revealed trisomy 21 in one case. A patient had disorder Medical Rehabilitation Clinical Hospital Baile Felix, Romania, after ischemic of sexual development. Environmental exposure to diluents was documen- stroke. The patient with unremarkable anamnesis, negative family history, ted in another case. Identifying patients with a genetic susceptibility and no known diagnosis of homocystinuria developed an acute cerebrovascular further studies regarding gene and environment interactions will play an ischemic accident. MRI described an ischemic vascular lesion of the left ce- important role in preventing the occurrence of the defect. rebellar hemisphere with edema, herniation phenomena through foramen P02.128 magnum and supratentorial and amputation of the fourth ventricle. Ultraso- Molecular analysis is essential in the hypotonic infant approach nography of the heart and precerebral arteries revealed normal aspects The detecting high incidence of Genetic diseases most significant laboratory finding was moderate hyperhomocysteinemia. G. Queipo1, J. Perez1, L. Gonzalez1, E. Barragan2, N. Najera1, N. Garibay3; Molecular analysis revealed the presence of a heterozygous MTHFR C677T 1Hospital General de México-Facultad de Medicina UNAM, México DF, Mexico, 2Hospital mutation and the absence of A1298C mutation. After drug therapy, he was Infantil de Mexico Federico Gomez, México DF, Mexico, 3Hospital General de México, admitted in our clinic at about one month after the vascular accident, having México DF, Mexico. only coordination problems. Rehabilitation treatment was complex and in- volved coordination of several team members, with the following main ob- jectives: coordination and balance in physical activities, through stimulation Neonatal central hypotonia is the lack of spontaneous movement, with or exercises specific for occupational therapy and kinetotherapy. He showed without muscular weakness, and generalized hypotonia during the neonatal significant improvement after three weeks of intensive treatment. Prompt period. This condition can be caused by a number of different pathological response to the rehabilitation programme in this case is another argument processes in the brain or defects to any structure in the motor unit. Cen- for early, individualized treatment, which continues at home, over a long pe- tral hypotonia affects the central nervous system, including the spine, and riod of time. among its most frequent causes is systemic illness. As part of the central approach to the hypotonic baby, it is important to eliminate syndromic and P02.126 genetic causes. Some reports have been proposed that 40% of the central Phenotype-genotype correlation in patients with mutations in the hypotonic neonates had Prader Willi the most common genetic cause of beta-myosin converter domain D. A. Garcia-Giustiniani1, X. Fernández1, M. Ortiz-Genga1, R. Barriales-Villa1, A. Mazzanti1, obesity however, in children under 2 years of age the diagnosis is especially M. I. Rodríguez-García1,2, L. Cazón1, M. Perez-Barbeito1, E. Maneiro1, L. Monserrat- difficult. It is clear that early diagnosis of PWS o any other genetic entity is Iglesias1,2; crucial to avoid complications and decrease morbidity and life expectancy. 1INIBIC, A Coruña, Spain, 2CHUAC, A Coruña, Spain. Nevertheless, other genetic syndromes have central hypotonia as main cli- nical manifestation during infancy. So, genetic approach is mandatory du- ring the initial clinical intervention. We present the genetic approach in 30 Purpose: Evaluate the genotype-phenotype correlation of mutations located consecutive pediatric patients with central hypotonia as a major symptom, in the beta-myosin converter-domain (aminoacids 709-777). This region is referred by the neuro-pediatrician. According with the clinical genetic eva- responsible for the elastic distortion of the protein which allows strain to luation and presumptive clinical diagnosis, molecular analysis was perfor- develop within the motor before the cargo is actually moved. med detecting that 70% of the cases had a genetic disorder. We conclude Methods: Identification of mutations in the converter domain of MYH7 was that genetic evaluation is crucial in the central hypotonic clinical approach, performed in a cohort of more than 800 cases diagnosed either with Hyper- proposing that all the central idiopatic hypotonic babies should be evalu- trophic (HCM) or Dilated Cardiomyopathy (HCM), followed-up in a single ated by a clinical genetic professional. reference unit. We also reviewed the published data about mutations loca- ted within this domain. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 77 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.129 P02.131 Incidence of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome A novel INPP5E mutation in a patient with Joubert syndrome C. Molinatto1, A. Mussa1, A. De Crescenzo2, N. Chiesa1, G. Baldassarre1, A. Selicorni3, S. G. Uyanik1, M. Güzünler2, F. Sönmez3, D. Yilmaz3, I. Vater4, G. Cömertpay1,5, M. Heise1, S. Russo4, A. Riccio2, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; Cirak6, Y. Hellenbroich7; 1Department of Pediatrics, University of Turin, Turin, Italy, 2Genetics and Biophysics 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Hamburg, Germany, Institute, A. Buzzati-Traverso, CNR, Naples, Italy, 3Pediatric Clinical Genetics, 2Department of Pediatrics, Gördes Hospital, Manisa, Turkey, 3Division of Pediatric Department of Pediatrics, University of Milano Bicocca, S. Gerardo Hospital MBBM Neprology, Department of Pediatrics, Adnan Menderes University, Aydin, Turkey, Foundation, Monza, Italy, 4Laboratory of Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics, Istituto 4Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus, Kiel, Auxologico Italiano, Milan, Italy. Germany, 5Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Çukurova University, Adana, Turkey, 6UCL Institute of Child Health, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Background - Kingdom, 7) Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck / University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is the most common genetic overgrowth disorder, with an incidence ranging 1:13,000-15,000 live births. However, as dOabtaje ocnti vites -epidemiology are scanty and estimates Joubert syndrome (JS) is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by show wide variability, there is a feeling that BWS could be more commMoen- ataxia, muscular hypotonia, developmental delay, irregular breathing pat- tthhaond sp r-eviously thought. We assessed its incidence in Piedmont, tern and eye movement abnormalities. The MRI shows cerebellar vermis Italy (4,432,571 population) locating BWS cases born in this region. hypoplasia with accompanying brainstem malformations resulting in the Patient were searched through local genetic counselling services, characteristic “molar tooth sign”. JS can also be associated with additional BWS Italian Association, malformation registries and rare diseases network. features including retinal dystrophy, ocular colobomas, cystic renal disease, Data from the Italian National Institute for Statistics was used for live births nephronophtisis, hepatic fibrosis and polydactyly summerized as JS-related assessment. BWS dRiaegsnuoltssis - was clinical according to Wecksberg’s criteria disorders (JRDS). and molecular testing was performed according to currently employed dia- JS and JSRD are genetically and clinically heterogeneous disorders, so far gnostic flow-chart. 45 clear-cut BWS cases (26 females, 19 males) 16 different causitive genes have been identified in JSRD. Here, we present were born across a 13-year period (1996-2009), providing an incidence of a 5 years old Turkish girl with JS. The parents were first degree cousins 1:10,569 live birth. Fourty patients accepted molecular testing: 72.5% tur- and the patient was on chronic peritoneal dialysis program since the age of ned positive showing imprinting center 2 (IC2) hypomethylation (30.0%), paternal chromosome 11p15 uniparental disomy (UPD, 25.0%), IC1 hy- 15 months. We decided first to perform a homozygosity mappINinPgP 5bEy SNP- Array (6.0 Affymetrix) analysis, which showed “loss-of-heterozygosity” for permethylation (15.0%), CDKN1c mutation (2.5%), whereas 27.5% turned the JBTS1 locus on chromosome 9q34.3. The analysis of the gene negative. Mean age at diagnosis was 0.49±1.07 years, with 34 patients dia- revealed a homozygeous mutation (c.1303C>G; p.R435G) within exon 6, gnosed in the first semester of life, providing a birth prevalence of 1:13,989. affecting a highly conserved amino acid within the inositol polyphosphate Four Cpoanticelnutssi oofn t h-e cohort developed Wilms’ tumor (8.9%) and 2 hepato- phosphatase catalytic domain of INPP5E. The genetic and clinical data will blastoma (4.4%) during the observation period, resulting in a 14.2%cancer be presented and compared to the published cases. risk. We observed a BWS incidence of 1:10,569 live birth in Piedmont. This estimate results higher than previous figures, and represent P02.132 the first attempt to correlate epidemiologic and molecular data in BWS. Autosomal recessive syndrome characterized by Hypertelorism - Intellectual Disability - Microcephaly - Short stature: clinical P02.130 delineation and identification of two possible candidate loci Inheritance of the VATER/VACTERL association M. Feingold1, A. Har Zahav2, K. Neveling3, C. Gilissen3, M. Kwint3, S. Gijsen3, J. Veltman3, H. E. Bartels1, E. Jenetzky2, B. D. Solomon3, M. Ludwig4, E. Schmiedeke1,5, S. Grasshoff- Brunner3, M. Shohat1,4,5, L. Basel-Vanagaite1,4,5; Derr6, D. Schmidt7, S. Märzheuser7, S. Hosie8, S. Weih9, S. Holland-Cunz9, M. Palta10, J. 1Pediatric Genetics, Schneider Children‘s Medical Center of Israel, and Raphael Recanati Leonhardt11, M. Schäfer12, C. Kujath13, A. Rißmann14, M. M. Nöthen15,16, H. Reutter15,17, N. Genetic Institute, Petah Tikva, Israel, 2Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Zwink2; Tel Aviv, Israel, Tel Aviv, Israel, 3Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Center for 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Division of Clinical Epidemiology and Molecular Life Sciences and Institute for Genetic and Metabolic Disorders, Radboud Aging Research, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Medical University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Sackler School of Medicine, Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 5Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Tel Aviv States, 4Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, Bonn, Germany, University, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Tikva, Israel. 5Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Center for Child and Adolescent Health, Hospital Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Surgery, University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric Surgery, Campus Virchow Clinic, Charite University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 8Department of Autosomal recessive intellectual disability (ID) is particularly prevalent Pediatric Surgery, Klinikum Schwabing, Technische Universität München, Munich, in consanguineous populations. Numerous genes associated with ID have Germany, 9Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, been identified, and for several genes, mutations can result in both syndro- Germany, 10Department of Pediatric Surgery, Evangelisches Krankenhaus Hamm, mic and non-syndromic ID. We describe a consanguineous family with three Hamm, Germany, 11Department of Pediatric Surgery, St. Bernward-Hospital, Hildesheim, Germany, 12Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Cnopf´sche Klinik, Nürnberg, boys and one girl affected with a hitherto undescribed autosomal recessi- Germany, 13Department of Pediatric Surgery, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, ve syndromic form of ID characterized by, in addition to ID, hypertelorism, Germany, 14Malformation Monitoring Centre Saxony-Anhalt, Otto-von-Guericke broad nasal bridge with a broad and bifid nasal tip, and microcephaly ran- University, Magdeburg, Germany, 15Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, ging from -4 SD to -2 SD. One patient has multiple milia and another was Bonn, Germany, 16Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, diagnosed with keratosis pilaris. Three of the patients have short stature. Bonn, Germany, 17Department of Neonatology, Children’s Hospital, University of Bonn, Neurological examination of all the affected individuals was normal; none Bonn, Germany. of them had seizures. Brain MRI studies showed normal results. We were not able to find any reports of this combination of clinical features in the scientific literature. VATER/VACTERL association refers to the non-random co-occurrence of the Consanguinity increases the coefficient of inbreeding, which in turn in- following component features: vertebral defects, anal atresia, cardiac mal- creases the likelihood of the presence of pathogenic mutations in a homoal- formations, tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal abnormalities, and limb de- lelic state. Homozygosity mapping provides a rapid means of mapping auto- fects. Recent observations suggest that in some patients, the disorder may somal recessive genes in consanguineous families through identification of be inherited. The aim of the present study was to replicate these findings by „homozygous blocks“ suspected of harboring the causative mutated genes. investigating 116 VATER/VACTERL patients and their relatives. The preva- We performed homozygosity mapping using SNP array in four affected fami- lence of anal atresia (OR 41.7, 95% CI 15.5-112.2) and limb anomalies (OR ly members and identified two candidate loci, one on chromosome 6p12.1- 6.4, 95% CI 1.6-25.7) was significantly higher among first-degree relatives q12.2 and one on chromosome 9p23-p24, possibly containing a homozy- compared to the general population. This confirms other observations of an gous mutation responsible for this family’s unique phenotype. None of the increased prevalence of component features among relatives. The fact that genes mapping to these two candidate regions are known to cause a similar the two studies report a higher prevalence for differing specific component syndromic form of ID. features might be explained by the differing malformation spectra of the P02.133 respective index patients. Conclusion: the present study provides indepen- A partial de novo deletion of GLRB and GRIA2 in an individual with dent support for the hypothesis that some cases of VATER/VACTERL have a intellectual disability genetic basis. K. Hackmann1, S. Matko1, E. Gerlach1, M. von der Hagen2, B. Klink1, E. Schrock1, A. Rump1, N. Di Donato1; 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Abteilung Neuropädiatrie, Klinik und Poliklinik www.eshg.org www.eshg.org78 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. P02.136 Mutations in the intraflagellar transport component IFT144 cause a broad spectrum of ciliopathies extending Jeune and Sensenbrenner Molecular karyotyping revealed a deletion of 102-111 kb in an individual syndrome with intellectual disability. This finding was validated as a de novo event H. Fehrenbach1, V. Frank2, U. Walden3, T. Hampel1, K. Amann4, K. Häffner5, H. J. Bolz2, M. by FISH. The aberration partially affects GLRB and GRIA2. Both genes are Pohl5, C. Bergmann2; 1Department of Pediatrics, Children´s Hospital Memmingen, Memmingen, Germany, highly expressed in brain tissues. GLRB encodes the beta subunit of the in- 2Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, hibitory glycine receptor. It has been associated with autosomal re-cessive Children´s Hospital Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany, 4Department of Pathology, University hyperekplexia. No symptoms of this disorder were found in this case. GRIA2 of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 5Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent encodes the GluR2 subunit of a glutamate receptor. Other subunits of glut- Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. amate receptors have been associated with intellectual disability. Sequen- cing did not detect any further mutation in ei-ther of the two genes. Analyses of reversely transcribed RNA from blood revealed the exist-ence of GLRB/ Intraflagellar transport (IFT) along the microtubule core organizes the car- GRIA2 fusion transcripts. We were not able to find a fragment that carried go of proteins into and out of the cilium and is needed for its formation, an open reading frame across the fusion site. Nonetheless, open reading fra- maintenance and function. An emerging number of diseases is related to the mes could be restored by different alternative splice events that might occur dysfunction of cilia, collectively termed ciliopathies. We describe an 8-year- in neuronal structures. We speculate that either haploinsufficiency of GRIA2 old girl with a complex phenotype that does not fit properly to any known or a GLRB/GRIA2 fusion gene was causing the disorder. syndrome. Hypotonia, facial dysmorphism and retardation were noted P02.134 shortly after birth. Other features include short stature, skeletal anomalies, Haploinsufficiency of SOX5, a member of the SOX (SRY-related HMG- strabism, deafness, subdural hygroma, hepatosplenomegaly, and end-stage box) family of transcription factors is a cause of intellectual disability renal failure due to focal-segmental glomerulosclerosis. Ten weeks after kid- I. Schanze1, D. Schanze1, C. A. Bacino2, S. Douzgou3, B. Kerr3, M. Zenker1; ney transplantation, life-threatening acute respiratory distress due to an E. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, coli sepsis recently made extracorporal membrane oxygenation necessary. 2Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, After array-CGH had revealed no pathogenicity, we used our next-genera- United States, 3Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. tion sequencing (NGS) “ciliopathy panel” which encompassed at that time 131 cilia-related disWeDasRe1 a9nd candidate genes targeting 2335 exons and 644 kb of sequence. By this, we identified the homozygous mutation c.1483G>C (p.Gly495Arg) in encoding the intraflagellar transport protein Intellectual disability (ID) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous con- IFT144. This mutation affects an evolutionarily highly conserved residue, dition; the cause is unknown in most non-specific and sporadic cases. To is absent from databases, and predicted by different bioinformatic sources establish an etiological basis in those patients represents a difficult challen- ge. Over the last years it has become apparent, that chromosomal rearran- to be WpaDtRho19genic. Our patient emphasizes the usefulness and efficiency of gements below the detection level of conventional karyotyping contribute this NGS panel approach anWd aDdRd1s9 to the recent description of three families with mutations and nephronophthisis, Jeune and Sensenbrenner significantly to the cause of ID. syndrome suggesting that mutations can cause a broad spectrum We present three patients with non-specific intellectual disability who of ciliopathies. all have a microdeletion in the chromosomal region 12p12.1. In two pati- ents these deletions occurred de novo. All three identified deletions have P02.137 different breakpoints and range in size from 120 kb to 4.9 Mb. The SsmOXa5l- Hematologic anomalies in a rare case of Jacobsen syndrome C. M. Jurca1,2, C. Skrypnyk1, K. Kozma1, A. Jurca1, C. Cladovan1,2, M. Bembea1,2; SleOsXt 5deletion helps to delineate the critical region to a genomic segment 1Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2Municipal Clinical Hospital, (chr12:23924800-24041698, hg19) encompassing only one gene, . Oradea, Romania. is a member of the SOX (SRY-related HMG-box) family of transcription factors shown to play roles in chondroblast function, oligodendrocyte dSiOffXe5- rentiation and migration as well as ensuring proper development of specific BACKGROUND: Jacobsen syndrome is a contiguous gene syndrome caused neuSrOoXnal cell types. Because of these biological functions, mutations in by partial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 11. It is a rare syndrome, were predicted to cause complex diSsOeaXs5e syndromes, as is the case for seve- first described in 1973 by Jacobsen, reported so far about 200 cases. The ral genes, but no such mutations have yet been identified. Our findings incidence is about 1/100000 newborns. The key features of the syndrome indicate that haploinsufficiency of is a cause of intellectual disability. are pre- and post-natal growth failure, mental retardation, facial dysmor- To verify this presumption we are performing mutational analysis in a co- phism, thrombocytopenia. CASE PRESENTATION: The patient, now a 19 hort of patients with non-specific and unexplained ID. year-old female, has been followed at the Oradea Genetics Department since P02.135 the age of 3 months. Phenotypically she shows severe mental retardation, Analysis of ring finger proteins RNF133 and RNF148 in Intellectual characteristic cranio-facial dysmorphism suggesting Jacobsen syndrome disability (trigonocephaly, hypertelorism, coloboma, down-slanting palpebral fissu- E. Bonora1, A. Wischmeijer1,2, F. Minopoli1, C. Tabarroni1, M. Vidone1, M. Seri1, C. res, epicanthic folds, small nose, depressed nasal bridge, small, lowset ears, Graziano1, G. Romeo1; 1Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, BOLOGNA, Italy, 2Unit of Clinical large mouth). Hematological (pancytopenia) and immunological (IgM defi- Genetics, IRCCS Arcispedale S. Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. ciency) anomalies were absent in infancy, but become apparent at puberty. Karyotype: 46, XX del (11) (q23.3-qter). DISCUSSION: Authors discuss the hematological and immunological abnormalities of the presented case, in Intellectual disability (ID), also referred to as cognitive impairment or mental terms of delayed onset of these symptoms and problems raised for differen- retardation, is characterized by a substantial below-average score on tests of tial diagnosis. CONCLUSION: This rare case of Jacobsen syndrome shows he- mental ability or intelligence, and limitations in functions related to areas of matological and immunological features that can be useful both for practice daily life. Intellectual disability can range from mild to profound and can be and for better understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships. associated with other clinical findings or can occur as an isolated trait, with P02.138 an extensive genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity. Taken together, syndro- A 1 Mb deletion within the Jacobsen-Syndrome critical region causes mic and non-syndromic forms of intellectual disability affect 1-3% of the po- moderate mental retardation in a boy pulation. More than a hundred genes have been associated so far to ID, and I. M. Bader1, I. Prassl1, M. Marton1, H. Suess-Burghart1, C. Nevinny-Stickel-Hinzpeter2, M. Cohen1, J. Pricelius2, B. Becker2; they mainly have roles in brain development, synaptic plasticity and function. 1Kinderzentrum München, Munich, Germany, 2synlab, Munich, Germany. The ubiquitin proteasome system plays a fundamental role in maintaining the correct balance of protein levels inside cells and any disruption to this system is likely to have severe consequences, as shown for Angelman Syndrome. Se- Jacobsen syndrome is a contiguous gene disorder caused by partial deletion veral types of ubiquitin ligase have been identified, the largest group being of the long arm of chromosome 11. It is characterized by developmental de- those proteins containing a ‚RING‘ motif. We analyzed two of these, RNF133 and RNF148, in a cohort of 36 ID patients selected from the CHERISH consor- lay /mental retardation, physicalS gNrXo1w9t,h T HreYtNar1d, aOtPioCnM, Lfa, cNiaClA dPyDs3morphNiTsmM, visceral malformations and thrombocytopenia. Candidate genes for mental tium and negative at the array-CGH analysis. A novel missense change was retardation in this region include and . identified in one patient in RNF148 and was of maternal origin. The unaffec- Here we report a boy with moderate mental retardation, behavioral pro- ted brother does not carry the variant. We therefore performed an expression blems and slightly dysmorphic features but without physical growth retar- analysis of the gene and could prove that the mother expresses only the wild dation, with normal platelet count and no further obvious malformation. type form in blood. Expression analysis in the patient and in different tissues Molecular karyotyping (4x180A, Agilent) was performed on the patient sho- will be reported.Supported by FP7 grant CHERISH (www.cherishproject.eu). www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 79 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Malades, Paris, France, 4cDépartement de cytogénétique, Hospices civils de Lyon, Centre NTM OPCML. des neurosciences, Tiger, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France, 5Département wing an approximately 1Mb loss of genoOmPicC MmLaterial inN 1T1Mq2 5 encompas- de Génétique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 6Service de Génétique, Groupement sing only the two genes and Hospitalier Est, HFME, Lyon, France, 7Service de génétique médicale, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 8Service de Génétique, CHU La Milétrie, Poitiers, France, 9Unité de Our findings support the hypothesis that and/or are candidate génétique clinique, CHU Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 10Service de génétique genes for mental retardation. médicale, Groupe Hospitalier Sud, La Réunion, France, 11Service de génétique, Hôpital de P02.139 la Pitié-Salpétrière, Paris, France, 12Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, Hôpital Joubert syndrome: clinical variability in a family d‘Enfants de La Timone, Departement de Génétique, Marseille, France, 13Service de M. Puiu, S. Dumitriu, C. Haivas, A. Chirita-Emandi; génétique clinique, Hôpital Sud, Rennes, France, 14Département de Génétique Médicale, University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. CHRU Montpellier, Université Montpellier 1, Unité Inserm U844, Montpellier, France, 15Service de génétique, Hôpital Poissy-saint Germain, Poissy, France, 16Hospices Civils de Lyon, Service de Cytogénétique Constitutionnelle, Bron, France, 17Service de génétique, Hôpital Bretonneau, CHU, Tours, France, 18Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Joubert syndrome is a rare genetic disorder characterized by the underde- Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France, 19Service de Néphrologie, Dijon, France, velopment or even the absence of vermis cerebelli and a brain malformation 20Centre d’Investigation Clinique – Epidémiologie Clinique, CHU Dijon et Université de (molar sign). Most common manifestations are ataxia, hyperpnea, slep ap- Bourgogne, Dijon, France. nea, ocular anomalies, hipotonia. Presentation: Non-consanguine couple with 6 children of whom 4 with typi- cal manifestations of Joubert syndrome. Kabuki syndrome (KS) is a rare syndrome with multiple congenital abnor- Results: Family history reveals one child that died 1 day after birth and one malities and intellectual disabilities. The most specific feature is a charac- spontaneous abortion at months 2-3 of pregnancy. The affected children teristic face. Numerous patients with MLL2 mutations and rare of KDM6A have different severity forms of disease in terms of motor coordination, ocu- have been reported. Kidney and urologic abnormalities occur in 12 to 43% lar troubles, intellectual impairment, and respiratory problems. Mother pre- of KS patients. Kidney function in KS has not been studied. Only 3 cases of sents with retinitis pigmentosa with no other symptoms. Laboratory testing terminal renal insufficiency are reported. and interdisciplinary consultations are used to staging the disease. MRI Taking advantage of a French cohort including 95 genotyped KS patients, done on all brothers reveals the specific form of cerebellum (molar tooth renal ultrasounds and serum creatinine were collected. Renal function was sign). Genetic testing that we had available did not show abnormalities. evaluated by estimated glomerular filtration rate. A special attention was Conclusions: The syndrome is managed differently in the four children. Ge- given to severe cases and a genotype-phenotype study was conducted for netic counseling is challenging because of the variable clinical picture as kidney malformation. well as the different progression and prognosis of the disease. The children Kidney malformations were present in 24% of cases and urinary tract ab- benefited from the adequate and empathic genetic counseling together with normalities in 17%. Renal function was normal except for the two patients psychological counseling of the family who better supported them and diffe- with severe renal disease. Patient DIJ002 presented with renal agenesia and rentially addressed their problems. controlateral severe hypoplasia. Severe renal insufficiency was diagnosed P02.140 in the first days of life and progressed to terminal stage at 2 years of age. A Kabuki syndrome - clinical and genetic study of four new cases MLL2 mutation was found (c.9829C>T, p.Gln3277X). Patient NCK013 pre- C. Rusu1, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha1, M. Panzaru1, C. Iordache1, R. Russu2, C. Schrander sented with tubulointerstitial nephritis during childhood, leading to termi- Stumpel3; nal renal insufficiency at 27 years of age, and no MLL2 or KDM6A mutations 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Children‘s Hospital, Iasi, Romania, or deletions were found. 3Academic Hospital Maastricht, Maastricht, Netherlands. Kidney malformations were observed in 27% of MLL2 mutation-positive group and 5% of MLL2 mutation-negative group. No correlation was found between renal malformation and the location or type of MLL2 mutation. Kabuki syndrome (KS, Kabuki makeup syndrome, Niikawa-Kuroki syndro- Our study emphasizes the need for renal function and ultrasound screening me) is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by distinctive facial when KS is diagnosed. features (long palpebral fissures, eversion of the lower lateral eyelid, ar- P02.142 ched/interrupted eyebrows, depressed nasal tip, abnormal teeth and large/ Investigating KBG Syndrome: Partial deletion of ANKRD11 results prominent ears), fetal pads, intellectual disability and postnatal growth de- in the KBG phenotype distinct from the 16q24.3 microdeletion ficiency. Cardiac, renal and skeletal defects are sometimes associated. Most syndrome cases are sporadic, but a few familial cases have been reported, suggesting M. Khalifa, J. Stein; an autosomal dominant inheritance with variable expressivity. Genetics Department, Akron Children‘s Hospital, Akron, OH, United States. We present 4 cases with KS in order to show some particularities that could be included in the feature list of the syndrome. Cardiac and renal defects seem more common, whereas skeletal defects have been identified less fre- KBG syndrome (OMIM 148050) is a very rare genetic disorder characterized quently. Soft skin and moderate/severe intellectual disability seem to be by macrodontia, distinctive craniofacial abnormalities, short stature, skel- common features. All our cases are males and in 2 of them the mother pre- sented a mild phenotype. etal and neuroAlNogKiRcD in1v1olvement, and intellectual disability. Approximately Case 1: postnatal growth retardation, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, seve- 60 cases have been reported since it was first described inA 1N9K7R5D. R11ec ently mutations in have been documented in patients with KBG syn- re vesico-ureteral reflux leading to chronic renal failure, moderate/severe intellectual disability; the mother has typical face and fetal pads; drome, and it has beeAnN pKrRoDp1o1s ed that haploinsufficiency of is the cause of this syndrome. In addition, copy number variation in the 16q24.3 Case 2: normal growth, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, heart defect, unila- region that includes results in a variable phenotype that overlaps teral renal agenesis, nephrocalcinosis, moderate intellectual disability; with KBG syndrome that also includes autism spectrum disorders and other Case 3: normal growth, situs inversus, typical face, fetal pads, cardiac and renal defect, severe intellectual disability with behavioral disturbance; dysmorphic facial features. In this report we prAeNseKnRtD a1 21 ½ year old African American male with features highly suggestive of KBG syndrome. Genomic Case 4: postnatal growth retardation, typical face, soft skin, fetal pads, car- microarray identified a 154 kb deletion within . The deletion does diac and renal defect, gynecomastia, moderate/severe intellectual disabili- not involve other nearby genes. This child’s mother was mosaic for the same ty; the mother has typical face and fetal pads. In conclusion, we present 4 cases with KS to illustrate particular features deletion (present in approximately 50% AoNf KceRlDls1)1 a nd exhibited a milder phenotype including macrodontia, short stature and brachydactyly. This and to discuss management. family provides additional evidence that causes KBG syndrome P02.141 and the phenotype seems to be dose dependent, differentiating it from the Clinical and molecular spectrum of kidney malformations in Kabuki more variable 16q24.3 microdeletion syndrome. This family has additional syndrome features that could expand the phenotype of KBG syndrome. J. Courcet1,2, L. Faivre1,2, C. Michot3, E. Alix4, J. Amiel3, C. Baumann5, M. P. Cordier6, V. Cormier-Daire3, M. A. Delrue7, B. Gilbert-Dussardier8, A. Goldenberg9, M. L. Jacquemont10, P02.143 A. Jaquette11, H. Kayirangwa3, D. Lacombe7, M. Le Merrer3, S. Lyonnet3, A. Moncla12, Detection of large-scale mtDNA deletions by next-generation- S. Odent13, A. Pelet3, N. Philip12, L. Pinson14, S. Poisson3, K. Quan Sang3, J. Roume15, E. sequencing (NGS) in patients with Kearns-Sayre Syndrome (KSS) Sanchez14, D. Sanlaville14, M. Willems3, M. Till16, A. Toutain17, C. Vincent-Delorme18, C. H. Gabriel, M. Gencik; Mousson19, S. Vinault20, C. Binquet20, F. Huet1, P. Sarda14, D. Geneviève14; Diagenos, Osnabrück, Germany. 1Service de pédiatrie1 et de génétique médicale, Dijon, France, 2Centre de référence Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs, Dijon, France, 3Université Paris 5-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, INSERM U-781, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfant Kearns-Sayre syndrome (KSS) is a severe early-onset multisystemic mito- chondrial syndrome. Prominent features include progressive external oph- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org80 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 thalmoplegia, retinophathy, encephalopathy, proximal muscle weakness, male fetus. Medical history revealed that the mother was diagnosed w. ith cardiac arrhythmia and ataxia. hydrocephalus at 22 years that necessitated a surgical insertion of a shunt. In most affected patients heteroplamic large-scale mtDNA deletions can No other family members had symptoms consistent with L1 syndrome Se- be found. The percentage of mutated mtDNA varies between patients and quencing of the L1CAM gene revealed that the mother was a carrier of a mis- from tissue to tissue within the same individual. A high proportion of mtD- sense mutation: c.791G>A which is known to be causative for L1 syndrome. NA deletions are found consistenly in the most affected tissues (e.g. central The mutat ion was also identified in the fetal DNA and in an asymptomatic nervous system, muscles), whereas very low or undetectable amounts are mCoantecrlunasil osnisster. The couple chose to proceed with preimplantation genetic found in unaffected tissues (e.g. peripheral blood). diagnosis. Due to the low amount of deleted mtDNA in peripheral blood confirmation : L1 syndrome can be associated with atypical presentations. of KSS by deletion specific PCR or Southern Blot from blood samples is not A high level of clinical suspicion and active work-up is warranted in some possible in most cases. In cases in which a mtDNA deletion is confined to af- cases. fected tissues (e.g. skeletal muscle), the molecular diagnosis of KSS requires P02.146 genetic analysis of DNA form muscle biopsy. Occipital band heterotopia in an infant with partial merosin To overcome this limitation, we have established a next-generation-sequen- deficiency due to novel LAMA2 mutations cing protocol on the Roche 454J platform, which allows the detection of very S. Goobie1,2, M. Alturkustani1,2, L. C. Ang1,2, P. Ainsworth1,2, K. Y. Tay1,2, C. Campbell1,2; low amount of deleted mtDNA from peripheral blood samples. With this 1London Health Sciences Centre, London, ON, Canada, 2Western University, London, ON, approach we are able to test for the three most common mtDNA deletions Canada. found in approx. 80% of KSS patients. We could show that this new approach is able to characterize mtDNA dele- tions in patients with KSS from peripheral blood samples with a very high Laminin α2 (merosin) deficiency (MDC1A) is the most common congenital sensitivity. It allows clincial testing for KSS without muscle biopies. muscular dystrophy in Western countries. Typically patients are hypotonic P02.144 at birth, with muscle weakness and joint contractures. Many will sit inde- Neurocognitive phenotype and personality profile in men with pendently, but less than 10% will walk. Lifespan can be shortened due re- Klinefelter syndrome and their vulnerability to psychiatric symptoms spiratory compromise. Most children with MDC1A will have characteristic A. S. Jensen1, A. D. Petersen2, A. Bojesen3, J. Hertz4, M. Wallentin5, J. R. Østergaard6, C. H. cerebral white matter hypodensities detected by MRI after 6 months of age. Gravholt1; Neuronal migration defects (cortical dysplasia, polymicrogyria) are rare,1 oc- 1Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital,, curring in approximately 4% of merosin deficient muscular dystrophies. Aarhus, Denmark, 2Hammel Neurocenter, Aarhus University Hospital, Hammel, We report a case of a 1 year old boy with congenital hypotonia and an ele- Denmark, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Vejle, vated creatine kinase level. Electromyography was consistent with a myopa- Denmark, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense University Hospital, Odense, thic process. MRI of the brain at 14 weeks of age revealed band heterotopia Denmark, 5Center of Functionally Integrative Neuroscience, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark, 6Center for Rare Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, Aarhus bilaterally in the occipital lobes. There was also the suggestion of polymi- University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark. crogyria involving the inferior occipital lobes and posterior temporal lobes bilaterally. Sequencing of the LAMA2 gene revealed three novel nucleotide changes of uncertain clinical significance. Two of the mutations were pre- Klinefelter syndrome (KS) is associated with increased risk of psychiatric dicted to be probably damaging, and parental mutation analysis confirmed a disease and behavioral problems. The background for these risks is not trans orientation of these two mutations in our patient, which would be con- known. sistent with autosomal recessive inheritance. The patient also had one novel The aim was to describe the cognitive function, personality traits and the splice site mutation in the fukutin gene. Muscle biopsy at 9 months of age vulnerability to psychiatric symptoms in patients with KS. showed partial merosin staining and normal alpha dystroglycan staining, 41 KS patients and 41 age- and educational-matched control subjects par- which together with the molecular results supports a diagnosis of MDC1A. ticipated in the study. All participants were tested with standardized neu- The finding of band heterotopia in this patient expands the rare cortical dys- ropsychological tests and 4 questionnaires investigating psychological pro- plasia phenotype seen with this congenital muscular dystrophy. blems. P02.147 KS patients scored significantly lower in processing speed, working memo- A case of Mandibuloacral Dysplasia type A due to heterozygous LMNA ry, verbal abilities and showed a selectiv e deficit in executive function com- mutation pared to control subjects, whereas visual cognitive abilities and cognitive V. Uliana1, M. D‘Apice2, M. Balocco3, E. Di Maria1,4, G. Forni3, V. Viassolo1, F. Forzano1, S. M. Lepore5, M. Trabacca6, G. Novelli7,8, F. Faravelli1; response inhibition was preserved. TheKS patients displayed significantly 1Division of Medical Genetics, Genova, Italy, 2Genetica Medica, Fondazione Policlinico higher levels of cognitive failures, emotional distress and autism traits as Tor Vergata, Roma, Italy, 3Centro della Microcitemia e delle Anemie Congenite, Galliera reported in questionnaires. Furthermore symptoms of anxiety were also si- Hospital, Genova, Italy, 4Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, Italy, gnificantly higher among KS patients, whereas there were no difference in 5Biopathology Department, Tor Vergata University, Roma, Italy, 6Department of Internal depressive symptoms between KS patients and control subjects. On the NEO Medicine, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 7Genetica Medica, Ospedale San Pietro PI-R personality test KS patients scored high on the neuroticism scale, low Fatebenefratelli, Roma, Italy, 8Agenzia di Valutazione del Sistema Universitario e della on the extraversion scale and low on the conscientiousness scale. Ricerca, Roma, Italy. Men with KS have deficits in several cognitive domains and have an alte- red personality phenotype. Furthermore our results suggest that KS patient may be associated with an increased genetic vulnerability to psychiatric Mandibuloacral Dysplasia type A [MADA; OMIM # 248370] is an autosomal symptoms. In future analyses, we are going to assess the neuroanatomical, recessive disorder, due to mutations in LMNA gene, characterized by peculi- neurofunctional, endocrine and genetic basis for the cognitive deficits, alte- ar facial dismorphysms, lipodystrophy and progeroid features. red personality phenotype and increased psychiatric symptoms seen in KS We report a 28-year old Italian female patient with mandibular hypoplasia, patients. Whether testosterone therapy or other interventions can alleviate scoliosis, lipodystrophy, breast aplasia and metabolic abnormalities. She was these deficits remain to be proven. found to be heterozygous for a missense mutation c.1045C>T (p.R349W) in P02.145 exon 6 of the LMNA gene. L1 Syndrome diagnosed in a family with a manifesting female carrier She presented a features described in different LMNA-associated entities with hydrocephalus and a fetus with agenesis of the corpus callousm. and a mutation previously described a patient with muscular dystrophy, R. Sukenik-Halevy1, A. Reches1, Y. Kaplan1, S. Ben-Shachar1, A. Orr-Ortreger1,2, Y. Yaron1,2; cardiac involvement and lipodystrophy. 1Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel The case underlines the clinical heterogeneity and the unclear genotype- Aviv, Israel. phenotype correlation in laminopathies. P02.149 Large homozygous interstitial duplication within the LARGE gene in a L1 syndrome is consistent with a variable clinical phenotype, including hy- patient with Walker-Warburg-syndrome drocephalus, MASA syndrome, hereditary spastic paraplegia, and corpus U. Grasshoff1, U. Hehr2, M. Bonin1, A. Weichselbaum3, A. Rieß1; callosum agenesis. Mutations in the L1CAM gene located on the X chromo- 1Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany, 2Center for and Department of Human Genetics, some cause the full syndrome in males while females may manifest minor Regensburg, Germany, 3Childrens Hospital, Tübingen, Germany. features such as adducted thumbs and/or subnormal intelligence. We pre- sent here a family with an unusual presentation of the L1 syndrome. The couple was referred to genetic consultation after a pregnancy which Mutations in the LARGE gene are a rare condition causing Walker-Warburg- was terminated due to a diagnosis of agenesis of the corpus callowsumw win .ae shsgyn.dorrogme (WWS). We report on a girl with clinical features of WWS. The 19 www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 81 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 months old girl, born to consanguineous parents, shows a very severe global stoles. The heart rhythm was imposed by pacemaker, implanted in 2005 (at developmental delay and extreme hypotonia. She is not able to turn her head 13 y.o.), the battery was almost discharged. Extra-cardiac symptoms include or move any part of her body. Complex brain malformations with ventricular multiple lentigines, growth retardation, pectus carinatum, and feet defor- dilatation, absence of the inferior cerebellar vermis, and hypoplastic cere- mation. Parents were apparently healthy. Surgery treatment included mitral bellum were detected. She has got unilateral microphthalmia and cataract valve replacement, left ventricular outflow resection, sub-aortic membrane and ureteropelvic junction stenosis with hydronephrosis. Myoclonic seizu- excision, explanation of electrodes, pacemaker and ICD implantation. res started at the age of 6 weeks. CK was highly elevated (>2000 U/l). Genetic screening results: We did perform Senger sequencing of PTPN11, The diagnosis of WWS was confirmed by microarray analysis. It revealed an RAF1 and BRAF genes by direct Sanger sequencing. New genetic variant interstitial duplication of a 132 kb segment within the LARGE gene on both p.Thr468Met in PTPN11 gene was found in proband’s DNA sample but not alleles (4 copies, 6.0 Affymetrix SNP-Array) in the index patient. The twofold in a control group. Additionally, several SNPs in RAF1 gene without clear duplication in the index patient was confirmed by MLPA. Both parents have clinical importance were found. 3 copies analogous to a duplication of one allele. We hypothesize that the Conclusion: We suspect that new variant p.Thr468Met in PTPN11 gene is partial duplication of the LARGE gene has a loss-of function effect on the a mutation causing LEOPARD syndrome. Clinical phenotype characterized duplicated allele with the parents being heterozygote carriers of this auto- mainly by cardiac and skeletal involvement. It’s important for clinicians to somal recessive disease, respectively, and the child being homozygous. This make correct and timely differential diagnostics between hypertrophic car- is the first case of WWS caused by a large duplication within the LARGE gene diomyopathy and inherited syndrome accompanied by myocardial hyper- emphasizing the need of gene dosis analysis in WWS patients in whom mu- trophy. tations have been ruled out by conventional sequencing analysis. Further- P02.152 more it shows that array analysis should be considered even in cases with a Leri Weill Dyschondrosteosis -The bone microarchitecture in subjects presumed autosomal-recessive disease. with mutation in the SHOX-gene P02.150 M. Frost1, S. J. Hansen1, C. Fagerberg2, L. Ousager2, A. L. Frederiksen3; Distinct and pathogenic substitution of IVS15+5G→A in the SLC26A4 1Dept. of Endocrinology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 2Dept. of Clinical Genetic, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 3Dept. of Clinical Genetic, Vejle gene in patients with enlarged vestibular aqueduct syndrome or Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. Pendred syndrome in Okinawa islands. A. Ganaha1, M. Suzuki1, K. Naritomi2, T. Kaname2, K. Yanagi2, S. Usami3; 1Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of the Ryukyus, Background: Leri Weill Dyschondrosteosis (LWD) syndrome is characteri- Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan, 3Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck zed by short stature with mesomelic disproportion of the limbs and Made- Surgery, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, Japan. lung deformity caused by SHOX-haploisufficiency. The morphology of the Background bones is only partly described. Aim: To assess volumetric bone mineral density, microarchitecture, and strength in subjects with LWD and controls. The SLC26A4 gene, located on chromosome 7q22.3, is responsible for two Methods: Controls matched on sex and age. A high-resolution peripheral clinically overlapped syndromes, Pendred syndrome (PS) and enlarged ve- quantitative CT scanner was used to measure volumetric BMD, bone geome- stibular aqueduct syndrome (EVA). Distinctive SLC26A4 mutations in such try, and microarchitecture of the non-dominant distal radius and the distal patients were described in some ethnic populations. Previous studies re- part of tibia. Osteoporosis was defined as a T-score<- 2.5 SD on the basis of vealed that the spectrum of SLC26A4 mutation was different in different a DXA scan. ethnic background. For example, a mutation, H723R, was reported as the Subjects: Five families comprising 22 individuals (15 females) aged 38 years most common mutation for EVA and PS in Japanese. [IQR: 21-35] were included and controls. SHOX-mutations: c.440G>T (n=2), We investigated 18 patients from 18 unrelated families with EVA or PS to c.657delA (n=9), del exon 3-4 (n=2), del SHOX (n=9). dReefsinuelt sthe frequency of SLC26A4 mutations and clinical manifestations in Results: Tibial trabecular thickness was lower in cases (0.067 vs. 0.076, Okinawa islands. p<0.05). In radius the cortical areal was larger in cases (74.4 vs. 56.5, p<0.001), cortical thickness was increased (1.16 vs. 0.82, p<0.001) and the Eight patients diagnosed with PS, and 10 patients with NSEVA were exami- trabecular number decreased (1.61 vs. 1.90, p<0.05). Bone strength was si- ned in the SLC26A gene. Mutations of the SLC26A4 gene were identified in milar in cases and controls. The radial cortex adjacent to ulna was absent 15 out of 18 patients. Of the 15 patients, four patients were having a homo- in 5 cases. Four subjects were osteoporotic based on a T-score but neither zygous mutation of H723R, six patients were having compound heterozy- reported a previous fracture. gous mutations of H723R and IVS15+5G>A, four patients were homozygous Conclusion: These results suggest that bone microarchitecture is changed mutation of IVS15+5G>A, and one patient had heterozygous mutation of in LWD cases. The increased cortical thickness in radius may be caused by IVS15+5G>A. a more proximal measurement of the radius of cases due to the mesomelic Among the mutations detected, IVS15+5G→A was most common, accoun- forearm. 5 cases had a radial cortical defect. ting for 61.1% (11/18) of the patients. In order to know whether the muta- P02.153 tion was pathogenic, we A new inactivating LH receptor mutation causes a disorder of sex performed a quantitative RT-PCR for SLC26A4 in patients with homozygous development in a 46,XY girl and amenorrhea in her 46,XX sister mCountacltuiosnio onfs IVS15+5G→A. The result showed that the SLC26A4 gene was U. Groß1, M. Möller-Krull1, H. Drexler1, S. Fleischer1, N. Kandemir2, H. M. Schulte1, A. not expressed in the patients. Richter-Unruh3; 1Endokrinologikum Hamburg, Center for Hormonal and Metabolic Diseases, The substitution of IVS15+5G>A in the SLC26A4 gene was most common Reproductive Endocrinology and Prenatal Medicine, Hamburg, Germany, 2Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Division of Paediatric Endocrinology, Ankara, Turkey, in PS or EVA patients in Okinawa area. The substitution of IVS15+5G→A 3Endokrinologikum Ruhr , Center for Hormonal and Metabolic Diseases, Wattenscheid, caused loss of expression in the gene, which affects PS or EVA. Germany. P02.151 New mutation in PTPN11 gene causing LEOPARD syndrome with prominent cardiac hypertrophy. Leydig cell hypoplasia (LCH) is a rare autosomal recessive condition that V. Rumyantseva, A. Bukaeva, L. Rizun, E. Zaklyazminskaya; interferes with normal development of male external genitalia in 46,XY indi- Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. viduals. In 46,XX women primary and secondary sexual characteristics are developed normally but they are suffering fLrHomR amenorrhea and infertility. Here we report a family with two affected sisters suspected to have an inac- Background: LEOPARD syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant disorder tivating mutation in the LH receptor gene ( ). characterized by multiple lentigines and café-au-lait spots, hypertelorism, A 14-year-old girl was referred with lack of the progression in breast deve- cardiomyopathy and heart rhythm defects, pulmonary stenosis, abnormali- lopment and amenorrhea. In physical examination her height was 165.7cm ties of genitalia in males, growth retardation, and deafness. Clinical manife- and weight 81.5 kg. Breast development was Tanner stage I with lipomastia station is highly polymorphic. Mutations in the three genes (PTPN11, RAF1, and pubic hair development Tanner stage III. She had female external geni- and BRAF) can be responsible for LEOPARD syndrome. About 85% of all talia with mild posterior labial fusion. cases are PTPN11-positive. Hormonal evaluation revealed FSH 2.62mIU/ml, LH 10.94 mIU/ml, E2 Clinical case: We did observe 17 y.o. male patient with prominent hypertro- <10pg/ml, phic cardiomyopathy, left outflow tract obstruction, mitral valve insuffici- Testosterone <20ng/dl. Karyotype was 46,XY. Pelvic MRI demonstrated te- ency III-IV, left atrium dilation, ventricular and supra-ventricular extra sy- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org82 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 sticular tissue bilaterally in inguinal regions. She had therapeutic gonadec- epithelium in the inner ear. In case of ototoxic aminoglycosides (eg genta- tomy. micin, amikin, streptomycin) causing the damage to the bacterial ribosome, Her 21-year-old sister was also evaluated when she was 15 years old for mitochondrial ribosome may be destroyed because of its similarity. Suscep- amenorrhea. Her secondary sexual characteristics were well developed. Pel- tibility to such antibiotics effect is passed in the maternal line, indicating the vic ultrasonography showed an uterus with atrophic endometrium. In hor- mitochondrial type of inheritance. monal evaluation, serum LLHH Rlevel was 30.9 mIU/ml, FSH 7.68 mIU/ml, E2 Many mutations in the mitochondrial genes 12S rRNA and tRNASer related 35.44 pg/ml and testosterone 36.8ng/dl. to „aminoglycoside“ hearing loss were described. One of them is m.A1555G Sequence analysis of the gene showed a new homozygous mutation mutation which occurs in a highly conserved region of 12SrRNA molecule, p.Gly71Ala in both sisters. In vitro leading to reduced production of ATP in the cells of the cochlea. This mutation is located in the extracellular ligand-binding domain in exon We studied a group of 1933 patients of the Institute of Physiology and Pa- 2, probably interfering with binding of LH to the LH receptor. expe- thology of Hearing for the presence of mutation m.A1555G using RealTime riments with the mutant receptor will follow to get more insights into the PCR technology. In the studied group 25 patients with this mutation were binding capacity and activity of this receptor. found. P02.154 The aim of this study was to assess the level of hearing loss among patients Splice mutations of the luteinizing hormone receptor gene (LHR) as a with the mutation m.A1555G cause of 46,XY disorders of sex development (DSD) P02.157 A. Richter-Unruh1, A. Themmen2, M. Verhoef-Post2, S. Fleischer3, M. Möller-Krull3, H. Novel c.1731delC mutation in RIN2 gene in two Turkish siblings with Drexler3, H. M. Schulte3, U. Groß3; MACS / RIN2 syndrome 1ENDOKRINOLOGIKUM Ruhr, Center for Hormonal and Metabolic Diseases, H. Kayserili1, A. D. Aslanger2, U. Altunoglu1, E. Aslanger3, B. Satkin1, Z. O. Uyguner1; Wattenscheid, Germany, 2Erasmus University, Internal Medicine, Rotterdam, 1Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Netherlands, 3ENDOKRINOLOGIKUM Hamburg, Center for Hormonal and Metabolic Turkey, 2Medical Genetics Unit, Kocaeli Derince Research and Education Hospital, Diseases, Reproductive Endocrinology and Prenatal Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. Kocaeli, Turkey, 3Cardiology Unit, Gölcük State Hospital, Gölcük, Kocaeli, Turkey. Leydig cell hypoplasia (LCH) is a rare autosomal recessive condition that Inherited disorders of connective tissue, such as Ehlers-Danlos(EDS) and the interferes with normal development of male external genitalia in 46,XY indi- Cutis Laxa syndromes(CLS), are a heterogenous group of disorders which viduals. Inactivating mutations of the human luteinizing hormone receptor are characterized by hyperextensible skin and joint laxity. Thin/translucent (LHR) lead to decreased response of Leydig cells to LH and hCG. skin with visible veins and easy bruising are also observed in EDS patients. Here we report 17 patients in 4 families with 46,XY disorder of sex LdHifRfe- The EDSs involve a genetic defect in synthesis and structure of collagen and rentiation caused by homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in collagen fibril assembly while the cutis laxa syndromes(CLs) are characRtIeNri2- non-coding DNA sequences of the luteinizing hormone receptor gene ( ). zed by loose/redundant skin and growth retardation and in some types de- 14 patients in 2 different families were homozygous carriers of a mutation fective biogenesis of elastic fibers have been shown.The mutations in at the exon splice donor site in intron 1 (c.161+4A>G) whereas two sisters gene were first reported on three patients by Basel-Vanagaite et al.,(2009) were heterozygous for a missense mutation (p.Y623S) in combination with in two related families of Israeli-Arab origin who showed macMroAcCeSphMaly, a mutation 34 nucelotides downstream of the splice donor site of exon 4 coarse and sAwollen facCial appearanceS affecting the eyelids, lips, and cheeks, (c.383+34G>A). One patient was homozygous for a splice acceptor site mu- scoliosis, skin hyperlaxity and joint hypermobility. The acronym ; a- tation in intron 1 (c.162-3T>G). In vitro minigene expression was employ- crocephaly, lopeciRaI,N 2utis laxa and coliosis; was suggested for this new ed to examine the effect of the mutations on pre-mRNA splicing, while for syndrome related to the cutis laxa group of inherited disorders. Recently one patient testis RNA was available to validate the minigene expression novel mutations in gene were identified in three affected patients from approach. The results of these molecular studies represent a large increase Algeria by Syx et al.(2010) who were formerly reported as EDS-like syndro- in the spectrum of mutations that cause Leydig cell hypoplasia in 46,XY dis- me in 2005‘’ RbyIN V2e rslyonesd reot mal.e T’’.he authors discussed that MACS acronym may orders of sex differentiation patients and to the tools available for its mole- not be the most appropriate term to sum up the phenotypic spectrum and cular diagnosis. suggested P02.155 We here describe the third family with MACS/RIN2 syndrome in two sib- Evaluating the clinical significance of observations of loss of lings from Turkey also dispRlIaNy2in g additional findings such as hypogonadism heterozygosity in SNP-arrays and mediastinal tumor, carrying a novel homozygous c.1731delC mutation J. Graakjaer, M. Rasmussen, S. Kolvraa, A. Bojesen; resulting in frame shift in gene and causing protein truncation. Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. P02.158 De Novo triplication of the MAPT gene from the recurrent 17q21.31 microdeletion region in a patient with moderate intellectual SNP-based detection of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) is now supported by disability and various minor anomalies most major array providers. Many labs are therefore for the first time chal- C. Kraus, A. Gregor, M. Krumbiegel, A. Reis, C. Zweier; lenged with the task of interpreting the clinical significance of areas of LOH Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. in the genome. However, until now no formal guidelines for the interpreta- tion of LOH are available. In this study we present our internal workflow for the handling of observations of LOH. We report on a 16-year old male patient with moderate intellectual disa- In this workflow we are grouping LOH observations into three groups: LOH bility, behavioral pdreo bnloevmos, and further anomalies such as facial dysmor- interstitially on one chromosome, LOH on one chromosome extending to phism, heart defect and uMroAgPeTnital anomalies. By molecular karyotyping we the telomere and LOH on multiple chromosomes. For each group of LOH identified the first copy number gain to four copies on chromosome observations, we review the possible biological mechanisms, the possible 17q21.31 inMclAuPdTin g the CHR Hg1ene but not the entire recurrent microde- clinical significance and we suggest a procedure for further investigations of letion/microduplication region. Recurrent microdeletions of this region in- the observation. Each workflow takes into consideration resources and time cluding the and the genes have been shown to be a relatively constraints typically present in a clinical genetics laboratory setting. frequent cause of intellectual disability, while only a few reciprocal dupli- Hopefully these workflows can aid other laboratories in setting up their own cations in patients with variable cognitive disorders have been published internal workflow for interpreting LOH observations or add to a discussion so far. of this new “challenge” in clinical genetics. A common inversion polymorphism in this region has been linked to a di- P02.156 stinct H2 haplotype and seems to be associated with an increased risk for The level of hearing loss among patients with the mutation m.A1555G microdeletions and -duplications. Our patient and his father were both he- U. Lechowicz1, A. Pollak1, M. Mueller-Malesinska1, L. Korniszewski1, H. Skarzynski1, R. terozygous for the H1/H2 haplotype, whereas the mother was homozygous Ploski2; for the H2 haplotype. Interestingly, in our patient the dosage gain apparently 1Institute of Physiology and Pathology of Hearing, Warsaw, Poland, 2Medical University occurred on the paternal H1 allele and did not involve the H2 allele as in the in Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. previously published cases. This patient further delineates the genotypic and phenotypic variability associated with copy number variants from the 17q21.31 microdeletion Many commonly used medications may be in a transient and reversible, or region. permanent adverse effect on the level of hearing impairment in humans. It is believed that some aminoglycoside antibiotics can damage the sensory www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 83 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.159 Tours, France, 14Service de génétique et embryologie médicales-CHU Paris Est - Novel mutations causing Marfan syndrome in Czech population and Hôpital d‘Enfants Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France, 15Laboratoire de Cytogénétique- rare case of compound heterozygozity Etablissement français du sang - Normandie, Bois-Guillaume, France, 16Unité de génétique clinique-CHU de Rouen - Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France, 17Service de M. Dvorakova, P. Cibulkova, E. Augste, A. Boday; génétique médicale-CHU de Bordeaux - Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France, 18Service Laboratory of Molecular Biology, P&R LAB a. s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic. de génétique médicale-CHU de Nantes - Institut de Biologie, Nantes, France, 19Génétique Background: moléculaire et développement-GH Henri Mondor, Créteil, France, 20Génétique médicale- Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 21UF de Génétique Chromosomique-Hôpital Marfan syndrome (MFS) is an autosomal dominant connec- Couple-Enfant - CHU Grenoble, Grenoble, France, 22Service de neurologie pédiatrique- tive tissue disorder mainly involving the cadred nioovvaoscular, skeletal and ocular CHU de Lyon-GH Est - Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Lyon, France. systems. The estimated incidencFe BisN o1f about 1:5 000 - 1:10 000 and appro- MECP2 ximately 25% of cases are associated with mutations. MFS is caused by mutations in fibrillin 1 gene ( , 15 q15-q21.1.) resulting in defective Duplication of Xq28 including the genehas been described primari- gAliymcosp:rotein fibrillin-1. Recently, there are showed that three other genes ly in male patients with severe developmental delay, progressive spasticity, FBN2 (5q23-q31), TGFBR2 (3p22) and TGFBR1 (9q22) influence MFS. epilepsy, stereotyped hand movements and recurrent infections. The aim of In this study we performed SSCP analysis of all 65 exons of FBN1 gene our study was to carry out an epidemiological study in order to determine iMn aotredreiar ltso a indedn Mtifeyt hnoodvesl: mutations in 570 unrelated patients with clinical the number of cases identified in France since the implementation of targe- diagnosis of Marfan syndrome. ted molecular study (MLPA) and array-CGH, and to estimate the proportion DNA was isolated from whole blood, the molecu- of patients detected by either method. The 15 French cMytEoCgPe2netic and mole- lar analysis includes mlpa (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplifica- cular labs were contacted and biological and epidemiological data were tRioensu) latns:d separation of PCRFB pNro1ducts by SSCP (single-strand conformation gathered in all caseMs. E7C1P s2ymptomatic patients with a duplication of polymorphism). Exons with abnormal migrating patterns were sequenced. less than 4 MB were collected, including 66 boys and 5 females ranging from We identified 87 mutations, 53 of them have not been pre- 0 to 24 years. The duplication was identified in 45 patients (63%) viously described. Of the 46 were misseFnBsNe1, 1 5 nonsense, 7 splicing, 17 small using a targeted analysis, and in 26 patients (37%) using an arrayM-CEGCPH2 ana- dCeolnectilounssio onrs i:nsertions and 2 gross deletions. Than we identified 4 patients lysis. The majority was inherited from unaffected mothers and the size of wFBitNh1 compound heterozygosity at the locus, that is very rare. the duplication varied between cases. Within the 5 females, the du- F WBNe 1h ave confirmed 107 cases of Marfan syndrome caused by plication resulted from an unbalanced X-autosome translocation (3 cases), mutation, which constitutes detection of about 19%. But mutation random X inactivation (1 case) or a partial MECP2M dEuCpPl2ication (1 case, exon screening of should yield a result in about 80-85% of MFS patients 4 only). Two cases were detected prenatally by array-CGH, in a context of ge- who meet the Ghent criteria. Our result is much lower due to sensitivity of neMraEliCzPed2 lymphoedema or polymalformations ( triplication). From SSCP and because the patients involved did not meet the Ghent criteria. this study, besides the epidemiological data, we conclude that the diagnosis P02.160 of duplication can be difficult since 1/3 of cases were detected using Interesting case of an atypical Marfan syndrome patient non targeted analysis. The second step of this study will gather the clinical M. Pfob1, M. Eggert1, E. Aichinger1, T. Koeppel2, U. Hoffmann3, O. Steinlein1; data from this cohort in order to search for genotype-phenotype correlati- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Surgery, Munich, ons. Germany, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Munich, Germany. P02.162 Dosage changes of MED13L further delineate its role in heart defect and intellectual disability The Marfan syndrome is an autosomal dominantly inherited genetic disor- R. Asadollahi1, B. Oneda1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, D. Bartholdi1, A. Baumer1, G. Houge2, A. der due to mutations in the fibrillin-1 (FBN1) gene, a gene that encodes a Rauch1; connective tissue protein. 1University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland, Consequently, mutations in this gene cause skeletal and connective tissue 2University of Bergen, Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland symptoms (pectus carinatum/excavatum, hypermobile joints, arachnodac- University Hospital, and Institute of Clinical Medicine, Bergen, Norway. tyly), complications of the cardiovascular system (dilatation/ dissection of ascending aorta, mitral valve prolapse), and the eyes (ectopia lentis, myopia). Patients suffering from Marfan syndrome are at risk of aortic rupture. A chromosomal balanced translocation disrupting the MED13L (PRO- Here we report an atypical case of Marfan syndrome. SIT240) gene was previously reported to be associated with transposition of The 44 year old patient was hospitalized in 2007 with a spontaneous dissec- the great arteries (TGA) and intellectual disability (ID) and led to the identi- tion of the arteria carotis interna. Last year, an infrarenal aneurysma of the fication of missense mutations in three patients with isolated TGA. Recently, abdominal aorta was diagnosed. Physical examination showed a patient of a homozygous missense mutation in MED13L wacs. efoleugnadn sin 2 patients with below average size (167 cm (mother and father: 160 cm)). The arm span/ non-syndromic ID (without cardiac involvement) from a consanguineous body height ratio was 0,98 (<1,05), neither skeletal nor ocular abnormali- family. Next to the clinical findings, studies on imply a specific ties were present. Thumb signs and wrist signs were negative. Thus classical role for MED13L in regulating transcription of the Wnt and Shh signaling characteristics of the syndrome were non-existent. Family history showed targets which are crucial for emdber ynoonvioc development. Here, we describe 2 that the patient’s mother died at the age of 56 due to an arterial rupture. new aberrations of MED13L which were detected by means of molecular Molecular analysis of the FBN1 gene revealed a missense mutation karyotyping. The first one is a 17 kb out of frame deletion of its c.4727T>C (p.M1576T) in exon 37. This mutation leads to an amino acid exon 2 in a patiednet nwoivtoh complex congenital heart defect, ID, gross and fine exchange in the TGF-beta domain of the FBN1 protein. motor coordination problems and dysmorphic features. The second aber- In conclusion, the life threatening complications of Marfan syndrome can ration is a 1 Mb triplication in 12q24.21 including MED13L, several occur in patients without any of the typical Marfan features. non protein coding RNA genes and MAP1LC3B2, in a patient with a milder P02.161 phenotype including learning difficulties and perimembranous VSD (closed Epidemiological study of MECP2 duplications in France spontaneously). These findings suggest that abnormal MED13L dosage af- S. El Chehadeh1, C. Philippe2, T. Bienvenu3, C. Badens4, M. Béri5, R. Touraine6, J. Andrieux7, fects both, cardiac and neurologic developement. While different missense J. Bonnefont8, S. Julia9, S. Drunat10, V. Malan11, C. Dubourg12, M. Raynaud13, S. Chantot14, N. mutations result in either cardiac or intellectual problems, heterozygous Lemeur15, A. Goldenberg16, C. Rooryck-Thambo17, C. Lecaignec18, C. Métay19, B. Keren20, C. copy number variants can lead to both in a dose dependent manner. Haplo- Coutton21, V. Des Portes22, L. Faivre1; insufficiency of the gene is associated with a more severe phenotype inclu- 1Centre de référence Anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs - CHU de ding complex heart defect and ID where as the outcome of increased gene Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Service de cytogénétique et génétique moléculaire - CHU de Nancy, dosage is a milder phenotype in both systems. Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 3Laboratoire de biochimie et biologie moléculaire - CHU Paris Centre - Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France, 4Laboratoire de génétique moléculaire- CHU P02.163 de Marseille-Hôpital la Timone, Marseille, France, 5service de cytogénétique et biologie Simultaneous occurrence of medullary cystic kidney disease type 2 moléculaire - CHU de Nancy, Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 6Service de génétique and autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease in a single family clinique chromosomique et moléculaire- CHU de Saint-Etienne, Saint-Etienne, France, due to novel UMOD and PKD1 mutations 7Laboratoire de génétique médicale-CHRU de Lille-Hôpital Jeanne de Flandres, Lille, G. Miltenberger-Miltenyi1, J. Calado2, M. Carvalho2, H. Viana2, S. V. Pereira3, C. Teixeira4, France, 8Département de génétique-Hopital Necker - Enfants Malades, Paris, France, S. Jorge4, A. Brinca2, E. Ars5, E. Almeida4; 9Service de génétique médicale-CHU de Toulouse-Hôpital Purpan, Toulouse, France, 1Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, 10Laboratoire de biochimie génétique-CHU Paris - Hôpital Robert debré, Paris, France, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Hospital Curry Cabral, Lisbon, Portugal, 3GenoMed Diagnosticos de 11Service de cytogénétique-Hopital Necker - Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 12Service Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, de Génétique Moléculaire et Génomique-CHU de Rennes - Hôpital Pontchaillou, Rennes, 4Dept. of Nephrology, Hospital Santa Maria, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade France, 13Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire-CHRU de Tours - Hôpital Bretonneau, de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 5Laboratori de Biologia Molecular, Fundació Puigvert, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org84 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Barcelona, Spain. Background: global developmental delay and head circumference curve was above + 2 Medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD) is a rare autosomal SD. The four patients had the same dysmorphic features including downs- dominant renal disease characterized by medullary cysts, tubulo-intertsti- lanting palpebral fissures, long and expressionless face, small mouth. Three cial nephritis, progressive chronic renal failure UleMaOdiDng to end-stage renal of them had enamel defect and distal amyotrophy. In all children, brain MRI disease in adult life and, in occasional instances, gout. Two loci have been detected bilateral megalencephaly, a thick corpus callosum, an enlarged identified: mutations in the uromodulin gene ( , 16p12.3), encoding white matter and normal ventricles. Whereas CT scans were initially nor- the Tam-Horsfall glycoprotein expressed in the thick ascending and distal mal, calcifications of basal ganglia were present in case 2 at 15 years, and tubules, were found to associate with MCKD type 2 (MCKD2). Clinical sym- in case 3 at 23 years. Extensive metabolic and cytogenetic studies were no pPtaotmiesn mtsi aghntd s mhoewth iondtesr:- and intra-familiar variability, making robust geno- contributive. We hope that ongoing cytogenetic and molecular studies will type/phenotype correlations hard to establish. further define this new entity distinct from previously known syndromes A 3 generation MCKD2 family was evaluated. Eight with megalencephaly. members (7 affected, 1 non-affected) were available for molecular and phe- P02.166 notype investigation. Immuno-histochemical analyses of kidney biopsies MFRP-related oculopathy in a child and a distinct retinal disease in Rweesrue lptes:rformed. Genetic screenings were perforUmMeOdD by PCR, direct sequen- his mother cing and MLPA. A. R. Janecke1, M. Ritter2, J. Vodopiutz3, E. Moser2; 1Division of Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Department of Ophthalmology, Wien, We detected a nUoMveOl Dm utation in the gene in 6/7 patients Austria, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Wien, Austria. tested with intra-familial variability of the phenotype. In oneP aKfDfe1cted inPdKiDvi2- dual we did not find any mutationPs.K HDo1wever, subsequent screening Cofo tnhcel upsoiloyncyss:tic kidney disease (ADPKD) associated genes and The combination of nanophthalmos and retinal dystrophy is a rare syndro- in this patient revealed a novel variant in . me recently identified as an inherited autosomal recessive disease caused We present the clinical, immuno-histochemical and gene- by mutations in the MFRP gene. A 7-year old boy with high hypermetropia tic results of a family demonUsMtrOatDing a uPnKiDq1ue finding of simultaneous ap- and signs of a progressive retinal dystrophy was referred. His 37-year old pearance of two different cystic kidney diseases (MCKD2 and ADPKD) and myopic mother was known to have a retinal dystrophy since childhood clas- with novel mutations in the and genes. Beside the phenotypic sified as M. Stargardt, consanguinity of the parents was denied. The boy was variability of MCKD2, our findings demonstrate the possibility of genetic va- found to have nanophthalmos with the striking aspect of the fundus with a riety as the cause of cystic kidney disease even within the same family. ,,macular fold“ and clinical and ERG findings indicating disturbed photopic P02.164 and scotopic vision. Molecular analysis identified a homozygous truncating Controversy in the mode of inheritance in Familial Mediterranean mutation in the membrane-type frizzled-related protein (MFRP) gene. Com- fever diseases; Molecular Analysis of MEFV Gene in Patients plete sequence analysis of the MFRP gene in the mother showed heterozy- M. S. khaniani, S. M. Derakhshan, L. mohammadnejad; Tabriz university of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. gosity for the mutation identified in the patient, and no further mutation. The heterozygous mutation of the MFRP gene is not sufficient to cause the phenotype of the mother, and we assume that two phenotypically and ge- netically distinct retinal dystrophies exist in the family. A comprehensive Familial Mediterranean fever is an autosomal recessive disorder characte- molecular genetic screening of the mother was initiated. rised by episodic fever, abdominal and pleuritic pain, serositis and arthritis. The FMF gene (MEFV) generates a protein found exclusively in granulocytes. P02.167 In this study, we report our 4-year experience of over 267 Azeri Turkish Microcephaly-Capillary Malformation Syndrome (MIC-CAP): a new patients with this disease case D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1, A. Hotz1, H. Gabriel2, T. Polster3; in the central region of Algeria 1Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 2Diagenos, Praxis für Humangenetik, 267 Azeri Turkish unrelated subjects clinically diagnosed with FMF from Osnabruck, Germany, 3Epilepsie-Zentrum Bethel, Mara Krankenhaus, Bielefeld, Germany. various clinics from north west of Iran were referred by specialists to the Medical Genetic Centre of Tabriz University of Medical Sciences. A clinical diagnosis of FMF was made according to published Criteria. Mutation scree- Microcephaly-Capillary Malformation (MIC-CAP) syndrome was first descri- ning of the MEFV gene was performed for the 2, 3, 5 and 10 exons by using bed in 2011 as a disorder combining severe microcephaly with progressive sequencing method. cortical atrophy, intractable seizures, profound developmental delay and 163 (% 61) of these patients had one or two mutations. Of those with muta- multiple small capillary malformations on the skin. An autosomal recessive tions, 83 were compound heterozygous, 46 were homozygous, and 34 had mode of inheritance was implied in the families of the six described patients. only one identifiable mutation. The most frequent mutations were M694V We describe an affected male patient, the first child of non-consanguineous and E148Q (41% and 23% respectively) of the alleles, followed by V726A German parents, who was delivered by cesarean section due to pathological (17%), M680I (16%) mutations. CTG at 34 weeks. Oligohydramnios was noted prenatally, a cranial deformity The results show the diversity and the frequency of the FMF mutations in with severe microcephaly was noted after delivery (OFC 29 cm), as well as the Iranian Azeri Turkish FMF patients, and indicate that FMF is one of the cutaneous macules. Seizures with tonic or clonic semiology started on the common inflammatory diseases in the north west of Iran that must be noted first day of life and have remained pharmacoresistant ever since. His EEG in management of cases with episodic fever, abdominal and pleuritic pain showed multifocal spikes, focal seizure patterns and a sinusoidal alpha ac- have been referred to clinic. Also, the mode of inheritance in almost 30% of tivity, often seen in children with severe malformations of cortical develop- FMF patients was Autosomal dominant. ment. Brain MRI revealed severely reduced cortical gyration both anteriorly P02.165 and posteriorly. At the age of 18 months he has no appreciable psychomotor Megalencephaly, thick corpus callosum, dysmorphic facial features, development, no eye contact, no vocalization and spastic quadriparesis with and mental retardation in four unrelated patients: a new syndrome? axial hypotonia. He is severely dysmorphic with a disproportionately small M. Rio1, N. Boddaert2, V. Malan1, J. Amiel1, L. Colleaux1, A. Munnich1, I. Desguerre3, V. cranium and low-sloping forehead, broad nasal bridge, hypertelorism and Cormier-Daire1; 1Department of genetics, Necker Hospital, Paris, France, 2Department of radiology, shallow philtrum. Toes are short and partly overlapping, the big toes have Necker Hospital, paris, France, 3Department of neurology, Necker Hospital, paris, France. dysplastic nails. The scrotum is hypoplastic with small testes. An interna- tional consortium has been established in order to elucidate the molecular genetic cause of the disorder. Macrocephaly associated with mental retardation is a part of various syn- P02.168 dromes including overgrowth conditions, cutis marmorata telangiectatica, A de novo 12q13.13 microdeletion in a patient with mild mental Cowden disease, and neuro-metabolic disorders. We report here a new as- retardation, disproportionate habitus, facial dysmorphy and sociation characterized by progressive macrocephaly, mental retardation, congenital heart defect. specific facial features and similar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) fin- M. Simandlova1, M. Hancarova1, J. Drabova1, M. Vlckova1, M. Koudova2, M. Havlovicova1, Z. Sedlacek1; dings in four unrelated boys. All patients except one were born from non 12nd Medical Faculty, University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2GHC Genetics, consanguineous parents. Case 1 walked at 3 years, developed seizures at Prague, Czech Republic. 5 years. At 15 years, he had limited speech and a large head circumference (59cm, +3SD). Case 2 developed seizures at 3 years, walked at 8. He had li- mited speech and head circumference was 64 cm (>+4 SD) at 14 years. Case We report a de novo 12q13.13 deletion in an 4.5-year-old dysmorphic boy 3 developed seizures at 2 months, walked at 20 months. At 23 years, he had with multiple congenital anomalies/mental retardation (MCA/MR) syndro- no speech, and head circumference was 62 cm (+4 SD). Case 4 hawd swevwer.ee shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 85 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 me consisting mainly of mild to moderate MR, disproportional habitus with allowed the identification of novel cytogenetic abnormalities. Partial triso- extremely narrow shoulders and long, narrow thorax, facial dysmorphism mies of the long arm of chromosome 20 are rare. Here we report de novo (long narrow face, hypotelorism, enophtalmus, wide nose), onychodystro- 20q11.2 confirmed in CGH-Array in two boys with intellectual deficiency, phy, fine hair, atypical hand grip between index and middle fingers, ulnar speech delay, and distinctivAeS LdXy1s morphic features wi thA SaLbXn1ormal shape duction of both hands, ventricular septal defect, pulmonary stenosis, and head and short hands. The absrxeakpoints and sizes of the duplications are cryptorchism. His behavioural pattern is very remarkable with a sad ex- different but included the gene (MIM612990). iAsS aL Xh1uman pression in the face, timidity and balbuties. The deleted region is 0.95 Mb homolog of the Drosophila gene which is an homeotic gene. Recently, long and encompasses the whole HOXC gene cluster and 19 additional pro- de novo heterozygous nonsense or truncating mutations in the gene ximally located genes. Although the HOXC cluster was shown to be dispen- have been reported in 7 of 13 unrelated patients with Borhing-Opitz syn- sable in mouse, we speculate that its haploinsufficiency could potentially drome (MIM605039), a severe developmental and malformation disorder. be responsible for the remarkable disproportionate stature of the proband. The finding of two other patients in the literature with ovAeSrLlaXp1ping 20q11 Reduced dose of several other genes mapping to the deletion may also in- microduplication and clinical features allowed us to reduce the minimal cri- fluence this specific phenotype, especially RAGR which plays a role in limb tical region to 7,4MB encompassing 173 genes including gene. Inte- bud development and skeletal growth, or SP7 which influences bone forma- restingly, patients dAiSsLpXla1y clinical features in common with Borhing-Opitz tion. MR of the patient could be influenced by neural-expressed genes AAAS syndrome, and in particular abnormal shape head. We hypothesize that and MAP3K12, but the remaining deleted genes could also influence his the duplication of is responsible of a milder phenoAtSyLpXe1 resembling phenotype. To our knowledge this is the first report of a de novo 12q13.13 Borhing-Opitz syndrome. These observations give data in favour of a novel microdeletion removing the whole HOXC cluster and several neighbouring microduplication syndrome and suggest a contribution of to the phe- genes, which is likely associated with the MCA/MR syndrome in the patient. notype. Reporting of additional patients with molecular characterization Supported by CHERISH and MZ0FNM2012. will allow more detailed genotype-phenotype correlations. P02.169 P02.171 Microdeletions in 9q33.3-q34.1 are associated with developmental CGH Array in Miller-Dieker syndrome delay, micro-/brachycephaly, and seizures of incomplete penetrance B. Bozorgmehr1, F. Afroozan1, S. Tonekaboni2, R. Kariminejad1, A. Kariminejad1; J. A. Lee1,2, J. K. Ehret1, E. Wohlleber1, S. Vogt1, A. M. Zink1, E. Rossier3,4, M. Bonin3,5, U. 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Genetic centere, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Mofid Grasshoff3, A. Bevot6, M. Mathieu-Dramard7, A. de Broca8, S. Kanafani7, M. Holder- Children Hospital, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Espinasse9, I. Simonic10, L. Willatt10, J. Andrieux11, H. V. Firth10, A. Dufke3, H. Engels1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics - Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany, Miller-Dieker syndrome is one of the reason of profound neurodevelop- 3Department of Medical Genetics - University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, mental delay with lissencephaly.A contiguous gene deletion in 17p13.3 is 4Genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 5Microarray Facility - University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 6Children’s Hospital - University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 7Centre de documented.It is characterized by microcephaly,bitemporal narrowing Génétique, CHU d‘Amiens, Amiens, France, 8Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU d‘Amiens, ,small nose,anteverted nostils,prominent upper lip,micrognathia,low set Amiens, France, 9Service de Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU de Lille, ears,vertical ridging and forrowing in central forehead,hypotonia,seizu Lille, France, 10Department of Medical Genetics - Addenbrooke’s Hospital NHS Trust, re,brain malformation like incomplete development of brain often with Cambridge, United Kingdom, 11Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale - Hôpital Jeanne de smooth surface ( lissencephaly ), hypoplasia of corpus callosom, and pro- Flandre, CHRU de Lille, Lille, France. found mental ratardation. we are reporting , two patients aged 1 and 2 years with microcephaly ,profound mental retardation,bitemporal narrowing,low set ears,and lissencephaly.In CGH Array ,we found the deletion in 17p13.3 We report four patients with overlapping microdeletions of chromosome 9q which documented the disease.in this article we want to emphasize on CGH identified by molecular karyotypinDge u nsionvgo various platforms. Their common Array in lissencephaly spectrum. clinical features include developmental delay with delayed or absent speech P02.172 and micro- and/or brachycephaly. deletions of 1.76, 1.3, and 2.8 Mb, Agenesis of the corpus callosum and gray matter heterotopia in three in 9q33.3-q34.11 were detected in patients 1 through 3, respectively, whe- patients with constitutional mismatch repair deficiency syndrome reas the 432 kb 9q33.3 deletion in patient 4 was inherited from her mother A. Baas1, M. Gabbett2, M. Rimac3, M. Kansikas4, M. Raphael5, R. A. J. Nievelstein6, W. who is reported to have mild intellectual disability. Nicholls7, J. Offerhaus8, D. Bodmer9, A. Wernstedt10, U. Strasser11, M. Nyström4, S. The smallest region of overlap (SRO) is definSeTdX BbPy1 the deletion in patient Robertson12, M. van Haelst1, J. Zschocke10, K. Wimmer10; 4 and includes only threSeT XRBePfS1e q genes. Interestingly, the three larger de- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, letions have 27 genes in common including , which plays a role in Netherlands, 2Genetic Health Queensland, Royal Brisbane & Women’s Hospital, & The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 3Department of Pediatric Hematology synaptic transmission. loss-of-function mutations and deletions and Oncology, University Hospital Center ‚Sisters of charity‘, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Division have been associated with early infantile epileptic encephalopathy (EIEE, of Genetics, Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, or Ohtahara syndrome), and were identified in patients with intellectual 5Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Wilhelmina Childrens Hospital, disability and non-syndromic epSiTleXpBsPy1. In our cohort, the seizure SpThXeBnPo1- University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Department of Pediatric type appears to be incompletely penetrant. Notably, patient 4 had seizures, Radiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Department although her deletion excludes . Thus, the involvement of of Haematology Oncology, Royal Children’s Hospital, Brisbane, Brisbane, Australia, and/or possibly other genes due to deletion of long-range regulatory ele- 8Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 9Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Center St Radboud Nijmegen, ments cannot be ruled out. Sequencing of the three SRO genes in a cohort Nijmegen, Netherlands, 10Division Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, of unrelated patients with mild to severe idiopathic intellectual disability, as Innsbruck, Austria, 11Pathology Laboratory Dr. Obrist – Dr. Brunhuber, Zams, Austria, well as gene expression analyses in our patients, is underway to identify the 12Department of Paediatrics and Child Health Dunedin School of Medicine University of causative gene(s). Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. We suggest that microdeletions of this region on chromosome 9q may cau- se a clinical spectrum including developmental delay especially concerning speech, micro- and / or brachycephaly, mild dysmorphisms and seizures of Constitutional mismatch repair deficieMnLcHy 1(CMMSMHR2-DM)S sHy6ndroPmMeS 2is. a rare incomplete penetrance. inherited childhood cancer predisposition caused by biallelic germline mu- P02.170 tations in one of the four MMR-genes, , , or Due to Description of 2 patients with overlapping duplication of a wide tumor spectrum, the lack of specific clinical features and the overlap chromosome 20q11.2 with abnormal shape head and intellectual with other cancer predisposing syndromes, diagnosis of CMMR-D is often deficiency delayed in pediatric cancer patients. We report of three new CMMR-D pa- M. Avila1,2, P. Callier3, H. Dahlgaard Hove4, M. Kirchhoff4, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,5, N. Marle3, tients each of whom developed more than one malignancy. The common A. Mosca-Boidron3, A. Masurel-Paulet1, F. Huet2, F. Mugneret3, S. Kjaergaard4, L. Faivre1,5; finding in these three patients is agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) and 1Centre de Génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares- Anomalies du Développement gray matter heterotopia present in two patients. Fifty-seven CMMR-D pati- et Syndromes Malformatifs de l‘Intégration Est - Hôpital d‘enfants- CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Service de Pédiatrie 1, Hôpital d‘Enfants - CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, ents with brain tumors (therefore all likely had cerebral imaging) have pre- 3Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau Technique de Biologie -CHU de Dijon, Dijon, viously been reported, one of whom had cerebral malformations. Taken tog- France, 4Departement of Clinical Genetics, Unit for Rare Diseases, University of ether with our patients, the prevalence of cerebral malformations is at least Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Equipe émergente GAD, IFR Santé STIC, Université 4/60 (6.6%). This number is well above the population birth prevalence de Bourgogne, Dijon, France. of 1 to 4/4,000 live births with these cerebral malformations, suggesting that ACC and heterotopia are features of CMMR-D. The presence of cerebral malformations in pediatric cancer patients should alert to the possible dia- www.eshg.org The current use of microarray-based comparative genomic hybriwdizwatwion.e shgngo.soisr ogf CMMR-D. ACC and gray matter heterotopia are the first congenital 86 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. malformations described to occur at higher frequency in CMMR-D patients than in the general population. Further systematic evaluations of CMMR-D Mutations in proteins involved in the RAS/MAPK pathway cause Noonan patients are needed to identify possible other malformations associated syndrome, Costello syndrome, cardio-facio-cutaneous syndrome, Noonan with this syndrome. syndrome with multiple lentigines/LEOPARD syndrome, Noonan syndro- P02.173 me with loose anagen hair/Mazzanti syndrome, CBL mutation-associated Array detection of apparent mosaic monosomy 7 - a marker for syndrome, neurofibromatosis type 1 and related phenotypes, collectively underlying disorders of genome maintenance? called RASopathies. While the number of mutations and sequence variants S. A. McKee1, D. LaGrave2, J. Wales3, S. McNerlan1, J. Achermann4, M. Humphreys1; identified in RASopathy genes is still increasing, the probability for novel 1Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast, United Kingdom, 2Cytogenetics & mutations to be reported to the public has become quite low and the si- Molecular Cytogenetics, ARUP Laboratories, Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 3Academic gnificance of rare variants may even remain unclear. Moreover, phenotypic Unit of Child Health, Sheffield Children‘s Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4Institute of Child Health, UCL, London, United Kingdom. data of published cohorts is hardly comparable due to the lack of standar- dization, and individual study cohorts do not reach the statistical power for reliable genotype-phenotype correlations. To overcome these limitations, the NSEuroNet Consortium has established The increasing availability and precision of array-based comparative geno- a database that contains all published germline mutations in the known mic hybridisation (aCGH) techniques allow detection of subtle abnormali- RASopathy genes (excluding NF1), unpublished mutations observed by the ties that may have previously eluded traditional analyses. We present a male consortium partners and collaborators, as well as polymorphisms and un- baby (Case 1), born at 36+4/40 gestation, with dysmorphic facies, severe classified variants. In addition, standardized clinical datasets on a steadily micrognathia, cleft palate, choanal stenosis, small extremities, hypoplastic increasing number of patients with a molecularly proven RASopathy are terminal phalanges and normal genitalia. He had a ventricular septal defect collected in order to establish genotype-phenotype correlations. Data can and a patent ductus arteriosus. aCGH analysis on blood DNA revealed mo- be submitted by registered users via an online questionnaire, are reviewed saic monosomy for chromosome 7 (estimated 6% of cells). Mosaicism was and then added to the database. not detected in fibroblasts, and there was no overt evidence of a blood dys- The database will be freely accessible. It can be browsed for genes, mutati- crasia on a blood smear. He died at age 4 months. ons or phenotypes through a user-friendly graphical surface. We introduce Monosomy 7 is a common feature in several myeloproliferative disorders this novel resource which will be of great value for scientists as well as for and is very rare as a constitutional abnormality. We previously identified clinical geneticists involved in counselling of patients with these disorders three male patients (Cases 2-4) with features reminiscent of IMAGe syndro- and their families. me (Intrauterine growth retardation, Metaphyseal dysplasia, Adrenal insuf- ficiency and Genital abnormalities), who were found to have monosomy 7 P02.176 mosaicism in blood or bone marrow. This was associated with a confirmed Genotype-phenotype correlation in cohort of patients with myotonic myelodysplastic process in at least one child, who underwent bone marrow syndromes. transplantation in the first year, remaining stable at age 7 years. The other S. A. Kurbatov1, V. P. Fedotov1, E. A. Ivanova2, N. M. Galeeva2, A. V. Polyakov2; 1Genetic counseling, Regional Clinical Hospital, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Russian two died in early infancy. Case 1 above, however, had normal adrenal func- Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. tion and normal genitalia, possibly suggesting a different underlying disor- der. We hypothesise that these children display defective genome maintenance Myotonic syndromes (MS) - a heterogeneous group chloride and sodium contributing to their phenotype, with monosomy 7 as a secondary event. channels diseases with marked clinical polymorphism and often overlap- Exome sequencing is in progress in two of our cases. ping phenotypes. Attempts are being made to optimize the algorithm of fin- P02.174 ding causative mutations in the genes for the diagnosis of MS. Syndromic Moyamoya disease and hemophilia A caused by Xq28 We have conducted a molecular genetiCcsL CsNtu1dy in 94 patients from 65 unre- deletion in Czech patient lated families with MS. In 44 patients with myotonia congenita (MC) were R. Pourová, J. Drábová, S. Koloušková, V. Komrska, A. Tomek, Z. Zmítková, D. Novotná, M. Havlovicová; revealed 26 differenDt MmPuKtations in the gene, in 39 patients with myo- Charles University in Prague, Second Medical Faculty, Prague, Czech Republic. tonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) were detected increased numSCbNer4 Aof CTG-re- peats (n>50) in the gene and in 8 patients with clinical hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (HYPP) with myotonia - mutations in the gene. In the three formed groups, we performed a study of the decrement of com- There are 5 types of Moaymoya disease (MYMY) with genetical alignment, pound muscle action potential (CMAP) (50 Hz 200 repetitions): 34 cases of of which type 4 is syndromic. MYMY4 described patients suffer from MYMY, MC, 25 cases of DM1 and 7 cases of HYPP. Decrement of CMAP was obser- growth retardation, hypergonadotropic hypogonadism (HH), azoospermia ved in all patients with MC and was 68±21%, no significant statistical diffe- and stigmatization. Cardiomyopathy, cataract and stroke may also occur. rences in the values of the decrement between the patients with Thomsen We present a 19-years old Czech patient with normal intellect, who has dys- (7cases) and Becker (27cases) myotonias: 74±8% and 67±22% accordingly. mophic features, growth retardation since 10 years of age, HH with regress In patients with DM1 decrement of CMAP was detected in 15 of 25 patients of puberty in 15 years and azoospermia, but shows neither neurologic nor and was 33±14%. In patients with HYPP decrement was found in one of cardiologic symptoms. Unlike any of described patients he suffers from se- seven patients and was 34%. vere hemophilia A with level of factor VIII under 1% and low level of inhibi- The largest decrement of CMAP allows statistically to distinguish between tor (antibodies against exogenous FVIII). groups of patients with MC from the DM1 and HYPP (p>0,001). The patient has normal karyotype 46,XY and there has been found no muta- Statistically significant difference between decrement of CMAP in patients tion in F8 gene. Array CGH investigation was later performed in this patient with DM1 and HYPP wasn’t established. and cryptic deletion within Xq28 was detected. The deletion removed ap- proximately 100 kb and the deleted region harboured promotor of F8 gene P02.177 as well as genes MTCP1/MTCP1NT and BRCC3, which might play an impor- LMX1B mutations in Nail-Patella Syndrome (NPS) tant role in syndromic MYMY development. L. Rocha1,2, S. Fernandes1, J. P. Oliveira1,2; 1Genetics Department, Porto, Portugal, 2CHSJ, Porto, Portugal. After obtaining the array CGH result, we immediately performed MRI, MRA and TCCS (transcranial colour coded sonography) with perfectly normal re- sSuulptps.orted by CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022, MZ0FNM2005 andIGA-NS-9913-4. Introduction: Nail-Patella syndrome (NPS; MIM 161200) is a rare (1/50000 Phenotype - genotype correlation will be further discussed. births) autosomal dominant disorder characterized by dysplastic nails, ab- sent or hypoplastic patellae, elbow dysplasia, iliac horns, glomerulopathy, P02.175 and glaucoma. NPS is caused by mutations in the LMX1B gene (LIM homeo- The NSEuroNet Database: an online resource for mutation spectrum box transcription factor 1-beta), mapped at chromosome 9q34. The main and phenotype correlations in RASopathies pathogenic mechanism underlying NPS, particularly of the skeletal defects, C. Lissewski1, J. Allanson2, H. Cavé3, B. Kerr4, M. Tartaglia5, M. Zenker1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, is the haploinsufficiency of LMX1B. 2Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 3Department of Genetics, Material and Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from 4 patients with the Hôpital Robert Debré AP-HP, Paris, France, 4Genetic Medicine, St. Mary‘s Hospital, clinical diagnosis of NPS and an unequivocal autosomal dominant pattern of Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, School of Biomedicine, University of inheritance. The 8 exons of LMX1B were amplified by PCR and sequenced Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Dipartimento di Ematologia, Oncologia e in an ABI Prism 3500 genetic analyzer. MLPA technique (SALSA P289-A1 LMX1B) was used for detection of deletions and/or duplications. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 87 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.180 Molecular characterization of two similarly emerging NF1 Results: Four different mutations were detected: two nonsense mutati- microdeletions with Oligo-Array-CGH: differentiation of a 66,84-84,42 ons - p.Q60X, on exon 2, and p.C142X, on exon 3; one missense mutation kb intragenic and a 160,69-178,14 kb contiguous gene deletion in two - p.R223Q, on exon 4; and a duplication of exon 3 (dup Ex.3). Mutations NF1 patients with different clinical characteristics p.C142X and dup Ex.3 are novel. U. Heinrich1, D. Wahl2, J. Höfele1, H. Klein1, K. Mayer1; Conclusions: The genetic diagnosis of NPS was confirmed by the identifica- 1Centre for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 2Practice tion of a pathogenic LMX1B mutation in all four patients. Three of those mu- for Genetic Counselling and Psychotherapy, Augsburg, Germany. tations are located in the LIM domains (exons 2_4) and remainder in the homeodomain of LMX1B (exons 4_6), the former causing a decrease in tran- scriptional activity and the latter leading to loss of DNA binding activity. Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) results from microdeletions encompassing P02.178 the entire NF1 gene and a variable number of flanking genes in 5-10% of A review of breast cancer risk and female patients with patients. Three recurrent microdeletion types have been described: 1.4 Mb neurofibromatosis type 1 in the West of Scotland. type-1, 1.2 Mb type-2, and 1.0 Mb type-3 microdeletions. Usually, a more C. M. Watt1, E. McGuire2, N. Bradshaw1, S. Gibson1, M. Longmuir1, D. Meechan3, V. severe phenotype has been reported in patients carrying genomic microde- Murday1, L. Snadden1, E. Tobias1, M. Whiteford1, R. Davidson1; letions involving the entire NF1 gene compared to patients with intragenic 1West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2University of NF1 mutations. Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 3Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Ninewells Hospital, We demonstrate the results of the molecular genetic analysis in two 2 and Dundee, United Kingdom. 4 year old NF1 patients mainly presenting with multiple café-au-lait-spots and a positive family history in one case. MLPA analysis using Salsa-Kit P081/P082 detected an indistinguishable deletion in both cases of at least Background: The West of Scotland (WoS) Clinical Genetics service received 48 kb starting in intron 27b and comprising the 3’ terminal half of the NF1 a referral from a general practitioner asking us to meet with a 46 year old gene including the last but one exon 48. Efforts to specify the deletions ap- woman with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) to discuss her risk of breast plying Salsa P122 NF1-area probemix confined the deletion sizes to a maxi- cancer and screening requirements. mum of 579 kb in both cases that remained still indistinguishable. Finally, Anecdotal evidence and case reports have indicated an associated increased oligo-array-CGH with the microarray kit 244A resolved a 66,84-84,42 kb risk of breast cancer and NF 1. A 2006 study showed an increased risk of intragenic NF1 deletion and a 160,69-178,14 kb gene deletion involving breast cancer in women under 50 years but failed to show significance over- two distally adjacent genes, respectively. Atypical microdeletions less than all. In 2007 a population based study showed with significance that women 1 Mb encompassing the NF1 gene and distally adjacent genes are very rare. with NF 1 below the age of 50 years had a five fold increased risk of breast We want to highlight the clinical manifestations in our patients with regard cancer in the population studied. to both deletion types identified. This study confirms that array-CGH is a It was decided to review a cohort of female patients with NF 1 from the WoS sensitive approach for accurate characterization of NF1 microdeletions to and compare the observed cases of breast cancer in this cohort with expec- differentiate between the types of microdeletions with respect to patients’ ted figures in the expected population. follow-up care. Methods: The pedigrees of families affected by NF 1 were reviewed, inclusi- P02.181 on and exclusion criteria were applied producing a cohort of female patients Nonfracture Osteogenesis imperfecta (or another collagenopathy ?) in with know NF 1 and who were 20 years or older. 4 women were excluded a 2 year old Russian boy with a mutation in the COL1A2 gene due to incomplete information and 26 were under 20 years of age the fi- L. M. Graul-Neumann1, C. Ehlers2, G. C. Schwabe3; nal cohort included 119 patients. Statistical significance of the results was 1Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2IMitteldeutscher shown using the Poisson distribution. Praxisverbund, Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 3Children’s Hospital, Pediatric Results: The results from this study showed a 4.13 fold risk of breast cancer Hematology & Oncology, HELIOS Klinikum Berlin-Buch, Berlin, Germany. over all ages and, a 20.8 fold risk less than 50 years of age. These results could prove challenging in genetic counselling. P02.179 Case Report: A 19-year-old man with intellectual disability, neurofibromatosis, Our patient is the second child of healthy parents. multiple exostoses, and a paracentric inversion (inv(9)(q12q22.3)) He had congenital clubfeet, a unilateral hernia inguinalis, a large frontal fon- J. Wickert1, S. Fuchs1, R. Nguyen2, G. Uyanik1, V. Mautner2; tanel, frontotemporal alopecia, blue sclerae, normal teeth. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Clubfeet were present at birth, but so far no osseous fractures have been Germany, 2Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, reported. Hamburg, Germany. At the age of 2 years, height and weight were at P3, OFC at P97 and hyperm- obility of the hip joints was evident. Serum levels of calcium, phosphate and alkaline phosphatase were normal. Here, we present a man with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) and multiple Radiographs showed wormian boCnOeLs,1 nAo2r mal s kedleet anlo mvoin eralisation. hereditary exostoses (HME). The patient is affected by multiple exostoses As some of the clinical features were suspicious of OI we initiated a mole- like benign enchondromata of the tubular bones, multiple cutaneous neuro- cular analysis. In exon 23 of the genea not yet described fibromas, axillary and inguinal freckling and café au lait spots. In addition, heterozygous missense mutation c.1316G>A (p.Gly439Asp) was identified. the patient has a global developmental delay with intellectual disability, a Comment: disproportionate short stature associated with macrocephaly, facial dys- The mutation described here is characteristic for osteogenesis imperfecta morphisms, and shortened extremities with brachydactyly and proximal as Glycin substitutions are typical for OI. Comparable mutations have only placement of thumb. A paracentric inv(9)(q12q22.3) was identified by con- been twice recorded in Ehlers-Danlos syndrome - but the published mutati- ventional karyotyping and fluorescence in situ hybridization in the index ons were all located in exon 8 and not in exon 23 as in our case (LOVD; sub- patient. The array-CGH (180K) showed no evidence of a clinically significant mitted by S. Symoens, Ghent University, Belgium). Collagen structural de- deletion or duplication. His 22-year-old sister and the 50-year-old father fects, which are usually glycine substitutions or exon skipping defects, act in are also affected by NF1. The heterozygous mutation c.4299insTT in exon a dominant negative fashion. They usually result in a phenotype that ranges 25 of NF1 gene could be detected. Only the index patient and his sister are from lethal to moderately severe depending on the collagene chain affected, affected of HME and a disproportionate short stature. The molecular genetic its location within the chain, and the specific amino acid substituted. analysis of the EXT1 gene revealed the heterozygous mutation c.1723-1G>T In summary, the patient presented hCeOrLe1 eAx2h ibits particular phenotype with in intron 8. The inversion inv (9)(q12q22.3) was not detected in the lym- only mild osseus involvement, some features reminiscent of a connective phocytes of the sister tissue disease, alopecia and a novel mutation. We report this unusual case of a patient with neurofibromatosis type 1, exo- P02.182 stoses, disproportionate stature and profound intellectual disability. NF1 Visual Function and Ocular Manifestations in Noonan Syndrome and HME are sufficiently explained by the identification of the heterozygous R. Radhakrishnan1, K. Rauen2, D. Orel-Bixler3, S. P. Shankar4; familial mutations in NF1 and EXT1 genes. However, the profound intellec- 1Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, United States, 2University of California,, San Francisco, CA, tual disability and facial dysmorphisms are found only in the index patient. United States, 3Berkeley Optometry, University of California,, Berkeley, CA, United States, Whether the inversion inv(9)(q12q22.3) contributes as another piece of 4Emory University School of Medicine, The Department of Human Genetics, Atlanta, GA, puzzle to the complex phenotype of the index patient is not defined yet. United States. Purpose of study : To determine visual function and characterize ophthal- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org88 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2McGill University and Genome Quebec Introduction: Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. mic manifestations in Noonan syndrome. Noonan syndrome is a developmental syndrome caused by heterozygous mutations in the genes PTPN11, SOS1, RAF1, NRAS, CBL, or Short stature, congenital heart defects, craniofacial dysmorphia and skeletal KRAS. It is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Clinical features in defects (thorax deformation) are the main PcTliPnNic1a1l feSaOtSu1res tyRpAicFa1l for Noo- tMheist hsyonddsr:ome include congenital heart defects, short stature, developmen- nan syndrome (NS). The disease is caused by mutations in genes encoding tal delay of variable degree and ocular involvement. proteins of RAS/MAPK pathway, mainly in , and PTPN 1g1enSeOs.S1 Thirty individuals were studied in the Berkeley and Chicago RAS/ TogeRthAeFr1, 171 patients with clinical suspicion of NS were exPamTPinNe1d1 bSyO aSn1 MReAsPuKlt ssy:mposium by visual function assessment, slit lamp exam and dilated expeRriAeFn1ced clinical geneticist and the molecular analysis of , fundus exam. and genes was performed. The pathogenic mutations in , Conclusi oTnh:e Ocular findings in 30 Noonan syndrome patients have been and genes were found in 65 (38.0%), 14 (8.2%) and 13 (7.6%) pati- tabulated below. We noted the following parameters. ents, respectively. Ophthalmic manifestations are commonly noted features in The clinical analysis of NS patients revealed that there is significant varia- Noonan syndrome. Most individuals have good visual function with majori- tion in disease phenotypRiAcF e1xpressPiToPnN d1e1pending on the mutation presSeOnSc1e ty having stereopsis. Annual eye exams are recommended and necessary to in specific gene. The short stature was statistically more frequent in pati- correct refractive errors, prevent amblyopia and in monitoring for intracra- ents with mutations in PTPN a1n1d (76.9SO%S 1and 69.2%) than inR AF1 nial complications such as hydrocephalus or rarely intracranial tumors. (42.9%; p<0.05). Pulmonary valve stenosis was present in 30 (46.2%) pa- tients with mutation in , 7 (50.0%) in and 5 (38.5%) in , Results of Ocular Findings in Noonan Syndrome although the obseRrvAeFd1 differences were not statistically significaPnTtP. NT1h1e Number Parameters Results n=30 hypeSrOtrSo1p hic cardiomyopathy and strabismus were more common in pati- 1 Eyelids Ptosis 14 ents with mutated (46.2% and 38,5% vs. 2.7% and 12.3% for Astigmatism 14 PanTdP N11 togeStOhSe1r, p<0.05). The delayed psychomotor development, speech 2 Patient with glasses Mild Myopia 1 delay and cRrAyFp1torchidism were more frequently observed in patients with High Myopia 1 and mutations (45.2%, 21.9% and 65.1% vs. 15.4%, 0% and Hypermetropia 2 16.7% for , p<0.05). Our results confirm a significant correlation bet- 3 Nystagmus 4 ween the NS-causing mutation in specific gene and clinical symptoms of the 4 Anterior segment Normal 30 disease. Tortuosity 4 Supported from NCN research project no. DEC-2011/01/D/NZ5/01347. Wide optic disc 2 5 Fundus exam Swollen optic disc 1 P02.186 Tilted optic disc 4 Phenotype-genotype associations and significant differences between Small optic disc 1 PTPN11 and SOS1 mutated patients with Noonan syndrome 6 Color vision unable to determine 2 E. Ciara, M. Kugaudo, S. Łuczak, M. Pelc, A. Tańska, D. Jurkiewicz, D. Piekutowska- 1/4 1 Abramczuk, P. Kowalski, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz, J. Trubicka, A. Jezela-Stanek, M. 1/5 1 Jędrzejowska, A. Cieślikowska, D. Gieruszczak-Białek, A. Skórka, K. Chrzanowska, M. 7 Happy Contrast 1/3 2 Krajewska-Walasek; 1/2 26 The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. 1 notch-60 14 2 notch-120 5 8 Stereo smile test 3 notch -240 2 PTPN11 SOS1 4 notch-480 1 NRAoFo1nan syKnRdArSome (NS) is an autosomal dominant disorder caused by hete- P02.184 rozygous gain of function mutations in various genes (mainly , , Atrioventricular canal defect in patients with RASopathies and ) encoding proteins of the Ras-MAPK signaling pathway. HePrTe- F. R. Lepri1, M. Digilio1, M. Dentici1, A. Henderson2, A. Baban1, M. Roberti1, R. Capolino1, P. PwNe1 r1e port genotype -SpOhSe1n otype correlatRioAnF 1in a well-charactKerRiAzeSd cohort of Versacci3, C. Surace1, A. Angioni1, M. Tartaglia4, B. Marino3, B. Dallapiccola1; 63 Polish patients affected by NS. We identified pathogenic mutations in 1Medical Genetics, Cytogenetics, Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Pediatric Hospital, for 32 (51%), for 12(19%), for 2 (3%) and for 1 (2%) IRCCS, ROME, Italy, 22Northern Genetics Service, Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals, unrelated patients. Our total mutation detection rate was 75%. All patients Newcastle, United Kingdom, 3Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Sapienza presented phenotype typical for NS, however we observed differences in the University, ROME, Italy, 4Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, prevalence of some features depending on the mutated gene. Ptosis, macro- Istituto Superiore di Sanità, ROME, Italy. cSeOpSh1aly, hypotonia, hyperkeratosis, sparse eyebrows, mitral valve anomalies and renal defects were significantly more prevalent among individuals with mutations. Whereas shoPrTt PsNta1t1ure, pulmonic stenosis, atrial septal de- Congenital heart defect (CHD) affects 60-85% of patients with RASopathies. fect, sparse hair and skin pigmentation were significantly more frequently Pulmonary valve stenosis (PVS) and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) associated with presenPcTe PoNf 11 SO Sm1utations Two characteristic NS fea- are the most frequent anomalies, although the spectrum of cardiac defects tureRs,A sFu1ch as mental retardation and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were is wider. We analysed the clinical and molecular characteristics of atrioven- rarely associated with or mutations, while were observed in tricular canal defect (AVCD) in patients with mutations affecting genes in our cases. Additionally, we revealed that 10 affected mothers and one the RAS/MAPK pathway. Between 2002 and 2011, 101 patients with cardiac affected father manifested a milder phenotype than their sick children. defect and a molecularly coPnTfiPrNm1e1d RASopathy were collected. CoRmAFp1le te or The study was supported by National Science Centre Project no. PB0056/B/ partial (including cleft mitral valve) AVCD waPs TdPiaNg1n1o sed in 8/101 (8%) pa- P01/2008/35 and by Children’s Memorial Health Institute Project no. tients, including 7/8 with gene mutations, 1/8 with a gene 190/08. mutation. The only recurrent mutation was c.124A>G (Thr42Ala). P02.187 AVCD was partial in 6 cases, complete in one; in 4 was associated with other Extreme clinical variability in Noonan-like syndrome with loose cardiac defects, including subvalvular aortic stenosisP, TmPiNtr1a1l valve anomaly, anagen hair due to the Ser2Gly SHOC2 mutation PVS, and HCRMAF. 1T he associated cardiac defects were mutation-specific. Ma- G. Baldassarre1, C. Rossi2, M. Tartaglia3, M. Silengo1, G. B. Ferrero1; ternal segregaPtTioPnN w11a s observed in two families with mutations and 1Department of Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, RinA oFn1e with mutation. CHDs in the affected relatives were discordant in 3Department of Hematology, Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Roma, Italy. families with mutations, and concordant in the mother-sib pair with mutation. This study recommend to check Noonan syndrome features in syndromic patients with AVCD. Although mutations are heterogeneous, Noonan syndrome (NS) belongs to a group of developmental disorders due partial AVCD, and its association with left-sided obstructions, PVS and HCM to deregulation of the RAS/MAPK pathway named RASopathies, including must be considered clinical markers of RASopathies, often displaying geno- Cardiofaciocutaneous (CFCS), Costello (CS), LEOPARD (LS), Neurofibroma- type-phenotype correlation. Familial segregation of AVCD should be consi- tosis type I (NF1) and Legius syndrome. Some of these conditions, as CS, dered in the genetic counselling of families with RASopathies. NF1 and Legius syndrome, are gene specific being caused by mutations in P02.185 HRAS, NF1 and SPREAD1 genes respectively; the others syndromes are cha- Mutations in PTPN11, SOS1 and RAF1 genes and clinical racterized by a considerable molecular overlapping. Two additional NS-like characteristics of Noonan syndrome patients. conditions have been recently described, caused by mutations in CBL and M. Gos1, J. Klapecki1, R. Frazao2, J. Majewski2, A. Abramowicz1, A. Kutkowska- SHOC2 genes. In particular, a specific SHOC2 gene mutation (4 A>G predic- Kazmierczak1, K. Szczałuba1, P. Lepage2, E. Obersztyn1, J. Bal1, E. Bocian1; ting the Ser2Gly aminoacid substitution), is responsible for a distinctive condition “Noonan-like syndrome with loose anagen hair (NS-LAH)”, cha- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 89 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.190 22q11.2 microduplication in a patient with bladder extrophy and racterized by a specific ectodermal phenotype. Here we report two cases of delayed psychomotor development NS-LAH SHOC2 mutated patients revealing the extreme clinical variability of G. Pierquin, u. annette; this condition. The first patient presented common NS features at birth with Center for Human Genetics, CHU Sart-Tilman, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium. typical facial dysmorphisms and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. However, he had a dramatic clinical evolution in the first months of life rather resembling that typical of CS. Central nervous system (CNS) involvement with drug-re- sistant epilepsy and severe developmental delay occurred associated with Bladder extrophy (BE) is a complex congenital anomaly,part of the cli- significant growth delay and dystrophyc appearance. The second patient nical spectrum of the bladder extrophy-epispadias complex (BEEC).The presented a distinctive NS-LAH phenotype at birth, without CNS anomalies BEEC represents a spectrum of urological abnormalities in which part of or cardiac defects documented in the 18 months clinical follow-up. These all the distal urinary tradt fails to close and is exposed to the outer abdo- two cases represent the mild and the severe end of the same phenotypic minal wall.Previously,nine cases of classical extrophy of the bladder with spectrum, demonstrating that SHOC2 genotype-phenotype correlation is underlying microduplication 22q11.2 have been reported (Lundin et more complex than previously thought, and preventing the possibility of a al.2010;Draaken et al.,2010;Ludwig et al.,2011).A 10-year-old boy was re- genotype-based prognosis. ferred for genetic evaluation for psychomotor retardation.He had a blad- P02.188 der extrophy at birth.He was adopted.He showed short stature,scar of Boy with Noonan syndrome with multiple giant cell lesions (NS/ repair of bladder extrophy,micropenis.Multiple ligation-dependent probe MGCL) and review of the literature amplification(MLPA) analysis performed using the SALSA MLPA KIT P250 O. Bartsch1, W. Coerdt2, W. Wagner3, J. Karbach1; DiGeorge (MRC-Holland,Amsterdam,Netherlands)detected a micro-dupli- 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsmedizin der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität cation 22q11.2.The duplication was confirmed in FISH and array-CGH.The Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Institut für Pathologie, Universitätsmedizin der Johannes array-CGH (Affymetrix Cytogenetics Whole-Genome,2,7 M Array) identified Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 3Klinik für Mund-, Kiefer- und a duplication of 2419 kb in the 22q11.2 regionIn conclusion,this report Gesichtschirurgie, Universitätsmedizin der Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz, extends the phenotypic spectrum of bladder extrophy in microduplicati- Mainz, Germany. on 22q11.2 and may point to possible gene(e) located in 22q11.2 playing a putative role in urogenital development.It provides further evidence of genotype-phenotype correlation Noonan syndrome with multiple giant cell lesions (NS/MGCL) was recently shown to be part of the phenotypic spectrum of the syndromes of the RAS/ P02.191 MAPK pathway. We report on a 13-year-old boy with a typical phenotype of Two years experience of Fibular Aplasia, Tibial Campomelia, and Ndeo noonvaon syndrome including PaTtrPiNal1 s1eptal defect, pulmonic stenosiPsT, PshNo1r1t Oligosyndactyly O. Sezer1, I. Gebesoglu2, E. Gokce3, S. Gunes4; stature, pectus excavatum, and multiple giant cell lesions of both jaws, and a 1Department of Medical Genetics, Samsun Maternity and Children Diseases Hospital, mutation in exon 3 of , c.236A>G (predicting Q79R). Samsun, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Samsun Maternity and Children Diseases mutations are the most frequent cause of Noonan syndrome and Q79R is a Hospital, Samsun, Turkey, 3Department of Radiology, Samsun Maternity and Children well-described recurrent mutation. Including thiPs TpPaNti1e1ntS, O24S1 subjReActFs1 with Diseases Hospital, Samsun, Turkey, 4Department of Medical Biology, Faculty of Medicine, molecularly confirmed NS, LEOBPRAARFD or MCFACP/2MK1GCL syndrome have been re- Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey. ported to date. Of these, 21 subjects (87.5%) had , or mu- tations and three (12.5%) had or mutations, confirming that MGCL is a rare complication of the deregulated RAS/MAPK pathway. The Fibular Aplasia, Tibial Campomelia, and Oligosyndactyly (FATCO) syndro- lesions of the mandible and to a lesser extent of the maxilla were first noted me (MIM#246570) is an extremely rare syndrome related with shortening between ages 2 and 19 years (median 11 years) and were combinPeTdP wN1it1h, and anterior bowing of the lower limb at the distal third of the tibia over- fSaOcSia1l, aRsAyFm1m, BeRtrAyF i,n 5/2 M4 ApPat2iKen1ts (21%). With one exception (mutation not lying soft tissue dimpling, oligodactyly of the foot, and oligosyndactyly of reported), all 24 subjects demonstrated known mutations in the the hand, is associated with autosomal dominant inheritance/sporadic. So and genes that were previously reported with far no disthease gene/genes were identified. According to our knowledge this RASopathies without MGCL. is the 11 case of FATCO described in literature and 3rd case in Turkey. We P02.189 presented two years of experiences of FATCO syndrome. Widening the phenotypic spectrum of 5q35.3 microduplication The patient was born at term with uneventful pregnancy and delivery. He encompassing NSD1: description of two more patients with the was the first child of healthy parents, 17 years old mother and 25 years old reversed Sotos syndrome phenotype father. They were non-consanguineous, both born in same small town. H. Gaspar, B. Maas, A. Jauch, K. Hinderhofer, J. W. G. Janssen, U. Moog; The pregnancy was follow-up regularly. During follow-up pregnancy of Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany. mother triple screening test risk was low. Fetal ultrasonography showesdt Background: NSD1 echthogenicittyh of the tibial osseous and shortening of both tibias during 21 , NSD1 25 and 27 weeks, respectively. The right upper extremity had evaluated in Loss-of-function mutations in and 5q35 microdeletions normal range and the left upper extremity could not be evaluated due to fe- encompassing are a major cause of Sotos syndrome which is characte- tal position. His birth weight and head circumference was normal but length rized byovergrowth, macrocephaly, characteristiNc SfaDc1ies and other features. was short, 46 cm (<3 percentile). Our case demonstrated major common Among several patients with partial trisomy 5q, five patients with confirmed findings of FATCO syndrome. microduplication of the 5q35.3 region including have been described. We will discuss the perinatal and postnatal futures of the propositus during They show a ‘reversed phenotype’ of Sotos syndrome with microcephaly, gestation, newborn and two years old period with previous patients in the sPhaotiret nsttsa:t ure and mental retardation. We here report on two siblings with literature. interstitial duplication 5q35, widening the phenotypic spectrum. P02.192 Both siblings had microcephaly, behavioral problems with agita- Ohdo syndrome Maat-Kievit-Brunner type is caused by mutations in tion and lack of social distance, and a distinctive facial phenotype with thin MED12 upper lip, flat philtrum, short palpebral fissures and epicanthic folds. The A. T. Vulto-van Silfhout1, A. Hoischen1, B. W. M. van Bon1, C. Gilissen1, F. Gao2, J. M. 13-year-old girl showed mild to moderate mental retardation, short stature Spaeth2, B. C. Hamel1, T. Kleefstra1, W. M. Nillesen1, H. G. Yntema1, H. van Bokhoven1, B. B. and cataracts. Her 15-year-old brother had learning problems with an IQ of A. de Vries1, H. G. Brunner1, T. G. Boyer2, A. P. M. de Brouwer1; 7M8e. tHhiosd lse:n gth was within the lower normal range. The biological parents 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Molecular Medicine/Institute of Biotechnology, were neither available for clinical examination nor for testing. University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. Besides chromosomal analysis (with a resolution of about 550 bRaensduslt)s w:e performed SNP-array analysis (Affymetrix® Cytogenetics Who- le-Genome 2.7M) and FISH (using a specific probe for NSD1). Ohdo syndrome [MIM 249620] is characterized by intellectual disability Chromosomal analysis was normalN iSnD b1oth siblings. Molecular ka- and the typical facial features including blepharophimosis. Clinically the ryotyping in the sister revealed a 1.6 Mb interstitial duplication of 5q35.2- blepharophimosis-intellectual disability syndromes have been classified in q35.3 containing 40 RefSeq genes including and the duplication could five distinct subgroups: del(3)(pter) type, Ohdo type, Say-Barber-Biesecker- be confirmed in both siblings by FISH analysis. The siblings illustrate in- Young-Simpson (SBBYS) type, Verloes type, and Maat-Kievit-Brunner (MKB) trafamilial variability of the reversed Sotos syndrome phenotype. type. Here, we performed exome sequencing in two families with two affec- teMdE mD1a2les with Ohdo syndrome MKB type. Two novel missense mutations were identified in Mediator of RNA polymerase II transcription subunit 12 www.eshg.org www.esh(g.org; NM_005120.2), p.(Arg1148His) and p.(Ser1165Pro), that segre-90 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 gated with the disease phenotype. Uponde s unbovsoeq uent analysis of an aMdEdDit1io2- collagen 1, which consists of two α1- and one α2-chains forming a triple-he- nal cohort of seven single male patients with the broad definition of Ohdo lical structure. The spectrum of clinical severity is wide, ranging from mild syndrome, we detected one additional missense change in : predisposition to fractures to perinatal lethality. We describe a 24-year-old p.(His1729Asn) in a patient with the MKMB EtyDp1e2. The occurrence of three female patient with postnatal fethmur fracture, blue sclerae, and approxi- different hemizygous missense mutations in three unrelated families with mately 30 fractures until her 16 yeathr of life. thHer father had blue sclerae Ohdo syndrome MKB type, suggests that is the McaEuDsa1t2iv e gene for and about 25 fractures beCtwOLee1nA 2his 8 and 20 year of life. Molecular ana- this Ohdo syndrome subtype. lysis revealed a heterozygous nonsense mutation c.4060C>T (p.Gln1354X) Previously, three other specific missense mutations in have been within the last exon of the COL1A1-gene in both patients. Such mutations are described in patients with FG syndrome and Lujan-Fryns syndrome. Our rare and the clinical phenotype has so far not been characterized. Nonsense patients clearly differ from these two syndromes as they have the classi- or frameshift mutations iCnO L1A2 typically lead to mRNA-decay and haplo- cal Ohdo features ptosis and blepharophimosis, while the high palate and insufficiency of the affected protein, resulting inC mOiLl1dA f1ormsC oOfL t1hAe2 d isease. high, prominent forehead as seen in Lujan-Fryns and FG syndrome and the Nonsense mutations in which lead to mRNA decay do not cause typical ears in FG syndrome are less apparent. However, in adulthood the osteogenesis imperfecta. Missense mutations in or that af- facial appearance of Ohdo patients type MKB becomes more coarse, and fect triple helix formation lead to severe forms of the disease, attributed to a tMhEeD d1is2tinction from FG syndrome becomes less apparent. Further studies dominant negative effect of the dysfunctional protein. Nonsense mutations are necessary to determine the exact genotype-phenotype correlations in in the last exon, as it is found in our patients, are predicted not to result in mutations. mRNA decay but in the generation of a truncated protein. The respective P02.193 domain is considered to be important for the assembly of the three chains. Two novel GJA1 missense mutations in patients presenting with A dominant negative effect affecting a domain beyond the triple helix could oculodentodigital dysplasia account for the moderate clinical phenotype. A. Jamsheer1,2, A. Sowinska1,2, A. Latos-Bielenska1,2; P02.196 1Department of Medical Genetics, University o Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Center Recurrence of osteogenesis imperfecta: a case report for Medical Genetics GENSIS, Poznan, Poland. A. Kondo, J. Nishikata, K. Mitsuzuka, S. Sato, H. Yokoyama, M. Mizoguchi, H. Ishimoto, S. Izumi; Tokai University, Isehara, Japan. Oculodentodigital dysplasia (ODDD) also known as oculodentoosseus syn- drome (OMIM #164200) is a rare congenital, predominantly autosomal dominant disorder that comprises craniofacial, ocular, dental, and digital Perinatal lethal osteogenesis imperfect (OI) is the result of heterozygous abnormalities. The syndrome is caused by GJA1 mutations. The clinical phe- mutations of the COL1A1 and COL1A2 genes. Point mutations resulting in notype of ODDD involves characteristic facial dysmorphic features, ocular the substitution of Gly residues in Gly-X-Y amino acid triplets of the triple findings (microphthalmia, microcornea, glaucoma), syndactyly type III of helical domain of the alpha 1(I) or alpha 2(I) chains are the most frequent the hands (fusion between fingers 4 and 5), phalangeal abnormalities, diffu- mutations. They interrupt the repetitive Gly-X-Y structure that is mandatory se skeletal dysplasia, enamel dysplasia, and hypotrichosis. In two unrelated for the formation of a stable triple helix. Most babies have their own private patients presenting with the typical clinical symptoms of ODDD, we demon- de novo mutation. However, the recurrence rate is about 7% owing to germ- strated two different novel missense mutations of the GJA1 gene: c. 257C>A line mosaicism in one parent. (p.S86Y) and c.317T>G (p. L106R). Our report expands the known mutatio- 29y/o lady had recurrence of OI. Her first fetus was diagnosed as OI at 21 nal spectrum of the GJA1 gene and provides evidence on the importance of weeks gestation and she declined. She referred to us for her second preg- this highly conserved amino acid residues for the native functioning of the nancy because of ultrasound findings. Short long bones with fractures, small corresponding protein. chests and soft skulls were significant and the fetus was also suspected OI at P02.194 19 weeks gestation. Type II OI was suspected with these findings. Familial Osteofibrous Dysplasia with Pectus Excavatum: A Phenotypic Her previous doctor explained her it would not recur because most cases Evaluation of OI type II represent autosomal recessive traits. However, there is another M. J. Gray1, S. Manners2, H. Crawford2, L. McEntee2, D. Markie3, S. P. Robertson1; possibility with germline mosaicism and this case could be in this group. 1Department of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Otago, Dunedin, New In addition, similar extremely severe types of OI, Types VII and VIII, can be Zealand, 2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Starship Children’s Hospital, Auckland, caused by recessive mutations to other genes. New Zealand, 3Department of Pathology, University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. It is very important to make an accurate diagnosis to plan future pregnancy. Hence genetic test for OI patients is recommended even if it is difficult to perform genetic test for every patients with OI in Japan. Four generations of a New Zealand family have autosomal dominant inheri- P02.197 tance of bilateral congenital bowing of the tibia, hypoplastic fibula and pec- A new overgrowth syndrome with cranio-facial dysmorphisms, tus excavatum. The first three generations (reported in 1978) had several complex cardiac abnormalities, progressive scoliosis and mild incidences of radiolucent lesions and pseudoathrosis of the tibia following cognitive impairment fracture that required surgical intervention. The two affected members of M. Dentici1, M. Tartaglia2, B. Dallapiccola1; the fourth generation have not sustained either fractures of the tibia or 1Bambino Gesú Pediatric Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Ematologia, radiolucent lesions, but anterolateral bowing of the tibia was a persistent Oncologia e Medicina Molecolare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. feature. One of these two individuals presented with thoracic scoliosis in addition to the tibial and pectus malformation. Congenital bowing of the ti- bia with the presence of radiolucent lesions or pseudoathrosis in this family We report on two sisters of 14y6m and 11y old, born from healthy non con- is reminiscent of osteofibrous dysplasia (OFD). OFD can occasionally exhi- sanguineous parents, presenting strictthly overlapping clinical features. All bit familial aggregation as in this family but is usually a unilateral, sporadic auxological parameters were above 97 centile in both siblings. Facial dys- condition. Sporadic OFD presents with the same phenotype of anterolateral morphisms included flat face, palpebral fissures slant down, hypertelorism, bowing, radiolucent lesions, pseudoathrosis upon fracture and apparent deep set eyes, thick eyebrows, flat nasal bridge, prominent naso-labial folds, healing of bowing and/or lesions as skeletal maturity proceeds. The addi- long philtrum, low set ears, open mouth appearance and multiple oral fre- tional phenotypic features are suggestive of a mild anomaly in skeletal deve- nula. Cardiac evaluation showed DIA II with left-right shunt in both sisters lopment that is especially apparent in the tibia. This family may inform the while the younger also presents restrictive interventricular septal defect, genetic basis of OFD and allied bone neoplasms such as adamantinoma and right branch block, left ventricular hypertrophy and at 9 years of age she non-NF1 tibial pseudoarthosis. was diagnosed with mixoma which was surgically removed. Skeletal abnor- P02.195 malities included short neck, progressive severe scoliosis that requires the A novel C-terminal stop mutation in COL1A2 in a family with moderate use of corset, brachymetacarpia of digit 5 and hallux valgus. Brain MRI dis- osteogenesis imperfecta played abnormality of white matter and asymmetry of the lateral ventricles. M. Reuter1, C. Marschall2, C. Thiel1, A. Reis1; Psychomotor development was mildly delay. High-resolution array- compa- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany, 2Zentrum für Humangenetik und rative genomic hybridization (CGH) analyses was performed on the older Laboratoriumsmedizin, Martinsried, Germany. sibling and did not disclose any disease-causing genomic rearrangement. According to our knowledge the siblings don’t fit into any known disorder. COL1A1 COL1A2 The clinical history of the siblings was uploaded to the the web-based Dys- Osteogenesis imperfecta is a connective tissue disorder, the vast majority morphology Diagnostic System (DDS) developed by DYSCERNE, a European caused by mutations in or -genes. These genes encode for network of Centres of Expertise in dysmorphology (DG Sanco- Project: www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 91 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 2006122). The DDS experts’ panel discussed over differential diagnosis and common genetic disorders. Most elderly patients also show liver cysts. Po- we concluded that the present siblings are likely affected by a previously lycystic liver disease (ADPLD) can also occur isolated, but may also encom- undescribed autosomal recessive disorder. Exome sequencing and filtering pass kidney cysts. Variable disease expression even in the samPReK fCaSmHily is the results based on a hypothesis-driven strategy is currently undergoing. iSnEcCo6m3,pletely understood. ADPKD and ADPLD overlap not only clinically, but P02.198 also genetically and functionally. Both genes known for ADPL.D , and Papillon-Lefevre syndrome and GJB2 associated hearing loss in two encode proteins that are involved in posttranslational translocation sibs and quality control of proteins (such as the ADPKD proteins) We describe a B. F. Stadheim1, A. S. Rossow2, J. C. Sitek1, T. E. Prescott1; family with liver and kidney cysts in which the much more severely affected 1Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 2TAKO centre, Lovisenberg Diakonale Hospital, index patient harbours a total of four mutant alleles in genes for ADPKD Oslo, Norway. and ADPLD with massive hepatic and neurovascular complications leading to stroke at the age of 38. All other affected family members displayed a mild CTSC phenotype with practically no disease burden and a few liver and kidney Papillon-Lefevre syndrome (PLS, OMIM #245000) is an extremely rare auto- cysts to varying degrees. In line with recent functional data, we postulate a somal recessive disorder associated with mutations in (chromosome dosage-sensitive, tissue-dependent network for polycystic liver and kidney 11q14.2). Palmo-plantar hyperkeratosis beginning in early childhood is the disease in which additional mutational hits exert an aggravating effect and hallmark of severe disease. The disorder is most often diagnosed by den- contribute to earlier and more severe disease expression. This concept may tists, however, because of severe painful progressive periodontal disease describe a general principle for the modification of disease expression and with premature loss of teeth which affects both primary and secondary den- demonstrates how trafficking and quality control of proteins matter in hu- tition. Pyogenic liver abscesses, presumably a consequence of neutrophil man disease. dysfunction, have been reported. Systemic retinoids, especially acitretin, can P02.201 be very effect GivJeB i2n treating the skin lesions and may have some effect on the Polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD/ADPKD) gets complex: Genetic periodontal manifestations. Dental implants may be an option. network and mutations in multiple cilia-related genes Mutations in (chromosome 13q12.11) are a cause of autosomal reces- V. Frank1, M. Kuhn1, T. Eisenberger1, H. Fehrenbach2, L. Pape3, K. Häffner4, S. Weber5, J. sive non-syndromic mild to profound sensorineural hearing impairment Gellermann6, M. Schröder7, K. Latta7, S. Berland8, T. Fiskerstrand8, K. Zerres9, H. J. Bolz1, which is usually congenital (OMIM #220290). Estimated prevalence in the C. Bergmann1,9; general popGuJBla2tion is 14:100,000. 1Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, We present a brother and sister who both have molecularly confirmed PLS Children´s Hospital Memmingen, Memmingen, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hepatology and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, as well as associated hearing loss. Seven of nine surviving sibs have Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital neither disorder. Three sibs died of unknown cause in infancy. The parents, Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital originally from Somalia, are not consanguineous by history. Both teenagers Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Charité Berlin, Berlin, presented with severe periodontal disease and palmo-plantar hyperkerato- Germany, 7Department of Pediatrics, Clementine Children´s Hospital, Frankfurt, sis interfering with mobility and sleep. The boy is deaf; the girl has minimal Germany, 8Department of Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland residual hearing University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 9Department of Human Genetics, RWTH Aachen This case reminds us that treatment and follow-up can be significantly in- University, Aachen, Germany. fluenced by making the correct diagnosis of a rare disorder and that two monogenetic conditions occasionally co-occur Polycystic kidneys paved the way for elucidation of cilia-related disorders P02.199 and notably most ciliopathies have a renal cystogenic component. Autoso- CYP2C9 and VKORC1 polymorphisms influence the warfarin dose adjustment during initial anticoagulation and follow-up of 360 days mal dominant polycystic kidney disease (APDKPDK1D) iPs KoDn2e of the most com- P. C. J. L. Santos1, C. L. Dinardo1, I. T. Schettert1, R. A. G. Soares1, L. Kawabata-Yoshihara2, mon Mendelian disorders with a prevalence of 1:500-1000 and typically a I. M. Bensenor2, P. A. Lotufo2, J. E. Krieger1, A. C. Pereira1; late-onset disease caused by mutations in or . About 2% of AD- 1Laboratory of Genetics and Molecular Cardiology, Heart Institute (InCor), University of PKD patients show an early and severe phenotype with considerablPeK pHeDri1- Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2University Hospital of the University of Sao Paulo, Internal natal morbidity and mortality that can be clinically indistinguishable from Medicine Division, Sao Paulo, Brazil. the recessive form of polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) caused by mutations. We demonstrate severely affected PKD patients who carry, in addition to their expected familial germline de fHecNt,F f1ußr ther mutations that Background: Warfarin is an anticoagulant that has been the standard to pre- are likely to aggravate the phenotype. We also show that polycystic kidney vent and treat thromboembolism and, genotypic variations in the CYP2C9 disease may also be mimicked by mutations in and genes typically and VKORC1 have been reported to predict dosing. Objectives:As an initi- causing other ciliopathies, such as Nephronophthisis and Meckel syndrome. al step towards clinical pharmacogenetic implementation, the main aim of Due to these aspects, we established a novel genetic testing approach based this study was to determine whether CYP2C9 and VKORC1 polymorphisms on Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) that allows simultaneous investigati- influence the warfarin dose adjustment during initial anticoagulation and on of all PKD and other ciliopathy genes. follow-up of 360 days. Methods: Two hundred six patients who were be- P02.202 ginning warfarin therapy were selected. They were assessed with general Pre and post-axial polydactyly caused by a novel dominant GLI3 and clinical characteristics, response to therapy followed on days 7-10, 30, mutation in a large kindred 60, 180, 360, and adverse events. Results: During 360 days, the total dose M. Volodarsky, O. Birk; variation was associated with predicted metabolic phenotypes according to Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel. CYP2C9*2 and CYP2C9*3 (extensive metabolizer (EM): +1.7±1.5 mg/week and intermediate or poor metabolizers (IM+PM): -5.5±2.5 mg/week; p= 0.03, adjusted for covariates). Dose variation during first month was also A large Jewish Moroccan kindred presented with 12 cases of isolated poly- associated. Patients carrying VKORC1 and CYP2C9 variants presented lower dactyly. Affected individuals had either pre-axial, post-axial or combined po- required dose compared to patients carrying wild-type genotypes (p= 0.04 lydactyly. Most had also syndactyly. Using polymorphic markers adjacent to and p= 0.03, respectively). Conclusions: This genetic information is impor- candidate genes, linkage to SHH, GJA1, HOXD13, LMBR1, FBLN1 was ruled tant in the initial anticoagulation dosing and during treatment maintenance. out. Analysis using markers D7S691 and D7S1526 near GLI3 followed by In this scenario, the present study could help to design programs towards sequencing of the coding sequence of the gene, demonstrated that the phe- individualization of warfarin therapy in the Brazilian population. notype in this family was due to a novel c.A1802G (p.H601A) mutation in P02.200 exon 12 of GLI3 abrogating one of the C2H2 type zinc fingers of the encoded Dosage-sensitive network in polycystic kidney and liver disease: protein. Multiple mutations cause severe hepatic and neurological The study demonstrates the significant phenotypic variability of GLI3 muta- complications tions, with the same mutation leading to pre or post-axial polydactyly. J. Kleffmann1, V. Frank2, C. Roth1, H. J. Bolz2, A. Ferbert3, C. Bergmann2; P02.203 1Department of Neurosurgery, Klinikum Kassel, Kassel, Germany, 2Bioscientia Center Candidate genes and CNVs in patients with polymicrogyria. for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 3Department of Neurology, Klinikum Kassel, N. Di Donato1, U. Hehr2, G. Schuierer3, J. Lemke4, G. Hahn5, J. Schallner6, A. Rump1, E. Kassel, Germany. Schrock1, K. Hackmann1; 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Zentrum für Humangenetik, Regensburg, Germany, 3Institut für Neuroradiologie, Regensburg, Germany, Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is one of the most www.eshg.org www.eshg.org92 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 4Universitätsklinik für Kinderheilkunde, Inselspital Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 5Institut und Poliklinik für Radiologische Diagnostik am Universitätsklinikum Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 6Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum am Universitätsklinikum Dresden, Dresden, rangements are caused by nonallelic homologous recombination between Germany. flanking repeat gene clusters (Zhang et al. 2010). Clinical features of PTLS include infantile hypotonia, failure to thrive, mental retardation, autism, be- havioural abnormalities and speech delay. Polymicrogyria (PMG) represents a common cortical malformation and is Here we report about two patients with PTLS who were ascertained by ka- characterized by an excessive number of small gyri as a result of the abnor- ryotyping and array-CGH analyses. Patient 1, a 5 year old boy, showed an mal neuronal migration. Up to date mutations in 35 genes are related with uncommon duplication of 4,7Mb. He demonstrated classical features like various neuronal migration disorders. 13 chromosomal loci were associated hypotonia, failure to thrive, mental retardation, speech delay, auto aggres- with PMG. sive behaviour and facial dysmorphisms, but no congenital malformations. Here we present the results of high resolution array CGH analysis (Agilent Patient 2, a 2 month old boy, presented the common duplication of 3,7Mb 2x400k) in 21 patients with PMG. with hypotonia and additional club feet. In one patient we identified de novo deletion 15q26.3 (24 Mb). Although Our study was established to design new self-designed two-colour FISH pro- known from the literature in association with developmental delay/multip- bes for investigation the duplication region more precisely. Therefore, we le malformations this locus was not previously associated with PMG. amplified two genes from proximal and distal part of the duplication by Long 11 patients showed copy number variations (CNVs) neither listed as benign Range PCR with a size in total of 30kb. After fluorescent labelling with diffe- nor previously described in the literature. 7 patients had a single aberration rent colours we hybridised the FISH probes on patients metaphase spreads. (4 losses and 3 gains). In 3 patients a combination of 2 CNVs and in one Both revealed an inverted duplication due to specific signal pattern. patient 4 CNVs (gains) were seen. The size of the copy number losses and Using our self-generated protocol to establish PTLS specific FISH probes it is gains varied from 25 kb to 250 kb and from 36 kb to 250 kb, respectively. In possible to detect how the duplicated region is arranged. Furthermore, we six patients a segregation analysis was possible. A de novo event could be demonstrate patients from the literature with similar duplication segments confirmed in one patient (loss). Four patients showed maternal inheritance in comparison of their phenotype for phenotype-genotype correlation. (one mother partially affected) of the CNVs and one patient had two CNVs, P02.206 one inherited from either parent. Two discovered CNVs reside within the The frequency and exact karyotypes of complex chromosomal known PMG loci 4q22.1 and 13q22.1. aberrations in Prader-Willi syndrome In 9/21 patients only CNVs listed in Database of Genomic Variance were N. Murakami, K. Obata, S. Sakazume, Y. Kido, Y. Oto, T. Nagai; found. Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, Koshigaya, Japan. The phenotype, candidate genes, possible causative role of the rare CNVs and further studies using NGS will be discussed. P02.204 The pathogenesis of Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS) includes deletion chro- Polymicrogyria, schizencephaly, and eye anomalies in a girl with mosome 15q11-13, maternal uniparental disomy (matUPD), and imprin- COL4A1 mutation ting center abnormality. Some complex chromosomal aberrations are also T. M. Neuhann1, F. Baumeister2, J. Kohlhase3, S. Balg1, E. Holinski-Feder1, A. Abicht1, B. known to cause PWS. But the frequency and exact karyotypes of chromo- Ertl-Wagner4; somal aberrations have not been reported. All 217 patients followed by us 1Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim, were diagnosed either by G-banding analysis, FISH, or methylation test. Six Rosenheim, Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik, Freiburg, Germany, 4Institute of Clinical of them (2.7%) showed complex chromosomal aberrations (shown below). Radiology, University of Munich – Grosshadern Campus, Munich, Germany. Four (case 1-4) had an extrachromosome originating from chromosome 15, COL4A1 one Robertsonian translocation between chromosome 14q and 15q (case 5), and one translocation between chromosome 15q12 and 16q24 (case 6). Mutations in are associated with autosomal-dominant type 1 All of the 4 patients with extrachromosome had matUPD. On the extrachro- porencephalyC; ObrLa4iAn1 small-vessel disease; and hereditary angiopathy with mosome, 3 of these 4 (case 1, 3, 4) showed no SNRPN. The other one (case nephropathy, aneurysms, and muscle cramps (HANAC) syndrome. Recently, 2) had SNRPN on the paternally-originated extrachromosome. The patient mutations in have also been identified in patients with presumed with Robertsonian translocation (case 5) had matUPD and his mother had Walker-Warburg syndrome. Schizencephaly and abnCoOrLm4aAl 1gyration (such as the same karyotype with normal phenotype. One with translocation (case 6) polymicrogyria) have not been described as primary features. showed no SNRPN on translocated chromosome 15. We describe a girl with a novel mutation in (c.2716+2T>C, In summary the frequency of complex chromosomal aberration was around IVS33+2T>C, het.). She was presented at the age of 4 months with complex 2.7% and many of them had matUPD with extrachromosome 15. brain (schizencephaly, polymicrogyria, hypoplastic corpus callosum, and Karyotypes of cases ventriculomegaly) and eye (congenital cataract, microphthalmia) abnorma- 1. 47,XX,inv(13)(q22q34), idic(15)(q11.2) [4]/46,XX, inv(13)(q22q34) [56] lities. Her development was markedly delayed. In the further course, she .ish der (15)(D15Z1+, SNRPN-) developed West syndrome. 2. 47,XX, +idic(15) [3]/46,XX [17]. ish der (15)(D15Z1++, SNRPN++) Prenatally she was diagnosed with bilateral cataracts and transient ventri- 3. 46,XY,+mar [25]/46,XY [5]. ish der (15)(D15Z1+, SNRPN-) culomegaly. Within the first month of life, the girl suffered from bilateral 4. 47,XX, der(15) [26]/46,XX [4] . ish der (15)(D15Z1+, SNRPN-) fulminant orbital phlegmona; consecutively, both orbits became markedly 5. 45,XY, t(14q;15q) microphtalmic. When reassessing the consecutive MRI and CT scans that 6. 45,XY, -15-16, +der (16)t(15;16)(q12;q24) had been performed since birth, multifocal bleeding episodes at different P02.207 stages of development and organization as well as porencephalic changes Oro-dental abnormalities in a group of patients with Prader-Willi were detected in the early brain imaging studies. Polymicrogyria and schi- syndrome zencephaly most likely developed secondary to the vascular changes and D. Belengeanu, D. Stoicanescu, C. Bratu, A. Podariu; bleeding episodes caused by the mutation during early stages of fetal deve- University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. lopment. Her parents and the dizygotic twin sister are healthy and do not carry the mCuOtaLt4ioAn1. This case highlights, that the brain phenotype may change over time in pa- Prader-Willi syndrome is characterized by obesity, short stature, facial dys- tients with mutations and may mask the primary defects expected morphism and behavior problems. The main features in the oral area inclu- in these patients. de enamel hypoplasia, delayed tooth eruption, tooth decay and poor oral P02.205 hygiene. Other reports mention micrognathia, xerostomia, hypodontia, su- New insights into Potocki-Lupski syndrome by characterisation of the pernumerary teeth, teeth fusions and dental erosion. The aim of this study duplicated region 17p11.2 with self-designed two-colour FISH probes is to evaluate oro-dental phenotype in Prader-Willi patients and recommen- B. Katmer1, E. Rossier1, G. Tariverdian1, M. Viellieber2, P. Ruef3, H. Büttel3, K. Mehnert1, I. ding strategies for the dental management of cases with this syndrome. Due Dietze-Armana1; 1genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 2St. Annastiftskrankenhaus, Ludwigshafen, Germany, to very low incidence of the disease in general population, the study group 3SLK-Kliniken Heilbronn GmbH, Heilbronn, Germany. included 12 patients, aged between 4 and 25 years. Evaluation of dental caries was carried out according to WHO criteria. Orthopantomographies were performed. Based on the radiological appearance of 7 teeth in the left The Potocki-Lupski syndrome (PTLS, MIM 610883) is a microduplication hemimandibula, a dental maturity score was calculated, which was used to syndrome caused by a common duplication of about 3,7Mb in 17p11.2. The determine dental age. Enamel hypoplasia was revealed in 9 cases (75%). PTLS-associated duplication is reciprocal to the common 17p11.2 deletion Cavities were recorded in all cases, causing massive crown destructions in syndrome (Smith-Magenis syndrome). Both, deletion and duplication rear- adults, with early loss of a variable number of teeth, between 4 and 7, af- www.eshtegr. othreg age of 20. Xerostomia was noticed in all, anodontia of one canine, www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 93 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Research Group Mundlos, Berlin, Germany, 3Technische Universität Dresden, Institut für Klinische microdontia and supernumerary tooth-odontom type occured each in one Genetik, Dresden, Germany. case, poor oral hygiene in 5 cases. An interesting feature was the finding of premature eruption of permanent teeth, 3 patients had early second molar eruption. Accelerated dental age was recorded in patients who were treated Proteus syndrome (PS) [OMIM#176920] is a highly variable disorder cha- with growth hormone. Regular dental examination in Prader-Willi patients racterized by asymmetric and disproportionate overgrowth of body parts, is necessary for correct management and justifies its inclusion in the panel including bone overgrowth. The concept of a dominant lethal gene defect of their mandatory investigations. surviving by mosaicism was proposed by HapApKleT 1over twenty years ago to P02.208 explain thee tm aol.saic distribution of lesions and the sporadic occurrence. Re- Primordial Dwarfism: A case report of two South African patients cently, an activating missense mutation in the gene has been found by S. Moosa1, L. Bhengu1, A. Jackson2; Lindhurst (2011) to be associated withe tth ael .PS. The AKT1 serine-thre- 1Division of Human Genetics, National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South onine protein kinase is a central mediator of PI3-Kinase signaling which in- Africa, 2Medical Research Council, Human Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. fluence cell proliferation and apoptosis (Lee 2011). Here, we screened affected tissues from two patients with classical PS and three patients with an asymmetric and disproportionate overgrowth not fulfilling the PS crite- Primordial dwarfism (PD) is the term used for a group of genetic disorders, ria; one of thee tl aatlt.er with unilateral lower extremity overgrowth and two which result in severe short stature and growth failure. „Primordial“ has with cranial bone overgrowth. We used restriction-enzyme assay described been defined as belonging to or being characteristic of the earliest stages by LAinKdTh1urst . To test our method we created mutated PCR fragments of development. Thus, PD is a class of disorders where growth delay occurs and showed a sensitivity up to ~5% mutated PCR-fragments. We detected at the earliest stages of embryonic development. Unlike some of the other the mutation in the affected bone, fat and cartilage but nAoKtT in1 the blood forms of dwarfism where neonates may have normal growth parameters, sample of two Proteus syndrome affected patients. The mutated allele fre- children with PD are born small. Here we report on two South African girls quency ranged between 4 and 20 percent. We did not detect mutation with PD, aged four and six years. Short stature was evident at birth. Current- in affected tissues of the patients with cranial bone overgrowth and unila- ly their growth parameters fall below the -8SD and -10SD curves, respec- teral extremity overgrowth. This data suggest a different molecular mecha- tively. Both girls have clinical features suggestive of a diagnosis of Majewski nism accounts for the overgrowth in these distinct from PS cases. Osteodysplastic Primordial DwarPfCisNmT Type II (MOPD II), and molecular te- P02.211 sting has confirmed that the four year old is homozygous for a mutation in Causal mutations of PRSS1 gene and association with hereditary the causative gene, pericentrin ( ). Apart from severe intrauterine and chronic pancreatitis postnatal growth failure, patients with MOPD II have microcephaly, skeletal L. Vavrova1, M. Milly1, I. Mlkva2, D. Ilencikova1, M. Konecny1; dysplasia and a distinctive facial appearance. Individuals with MOPD II are 1Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, at increased risk for several significant complications, which include insulin 2Centre of Clinical Genetics, University Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia. resistance, diabetes mellitus and central nervous system vascular malfor- mations. As adults, their average height approaches 100cm, making them among the smallest of human beings. We compare the physical features and Hereditary chronic pancreatitis (HCP) belongs into the group of rare di- radiological findings of these two patients, followed by a brief discussion on seases. HCP follows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern with a the associated co-morbidities and current research on the genetic basis and penetrance of approximately 80%. The incidence is expecPteRdS Sto1 be 3,5-10 natural history of PD. cases/100 000 inhabitants in Europe and USA. It was shown that in appro- P02.209 xPiRmSaSt1ely 50% of families affected with HCP, mutation of gene was Primrose syndrome with testicular cancer: case report and review of present. the literature gene encodes cationic trypsinogen and some mutations described in D. Liebrecht1, C. Daumer-Haas1, T. Braun2, C. Hann von Weyhern3; this gene lead to higher stability of pSrPeImNaKt1urely activated trypsin in pan- 1Praenatal-Medizin München, Munich, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für Hals-Nasen- creas or higher autocatalytic activation of inactive trypsinogen to trypsin. Ohrenheilkunde Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Medizet Another gene associated with HCP is . This gene encodes serin pro- Pathologie Standort Harlaching, Munich, Germany. tease inhibitor Kazal type I, which is markedly upregulated in the pancreas during active inflammation. Variants present in this geneP mRSaSy1 interrSuPpItN tKh1e specific inhibition of active trypsin in pancreas. We report on a male patient with the rare finding of enlarged calcified exter- Recently we have started the analysis of mutations in and nal ear auricles combined with macrocephaly, mental retardation, dysmor- genes in Slovak HCP families. Although, we have so far tested only few fa- phic facial features, bilateral cataracts, hearing impairment, sparse body milies, several mutation carriers were already identified. One unreported hair, progredient muscle wasting, severe kyphoscoliosis and behavioural variant, the p.Ile141Asn that we detected, presumably has a negative effect problems. All findings are consistent with the clinical diagnosis of Primrose on the protein function. This novel variant may be specific for our populati- syndrome. At the age of 28 years the patient developed a germ cell tumor on and will be analyzed further.The genetic testing resulting in discovery of and a seminome of his testicles, which was effectively treated by orchiec- the mutations in mentionePdR SgSe1nes asSsPoIcNiaKte1d with HCP may help to enroll tomy and chemotherapy. The patient died at the age of 31 years because of the patients into special preventive programs. Here we discuss the impor- pneumonia. Array-CGH analysis performed by us on asservated DNA from tance of genetic testing of and in patient with pancreatitis as testicular tissue, revealed no microdeletion or microduplication. the risk of pancreatic cancer is elevated in patients with diagnosed HCP to Primrose syndrome is an extremely rare neurodegenerative disorder of more than 50% . unknown cause. The first patient diagnosed with Primrose syndrome was P02.212 described in 1982 by Dr. D. A. Primrose. Between 1982 and 2011 there have A large deletion in the GNAS gene in a patient with been published about seven cases of Primrose syndrome (OMIM #259050). pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a (PHP-1a) To our knowledge our case is the second reported case of Primrose syndro- E. Tønne1, M. A. Kulseth1, A. G. Myhre2, T. Prescott1; me with testicular cancer; the first case was reported by Mathijssen et al., 1Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway, 2Department of Pediatrics, Oslo, 2006. This new case of testicular cancer confirms an increased risk to mali- Norway. gnancies, especially testicular tumors, as a part of Primrose syndrome. We compare the phenotype and findings of our case to previously published cases of Primrose syndrome in order to expand the phenotypic spectrum. Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (AHO) is a rare autosomal dominant- Up to now all cases of Primrose syndrome are mentioned to be sporadic wi- ly inherited condition associated with short stature, obesity, subcutaneous thout familial occurrence or consanguinity and probably related to a novel ossifications and shortening of the long bones of the hands and feet. Some autosomal dominant mutation of a yet unknown gene. degree of development delay, generally mild, is common. The underlying P02.210 molecular cause is reduced activity of the alpha subunit of the stimulatory Identification of mosaic AKT1 mutations in two patients affected guanine nucleotide-binding protein (Gsalpha). Gsalpha is encoded by GNAS with Proteus syndrome but not in three patients affected with an and heterozygous mutations including missense, nonsense, small inserti- asymmetric and disproportionate overgrowth not fulfilling the ons and deletions in GNAS exons 1-13 have been reported to cause AHO. Proteus syndrome criteria Submicroscopic deletion detected by array CGH, involving the whole GNAS D. Emmerich1, M. Kolanczyk1,2, S. Mundlos1,2, S. Tinschert3; locus, has also been reported. GNAS is subjected to maternal imprinting in 1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Institut für Medizinische Genetik und some human tissues, including the thyroid gland, and hormone resistance (particularly for parathyroid hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone) is associated with AHO, only when the genetic defect is maternally inherited. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org94 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.215 Hemodynamic and genetic analysis in children with idiopathic/ AHO with hormone resistance (pseudohypoparathyroidism type 1a (PHP- heritable and congenital heart disease associated pulmonary arterial 1a)) was diagnosed clinically in an adopted boy with subcutaneous ossi- hypertension fication on the left leg, short stature (2.5 percentile), brachydactyly, obesity N. Pfarr1,2, J. Szamalek-Hoegel1, C. Fischer1, N. Ehlken2, T. Becker-Grünig2, O. Miera3, M. (weight for height 97.5 percentile), a round face with a short neck and mild Gorenflo4, A. Hager5, K. Hinderhofer1, C. Nagel2, D. Schranz6, E. Grünig2; development delay. He had PTH resistance with hypocalcemia and mild TSH 1University Hospital of Heidelberg, Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, resistance. 2Centre for pulmonary hypertension/Department of Pneumology, Thoraxclinic, Heidelberg, Germany, 3German Heart Center Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4University MLPA analysis revealed heterozygosity for a deletion of exon 7-13 in GNAS. Hospital of Heidelberg, Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Heidelberg, Germany, The clinical feature of PTH resistance indicates that the deletion was located 5Clinic of Pediatric Cardiology and Congenital Heart Defects, Munich, Germany, at the maternal allele. This case underscores the usefulness of MLPA in the 6University of Giessen, Department of Paediatric Cardiology, Giessen, Germany. diagnosis of AHO. To the best of our knowledge, a similar partial GNAS dele- tion has not been described previously. P02.213 Background: Idiopathic (I) pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is rare Genetic study of PTEN mutations among individuals with ASDs / MR in childhood and can be heritable (HPAH) caused by defects of genes par- and macrocephaly ticipating in the TGFß signaling pathway. The genetic background of PAH M. Havlovicova, P. Vasovcak, A. Krepelova, M. Simandlova, T. Marikova, A. Holubova, Z. associated with congenital heart defects (CHD-APAH) is less clear. The aim Sedlacek; of this study was to compare hemodynamic and genetic findings in children Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of Medicine with I/HPAH and APAH-CHD. and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Methods: Prospectively included were consecutive children with invasively confirmed diagnosis of I/HPAH or CHD-APAH. Assessment of family mem- bers, pedigree analysis and systematic screening for mutations in the genes Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a group of severe neurodevelopmen- BMPR2, ACVRL1, ENG, SMAD1, SMAD5 and SMAD9 was performed. tal conditions among which pervasive developmental disorder (not other- Results: 19 children with I/HPAH (6.3±4.7 years) and 11 with CHD-APAH wise specified) and autistic disorder are the most common. The prevalence (7.2±4.5 years) were included. Four mutations (BMPR2 n=2; ACVRL1 n=2), of ASDs is currently estimated at 60 and 13 per 10,000 for ASDs and autism, and 3 not yet described unclassified sequence variants (ACVRL1 n=1; respectively. Autistic disorder is often associated with macrocephaly; 24% SMAD9 n=2) were found in I/HPAH children. One ACVRL1 mutation has not of patients have head circumference (HC) at >98th centile. Mutations in the been described before. In CHD-APAH patients 1 BMPR2 mutation and 2 un- PTEN gene have been reported in patients with ASDs and significant ma- classified sequence variants (ENG n=1, BMPR2 n=1) were identified. crocephaly (HC ranging from +2.5 SD to +8 SD). Germline PTEN mutations Conclusion: Mutations and unclassified variants with functional impact in also cause a variety of inherited cancer predispositions like the Cowden, different TGFß signalling genes occurred in 21% of I/HPAH patients and Bannayan-Riley-Ruvalcalba, Proteus and Proteus-like syndromes. These 27.3 of patients with CHD-APAH and may influence the clinical status of the conditions may also have neurobehavioural features resembling autism as disease. Therefore, genetic analysis in children with various forms of PAH is well as overgrowth and macrocephaly. On the contrary, most macrocephalic important, may be of clinical and prognostic relevance, and shows the com- autistic patients with confirmed PTEN mutations were lacking the typical plexity of the genetic background. signs of these syndromes, at least at the time of testing. We have selected 53 autistic individuals with HC ranging from +2 SD to +4.8 SD (including P02.216 their relatives) for PTEN mutation analysis. Three novel (p.Asp331Thrfs*11, Associated malformations in patients with radial ray deficiency C. Stoll, B. Dott, Y. Alembik, M. Roth; p.Thr321Glnfs*23, p.Glu242*) and two known germline mutations Genetique Medicale, Strasbourg, France. (p.Pro246Leu, p.Arg130*) have been found in 8 of the 53 probands (15%). We discuss possible genotype/phenotype correlation in our group of pati- ents. Our data support former findings that PTEN mutations are frequent Infants with radial ray deficiency (RRD) often have other associated conge- in patients with ASDs and macrocephaly. Therefore PTEN testing should nital malformations. The purpose of this investigation was to assess the pre- be considered in such patients. The findings may impact the assessment of valence and the types of associated malformations in a defined population. the recurrence risk and medical management of the families including early Each affected child was examined by a geneticist, all elective terminations cancer prevention. Supported by CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and MZ0FNM2012. were ascertained, and the surveillance for malformations was continued P02.214 until 1 year of age. The associated malformations in infants with RRD were Ptosis, arched eyebrows, hypernasal speech, obesity & mild learning collected in all livebirths, stillbirths and terminations of pregnancy during disability- a clinical & mapping study 26 years in 346,831 consecutive births in the area covered by our populati- S. A. Lynch1, M. Akram2, N. Goggin2, M. Earley3, S. Ennis4, J. Conroy4; 1National Centre for Medical Genetics, Dublin, Ireland, 2Department of paediatrics, on based registry of congenital malformations. Of the 67 infants with RRD Ardkeen Hospital, Waterford, Ireland, 3Dept of Surgery, Temple Street Children‘s born during this period (prevalence at birth of 1.93 per 10,000), 60 (89.6 %) Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, 4School of Medicine & Health Science, University college had associated malformations. There were 18 (26.9%) patients with chro- Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. mosomal abnormalities including 15 trisomies 18, and 32 (47.8%) nonchro- mosomal recognized dysmorphic conditions. There were no predominant recognised dysmorphic conditions, but VA(C)TER(L) association. However, We report 15 members of a three generation pedigree with ptosis, velopha- other recognised dysmorphic conditions were registered including, Fanco- ryngeal incompetence, dysmorphism and a learning disability. The index ni, thrombocytopenia absent radius, and Holt-Oram. Thirty two (47.8 %) of case presented with nasal regurgitation, ptosis, obesity and developmental the patients were multiply, non syndromic, non chromosomal malformed delay. His mother has similar features. She has 6 children, 4 of whom are af- infants (MCA). Malformations in the cardiovascular system, the urogenital fected. The maternal grandfather had ptosis & cannot read or write. He had system, the central nervous system, and the digestive system were the most 8 children, 5 affected & 3 unaffected. Two aunts of the index case have ptosis, common other malformations. Prenatal diagnosis was performed in 47.8 % obesity & learning difficulties. One has a son with ptosis. Mapping analysis of dysmorphic syndromes with RRD. The overall prevalence of associated was performed on an Illumina Human-1M array on 15 samples including 8 malformations, which was more than one in two infants, emphasizes the affected & 7 unaffected individuals. Three regions of interest on Chromo- need for a thorough investigation of infants with RRD. A routine screening some 2, 10 & 18 were identified. A number of genes within these regions for other malformations may be considered in infants and in fetuses with are of interest including: NRXN1, NLGN1, PIK3CA, FXR1. However, one gene, RRD. FOXI2, stands out. Many of the forkhead genes have important biological P02.217 functions in multiple species. Mutations in FOXL2 cause Blepharophimosis- ‘Noonan Spectrum Test’ - comprehensive screening for RASopathies ptosis-epicanthic inversus, a dominant disorder with ptosis as a prominent S. Borras1, D. Bromley1, P. Scully1, J. M. Coxhead1, S. Spiden2, J. Short2, J. Robinson1, D. feature. Mutations in FOXC2 cause Lymphoedema-Distiachiasis, a dominant Huntley1, A. Curtis1, R. Taylor2; disorder also causing ptosis & cleft palate. FoxO proteins play a critical role 1NewGene Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2SW Thames Molecular Genetics Diagnostic Laboratory, St George’s Healthcare NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom. in cellular differentiation, proliferation, apoptosis and stress resistance. Therefore there is evidence that mutations in forkhead proteins can result in many of the clinical findings seen in our patients (ptosis, velopharynge- al insufficiency, speech & language difficulties & obesity). We are currently The Ras/MAPK signal transduction pathway is critical for the regulation of performing exomic sequencing on 5 members of the family (4 affected & 1 proliferation and differentiation of multiple cell types. Deregulation of the unaffected) & will perform Sanger sequencing on any variant of interest in pathway results in a number of disorders with overlapping physical manife- the other family members. stations. These include postnatal growth reduction; skeletal, ectodermic and www.eshhgae.moratgologic anomalies; congenital heart defects and hypertrophic cardio- www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 95 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 myopathy, and variable cognitive deficit. WithP aTnP Nin1c1id, SeOncSe1 ,o Rf A1F:110, 0SH-2O5C020, to be related with one of these mechanisms of Roferon-A. Moreover, in the iBnR aAlFl ,l iMveA bPi2rKth1s, , MNoAoPn2aKn2 ,s ySnPdRrEoDm1e, C(NBLS), KisR tAhSe, mNoRsAtS c omm HonR ARSASopathy. To present case, teratogenic effects were observed even though the dose was date, pathogenic mutations in twelve genes ( lower than in the previously reported Roferon-A embryopathy cases. and ) have been P02.221 shown to underlie NS and other Ras/MAPK-related conditions that include Rubinstein-Taybi-like syndrome: clinical and molecular genetics Cardio-facial-cutaneous (CFC), Costello, LEOPARD and Legius syndromes, delineation enabling a molecular diagnosis in up to 75% of affected patients. E. Chabchoub1,2, I. Chabchoub3, B. Dimitrov4, N. Ardeshirdavani1, J. R. Vermeesch1, A. In a joint collaboration between SW Thames Molecular Genetics Diagno- Landolsi3, A. Zakhama5, S. Ben Ahmed3, J. P. Fryns1; stic Laboratory and NewGene, we have developed a single diagnostic test 1Centre for Human Genetics – University Hospitals of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Genetics and Immunology, Research Unit 04UR0805 - Faculty of to screen for all the Noonan spectrum disorders, based on next generation Medicine - University of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department of oncology – University sequencing (NGS) technology. The NGS assay, using the Roche amplicon ap- Hospital Farhat Hached, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Department of Clinical Genetics - Guy‘s and proach with multiplex PCR, has been validated using samples from patients St Thomas‘ Hospital – NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of referred for Noonan related syndromes that were previously tested by a 3-s- Pathology - University Hospital Fattouma Bourguiba, Monastir, Tunisia. tage approach at St George’s. We compare the cost and turn-around-times of this ’Noonan Spectrum Test‘ with similar assays currently available in the EU and the US and outline a new service strategy for molecular diagnosis of In 1963, Rubinstein and Taybi reported a syndrome (RTS) characterized by RASopathies. We include some case studies to demonstrate the benefits of mental retardation, broad thumbs and toes, and recognizable facial abnor- this approach to testing. mCRaEliBtiBePs with a high propensity to neoplasms. RTS is caused by submicro- P02.219 scopic E1P63p0103.3 deletions in approximately 10% of patientEsP. M30u0tations in the De novo mosaic ring chromosome 18 in a child with a Fallot gene (16p13.3) explain about 30% of the cases. Recently, mutations type double outlet right ventricle, developmental delay, growth in the gene (22q13) were reported in 5 patients. gene can be retardation, and polysplenia with right isomerism considered as a rare cause of RTS. I. Sudholt, B. Oneda, A. Rauch; We report here, three patients presenting clinically with a RTS. These are Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich-Schwerzenbach, Switzerland. two Belgian patients, a male and a female, aged respectively 29 and 11 years, followed in the genetics and paediatric neurology clinics in Leuven and a Tunisian patient followed in the oncology clinics of Sousse (Tunisia). The We report on a 9 months old child with Fallot type double outlet right ven- conventional karyotype was normal. We found no deletion on 16p13 by tricle, developmental delay, growth retardation, microcephaly, polysplenia FISH. By aCGH we detected in the first patient a terminal deletion on chro- with right isomerism, latent hypothyroidism, absent 12th rib, strabismus mosome 6q and a terminal duplication on 7q. We confirmed by FISdHe ntohvaot and dysmorphic features. Karyotyping and FISH studies revealed two cell these submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities were the product of an lines, one with monosomy 18 (13 %) and one with r(18) (87 %). Ring chro- unbalanced reciprocal translocation (6;7). The second patient has a mosome 18 is a rare chromosome disorder with highly variable phenotype, microduplication of 500 kb on chromosome 5q11.2. We found no abnorma- which probably depends on the extent of the terminal 18q and 18p deletions. lity in the third patient by aCGH at a resolution of 1 Mb. A clear genotype-phenotype correlation though, was hampered by the lack In this report, we will discuss the pathogenic relevance of these abnormali- of exact breakpoint mapping in previously published cases. The majority of ties and their possible contribution to the clinical phenotype. In conclusion, reported patients showed mild features of the 18q- syndrome. Only a mino- we show that aCGH is a powerful tool for investigating the genetic aetiolo- rity of patients with ring chromosome 18 presented with clinical features of gies of Rubinstein-Taybi-like syndrome. 18p- syndrome or a combination of these two syndromes.The phenotype of P02.222 the 18q- syndrome is characterized by characteristic face, mental retardati- Midline defect with single central incisor masks facial phenotype of on, short stature, microcephaly, abnormal male genitalia, congenital heart Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome defect, congenital aural atresia/stonosis, hypotonia, foot deformity, and B. Albrecht1, O. Bartsch2, D. Wieczorek1; white matter abnormalities. Common features in 18p- syndrome patients 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Essen, Germany, 2Institut fuer Humangenetik, Mainz, are dysmorphic features, growth and mental retardation, immunological Germany. problems, skeletal abnormalities, cardiac defects, brain malformations, alo- pecia and dystonia. High-resolution SNP-array molecular karyotyping in our patient revealed a 14.7 Mb deletion and an adjacent 277 kb duplication We report on a patient followed from one to 11 years of age. She presented at chromosome 18p and a 3,8 Mb deletion at 18q. This finding explains the with intellectual disability and facial dysmorphism. She was born to healthy clinical overlap with 18p- syndrome in our patient. We just identified a se- unrelated German parents and has a healthy elder sister. Pregnancy watsh cond patient who is currently under further investigation. complicated by polyhydramnios. Caesarean section was performed at 38 P02.220 week of gestation. Birth measurements were normal, but the patient nee- Is Roferon-A ( Interferon alpha-2a) Teratogenic Risk Factor-X? ded ventilation and showed brachycardia. A naevus of the glabella, choanal M. A. Soylemez, A. Tafazzoli, H. Kazan, P. Gültepe, G. Koc, G. Girgin, T. Avcılar, S. Ergunsu, atresia, a fleshy nose, a high arched palate and ovarian cysts were diagnosed M. Avsar, C. Erzik, M. Gülçebi, I. Guney; after birth. At the age of one year a single central incisor and right sided aor- Marmara University Medical School, Istanbul, Turkey. tic arch and left sided vena cava superior were observed. MRI scan showed a thin corpus callosum and mild frontal brain atrophy. The patient walked and talked at the age of 3 years. She is short and obese and has normal head BACKGROUND Roferon-A (Interferon alpha-2a) is a pregnancy risk catego- circumference. She has myopia and had mucotympanon during childhood. ry C drug, which has been shown to demonstrate a statistically significant Endocrine fSoHlloHw up SsIhXo3wed elevated oestriol levels and premature thelar- increase in abortifacient activity in rhesus monkeys when given at approxi- che. She has a single central incisor of her permanent teeth, but molecular mately 20 to 500 times the human dose. A particular birth defect may have analyses in and genes gave normal results, as did numerous other its origins through multiple mechanisms and possible exposures, including investigations. At the age of 10 years broad thumbs and toes became more medications. A specific pathogenic process may result in different outcomes obviouCsR aEnBdB tPalon cusps were observed, leading to the tentative diagnosis of depending upon factors such as embryonic age at which a drug is administe- Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RTS). Detection of a deletion of exons 24 to 31 red, duration, dose of exposure and genetic susceptibility. This case report of the gene confirmed RTS. Although holoprosencephaly is descri- discusses the teratogenic effect of Roferon A. bed in RTS the alteration of the facial gestalt by the midline defect postpo- CASE An infant was exposed to 1x1 1000000IU /day of Roferon-A from the ned the final diagnosis for 10 years. beginning of pregnancy until the 28th gestational week. Preterm newborn P02.223 (28th week) showed the following abnormalities: Cliteromegaly, hydranen- Defect initiation of proteoglycan synthesis in patients with joint cephaly, microcephaly, hypotelorism, frontal bossing, asymmetry of head , dislocations,bicuspid aortic valve and other heart defects big right ear, cleft plate, absence of nasal bridge and single alae nasi. Chro- S. Baasanjav1,2, L. Al-Gazali3, T. Hashiguchi4, S. Mizumoto4, B. Fischer1, D. Horn1, D. mosomal analysis of proband revealed 46,XX karyotype. Seelow1, B. R. Ali5, S. A. A. Aziz6, R. Langer7, A. A. H. Saleh6, C. Becker8, V. Cantagrel9, D. CONCLUSIONS Identifying teratogenic mechanisms may not only be relevant Gomez10, J. Michel10, S. Stricker11, T. H. Lindner2, P. Nürnberg8, K. Sugahara4, S. Mundlos1,11, for etiologic and post-marketing research, but may also have implications K. Hoffmann1,11,12; for drug development and prescribing approach for women of reproductive 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Charite´ University Medicine, Berlin, Germany, 2Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University Clinic Leipzig, Leipzig, age. Six teratogenic mechanisms are associated with medication use. Many medications classified as class X are associated with at least one of these www.eshg.org teratogenic mechanisms. Our patient may be the first case which is wpowssiwble.e shg.org96 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Germany, 3Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 4Laboratory of Proteoglycan Signaling and Therapeutics, Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Graduate School of Life We performed homozygosity mapping in this family and found clear evi- Science, Hokkaido University, Frontier Research Center for Post-Genomic Science and dence of linkage to a single large region on chromosome 20 encompassing Technology, Hokkaido, Japan, 5Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine and Health an interval of approximately 35 Mb (15,200,000 - 51,300,000). The locus Sciences, United Arab Emirates University, P.O. Box 17666, Al Ain, United Arab Emirates, was confirmed but not further refined by another affected child born to Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 6Department of Pediatrics, Saqr Hospital, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 7Department of Radiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, this family more recently. In a sporadic patient with scalp defects, mild-to- United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 8Cologne Center for moderate cognitive impairment and facial dysmorphism, we discovered a Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 9Neurogenetics Laboratory, significant stretch of homozygosity overlapping with the above mentioned Department of Neurosciences, University of California, California, CA, United States, region. This girl was born to healthy parents originating from a remote area 10INSERM Unit 698, Cardiovascular remodeling, Paris, France, 11Max Planck Institute in Romania but who denied consanguinity. for Molecular Genetics, Development and Disease, Berlin, Germany, 12Institute of Human We hypothesize that the affected individuals in these two families share the Genetics, Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle (Saale), Germany. same very rare autosomal recessive condition, the hallmarks of which are congenital scalp defects and intellectual disability. The gene for this conditi- on is probably located on chromosome 20. Further investigations are on the Bicuspid aortic valve (BAV) is the most frequent inborn heart defect. It is way to identify the causative gene for this syndrome. associated with insufficiency and/or stenosis of the heart and results in the P02.226 pathologic changes in left-ventricular structure and function as well as a A de novo mutation in the SETBP1 leading to Schinzel-Giedion dilatation of the ascending aorta. BAV increases the risk of cardiac death. syndrome and juvenile myelomocytic leukemia We studied a family with inherited joint dislocations and a congenital heart E. Mihci1,2, A. Hoischen3, B. W. Van Bon4, G. Tezel5, B. G. Nur1, N. E. İlhan6, A. Yesilipek6; disease with multiple defects (BAV with aortic root dilatation, mitral valve 1Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Pediatric Genetics, Antalya, prolaps, VSD, ASD). We mapped the disease to chromosome 11 and sub- Turkey, 2Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, sequently identified hypomorphic mutations in glucuronyltransferase-I Antalya, Turkey, 3Radboud University Medical Centre Department of Human Genetics, (GlcAT-I), the enzyme catalyzing the synthesis of the last step in the linker Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Radboud University Medical Centre, Department of Human region tetrasaccharide formation, which connects glycosaminoglycans and Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Neonatalogy, Antalya, Turkey, 6Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of the core protein of a proteoglycan. We showed that the mutations reduce Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Antalya, Turkey. enzymatic activity and decrease the levels of all three lines of O-glycanated proteoglycans, namely dermatan sulfate, chondroitin sulfate and heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Real-time PCR showed that GlcAT-I is expressed in Schinzel-Giedion syndrome (SGS; MIM #269150) is a rare multiple conge- heart, aorta, bone, and osteoblasts - tissues affected in the patients. Further, nital malformation syndrome. A clinical diagnosis of SGS may be made by GlcAT-I protein was present in the medial tissue of the human aorta, indi- identifying the dysmorphic features, including prominent forehead, mid- cating that altered GlcAT-I function may be involved in developmental or face retraction, and short, upturned nose plus typical skeletal anomalies or degenerative aortic root dilation and aortic aneurysm. Our results point to hydronephrosis. Typical skeletal anomalies of SGS include a sclerotic skull the proteoglycan synthesis as a candidate gene pathway for several cardio- base, wide supraoccipital-exoccipital synchondrosis, inreased cortical den- vascular malformations as well as for congenital joint dislocations. sity or thickness and broad ribs. In addition, there is an increased preva- P02.224 lence of neoplasia in SGS. Deletion of a long-range cis-regulatory element for the TWIST1 We present a 3-month-old girl patient with both SGS and juvenile myelomo- gene in a family with mental retardation and mild craniofacial nocytic leukemia. She had craniofacial abnormalities, hypertrichosis over dysmorphism forehead, bilateral grade 3 degree hydronephrosis, secundum atrial septal W. Heinritz1, K. Kölzsch2, G. Rettenberger3; 1Private Practice for Human Genetics, Cottbus, Germany, 2Social pediatric center at the defect, skeletal abnormalities, hydrocephaly and severely hypotonia. She Carl-Thiem Hospital Cottbus, Cottbus, Germany, 3genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany. was the first child of the parent and her family history was unremarkable. cis Her karyotype was3 46, XX. In her follow-up, she had high white blood cells (WBC: 55.040/mm) and high level liver enzymes activity. Her bone marrow TWIST1 Disruption of the normal -regulatory architecture of disease gene loci has biopsy consisted with juvenile mSyEeTloBmP1o nocytic leukemiad.e S nhoev doied at the bTeWeInS Tde1s cribed as a special cause of different genetic disorders. The age of 10 month since untreatable bronchopneumonia. Mutation aSnEaTlBysPi1s gene locus migThWt bISeT o1ne of those. Mutations within the coding region of for the mutation hotspot in the gene showed a mutation are associated with the Saethre-Chotzen syndrome. Large deletions (p.Asp868Asn (c.2602G>A)). In the literature, overexpression of encompassing and its neighbouring genes also contribute to this had been related with growth advantage in hematopoieticd per noogveonitor cells. disorder, but some patients have additional significant learning difficulties, Our case had both juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia and SGS. To our know- which led to the suggestion of a novel microdeletion syndrome 7p21.1. Here ledge, leukemia in SGS was not described previously. This mutation we describe a three generation family, in which several members have a may be associated with leukemia in SGS. slight to moderate meTnWtaISl Tre1tardation and mild craniofacial dysmorphism. P02.227 On array-CGH analysis variable constellations of two different copy-number Sertoli cell tumor and gonadoblastoma in an untreated 29-year- changes flankinTg WthIeS T1 gene at 7p21.1 could be detected in the affec- old 46,XY phenotypic male with Frasier syndrome carrying a WT1 teTdW aInSTdN nBonM-aIfRfe3c1t4e6d pTrMoEbMan1ds. One is a duplication of ~800 kb nearly 270 IVS9+4C>T mutation kb upstream of , which contains 3 genTeWs IoSfT s1o far unknown function S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, M. Deligiorgi2, S. Malaktari-Skarantavou2, C. Vlachopoulos3, S. Megremis1, I. Fylaktou1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Kanaka-Gantenbein4, C. Stefanadis3, E. ( , , ). The other, a small deletion of ~150 kb, is lo- Kanavakis1; cated approximately 2.9 Mb downstream of and encloses the gene 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Aghia Sophia LOC729920. Both changes are ncoist yet known as pathogenic or benign CNVs. Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Endocrinology Based on the clinical and molecular findings in our family and considering and Metabolism, Hippokration General Hospital of Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 31st tThWe IcSuTr1rent knowledge about ‘ -ruption disorders’ we suggest - in parti- Department of Cardiology , Medical School, University of Athens, Hippokration Hospital, cular for the smaller deletion - disease causing effects on the function of Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 4Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, and/or other genes nearby. First Department of Pediatrics, Medical School, University of Athens, Aghia Sophia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece. P02.225 A syndromic condition with scalp defects, developmental delay and Objective: dysmorphic features maps to chromosome 20. M. Sukalo1, L. Al-Gazali2, C. Rusu3, A. Ekici4, M. Zenker1; Frasier Syndrome (FS) phenotype in 46,XY patients usually con- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, sists of female external genitalia, gonadal dysgenesis, high risk of gonado- 2Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, Al Ain, United blastoma, and development of end stage renal faiWluTre1 usually in the second Arab Emirates, 3Human Genetics, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, decade of life. FS is WcaTu1sed by heterozygous de novo intronic splice site mu- 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. tations of the Wilm’s tumor suppressor gene 1 ( ), although few cases with typical exonic Denys-Drash mutations that resemble an FS pheno- type have been described. The aim of this study was to present further data In 2007, Al-Gazali et al. reported on an apparently new autosomal recessive on the spectrum of FS phenotypes, through the evaluation of a 29-year-old condition comprising hypotonia, developmental delay, cutis aplasia of the pRaetsiuenltts w ith a predominantly male phenotype and coexistence of Sertoli cell vertex and dysmorphic features in an inbred Arab family. It was proposed tumor and gonadobWlaTs1toma. that this could represent a severe recessive form of scalp-ear-nipple syndro- Genetic analysis using standard methods for DNA sequencing con- me (Clin Dysmorphol 2007). firmed FS due to a gene mutation, IVS9+4C>T. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 97 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Conclusions This very rare case illustrates the natural course of FS over short stature and skeletal malformations. Here we describe one patient with many years, due to neglect by the patient to address his need for follow-up features of a skeletal dysplasia. Initial analysis with 180k oligo-aCGH detec- and adds further data on the spectrum of FS phenotypes associated with ted a 220 kb deletion harbouring the complete SBDS gene and part of the IVS9+4 C>T mutations. The coexistence of the rare Sertoli cell tumor and neighboring gene TYW1 indicating a possible cause for clinical sign of a skel- gonadoblastoma, emphasizes that the early clinical recognition and molecu- etal dysplasia. Array-CGH in both parents demonstrated the same deletion lar identification supports appropriate patient management, especially with in the healthy father. Sequencing of the SBDS gene in the patient detected an respect to the high risk of gonadal malignancy. already published donor splice site mutation in intron 2 of the SBDS gene P02.228 demonstrating the second mutation on the patients non deleted allele. Lobar holoprosencephaly and eye anomalies in a patient with a Additional sequence analysis of the respective mutation in both parents de- deletion in the SHH regulatory region tected the heterozygous mutation in the healthy mother giving the couple a R. G. Quiezi1, K. A. Williamson2, D. R. FitzPatrick2, M. Ansari2, S. MacKay2, A. Richieri- 25% recurrence risk for following new pregnancies. Costa1, L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo1; This is to our knowledge the first case with a combination of a classical small 1Hospital de Reabilitacao de Anomalias Craniofaciais, Bauru, Brazil, 2MRC Human point mutation combined with a large deletion in SBDS. Initial detection Genetics Unit, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. started from aCGH and thus demonstrates the usefulness of initial screening by aCGH, because small proportions of already known monogenic disorders should be due to large deletions not detectable by conventional sequencing. HPE is one of the most common congenital malformations in humans and it Up to date 25% of SBDS-patients described in the literature lack mutations is characterized by the incomplete separation of the cerebral hemispheres in the SBDS-gene. Due to the detected mutations prenatal testing could be into distinct right and left halves. ClinSicHaHl ,e GxpLIr2e,s PsiToCnH i1s , eTxGtrIFe,m ZeICly2 ,v TarDiGabFl1e, offered for the new pregnancy. SraIXn3g,i nGgA fSr1o,m Z ImC3in.or facial signs to complexes craniofacial anomalies such as P02.231 ciclopia. Main genes involved include Molecular investigations of Estonian patients with Silver-Russell and We report a Brazilian patient presenting a mild form of Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome lobar HPE associated with eye anomalies who presented a deletion in the T. Kahre1,2, P. Mee3, M. Vals1,2, K. Muru1,2, K. Joost1,4, R. Teek1,2, K. Õunap1,2; SHH. Brain CT Scan showed hypotelorism, hypoplastic nasal structures, the 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, premaxilla is highly placed with a single central maxillary incisor, midline 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3United Laboratories, clefting extending from the premaxilla to hard palate, lateral ventricles are Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biochemistry, University of hSHypHoplasic and fused at the midlinSeh. hA rray-CGH analysis showed a loss at Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Sthheh chromosome 7q36.3 - 155,452,499-155,992,49Sh9hbp; (size 540 kb) in the regulatoSryh hregion. In mice, the gene has six enhancers that regulate transcription inS hthhe embryonic forebrain. The floor-plate enhancers Silver-Russell (SRS) and Beckwith-Wiedemann (BWS) syndromes are both (SFPE2) and brain enhancer (SBE1) are localizeSdh happroximated 200 kb clinically heterogeneous disorders. Due to variable presentation molecular downstream from promoter, the other enhancers, SFPE1, SBE4, SBE2 confirmation of these diseases is necessary. SRS is mainly characterized by and SBE3 are approximated 400 kb upstream from promoter, and three severe pre-and postnatal growth restriction and typical triangular face. BWS of these enhancers are highly conserved in human. The microdeletion found is an overgrowth syndrome involving predisposition of tumor development. in SoHurH study affected at least three of these enhancer elements (SBE2, SBE3 Defective expression of imprinted genes (IGF2, H19, CDNK1C, KCNQ1, KCN- and SBE4) and suggests that the HPE phenotype is probably casual for loss Q1OT1) at 11p15 is implicated in etiology of both syndromes. IRC1 hypom- of enhancers. ethylation is the major cause of SRS and IRC2 hypomethylation mostly found Grants: Fapesp Proc. n° 2011/07012-9 in BWS. Both disorders occur sporadically, but familial inheritance is also P02.229 described. Deletion causing SHH disruption in a family with severe Altogether 28 patients were enrolled in BWS and 20 patients in SRS group. hydrocephalus All patients` clinical symptoms were re-evaluated by one investigator. In L. K. McGregor1, H. Salvemini1, S. Kerin2, J. Nicholl2; BWS patient’s group 19/28 and in SRS patients 14/20 fulfilled the minimal 1South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, Adelaide, Australia, 2Molecular Pathology, diagnostic criteria. Molecular analysis was performed by methylation-speci- Adelaide, Australia. fic MLPA (MRC-Holland). In SRS group hypomethylation in IRC1 region was found in 4 SRS patients in- cluding 2 siblings. One SRS patient had maternal duplication in 11p15 invol- A couple presented to the SACGS with a history of two previous TOP for ving both IRC1 and IRC2 regions. She has inherited 11p15 region duplication severe hydrocephalus. The gender of the first fetus was uncertain, and the from her mother who shows overgrowth since the birth and clinical features second was male. Given the likelihood of X-linked recessive inheritance, the of BWS. Patients´ mother has inherited duplication from father. Therefore L1CAM gene was tested in fetus 2 and returned a normal result. An array 38.5% (5/13) of SRS patients exhibited an epimutation at the 11p15 region, CGH test was also performed. This showed a 7q36 terminal duplication in which is consistent with other investigations. Interestingly, two familial SRS fetus 2, no DNA was available from fetus 1. Parents were tested and the du- cases were found in the group. plication was identified in the father who was phenotypically normal. An BWS was confirmed in one patient with hypomethylation in IRC2. In almost MRI scan was then arranged in the father which showed a small tectal ha- 95% of BWS patients we could not confirm the clinical diagnosis, therefore martoma not causing obstruction. molecular investigations should continue. The 7q36 duplication in this case was 562kb in length, with one breakpoint P02.232 disrupting the SHH (sonic hedgehog) gene. Heterozygous deletions of the Monozygotic male twins with ICR1 and ICR2 hypomethylation on SHH gene are known to cause holoprosencephaly and the maldevelopment chromosome 11p15 of midline brain structures. Duplication of 7q36, has been reported to cau- A. Tańska1, E. Ciara1, A. Marczak-Hałupka2, M. Kalina3, M. Kugaudo1, D. Jurkiewicz1, D. se hydrocephalus, hypotonia and cleft palate, with variable severity. It has Piekutowska-Abramczuk1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, S. Łuczak1, M. Pelc1, J. previously been postulated that overexpression of SHH could contribute to Trubicka1, E. Arasimowicz1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1, K. H. Chrzanowska1; this phenotype. 1Department of Medical Genetics, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Neonatal Pathology and Infants, Paediatric Centre, Sosnowiec, It was explained to the parents that the SHH gene disruption was a likely but Poland, 3Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Medical University of uncertain cause of the hydrocephalus. They embarked on a third pregnancy. Silesia, Katowice, Poland. CVS and FISH showed that the fetus did not carry the duplication. A normal male was subsequently born. P02.230 Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a congenital imprinting disorder mainly Case report of Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome (SBDS) with a characterized by intrauterine as well as postnatal growth restriction, body combined point mutation and large deletion asymmetry, relative macrocephaly and a typical triangular face. SRS is most- G. Rettenberger1, S. Dahlum1, F. Austrup2, D. Wüller3, P. Lohse4, E. Gödde2, K. Mehnert1; ly caused by dysregulation of imprinted genes controlled by ICR1 and ICR2 1genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 2LADR MVZ Ihr Labor vor Ort, Humangenetik, located on chromosome 11p15.5 or maternal uniparental disomy of chro- Recklinghausen, Germany, 3Christophorus-Kliniken GmbH, St.-Vincenz-Hospital, Coesfeld, Germany, 4Institut für Laboratoriumsmedizin und Humangenetik, Singen, Germany. mosome 7. Here we report on a pair of male monozygotic twins discordant for SRS. They were delivered by caesareatnh secthtion at 34 weeks of gestation. Birth weight of the twin A (2400 g; 25 -50 centile), as well as other auxologic Shwachman-Bodian-Diamond syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disor- der characterized by exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, hematologic defects, parameters wetrhe appropriate for gestational age. Birth weight of the twin B www.eshg.org www.eshwgas. o11r5g0g (<5 centile) and the difference between head and chest circum-98 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ference amounted to 9 cm. He experienced severe failure to thrive requi- Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0. ring feeding by gastrostomy. At the age of 4.5 years, the brothers presented Thereby we identified pathogenic de-novo copy number variations with height and weight diversity of 13 cm and 6.1H k1g9, resp eKcCtNivQe1lyO.T1 sizes ranging from 672 kb to 9.158 Mb in eight patients. Some of them were Genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood of both twins was analysed associated with known microdeletion syndromes with overlapping features at the differentially methylated regions of and genes. Me- with SRS. In 5 further patients imbalances with so far unknown clinical si- thylation specific MLPA analysis revealed ICR1 and ICR2 hypomethylation gnificance were detected. in both brothers. Second analysis performed on DNA isolated from buccal In conclusion, as pathogenic submicroscopic imbalances were detectable in swabs also indicated decreased level of methylationin both ICRs. a significant proportion of our patients molecular karyotyping should ge- So far, in SRS, one concordant and four discordant monozygotic pairs car- nerally be implemented in routine diagnostics for growth retarded patients rying the ICR1 epimutation have been observed. This is the first report on with even slight dysmorphisms suggestive of SRS. monozygotic twins discordant for SRS with both ICR1 and ICR2 hypom- P02.235 ethylation. The mutation in KRT5 gene in Iranian EB patients The study was supported by the Polish National Science Centre (grant No H. Dehganpour1, M. Moghaddam1, N. Hatamnejadian1, M. Mahdavi1, A. Kakavand1, B. NN 407 285339). Sedaghaty khayyat1, M. Yousefi2, P. Tousi2, A. Ebrahimi1,2; 1Parseh Medical Genetic Counseling Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid P02.233 Beheshty University Skin Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Silver-Russell Syndrome - correlations between the phenotype and (epi)genetic alterations K. H. Chrzanowska1, A. Tańska1, A. Marczak-Hałupka2, E. Ciara1, M. Kalina3, M. Kugaudo1, E. Arasimowicz1, H. Kołodziejczyk1, A. Świąder1, M. Ginalska-Malinowska1, M. INTRODUCTON: Epidermolysis Bullosa (EB) is a group of inherited disor- Szarras-Czapnik1, M. Syczewska1, D. Jurkiewicz1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; ders in which skin blisters develop in response to minor injury. There are 1The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 2Paediatric Centre, four main types of EB Including: SIMPLEX, JUNCTIONAL, HEMIDESMOSAL Sosnowiec, Poland, 3Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. and DYSTROPHIC. Because of many overlapping clinical manifestations, identifying the exact type of EB is complicated. The most severe and com- mon form of EB is SIMPLEX that caused by a mutation in either of the keratin Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) is a well known congenital imprinting dis- genes, KRT5 or KRT14.The purpose of this study is to investigate of KRT5 order with hypomethylation of ICR1 on chromosome 11p15.5 or maternal gene common mutation in Iranian affected patients. uniparental disomy of chromosome 7 (mUPD7) identified in about 60% and MATERIALS and METHODS: Eighty clinically diagnosed patients as EB eva- 10% of patients, respectively. The disease is characterized mainly by severe luated and their DNA extracted from blood sample.PCR reaction fallowed by pre- and postnatal growth retardation, relative macrocephaly and a small direct sequencing were done using designed primers for hotspot exons of triangular face. Several scoring systems have been proposed but making KRT5 gene including exon 1, 4, 5 and 7. diagnosis may be still challenging due to wide spectrum of clinical features. RESULTS: A novel mutation was detected in codon 308 and about 18 % of Thus studies of patients with confirmed diagnosis of SRS may provide ad- patients illustrated a kind of mutation in selected regions. The most hotspots ditional valuable information. We performed retrospective and prospective were exon 4 and 5. Interestingly the most of mutations were diagnosed in study of a group of 55 SRS patients diagnosed and followed at a single cen- compound heterozygous form. tre (CMHI). Among them there were 45 with ICR1 hypomethylation and 10 P02.236 with mUPD7. Maternal hetero-, isodisomy and a mixture of hetero- and iso- Identification of a novel deletion in the DHCR7 gene in a patient with disomy were demonstrated. Growth parameters, phenotype characteristics SLOS and developmental anomalies were analyzed and scored. Mean birth weight K. Hinderhofer1, B. Maas1, M. Witsch-Baumgartner2, H. Gaspar1, D. Haas3, C. R. was lower (-3.1±0.156 SD vs. -2.8±0.306 SD) and head circumference was Bartram1; significantly larger (-0.638±0.174 SD vs. -2.042±0.421 SD; p=0.002) in ICR1 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Division for hypomethylation than in UPD7 patients. Asymmetry (face/body/limb) and Human Genetics, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 3Division of Inborn Metabolic Diseases, University Children’s Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. major congenital anomalies were also more frequent in patients with ICR1 hypomethylation; three individuals manifested gonadal dysgenesia and am- biguous genitalia, 2 males and 1 phenotypically female with male karyotype (46,XY CGD). Cesarean sections were exceptionally frequent in both groups Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome (SLOS) is an autosomal recessive defect of cho- (~50% in ICR1 hypomethylation and in 70% mUPD7). Follow-up of somatic lesterol biosynthesis DwHitChR 7characteristic dysmorphism, mental and growth development in both SRS groups enabled analysis of the phenotype depen- retardation, and multiple congenital malformations. Mutations in the human ding on epigenetic modulations. Δ7-sterol reductase ( ) gene are the genetic cause of this syndrome. In The study was supported by NSC_PL (grant NN 407 285339). most of the analyzed patients with distinct phenotypDicH fCeRa7tures and/or bio- chemical findings two mutations can be identified by sequencing of coding P02.234 exons 3 to 9 and adjacent intron boundaries of the gene (detection Submicroscopic chromosomal imbalances significantly contribute to rate approx. 96%). In a small number of clinically and/or biochemically po- the phenotype of SRS and SRS-like patients S. Spengler1, M. Begemann1, N. Ortiz Brüchle1, M. Baudis2, B. Denecke3, P. Kroisl4, B. Oehl- sitive patients, only a single heterozygous mutDaHtiCoRn 7can be identified. We Jaschkowitz5, B. Schulze6, G. Raabe-Meyer6, C. Spaich7, P. Blümel8, A. Jauch9, U. Moog9, K. analyzed 9 of these patients by self-made multiplex ligation-dependent pro- Zerres1, T. Eggermann1; be amplification (MLPA) of exons 3 to 8 of the gene. In one patient, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 2Institute wDHe CcRo7uld identify a heterozygous deletion of exons 3 to 6, in addition to the of Molecular Biology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, 3IZKF, University heterozygous common mutation p.Arg352Trp (c.1054C>T) in exon 9 of the Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Graz, Austria, gene. The deletion leads to an almost complete loss of the gene which 5Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Homburg, Germany, 6Praxis für Humangenetik, is presumably disease causing. At birth the patient was small for gestational Hannover, Germany, 7Institute for Clinical Genetics, Stuttgart, Germany, 8G v Preyer Kinderspital, Wien, Austria, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany. age, had short proximal limbs, syndactyly of toes 2 and 3, an atrial septal defect, horseshoe kidney, and typical facial features. During the first year psychomotor retardation, muscular hypotonia, aDnHd CfeRe7ding difficulties evol- ved. Plasma sterol analysis showed elevated 7- and 8-dehydrocholesterol Application of microarray-based molecular karyotyping has lead to a more and decreased cholesterol. Exon deletions in the gene have only been than two-fold increase in the detection rate in comparison to conventional reported once in a SLOS patient with holoprosencephaly. Therefore, we re- cytogenetics in patients with mental retardation (MR) and further con- commend MLPA analysis in patients suspected of SLOS harbouring only one genital anomalies. However, it is not routinely implemented in molecular mutation identified by exon sequencing. diagnosis for syndromes not typically associated with MR, including Silver- Russell syndrome (SRS). SRS is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous P02.237 disorder characterized by growth retardation, relative macrocephaly, a tri- In frame deletion and missense mutations of the C-terminal helicase angular face and asymmetry. The clinical spectrum is broad and the diagno- domain of SMARCA2 in three patients with Nicolaides-Baraitser sis is rather subjective. Up to now, in nearly half of the SRS patients (epi) syndrome C. Zweier1, D. Wolff1, S. Endele1, S. Azzarello-Burri2, J. Hoyer1, M. Zweier1, I. Schanze1, B. genetic alterations on chromosomes 7 and 11 can be detected while ~50% Schmitt3, A. Rauch2, A. Reis1; remain without molecular diagnosis. Recently, submicroscopic imbalances 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, have been reported in single cases but systematic studies are missing. 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich-Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, To determine the contribution of submicroscopic imbalances to the aetio- 3Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. logy of SRS, we performed molecular karyotyping in 41 patients referred as SRS without (epi)genetic alterations on chromosomes 7 and 11 using the www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 99 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Using high redseo lnuotvioon molecular karyotyping with SNP arrays to identify duals to confirm the clinical diagnosis and to support pharmacological treat- candSiMdaAtReC gAe2nes for etiologically unexplained intellectual disability, we iden- ment, which can reduce the frequency of pain episodes. tified a 32 kb in frame deletion of the C-terminal helicase domain of P02.240 the gene in a patient with severe intellectual ddisea bniolvitoy, epilepsy, Clinical variability of Sotos syndrome patients with no NSD1 deletion sparse hair, prominent joints and distinct facial anomalies. Sequencing of identified the gene in patients with a similar phenotype revealed missense I. M. Furquim1, C. E. F. Andrade1, M. R. Passos-Bueno2; mutations in this domain in two further patients, pointing to a crucial role 1Hospital Santa Marcelina, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Centro de Estudos do Genoma Humano, of the SMARCA2 C-terminal helicase domain. The clinical features observed São Paulo, Brazil. in all three patients are typical of Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome, an only rarely reported syndrome with mainly moderate to severe intellectual disa- bility and other typical aspects like a recognizable facial gestalt, sparse hair, Sotos syndrome is an overgrowth syndrome characterized by increased birth epilepsy, wrinkling of the skin, prominent interphalangeal joints and broad length and weight, excessive growth during the first years of life, advanced distal phalanges. Notably, one of our patients with a p.Gly1132Asp mutation bone age, learning disability, and distinctive facial features (including ma- showed typical morphological features but an exceptional good develop- crocephaly, ocular hypertelorism and prominent mandible). Other findings ment with borderline overall IQ and learning difficulties, thus expanding the associated with Sotos syndrome are: behavioral problems, cardiac anoma- phenotypic spectrum of Nicolaides-Baraitser syndrome. lies, cranNiSaDl M1RI/CT abnormalities, scoliosis and seizures. Sotos syndrome is P02.238 estimated to occur in 1:14,000 live births, and most cases are sporadic. Even Co-occurrence of the SMMCI syndrome and a 5q21 deletion in a young though is the only gene associated with the Sotos syndrome, in nearly girl patient 20% of the cases NnoS Dg1enic abnormality can be found. In 5 affected unrelated A. Uwineza, G. Pierquin, A. C. Hellin, M. Jamar, J. H. Caberg, K. Segers, V. Diderberg, V. patients who are currently being treated at Hospital Santa Marcelina, in Sao Bours; Paulo, Brazil, no deletion or duplication was identified by the MLPA Center for Human Genetics, CHU Sart-Tilman, University of Liège, Belgium., Liège, method. The purpose of this report is to describe the phenotypic spectrum Belgium. of these patients. Molecular genetic testing is important not only to confirm the diagnosis, but it also may help determining genotype-phenotype cor- relations and monitoring the affected patients in order to identify medical Solitary median maxillary central incisor (SMMCI) or single central inci- complications that may arise from their condition. sor is a rare dental anomaly. It is estimated to occur in 1:50,000 live births. P02.241 SMMCI syndrome is a complex, autosomal dominant developmental disor- Partial deletion of SOX6 in a boy with mental retardation, der in which an SMMCI is seen in association with midline nasal cavity de- extrapyramidal motor disorder and skeletal anomalies fects (choanal atresia, mid-nasal stenosis, nasal pyriform aperture stenosis) B. Maas1, K. Hinderhofer1, A. Jauch1, J. W. G. Janssen1, C. R. Bartram1, B. Assmann2, H. and variably holoprosencephaly. Runz1; We report a 21month-old girl, who was the second child of unrelated 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 2University parents. She was referred to our genetic counseling service for evaluation Children´s Hospital, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. of dysmorphic features suggesting the SMMCI syndrome and psychomotor development delay. On physical examination, she presented a single central incisor, choanal atresia, nasal pyriform aperture stenosis, ocular hypotelo- We report on a 17-year old boy who was referred to us with a seemingly rism, short stature and microcephaly. No brain anomalies were identified by progressive neuropsychiatric disorder of unclear aetiology. He presented cerebral CT-scan. with mild mental retardation, developmental delay, skeletal malformations A de novo heterozygote missense mutation 494C>T was identified within with sternum abnormalities and L-DOPA responsive extrapyramidal motor SHH gene, leading to the replacement of Alanine at amino acid position 165 disorder including ataxia, dysarthria, apraxia, tremor and mimic tics. Array with Valine. Affymetrix Whole-Genome 2.7M Array Chip revealed a deletion CGH analysis (Affymterix 2.7M array) revealed a monoallelic de novo 84 kb of 695kb of the 5q21.1-q21.2 region. deletion on chromosome 11p15.2 encompassing exon 14 to 16 of the SOX6 In conclusion, it difficult to establish genotype-phenotype correlations of gene. The deletion was confirmed by MLPA (multiplex ligation dependent the 5q21 deletion because of the simultaneous presence of the SMMCI syn- probe amplification). SOX6 belongs to the family of Sry-related HMG box drome. transcription factors with regulatory functions during embryonic develop- P02.239 ment. It plays important roles during early chondrogenesis, muscle develop- Two Portuguese families with recurrent episodes of pain and ment, erythropoiesis and development of the central nervous system. While different SCN9A mutations - Primary Erythermalgia or Paroxysmal Sox6 knockout mice show an early lethality, conditional Sox6-knockouts Extreme Pain Disorder? (Sox6fl-) revealed skeletal anomalies with short sternum, including fusion M. I. G. Rodrigues; of the fourth and fifth sternebrae (Dumitriu et al., 2006). Due to the funda- Department of Medical Genetics, Hospital Dona Estefânia, Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa mental role of SOX6 in a variety of developmental processes and the skeletal Central, EPE, Lisbon, Portugal. similarities between the patient and the mouse model we suggest the partial SCN9A deletion of SOX6 as apparently disease causing in this patient. P02.242 Background: Mutations in gene can cause three very different pain Molecular Genetic Confirmation of the Diagnosis Spastic Paraplegia phenotypes: Primary Erythermalgia (PE), Paroxysmal Extreme Pain Disor- 31 in a Teenage Boy der (PEPD) and Channelopathy-associated Insensitivity to Pain (CIP). The F. Stock1, U. Hehr2, A. Merkenschlager3; first two disorders result from gain-of-function mutations and are charac- 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 2Zentrum terized by recurrent episodes of pain, but the accompanying manifestations und Institut für Humangenetik, Universität Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 3Klinik und Poliklinik für Kinder und Jugendliche, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Leipzig, are usually distinct. Germany. Objectives: The authors aim to present two Portuguese families with recur- rent episodes of pain, in which the diagnosis between PE and PEPD was dif- # ficult to establish due to overlapping clinical manifestations. The first family Spastic paraplegia (SPG) 31 (MIM 610250) is an autosomal dominant neu- is one large kindred with 26 affected subjects and the second family has 3 rodegenerative disease. Typical signs are proximal weakness of the lower affected members. SCN9A extremities and progressive spasticity with gait abnormalities, the upper ex- Methods: After characterizing the clinical manifestations, we performed tremities and the sensory system are usually not affected. The age of onset mutation analysis of gene in 17 of the 26 affected and in 2 non affec- ted members of family 1, as well as in all the affected subjects of family 2. is during the fRirEstE Po1r second deca*de in 70 % of affected individuals, in the remainder after the age of 30 years. The genetic cause of SPG31 are mu- Results: In all the affected individuals of famSilCyN 19,A except for one female tations in the gene (MIM 609139) on chromosome 2p11.2, which subject, a heterozygous missense mutation c.4835T>C (p.Leu1612Pro) was identified. In family 2 complete sequencing of gene revealed a hete- were descrRibEeEdP f1or the first time in 2006 in six unrelated families. Variable expressivity and incomplete penetrance have been noted. Recent studies in- rozygous unclassified mutation c.4880T>G (p.Met1627Arg), which is most dicate that mutations are the third most frequent cause of hereditary likely pathogenic and is present in all tShCeN a9ffAected family members. spastic paraplegia, being responsible for 6-8% of cases. Conclusion: We believe that these two families are the first Portuguese fa- We present a 14-year-old boy from an otherwise neurologically unremar- milies reported to have mutations in gene, in which the molecular kable family showing abnormal statomotoric and language development. diagnosis was determining to correctly classify the clinical phenotype. This At first muscular dystrophy was suspected until he showed signs of spastic stresses the importance of performing mutation analysis in affected indivi- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org100 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Universität, München, Germany, 5Labor Dr. Klein und Dr. Rost, München, Germany, 6Abteilung Kinderkardiologie, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, Germany, paraplegia at the age of 7 years. Muscle biopsy and neuroradiologic ima- 7Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik I, Ludwig Maximilians Universität, München, ging were normal. The boy is receiving regular treatment by physiotherapy, Germany. surgery (elongation of Achilles tendons) and medication (botox injections, Introduction: baclofen). Now at age 14 years ShPeG i3s inSP aG s4tabSPleG c7onSdPiGti2o0n, being able to am- bulate using several auxiliary devices, and an excellent swimmer. Various Hereditary arrhythmia syndromes are found in more than genetic investigations (genes , , , , karyRotEyEpPin1g) did half of initially unexplained cases of sudden cardiac death (SUD) in young not disclose a cause for his disease. After seven years of diagnostic attempts pMeertshoonds.s :A dditionally to autopsy findings, examination of relatives and we found a novel heterozygous truncating mutation in the gene, molecular testing if appropriate enables establishing the diagnosis. c.550C>T (p.Gln184X), which confirmed the diagnosis in this patient. Family members of 29 SUD patients consulted our clinic. Mean P02.243 age of death was 24±15 years. Pedigree analysis and clinical examination in Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Type 8 (SPG8): A novel mutation in a relatives was performed, followed by phenotype guided genetic testing in German family the deceased, if appropriate. In case of no clinical suspicion in relatives but F. R. Kreuz, J. Fiedler, A. Bier, S. Reif, S. Krüger, J. Plaschke; death related to specific triggers (e.g. swimming) sequencing of the RYR2- Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany. gene resp. the 3 mostly affected LQTS genes was performed. If a mutation wReassu foltusn: d cosegregation within the family was verified before establishing the diagnosis. Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia (HSP) is caused by progressive upper motor In n=16 cases (55%) a hereditary arrhythmia syndrome could be neuron axons degeneration. Central-motor-system deficits lead to lower found. In n=12 (75%) of these cases clinical examination of relatives led to limb paraparesis. HSP can be classified in pure HSP with lower limb spasti- tChoen cdliuagsnioons:i s. In 3 families two arrhythmia syndromes (LQTS and CPVT, city only and complicated HSP with other neurological and non-neurological resp. HCM) were present. symptoms. SPG8 is one of the more aggressive subtypKeIsA oAf0 a1u9t6osomal domi- In case of SUD in a significant percentage of cases a postmor- nant pure HSP. The age of onset varies from the twenties to the sixties and tem diagnosis can be performed. When there are only unspecific findings there is relatively little interfamilial variability. The gene, consi- clinical screening of relatives leads to a proper diagnosis in a large proporti- sting of 29 exons coding for the strumpellin protein with 1150 amino acids, on. Genetic evaluation should follow clinical family examination because: 1. has been identified as the SPG8 locus mapped to chromosome 8q24.12. The- therapy should be started without waiting for the genetic result if indicated. re have been only three mutations reported in six families until now. 2. in 3 families (18%) two hereditary disorders were present and 3. in 2 Here we report on a male patient, aged 27 years, and his mother, aged 50 families the phenotype of the deceased was untypical so that the proper dia- years. Both suffer from spastic-atactic gait disorder, pes cavus, muscle atro- gnosis would not have been made without family screening. phy at lower limbKsI A(“As0to1r9k6-legs“), muscle hypertonia, brisk reflexes, wide P02.246 reflex zones, and cloni. Male with mosaicism for a supernumerary derivative X chromosome DNA analysis of gene revealed the novel missense mutation lacking the XIST gene and phenotypic features of craniofrontonasal c.1859T>C; p.Val620Ala in both patients. We did not find this mutation in syndrome 598 control chromosomes of German origin. It affects the same α-helix mo- J. Morgenthaler, C. Evers, J. W. G. Janssen, A. Jauch, U. Moog; tife (amino acids 619-628) like two mutations in five of the six reported fa- Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany. milies and resides within the 75 amino acid domain well conKsIeArAv0e1d9 a6mong mammals. The novel heterozygous missense mutation in exon 15 of the gene Background: Craniofrontonasal syndrome (CFNS, OMIM 304110) is an X- co-segregates with SPG8 in this family and was not detected in the mother’s linked disorder with typical craniofacial dysmorphism (brachycephaly, fa- elder healthy son, her healthy brother and her mother. cial asymmetry, coronal craniosynostosis, hypertelorism, broad nasal root, P02.244 bifid nasal tip), syndactyly, broad halluces, and hypoplastic corpus callosum. Subtelomeric 10q deletion: A new case with vertebral anomalies Mutations in the gene for ephrin-B1 (EFNB1) located at Xq13.1 have been J. Pilch1, R. Śmigiel2, I. Łaczmańska2, J. Kozłowska2, E. Gutmajster3, A. L. Sieroń3; identified as the primary cause of CFNS which paradoxically shows a more 1Department of Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland, severe phenotype in heterozygous females than in hemizygous males. In 2Genetics Department, Wroclaw Medical University, Wrocław, Poland, 3Department of rare cases, CFNS can be caused by X-chromosome anomalies. General, Molecular Biology and Genetics, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Case report: We describe a five month old boy with severe dysmorphic fea- tures including a broad face, hypertelorism, broad nasal root, bifid nasal tip and multiple congenital anomalies (agenesis of the corpus callosum, patent 10q terminal deletion is characterised by psychomotor and growth retarda- ductus arteriosus, VSD and hypospadias). tion, congenital heart defect, genital and urinary tract anomalies, microce- Cytogenetics including FISH analysis revealed mosaicism for a supernu- phaly and facial dysmorphic features consisting of hypertelorism, strabis- merary derivative X chromosome (mos 47,XY,+der(X)del(X)(p11.1)del(X) mus, broad prominent nasal bridge and low-set malformed ears. Some au- (q13) [7]/46,XY[23] lacking XIST. Parental cytogenetic studies were nor- thors observed behavioral disorders. We report on a boy with psychomotor mal. and growth retardation. He was born from second bigeminal pregnancy with Discussion: The severe phenotype of CFNS in females with a heterozygous unilateral cryptorchidism. Twin brother healthy. Clinical evaluation revealed EFNB1 mutation is hypothesized to result from inequalities in gene dosage microcephaly, widow’s peak, palpebral fissures slanted up, epicanthic folds, for EFNB1 due to X inactivation. A patchy ephrin-B1 defect leads to distur- strabismus, hypermetropia, malformed ears, thin upper lip, low posterior bed closure of cranial sutures by a process termed cellular interference. Mo- hairline, webbed and short neck, asymmetric thorax, scoliosis, clinodactyly. saicism for a derivative chromosome expressing EFNB1 in one cell line due Radiogram of cervical spine showed abnormal lordosis, fusion of vertebre, to a lack of XIST may explain similar phenotypic features in the present male C5-C7 spina bifida. A standard karyotype was normal. Some of dysmorphic patient and one other previously published case. features, especially webbed and short neck with chest deformity, suggested P02.247 Noonan syndrome. Molecular analyses of PTPN11 and SOS1 genes did not Cryptic deletion in chromosome 1q43 associated with syndactylies confirm this diagnosis. Further clinical evaluation showed behavioural pro- detected by arrayCGH - a different critical region for syndactylies? blems consisting of hyperactivity, hyperkinesis with destructive tendency. E. E. Fiedler, B. C. Gläser, H. Heilbronner, S. Biskup; Some behavioural anomalies are frequently observed in chromosomal mi- Institut für Klinische Genetik, Stuttgart, Germany. croaberrations. MLPA studies with a set of subtelomeric probes identified subtelomeric deletion of chromosome 10q. Subsequent FISH analysis with specific 10q probes confirmed this deletion. Parent‘s studies to asses the We report a case of a woman with a known familial history of syndactylies presence of cryptic translocation are in progress. probably associated with a cytogenetically balanced translocation t (1;9) P02.245 (q43;q32). At the age of 19 years she came for genetic counseling while Evaluation after sudden unexplained death in young patients being pregnant. She herself was analyzed by cytogenetic karyotyping where B. M. Beckmann1, I. Sinicina2, G. Niedobitek3, C. Marschall4, I. Rost5, A. Kleinmann6, S. a translocation was detected which she inherited from her father. As her Greil6, M. Graw2, H. Netz6, S. Kääb7; father, her brother and her half-brother from father’s side also had syndac- 1Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik I, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, tylies of hands and feet as well as a skeletal dysplasia and were carriers of Germany, 2Institut für Rechtsmedizin, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, München, this specific translocation, we performed arrayCGH analysis on all of them. Germany, 3Institut für Pathologie, Unfallkrankenhaus Berlin and Sana Klinikum Lichtenberg, Berlin, Germany, 4Labor Dr. Klein und Dr. Rost, Ludwig-Maximilians- ArrayCGH analysis revealed a microdeletion in 1q43 which spans over 528 kb of size in all three members of this family who bear the translocation. The www.eshdgel.eotirogn includes partly the CHRM3 (cholinergic receptor, muscarinic 3) and www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 101 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P02.250 Identification of TAZ mutation in a family with X-linked dilated the FMN2 (formin-2) gene, two genes which are hardly described in literatu- cardiomyopathy by Next Generation Sequencing re until now. Formin-1 is the founding member of a family that share specific B. Chung, E. Man, T. C. Yung, K. S. Lun, K. T. Chau; domains of homology and are classified together as the formin homology Department of Paediatrics, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. proteins. Deficiency mutations in formin-1 lead to profound developmental defects in limb and kidney formation. To date variations in formin-2, a gene which seems to have a high degree of similarity to formin-1, are rarely de- Familial dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is defined as DCM of unknown cau- tected and understood. se in 2 or more closely related family members. We reported a family with 2 In order to elucidate this specific region, we intend to perform next gene- male siblings both presented with heart failure in infancy and subsequently ration sequencing (NGS) to correlate the clinical phenotype to this deleted confirmed to have DCM without conduction abnormalities. Endo-myocardial region. biopsy (in the elder sibling), extensive metabolic workup, viral studies and P02.248 NimbleGen CGX-12 array were all normal. Oligonucleotide-based target cap- CGH-array detection of a “de novo” chromosome 19p13.3 deletion: ture (Sureselect, Agilent) followed by next generation sequencing (Illumina case report. HiSeq2000) was used to capture variants of 46 genes implicated in the cau- F. Blanco-Kelly, M. Trujillo-Tiebas, I. Lorda, C. Ayuso; sation of cardiomyopathy (Partners Healthcare Center for Personalized Ge- Servicio de Genética, ISS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. netic Medicine). Clinically significant /novel variants are confirmed by inde- pendent Sanger sequencing. A hemizygous variant c.718G>C (p.Gly240Arg) in exon 10 of TAZ gene is identified. This variant is likely pathogenic as it Introduction: the development of high-resolution array-CGH has allowed has been reported in 5 individuals with X-linked infantile DCM and was the identification of genomic alterations not previously detectable with rou- described in a family with endocardial fibroelastosis. So far, the 2 siblings tine techniques. We present a patient with a “de novo” genomic imbalance did not show evidence of skeletal myopathy, stunted growth, neutropenia of 19p13.3, not detected by routine techniques (high resolution G-banded or abnormal urine organic acid analysis. Next generation sequencing (NGS) chromosome analysis and MLPA). allows efficient screening of a panel of genes in complex disorders like DCM, Patients and Methods: five members of the same Spanish family: the index in which there is substantial overlap among phenotypes, multiple causative patient, a 23 year old male who presented athonic epileptic crisis, mild men- genes, and some mutations associated with > 1 phenotype. The identifica- tal retardation and dysmorphic phenotype, the unaffected parents and two tion of TAZ mutation has major impact in the medical surveillance of our unaffected sisters. patients as they need to be monitored for symptoms of Barth syndrome in Oligonucleotide comparative genome hybridisation-based microarray ana- addition to DCM. (Funding support from Children’s Heart Foundation, Hong lysis (array-CGH; 105A or 180K, Agilent Technologies) was performed on Kong) each DNA sample of each family member. P02.251 Results: the proband showed three deletions not previously described in the Novel insertion in exon 5 of the TCOF1 gene in Twin Sisters with general population, two of them potentially pathogenic, deletion in 19p13.3 Treacher Collins syndrome and 22q21.3. He also presented eighteen copy number variations (CNVs) B. A. Marszalek-Kruk1, P. Wojcicki2, R. Smigiel3, W. H. Trzeciak4; previously described in the general population, 1Department of Genetics, Wroclaw University of Environmental and Life Sciences, The deletion in 22q21.3 was also present in the sisters and in the mother. Wroclaw, Poland, 2Department of Plastic Surgery, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, The 19p13.3 monosomy covers 821kb (from position 982,017 to Poland, 3Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Faculty of Public Health, WSPiA, Poznan, Poland. position1,803,579) which includes 33 genes, four of them pathological (STK11, NDUFS7, GAMT and TCF3). Conclusions: Treacher Collins Syndrome (TCS) is an autosomal dominant disorder, asso- The “de novo” 19p13.3 monosomy seems to be responsible for the patholo- ciated with an abnormal differentiation of the first and the second pharyn- gy of the proband. geal arches during fetal development. It cause craniofacial deformities with This is the first case of 19p13.3 monosomy described in Spanish population (two cases have been previously reported among other populations, Sigg- typical clinical symptoms: downward slanting of the eye ldides n, ohvyopoplasia berg, 2010 and Smith, 2010). of th e zygomatic bone, mandibular hypoplasia. The estimTCaOteFd1 incidence is 1/50000 live births, with 60% of the cases resulting from a mutati- CGH-arrays allows for the genetic diagnosis of new syndromes, but further studies are needed to establish genotype-phenotype correlation. ons.The syndrome is mostlyP cOaLuRse1dC by muPtOaLtRio1nDs in the gene, which P02.249 encodes the serine/alanine-rich protein named Treacle. TCS TcaCnO Fb1e also caused by mutations in the and genes encoding subunits A rare combination of Syntelencephaly, Wormian bone and Split of RNA polymerases I and III. Over hundred mutations of the gene Metopic suture A. KOPARIR1, H. Aydın1, E. Koparır1, H. Ulucan1, E. Yosunkaya1, M. Seven1, A. Yüksel2, M. responsible for TCS have been described, which about 70% are deletions. Ozen1; Investigated DNA fragments were amplified by PCR and were subsequent- 1Istanbul university cerrahpasa medical school, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif ly subjected to multitemperature single-stranded conformation polymor- University, Istanbul, Turkey. phism analysis. Fragment of the allele, which exhibited an abnormal MSSCP pattern were eluted from the gel and used as template for reamplification of single band by PCR method. The PCR products were purified followed by Syntelencephaly is a rare anomaly characterized by fusion of the direct sequencing. TCOF1 hemispheres in the posterior frontal and parietal regions and is considered a In the patients - two monozygotic twin sisters a novel, heterozygotic inser- new variant of holoprosencephaly.Wormian bones are accessory bones that tion c.483_484ins185d ew naosv odetected. It is the longest discovered in . occur within cranial suture and fontanelles, most commonly within the po- This mutation was absent in the patients’ father, brother and uncle, which sterior sutures. They occur more frequently in disorders that have reduced probably indicates a origin. The c.483_484ins185 insertion causes a cranial ossification, hypotonia or decreased movement, thereby resulting reading-frame shift and premature termination of translation at 167aa. in deformational brachycephaly.Here, we report a one-week- old male who We believe that these findings facilitated a precise diagnosis of both patients presented with abnormal head shape and concern for craniosynostosis. He and extended our knowledge on the pathogenesis of TCS. had rachycephaly, alopecia, right hemiparesis and closed anterior fontanel- P02.252 le. Three dimentional CT scan revealed absence of the anterior fontanelle, Beta-globin deletion in a transfusion dependent child with parents sagittal wormian bone and split metopic suture. Alopecia was noted in the showing no elevated HbF skin overlying the wormian bone. MRI scanning showed N. Bayat, M. Ashki, S. Farrashi, N. Faramarzi Garous, S. Vakili, M. Montajabi Niat, A. deficient formation of the interhemispheric fissure with fusion of parietal Azarkeivan, H. Imanian, H. Najmabadi; lobes and agenesis of corpus callosum. We used a custom array with a 44K Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, 14665/154, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. whole genome and extra 14,217 additional probes for all known 226 genes of skeletal dysplasia. We detected no significant copy number changes in our patient. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case with syntelen- cephaly, wormian bone and split metopic suture. The molecular investigation of beta-globin gene cluster deletions is usually performed in the presence of fetal hemoglobin (HbF). In this study, a family showing no elevated HbF (0.6% and 0%), the mean corpuscular value (MCV: 59.9 fL and 64.7 fL), and HbA2 (3% and 2.9%) for the maternal and paternal sides respectively has referred to our laboratory having a 3 months old child with severe anemia undergoing blood transfusion every 15 days. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org102 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Firstly, the most common alpha thalassemia deletions were investigated additional chromosome 22 in all metaphases analyzed (47,XY,+22). SNP by gap-PCR and the paternal side revealed homozygote alpha gene deleti- array and aCGH demonstrated a complete trisomy 22. Clinical features in- on -α3.7and consequently the child has inherited the -α3.7in heterozygous cluded dolichocephalus, hypertelorism, flattened nasal bridge, dysplastic form. The maternal side did not show any alpha gene mutation even by ears with preauricular sinuses and tags, medial cleft palate, anal atresia, and alpha-globin DNA sequencing. Direct sequencing for beta- globin gene was coronary hypospadia with scrotum bipartitum. Echocardiography showed also performed and no mutation was detected for the family. Finally, multi- persistent foramen ovale and ductus Botalli. Essential therapy was imple- plex ligation probe amplification (MLPA) was subjected to detect alpha- and mented in close coordination with the parents. The child died 29 days after beta- globin large deletions in the affected child and the results indicate a birth due to respiratory insufficiency and deterioration of renal function; huge homozygote deletion in beta-globin gene cluster with the same pattern an autopsy was not performed. This patient’s history complements other as Indian GγAγ (δβ)° or Belgian (50 Kb) deletions. The deletion was confir- reports illustrating that children with complete trisomy 22 can survive until med in both paternal and maternal sides in heterozygous form. birth and even some time beyond. This study shows that MLPA can effectively identify different and unknown P02.255 types of beta-globin gene deletions, to allow characterizing previously un- Recurrent hypoglycemia due to growth hormone deficiency and solved thalassemia intermedia genotypes, and remarks the probability of resistance in a preterm with Turner syndrome presence of beta deletions in cases that do not show significant elevations N. Salem1, W. Bonfig2, K. Heiliger1, M. Hempel1, G. Lederer1, M. Bornkamm2, K. Wieland2, P. of HbF. Lohse3, S. Burdach2, K. Oexle1; 1Humangenetik, TUM, München, Germany, 2Kinderklinik, TUM, München, Germany, P02.253 3Clinical Chemisty, LMU, München, Germany. Mutations in WNT10A are present in more than half of isolated hypodontia cases Objectives: M. H. van den Boogaard1, M. Creton2, Y. Bronkhorst1, A. H. van der Hout3, F. A. M. Hennekam1, D. Lindhout1, M. Cune4,5, J. K. Ploos van Amstel1; i) To report a case of infantile hypoglycemia in Turner syndrome 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands;, (TS) patient with growCtha she orrempoornt:e (GH) deficiency and resistance, and ii) Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Prosthodontics to compare conventional cytogenetics and array CGH in the diagnosis of a and Special Dental Care, University Medical Center Utrecht, The Netherlands;, complex TS karyotype. In a preterm (32 weeks) with prolonged Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, and cholestatic jaundice, recurrent hypoglycemia occurred at the age of 1.5 The University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of Fixed and months and related to GH deficiency. There were no other endocrine or syn- Removable Prosthodontics, Academic Centre for Dentistry and Oral Health, University dromic features. GH therapy was started at a usual dose of 25-30 µg/kg/d Medical Center Groningen, The University of Groningen, The Netherlands, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Prosthodontics and but hypoglycemia recurred. Hepatopathy and hypogammaglobulinemia sug- Special Dental Care, St. Antonius Hospital Nieuwegein, The Netherlands., Nieuwegein, gested X-recessive GH deficiency type 3 with non-random X-inactivation but Netherlands. resolved spontaneously. Nonetheless, a TS karyotype 45,X[75]/46,X,i(Xq) [21]/47,X,i(Xq)x2[4] was diagnosed with an apparent isochromosome fu- sion at the centromere. Upon this diagnosis, GH dose was doubled (50 µg/ Hypodontia or the congenital absence of one or more permanent teeth is kg/d) and blood glucose normalized consistently. In array CGH, the signal of the most common congenital anomaly in man. The disorder is highly heri- Xp deviated more strongly than that of Xq but the relation of the signals dif- table and occurs as an isolated anomaly or as a symptom of a large variety fered substantially from what the kCaornycoltuyspioen ps:redicted. The isochromosome of syndromes, including Ectodermal WDNysTp1l0asAia (ED). The recent finding of fusion point was relocated to Xp11.22, distal to a block of mental retardation hWyNpTod10oAntia in carriers of the autosomal recessive disorder odonto-oncycho- genes that escape X-inactivation. i) TS with GH deficiency or dermal dysplasia due to mutatioWnsN iTn1 0A (OMIM 257980; OODD) made resistance is a differential diagnosis of hypoglycaemia in infants. ii) Array an interesting candidate gene for dental agenesis. This motivated CGH is useful in precisely delineating isochromosome structure but may be us to study the contribution of mutations in comparison with mu- erroneous in quantification of TS mocaicism. tations in other genes that are associated with hypodontia in isWolNatTe1d0 hAypo- P02.256 dontia patiMenSXts1. WPeA Xte9stIeRdF a6 panelA oXfI 3N42 probands that show variable severity Maternal isodisomy for chromosome 9 in a patient with IgA of isolated tooth agenesis for mutations in the candidate gene and nephropathy, short stature and intellectual disability the genes , , and . The probands all had agenesis with S. Azzarello-Burri, B. Oneda, A. Baumer, S. Pajarola, D. Niedrist, A. Rauch; a range of 6 - 28 teeth. Nineteen cases with non-syndromic probands (56%) Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Switzerland. showed alterations in the WNT10A gene: 8 probands were homozygous, 4 probands were compound heterozygous and 7 probands were heterozygous for a single WNT10A mutation. In individuals, testWedN Tas1 0hAeterozygote for a Descriptions of patients with maternal isodisomy 9 are rare in the literature WNT10A mutation, tooth agenesis was comparable in males (6/9; 67%) and (10 cases of maternal UPD 9 and 2 cases of paternal UPD 9). The possibility females (7/12; 58%). In conclusion, we identified as a major gene of hidden mosaicism or homozygosity of mutations in autosomal recessively in the aetiology of isolated hypodontia. By including this gene, the yield of inherited diseases hampers the delineation of a clear UPD 9 phenotype. molecular diagnostics in isolated tooth agenesis has increased significantly Here we report a 34 years-old man with maternal isodisomy for chromoso- from 15% to 71%. This approach will be of help in a more optimal counsel- me 9 detected by genome-wide combined copy number and genotype pro- ling of patients with hypodontia and their family members. filing using a high-resolution CN/SNP array. The major problems in this pa- P02.254 tient were renal failure because of IgA nephropathy, hypothyroidism, short Live-born Child with Trisomy 22 stature with overweight, hypercholesterinemia, hypertriglyceridemia and T. Heinrich1, I. Nanda1, M. Rehn2, U. Zollner2, E. Frieauff3, J. Wirbelauer3, T. Grimm1, M. hyperuricemia. Other features were dislocation of the patella, atopic ecze- Schmid1; ma, eye problems (strabism, nystagmus, myopic astigmatism), inguinal her- 1Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 2Departments of Gynecology and nias and umbilical hernia as an infant. Since infancy a disproportional large Obstetrics, University Hospital, Würzburg, Germany, 3University Children‘s Hospital, distended abdomen was noted with unidentified cause. At the age of about University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. 15 years some hearing problems on the left side were noted. The young man was able to live alone and was working 50% at a protected workplace. Chromosomal abnormalities represent a major cause of spontaneous ab- No evidence of trisomy 9 mosaicism could be detected in blood and buccal ortions (SABs). Trisomy 22 has been identified as the third most common smears. trisomy in SABs, representing 16% of cases. Due to severe organ malfor- P02.257 mations associated with trisomy 22 a live-born child is a very rare event. Can we prevent ELST related hearing loss through early audiological Here, we report on a male infant with complete, non-mosaic trisomy 22 in ELST diagnosis? - A case of deafness due to microscopic ELST and an peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and skin fibroblasts. international collaborative study The patient was born at 35+5 weeks by caesarean section as the second child M. M. Poulsen1, S. Gimsing2, C. Thomsen3, M. Bisgaard1; of a 44-year-old female and a 40-year-old male. The parents are healthy and 1Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Copenhagen N, Denmark, 2Department unrelated. Prenatal sonographic examinations had revealed IUGR, dolicho- of Audiology, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 3Department of Diagnostic Radiology, cephalus, SUA, absent right kidney, and hypospadia. Due to the parents’ Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark. beliefs they did not opt for additional prenatal diagnostic procedures and Background chose to continue the pregnancy. Birth weight and length were below the 3rd percentile; APGAR 5/6*/8* (*CPAP). GTG-banded chromosomes from PBLs and fibroblasts showed an Endolymphatic sac tumours (ELSTs) occur in up to 16% of von Hippel- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 103 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Lindau (vHL) patients. Timely diagnosis and surgical excision of tumors is neously disappeared in later life. Menarche started at the age of eleven, but essential to prevent severe audio-vestibular morbidity as even microscopic secondary amenorrhea ensued early. Enuresis nocturna and epilepsy have ELSTs can cause irreversible hearing loss. We present a case in which deaf- been a constant problem. Neither gonadoblastoma nor Wilms tumor were nMeestsh ocadussed by a microscopic ELST possibly could have been prevented by diagnosed. She was referred to geneticist to specify the diagnosis at the age early pre-symptomatic audiometric diagnosis. of 24. We have used effective genetic diagnosis work-up: a routine G- banded ka- Full medical records of the patient’s subjective audio-vestibular symptoms, ryotyping and SNP array (Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1) analysis. The aRuesduioltlsogical examinations, and Magnetic Resonance Imagings (MRIs) of the deletion has been detected by classical karyotype and further updated by inner ear from 1995-V2H0L1 1 were collected and evaluated. SNP array. The 18 Mb haploinsufficiency of 11p11.2 -14.2 has been con- firmed containing over 70 genes including PAX6 and WT1 associated with A 42-year-old male mutation carrier with initial normal hearing was WAGR. Haploinsufficiency of BDNF in this deleted region can explain the followed for twenty years with audiometry and MRI of the brain and inner WAGRO phenotypic features. ear as part of a surveillance program. He reported occasional bilateral tinni- The observed disease phenotype depends on gene dosage and specific se- tus, but no subjective hearing-loss until 2009 when in his right ear hearing quences involved in hemizygous deletion. It is necessary to determine the began to deteriorate and progress to total deafness. extent of each 11p deletion. The early diagnosis may provide a possibility of Despite annual MRIs, a right-sided ELST was not visible until 4 months after more specific health supervision which could be essential for the patient’s onset of deafness in 2010, when it appeared as 4 x 3 mm tumor mass. Alt- prognosis. hough his hearing was objectively within normal limits until 2009, a distinct P02.260 aCuondciolumsieotnrisc pattern of low-frequency hearing loss could retrospectively be The mitochondrial ND1 m.3337G>A mutation associated to multiple seen from first audiometry. mitochondrial DNA deletions in a patient with Wolfram syndrome and cardiomyopathy Previous reports suggest that certain audiometric patterns as seen in our N. Mezghani1, M. Mnif2, E. Mkaouar-Rebai1, N. Kallel2, I. Haj Salem1, N. Charfi2, M. Abid2, patient may indicate early ELST development. Accordingly, audiometry may F. Fakhfakh1; be an important diagnostic tool to detect non-symptomatic ELSTs. To inve- 1genetic laboratory, sfax, Tunisia, 2Service d’endocrinologie C.H.U. Habib Bourguiba, sfax, Tunisia. stigate the use of audiometry for this purpose we have initiated an inter- national collaborative study and hope to attract new collaborators: http:// icmm.ku.dk/english/icmm-staff/marie_luise_bisgaard/vhl_collaborative_ Wolfram syndrome (WFS) is a rare hereditary disorder also known as research/ DIDMOAD (diabetes insipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy, and deaf- P02.258 ness). It is a heterogeneous disease and full characterization of all clinical A 725 kb deletion within the 22q13.1 chromosomal region detected and biological features of this disorder is difficult. The wide spectrum of cli- by array CGH associated with Waardenburg syndrome E. Siomou1, E. Manolakos2, M. Petersen2, L. Thomaidis3, Y. Gyftodimou4, I. Papoulidis1; nical expression, affecting several organs and tissues, and the similarity in 1Eurogenetica, Thessaloniki, Greece, 2Eurogenetica, Athens, Greece, 3Department of phenotype between patients with Wolfram syndrome and those with certain Pediatrics, University of Athens, Aglaia Kyriakou Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, types of respiratory chain diseases suggests mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 4Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, Athens, Greece. involvement in Wolfram syndrome patients. We report a Tunisian patient with clinical features of moderate Wolfram syndrome including diabetes, dilated cardiomyopathy and neurological complications. Waardenburg syndrome (WS) is a rare (1/40,000) autosomal dominant The results showed the presence of the mitochondrial ND1 m.3337G>A mu- disorder resulting from melanocyte defects, with varying comb inations of tation in almost homoplasmic form in 3 tested tissues of the proband (blood sensorineural hearing loss and abnormal pigmentation of the hair, skin, and leukocytes, buccal mucosa and skeletal muscle). In addition, the long-range inner ear. Due to the variety of additional clinical symptoms andgenetic he- PCR amplifications revealed the presence of multiple deletions of the mito- terogeneity, WS is claSsOsiXfi1e0d into four clinical subtypes (WS1- S4). Mutations chondrial DNA extracted from the patient’s skeletal muscle removing sever- in six genes have been identified to be associated wSOitXh1 t0h e different subtypes al tRNA and protein-coding genes. of WS, among which (SRY bOX10 transcription factor)gene, which is Our study reported a Tunisian patient with clinical features of moderate locSaOliXz1ed0 within the region 22q13.1. Whole gene deletions haveS ObXe1en0 Wolfram syndrome associated with cardiomyopathy, in whom we detected described by BonduSrOanXd et al. [2007] suggesting that haploinsuffiency due the ND1 m.3337G>A mutation with mitochondrial multiple deletions. to gene deletions should be encountered when testing for WS. P02.261 is a member of the family transcription factors and is a key transcrip- Array-CGH detection of cryptic genomic rearrangements in children tion factor of neural crest developmeSnOtX. 1In0 this study we report a case of a with X-Linked Intellectual Disability 13 year old male with a unique de novo 725 kb deletion within the V 2e2rqy 1fe3w.1 K. Giannikou1,2, S. Sofia Kitsiou-Tzeli1, H. Frysira1, V. Oikonomakis1, K. Kosma1, A. cphartoiemnotsso hmaavle r ebgeieonn, denoccoummpeanstseindg w ith whanodle a gneonthee rd e1l3e tOiMonIMs olifs tSeOdX g1e0- Syrmou1, A. Xaidara1, E. Kanavakis1,3, M. Tzetis1; annesd a anlds op rveesreyn tfienwg cdliantiac ails f ekantuowrens orfe ag anreduirnoglo dgeicl evtairoiannst wofi tWhiSn. 22q13.1 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Greece, Athens, Greece, 2Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation, Athens, Greece, 3Research and of neurologic defect candidate genes such as PLA2G6 KCNJ4 Institute for the Study of Genetic and Malignant Disorders in Childhood, “Aghia Sophia, PICK1, which are localised within the deleted region. we Children’s Hospital”, Athens, Greece. , and In this study compare the clinical features of our patient to other reported cases with analogous 22q13.1 deletions and look into Clinical and genetic observations have shown that X-Linked Intellectual . Disability (XLID) is a very heterogeneous entity, involving syndromic and genotype-phenotype non-syndromic indistinguishable forms with more than 100 causative ge- correlations nes implicated and an estimated prevalence of ~10% in males. Underlying X chromosome defects are not always visible with conventional cytogenetic P02.259 techniques as a first-line approach, making the genetic evaluation and dia- WAGRO syndrome caused by deletion 11p14.2p11.2 gnosis difficult. Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (Array-CGH) has M. Hejtmankova, M. Trkova, E. Svobodova, V. Becvarova, L. Hnykova, D. Stejskal; proven a high throughput method, allowing genome wide XLID gene scree- GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic. ning in the diagnostic workup. Overall 198 male patients with a large spec- trum of phenotypic variability (developmental delay, seizures, dysmorphic feautures, congenital anomalies), normal previous conventional karyotype WAGR is a contiguous gene deletion syndrome caused by loss of distal porti- and negative genetic tests (FRAX, RETT, FISH tests or metabolic screens) on of chromosome 11p13 band. Its subphenotype WAGRO including obesity were analyzed with Agilent platform 4x180K and 1x244K oligoarrays( is associated with additional haploinsufficiency of BDNF gene with locus >170.000 probes and >236.000 probes respectively with a high resolution 11p14.1. of 8.9 Kb). 14 X-chromosome cryptic rearrangements containing clinically We present a case where diagnosis of the WAGRO was delayed because of relevant genes were detected in 21 patients, explaining partially or comple- the absence of predictable tumor in a mentally retarded female with ani- tely the pathological phenotype (Table below).The remarkable percentage ridia and severe obesity with onset at 10 years of age. She had craniofacial of positive patients is probably due to the strict criteria of patient selection. dysmorphism, nasal cleft, and large anterior fontanelle. Diagnosis of aniridia Array-CGH offers a higher diagnostic yield for the identification of previous- and cataracts was confirmed early after birth. Multiple renal cysts sponta- ly unreported X-linked aberrations of unclear significance, elucidating novel www.eshg.org www.eshg.org104 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 non-syndromic/syndromic forms and permitting better dinstiction and cor- tonia, feeding problems, mild conductive hearing loss, recurrent aspiration Aberration Proximal->Distal No of Relevant r(esiczte rine cMlba)ssifica(UtiCoSnC hogf1 s8p), eMcbificP XatL.ID casGeesn.es Inheritance Phenotype pneumonia and prolonged neonatal hypoglycemia. He has microcephaly ASMT (-4.5 SD) and growth retardation (his weight is -4.5 SD and height -5 SD). His DUP Xp22.33 Autism Spectrum dysmorphic features include: large open fontanel, hypertelorism, up-slan- (0.026) 1.68->1.71 1 NLGN4X Disorder ted palpebral fissures, synophrys, depressed nasal bridge, marked general D(0U.1P) Xp22.32 5.8-5.9 1 VCHXD2,HhDsa1-Am,SirT-S6,51 maternal AutisDmis oSrpdeecrtrum hirsutism a ventricular septal defect and normal genitalia. The mother car- DUP Xp22.31 ries the same deletion. The deleted X chromosome in her blood lymphocytes (1.61-1.65) 6.47-8.12 2 CDKL5 1 De novo Syndromic XLID is completely inactivated (0:100). DUP Xp22.13 UBE2A (0.058) 18.33->18.39 1 SMPX De novo Syndromic XLID D(0E.0L2 X3p)22.12 21.67->21.69 1 MAOA,MAOB maternal Non-sXyLnIdDromic TNhKiRs Fis UthBeE s2mAallestC dXeolreft5io6n UeBncEo2mApassing the gene reported so far. DEL Xp11.3 Non-syndromic Only three genes are locUaBteEd2 Ain the deleted Xq24 region found in this boy: (0.56) 43.21->43.8 1 JARID1C De novo XLID , and . deficiency syndrome that is caused by DUP Xp11.22 Non-syndromic (0.013) 53.23->53.25 1 SLC16A2,ZCCHC13 XLID point mutations in the gene, has been shown to cause syndromic D(0E.0L5 X8q-103.2.26 4) 73.4->73.7 2 ZDHHC15 De novo Syndromic XLID Xim-lpinakireedd isnpteelelcehct, usaml adlli spaebniliist ya n(dXU LhBIiDErs2)u Atwisimth. Odyusrm caosrep hfuicr tfheeart usruepsUp, BosEret2vsAe pr erely- DEL Xq13.3 Non-syndromic (0.041-0.1) 74.47->74.52 2 POU3F4 1 XLID vious suggestion that deletion of is sufficient to cause the de- D(1E.8L3 X)q21.1 81.1->82.9 1 PCDH11X mDae tneorvnoa,l Non-sXyLnIdDromic ficiency syndrome. DEL Xq21.31 1 1 Non-syndromic (0.103-0.38) 90.6>91.2 5 SOX3 XLID P02.264 D(0U.0P6 X9q)27.1 139.38->139.44 1 ASFFMMRR11,FNMBR1, De novo Syndromic XLID Interstitial duplication in the case of Yunis Varon Syndrome D(0E.6L2 X)q27.3-q28 146.5->147.1 1 GLA1BCRAAM3,,MIREACKP12, De novo regioFnR(mAXo saic) ACh. Mud. eTka1,r Mko. 1N, Ayc. zM-B. Pocyhrkeonsezk22,; E . Kortyczko1, E. Musialik-Świetlińska1, I. Maruniak- DUP Xq28 149.7->154.7 1 RETT syndrome 1Dept. of Neonatal Intensive Care, Upper Silesian Centre of Child‘s Health, Katowice, (5.03) Poland, 2Dept. of General and Molecular Biology and Genetics, Medical University of P02.262 Silesia, Katowice, Poland. Interstitial Xq duplication in a male patient - clinical, cytogenetic and Brief Introduction arrayCGH characterization of a new case B. Goryluk-Kozakiewicz, M. Jędrzejowska, M. Kucharczyk, M. Pelc, A. Jezela-Stanek, A. : The aim was to evaluate the relationship between ab- Cieślikowska, A. Gutkowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. normality in the region of 5p15.31-5p15.2 Mreaptreersieanltse dan odn Mtheet hmoidcrsoarray analysis, classified as an interstitial duplication and the subsequent clini- cal presentation of Yunis Varon Syndrome. : Neo- nate with dysmorphic, typical phenotypic and radiologic features of Yunis Prevalence of isolated Xq duplications is presently unknown. At least 30 Varon Syndrome, born as 37 weeker, 2300g, Apgar score 1/2/3/3, a first male patients with this aberration have been reported, with the majority child to a healthy couple. Prenatal ultrasound scans, fetal biometry and fe- localized within Xq12-q24. Large, cytogentically visible Xq duplication are tal MRI were performed showing malformations in central nervous system, rare. However, application of microarray-based technique gives the chance hypertelorism, micrognathia, abnormal views of extremities. Chromosomal for detection of smaller aberrations, as well as defined genes influencing the caryotyping from amniotic fluid cells cultures was done - 46, XX.Postnatally causative phenotype. the baby was growth restricted, hypotonic and dysmorphic. Microcephaly, Clinical manifestations in described cases vary depending on the gender of hypertelorism, microtia, narrow high-arched palate, wide fontanelles, bila- the patient and on the size of duplication, hence gene content of the dupli- terally absent thumbs and great toes were observed. Radiologically - aplasia cated segment. Consequences of over-expression of X-linked genes are not of both clavicles. ASD II in echocardiogram. No abnormalities in abdominal well known. In most male cases the consistent phenotype includes profound ultrasound scans. Chromosomal karyotyping from peripheral blood lym- muscle hypotonia accompanied by severe psychomotor and growth failure, phocytes was correct female karotype.Autopsy showed agenesis of corpus hypoplastic genitalia, seizures and craniofacial dysmorphism. Such pheno- callosum with atrophic subcortical nuclei and hydrocephalus, middle and type seems to be quite specific, however, due to rarity of this disease, it is external ear anomalies, bilateral dysplasia of eye bulbs, hyperaemia of kid- difficult to suspect it based on clinical symptoms. neys and lungs and focal liver necrosis.Microarray analysis was performed In our presentation we report the clinical and laboratory data of 3-year-old boy with profound generalized hypotonia, growth failure resulting from using NimbleGen CGX-12, revealing abnoCromnacliltuys iino nthse region of 5p15.31-5- p15.2, covering ADCY2, MTRR, SEMA5A, TAS2R1, CCT5, CMBL genes, which Xq duplication identified cytogenetically as 46, XY,dup(X)(q21q22?)mat. is classified an interstitial duplication. : Microarray analysis Further delineation of the duplicated region by arrayCGH refined the break- using NimbleGen 135k CGX-12 enables to identify submicroscopic changes, points to Xq13.1-q22.11 and showed the duplication size of 32 Mb. This is localized in genome regions bigger than 30-100 kb and therefore, abnorma- only the second case with similar aberration characterized molecularly. lity in the region of 5p15.31-5p15.2 classified as an interstitial duplication By comparison of our patient’s phenotype with the previously reported can highly be a pathogenic one. male with overlapping duplicated region, we hope that presented detailed P02.265 results give insight into the genotype-phenotype correlation of Xq-linked Expanding the clinical phenotype of patients with ZDHHC9 mutation genes duplication. A. Masurel-Paulet1, F. Levy2, C. Thauvin- Robinet1, J. Thevenon1, S. Chancenotte2, M. The study was partially supported by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Sci- Ruffier-Bourdet2, M. Bonnet2, S. El Chehadeh1, V. Desportes3, J. Chelly4, L. Faivre1; ence and Higher Education (Contract No 0605/B/P01/2009/37). 1Centre de génétique et Centre de Référence Anomalies du développement et Syndromes P02.263 malformatifs, CHU, Dijon, France, 2Centre Référent des Troubles du Langage et des A 91kbp interstitial deletion of Xq24 encopassing the UBE2A gene, Apprentissages, CHU, Dijon, France, 3Service de neurologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Femme in a boy presenting with intellectual disability, impaired speech, Mère Enfant, CHU, Lyon, France, 4Service de génétique moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, microcephaly, growth retardation VSD and hirsutism. Paris, France. C. Vinkler1,2, A. Frumkin3, M. Michelson1,2, B. Tziperman2, T. Lerman-Sagie2, D. Lev1,2; ZDHHC9 1Institute of Clinical GeneticsWolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Metabolic Neurogenetics Service, Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 3The Department of In 2007, four families with a mutation in the gene have been descri- Genetic and Metabolic Diseases, Hadassah, Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, bed, out of the screening of 250 families with X-linked intellectual deficiency Israel. (ID). ID was either isolated or associated with a marfanoid habitus. ZDHHC9 encodes for a palmitoyl transferase that catalyses the posttranslational mo- UBE2A dification of NRAS and HRAS. Since this first description, no additional pa- Interstitial deletions of chromosome Xq24 are rare with only five reported tient has beepn.R 2d9e8scXribed. A new family has been identified in France from cases so far. In all of these cases the deletions included the UBE2A gene and the systematic screening of X-linked ID genes in 95 families, carrying the the size of the deletion was almost identical, ranging from 275kb to 371kb unreported variant leading to a stop codon, cosegregating with the and encompassing between 5 and 6 genes in addition to the gene. disease. A 18-year-old patient and his 40-year-old maternal uncle have been evaluated. Clinical examination revealed normal growth parameters, lingual We describe a 2y and 3m old boy with a 91 kb deletion in the Xq24 regi- fasciculations, a limited extension of the elbows and metacarpophalangian on detected by array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH). His joints, and acrocyanosis. There was no facial dysmorphism or marfanoid ha- phenotype includes: severe intellectual disability with absent speech, hypo- bitus. Brain MRI revealed dysplastic corpus callosum. Neuropsychological www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 105 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 testing demonstrated a mild to moderate mental retardation. The younger mother were homozygous for H1 and H2, respectively, and the maternal suffers of significant impairment of behaviour requiring attention or treat- 17q21.31 allele was missing in the twins. ment, and the older a generalised anxiety disorder (ICD 10). Speech evalua- Supported by CHERISH 223692, SF0180027s10, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and tion revealed a satisfactory oral language since both were able to provide MZ0FNM2012. information and to understand conversations of everyday life. Occupational P03.005 therapy examination revealed impaired visuospatial and visuomoZtoDrH pHeCr9- De novo ring chromosome 21 with a complex 21q interstitial and formance with poor drawing/graphic skills. These manifestations appear terminal deletion with array-CGH, in patient with several congenital not enough specific to permit to define specific criteria justifying anomalies, mental retardation and thrombocytopenia screening in patient with ID, and emphasized the value of next generation A. Barcia Ramírez1,2, G. Cruz Guerrero1, L. Alcaraz Mas3, A. Moro Ortiz1, M. Viloria1, M. sequencing for genetic counselling in families with X-linked ID. Miranda Díaz1; 1Hospital Universitario Nuestra Sra. de Valme, Sevilla, Spain, 2Instituto Hispalense de P03. Cytogenetics Pediatría, Sevilla, Spain, 3Bioarrays, Alicante, Spain. P03.002 We present a 20 months old infant with a de novo ring chromosome 21, A clinical study of patients with pericentromeric deletion and detected in prenatal kariotype, with breaking point in p11.1 and q22.3, in duplication within 16p11.2-p12.2 which postnatal array-CGH demonstrated an almost complete loss of the N. Okamoto1, K. Saito2, T. Matsui2, N. Harada2, N. Miyake3, N. Matsumoto3; q arm in the affected chromosome, with little microduplication fragments 1Department of Medical Genetics, Osaka Medical Center & Research Institute for within four deleted fragments (1.2 Mb to 23 Mb) between 21q11.2-q21.1 Maternal and Child Health, Osaka, Japan, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Advanced and the chromosome end. Phenotypically, the infant presents moderate to Medical Science Research Center, Mitsubishi Chemical Medience Corporation, Tokyo, severe growth and developmental delay, structural cardiac defects, bilateral Japan, 3Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. hip dysplasia, microcephaly with cerebral atrophy, mild thrombocytopenia and facial dysmorphism, with similar features that those described in pa- tients with partial or complete 21 monosomy. There are multiple affected The pericentromeric region on 16p is susceptible to chromosomal rearran- genes, one of them, RUNX1, has been reported to pedisponse, when in ha- gements. There are many reports that deletions of 16p11.2 are observed ploinsufficiency, to thrombocytopenia and acute myelogenus leukemia. In about 1% among patients with autism. The 16p11.2-p12.2 deletion syndro- this case, the array-CGH has contributed to a more accurate diagnosis of the me is characterized by developmental disabilities and dysmorphic features. chromosome disorder, which with at first seemd just a terminal 21q deleti- We have identified pericetromeric deletion and duplication, within 16p11.2- on instead of an almost complete 21 monosomy. p12.2 in three patients by Cytogenetics 2.7M array. Patient 1 was a 10-year- P03.006 old girl with autism and obesity. She had a heterozygous 593kb deletion in Homozygous 2p21 deletion syndrome due to maternal uniparental 16p11.2. Her mother with the same deletion was not autistic, but was obese. disomy 2 Patient 2 was a 2-year-old boy with VSD, hypotonia, developmental delay U. Siebers-Renelt, B. Dworniczak, P. Wieacker, A. Röpke; Institut für Humangenetik, Muenster, Germany. and frequent ear infections. He had.dysmorphic features including flat face, down slanting palpebral fissures, low-set posteriorly rotated ears and thin upper lip. Autistic features were not seen. Microarray analysis revealed a The 2p21 deletion syndrome (MIM 606407) is a contiguous gene syndrome 7.7Mb deletion at 16p11.2-p12.2. He showed common clinical features to caused by homozygous deletions on chromosome 2p21. Depending on the the 16p11.2-p12.2 deletion syndrome. Patient 3 was an 8-year-old girl with size of the deletion different clinical symptoms have been described. Dele- developmental delay, autism and dysmophic features including hypertri- tions of the SLC3A1 and PREPL genes are responsible for the hypotonia-cy- chosis, wide mouth and macrocephaly. She showed poor communication stinuria syndrome. Homozygous mutations in the SLC3A1 gene were found skills and ritualized patterns of interests and behavior. Microarray analysis in patients with isolated cystinuria (MIM 220100). We report on a girl born revealed a 6.7Mb duplication at 16p11.2-p12.2. The duplicated region of pa- preterm to non consanguineous healthy parents. At delivery, the mother tient 3 was very similar with the deleted region of the patient 2. We suggest was 44 years old. After birth, meconium ileus and a persistent Ductus arte- that 16p11.2-p12.2 duplication may be a new syndrome with autism. riosus Botalli had to be corrected surgically. Profound muscular hypotonia P03.004 was present and psychomotor development was delayed. Failure to thrive 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome in monozygotic twins was so severe that at 2 years age tube feeding was still necessary. Karyotype M. Vlckova1, M. Hancarova1, J. Drabova1, Z. Zmitkova1, M. Koudova1,2, R. Alanova1,3, K. Mannik4, A. Kurg4, Z. Sedlacek1; on conventional cytogenetic analysis was apparently normal (46,XX). Array- 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University 2nd Faculty of CGH analysis uncovered a small homozygous deletion of approximately 28.6 Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2GHC Genetics, ltd. - kb that disrupts the PREPL and the CAMKMT genes but not the SLC3A1 Private Medical Facility, Prague, Czech Republic, 3Institute for the Care of Mother and gene. Quantitative PCR analysis of both parents demonstrated a heterozy- Child, Pregue, Czech Republic, 4Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of gous deletion of the same size in the maternal blood only. We hypothesized Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. that a maternal uniparental disomy could be responsible for the homozygo- sity of the deletion in the daughter. A microsatellite analysis showed mater- nal isodisomy 2 in the critical region 2p21. Possibly meiotic non-disjunction Chromosome 17q21.31 microdeletion syndrome is a genomic disorder followed by trisomy rescue led to homozygosity for the small maternal de- caused by recurrent ~600 kb deletion of the region containing the common letion. This case illustrates a complex multistep process leading to a disease 900 kb inversion. The inversion is associated with the H2 haplotype present causing genomic imbalance. Moreover, it underlines the necessity of investi- in ~20% of Europeans. H2 carries additional low-copy repeats susceptib- gations in the parents for a correct interpretation of array-CGH results. le to NAHR which can lead to the deletion. The syndrome is characterised P03.007 by intellectual disability, hypotonia, long face, tubular or pear-shaped nose, De novo chromosome (2)(q24.2q24.3) deletion in a 17-months old bulbous nasal tip and friendly behaviour. developmentally delayed girl We present monozygotic twin sisters carrying the microdeletion and sho- M. Stoian1, V. Belengeanu1, N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, D. Misceo2, T. H. Gamage2, E. wing only slightly different phenotypes. Both had disproportionate short Frengen2; stature, short upper and lower limbs, thoracic hyperkyphosis, low-pitched 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Medical voice and similar long, thin and coarse face, coarse hair, thick eyebrows, Genetics, Olso University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. pear-shaped nose, smooth broad philtrum, thick lips, mandibular progna- thism, and hirsutism. Twin A had high palate and Twin B had wide-spaced teeth, diastema, more severe intellectual disability, more coarse facial fea- We present a 17 months old female patient, first examined at the age of 11 tures, strabismus, and horizontal nystagmus. months for developmental delay. The girl is the second child of a healthy and The microdeletion was identified in Twin A using BAC array CGH and con- non-consanguineous couple. The family history was unremarkable. She was firmed in both twins but not in the parents using FISH. Potential genomic delivered by caesarian section at 38 weeks of gestation with a birth weight differences were subsequently searched using Illumina Human CytoSNP-12 of 2900 g (pc=25th), length of 50 cm (pc=50th) and cranial circumference SNP arrays (~300K) and Nimblegen 2.1M whole-genome CGH array. These of 32.5 cm (pc=10th). Clinical evaluation revealed: hypotonia, microcephaly, analyses identified no differences potentially responsible for the phenoty- high forehead, hypertelorism, palpebral ptosis, strabismus, arched mouth, pic differences, which could possibly be related to a more severe perinatal low set ears, pectus excavatum, coxofemoral dysplasia. Development miles- history of Twin B or the variable expressivity of the disorder. The father and tones were delayed, she held her head at 6 months, sat at 11 months and www.eshg.org www.eshg.org106 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.010 Morbid obesity, hypogonadism, minor facial dysmorphism and started to walk sustained at 17 months. For lack of eye contact and repeti- mild mental retardation in a patient with a 2.7 Mb duplication on tive hand movements we performed FISH analysis using Abbott probes for chromosome (6)(q14.1) detected by arrayCGH Angelman syndrome, but result was negative. Cerebral MRI evaluation was N. Andreescu1, V. Belengeanu1, D. Misceo2, M. Stoian1, A. Belengeanu1, S. Farcas1, T. H. normal. Upon last evaluation at age of 17 months, the patient had length Gamage2, E. Frengen2; of 80 cm (pc=50th), head circumference 44 cm (<pc3rd), weight of 8400 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department g (<pc3rd). 180k Agilent aCGH detected a deletion on chr2: 162261555- of Medical Genetics, Olso University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. 164571028 bp hg19, chromosome(2)(q24.2q24.3). The deletion was confir- med using qPCR. Parents were checked and deletion occurred de novo. Nine genes are located in the deleted region including TBR1, SLC4A10, KCNH7 The association of obesity and developmental delay as presenting clinical and FIGN, which may be good candidates in generating the phenotype TBR1 features was the subject of many reports. Several gene mutations and ge- is involved in cortical development SLC4A10 has been previously associated nomic imbalances of specific loci scattered on different chromosomes have to epilepsy. KCNH7, is involved in the regulation of NMDA receptor level in been reported to be involved in the pathogenesis of human obesity. Here cortical neurons. FIGN are molecular chaperones with a role in embrionic we present a 29 years-old male, with hypogonadism, morbid obesity, minor development. facial dysmorphism and mild mental retardation evaluated for a suspected P03.008 diagnosis of Prader-Willi syndrome. His weight was 180 kg (>95th percen- Same genotype, different phenotype in a mother and son with tile), height was 172 cm (25th percentile) and BMI was 60.84 kg/m2. His genomic imbalance deceased father and paternal grandparents presented morbid obesity. As S. Custódio, S. Serafim, A. Sousa, R. Silveira-Santos, M. Ávila, P. Dias, A. Medeira, I. PWS was suspected, FISH analysis using specific probes was performed Cordeiro; and didn‘t reveal the microdeletion. Next we performed a 180k aCGH which Hospital de Santa Maria - Centro Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisboa, Portugal. detected a duplication on the chromosome (6)(q14.1) (chr6: 76096298- 78763228 bp hg19). Imbalances of the long arm of chromosome 6 were reported in several patients with Prader-Willi-like phenotype and SIM1 has With the broad application of molecular techniques like aCGH, findings of in- often been considered the possible causes of nonsyndromic and PWS-like herited chromosomal imbalances from unaffected or mildly affected parents monogenic obesity. However SIM1 is not involved in the duplication detec- have become more frequent. The phenotypical variability in these cases is ted in the patient. A recent study found 2 patients with comparable clinical often attributed to genetic, epigenetic and environmental modifiers. features to our patient, having interstitial deletions at 6q14.1q15, partially Here we report a 33 years-old male with cognitive impairment, speech de- overlapping our patient’s duplicated region. Thus it is possible that altera- lay, epilepsy and hearing deficiency but no dysmorphic features. Subtelome- tion of dosage-sensitive genes in the 6q14.1q15 region may represent the ric FISH studies detected a 5p monosomy and a 18p trisomy consistent with cause of a novel clinically recognizable syndrome. The identification of the the presence of a derivative chromosome from a (5;18) translocation. The specific mechanisms of genetic predispositions for morbid obesity is impor- same rearrangement was found on the unaffected mother. Subsequent aCGH tant for the adequate management of individuals with morbid obesity and analysis further delineated the rearrangement as a 1,7 Mb terminal deletion may improve the outcome of these patients. of 5p and a 2,1 Mb terminal duplication of 18p. P03.011 The patient’s phenotype is consistent with other reported 5p distal deleti- Gene regulatory variation in Cynomolgus monkeys ons upstream from cri-du-chat syndrome critical region. The 18p duplicati- A. Gschwind1,2, E. Migliavacca1,2, T. Heckel3, U. Certa3, A. Reymond1; on doesn’t seem to contribute to the phenotype, as reported patients with 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss larger duplications, in some cases encompassing the whole short arm, were Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3F. Hoffmann-La Roche AG, Basel, Switzerland. clinically normal. Absence of clinical phenotype in the mother may be due to a second hit on the patient, for example, a recessive mutation within the hemizygotic regi- Macaque monkeys are a key model species for various fields of biomedical on, or a mutation in its vicinity that alters expression pattern of contained genes. rMesaecaarccah fsauscchic ualsa rsiismian immunodeficiency virus pathogenesis, transplan- tation biology, drug development and safety testing. Cynomolgus monkeys P03.009 ( ) are the most widely used non-human primate species First case of 5q13.2 duplication revealed by array comparative for drug safety testing in pharmaceutical companies and experimental re- genomic hybridization O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, I. Y. Iourov2,1; sults might be influenced by variation in biological processes among the in- 1Institute of Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian dividuals sampled. Knowledge of genetic factors contributing to variability Federation, 2Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, with respect to biological drug responses could help to design better expe- 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. rimental approaches, which in turn would help to reduce, refine or even re- place animal experiments. We attempted to investigate the importance and implications of genetic variation on cellular processes using genome-wide We report on a case of 5q13.2 duplication uncovered by array comparative information on copy number variation (CNV) and gene expression from genome hybridization (array CGH). The proposita (age 9 months) presented Cynomolgus monkeys originating from three different populations used with brain malformations (cerebellar hypoplasia and atrophy of frontal and in pharmaceutical research (Mauritius, China and the Philippines). Using temporal lobes), congenital heart and eye abnormalities, muscle weakness/ aCGH data and a CNV calling pipeline combining different methods for CNV atrophy, brachycephaly, broad nasal bridge, short nose, high palate, low-set calling, we quantified copy number variation among our cohorts, which we and deformed ears, short neck, distal digital and nail hypoplasia. Array CGH then correlated with tissue specific gene expression data from five different revealed an interstitial duplication of 5q13.2 (approximately 3.8 Mb) span- tissues (heart, kidney, liver, lung, spleen). We identified several loci where ning chromosome 5 region from 68.9 to 72.7 Mb according to NCBI Build copy number variation is associated with changes in gene expression levels 37.3. The region contains 74 genes, from which 14 are indexed in OMIM. of several genes in a tissue specific manner. Of interest is, that many of the- Among notable disease-associated genes of this region are SMN1(*600354), se changes occur in the kidney, which is also involved in drug metabolism. SMN2(*601627), NAIP(*600355), GTF2H2(*601748), MCCC2(*609014). In Using further downstream analyses, we will attempt to get information on addition, a deletion of 2q37.3 (subtelomeric 2q) encompassing 3 genes, two the cellular processes possibly affected by these gene regulatory changes of which are also indexed in OMIM, was detected. Although 2q37.3 deleti- and make statements on potential implications for drug safety testing. on represents a CNV, its impact on clinical manifestations in the index case P03.012 cannot be excluded. It is to note that mapping of spinal muscular atrophy Clinical utility of molecular karyotyping using high resolution array (SMA) genes (i.e. SMN1 and SMN2) to 5q13 have suggested these loci to be comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) susceptible to genetic instabilities and DNA duplications. However, no cases M. Tzetis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, H. Frysira1, K. Giannikou1,2, V. Oikonomakis1, K. Kosma1, A. of large constitutional duplications within 5q13.2 have ever been reported. Syrmou1, A. Xaidara1, E. Kanavakis1,3; One can hypothesize that genomic organization of SMA region predisposes 1Dept of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2Alexander S. Onassis, Public Benefit Foundation, Athens, Greece, 3Research Institute for the Study of Genetic and Malignant both to small intragenic and large constitutional chromosomal duplications. Disorders in Childhood, “Aghia Sophia, Children’s Hospital”, Athens, Greece, Athens, Our case report supports current trends in molecular cytogenetics, which Greece. postulates molecular karyotyping (array CGH) as the most effective way to reveal previously unreported cases of constitutional chromosomal and ge- nomic rearrangements. Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is used to detect small copy number variants (CNVs) within the genome that are not visible by www.eshcgon.voerngtional karyotyping. The clinical application of aCGH has helped the www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 107 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genetic diagnosis of patients with unexplained developmental delay (DD)/ ver, increased rates of tetraploidy and DNA replication activity in AD were intellectual disability (ID), autism spectrum disorders (ASD), with or wit- not observed. We were able to demonstrate that the incidence of aneuploid hout multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) and/ or nonspecific features. We neuronal cells affected by aneuploidy was significantly higher in degenera- have implemented aCGH (244K & 4x180K Agilent aCGH platform, theore- ting brain areas (hippocampus, prefrontal cortex) as to less affected areas tical resolution <50Kb), since 2008 on 334 patients with various degrees (cerebellum). This suggests that cancer-like cellular behavior in the AD of DD/ID, seizures, ASD, MCA and normal previous conventional karyotype. brain mediates neurodegeneration via non-malignant aneuploidization and The patients had also received other genetic tests (FRAX, RETT, single FISH represents the leading genetic factor contributing to AD pathogenesis. Thus, tests or metabolic screens), which were normal.d Ce lninoivcoa,l ly significant sub- neurocytogenomics provides for a new molecular/cellular mechanism un- microscopic imbalances were detected in 84 (~25.15%) patients. From the derlying somatic neural genome diversity in brain diseases. Supported by total of 103 pathological CNVs detected, 38 were 5 were maternally DLR/BMBF (BLR 11/002). inherited (one mosaic) while 4 were paternally inherited. In 66 patients 1 P03.015 pathological CNV was detected, 51 were deletions (range: 0.03-18.4Mb) and Assessment of genotoxic risks in Tunisian health care workers 15 were duplications (range: 0.071-34.2Mb). More specifically 30 had one occupationally exposed to antineoplastic drugs of the previously well known microdeletion/ microduplication syndromes, G. Ben Salah1, K. Jmel-Hammami2, F. Kallabi1, S. Maatoug1, M. Larbi-Masmoudi2, F. while six others had an additional smaller aberration modifying the final Fakhfakh1, H. Ayadi3, H. Kamoun1; phenotype. The remaining had recently recognized syndromes or novel 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Occupational Medicine, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Centre of Biotechnology, pathogenic imbalances some of them overlapping with reported cases in Sfax, Tunisia. DECIPHER and ISCA databases. 18 patients had more than 1 pathological aberration, six had a combination of 2 deletions, 10 a combination of a de- letion/duplication, one 3 deletions, and finally one had a combination of 2 Antineoplastic drugs (AND) constitute a heterogeneous group of chemicals duplications and 1 deletion with sizes ranging from 0.025-19.8Mb. known for their mutagenic, carcinogenic and teratogenic effects. They in- P03.013 clude alkylating agents, mitotic spindle inhibitors, free radical generators. Back to the karyotype: a case of mosaic marker chromosome 11 Hospital personnel handling AND are potentially exposed to health risk; ho- detected by aCGH wever, investigations on their genotoxicity are inconsistent, and little infor- R. Silveira-Santos, A. C. Sousa, M. Avila, S. Serafim, S. Custódio, A. B. Sousa, I. Cordeiro; mation in Tunisian medical staff was available. Hence, our aim was to eva- Serviço de Genética Médica, Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal. luate cellular DNA damage of medical staff occupationally exposed to AND under routine working conditions. The level of cellular DNA damage was determined in lymphocytes with chromosomal aberration (CA) and sister Array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is currently being used in chromatid exchange (SCE) assays of 26 exposed subjects and 30 controls, many cytogenetic laboratories as a first-line approach to detect chromoso- matched for age and sex. An individual DNA repair capacity was determined me imbalances associated with development delay, mental retardation and by a mutagen sensitivity assay with Bleomycin (BLM) treatment in the late congenital anomalies. However some abnormalities are better elucidated S-G2 phase of the cell cycle. Statistical analysis was performed using Mann- by conventional techniques such as standard karyotyping, namely when the Whitney U test and Chi-square test. The results showed a significant increa- presence of a marker chromosome or chromosomal mosaicism is suspec- se in CA frequency (p<0.01) and SCE frequency (p<0.05) in exposed subjects ted. compared with controls. The mutagen sensitivity assay showed a significant Here we report the clinical and cytogenetic findings of a 4-year old girl with increase breaks/cell (b/c) frequency in exposed subjects (p<0.05). Our stu- intellectually disability, mild dysmorphism and macrocephaly with a 5,9 Mb dy has shown that increased genetic damage was evident in medical staff gain in chromosome 11 detected by aCGH and a previous normal prenatal due to AND occupational exposure. We suggest that cytogenetic follow up karyotype. studies should be included in regular health examination for this populati- The size and pattern of the aCGH showing a three and four copies profi- on, at least in cases of accidental exposure. le suggested a complex rearrangement involving the 11q11-q12.2 region, compatible with a supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC). The case P03.016 was then reevaluated by karyotyping revealing a de novo mosaic SMC in ap- Are apparently balanced chromosome rearrangements associated proximately 70% of the cells analyzed. to a higher risk of congenital anomalies due to cryptic genomic Although aCGH accurately identified the chromosome and gene content of imbalances? B. Hernández-Charro, M. Moreno-Igoa, A. Bengoa, A. Pérez-Juana, M. Artigas, M. A. the SMC in the patient presented here, karyotype was necessary to deter- Ramos-Arroyo; mine the presence and structure of the marker and to established the asso- Genetics Department. Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. ciated abnormal cell line. We compare our patient with other reported cases of SMC(11), to determine the respective contributions of this rearrangement to the phenotype. Genomic imbalances detectable by array-CGH have been postulated as the P03.014 underlying cause of developmental delay and/or congenital abnormalities Genomic instability in the Alzheimer’s disease brain: cancer-like (DD/MCA) in 10-15% of patients with normal karyotype. Similarly, over cellular behavior mediates neurodegeneration via non-malignant 40% of apparently balanced chromosome rearrangement (ABCR) carriers aneuploidization with abnormal phenotype present copy number variants (CNVs), both at the I. Y. Iourov1,2, S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, T. Liehr4, A. D. Kolotii2, I. A. Demidova1,2,3, A. K. breakpoints and elsewhere in the genome, implying a potential higher risk Beresheva1,2,3, I. V. Soloviev1, Y. B. Yurov1,2,3; 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of for DD/MCA. Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, We present the preliminary results of an on-going genome-wide arrayCGH 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, analysis (Agilent 180K) in three populations: G-1) Individuals DD/MCA 4Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. and normal karyotype (n=5), G-2) ABCR carriers with DD/MCA (n=9), G-3) ABCR carriers with normal phenotype (n=6). A similar total number of CNVs per individual was present in all three groups Uncovering relationship between genomic instability and neuronal cell cyc- (Table 1). However, potentially pathogenic imbalances were significantly le and death is required for identification of the Alzheimer’s disease (AD) more frequent among DD/MCA patients, independently of their karyotype neurodegeneration pathway. A hypothesis considering structural and func- (10,3% and 14,4%, in G-1 and G-2 groups, respectively), than in phenoty- tional alterations to genome landscape was proposed to link ectopic cell pically normal ABCR carriers (1,5%). All imbalances among ABCR carriers cycle events and aneuploidy. Previous experimental evidences suggest that were located outside of the breakpoint regions. Pathogenic imbalances were genomic landscape in the AD brain is featured by of genomic or chromo- present in 80%-G1 and 77.8%-G2 of DD/MCA patients and in 16,7% in phe- somal instability manifesting as tetraploidy and aneuploidy. Aberrant DNA notypically normal group. replication, leading to intracellular replication stress in the AD brain is likely Genomic imbalances have an important role in the pathogenesis of pheno- to produce the accumulation of genomic instabilities in vulnerable neuro- typic abnormalities. However, simple ABCR do not seem to confer a signi- nal cells and to promote neurodegeneration. Here, we report on molecular ficantly higher risk for DD/MCA associated to the presence of cryptic geno- cytogenetic analysis of aneuploidy, tetraploidy, and DNA replication events mic imbalances. Further systematic and comparative studies will be needed in the AD hippocampus to define the role of neuronal genome instability to provide adequate prenatal genetic counselling in pregnancy with ABCR. in AD pathogenesis. Increased aneuploidy rates (4-21%) (monosomy and trisomy) affecting chromosome 21 and chromosome X was observed in the AD brain in contrast to 1.2-3.6% rates in the unaffected brain. Howe- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org108 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Table 1.Summary of patients and imbalances the population. Among these, cytogenetic anomalies explain about 30% of detected by genome-wide array-CGH analysis patients with more severe mental retardation. Using conventional methods, Nº CNVs Total detection of subtle structural aberrations is limited to 6-10Mb. We obser- Patients Karyotype potentially Imbalance Size Nº CNV pathogenic ved a boy in which developmental delay and mild dysmorphic phenotype in G1-1 46,XX 12 0 spite of a normal karyotype remained highly suggestive for a chromosomal aberration. The most impressive features were microcephaly, absent speach G-1.2 46,XY 10 1 dup Yq11.22 296Kb and epilepsy. MLPA analysis for deletions / duplications of subtelomeric del 8q24.12 del 227Kb G-1.3 46,XY 14 2 17p12 150Kb chromosome regions using commercial kits P070 and P036 (MRC, Holland) dup19p12 762Kb detected a deletion of 3p. Array CGH analysis was performed using custom G-1.4 46,XX 10 2 del7q36.2-q36.3 20Mb designed whole-genome oligonucleotide arrays (OGT, UK), covering the hu- Total G-1 G(n-1=.55) 46,XY 5182 6 (101,3%) del 7p21.1 66 Kb man genome at a median density of 2.5 kb. Except the deletion of 3p26.3 encompassing 1.054 Mb arrayCGH revealed a constitutional interstitial de- letion of 2.64 Mb at 1q43-q44. Possible impact of both cryptic chromosomal G-2.1 46,XY,t(3;5) 9 1 del 15q22.31 50 Kb aberrations on the patient’s phenotype is discussed. del4q13.1 193Kb G-2.2 46,XX,inv(15) 10 2 P03.019 del10p15.3 128Kb Outcome of Array-CGH analysis in 197 Spanish patients with G-2.3 46,XY,inv(15) 12 1 del10p15.3 128 Kb idiopathic mental retardation, dysmorphic features and/or dup4p16.1 218Kb congenital anomalies. dup9p24.1 308Kb G-2.4 46,XY,t(16;17) 10 4 dup16p11.2 206Kb V. López-González1, J. A. Piñero-Fernández1, M. J. Ballesta-Martínez1, L. Villacieros- dupXp22.12 629Kb Hernández1, L. Armengol-Dulcet2, E. Guillén-Navarro1; 1Unidad de Genética Médica. Servicio de Pediatría. Hospital Universitario Virgen de la G-2.5 46,XY,t(1;13) 18 1 del 9p23 155 Kb Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 2Quantitative Genomic Medicine Laboratories, S.L., Barcelona, del6q13q14 873Kb Spain. G-2.6 46,XY,t(3;6;13) 13 3 del6q14.1 126Kb del13q31.3 1 Mb G-2.7 46,XX,t(15;18) 8 0 del1p31.1 122Kb INTRODUCTION: Array genomic hybridization (aCGH) is being used clini- G-2.8 46,XY,inv(11) 11 2 del1q21.1 2.3Mb cally to detect pathogenic copy number variants (CNVs) in individuals with Total G-2 G(n-2=.99) 46,XY,t(8;17) 967 14 (104,4%) intellectual disability (ID), dysmorphic features (DF) and/or congenital ano- malies (CA). It is now widely adopted as a first-tier clinical diagnostic test. Our aim is to review the diagnostic yield in our unit. G-3.1 46,XX,t(3;5) 10 0 MATERIAL AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of aCGH G-3.2 46,XX,t(16;17) 9 1 dupXp22.12 629Kb data (180-400k) of 197 patients with ID, DF and/or CA, with normal karyo- type and subtelomeric MLPA, between july 2009 and july 2011. G-3.3 46,XX,t(19;21) 12 0 RESULTS: We found pathogenic genomic imbalance in 28 (14.2%) of these G-3.4 46,XY,inv(2),t(2;12) 13 0 197 patients. Within this group, 4 patients (14.28%) had previous balanced GTo-3ta.5l G3 46,XY,t(3;7) 11 0 rearrangement in karyotype. The size of the pathogenic structural aberrati- G(n-3=.66) 45,XY,rob(14;21) 6116 1 (10,5%) ons found varied from 17 Kb to 14.1 Mb. In 90 patients (45.68%) polymor- phic CNVs were detected, non-clinically significant CNVs in 39 (19.8%) and variants of uncertain clinical significance (VOUS) in 40 (20.3%). Parental P03.017 complementary aCGH analysis was done in 39 patients. CASK gene heterozygous deletion in a female patient with CONCLUSION: 1) The diagnostic yield of our study (14.2%) was consistent microcephaly and cerebellar hypoplasia with prior reports (11-20%). 2) aCGH is a valuable tool in patients with J. B. Melo1, S. I. Ferreira1, A. Mascarenhas1, A. Jardim1, L. Ramos2, J. Saraiva2, I. M. mental retardation, dysmorphic features and/or congenital anomalies of Carreira1; unknown etiology. 3) Further investigations are needed in order to clarify 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Genetics Department, Pediatric Hospital, CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal. the role of VOUS in the pathogenesis since they account for a significant pro- portion of our results. 4) Effective clinical interpretation of these studies CASK requires considerable skill and experience. gene (OMIM 300172) has an important function during neural deve- P03.020 lopment, having a crucial role during synaptogenesis and cerebellar and Additional evidence to support the role of the 20q13.33 region in forebrain development. It encodeCsA aS Kmember of the membrane-associated susceptibility to autism guanylate kinase (MAGUK) protein family, highly expressed in the nervous A. Mosca-Boidron1, M. Valduga2, C. Thauvin3, N. Lagarde4, C. Henry4, M. Béri- Deixheimer2, N. Marle1, M. Payet1, C. Ragon1, L. Gueneau5, P. Callier1, F. Mugneret1, P. system of both adult and fetuses. gene deletions, duplications and mu- Jonveaux2, L. Faivre6; tations have been recently reported to be associated with mental retarda- 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 2Laboratoire de Génétique, EA tion and microcephaly with pontine and cerebellar hypoplasia (MICPCH - 4002, CHU, Nancy-University, Nancy, France, 3Centre de Génétique et centre de référence OMIM 300749). Deletions have only been reported in female patients, while maladies rares anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs, CHU Dijon, mutations have been reported in both males and females. Missense imn uuttaetrio- Dijon, France, 4Centre de Ressources Autismes de Bourgogne, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, ons can cause a milder phenotypic spectrum while inactivating mutations 5Equipe Génétique et Anomalies du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Faculté and deletions can be associated with reduced male viability or even de Médecine, Dijon, France, 6Centre de Génétique et centre de référence maladies rares anomalies du développement et syndromes malformatifs, Dijon, France. lethality. We report a female patient with mental retardation, ataxia, microcephaly, cerebellar hypopdlaes niao, vvoentricular septal defect and scoliosis that was ana- Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of highly heritable complex lyzed with a 4x180K ACAgiSlKent oligonucleotide array-CGH. Array analysis re- neurodevelopmental disorders and identifying its genetic bases has been vealed a 900 Kb deletion at Xp11.4 between pCoAsSiKtions 41,342,834- challenging. The susceptibility genes so far identified seem to be involved in 42,241,039 involving gene. This report, together with published data, the proper establishment of the synaptic cleft, the secretion of surface pro- reinforces the hypothesis that haploinsufficieCnAcSyK of gene is respon- teins, the excitation/inhibition balance, or the overall cellular translation sible for mental retardation associated with MICPCH. In the presence of a processes, suggesting that impacting translation-dependent processes like clinical phenotype with these characteristics, gene mutations but also synaptic plasticity or cell-to-cell connectivity may lead to an ASD phenotype. genomic copy number changes should be considered. P03.018 Chromosomal imbalancedse indoevnotified by conventional or molecular cytoge- netic techniques account for 10-15% of patients with autism. Here, we re- ArrayCGH analysis of constitutional cryptic deletions of 1q43-q44 and 3p26.3 in a boy with microcephaly and developmental delay port a third cFaMseR 1of pure 20q13.33 deletion in a boy presenting with autism. Metabolic evaluation and standard karyotype were reported as nor- R. V. Vazharova1, I. Bradinova1, S. Andonova1, S. Bichev1, A. Savov1, V. Bojinova2, I. Kremensky1; mal, as was molecular analysis. The Human Genome Microarray CGH 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2USBALNP Saint Naum, Sofia, Bulgaria. 180K from Agilent® used for array-CGH analyses revealed an interstitiaCl HdRe-- NleAti4on of KatC NleQas2t 556 kb in the 20q13.33 region (arr20q13.33(61,229,038- 61,785,825)x1, hg18). This deletion encompassed 21 genes including Mental retardation is a distressing disorder affecting approximately 3% of and . These genes are interesting candidate genes in the autistic www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 109 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.023 Evaluation of genomic imbalances in apparently balanced phenotype since they have been reported in association with entities with rearrangements exclusive neurological manifestations such as epilepsy. Thed fer enqouveont associa- T. I. Mancini1, M. M. Oliveira1, A. B. Perez1, C. A. Kim2, D. Bertola2, R. S. Guilherme1, S. tion between epileptic and CaHuRtiNstAic4 phenKoCtyNpQe2s suggests that these diseases Bragagnolo1, V. A. Meloni1, A. R. Dutra1, M. C. Cernach1, A. Garcia1, S. S. Takeno1, M. I. may share common predisposing genes. Interestingly, a 20q13.33 Melaragno1; duplication encompassing and in a girl with autism has also 1UNIFESP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 2USP, Sao Paulo, Brazil. been reported. This study underlines that copy number variations of the 20q13.33 region can cause autism and emphasizes the importance of array- CGH in the genetic work-up of patients with autism. Apparently balanced rearrangements are generally associated with a nor- P03.021 mal phenotype. In some cases, however, phenotype alterations are obser- A de novo balanced translocation that affects chromosomal bands ved, which have been attributed to different pathogenic mechanisms inclu- Xp21.2 and 11q13.1 is associated with an autism spectrum disorder. ding intragenic rupture, deletions, duplications, pdoe snitoivoon effect, or may even P. M. Kroisel1, K. M. Roetzer1, M. Mach1, M. R. Speicher1, A. Kortschak2, W. Kaschnitz2, M. be a chance association. We investigatedd e1 1n opvaotients with altered phenotype Auer1, J. B. Geigl1, K. Wagner1; and apparently balanced rearrangements: eight translocaitnio snitsu, two 1Institute of Human Genetics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Department of inherited inversions and one complex rearrangement. Cytogenetic Paediatrics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. and molecular techniques, including SNP-array and fluorescent hy- bridization (FISH) detected genomic imbalances in two patients. Using 200 kb filter in array analysis, one female patient with an apparently balanced An autism spectrum disorder was diagnosed in a 3 1/2 year old boy and translocation between chromosomes 6 and 14 was found to have a 1.1 Mb consecutive cytogenetic analysis revealed a balanced translocation involving deletion in 6p. In another female patient, who presented a complex rearran- the X chromosome and chromosome 11 leading to the following karyotype: gement involving chromosomes 2, 10, 13 and 21, two deletions of 10q were 46,Y,t(X;11)(p21.2;q13.1).ish t(X;11)(wcpX+,wcp11+;wcpX+,wcp11+) dn. detected, one of them next to the breakpoint measuring 1 Mb, and the other No additional obvious phenotype anomalies or dysmorphic features could one, more distal, approximately 7 Mb in size, probably related to the phe- be recognized. A cryptic genomic unbalance up the achieved resolution was notype. Two of the patients had genomic imbalances smaller than 200 kb, be ruled out by application of a 60k Agilent array CGH analysis which sho- involving genes which might be related to their phenotype. We concluded wed normal results. Balanced chromosomal aberrations in patients with a that molecular techniques such as arrays, associated to cytogenetic methods particular phenotype represent a valuable resource to identify causative ge- can help in detecting genomic imbalances which are invisible under the mi- nes involved in such cytogenetic rearrangements. Besides conventional but croscope and unveiling the role of genes involved in the phenotype variabi- tedious approaches like FISH analysis using tiling path clones to finally iden- lity of patients with apparently balanced rearrangements. Furthermore, the tify chromosome breakpoint spanning clones and the gene(s) affected, re- molecular characterization of the alterations found provides information for cently more straightforward methods were demonstrated to be successful. the follow-up of the patients and genetic counseling of their families (Finan- These techniques include so called array painting procedures as well as cial support: FAPESP, Brazil). breakpoint analysis of balanced chromosome rearrangements by next-ge- P03.024 neration paired-end sequencing. The particular chromosomal breakpoints Two balanced chromosomal modifications transmitted from parents involved in this specific case are close to or nearly identical to chromosomal to their offspring bands in similar rearrangements reported in a very few patients with auti- D. Mierla, L. Neagu, S. Grigore, V. Radoi; stic traits. However the number of potential candidate genes at these loci Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. is still to high for a classical Sanger sequencing strategy to characterize the involved gene. Since our group has already successfully applied the array painting methodology in comparable settings we have now also started to A 33 years old pregnant woman was investigated by amniocentesis. evaluate the next-generation paired-end sequencing approach to compare Prenatal karyotype from cultured amniocytes was performed due to in- the efficiacy of these quite different techniques in the described patient as creased risk for trisomy 21 at serological test without ultrasonographic ab- well as similar cases. normalities. P03.022 Fetus‘ karyotype established by GTG banding was: 46,XX,t(3;6) Brain-specific X chromosome aneuploidy is likely to contribute to the (q28;q13);inv(5)(p14q11.2). We performed chromosome analysis in the pathogenesis of autism and can explain the unsolved paradox of male parents for checking if chromosome modifications in fetus are „de novo“ or susceptibility are inherited from parents. Mother‘s karyotype revealed the inversion on Y. B. Yurov1,2,3, S. G. Vorsanova2,1,3, A. D. Kolotii2, T. Liehr4, I. Y. Iourov1,2; chromosome 5 [46,XX,inv(5)(p14q11.2)] and father‘s karyotype showed the 1Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of other modification, the translocation t(3;6)(q28;q13). Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian Federation, We informed the family about results and we found out that the mother‘s 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation, brother has the same modification as her and this man was cytogenetic in- 4Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, Jena, Germany. vestigated because his infertility. Conclusion: Kariotypes of fetus and his parents were performed for correct genetic advices. Autism is a common childhood psychiatric disorder characterized by impai- P03.025 red social interaction and communication, repetitive/stereotypic behavior. Cytogenetic effect in vivo and in vitro of the antihypertensive drugs Numerous studies indicate that chromosomal and genomic imbalances play ARBs on human lymphocytes a role in the etiology and pathogenesis of autism. However, the incidence I. Huerta1, M. Barasoain1, M. Télez1, P. Gurtubay2, B. Criado3, A. Domínguez de and role of genomic imbalances in the autistic brain - the prime target of the Bidaurreta4, E. Ortiz-Lastra5, J. González5, G. Barrenetxea5, I. Arrieta1; disease - have not been addressed. Here, we report on the first evaluation 1Department of Genetic, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology. Faculty of of mosaic aneuplody in the autistic brain. Postmortem brain tissue samples Science and Technology. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Unit of (cerebral cortex and cerebellum) of 12 autistic patients and 12 age-/sex- Reproductive Medicine. School of Nursing., Cruces, Spain, 3Department of Genetics. matched controls were provided by the Brain and Tissue Bank for Develop- Cooperativa de Ensino Superior Politecnico e Universitario, Porto, Portugal, 4Primary mental disorders, University of Maryland. In the male autistic brain, we ob- Care Unit. Interior Comarca, Bilbao, Spain, 5Department of Medical-surgical Specialities. Faculty of Medicine. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain. served statistically significant increase of chromosome X aneuploidy rates in the cerebral cortex and cerebellum (p=0.0166) as compared to control samples. Autistic spectrum disorders currently affect four times as many Hypertension is the most prevalent, treatable risk factor for diseases of the males as females. Mosaic chromosome X aneuploidy in the brain may help heart, brain and kidneys. The majority of hypertensive patients need long- to explain the preponderance of autism among males in addition to specific term administration of antihypertensive agents and that is why the duration alterations of the X chromosome genes. We conclude that intercellular geno- of the pharmacological treatment requires documentation of long-term sa- mic variation manifesting as brain-specific low-level mosaic aneuploidy is fety and efficacy, including sensitive indices of genotoxic damage. one of the possible genetic factors likely contributing to autism neuropatho- Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs) are a widely used class of drugs that logy. Our findings support the hypothesis that somatic genome instability are growing in popularity due to the excellent blood pressure control and could affect as homeostasis of aneuploid neurons as functioning of the neu- tolerability. However, recent concerns have surfaced about possible links ronal network in the whole autistic brain, playing, therefore, an important between ARBs and increased cancer risk. role in the pathogenesis. Supported by BMBF/DLR (RUS 09/006). Chromosomal aberrations (CAs) represent the most extensively used and validated biomarker in populations exposed to genotoxic agents and it is www.eshg.org www.eshalgso. oasrsgociated with a higher cancer risk. This study aimed to evaluate the 110 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.030 in vivo in vitro Frequency of chromosomal aberrations among general human genotoxic potential of five kinds of ARBs (candesartan, valsartan, eprosar- population tan, telmisartan and olmesartan), assessed and for their capa- I. Aganovic, M. Mackic, S. Ibrulj; city of inducing CAs on lymphocytes of 55 patients and 10 controls. Center for genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. Results revealed that tiont vailt rnoumber of CAs as well as the mean frequency of CA/cel and % of aberrant cell were increased for the patients and at the the- rapeutic doses tested comlopcaired to the controls. Chromatid type ab- Genetic monitoring is used for surveillance of professionally exposed people errations were the predominant CA. Most of the chromosomal breakpoints to ionizing radiation, chemicals and medical treatments and rarely to inve- locations coincided with specific known as fragile sites, which are prefe- stigate the state of general population exposed to environmental mutagens rential targets for mutagens and carcinogens. that include all mentioned and life-style factors and habits. We have per- The results are consistent with our previous studies of beta-blockers geno- formed cytogentic analyzes of chromosomal aberrations (CA) in blood lym- toxicity and provide evidence for an association between antihypertensive phocytes among healthy population, including the data of their age, gender therapy and DNA damage in human lymphocytes. and smoking habits (none of them was professionally exposed to ionizing P03.026 radiation). Step by Step, Formation of Complex Chromosomal Rearrangements Analyzes were done for 200 examinees, 200 cells were counted for each of B. Satkin, B. Karaman, K. Yilmaz, U. Altunoglu, S. Basaran; them for CA. Laboratory used standard method of 48h cultivation of peri- Medical Genetics Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, pheral blood lymphocytes. Turkey. We concluded that there is no significant difference in CA frequency among gender (p > 0,05); that there is highly significant difference in frequency of acentric fragments among age groups (20-29y; 30-39y; 40-49y; 50-59y and Complex Chromosome Rearrangements (CCR) are defined for the aberrati- 60-70y)(p<0,001); and that there is no significant difference in frequency ons involving three or more breakpoints on two or more chromosomes. The of acentric fragments and ring chromosomes depending of smoking habits occurrence is extremely rare. There is no available classification according (p>0,05) but there is significant difference in frequency of minute fragments to the formation mechanism. depending of smoking habits(p<0,05). These suggest that smoking can cau- We report here a new familial case of CCR involving chromosomes 3, 6 and se genetic instability in humans and potential micro mutations that even- 10 with 4 breakpoints tually may play a role in cancerogenesis. Proband, 33 years old male, was referred to our cytogenetic laboratory for P03.032 chromosome analysis due to the history of repeated miscarriages. Submicroscopical duplication of the Wolf-Hirschhorn critical region. Chromosome analysis revealed a balanced CCR in the proband (Karyoty- Case report. pe: 46,XY,t(3;6;10) (3pter->3q12::6q24->6qter;6pter->6q14.2::10p11.2- R. Zordania1, K. Kuuse1, A. Tiidema1, O. Zilina1, E. Kurvinen1, K. Õunap1,2; >10pter;3qter->3q12::6q24->6q14.2::10p11.2>10qter). The mother with a 1Department of Genetics United Laboratory Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, history of two alive sibs and four miscarriages, was the carrier of the same 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. CCR. Surprisingly the brother of the proband was a carrier of a simple reci- procal translocation, (46,XY,t(6;10)( q14;p12)). CCR was confirmed with FISH study by using Chromoprobe Multiprobe Sy- Chromosomal rearrangements in the short arm of chromosome 4 can result stem (Cytocell) and centromeric probes of 3, 6, and 10. in two different clinical entities: deletion causes Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrom We suggest that the CCR in the family most likely have arisen in two conse- (WHS) - characterized by severe growth delay, mental retardation, facial cutive steps; the first step was the translocation t(6;10)(q14;p12) and the dysmorphism and congenital anomalies. Genotype-phenotype correlations second step was the new translocation occurred between the chromosomes of patients with WHS point to a critical locus (4p16.3) to be responsible for 3 and derivative 10. the main characteristics of this disorder. In addition it was shown that not We concluded that the mother was hidden mosaic for both of the cell lines, only deletions but also duplications of the WHS critical region cause mental simple translocation and complex rearrangement. This family was intere- retardation and anomalies. The duplication phenotype overlaps partially sting to understand the formation mechanisms of CCR. with the deletion phenotype, but facial dysmorphism is different. P03.027 We report clinical and laboratory data of one month old patient. He was 3D position of constitutive heterochromatin regions within the born to young unrelated healthy parents, 1G/1P, pedigree unremarkable. nucleus of chorionic villi and embryonic tissues. Patient was macrosomic, head circumference compared to body was micro- I. Trofimova1,2, K. Solovyov3, E. Fedorova3, V. Vasilyev3, T. Kuznetzova2; cephalic, he had dysmorphism- periorbital fullness, large hands and feet, 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s Institute macroglossia, umbilical hernia, developmental delay, but no congenital ano- of obstetrics & gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Institute of malies. Cytogenetic investigation using Giemsa banding revealed karyotype Experimental Medicine of the North-West Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical 46,X,add(Y)(q12)dn. Using HumanCytoSNP-12 array (Illumina Inc) a 6,8 Mb Sciences, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. duplication was found in the region 4p16.3-16.1. The result was confirmed with FISH-analysis using WHS Region Probe (Cytocell, UK). The patient had pathological unbalanced translocation and his final karyo- Nuclear architecture and chromatin organisation during interphase are type was 46,X,der(Y)t(Y;4)(q12;p16)dn.ish der(Y)t(Y;4)(Yqter-,WHSCR+). known to play crucial roles in the regulation of gene expression. Constitu- arr 4q16.3q16.1(1-6,806,837)x3. tive heterochromatin regions (CHR) in chromosomes of embryonic tissues Conclusion: using different laboratory cytogenetic methods allowed to get a are characterized by tight condensation, late replication and methylation. correct diagnosis, the family got appropriate genetic consultation and pre- Meanwhile decondensation, hypomethylation, early replication and DNAse natal invasive diagnostics during following pregnancy. 1 hypersensitivity CHR in human trophoblast cells were registered. These P03.033 data could be indicated CHR in chromosomes of chorionic villi has unusual Impact of different chromosomal inversions on infertility functional state. A. Mohseni Meybodi, H. Gourabi, S. Zari Moradi, H. Karimi, M. Tahsili, K. Anissi The aim of study was analysis of 3D position of CHR of chromosome 1 Hemaseh, S. Asia, Z. Saffari, T. Tavakol zadeh, Z. Beheshti, P. Fahimi, P. Pirasteh, N. (1q12) in human trophoblast and embryonic cells. It is known that CHRs Shahrokhshahi; are associated with nuclear periphery and form chromocenter. Our 3D-FISH Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for results showed a significant repositioning of 1q12 towards the centre of the reproductive Biomedicine,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. nucleus and near of chromocenter in chorionic villi sample from early preg- nancy (4-5 week). We found no change in the position of 1q12 in human embryonic tissues and chorionic villi from 5-6 week to 36 week pregnancy. Objective: One of the frequent occurrences in chromosome rearrangements Almost all of FISH-signals (correspond to 1q12) were closer to the nuclear is inversion of different Chromosomes. An inversion does not usually have periphery and in chromocenter. phenotypic effect in the majority of inversion heterozygote carriers, when it In conclusion, today little is known about the nuclear organization in ex- is a balanced rearrangement. However, infertility, miscarriages and/or chro- traembryonic and embryonic tissues. Data of 3-D FISH analysis of this work mosomally unbalanced offspring can be observed in carriers of either type have indicated in possible functional role of CHR in embryogenesis of hu- of inversions especially per centric inversions. man. Material and Methods: We investigated the karyotypes of 13017 infertile in- dividuals being referred to Genetic laboratory of Royan infertility institute between 2005 and 2011, using standard GTG banding. We attend to report the variety of heterozygous par centric and per centric inversions. C- Ban- ding for par centric inversions of the long arm of Y chromosome used for www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 111 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.036 Chromosome kissing in association with the ATR-X syndrome more precise detection. H. Tanabe1, T. Wada2; Results: A total of 252 cases (1.93%) showed these chromosomal alterati- 1The Graduate University for Advanced Studies (Sokendai), Kanagawa, Japan, ons. Twenty one (0.16%) were inv(Y)(p11.2q11.2), fifteen (0.11%) inv(Y) 2Kanagawa Children’s Medical Center, Kanagawa, Japan. (q11.2q12), one hundred thirty nine (1.06%) inv(9)(p11q12), forty four (0.34%) inv(3)(p11q11.2), nine (0.07%) inv(2)(p11.2q13), and twenty four (0.18%) inversions of other chromosomes. ATR-X (X-linked α-thalassemia / mental retardation) syndrome is one of Conclusion: Human inversion mutations occur at a low but detectable fre- the syndromes associated with abnormal epigenetic gene regulation, which quency. Although the number of inversions has been considered normal appears males with X-linked mental retardation, HbH disease, skeletal ab- variants such as inv (9)(p11q12), we are trying to discuss the importance normalities, and autistic behavior. ATR-X syndrome is caused by a mutation of this chromosomal rearrangement and its role on infertility or sponta- in the ATRX gene localized on the X chromosome (Xq21.1), which encodes neously abortions. Carriers of such inversions are at risk of producing ab- ATRX protein, one of the chromatin-remodeling proteins. However, the normal gametes during meiosis that may lead to unbalanced offspring. Our details of molecular mechanism with symptoms of this syndrome are still data suggests that it’s better for all couples with the same symptoms to have unknown. Here to learn more about the relationships between nuclear ar- karyotype analysis on a parallel with their routine tests. chitecture and failure of epigenetic regulation in the ATR-X syndrome, we ex- P03.034 amined characteristics of spatial positioning of following three chromosome Mosaic trisomy 1q and Fryns-like phenotype arm specific regions by 3D-FISH technique; 1) Xq (ATRX gene has mapped A. Rajaee, A. Kariminejad, R. Kariminejad, K. Najafi, S. Ghaderi-Sohi, M. Kariminejad; on), 2) 16p (HBA has mapped on), and 3) 11p (HBB has mapped on). After Kariminejad-Najmabadi Path. & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. image acquisition by confocal laser scaning microscope, analysis of relative spatial positioning of three painted regions was performed. The results sho- wed that neighborhood association of particular two chromosome territory Fryns Syndrome is a lethal condition characterized by diaphragmatic her- regions called as chromosome kissing was observed with high frequency nia, coarse facial features, lung hypoplasia, cardiac defects, and the charac- between Xq and 16p and between 11p and 16p in cell nuclei from the ATR-X teristic distal limb defects. Autosomal recessive inheritance has been sugge- syndrome patients, respectively. The frequency of the same combination sted on the basis of occurrence in both sexes and recurrence in siblings with from the normal individual is approximately halves of them, respectively. healthy parents. Cases with chromosomal abnormality have been reported Thus we considered that the spatial arrangement of nuclear architecture with clinical findings very similar to Fryns syndrome. Duplication and or has been affected after one has been attacked with the ATR-X syndrome. deletion of long arm of chromosome 1, and anomalies of chromosomes 15, 6 P03.037 and 22 have been reported in cases with Fryns-like syndrome. Use of customised array CGH to investigate the sequence composition Herein, we reported a case of midtrimester fetus with multiple congenital around the breakpoints of de novo CNVs according to their parental anomalies. Prenatal ultra-sound at 21 weeks of gestation demonstrated con- origin genital hernia of diaphragm and hydrocephaly. Pregnancy was terminated S. Thomas, S. Laird, S. Huang, J. Crolla, P. Jacobs; and fetus was sent for autopsy, karyotyping and aCGH. Autopsy examination Wessex Regional Genetics Laboratory, Salisbury, United Kingdom. showed microphthalmia of left eye, hydrocephaly, hypoplasia of corpus cal- de novo losum, left optic nerve hypoplasia, congenital hernia of diaphragm, micro- gnathia, dysplastic ears, lung hypoplasia (left lung), malformed uterus and Among a large series of CNVs identified by array CGH, we found the right club foot. Chromosomal study showed mosaic 46,XX/47,XX+1(q21- proportion of LCR-mediated imbalances (formed by non-allelic homologous q41). Array comparative genomic hybridization (a-CGH) confirmed mosaic recombination) to be significantly higher among maternally- compared to duplication of long arm of chromosome 1q21 to 1q41. Our fetus has many paternally-derived CNVs. To investigate thdee ncoonvotribution of repetitive se- of the clinical features of Fryns syndrome. Our case gives further evidence quences other than LCRs to the formation of CNVs, we refined the break- that 1q duplications are associated with a Fryns-like phenotype including point intervals (BPIs) of 37 patients with non-LCR mediated CNVs congenital hernia of diaphragm, pulmonary hypoplasia, micrognathia, long (18 maternal and 19 paternal) using an Oxford Gene Technology customised philtrum and joint contractures. oligonucleotide array and screened the BPIs for the presence of homologous P03.035 and/or repetitive sequences. Twelve BPIs (in 10 patients) could not be refi- Mosaic interstitial duplication of the long arm of chromosome ned further due to the high repetitive sequence content. For the remaining 20 associated with vertebral malformations as the only major BPI the average size was reduced from 113kb (range 14 - 391kb) to 2.6kb phenotypic manifestation (121bp - 34kb). At least 17/36 maternal and 18/38 paternal breakpoints B. Pabst1, K. Miller1, B. Bohnhorst2, J. Weidemann3, J. Schmidtke1, M. Arslan-Kirchner1; occurred within the intron of a gene. The majority (76%) of BPI contained 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, at least one repetitive sequence element and for 8/18 maternal CNVs and 2Department of Paediatric Pulmonology, Allergology and Neonatology, Hannover 5/19 paternal CNVs, the same or similar repetitive sequence element was Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Institute of Diagnostic and Interventional present at both BPI. However, for those CNVs where both breakpoints were Radiology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. mapped to intervals below 1kb, only 1/9 showed significant homology bet- ween the BPI. Therefore, although we have demonstrated the utility of large scale breakpoint mapping using customised array CGH, further work to try Duplication of the long arm of chromosome 20 as the only chromosomal and determine the exact breakpoint site by junction fragment cloning will be aberration is rarely described. Better known are reports on patients with required to assess the contribution of repetitive sequences other than LCRs a mosaic trisomy 20 or a rearranged chromosome 20 with additional im- to the formation of CNVs. balances. th P03.038 We report on a girl born in the 35 week of gestation to a 31 year old mo- A case of de novo complex chromosomal abnormality involving a ther. The patient is the second child of healthy parents. Birth weight, length t(8;10) and an interstitial deletion 5q(q33.1→q34) characterized by and head circumference were within the normal range according to the GTG banding, FISH and cCGH gestational week. The girl presented with some mild dysmorphic features, N. Oliva-Teles1, S. Pires1, J. Aguiar1, M. Mota-Freitas1, B. Marques2, H. Correia2, J. Sales- e.g. low set and dysplastic ears, short nose with depressed nasal root, Marques3, A. Fortuna1; simple philtrum and thin lips. Ultrasounds of heart, abdomen and kidneys 1INSA-Centro de Genética Médica Jacinto Magalhães, Porto, Portugal, 2INSA, Lisbon, were normal while the corpus callosum was shortened and thicker than Portugal, 3Centro Hospitalar Vila Nova de Gaia – Espinho, Espinho, Portugal. usually. Multiple vertebrae anomalies, e.g. hemi as well as cleft vertebrae and rip fusion were identified by radiography. Cytogenetic and molecular cytogenetic analysis revealed a mosaic female karyotype with a duplica- Interstitial deletions of the long arm of chromosome 5 involving the region tion of part of the long arm of chromosome 20 in 8% of blood cells. The 5q33.1→q34 are rare occurrences. The clinical features of patients carrying karyotype is described as 46,XX,dup(20)(q11.2q13.3)/46,XX. ish dup(20) similar deletions include dysmorphic facial features, such as epicanthus, (D20S1157+,20QTEL14+,wcp20+). The parents have normal karyotypes. retrognatia, protruding left ear and asymmetric mouth, high-arched palate, Hemi and cleft vertebrae as well as rip fusion have been described in cases four finger lines and clinodactyly of digits II and V on both hands. with duplication 20 associated with other chromosomal imbalances. The We report on a female child aged 13 presenting with development dredlayth, present case helps to further establish the correlation of these malformati- agenesthis of the corpus callosum, hallux diverted into, clinodactyly of 3 , 4 ons with duplication of a part of the long arm of chromosome 20. and 5 fingdeer ns,o voobesity, hepatic steatosis, vesicular lithyasis and bilateral macular changes. Classical karyotyping using high resolution GTG banding revealed a complex rearrangement including three abnormal chro- mosomes: 5, 8 and 10; apparently there was an inversion in the long arm www.eshg.org www.eshg.org112 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Hospitalari Martí i Julià, Girona, Spain. of chromosome 5 and a t(8;10). FISH whole chromosome painting probes confirmed an apparently balanced t(8;10), a deleted chromosome 5 and Background: Copy number variants (CNV) are associated with a significance confirmed the inexistence of any other chromosomal involvement. increased risk of diseases for the individual and/or their family members. To define the deletion breakpoints and the extent of the deletion, cCGH tech- They are contributing to the development of congenital anomalies, intellec- niques were performed and revealed an interstitial deletion 5(q33.1→q34). tual disabilities, spectrum autism disorder and other psychiatric disorders. The final karyotype was: 46,XX,der(5)inv(5)(q21q33.1)del(5)(q33.1q34) It is known that the prevalence of psychiatric disorders among adults with t(8;10)(q13;q21.2)dn. ish cgh del(5)(q33.1q34). intellectual disability is higher than in control population. The authors enhance the importance of using high resolution banding com- Methods: We analyzed a cohort of 100 adult patients affected by mild/mode- bined with molecular cytogenetic techniques for more precise definition of rate intellectual disability associated with psychiatric disorders and minor complex chromosomal rearrangements in patients with uncharacteristic dysmorphic features. Genetic analysis included array comparative genomic phenotypic features and compare the present case findings with previously hybridization (aCGH) (Agilent 400K), performed in 45 cases at present. published data. Results: We detected 89 rare and potentially pathogenic CNVs in 37 cases, P03.039 with an average of 2,4 CNV/case (1-8). These CNVs include 184 genes (2,07 A de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement involving four genes/CNV). At present, we can correlate known CNVs with intellectual chromosomes in an infertile male with oligospermia: Case report disability and/or psychiatric disorders in 13 patients (31,1%). Deletions A. Mohseni Meybodi, M. Tahsili, H. Gourabi, H. Vaziri Nasab, P. Pirasteh, T. Tavakol and duplications found in these cases are: del2p12, del2p16.3, dup3q29, zadeh, M. Totonchi, S. Asia; del12p12.1, dup15q11q13, del15q13.1q13.3, dup15q25.2, del15q26.2, Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for reproductive Biomedicine,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dup1C5TqNteNr,A d2u, pN1R7XqN214,. 1PqA2K42.2, ,S dOeXl25,2 qGtAeBr,R aBn3d, dCuHpRXNqA272,. 1A. DGAeMneTsS rLe3s,p MonCsTibPl2e, oAfP pOsHy chia tSriHcA dNisKo3r.d ers and some of them also with intellectual disability are: NRXN1 and Del2p16.3 is present in three patients and is the only Purpose: Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR) are rare events in- recurrent CNV associated with psychiatric disorders. gene is related volving more than two chromosomes and more than two breakpoints. They with susceptibility to autism, schizophrenia and mental retardation. are usually associated with infertility or sub fertility in male carriers. We ex- Conclusion: We most emphasise the high frequency of rare CNVs associated amined a 29 year oligosperm man with a history of Varicocelectomy, normal testes size and normal endocrinology profile,who referred for chromosome sTpheisc iwalolyrk w witahs psusypcphoiratterdic b dyi aso grrdaenrt ionf pFaISti e(PnIt0s 8w0i7t7h8 m).ild/moderate intellec- tual disability. analysis to genetic laboratory of Royan infertility institute. Method: Chromosomal analysis was performed from peripheral blood lym- P03.042 phocyte cultures and analyzed by GTG banding. Additional tests such as C- Detection of cryptic chromosome rearrangements by BAC Genome banding and multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) procedure Array-CGH in five patients, with normal and/or abnormal karyotypes, for each of the involved chromosomes were performed to determine the associated with Mental Retardation, Autism and/or Epilepsy: new patterns of the segregations. Y chromosome micro deletions in the azoo- insights for genotype/phenotype correlation spermia factor (AZF) region were analyzed with multiplex polymerase chain V. Cabras1, A. Milia2, C. Montaldo3, A. Nucaro4; reaction. To identify the history and origin of this CCR, all the family mem- 1Experimental Medical Pathology Departement, Cagliari, Italy., Cagliari, Italy, bers were analyzed. 2Experimental Biology Department, Cagliari, Italy., Cagliari, Italy, 3Surgical Sciences Result: The case was a complex chromosomal translocation; Department, University, Cagliari, Italy., Cagliari, Italy, 4Genetic and Biomedical Research 46,XY,t(13;16;14;18) (q31.2;p13.2;q24.2;q21.2). No micro deletion in Y Institute-CNR, Cittadella Universitaria. Monserrato,Cagliari, Italy., Monserrato( chromosome was detected. Just his monozygous twin brother has the same Cagliari), Italy. de novo reciprocal exchanges. The other siblings and parents were normal. Conclusion: CCR are associated with male infertility as a result of the disrup- tion of spermatogenesis due to complex meiotic configurations and the pro- We re-examined ten patients with normal and/or abnormal karyotypes and duction of chromosomally abnormal sperm. In other word, s, it is likely that dysmorphic features, associated with Mental Retardation, Autism and/or these chromosomal rearrangements might have influence in decreasing the Epilepsy. We applied a fast BAC Genome Array- CGH platform (Cytochips number of sperms. To have a chance of healthy offspring preimplantation Blue-gnome, Techno-genetics - Bouty). Cyto-Chips are high quality BAC genetic diagnosis (PGD) method is suggested. microarrays (4898 BAC Clones spotted in quadruplicate 0.6 Mb). This ap- P03.040 proach led uSsL tCo8 dAi3sc over further cryptic chromosomal rearrangements, pre- Complex translocation involving 13, 15 and 16 chromosomes: a case viously undetected by conventional cytogenetic procedures. We identified report two genes: (human gene for member 3 of solute cCaSrMriDer1 f amily 8), a L. Letica, R. Lasan Trcic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, M. Miklos, S. Huljev sodium-calcium exchanger electively expressed in the brain, and a possible Frkovic, D. Begovic; candidate gene for Epilepsy (Nucaro et al 2010) and the gene (Cub Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre, Zagreb, and sushi multiple domains 1) a candidate gene for Autism associated with Croatia. Mental Retardation (MR) and Epilepsy (Nucaro et al 2011). This approach allows us to better delineate the genotype/phenotype correlation in our pa- tients. Our experience shows the validity of the BAC platform as a reliable Complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCR) occurring in phenotypical- method for genome-wide screening of chromosomal aberrations, as well as ly normal persons are rare. CCR are usually considered to include severe oligonucleotide-based Array CGH, in patients with idiopathic Mental Retar- reproductive impairment by disturbing the meiotic process and producing dation and/or in association with Autism and Epilepsy. unbalanced gametes responsible for high reproductive risk. Most of CCR are P03.043 reported to be de novo. A de novo interstitial deletion at 1p36.11 in a patient presenting with We report a case of a complex translocation in a 38 years old female with me- severe psychomotor delay, sensoneural hearing loss, congenital heart nopause praecox and sterility. Conventional chromosomal analysis revealed defect and dysmorphic features an apparently balanced translocation involving 13, 15 and 16 chromosomes. Ž. Čiuladaitė, A. Utkus, J. Kasnauskienė, E. Preikšaitienė, A. Pečiulytė, V. Kučinskas; This balanced complex translocation (BCT) involves three chromosomes Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, and three different breakpoints. Molecular cytogenetic analysis with whole Vilnius, Lithuania. chromosome probes , centromeric and locus specific FISH probes showed breaks at 13q21.2, 15q26 and 16q23. Carriers of balanced complex translo- cation have a high risk of having spontaneous abortions or a child with an We report on a patient with severe psychomotor delay, sensoneural hearing unbalanced karyotype. Our patient was informed by genetic counsellor. loss,d aeb nsoevnot speech, hydrocephaly, congenital heart defect, broad thumbs, P03.041 dysmorphic features (flat nasal bridge, pointed chin, low-set, abnormal ears) High frequency of copy number abnormalities in adult patients with and interstitial deletion at 1p36.11 detected by arrayCGH (400K). mental disabilities and psychiatric disorders TPIhGeV deleted segment at 1p36.11 is 1 Mb in size and involves 20 protein co- M. Viñas1,2, N. Baena1, E. Gabau3, C. Mata1, S. Esteba4, N. Ribas4, R. Novell4, M. Guitart1; ding genes. Based on the clinical and molecular data analysis we suspect 1Genetic Laboratory. UDIAT-CD. Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, Sabadell, Spain, gene as one of the strongest candidate genes responsible for severe 2Cellular Biology, Immunology and Physiology Department. Universitat Autònoma psychomotor delay, deaPfnIGeVss and limb anomalies in our patient. Horn et al. de Barcelona, Cerdanyola, Spain, 3Pediatric Service. Corporació Sanitària Parc Taulí, (2011) reported two cases with homozygous and compound heterozygous Sabadell, Spain, 4Specialized Service in Health Mental and Intellectual Disability. Parc missense mutations of and intelectual disability, hearing loss, muscu- lar hypotonia and dysmorphic features, which are observed in our patient www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 113 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Obregia“ Clinical Hospital of Psychiatry“, Bucharest, Romania. either. Besides, the main clinical features of our patient are also common for 1p36 monosomy syndrome. The critical region for 1p36 monosomy syn- Deletions involving chromosome 1q43q44 generate a recognizable phe- drome is located at 1p36.33 and is 25 Mb proximally from the interstitial notype, including psychomotor retardation, characteristic dysmorphic deletion at 1p36.11 detected in our patient. We predict that the overlap- features, microcephaly, hypoplasia or agenesis of the corpus callosum and ping phenotype of nonoverlapping deletions within 1p36 region could be various other anomalies. caused both by haploinsufficiency of one or more genes because of their We present the clinical and molecular findings of a 3 year-old girl, referred deletion and because of the disturbance of their expression by disruption for genetic investigations due to phenotypic features suggestive of 1q43q44 of an essential regulatory element PoIrG pVosition effect as the juxtaposition of deletion. a euchromatic gene with a region of heterochromatin. The expression stu- Classical and molecular cytogenetic investigations were performed on peri- dies of candidate genes, especially gene in cases of 1p36 deletions are pheral blood lymphocytes by GTG-banded karyotyping, FISH and array CGH. indicated. Karyotype analysis was performed for both parents. P03.044 Cytogenetic analysis showed a de novo terminal deletion of chromosome 1, A 3.8 Mb deletion in 10q11.21-q11.22 in a 7-year-old Iranian boy with 46,XX,del(1)(1q43q44). Array CGH (105K, Agilent) was performed for accu- mild dysmorphic features and developmental delay rate characterization of 1q deletion and for exclusion of other imbalances A. Rajaee, A. Kariminejad, F. Afroozan, M. Mirzazadeh, R. Kariminejad, M. H. at 1q or in other genomic regions. A 10,98 Mb deletion of chromosome 1, Kariminejad; spanning from 238,224,320-249,212,668 (hg19), was the only aberration Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. detected. The results were confirmed by FISH. Our case add data to the current body of knowledge regarding the pure deletion of 1q43q44; detailed molecular characterization allows for better Here we report on a 7-year-old Iranian boy with mild dysmorphic features genotype-phenotype correlations and contributes to the further delineation including high nasal bridge, low-set prominent ears. The patient also had of the phenotypic spectrum in this syndrome. developmental delay, mild intellectual disability, increased deep tendon re- Acknowledgments: Financial support: Research National Projects: PN flex, spasticity and ataxia. Brain MRI performed at ages 5 and 6 showed fluid 09.33.02.03, PNII 42-130/2008. collections in temporal lobe beside of sylvian fissure compatible with arach- P03.047 noid cyst. Whole genome BAC Array CGH was performed using CYTOCHIP A de novo interstitial deletion of 20q11.21q11.23 in a boy with genomic BAC array and showed a 3.8 Mb interstitial deletion on long arm of prenatal diagnosed megacystis and cystic renal dysplasia, analatresia, chromosome 10 encompassing bands 10q11.21-q11.22. Thirteen OMIM ge- ventricular septal defect (VSD), dysmorphic features and abnormal nes are situated in this region. To date, ten patients with deletion of 10q11.2 feet documented with routine karyotyping, and an additional 19 patients with D. Mueller1, H. Duba1, S. Deutschbauer2, G. Webersinke2; deletion of 10q11, overlapping 10q11.21-q11.22 region, confirmed by array 1Human Genetics Departement, General Women and Children Hospital, Linz, Austria, comparative genomic hybridization (aCHG) have been reported. Intellectual 2Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Tumorcytogenetics, Department of Internal disability and developmental delay were the only clinical features common Medicine, Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria. to all cases. Ataxia and increased deep tendon reflex, additional findings in our patient, were reported in only a few of the aCGH confirmed patients. Our case is of interest in that it is the first case of pure deletion of 10q11.21- Background: Interstitial deletions involving 20q11 are very rare. Only 3 ca- q11.22 region. ses with similar clinical features have been reported (Hiraki Y et al, Am J P03.045 Med Genet 2011,155A(2):409-14). Difficulties in the molecular diagnosis of a patient with features of Case report: We describe a boy with de novo 20q11.21q11.23 deletion. 1p36 deletion Molecular characterization of del(20)(q11.21q11.23) by high-resolution A. Jezela-Stanek, M. Kucharczyk, A. Gutkowska, M. Pelc, K. H. Chrzanowska, M. SNP microarray showed an approximately 5,7 Mbp deletion. A megacystis Krajewska-Walasek; was diagnosed in early pregnancy which led to hydronephrosis IV and oli- Department of Medical Genetics, The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, go/anhydramnios. Postnatal the boy showed multiple congenital anomalies Poland. such as analatresia, a ventricular septal defect, hypoplastic aortic arch, hyo- spadia, deformity of the thorax, hipluxation on both sides, talipes calcaneus and flatfeet as well as dysmorphic facial features including microcephalia, Deletion 1p36 is one of the most common subtelomeric aberration with an retro-/micrognathia, deep set ears, broad nasal bridge. Furthermore feeding estimated incidence of 1 in 5 000 to 1 in 10 000 live births. It is characteri- difficultiers were reported. Due to the renal disorder the boy died because of zed by severe developmental delay, microcephaly with distinct facial phe- renal failure a few weeks after birth. notype which is often accompanied by internal organs malformations and Discussion: Compared to the other three cases with deletion 20q11-q12 seizures. there is a similarity between our patient and the patient described by Hiraki We present a case of 8-year-old boy with multiple congenital anomalies/ Y et al. Because of our patient´s early death we will not know if there would mental retardation in whom neither classical G-binding karyotype nor have been a mental retardation or behavior abnormality. The 5,7 Mbp dele- FISH for 1p36 deletion and subtelomeric MLPA test revealed any aberra- ted segment identified in our patient encompasses at least 81 genes and 9 tion. He presents with aggressive behavior, craniofacial features consisting miRNAs. of microbrachycephaly, straight eyebrows, deep-set eyes, epicanthal folds, Our case adds new information to characterize the phenotype of patients midface hypoplasia, broad and flat nasal bridge, long philtrum, pointed chin, with rare proximal microdeletion (20q). low-set, abnormal ears. Besides, absence of the septum pellucidum, Ebstein P03.048 anomaly and club foot were noted. A 25 Mb Deletion of Chromosome 4q13.2 -q22.3 in a Male Fetus with Despite the normal results of FISH and MLPA subtelomeric screening and severe skeletal abnormalities because of either facial dysmorphism predictive for deletion 1p36 (midfa- M. Mirzazadeh, A. Kariminejad, A. Rajaee, K. Najafi, R. Kariminejad, S. Ghaderi-sohi, M. cial hypoplasia and horizontal eyebrows) or heart defect (Ebstein anomaly) H. Kariminejad; further molecular analysis - arrayCGH - was performed. This only allowed Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. confirm the clinical diagnosis and let to recognition of deletion. Interestingly, the Agilent SurePrint G3 Human CGH and SNP Microarray 4x180K revealed 2 aberrations: within 1p36.22-p36.32 (including 8.43 Mb, 101 genes) and We report on a 20-week-male fetus with interstitial deletion of the long 1p36.12 (of 0.44 Mb, 12 genes). arm of chromosome 4q13.2-q22.3. Ultra-sound examination at 19 weeks In this presentation we like to underline the importance of detailed analysis revealed multiple congenital anomalies and therapeutic abortion was per- of clinical features which may lead to the diagnosis, even with the correct formed at 20 gestational weeks. Fetus was sent for autopsy examination result of screening studies. and aCGH study. Autopsy examination revealed micromelia of upper and The study was partially supported by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Sci- lower limbs, long philtrum, micrognathia, small low-set ears, hypertelorism, ence and Higher Education (Contract No 0605/B/P01/2009/37). abnormal segmentation of right lung, adrenal agenesis. Radiology showed P03.046 triangular shaped hypoplastic ossification representing the humerus. There Pure 1q43q44 deletion characterized by array CGH - a case report was absent ossification of the radius and ulna with marked micromelia of S. Papuc1, M. Budisteanu2,1, A. Tutulan-Cunita1, I. Borcan1, M. Cristea1, A. Arghir1; all those 3 bones. In the lower extremities, a thin single ossification of the 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. Dr. Alex. femur with absence of a severely hypoplastic tibial anlage was seen. The pelvis was tiny, high, narrow ileum and only ischial ossification was pre- www.eshg.org www.eshsegn.to. Trhge skull showed a posterior ossification defect. The thorax showed 114 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.051 ArrayCGH characterization of a deletion on 2q13 associated with elongated clavicles and 12 ribs. Array comparative genomic hybridization developmental delay and facial dysmorphism (case report) was performed, revealing a 25 Mb deletion of chromosome 4q13.2-q22.3. I. Slamova1,2, E. Zrnova-Hladilkova1,2, T. Barøy3, V. Vranova1,2, S. Prasilova2, R. Gaillyova2, Even though skeletal abnormality and limb shortening has been previously E. Frengen3, P. Kuglik1,2; reported in 4q deletion cases, none of them have such severe skeletal ano- 1Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute of Experimental Biology, malies as seen in our case. Faculty of Science,, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Medical Genetics, P03.049 Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Norway, Oslo, Norway. Clinical consequences of 8pter deletion - new case of a girl with subtle facial dysmorfism and moderate mental retardation A. Gutkowska, M. Kucharczyk, M. Pelc, M. Kugaudo, M. Jędrzejowska, M. Krajewska- Genomic imbalances play a major role in the pathogenesis of many human Walasek; The Chidren‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. genetic diseases. The modern genome-wide analysis tools (such as array- CGH) have led to the discovery of novel copy-number variations (CNVs); many of them are known to be associated with diseases. Recently, CNVs at Microscopically visible 8pter deletions are associated with growth and men- 2q13 have been described in literature and the DECIPHER database as in- tal impairment, minor facial anomalies, congenital heart defect and beha- creasing risk for developmental delay and cranial facial dysmorphism. vioral problems. Submicroscopic subtelomeric 8p deletion is fairly uncom- We present a 5-year-old girl, who was born with microcephaly, navel cord mon. The patients either with microcephaly, normal facial appearance, mild hernia, and mild dysmorphic features (deep-set short nose, small chin, low mental retardation or clinical phenotypes of autism were described. One hairline, and low-set ears). A neuropsychological examination revealed mild could speculate that there is strong correlation between the clinical pheno- psychomotor retardation and speech delay. The proband suffers from fre- types and the size of 8pter deletion. quent febrile convulsion, dental caries and frequent respiration infections. We present a case of pure 8pter deletion found in a 17-year-old girl with G-banded karyotyping at 550 bands resolution defined the karyotype of the microcephaly, minor dysmorphic features, developmental delay, moderat-h proband as normal. te mental retardation, dyslalia and the features of depression, born as 5 An approximately 1.79 Mb deletion in chromosome band 2q13 child of healthy parents. In her family history there were no cases of neither (chr2:111415137-113194067 bp, hg19) was identified by arrayCGH and miscarriages nor mental retardation. Cytogenetic classic study revealed no verified by real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). The patient’s karyotype was visible aberrations, but no high resolution analysis was performed. The dia- therefore revised as 46,XX.arr 2q13(111,415,137-113,194,067)x1 mat. The gnosis of deletion of 8pter region was establish by MLPA, confirmed by FISH deletion on 2q13 was also detected in the maternal grandmother using a and delineated by array-CGH. Our patient has the terminal deletion of the specially designed FISH probe. 8p with the proximal breakpoint at 10075000 bp in band p23.1. The deleted Inherited chromosomal aberrations from parents in whom the variant was region has the size of ~ 10,1 Mb and contains 154 genes possibly involved in insufficient to cause such disease might be still causative for a pathological the phenotype of our patient. Examination of the mother did not show this phenotype in the next generation. The mother and the grandmother had deletion, the father was unavailable for this study. Our report shows that normal phenotype (except a mother’s speech delay in childhood). Distin- the clinical phenotype of 8p deletion is determined not only by the size and guishing pathogenic and benign CNVs is still challenging in the clinical prac- location of the deleted region but also by other factors. tice. The study was partially supported by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Sci- P03.052 ence and Higher Education (Contract No 0605/B/P01/2009/37). Trisomy 8p11.23 as a result of a dicentric chromosome 8 P03.050 S. Midyan1, A. Hovhannisyan1, A. Gasparyan1, E. Klein2, T. Liehr2, H. Mkrtchyan1,2; 1Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Jena University Multiple Genomic Rearrangements in a consanguineous family Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. R. F. Oliveira1, A. Beleza-Meireles1, F. Rodrigues1, A. Matos1, S. Maia1, M. Venâncio1, L. Ramos1, E. Matoso2, I. Carreira2, J. Saraiva1; 1Carmona da Mota’s Pediatric Hospital - CHUC, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Cytogenetics Laboratory-Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. Here we present on a case with de novo dic(8;8)(p11.2;q11). An eight years old boy was referred for genetic studies. He had microcephaly, autism, de- Introduction velopmental delay, mental retardation, a dysmorphic face, joint problems and chest deformation. GTG banding analyses of the index patient and his The birth prevalence of congenital disorders in children of first-cousin parents were done according to standard protocols. The parents karyoty- parents is about double of the general population (4-5%). Some cases can be pes were normal. To characterise the aberrant chromosome 8 found in the eCxlipnlaicinael dR ebpyo trhte cumulative inheritance of susceptibility genetic variation, patient fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed using cen- including unbalanced genomic rearrangements. tromeric probe for chromosome 8 and subcentromeric probes set (partial chromosome paint probes for 8p and 8q, BAC probes RP11-503A24 located The proband, a 2 year-old boy, born to consanguineous parents (r=1/8), on 8p11.21, RP13-116A4 located on 8q11.21 and centromeric probe). The was referred to the medical genetics clinic due to global psychomotor de- dicentric chromosome 8 with duplication of a small region 8p11.23 was dis- velopment delay, unspecific facial dysmorphisms, oesophageal atresia and covered: dic(8)(pter->q11::p11.23->qter). failure to thrive. Since there was a family history of learning difficulties, Partial trisomy 8p is a relatively frequent anomaly as this can be result of the parents and the siblings were also studied. The etiologic investigation an inversion-duplication or be found in the offspring of balanced transloca- revealed a heterozygotic 19q13deletion on subtelomeric MLPA analysis in tion carriers; different breakpoints related to 8p have been reported, even the proband, in both affected parents and in the two healthy sisters, and a though genes from the olfactory receptor gene family are involved more 19q13nullisomy in the older brother. As this was the more severely affected frequently. Still, there are controversial information about clinical features member an arrayCGH was performed which revealed a 1p33tetrasomy and of these patient. In the sSMC database (http://www.fish.uniklinikum-jena. a 3p21.31duplication. The parents’ arrayCGH identified a 1p33duplication de/sSMC.html) cases with duplication of the same region with and without in both parents and a 3p21.31duplication in the mother. clinical findings are described. Our report provides one more case with fea- PDrioscpuers scioognn/iCtiovne calussseisosnments were performed to all members and array- tures which shares some common clinical descriptions of partial trisomy 8p CGH analysis is being carried out to the proband and his sisters. syndrome. Supported in parts be DFG (LI 820/38-1) and the Else Kröner- Fresenius-Stiftung (2011_A42). Co-inheritance of genomic abnormalitieCsH mMaPy2 Ae,xplain the developmental P03.053 disorders and cognitive deficiNtsS iUnN th4is family. The affected genomic regions Atypical chromosomal rearrangements in Down syndrome - clinical includeT pRuEtXat1ive relevant genes, such as which participates in cell and cytogenetic study cycle progression regulation, , which interferes with DNA methylati- S. Popa1, C. Rusu1,2, M. Gramescu1, C. Bujoran1, R. Popescu1, E. Graur1, V. Vasilica1, E. V. on and that interferes in cell apoptosis. It is likely that the cumulative Gorduza1,3; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy ”Grigore T. Popa”, Iasi, Romania, 2”Sf Maria” effect of aberrations contributes to more pronounced clinical phenotypes. Children‘s Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 3”Cuza Voda” Obstetrical Hospital, Iasi, Romania. Genotype-phenotype relation is under investigation and will be discussed in the presentation. Down syndrome (DS) is one of the most common genetic disorder, and is caused by complete or partial 21 chromosome trisomy. The incidence of DS has a wide geographic variation, and is related directly to prenatal medical care assistance (country economic status). A variety of chromosomal abnor- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 115 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Background malities can be associated with this disorder. . Duplication of the distal long arm of chromosome 10 causes In the last 10 years in the Cytogenetic laboratory of University of Medicine a clinically recognizable dysmorphic syndrome. Most patients are severely and Pharmacy ,,Grigore T. Popa” Iasi were performed 2491 constitutional mentally retarded. Congenital malformations including microphthalmia and karyotypes with G banding and were confirmed cytogenetically 571 cases heart defects are suggested to occur only in larger duplications including with DS. From the number of diagnosed patients we discriminate: (i) 510 q24. Generally the aneuploidy is caused by a translocation inherited in an cases (89.00%) with homogenous trisomy of chromosome 21 (from these uCansbea lraenpcoerdt fashion. Here we report on microarray analysis of a large de five cases also present chromosome 9 inversion); (ii) 31 cases (5.41%) with novo inverted 10q duplication & subtelomer deletion. chromosome 21 trisomy in mosaic without translocations; (iii) 25 cases . The female patient was term-born, small for gestational age, (4.36%) with unbalanced Robertsonian translocations between the follo- referred because of growth and psychomotor delay, microcephaly, severely wing groups of chromosomes: 14 and 21 (14 cases), 21 and 21 (6 cases), handicapped vision due to right-sided microphthalmia, coloboma of the iris 13 and 21 (3 cases), 15 and 21 (one case), 22 and 21 (one case); (iv) 5 cases aLnadb rcehsourlotsi.d ea, small palpebral fissures and bilateral ptosis, ventricular and (0.87%) with different abnormalities other than chromosomal 21 trisomy: atrial septum defect. one case of chromosome 21 inverted duplication, one case of chromosome GTG studies with a lymphocyte culture showed an extended long 21 dicentricity, one case of chromosome 21 insertion into chromosome 18, arm of chromosome 10. FISH using wcp 10 and subtelomeric probe 10q re- and two cases involving one or more translocations of chromosomes other vealed the extra material to be exclusively derived from chromosome 10 and than chromosome 21. lack of the subtelomeric region 10q, respectively. Microarray investigation We focus our study on the latter 5 cases that present atypical cytogenetic DS, aCfofnircmluesdio tnhe 10q24.1>q26.3 duplication and adjacent subtelomeric deletion in order to illustrate some rare variants of chromosomal abnormalities and including a 6kb single copy stretch within the duplicated segment. cytogenetic particularities. Each individual case is compared to literature . The clinical severity of chromosome 10q duplication seems to data. depend particularily on the involvement of 10q24 suggesting a dosis effect P03.054 in the respective genes. The subtelomeric deletion most likely does not in- Mosaic interstitial duplication 14q fluence the phenotype. This report adds to the still few patients with 10q K. Hansson1, C. Ruivenkamp1, A. Gijsbers1, L. Rövekamp-Abels2, L. Smit2, M. Laurense- duplication delineated by array methods and the increasing understanding Bik1, K. Heijboer1, M. Kriek1, M. Koopmans1, L. M. E. Smit3; of genotype-phenotype correlations. Also, our results provide molecular 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Juliana Children‘s Hospital, The evidence for the inverted low copy repeat model postulated by Bonaglia Hague, Netherlands, 3Juliana Childrens‘s Hospital, The Hague, Netherlands. (2000). P03.057 A de novo interstitial duplication 14q32.11-q32.32 Interstitial duplications in the long arm of chromosome 14 are rarely en- A. Hovhanissyan1, S. Midyan1, A. Gasparyan1, T. Liehr2, H. Mkrtchyan1,2; countered. We report a male patient who was born with multiple congeni- 1Centre of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Jena University tal anomalies. The patient had microcephaly with structural brain abnor- Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. malities on MRI, polycystic kidneys, a VSD and an ASD. Newborn hearing screening showed mild-moderate hearing loss. He had low-set, posteriorly rotated dysplastic ears and a cleft of the soft palate. Furthermore a sacral The 2- year- old patient presented with minor clinical features, as epican- dimple was present, a small petnhis and overlapping toes of the left foot with thus, microcephaly, full lips and developmental delay. The child was born at of proximal placement of the 5 toe. 39 weeks of gestation with a birth weight of 3200g and length 50cm after Conventional karyotyping demonstrated a mosaic (95%) interstitial dupli- the pregnancy with polyhydramnios. cation in the long arm of chromosome 14. SNP array analysis was performed Additional material in the distal part of chromosome 14q was identified by to characterize the duplication in more detail. Both parents had a normal GTG-banding. The parents karyotypes were normal. Standard fluorescence karyotype. Detailed molecular characterizations and reports of chromoso- in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed using whole chromosome mal imbalances in combination with clinical phenotypes are important for painting, multicolour banding (MCB), subtelomeric and different bacteri- accurate genotype-phenotype correlations in genetic counseling. al artificial chromosome (BAC) probes for chromosome 14. FISH analysis P03.055 showed duplication of distal part of chromosome 14. Subtelomeric probe A new case with de novo proximal duplication of 10q11.2q21.3 14q and BAC probes in 14q24.3 (73.0-73.2Mb) , 14q32.33 (105.7-105.8 H. Mkrtchyan1,2, S. Midyan1, A. Gasparyan1, T. Liehr2, A. Hovhannisyan1; Mb), 14q32.33 (106.0-106.1 Mb), and 14q32.33 (106.1-106.2 Mb) showed 1Centre of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Jena University no duplication, while the probes RP11-1A3 (14q32.11; 89.4-89.5 Mb) and Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. RP11-65M20 (14q32.11, 91.8-92.0 Mb) demonstrated two signals, each on the der(14). Finally, based on GTG-banding and FISH results the derivati- ve was described as dup(14)(q32.11q32.32)dn. Only few cases with “pure” Here we report on a case with de novo duplication of proximal 10q11.2 to duplication of this distal region of chromosome 14q were described (Deci- 10q21.3. An eleven months old boy with developmental delay was referred pher). In most of them mental retardation, developmental delay, microce- for genetic studies. The patient was the first child of a healthy, non-consan- phaly were described. Here we report on a new case with de novo duplicati- guineous parent. He presented with microcephaly, deep set eyes, arched pa- on of 14q32.11q32.32 (located possibly between 89.4-92.0 Mb). Supported late, hypotelorism, strabismus, down slanted corners of the mouth, hypotro- in parts be DFG (LI 820/38-1). phy and motor development delay. Cardiac problems included coarctation P03.058 of aorta and open arterial duct. His right hand showed an absence of the De novo 2p21-p16.3 duplication in a patient with severe growth middle metacarpal bones. retardation and significant delayed bone age. The patient karyotype was 46,XY,dup(10)?(q24.3-qter)dn. To characterize C. Bandelier1, M. Ravoet1, A. I. Diplas1, Y. Gillerot1, V. Beauloye2, N. Revencu1; the der(10) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) was applied using 1Centre for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique whole chromosome painting, multicolor banding (MCB) and subcentromere de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 2Paediatric Endocrinology Unit, Cliniques universitaires specific probe sets for chromosome 10. Finally, the aberration was descri- Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium. bed as dup(10)(q11.2q21.3)dn. To the best of our knowledge only seven- teen cases with proximal duplication 10q11-q22 were reported, yet. All of them had common dysmorphic features, cardiac or renal defects. Our pati- Herein, we report on the phenotype of a 12-year-old girl with partial trisomy ent shares some of these features but others as kidney defects, muscle hypo- 2p. She is the second child of healthy non-consanguineous parents of Belgian or hypertonia, feedings difficulties are absent. In conclusion, only molecular origin. She was born at term after a pregnancy complicated by intrauterine cytogenetics allows us to precisely describe aberrant chromosomes; here growth restriction and oligohydramnios. The growth retardation persisted we report a new case with proximal duplication 10q11 to q21.3 without in- postnatally. In addition, she presented diaphragmatic hernia, moderate psy- volving chromosomal band q22 as in other previously found cases. Suppor- chomotor development, feeding difficulties, and recurrent respiratory infec- ted in parts be DFG (LI 820/38-1). tions. She had prominent forehead, relative macrocephaly, marked hyper- P03.056 telorism, thin upper lip and delayed closure of the anterior fontanelle. The Severe phenotype in a child with inverted duplication 10q24.1>q26.3: veins were visible on trunk and extremities. She had lumbar hyperlordosis. array-based evidence for the inverted low copy repeat model At the age of 12, her growth parameters were: height 114.0cm (-5.6 SD), O. Rittinger, S. Kalb, G. Kronberger, I. Vlasak, G. Sander; weight 18.5kg (-5.8 SD), and OFC 49.4cm (-2.2 SD) (father’s height: 156.5cm Universitätsklinik fü rKinder- und Jugendheilkunde, Salzburg, Austria. (-3.6 SD), mother’s height: 154cm (-2.1 SD)). According to Greulich and Pyle, bone age was 6 years and 10 months at the age of 10 years and 6 months. The IGF-1 levels were relatively low (64 ng/ml; normal: 78-405 ng/ml) and www.eshg.org www.eshg.org116 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 she had been treated by grodwet hn ohvoormone therapy for 19 months without Here a new fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH-) based probe set is any clear benefits on growth. presented and its possible applications are highlighted in thirty-four ex- Genetic workup identified a tandem dup(2)(p21~22p16) by high- emplary clinical cases. The so-called pericentric-ladder-FISH (PCL-FISH) resolution conventional karyotyping, followed by FISH. SNP-array revealed probe set enables a characterization of chromosomal breakpoints especially a 9.6 Mb interstitial duplication, arr 2p21p16.3(42,295,716-51,981,249)x3, in small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC), but can also be ap- encompassing 45 genes. plied in large inborn or acquired derivative chromosomes. PCL-FISH was To our knowledge, this is the first case of 2p21-p16.3 duplication. Pure 2p established as 24 different chromosome-specific probe sets and can be used trisomy, encompassing this region, is very rare, and was mostly identified in two- up multicolor-FISH approaches. PCL-FISH enables the determinati- by standard karyotyping. Molecular characterization of additional patients on of a chromosomal breakpoint with a resolution between 1 and ~10 me- will allow a better determination of the breakpoints and the genes involved gabasepairs and is based on locus-specific bacterial artificial chromosome in the phenotype. (BAC) probes. Thus, PCL-FISH leads to a better resolution than most FISH- P03.059 banding approaches. To approve the result eight of the in 29 sSMC cases A de Novo 5 Mb duplication of Xp11.23-p11.3 with non-random were studied by array-CGH; the used sSMC-specific DNA was obtained by X inactivation: Clinical report of female twins and molecular glass-needle based microdissection and DOP-PCR-amplification. Results cytogenetic characterization obtained on 29 sSMC cases and 5 larger derivative chromosomes are pre- C. Evers1, J. W. G. Janssen1, A. Jauch1, K. Hinderhofer1, B. Maas1, U. Haug2, U. Moog1; sented and discussed. Finally, application perspectives of the probe set in 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Center for tumor as well as in evolutionary cytogenetic studies are given. Supported Child Neurology and Social Pediatrics Maulbronn, Maulbronn, Germany. in parts by Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2011_A42), the Deutscher Aka- Introduction: demischer Austauschdienst (DAAD), the Monika-Kutzner-Stiftung and the Stefan-Morsch-Stiftung. P03.062 Partial duplications of the short arm of the X chromosome (Xp) in males Genotype phenotype correlation in 15 patients with deletion of result in intellectual disability, facial dysmorphism and variable malforma- chromosome 1q24-q25 tions. In females, a normal phenotype should be expected if the abnormal X V. Haddad1, A. Aboura2, J. Andrieux3, D. Sanlaville4, L. Bernardini5, C. Bonnet6, K. Fagan7, chromosome is preferentially inactivated. Recently, duplications of Xp en- J. McParland8, L. Roos9, C. Ruivemkamp10; compassing band p11.2 were found in females with developmental delay 1Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 2Hopital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Service aCnlidn ioctahle Rr eapnoormt aalnieds . GUenneextpiecc Fteinddlyi,n mgso:st of them showed preferential acti- de génétique médicale, CHU de Lille, Lille, France, 4Service de génétique clinique, vation of the duplicated X chromosome. CHU de Lyon, Lyon, France, 5Laboratorio di Citogenetica, Istituto CSS-Mendel, Rome, Italy, 6Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine, CHU de Nancy-Brabois, Nancy, France, 7Cytogenetics Laboratory, The John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, Australia, 8Cytogenetics We describe female twins of twentyfive months of age with developmental Department, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Center for Applied Human delay, seizures, EEG and MRT abnormalities, and facial dysmorphism. Both Molecular Genetics, KennedyCentret, Glostrup, Denmark, 10Laboratory for Diagnostic children were sociable and smiled frequently. The first child had a smdaell naotrvio- Genome Analysis, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. al septum defect, the second had a patent foramen ovale and a dilated renal pelvis. SNP-Array analysis in one child and both parents showed a ~5 Mb duplication of Xp11.23-p11.3 in the child. Subsequent FISH analysis Patients with deletions of 1q24q25 share common features of growth de- cDoinscfiurmsseiodn t:his duplication in both children. The twins showed selective in- ficiency, microcephaly, small hands and feet, dysmorphic face and severe activation of the normal X chromosome in more than 80% of blood cells. cognitive deficits. We report fifteen patients with 1q24q25 deletions, who show distinctive features of a clinically recognizable 1q24q25 microdeletion The described twins have phenotypic features in common with other males syndrome: prenatal and postnatal growth deficiency, microcephaly, mental and females carrying a partially overlapping Xp duplication. These individu- retardation, small hands and feet with distinctive brachydactyly and fifth als have developmental delay, seizures, EEG abnormalies, similar behavioral finger clinodactyly, single transverse palmar flexion creases and a distincti- phenotypes and facial dysmorphism. The described twins as well as almost ve dysmorphy (hypertelorism, small and low set ears, short nose with bul- all reported affected females show selective inactivation of the normal X bous nasal tip and micrognathia). Radiographs demonstrate disharmonic chromosome, suggesting that increased expression of a gene within the osseous maturation with markedly delayed bone age. Occasional features common duplicated region leads to skewed X-inactivation. Functional diso- include cleft lip and/or palate, genital, cardiac and renal abnormalities. my for genes within the duplication results in the described phenotype. Using array comparative genomic hybridization, we defined the critical P03.060 deletion region as 717kb at 1q25.1 (chr1 :173,710,633-174,427,602, hg19 Latest innovations in oligo FISH enable high resolution detection coordinates), containing 7 genes and including CENPL (Centromere protein S. Fulmer-Smentek1, M. Ruvolo1, V. Kulkarni1, P. Tsang2, P. Costa1, N. Faravashi1, A. De L). Witte1, M. Srinivasan1, E. LeProust1; CENPL encodes centromeric protein L, a protein essential for proper kine- 1Agilent Technologies Genomics, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Laboratories, tochore function and mitotic progression. The growth deficiency in this syn- Santa Clara, CA, United States. drome is similar to what is seen in other types of primordial short stature with microcephaly, such as Majewski osteodysplastic primordial dwarfism, type II (MOPD2) and Seckel syndrome, which result from loss-of-function The discovery of complex structural variations that exist within individual mutations in genes coding for centrosomal proteins. Therefore, CENPL is a genomes has prompted a need to visualize chromosomes at a higher resoin- candidate for microcephaly and for growth deficiency in 1q24q25 microde- lsuittuio n than previously possible. In response to the need for such high reso- letion syndrome. lution visualization, we have developed a new generation ofi nfl usiolirceoscent P03.063 hybridization probes targeting specific regions of the genome. These A new multicolor-fluorescence in situ hybridization probe set new probes, Agilent SureFISH probes, are designed using an design directed against human heterochromatin: HCM-FISH strategy that specifically avoids placing oligonucleotides in repetitive regi- H. Nelle1, M. Buksch1, M. Ziegler1, N. Kosyakova1, S. Morlot2, W. Fischer2, B. Belitz3, V. ons of the genome, allowing for highly specific detection of the region of Trifonov4, A. Weise1, A. Hamid1, T. Liehr1; interest. Each SureFISH probe is designed to a specific region of the genome 1University Hospital, Jena, Jena, Germany, 2Partnerschaft Georgstraße, Hannover, and is generated from complex libraries containing hundreds to thousands Germany, 3Praxis für Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 4Molecular and Cellular Biology of unique high quality long oligonucleotides. The resulting probes provide Department, Institute of Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Novosibirsk, high specificity and enable users to detect aberrations in targeted regions of Russian Federation. the genome as well as aberrations near highly repetitive elements. Because Agilent SureFISH probes are designed for specific, non-repetitive, regions of the genome, they provide superior resolution as compared to other availab- Here a new multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization (mFISH-) probe le technologies. set is presented and its possible applications are highlighted in fifteen cli- P03.061 nical cases. The so-called heterochromatin-M-FISH (HCM-FISH) probe set How to narrow down chromosomal breakpoints in small and large enables a one-step characterization of the large heterochromatic regions derivative chromosomes - a new probe set within the human genome. HCM-FISH closes a gap in the up to now avai- M. Voigt; lable mFISH probe sets as those do normally not cover the acrocentric short Jena University Hospital, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. arms, the large pericentric regions of chromosomes 1, 9 and 16, as well as, the band Yq12. Still, these regions can be involved in different kinds of chro- mosomal rearrangements like translocations, insertions, inversions, am- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 117 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 plifications and marker chromosome formation. Here examples are given The chromosome region 15q11q13 is known for its instability, and many for all these kinds of chromosomal aberrations, detected as constitutional rearrangements may occur in this imprinted segment. Supernumerary mar- rearrangements in clinical cases. Application perspectives of the probe set ker chromosomes formed by the inverted duplication of proximal chromo- in tumor as well as in evolutionary cytogenetic studies are given. Supported some 15q region was identified as one of the must frequent human marker in parts by BMBF/DLR (BLR 08/004 and BRA 09/020), DFG (LI 820/19-1, chromosomes. We report here, the clinic finding and cytogenetic analysis LI 820/32-1), Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2011_A42) and Dr. Robert of a girl with mental retardation. The child has a clinic who should suspect Pfleger Stiftung. a chromosomic aberration because she has a developmental delay, hypo- P03.064 tonia and dysmorphic features. Standard cytogenetic techniques and FISH Hyperspectral Imaging of Chromosomes: a New Approach for Label analysis using painting and locus specific probes were performed to iden- Free Karyotyping tify and characterize the chromosome anomaly. A supernumerary marker S. Luckow, A. Lorenz, K. Rebner, R. W. Kessler; chromosomes formed by the inverted duplication of proximal chromosome Reutlingen Research Institute, Process Analysis and Technology, Reutlingen University, 15 was identified. FISH using chromosome 15 specific centromeric probes Reutlingen, Germany. (Spectrum Green,CEP 15q11.2,D15Z1) and SNRPN, UBE3A and PML genes confirm the duplication of 15q11-13 region in the dicentric marker chromo- some. The critical region involved in duplications is a gene-rich region that Staining techniques are routinely used to identify metaphase chromosomes comprises the three γ-amino butyric acid (GABA)-A receptor subunit genes based on their unique banding pattern. Advanced molecular cytogenetic (GABRB3, GABRA5, and GABRG3). These subunit genes may contribute to techniques like Fluorescence-In-Situ-Hybridization (FISH) provide a more the clinical picture. In fact, even if it is still unclear how the GABAergic neu- sensitive tool for complex and small structural aberrations. In both cases a romodulators influence the developing brain, alterations of this system may broad expert knowledge is necessary to understand and diagnose diseases. cause both epilepsy and behavior problems to occur. Therefore, unexpected We have developed a new technique for fast and label free karyotyping using prenatal diagnosis, for maternal age or serum screening, of such a chromo- a Hyperspectral Imaging System (HSI) which can easily be integrated into somal abnormality would certainly lead to difficulties in genetic counselling a standard light microscope. With this system we measure the stray light and prognosis. interference pattern of an unstained chromosome or substructures of the P03.067 chromosome with a diode array spectrometer. The complex spectra can be Low level mosaicism of chromosomal aneuploidies in intellectual interpreted as spectra of “nanostructured particle arrays” of different size disability and refractive indexes. The signature of each spectrum is due to the super- B. Oneda1, R. Riera-Baldinger1, D. Bartholdi1, S. Azzarello-Burri1, D. Niedrist1, M. Kraft2, position of the interference pattern of the different layer thicknesses, the A. Rauch1; spectral interference of the band pattern and changes in refractive indexes 1Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, Zurich, along the chromosome axis. The hyperspectral data can be analyzed using Switzerland, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen- multivariate data analysis and the chromosomes can be classified by their Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, Erlangen, Germany. individual spectral features. The results are confirmed with model particle array measurements. The- se measurements show strong correlation with calculated Mie interference It has been shown that oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridi- spectra. Furthermore, FDTD (Finite Difference Time Domain) simulations zation (array-CGH) allows the identification of mosaic aberrations. The de- of model chromosomes confirm the photon diffusion pattern as well. Sub- tection sensitivity was reported to correlate with aberration size. We used structures of chromosomes can also be analyzed by Near Field Spectroscopy a high resolution array to molecular karyotype 73 patients with intellectual (imaging beyond diffraction limit) measuring the stray light pattern of sub disability. In 4/73 (5.5%) patients, mosaicism was found. The first one for structures of chromosomes as small as 50 nanometers. chromosome 18 of 21 Mb, with a copy number variant of 1.7, indicating a deletion mosaicism. The second and the third one for chromosomes X and P03.065 3, of 18 Mb and 19 Mb, respectively. The copy number level was for both Origin of genomic imbalances detected by array-CGH in children with 2.3, pointing to a trisomy mosaicism. In the last case, a trisomy 14 in mosaic intellectual disability. M. Drozniewska1, O. Zuffardi2, O. Haus1,3,4; form was detected, with a copy number level of 2.4. Importantly, this finding 1Department of Clinical Genetics, CM UMK in Bydgoszcz, Bydgoszcz, Poland, 2General matched, perfectly the phenotype, which reflected the mosaicism on the Biology and Medical Genetics, Pavia University, Pavia, Italy, 3Genetic Counseling Center, skin. Despite the size of this aneuplody, it had gone unrecognized with clas- Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Department of Hematology, Medical University, sical karyotyping due to the low mosaic rate and possibly due to selection Wroclaw, Poland. that might occur during culturing the lymphocytes. For the first three cases, we performed a fluorescence-in-situ-hybridization (FISH) and we confirm the mosaic aneuploidy. The abnormality was detected in 4/26 (15%), 1/31 We present the data from the genetic screening of 14 children with intellec- (3%) and 6/41(15%) metaphases, respectively. tual disability (ID), dysmorphic features and congenital malformations. 28 Our findings demonstrate the power of molecular karyotyping using high parents were also included to this study. The diagnostic algorithm included resolution arrays to detect low level mosaicism, which would go undetec- classical cytogenetic analysis (CC), performed according to the standard ted using classical karyotyping. Moreover, they raise the question whether procedures, array-CGH performed with Agilent SurePrint 3G Human CGH low level mosaicism of certain chromosomal regions are indeed the cause of Microarray Kit (4x180K platform) and subtelomeric FISH experiments per- some cases of intellectual disability and warrant further investigation. formed with Vysis ToTel subtelomeric probes. P03.068 All children presented normal karyotype. Subtelomeric FISH showed nor- Evaluation of the SNP 6.0 Array for molecular karyotyping in patients mal hybridization pattern in all children. In 14 children 16 different imba- with intellectual disability lances were found, of which 8 were duplications and 8 deletions. All parents M. Zweier1, J. Hoyer1, S. Uebe1, A. B. Ekici1, A. Reis1, A. Rauch2; were analysed with CC and a-CGH, which helped to establish the origin of 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, aberrations found in children. 8 aberrations were de novo, 3 of maternal and 2Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland. 3 of paternal origin. In one patient presence of 2 aberrations was the result of paternal balanced translocation. The use of array-CGH technique helped in direct genotype-phenotype cor- In the last years molecular karyotyping has evolved into a common techni- relation in our patients. In only 4 de novo cases the size and gene content of que for diagnostic testing in patients with intellectual disability (ID). It has aberration strongly correlated with patients phenotype. In 3 de novo cases been shown that high resolution array systems uncover apparently patho- the conclusion of pathogenic influence of the imbalance still need more evi- genic copy number variations (CNVs) in up to 15 % of patients with ID and dence. In familial cases it was not possible to exclude the potential pathoge- normal conventional karyotype. nic role of inherited changes - further molecular analysis is required. In this study we analyzed 79 patients with intellectual disability with the P03.066 Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array and scored CNVs with a minimum size of 100 kb Molecular cytogenetic analysis of a new case of inv dup chromosome and 5 markers. We detected a total of 855 aberrations with a mean of 10.82 15 syndrome . CNVs per patient. A group of 820 molecularly karyotyped controls and the I. Ben Abdallah Bouhjar, H. Hannachi, H. Ben Khelifa, N. Soyah, H. Elghezal, A. Saad, S. Database of Genomic Variants were used to rule out common genomic va- Mougou Zerelli; riants and artefacts, resulting in 56 remaining rare individual CNVs in 40 Laboratory of cytogenetic and biology of reproduction, Sousse, Tunisia. patients with sizes from 114 kb to 11.350 Mb. The first 23 of these CNVs, including the smallest one, were systematically validated by an independent method (QPCR, MLPA, FISH) and could all be confirmed. Segregation analy- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org118 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 sis of 54 CNVs in 38 patients was performed in the respective families (13 arrangements characterized by the presence of terminal deletions with de novo, 20 maternal, 21 paternal). In case of parental inherited CNVs the contiguous interstitial duplications. They originate through asymmetrical phenotype of the parents and the affected region/gene content were re-eva- breakage of a dicentric intermediate, formed after the repair of a double luated. In summary, 20 CNVs in 18 affected individuals were assumed to be strand break. Some, like the inv dup 8p, are recurrent and mediated by eit- potentially pathogenic, varying from large de novo aberrations and frequent her parental paracentric inversions or low copy repeats. Non-recurrent inv recurrent microaberration syndromes to single gene defects (NRXN1, CD- dup dels have been described for many chromosome arms, usually with the KL5). In conclusion, we identified potentially disease causing CNVs in 22.8 cytogenetically visible duplicated region longer than the deleted one. Inv % of affected individuals, exceeding the prognosticated rate. dup dels associated with large deletions and small duplications can be mis- P03.069 diagnosed cytogenetically for pure terminal deletions, with consequences A 7 Mb microdeletion in chromosome 2 band p13.3p15 associated for genotype - phenotype correlations and patient management. with devolopmental delay, heart abnormalities and facial We used microarray (Affymetrix) to define 12 cases of cytogenetically dysmorphisms diagnosed terminal deletions (with breakpoints at 3p25.3, 5p15.3, 5p15, D. Bondavalli1, V. Uliana1, M. Malacarne2, F. Forzano1, E. Di Maria1,3, C. Marciano1, A. 6q25.3, 7q34, 9p23, 10p13, 10q26.3, 10q26.12, 15q26.1, 18p11.2, Xp22.31). Cocchella1, V. Viassolo1, C. Viaggi2, D. Coviello2, M. Pierluigi2, F. Faravelli1; Pure terminal deletions were confirmed in 9 cases. Inv dup del was dia- 1Division of Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Laboratory of Genetics, gnosed in one patient, with a terminal deletion of 13.4 Mb at 9p23-p24.3 Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 3Dept. of Health Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, accompanied by a contiguous, 822 kb duplication at 9p22.3-p23. FISH ana- Italy. lysis confirmed the inverted nature of this duplication. Two other patients showed discordant results on the array: one with mosaicism for cell lines with two different 5p terminal deletions and the other with an interstitial We report on a patient with a de novo 7 Mb deletion in the short arm of chro- deletion of 15q25.3-q26.2. mosome 2, from band 13.3 to 15. The proband, a girl, presented congenital Our study of terminal deletions revealed a discordant array result in 3/12 heart defects (atrial septal defect and muscular ventricular septal defect), (25%) of cases. One inv dup del was observed (8% of the group), which sug- facial dysmorphisms, poor growth, intellectual disability, interstitial lung gests that inv dup del rearrangements are not infrequent among the cytoge- disease and severe gastroesophageal reflux. netic terminal deletions. The rearrangement encompassed 47 genes, 2 of which are known disease P03.072 gene (C2ORF86 and ANTXR1). Paracentric Inversion of Chromosome 5 detected in Prenatal Three cases with partially overlapping deletions were reported in literatu- Diagnosis re and database. Wohlleber and co-workers (2011) described two patients P. Botelho1, M. Souto1, A. Costa2, M. Martins3, O. Moutinho3,4, R. Pinto Leite1; with a de novo 2p14p15 deletions. One patient with a de novo 2p14 deletion 1Laboratório de Citogenética, Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e was reported in ECARUCA database. Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Our patient presented more severe clinical features and a deletion larger in Portugal, 3Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, size than patients reported to date. Portugal, 4Serviço de Ginecologia/Obstetrícia, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e Alto We suggest that the complex phenotype of our patient is caused by the Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. haploinsufficiency of several genes in the region or by different molecular mechanisms described in chromosomal rearrangements, such as impaired expression patterns. Inversions are a fairly uncommonly detected chromosome rearrangement, P03.070 not considering the variant forms, with a estimated frequency range 0.12‰ A new intersticial deletion of the long arm of chromosome 4 to 0,7‰ (pericentric) and 0,1‰ to 0,5‰ (paracentric). Usually they are (q13.2:q13.3) in a girl with growth hormone deficiency balanced with no clinical significance unless the breakpoint occurs within C. Baquero1, I. Bueno1, M. Artigas1, G. Bueno1, A. Miralles1, B. Puisac2, J. Pié2, F. J. Ramos1; a gene. Between 85-90% of inversions are inherited and the risk of having 1Servicio de Pediatría-Hospital Clinico Universitario „Lozano Blesa“, Zaragoza, Spain, a phenotypic consequences depends of the type (para- or pericentric) and 2Dpto. Fisiología, Facultad de Medicina-Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain. size of the inversion. The authors report a case of a paracentric chromosome 5 inversion detected on prenatal diagnosis. Amniotic fluid and blood samplesi n(p sairteunt’s) cultures Intersticial deletions of chromosome 4 long arm are relatively rare, with less were performed; high resolution GTL-banded metaphases were analyzed than 70 cases reported. The majority of cases are terminal 4q deletions with according laboratory routine protocols. Fluorescence Hybridizati- loss of the bands q31-q33, resulting in a characteristic phenotype. In con- on (FISH) was done with painting, subtelomeric and unique sequence for trast, deletions within the proximal long arm of chromosome 4 have rarely Cri-du-Chat probes to confirm the cytogenetic analysis. A small paracentric been reported. There is a wide clinical presentation among patients who inversion, between the bands p13.1 and p15, was detected and it was inhe- share similar breakpoints. We report one patient with proximal intersticial rited from the mother. Since the region involved was very small (band p13.1 deletion of chromosome 4q, defined at the molecular level by array-CGH. and p15), this inversion was difficult to detect, and only with high resolution The proband had a 7.7 Mb deletion, spanning from band q13.2 to q13.3. chromosomes it was possible to visualize it. The patient, a 11 year-old female was found to have craniofacial dysmorphic Inversions involving the chromosome 5 are rare and is important that the features, hiperextensible joints, severe short stature with growth hormone new cases detected should be reported for determining the genotype-phe- deficiency , developmental delay and seizures. No signs of puberty were ob- notype correlation to be used for genetic counseling and risk evaluation. served. P03.073 Pure intersticial deletions of 4q have been rarely reported in the literature A case with isochromosome18p and none of them was accurately mapped by last generation molecular tech- I. M. Bradinova1, R. Vazharova1, S. Bichev1, S. Andonova1, V. Bojinova2, A. Savov1, I. niques. Intersticial deletions of 4q are associated with a variable phenotype, Kremensky1; including growth retardation, dysmorphic features, upper and lower limbs 1National genetic laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2USBALNP „Saint Naum“, Sofia, Bulgaria. malformations,M dUevCe7l,o EpNmAeMn,t aSlL dCe4lAa,y G (Cs)peech delay is uGsNuRalHlyR m(Goornea sdeovterroe- tphina-nR meleoatosirn dg eHlaoyr)m aonnde sReeizcuepretos.r )T he de, leted region in our patient contains several genes ( , including the Isochromosome 18p (i(18p)), is a rare chromosomal disorder that occurs gene associated with hypogonadotropic once in about every 140.000 live births, affects males and females equally hypogonadism. and results in tetrasomy 18p. Most of the cases are due to a de novo for- This is the first report of a patient with a 4q13.2- q13.3 deletion and growth mation but in the literature familial cases were reported. The phenotype of hormone deficiency. tetrasomy 18p has been primarily delineated by published case series and P03.071 reports. Findings reported in more than 25% of these cases include neona- How common are the cryptic inverted duplication deletion tal feeding rearrangements among cytogenetically visible terminal deletions? problems, growth retardation, microcephaly, strabismus, muscle tone ab- L. Brown1, B. Lomax1, T. Gillan1, G. Horvath2, P. Eydoux1, K. Schlade-Bartusiak1,3; normalities, scoliosis/kyphosis, and variants on brain MRI. Developmental 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver, Canada, Vancouver, delays and cognitive impairment are universally present. BC, Canada, 2Department of Biochemical Diseases, Vancouver, Canada, Vancouver, BC, Marker chromosomes are seen in the 0.06% of the population and are small Canada, 3Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada. chromosomes that are additional to the normal chromosome count, the ori- gin of which cannot be determined by standard chromosome analysis. Mole- cular cytogenetic testing as M-FISH and CGH array techniques can be used Inverted duplication deletions (inv dup dels) are rare chromosomal re- to determine the origin of the marker chromosome and help reaching exact www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 119 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Barcelona, Spain, Barcelona, Spain. diagnosis in such patients. Here, we report a young female with dysmorphic features as microcephaly, We investigate the practical performance of three different microarray plat- dolichocephaly, high arched palate, low-set ears, open mouth appearance, forms for their implementation in our diagnostic setting in two hundred high palate and long philtrum, clinodactily, presenting a small metacentric cases of Spanish DD/ID in 2 hospital centers.The total cohort consisted of chromosome at the routine chromosomal analysis. Besides the dysmorphic 200 patients, 100 of who were analyzed with KaryoArray®v3.0, 32 on the features she also has muscle hypotonia, spasticity, strabismus growth and Agilent Human Genome CGH 244K and for the remaining 68 patients, on the intellectual retardation. Agilent Human Genome CGH 44K.As we expected targeted array revealed The performed CGH array revealed the presence of chromosome 18p tetra- less common CNVs than did the whole-genome arrays, which has a clear somy in this patient. The diagnosis of tetrasomic 18p syndrome is consistent advantage in clinical use. Nowadays it is straighter forward to recognize al- with the complex clinical features in our patient. terations against background of CNVs.These data support that higher yields P03.074 mainly depend on patient inclusion clinical criteria and the microarray High resolution array CGH study in newborns with isolated cleft/lip design. When non-strict criteria are followed, higher yields are also found palate using Karryoarray. The frequency of VOUS was similar in all three platforms K. W. Derwinska1, K. Szczałuba1, E. Obersztyn1, J. Castañeda1, R. Śmigiel2, E. Bocian1; (around 5% of cases). Although more studies are required in order to asses 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Department of Genetics, Wroclaw, the real significance of these CNVs with unclear clinical relevance, we spe- Poland. culate that some of them are likely to be pathogenic.The classification and interpretation of all the CNVs detected in both groups showed that CMA is a clinical useful tool for genetic diagnosis of ID/DD, with an overall diagno- Clefting is a common condition, found in 1/700-1/1000 births, with a com- stic yield of around 15%.However and considering the resolution of each of plex etiology. Although most cases are isolated, a subset is associated with the array platforms, all pathogenic imbalances, except one case, would have other anomalies and linked to already known syndromes involving cleft lip been identified despite the platform used. or palate (CL/P), such as van der Woude syndrome. Until now, a number of Agilent 4x44KAgilent 244K KaryoArray®v3.0 genes have been suggested to be involved in clefting events, but they account for small proportion of the recognized etiology. With the implementation of Pathogenic 3% 18.75% 25% array CGH for diagnostics purposes, among the mechanisms leading to clef- VOUS 4.4% 6.25% 5% ting, microdeletions have been hypothesized to play a significant role. Benign 75% 75% 42% Herein we present a study of 33 patients with isolated CL/P with the use of None CNV detected 17.6% 0% 31% whole genome Agilent 180k microarray with mean resolution of 16kb. We P03.077 have found 10 copy number variations (CNV) overall (9 deletions and 1 du- A rare variant of Klinefelter syndrome patient with a mosaic plication), ranging in size from 27 kb up to ~8Mb. Microaberrations found 48,XXXY/47,XXY/46,XX/45,X/46,XY karyotype studied by GTG- in the study are not covering any known microdeletion/microduplication banding and fluorescence in situ hybridization. syndrome regions. The summaryS oLfF Nal1l 2cases and genotype-phenotype cor- A. Mohseni Meybodi, N. Shahrokhshahi, H. Gourabi, S. Zari Moradi, S. Gilabadi, H. Vaziri relation will be presented. The most interesting ones will be presented in Nasab, K. Anissi Hemaseh, T. Tavakol zadeh, Z. Beheshti, H. Karimi; details, i.e del 17q12 where only is deleted. Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Our results demonstrate that a high resolution array CGH is an efficient tool reproductive Biomedicine,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. in diagnostics of patients with patients with isolated cleft lip/palate. Fur- thermore characterization of the novel pathogenic CNVs identified in our study can help in understanding the role of defined genes in clefting. Klinefelter syndrome is the first human sex chromosomal abnormality to be The research is founded by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Science and reported. The majority of Klinefelter syndrome patients have the XXY karyo- Higher Education NN407459438. type. Approximately 15% of Klinefelter patients, however, are mosaics with P03.075 variable phenotypes. Chromosomal aberrations and Micronuclei frequency in patients A 39-year-old male was investigated for primary infertility. Clinical ex- treated with J-131 for therapeutic causes amination showed an intelligent man with normal facial appearance and M. Mackic-Djurovic1, I. Aganovic1, S. Begovic- Hadzimuratovic2, E. Kucukalic2, S. Ibrulj1; small firm testes. Testicular histopathology revealed marked atrophy of 1Center for Genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2Department for nuclear the testes with no spermatogenesis and absence of germ cells. Hormo- medicine, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. nal profile showed elevated levels of FSH, LH and low levels of testoste- rone. Chromosome analysis from whole blood culture showed cells with 131 48,XXXY/47,XXY/46,XX/45,X/46,XY mosaicism. The predominant cell line Patients with thyroid diseases have been treated with different doses of J- was 47,XXY (86.66%). This was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridi- in therapeutic causes. Using standard method (cultivation 48 hours of peri- zation (FISH) using a dual-color X/Y probe. In our case, FISH also detected pheral blood lymphocytes) 12 patients have been cytog1e31netically analyzed the presence of a small population of cells with the 48,XXXY and 45,X ka- two times. First culture was set1 b31efore treatment with J- , and another was ryotypes not previously detected in the initial 30-cell GTG-banding analysis. set 7 days after application of J- . Chromosomal aberrations (CA) were ana- 46,XY/47,XXY mosaicism is not uncommon. However, mosaicism of multiple lyzed - 200 cells per patient and micronuclei frequency (MN) 1000 cells per sex chromosome aneuploidy is rarely observed. Thus, this case illustrates patient. Micronuclei appear during cell division as result of acentric frag- the utility of FISH as an adjunct to conventional cytogenetics in assessing ment or whole chromosomes condensation left in anaphases (it is consi- the chromosome copy number in each cell line of a mosaic. Because most dered as marker of structural or/and numerical chromosomal aberrations infertile individuals with Klinefelter syndrome may wish to reproduce with existence). 131 the aid of modern reproductive technology, it is important that accurate Applied doses of J- were 10mCi; 15 mCi and 20 mCi for 4 patients per each estimation of the frequency of abnormal cells be obtained for accurate risk dose. At first set of analyzes as initial no significant CA or MN‘s were found. estimation and genetic counseling. At second set of analyzes for patients who received doses of 10 mCi and 15 P03.078 mCi it is apparent slow increase of CA and MN frequency (small aberrati- Genomic imbalances in infertile men detected by array analysis ons); while for those who received dose of 20 mCi there is apparent increase R. Mikelsaar1, M. Nelis2, A. Kurg2, O. Žilina2, O. Bartsch3, M. Punab4, P. Korrovitš4, R. of CA (even bicentric chromosomes) as well as increase of MN‘s frequency Rätsep5; alone or with 2 micronuclei per cell. 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, This is initial phase of research that is going to be further investigated on 2Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute large number of patients. of Human Genetics, Mainz University School of Medicine, Mainz, Germany, 4Centre of Andrology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Physiology, University P03.076 of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Comparative array-CGH platform analysis in a clinical setting for diagnosing individuals with intellectual disability and developmental delay Array analysis frequently reveals the cases of multiple independent structu- E. Vallespin1, L. Rodríguez-Revenga2, I. Madrigal2, M. Palomares1, A. Mur3, F. Santos1, P. Lapunzina1, M. Milá2, J. Nevado1; ral abnormalities with more complex phenotypes than expected. We present 1INGEMM-IDIPAZ-HULP, Madrid, Spain, 2Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics results of two infertile men. They were studied cytogenetically using GTG Department. Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain, 3Paediatrics Service. Hospital del Mar. banding and FISH methods, and whole-genome array analysis (Illumina). Barcelona, Spain - Paediatrics and Obstetrics Deparment, Universidad de Barcelona. Case 1: 46,XY,t(10;15)(p11.1;q11.1) in an infertile man with glaucoma. FISH (Oncor) and array analysis showed that translocation was reciprocal (recT) www.eshg.org www.eshg.org120 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 and apparently balanced. Array analysis revealed two uncommon novel de- only slightly differed from normal. letions in 2q22.1 and 18q22.1, which contribute to the genomic instability. FISH using a chromosome 1 centromeric probe subsequently confirmed the Infertility might be caused by several factors including both genomicL iRnPst1aB- chromosome 1 origin of the marker chromosome. In order to estimate the bility and a high frequency of sperm aneuploidies reported in a male carri- mosaic level, 300 metaphases were scanned detecting 44 metaphases with ers of a recT. Glaucoma was probably caused by the mutation(s) of the marker chromosome. gene, located in the breakpoint region 2q22.1. Both parents had a normal SNP-array. Case 2: 46,XY,t(5;13)(q33;q12.1) in an infertile man with allergy. It was Discussion recT confirmed by FISH (Cytocell). Array analysis showed that it was ba- SNP array provides a high-resolution method to detect mosaic gains and lo- lanced, but also revealed a noTveUlB 6A831C-kb microduplication at 9q31.1 (arr ses and can be used as a first choice to characterize a marker chromosome. 9q31.1(102,352,111-103,033,172)x3). Infertility might be caused by the This strategy is both cost and time efficient. haploinsufficiency of tubulin ( ) gene located at breakpoint region Marker chromosomes of chromosomal 1 origin without phenotypic con- 13q12.1 but also by arised genomic instability. He also had allergy, unlike sequences have been described. We believe that this marker chromosome his non-allergic parents with normal karyotypes but with microduplication explains the phenotype of the patient. in the same region, where allergy-related quantitative trait locus (QTL) 12 is P03.081 localized. In our patient, probably both QTL 12 and balanced translocation Rare case of three small supernumerary marker chromosomes gave rise of genetic over threshold, and disorder. originated from chromosomes 1, 12 and 18 in a girl with congenital These findings show that one aberration can often predispose to the forma- abnormalities tion of others with phenotypic consequences. M. Gogiel1, J. Hagh2, H. Schüler1, I. Rad3, M. Omrani4, K. Eggermann1, S. Spengler1, U. Supported by target financings SF0180096s08 and SF0180027s10. Gamerdinger5, G. Schwanitz6; 1Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital, RWTH, Aachen, Germany, P03.079 2Praxisgemeinschaft für Medizinische Genetik, Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Department Molecular-cytogenetic analysis of marker chromosomes - clinical of Medical Genetics, University Motahhari Hospital, Urmia, Islamic Republic of Iran, importance and diagnostic possibilities 4Department of Medical Genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, P. Tesner1, R. Mihalová2, V. Zimanová1, J. Drábová1, D. Novotná1, E. Kočárek1; Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Pathology, University Hospital, Gießen, 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University - 2nd Faculty of Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Bonn, Germany. Medicine and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Department of Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles University and General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic. The genetic relevance of small supernumerary marker chromosomes de- pends on their amount and type of additional euchromatin. If they are pre- sent as mosaics the phenotype of the carrier depends on the amount of pa- Supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMCs) are structurally abnormal thologic cells and their equal or unequal distribution in the patient. Three chromosomes unidentifiable by classical cytogenetic methods. Their gene- different SMCs are therefore an extreme rare finding. ral incidence is about 1:2,000 (regardless of gender, ethnicity, etc.). SMCs We present the case of a patient showing 3 different autosomal markers as a represent a highly heterogeneous group of chromosomal aberrations asso- mosaic combined with a normal cell line. ciated with different clinical consequences: The majority of SMC-carriers Two of the markers were identified as derivates of chromosome 12 and 18 have no clinical symptoms, but some SMC could be related to fertility pro- which are classified as frequent aberrations, the third was originated from blems (particularly in males), to mental retardation or to congenital defects. chromosome 1. The extra chromosomes were analysed by a combination of To determine the clinical importance, it is essential to identify an original SNP array and FISH (cen and wcp probes). The size and the frequency were chromosome, from which the SMC was derived and determine as accurately striking different. Besides, we observed an unequal combination of the 3 as possible the genetic material that is present in the SMC. derivates. We demonstrate four cases of predominantly mosaic non-acrocentric SMCs We report on a four years old girl. She revealed a mosaic karyotype in her and diagnostic procedures which enabled their determination. These pati- lymphocytes: ents represent all groups with higher SMC frequency mentioned above. All mos48,XX,+mar1,+mar2[18]/47,XX,+mar1[8]/49,XX,+mar1,+mar2,+mar3[ cases were examined postnatally, but one of them is closely related to on- 2]/46,XX[2].ish der(1)(wcp1+,D1Z1+), der(12)(wcp12+,D12Z1+), der(18) going pregnancy (previous pregnancy of this female with primary finding (wcp18+,D18Z1+). By SNP array investigation (Affymetrix 6.0 SNP array) of SMC was terminated due to multiple foetal defects). Our report discusses we identified gains of 1p12→p11.2, 12p13.1→q13.11, 18p11.21. Patenal diagnostic possibilities, reliability, and limitation of some common molecu- origin could be delineated for der(1) and der(18). lar cytogenetic techniques, especially standard fluorescence in situ hybri- Clinical evaluation revealed severe mental retardation, absent speech, pro- disation (FISH) using satellite probes, whole chromosome painting probes minent forehead, epicanthus folds, hypertelorism, large ears, depressed and/or locus-specific probes, and multicolour FISH (painting and centro- broad nasal bridge, long smooth philtrum and a wide mouth with thin upper meric one). Some SMC samples were submitted for further examination by lip. She still walks on the tips of her toes. array-CGH, but this analysis failed in cases with low frequency mosaics. A karyotype-phenotype correlation was set up and the clinical findings of Our work is supported by Grant Agency of Charles University (No. 264811) our patient were compared with the patients features of patients with isola- and Technology Agency of the Czech Republic (No. TA01010931). ted duplications of the three regions mentioned above. P03.080 P03.082 SNP array evaluation of a mosaic supernummery marker Genomic imbalances in a cohort of Iranian patients affected by chromosome in a girl with developmental delay M. Rasmussen1, J. Graakjaer1, A. Skytte1, U. Dunkhase-Heinl2, A. Bojesen1; multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Sygehus Lillebælt, Vejle, Denmark, A. Rashidi-Nezhad1,2, S. M. Akrami1, E. Amini3, F. Farzanfar4, C. Azimi4, A. Reymond2; 2Department of Pediatrics, Kolding Hospital, Sygehus Lillebælt, Kolding, Denmark. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Center for Integrative Genomics, Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Genetics, Cancer Research Center, Cancer Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Clinical report The propositus is a 7-year-old female, who is the second child of non-con- sanguineous parents. Pregnancy was uneventful with an uncomplicated de- Congenital anomalies (CA) affect 2-3 % of live births and are seen in 25% of livery at term. Births weight 2.7 kilos and birth length 50 centimeters. In in- deaths in perinatal period and the first year of life. Cryptic genomic imba- fancy she had problems feeding and showed delayed motor milestones and lances might be an important cause of CA. New high resolution oligo array speech development. She has no malformations or dysmorphic features. platforms have been shown increased detection rate as well as potential to Materials and methods discover new regions involved in CA. In this study genomic imbalances were G-band chromosome analysis was performed on PHA-stimulated peripheral studied in a cohort of MCA patients using conventional and newer molecu- blood lymphocytes; 20 metaphases were analyzed revealing 5 metaphases lar cytogenetic techniques and compared their cost effectiveness in routine with a small supernumerary marker chromosome and 15 metaphases with clinical perspective. a normal karyotype. The identity of the marker was investigated by FISH Eighty five Iranian patients affected by MCA were studied for chromosomal analysis using a chromosome 15 and a chromosome 14/22 centromere aberrations using G-banding. Three MLPA kits were used to screen for ge- probe. None of these FISH analysis revealed the chromosomal origin of the nomic imbalances in subtelomeric and 21 microdeletion syndromes. Nim- marker chromosome. blegen Human CGH 3x720K Whole-Genome Tiling v3.1 Array was used to SNP-array detected a mosaic gain of chromosome 1 material. The genotype interrogate genomic imbalances through the genome. data clearly showed the presence of a third allele but the intensity data were www.eshIng G.o-bragnding 8 patients showed aneuploidies. Two patients diagnosed with www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 121 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 marker chromosomes and 1 patient with an additional segment on 4q. The chr5 and the chr10 long arm. last three patients and other patients with normal results in karyotype were These data demonstrate that the identification of such pathogenic CNV by further analyzed with MLPA and array CGH. MLPA detected 8 and array CGH CGH accompanied by FISH is important not only for diagnosis but also for detected additional 4 clinically significant genomic imbalances. The overall recurrence risk to family members’ estimation. detection rate was 28.2%. This research is a part of CHERISH project (n° 223692). In conclusion, array CGH detects all genomic imbalances detected by karyo- P03.085 type and MLPA. Array CGH recommended as the first line test in MCA pati- Identification of recurrent chromosomal syndromes in patients with ents and karyotyping just if be necessary. The exception is for those who are mental retardation using 44K array-CGH: report of two cases. suspected to aneuploidies according to their phenotypes that karyotype is H. Ben Khelifa1, S. Mougou2, N. Soyah3, I. Ben Abdallah2, H. Hannechi4, S. Bouraoui2, A. suggested first then array CGH if karyotype be normal. Saad2; 1laboratory of Cytogenetics,Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology - Farhat P03.083 Hached hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics Mental retardation, speech delay, attention-deficiency/hyperactivity and Reproductive Biology - Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 3Department disorder, and delicate microangiopathy in a boy with 11p13 deletion of Pedriatics, Sousse, Tunisia, 4Laboratory of Cytogenetics,Molecular Genetics and A. Kashevarova1, E. Tolmacheva1, O. Salyukova1, P. Magini2, C. Graziano2, G. Romeo2, J. Reproductive Biology - Farhat Hached Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. Kasnauskiene3, V. Kučinskas3, I. Lebedev1; 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Vilnius University, Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania. Mental retardation (MR) is a condition of incomplete development of the brain with the onset occurring before 18 years and is estimated to affect 1-3% of the population. The etiology of MR is very heterogeneous and in DeletioSnLCs 1oAf 2th, Pe R1R1Gp41,4-p12B DreNgFion has been previously described in WAGR about half of cases the cause still elusive. Chromosome imbalances are one and Potocki-Shaffer syndrome both accompanied by mental retardation of the most important causes. The advance of cytogenetic technologies has (MR). and were hypothesized to contribute to the ab- improved the diagnostic rate of small chromosome abnormalities such as normal mental development in patients with 11p deletion. Here we report microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization. The complementa- on a 5.9-year-old boy with MR, speech delay, attention-deficiency/hyper- rity of cytogenetic tools (Karyotype, Fluorescent in Situ Hybridization and activity disorder, delicate microangiopathy, and 11p13 deletion. Pa rCeDn4ta4l, array-CGH) is still needed to characterize the cryptic chromosomal imba- DSLNCA1 Aw2a, sP AnMotR a1v, aFilJaXb1l,e T fRoIrM a4n4a, lyLsDisL.R AA D13.1, 5M5I RM3b9 7d3e,leCtOioMnM wDa9s, dete cPtRedR 5bLy lances. array CGH and confirmed by real-time PCR. Deleted region includes In this study, genomic DNA’s from 13 patients with unexplained MR were and . analyzed by genome wide high-resolution 44K Agilent® oligonucleotides Some of these genes are expressed in brain. In particular, SLC1A2 protein arrays. Pathogenic microdeletions have been detected in two patients pre- is responsible for glutamate transport. Accumulation of extracellular glut- senting MR and congenital malformations, encompassing regions of Xp22.3 amate causes calcium homeostasis dysfunction, increased production of NO, and 8p23.1 containing dosage sensitive genes critical for normal develop- free radicals, and cytotoxic transcription factors, proteases aFctJXiv1ation, and, ment. These results were in accordance with those observed in previous as a consequence, neuronal damage leading to neurodegenerative disease, studies: the detection rate of our pathogenic CNV’s was 15,4 % (14,4% in inflammation or ischemic events. Yet although the function of in human other studies). The causality of these rearrangements were determined as remains unknown, in rodent it regulates dendrite extension. TRIM44 may well as their parental origin. play a role in neuronal differentiation and maturation. LDLRAD3 participates It is true that whole genome arrays have significantly succeeded in reve- in amyloid precursor protein proteolysis leading to beta amyloid formation aling recurrent chromosomal syndromes but in other way, these high sen- which fibrillar form is the primary component of amyloid plaques found in sitive technologies have complicated the clinical interpretation of many the brain of patients with Alzheimer disease. COMMD9 presumably regula- copy number variants of unclear significance. This emphasizes the need of tes the ubiquitin pathway and homeostasis. Based on the brain specific func- conventional and molecular cytogenetic combination to better clarify the tions reported for these genes, the detected 11p13 deletion can be conside- phenotype-genotype correlation in patients with unexplained MR. red to be pathogenic. This study was supported by European Community’s P03.088 Seventh Framework Programme, CHERISH project no. 223692. Microcephaly and Blepharophimosis in a girl with 46,XX,ins(6;3) P03.084 (q23;q27q21) Submicroscopic chromosomal rearrangements in Ukrainian families G. Yesil1, C. Sayar2, G. Toksoy3; 1Bezmialem Vakif University of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Zeynep Kamil Pediatric with severe syndromic mental retardation Gynecology & Obstetrics Training and Research Hospital, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Istanbul N. V. Hryshchenko1, O. O. Soloviov1, L. V. Tavokina2, A. O. Brovko2, G. M. Bychkova3, C. University Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. Graziano4, J. A. Hettinger5, L. A. Livshits1; 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics NAS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Clinic ISIDA- IVF, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3Research Centre for Radiation Medicine, NAMS of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 4U.O. Genetica Medica, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Cyprus Institute of This clinical report describes a one year old girl with severe microcepha- Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. ly, moderate developmental delay and blepharofimosis. She had no inter- nal organ malformations and structural brain abnormalities. Frequent up- per respiratory infections were noted. The chromosome analysis revealed Upon the identification of de novo genomic/chromosomal rearrangements, 46,XX,ins(6;3)(q23;q27q21) de novo. 44k array was also performed and the recurrence risk is considered very low. showed no abnormalities. We report on two Ukrainian mental retardation (MR) families with paternal The Blepharophimosis phenotype is known to be associated with the FOXL2 origin unbalanced translocation grown out of balanced ones in their healthy gene which is located at 3q22.3. The ATR gene that is responsible for the fathers. Seckel Syndrome phenotype is located at 3q23. We are awaiting targeted The first proband is a 16 years old girl with severe MR, trigonocephaly, array analysis results, which will show us the etiology of overlapping micro- dystrophic features. The proband‘s aunt has the same MR phenotype. The cephaly and blepharophimosis phenotypes. karyotyping results are: father - 46,XY,t(2;10)(q35;q26),9ph and proband P03.089 - 46,XX,der(10)t(2;10)(q35;q26)pat. 44K array-CGH of proband showed A patient with moderate intellectual disability and a deletion of 2p14- del10q26.3-qter (2257 kb) together with dup2q35-qter (24378 kb). The p15 overlapping with deletions of previously published cases CNVs are pathogenic with many MR candidate genes involved in. The same A. Vazna1, M. Hancarova1, S. Vejvalkova1, J. Drabova1, M. Trkova2, Z. Sedlacek1; rearrangements have been confirmed in the aunt on 400K array-CGH. Thus 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Gennet, Prague, proband has derivative chr10 of paternal origin generated by translocati- Czech Republic. on, involving the chr2 long arm. This unbalanced translocation in the aunt and balanced one in proband’s father had the same origin from one of their parents. Microdeletions spanning 2p14-p15 have been described in two patients The second proband is a 20 years old woman with severe MR, hypertelorism, with developmental and speech delay and intellectual disability (ID) but no generalized hirsutism, dystrophic features. Two pathogenic CNVs have been congenital malformations or severe dysmorphy. One additional patient with identified by 400K CGH-analysis: del5p15.2 (10 Mb) and dup10q25.3-26.3 a similar deletion has been identified in the ISCA study of developmental (18 Mb). Karyotype analysis showed: mother - 46, XX, father - 46,XY,t(5;10) delay. We report a prematurely born boy with a de novo deletion encom- (p15.2;q25.3) and proband - 46,XX,der(5)t(5;10)(p15.2;q25.3)pat. Proband passing the deletion overlap of these three cases. He had clinical features has paternal origin unbalanced translocation involving the short arm of partly consistent with the first two cases from whom detailed description is www.eshg.org www.eshavga.iloabrlge including absent speech, severe microcephaly, long face, bulbous 122 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 nasal tip and thin upper lip. He had thin short stature and moderate ID, and bral fissures, long eyelashes, hypoplastic alae nasi, short philtrum, narrow his overall clinical picture was more severe compared to the first two cases. hands and feet, tapering fingers). He was the first child born to non-con- His karyotype was normal but Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12 BeadChip ana- sanguineous Swiss parents, family history was unremarkable. Array-CGdHe lysis revealed a 3.7 Mb long deletion of 2p14-p15 between (and including) rneovveoaled a 415kb microdeletion at 15q26.1 encompassing only two genes: the COMMD1 and SPRED2 genes. FISH confirmed the deletion in the patient CHD2 and RGMA. The deletion was confirmed by qPCR and found to be but not in the parents. The deletion affected 17 protein-coding RefSeq ge- . To our knowledge this is the third case reported with microdeletion nes and 3 non-coding RNA genes. The shortest region of overlap of the four 15q26.1 encompassing only these two genes. So far CHD2 haploinsuffici- deletions contained 10 genes. Some of them including SLC1A4 and CEP68 ency has been associated with lordokyphosis, reduced body fat and growth could be candidates for ID. The Decipher database and two recent studies of retardation in mouse model. RGMA seems to perform several functions in large ID cohorts (ISCA and WashU/Signature) list additional patients with the developing and adult nervous system and could be a candidate gene for deletions extending proximally into the region of the 2p15-p16.1 microde- mental deficiency and seizure disorder. We review the clinical features of letion syndrome. Multiple genes from this region may thus be associated the reported cases and discuss the role of CHD2 and RGMA as critical genes with ID, and some patients may show composite phenotypes. Analysis of in microdeletion syndrome 15q26.1. additional cases is needed to clarify this complexity. Supported by CHERISH, P03.093 CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and MZ0FNM2012. 3q26.33-3q27.2 microdeletion: a new microdeletion syndrome? P03.090 F. Forzano1, F. Faravelli1, G. Mandrile1, V. Uliana1, E. Di Maria1,2, M. Malacarne3, D. Complex chromosomal aberration in a boy conceived after Coviello3, M. Dubois4, S. Zwolinski4, A. Dubois4; 1Medical Genetics Unit, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2Department of Health Sciences, intracytoplasmic sperm injection predicts adult onset leucodystrophy University of Genova, Genova, Italy, 3Laboratory of Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, C. Jaklin1, K. Heiliger1, M. Hempel1, D. Sollacher1, M. Cohen2, C. C. Makowski3, T. Italy, 4Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Meitinger1, A. Jauch4, K. Oexle1; 1Humangenetik, TUM, München, Germany, 2Kinderzentrum, München, Germany, 3Kinderklinik Schwabing, München, Germany, 4Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Heidelberg, Germany. We describe two unrelated patients carrying the same 3q26.33-3q27.2 mi- de novo crodeletion. Patient 1, 6 years old, was initially seen at age 2 years. Parents reported We report on a interstitial del/dup aberration consisting of a 13.3 IUGR since the first month. Cesarean section was performed at 32 gw due Mb deletion of 5q15-5q21.3 (92.1-105.4 Mb, hg19) in tandem with a 23.6 to growth arrest; BW 1380 g, L 39.5 cm, OFC 29.5 cm. Array-CGH: de-novo Mb direct duplication of 5q21.3-5q23.3 (106.1-129.7 Mb, hg19). Although 4 Mb deletion. the aberration covered a total of 60.6 Mb, it was cryptic, i.e., not detectable Patient 2, 17 years old, was initially seen at 5 months. Pregnancy was unre- by karyotyping at a resolution level of 500 bands. Array CGH indicated a di- markable; emergency Caesarean section was performed at 37 wg because ploid region of 0.6 Mb between deletion and duplication. The aberration af- of maternal hypertension. BW 1500 g, OFC 29.5cm; he required resuscita- fected a 14-month-old boy conceived after intracytoplasmic sperm injection tion. Tonic seizures developed at three hours of age. Array-CGH: 4.28 Mb who presented with developmental delay, muscular hypotonia, partial age- deletion. nesis of the corpus callosum, promLiMneNnBt 1forehead, low set ears, hypertelo- Both presented with neonatal hypotonia, muscular hypotrophy, severe fee- rism, wide-bridged nose, retrognathia, high palate, and cryptorchidism. The ding problems (gavage feeding), recurrent upper airways infections, deve- duplicated segment comprised the gene, thus predicting adult-onset lopmental delay (both sat at 18 months, Pt1: at 6 years has no language, nor autosomal-dominant leukodystrophy and revealing a temporal dimension sphincter control, and does not walk independently; Pt2: walked at 4 years of the phenotype. Counselling problems implicated by this prediction inclu- and has language delay), severe growth impairment (all measures below de “the right not to know” that the patient might want to use when coming 3rd centile). of age. Both patients share common dysmorphic features: thin skin, flat facial pro- P03.091 file, medially sparse eyebrows, epicanthal folds, flat nasal bridge and tip, Microdeletion and Microduplication Syndromes short philtrum, downturned corners of mouth. K. Mrasek1, E. Klein1, D. Hardekopf2, S. Pekova2, S. Bhatt1, N. Kosyakova1, T. Liehr1, A. Patient 1 had also oral aversion, gastroesophageal reflux, bladder diverticu- Weise1; la and vesicoureteral reflux, retractable lift right testicle, markedly delayed 1Jena University Hospital, Friedrich Schiller University. Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, teeth eruption. Patient 2 had also micropenis, which required testosterone Germany, 2Chambon Laboratory for Molecular diagnostics, Prag, Czech Republic. replacement, and mirror movements. P03.094 A comparative cytogenetic analysis of miscarriages following natural The widespread use of whole genome analysis based on array comparative conception and assisted reproductive technologies genomic hybridization (aCGH) in diagnostics and research has led to a con- A. V. Tikhonov1,2, A. A. Pendina2, O. G. Chiryaeva2, L. I. Petrova2, V. S. Dudkina2, N. A. tinuously growing number of microdeletion and/or microduplication syn- Sadik2, O. A. Efimova2, I. A. Galembo1, J. G. Lezhnina2, T. V. Kuznetzova2, V. S. Baranov2; dromes (MMSs) connected to certain phenotypes. These MMSs also include 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2D.O.Ott’s increasing instances in which the critical region can be reciprocally deleted Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. or duplicated. This review catalogues the currently known MMSs and the corresponding critical regions including phenotypic consequences. Besides the pathogenic pathways leading to such rearrangements, the different de- Chromosomal abnormalities are the most common cause of spontaneous tection methods and their limitations are discussed. Finally, the databases miscarriage during the first trimester. We performed a comparative study of available to for distinguishing between reported benign or pathogenic copy abnormal karyotype frequency and type in miscarriages following natural number alterations are highlighted. Overall, a review of MMSs that previous- conception (group I, n=558) and assisted reproductive technologies (ART) ly were also denoted ‘genomic disorders’ or ‘contiguous gene syndromes’ (group II, n=121). Standard karyotyping was made on QFH/AcD banded (CGS) is given. metaphase chromosomes, obtained from chorionic villi samples. The rate P03.092 of abnormal karyotypes was 66,5% in group I vs. 50,4% in group II. The A further case of microdeletion 15q26.1 encompassing CHD2 and difference is explained by the lower percentage of abnormal karyotypes in RGMA: clinical description and review of the literature miscarriages from patients under 35 in group II compared to group I (36,5% C. Courage, J. Lemke, N. Aliu, S. Gallati, C. Rieubland; vs. 63,1%). In miscarriages from patients over 35 the frequency of abnormal Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Inselspital, University of Bern, karyotypes was higher compared to normal in both groups: 76,7% vs. 23,3% 3010 Bern, Switzerland. in group I and 65,5% vs. 34,5% in group II). This tendency was registered when the terms of miscarriages were analyzed: in miscarriages under 7 weeks of gestation from group II the frequency of chromosomal pathology Chromosomal abnormalities including microdeletions and microduplicati- was lower, than in their counterparts from group I (45,6% vs. 66,2%). In ons are known to cause severe developmental disorders, mental retarda- miscarriages over 7 weeks from group II the frequency of abnormal karyo- tion, dysmorphism and seizures. We report a further case of microdeletion types increased up to 57,7%. These results demonstrate a leading role of 15q26.1 in a 25 year old man, presenting with mental retardation (IQ 48), non-genetic factors in early pregnancy loss for ART clinic patients under 35. generalized seizures with onset at 2 years of age, sredvere kyphoscoliosis, A wide spectrum of aberrations, including trisomies, monosomy X, polyplo- truncal obesity, growth retardation (height on the 3 centile), psychiatric idy and structural chromosomal rearrangements, detected in miscarriages disorder with anxious and aggressive behavior, astigmatism, delayed pu- did not differ between groups, indicating no increased risk of chromosomal berty, normal head circumference and dysmorphism (upslanting palpe- pathology, associated with ART. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 123 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Supported by RFBR, Carl Zeiss, State Contract 02.740.11.0698 and Admini- which included 215 NRXN1 probes (median spacing 4.9kb). We found 34 stration of Saint-Petersburg. NRXN1 deletions (0.33% of referrals) ranging from 9 to 942kb in size, of P03.095 which 18 were exonic (0.17%), and predominantly affected the alpha iso- Microduplication 22q11 in two patients with learning disabilities form of NRXN1. No NRXN1 duplications were found. Several patients had C. C. Legnaro1, R. M. C. S. Sandri1, B. F. Gamba2, L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo1; exonic deletions in both NRXN1 and other loci implicated in neurodevelop- 1Hospital de Reabilitação de Anomalias Craniofaciais - HRAC - USP, Bauru, Brazil, mental disorders (CNTNAP2, CSMD3 and the Williams-Beuren syndrome 2Universidade Estadual Paulista - Unesp/Brazil, Botucatu, Brazil. locus) and two patients had duplications of the 22q11.2 locus. Patients with NRXN1 deletions had a range of phenotypes including developmental delay, learning difficulties, ADHD, autism, speech delay, social communication dif- Susceptibility of the chromosome 22q11 region rearrangements has been ficulties, epilepsy, behaviour problems and microcephaly. The targeting of recognized in clinical disorders as DiGeorge/Velocardiofacial syndrome. dense oligonucleotide probes to the NRXN1 locus on array comparative hy- The 22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome is the most common of these conditi- bridisation platforms provides detailed characterisation of deletions in this ons, representing a spectrum of clinical anomalies affecting multiple organ gene, and is likely to add to understanding of the function and mechanism of systems. 22q11.2 duplication syndrome has also been recently characteri- action of NRXN1 in neural development. zed as a different clinical entity with features overlapping 22q11.2 deleti- P03.098 on syndrome. Evidence has implicated low-copy repeats (LCRs) on 22q as Clinical phenotypes and genotype-phenotype analysis of intragenic mediator of nonallelic homologous recombination that result in rearrange- NRXN1 deletions ments of 22q. We performed Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplifica- F. O. Bartel, Y. A. Zarate, J. S. Geer, M. J. Lyons, R. C. Rogers, S. A. Skinner, B. R. DuPont, A. tion (MLPA) using SALSA MLPA kit P250 DiGeorge in two patients presented Dwivedi; with learning disabilities and detected variable microduplication of 22q11 Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States. region. Patient 1 showed a microduplication including the region between NRXN1 LRC22-F and LCR22-H involving the SMARCB1 and SNRPD3 genes. Patient 2 showed microduplication at LCR22-D, involving the TOP3B gene. Chromo- Neurexin1 ( ) is a presynaptic neuraNl RceXlNl 1adhesion molecule and somal rearrangements in distal 22q11 region, as well as microduplications, receptor which functions in the stabiNlizRaXtNio1na of theN sRyXnNap1sbe by interaction are less common than rearrangements in the proximal region. One possible with postsynaptic neuroligin proteins. The gene is 1.1MB in size explanation is that LCR22E-H is smaller than the proximal LCRs are thus and codes for two protein isoforms and , each of which less susceptible to rearrangements. Our preliminary results do no support a has multiple promoters and collectively may code for thousands of different correlation between the size of the duplication and the severity of the phe- transcripts. Previous reports have demonstrated a significant association of notypic presentation. copy number variation within this gene to bothN aRuXtNis1m spectrum disorder P03.096 and schizophrenia, as well as addiction, intellectual disability and vertebral MLPA as screening method in detection of submicroscopic anomalies. We have identified 11 patients with intragenic dedlee tnioonvos rearrangemets detected in patients with developmental delay/ by chromosomal microarray. Deletions ranged in size from 8kb to 352 kb. intellectual disability Family study was conducted for six cases and identified three as L. Morozin Pohovski, I. Barisic; changes and three as maternally transmitted. Cognitive or behavioral rea- Children‘s University Hospital Zagreb, Clinical Hospital Centre Sisters of Mercy, Zagreb, sons for referral were given for 10 of the 11 patients (90%) ranging from Croatia. profound intellectual disability and encephalopathy to developmental delay. Five of 11 patients had NaR dXiNag1nosis of autism or autism spectrum disorder (45%). The characterization of these patients will expand the clinical phe- Chromosomal rearrangements represent a significant cause of developmen- notype associated with deletions, and aid in the genotype phenotype tal delay/intellectual disability (DD/ID). The implementation of Multiplex correlation of deletions within this structurally complex gene. Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) has enabled the analy- P03.099 sis of chromosomal aberrations beyond the range of routine karyotyping. Structural chromosomal aberrations diagnosed by FISH In this study we prospectively screened 150 patients with DD/ID with or T. Zolotukhina, N. Shilova, J. Kozlova, M. Minzhenkova, J. Markova; without dismorphic features or additional congenital abnormalities using Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of RAMS, SALSA MLPA P036, SALSA MLPA P070 and SALSA MLPA P245 kits, which Moscow, Russian Federation. are specifically designed to detect subtelomeric chromosome imbalances and 21 microdeletion syndromes respectively. The aim of the study was to determine the ability to detect chromosomal abnormalities in patients with GTG-banded karyotyping provides gold standard in clinical cytogenetics DD/ID using a combination of MLPA kits and to analyze the feasibility of which is widely used in medical-genetic consultations, despite of develop- the use of additional MLPA specific telomere and microdeletion probe mix ment and adoption of up-to-date molecular methods. However, GTG-method as an additional confirmatory test. The MLPA screening revealed chromo- often is limited in sensitivity. Accuracy of cytogenetic diagnostics of chro- some aberrations in 21 (14%) cases: 11 subtelomeric rearrangements (3 mosomal rearrangements increases with using FISH, which is an excellent deletions: del4p, del15q and del22q, 4 duplications: dup 9p, dupX/Yp, 3 approach to this aim. We used FISH-method with different DNA-probes and deletions and duplications: dup3p/del8q, dup8p/del18q, del 12p/dup22q have developed the algorithm of investigations. We analyzed the karyoty- and one del/dup19p) and 10 microdeletions (5 DiGeorge syndrome, two pes of 31 patients with dysmorphic features and congenital malformations. 17q21.31 microdeletions, one 15q24 microdeletion and one Prader-Willi/ When the analysis of GTG-karyotypes at level 550 bands revealed presence Angelman syndrome). The use of two subtelomeric kits per patient has re- of chromosomal structural rearrangements (deletions or duplications), we duced the rate of false positive and negative results and improved diagnostic investigated parents’ karyotypes to establish the origin of aberrations. In 27 yield. MLPA specific telomere and microdeletion probe mix have proven to cases these aberrations arised de novo, and in other cases were non-balan- be suitable for confirmation and better characterization of selected aberra- ced variants of parents’ translocations. For identification of chromosomal tions. Conclusion: MLPA is a fast, sensitive and cost-effective technique for rearrangements we used FISH with different DNA-probes: WCP, PCP, CEP, screening DD/ID patients. Use of combination of appropriate kits improves subtelomeric probes, LSI, and also multicolor technologies - mFISH, mBAND, diagnostics and is now used in our routine work. m-cenFISH. In cases of deletions we used appropriate chromosome-specific P03.097 subtelomeric probes. In cases of additional material of unknown origin we NRXN1 deletions identified by array comparative genome used mFISH, subtelomeric probes then mBAND. When derivate chromoso- hybridisation in a clinical case series - further understanding of the mes were revealed chromosome-specific CEP and then mFISH was used. In functional relevance to neurodevelopmental disorders. cases sex chromosome abnormalities we used PCP X long and shot and LSI C. Ogilvie1, J. Ahn1, H. Grayton2, D. A. Collier2, S. Curran2; SRY. In cases supernumerary chromosomal rearrangements - m-cenFISH, 1Guy‘s & St Thomas‘ NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Institute of WCP, then subtelomeric probes. In result of the application of listed FISH- Psychiatry, King‘s College, London, United Kingdom. probes the patients’ karyotypes were verified and breakpoints were estima- ted. The FISH-tests developed algorithm utilization allows to determine the origin of rearrangements and to reduce research time and costs. Microdeletions in the NRXN1 gene have been associated with a range of neurodevelopmental disorders, including autism spectrum disorders, schi- zophrenia, intellectual disability, speech and language delay, epilepsy and hypotonia. We carried out array CGH analysis on 10,397 individuals refer- red for diagnostic cytogenetic testing, using a custom oligonucleotide array, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org124 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.100 The cytokinesis-blocked micronucleus (CBMN) assay in workers at stone-crushing units BeadChip analysis revealed a 0.45 Mb long deletion of the paternal allele of G. Kaur, G. Gandhi; 2p16.1. FISH analysis confirmed the deletion in the patient but not in any of Department of Human Genetics,Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, India. her parents. The deleted region contains only 3 protein-coding RefSeq ge- nes, BCLA11, PAPOLG and REL, and 1 long non-coding RNA gene FLJ16341. Based on high phenotype similarity of our patient with 6 reported patients The stone-crushing industry is a labour -intensive sector where most of the showing the typical phenotype of the 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndrome operations are performed in a highly dust-polluted area often violating the we propose that the critical region of the syndrome can be narrowed down pollution control board guidelines. Since the cytokinesis-blocked micronu- and that these brain expressed genes can be considered candidates for the cleus assay (CBMN) assay provides a deeper insight into the mechanisms clinical symptoms. However, multiple deletions of variable length within contributing to genome damage events that could increase risk of develop- the interval between 2p14 and 2p16.1 have been described in patients with mental and degenerative diseases, in the present study chromosomal dama- intellectual disability but not necessarily the other typical symptoms of ge was assessed by CBMN in peripheral lymphocytes of 23 stone-crushing the syndrome and some of these deletions do not overlap. This observati- unit workers(32.69±1.42 y) employed for more than six years(7.74±0.25y) on indicates that also other genes located in this broader unstable region with a daily work schedule of 8-12h/day, in comparison with 09(33.00±0.50 are associated with cognitive functioning. Supported by CHERISH 223692, y) controls matched for gender, age, and socio-economic status and smoking SF0180027s10, CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022 and MZ0FNM2012. habits with no past/present history of any exposures. The study was cleared P03.103 by the Institutional Ethics Committee. Voluntary written informed consent A de novo 3.8 Mb duplication of chromosome 14q22.3q23.1, including was obtained from all study participants and a face- to -face interview was OTX2 and ARID4A, in a developmentally delayed boy conducted using a pre-designed questionnaire. The results of the assay re- K. Bjørgo, T. Barøy, E. Ormerod, O. Rødningen, E. Frengen, D. Misceo, M. Fannemel; veal a statistically significant (p≤0.000) two fold elevated percent frequen- Dept. of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital and Oslo University, Oslo, Norway. cy of MNd cells in the workers (0.55±0.02) compared to the control group (0.26±0.03). As these workers are continuously being exposed to workplace genotoxicants (causing structural alterations to chromosomes which can We present a three year old developmentally delayed boy with a vocabulary lead to altered gene dosage and expression), the evaluation of chromosomal of less than twenty words, who started walking two years of age. He has thin, damage in these occupationally- exposed workers can be an important pa- findee hnaoivro and a preauricular tag, but otherwise no dysmorphic features. Ma- thogenetic and prognostic predictor of future disease-related changes. gnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain revealed a subarachnoidal cyst. P03.101 A 3.8 Mb duplication involving chromosome 14q22.3q23.1 was de- Cytogenetic abnormalities in peripheral blood lymphocytes of tected by aCGH analysis (chr14:55331483-59107556 bp, hg19). There are patients with malignant salivary gland tumors during neutron no previous reports of patients carrying a duplication of similar size in this therapy region, which in addition to the relatively high number of geneOs TiXnv2oAlvReId- A. Melnikov1, S. Vasilyev2, E. Smolnikova3, L. Urazova1, L. Musabaeva1, V. Velikaya1, O. mD4aAk,e G gCeHn1o type -DpAhCeTnoOtyTpXe2 ,c orrelations challenging. Am ong the 32 RefSeq Gribova1, I. Lebedev2, E. Choynzonov1; genes affected by the duplication, genes of potential interest are , 1Research Institute of Oncology, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Institute of and . orthodonticle homeobox 2,is a homeodomAaRinI-- Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3The Siberian State Medical University, Dco4nAt,a ining transcription factor expressed in brain, whose haploinsufficiency Tomsk, Russian Federation. is linked to ocular developmental anomalies and GdCevHe1lopmental delay. AT rich interactive domain 4A, is a gene involved in chromatin remo- deling, therefore likely to have pleiotropic effect. , GTP cyclohydrolase Neutron therapy is used in more than 25 leading radiology centers in the 1, partially duplicated at the proximal border of the imbalance, causes dopa world, however, cytogenetic monitoring of cancer patients during this type responsive dystonia aDnAdC mT,a lignant hyperphenylalaninemia with autosomal of therapy have not been performed. The frequency and spectrum of cyto- recessive inheritance, although the patient’s phenotype is not consistent genetic damages in peripheral blood lymphocytes were investigated in 9 with this syndrome. dapper, antagonist of beta-catenin, homolog 1, patients with malignant neoplasms of the parotid salivary glands during the partially duplicated at the distal bordOeTr,X i2s involved in the Wnt- mediated treatment by fast neutrons in the cyclotron U-120. There were three time developmental processes. points: before treatment, 24 h after the first fraction and at the end of the We suggest that increased dosage of and ARID4A might have a rele- neutron therapy. Mode of exposure included: single focal dose - 1.6-2.4 Gy, vant role in the emergency of the clinical phenotype in our patient. 3-4 sessions, and the total tumor dose - 5.5-8.4 Gy (equivalent to 23-44 Gy P03.104 of photon radiation). Chromosomal aberration analysis was performed ac- Complex X-chromosome rearrangement. How could it happen? cording to standard protocol in the first mitosis of PHA-stimulated lympho- A. T. Hoejland, J. Graakjaer, S. Koelvraa, A. Bojesen; cytes. Cytokinesis-blocked micronucleus test was performed in combination Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. with FISH using a pancentromeric DNA probe. It was shown that chromo- some-type aberrations were prevalent among all cytogenetic abnormalities both before and after neutron therapy. The frequencies of chromosome-type We report the SNP-array finding of a complex X-chromosome rearrange- aberrations and all micronuclei increased significantly after both the first ment in a now 4 year old girl with delayed psychomotor development and fraction and the whole therapy comparing with the levels before the thera- failure to thrive. py (p<0.05). The predominant chromosome-type aberrations were paired We found on the short arm of the X-chromosomes neighbouring regions with (acentric) fragments (57 % of all chromosome-type aberrations). The ob- different aberrations, namely a duplication (Xp22.2), a loss of heterozygosity served mutagenic effect could be considered to optimize the neutron thera- (LOH) segment (Xp22.11-Xp22.2) with normal allele frequency and a deleti- py in patients with tumors of the salivary glands. This research is supported on (Xp21.1-Xp22.11). There were no other findings on SNP-array to suggest by the target Federal Program of „Research and development on priority di- different reasons for the girl’s symptoms. SNP-arrays on both parents were rections of scientific-technological complex of Russia for 2007-2013 years” also performed. The mother had a duplication (Xp22.11-Xp22.2) matching No. 16.512.11.2063. the duplication and LOH segment in the girl. The father had no deletions or P03.102 duplications. G-band karyotypes from the girl showed visible aberrations in Clinical and molecular characterization of a patient with de novo 0.45 both X-chromosomes; one with a duplication in Xp and one with a deletion Mb deletion of 2p16.1 in Xp (46,XX,dup(X)(p22.1p22.2)mat,del(X)(p21p22.2)dn) M. Hančárová1, M. Simandlová1, J. Drábová1, K. Männik2, A. Kurg2, Z. Sedláček1; Results of additional FISH analyses, using probes corresponding to the du- 1Department Of Biology And Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of plicated segment Xp22.2, the segment containing LOH (Xp22.11-Xp22.2) Molecular and Cell Biology, Tartu, Estonia. and the deleted segment (Xp21.1-Xp22.11), showed that the paternally deri- ved X-chromosome did not harbour any of these three segments, suggesting that the unbalanced complex duplication/LOH was a result of inheritance of The widespread use of microarray methods has contributed to the identi- two derivative X-chromosomes. A maternal derivative X-chromosome with fication of several new rare microdeletion syndromes including that asso- a duplication segment corresponding to the LOH region combined with ciated with deletions of 2p15-p16.1. The 2p15-p16.1 microdeletion syndro- insertion of the paternal duplication segment and a derivative paternal X- me is characterized by developmental delay, intellectual disability, autism, chromosome with a deleted segment encompassing all three regions. microcephaly, growth retardation, facial abnormalities, disturbed vision and We speculate that the reason for this complex rearrangement could be a other symptoms. We report here an 11-year-old autistic girl showing clinical post zygotic mitotic recombination, perhaps caused by an inverted duplica- features consistent with the syndrome. Conventional cytogenetic analysis of tion on the maternal X-chromosome, although this could not be verified. the patient showed a normal female karyotype. Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12 www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 125 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.105 Chromosome evolution 180 degrees backwards - a case report S. Müller, M. Neusser, M. Pfob, Y. Mehraein, O. Steinlein; sociated to a ~2 Mb deletion of 11q25. The patient, a 13 year-old boy, has Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, short stature, facial and corporal dysmorphisms. Cardiac evaluation showed Munich, Germany. atrial septal defect corrected by surgical treatment. He presents intellectu- al disability, aggressive and hyperactive behavior, limited verbal language repertoire and dysarthria. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first We present molecular cytogenetic evidence that the carrier of a paracentric report of a partial trisomy 1q32 associated to a partial monosomy 11q25 inversion inv(7)(q11.23q22.1) has reversed the evolutionary inversion that in the literature. Thus, the patient revise karyotype is 46,XY.ish der(11) distinguishes the chromosome 7 homologs of human and gorilla. The inver- t(1;11)(q32.3;q25)pat (RP11-663C5-,RP11-262H5+;RP11-15J5+,RP11- sion was observed in a 41 years old patient with inconspicuous phenotype 265F9-).arr 1q32.3q44(212,508,954-249,224,376)×3,11q25(132,927,027- after routine cytogenetic analysis because of recurrent abortions in the part- 134,944,770)×1. Among the duplicated genes at 1q region, DISC1 and TRAX ner of the patient. FISH experiments with a panel of BAC probes localized are crucial in neural development and TBCE and RAB3GAP are associated the inversion breakpoints at 76,5-76,9 Mb and 102,2-102,4 Mb (GRCh37. with neurodevelopmental disorders and mental retardation. Also the genes p5, Feb 2009), respectively. The proximal breakpoint maps approximately RYR2, VTSIP, ARVD2, ARVC2 are associated to cardiac abnormalities. Com- two Mb distal of the Williams-Beuren Syndrome critical region. Important- paring the molecular karyotype and the phenotype of our patient to few si- ly, both breakpoints reside in large clusters of primate specific segmental milar cases, the clinical features of our patient are more likely due to partial duplications, which by non-homologous allelic recombination (NAHR) may trisomy 1q than to partial monosomy 11q. Although one of the critical regi- have facilitated both the evolutionary inversion in the human/chimpanzee ons for conotruncal heart defects, that include JAM3 gene, is within 129.0- common ancestor and the inversion in the case presented here, and possibly 130.6 Mb at 11q25. Cytogenomic methods extended the scope of molecular also in several other cases described in the literature as inv(7)(q11q22). In diagnosis thus making possible a more comprehensive approach to identify summary, this example adds to the mounting body of evidence that some pathogenic genomic imbalances. structural chromosomal aberrations in humans can be caused by inherent P03.108 instability of genomic regions that were already prone to break during evo- A girl with partial trisomy 2p and monosomy 9p syndromes and sex lution, thus demonstrating that evolutionary genomic changes and human reversal chromosome pathology may be two sides of the same coin. L. L. Roese, K. T. Abe, M. Schneider, M. D. V. Oliveira, M. F. Pereira, A. L. V. Coelho, D. R. P03.106 Carvalho, C. E. Speck-Martins; A novel report of partial trisomy of distal 7q and partial monosomy SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasilia, Brazil. of distal 13q in a child with mental retardation,dysmorphism and ambiguous genitalia A. Shojaei1, J. Tavakkoly-Bazzaz1, R. kariminejad2, M. Razzaghy-Azar1, I. Bahman3, F. Partial trisomy 2p is associated with multiple distinctive findings including Behjati3; psychomotor delay and dysmorfic facial features. The deletion 9p syndro- 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical me is characterized by mental retardation, trigonocephaly, midface hypo- Sciences, Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22- Kariminejad & Najmabadi plasia and a long philtrum. Distal 9p deletions have also been reported in Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33- patients XY and sex reversal, with or without 9p deletion syndrome. Our Genetics Research Center, University of Social Wefare and Rehabilitation Sciences, patient presented low birth-weight, developmental delay, generalized hypo- Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. tonia and seizures. Facial dysmorphisms included high forehead, wide nasal root, anteverted nares, short neck, and normal external female genitalia. Conventional cytogenetic analysis was performed. Array-CGH was carried A four year old boy was hospitalized with neurodevelopment delay, grow- out using the Constitutional Chip 4.0 BAC Array platform. The karyotype th delay, mental retardation, brachycephaly, neuromuscular abnormality, was 46,XY,der(9)t(2;9)(p21;p24).arr 2p25.3p21(366,137-42,681,415) several dysmorphic features and ambiguous genitalia. Cytogenetics investi- x3,9p24.3p24.2(97,018-2,299,539)x1mat. She inherited the chromosome 9 gation using high resolution GTG banding technique showed an abnormal derivative from her mother who had the karyotype 46,XX,t(2;9)(p21;p24). chromosome 13 described as 46, der(13)t(7;13)(q32;q32)mat. The mother Our patient did not present with trigonocephaly, but presented with other had a balanced reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 7 and 13. features characteristic for 9p deletion phenotype. Considering the extent FISH technique using subtelomeric probes for 7q and 13q confirmed the of the 9p deletion in this patient (~2 Mb from the telomere), our results translocation and the der13 in the child. For Further characterization of the support the observations made by some authors, suggesting a more distal breakpoints aCGH was used.whole genome oligoarray was performed using critical region for 9p deletion syndrome phenotypes. Our patient had also a CYTOCHIP ISCA 4X44K version1.1.In the involved chromosomes using ar- 2p duplicated segment an average of 42 Mb. This segment was larger than ray CGH showed a 7.7 Mb deletion at 13q33.3 to qter and a 22Mb gain at those described by some authors (in general, 2p23→2pter), but presented 7q33 to q36.3. The breakpoints using conventional Cytogenetics technique many features in common with those described for them. The differences were furtherer refined with array CGH from 7q22 to 7q33 and from 13q32 could be explained due the different breakpoints and genes involved in each to 13q33.The concomitant occurrence of partial monosomy 13q with other patient. The present study could contribute to the description of unusual chromosomal abnormalities is uncommon. The patient’s intellectual disa- chromosomal aberrations affecting chromosomes 2 and 9 with sex rever- bility seems to be in accordance with 13q deletion syndrome and his ambi- sal. guous genitalia is more likely to be due to 7q partial trisomy. Specific neuro- P03.109 logical and neuromuscular problems like seizure and hypo/hypertonia have A boy with partial trisomy 3p and monosomy 10q due to an been described in most 7q partial trisomy patients but not in 13q partial unbalanced 3p:10q translocation monosomy. Dysmorphic features like low set ears, frontal bossing and po- M. S. YILDIRIM, A. G. ZAMANI, E. TUNCEZ; sitional abnormalities in teeth,epicantic fold and hypertelorisum, Low hair Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya University, Konya, line and Retro/micrognathia , present in our patient, have been described in Turkey. other cases of partial trisomy 7q and 13q deletion. P03.107 Partial Trisomy 1q associated to Partial Monosomy 11q: Cytogenomic Trisomy 3p syndrome is a rare syndrome characterized by psychomotor and and Clinical findings mental retardation, decreased muscle tone, seizures, short neck, hypertelo- L. D. Kulikowski1, V. F. A. Meloni2, S. S. Takeno2, A. L. P. Luce2, C. B. Mello3, M. I. rism/telecanthus, dysmorphic ears and congenital heart defects. Partial de- Melaragno2; letion of the long arm of chromosome 10 is a relatively frequent cytogenetic 1Department of Pathology, Cytogenomics Laboratory, LIM 03, Universidade de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 2Department of Morphology and Genetics, abnormality and exists considerable heterogeneity in the clinical presenta- Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Núcleo de Atendimento tion even among family members who share the same deletion boundaries. Neuropsicológico Infantil Interdisciplinar , AFIP, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Common facial appearance, cardiac and urogenital anomalies, and a high Brazil, São Paulo, Brazil. incidence of neurodevelopmental deficits are relatively consistent features for deletion 10q syndrome. We report a 6 years old boy presented with dysmorphic features such as Citogenomics methods have provided significant improvement in the dia- microcephaly, hypertelorism, narrow palpebral fissures, epicanthal folds, gnosis of rare diseases in individuals with developmental delay, multiple flat nasal bridge, deep philtrum, prognatism, malocclusion of teeth, large- congenital anomalies and autism spectrum disorders. We describe a pati- protruding ears, uplifted earlobes, short neck, neck webbing, wide spaced ent with partial trisomy 1q and partial monosomy 11q and a 46,XY,der(11) nipples, umblical hernia, camptodactyly of third fingers, clinodactyly of fifth t(1;11)(q41;q24)pat karyotype. Further investigations using FISH-BACs and fingers, sandal gap, overriding toes, clinodactyly of fourth toes, cryptorchi- SNP-array (6.0 Affymetrix) disclosed a ~37 Mb duplication of 1q32.3q44 as- dism, micropenis. The patient also had seizures, growth retardation and www.eshg.org www.eshg.org126 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 mental motor retardation. Abdominal USG showed hydronephrosis and a Investigations of apparently balanced chromosomal rearrangements in pa- cranial MR examination revealed enlarged posterior fossa. After conventio- tients with abnormal phenotype by molecular cytogenetics tools, especially nal cytogenetic screening the karyotype of the proband was described as by array CGH, has become the gold standard for deciphering cryptic chro- 46,XY,der(10)t(3;10)(p24;q26). This karyotype confirmed by microarray mosomal abnormalities. analysis. This analysis showed a 9,45 Mb gain in chromosome 3 and 5,07 Mb P03.112 loss in chromosome 10. His father is a carrier of a balanced translocation Application of array-CGH in prenatal diagnosis and aborted fetuses between chromosomes 3 and 10 [46,XY,t(3;10)(p24;q26)]. So our patient P. C. Evangelidou, C. Sismani, M. Ioannides, A. Alexandrou, M. Moutafi, P. Patsalis; has a partial duplication of 3p and partial deletion of 10q. Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and This case presented to contribute the literature owing to rarity of the triso- Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. my 3p and distal monosomy 10q syndrome. P03.110 Partial trisomy of 7q34 with loss of the heterochromatic region of Y Array -CGH, in postnatal diagnosis for intellectual disability is currently chromosome being used as a first-tier diagnostic test. However, in prenatal diagnosis, D. Begovic, R. Lasan Trcic, S. Huljev Frkovic, L. Letica, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac chromosomal analysis remains the method of choice. Its introduction in Gornik, M. Salamon; routine prenatal diagnosis is still in its infancy and further studies are nee- Medical School University of Zagreb, Department of Pediatrics, Zagreb, Croatia. ded prior to its implementation. Here we present our results from appli- cation of array-CGH in selected amniotic fluid and CVS samples as well as in first and second trimester samples from aborted fetuses (POC-Products We present a male infant with partial trisomy of the long arm of chromoso- Of Conception or skin biopsies). Fifty-one prenatal cases were referred for me 7. The patient is the first child of healthy and unrelated parents, born on array-CGH for ultrasound abnordme anloitvioes (N=37) or for further investigation term, birth weight 3750 g (50 to 75 centile), length 58 cm (+4 SD). Because of chromosomal abnormalities (N=14). The 105K Cytochip array, (BlueGno- of dismorphia, cardiac defect and delayed psychomotor development the me Ltd.) was applied and two and one inherited, from an affected cytogenetic study was performed at the age of 20 months. mother, deletions (6%) ranging from 2.5-14Mb, were detected. In addition The karyotype 46,X,der(Y)t(Y;7)(q12;q34)dn revealed de novo partial triso- the origin of two marker chromosomes was identified. One of the abnor- my 7q34 and loss of heterochromatic region of chromosome Y. High resolu- malities detected, would have been missed with conventional cytogenetics tion GTG banding revealed de novo derivate Y chromosome from transloca- highlighting the importance of array-CGH in prenatal diagnosis. In addition tion (Y;7)(q12;q34) in all methapases and normal karyotype in the patient‘s the characterization of chromosomal abnormalities with array-CGH offers father. FISH with wcp from chromosome 7 showed two normal signals, and valuable information for the pregnancy outcome. Forty-six samples from ab- an extra signal in the long arm of chromosome Y. Chromosome Y showed orted fetuses which failed to grow in vitro were analyzed using the Cytochip presence of SRY, centromere and loss of heterochromatic region. BAC array and six (13%) autosomal full trisomies were detected. No cases Cases with a 7q34 pure partial trisomies are uncommon. Patient shares were detected with submicroscopic copy number changes that could have most of the common findings with previously described patients such as been missed with conventional cytogenetics. However since BAC arrays post natal growth retardation, hypertelorism, epicanthus, low-set ears, mi- were used further studies are necessary with higher resolution arrays in or- crognathia, short neck, hypotonia, skeletal anomalies, cardiac defect and der to evaluate the importance and the value of array-CGH in miscarriages. developmental retardation with IQ 47. He is also characterized by hyper- P03.113 flexible fingers, Sydney line on and right testicular retention, a feature that Prenatal diagnosis of common chromosome disorders by QF-PCR. has previously not been described. V. S. Baranov, T. E. Ivashchenko, Y. A. Nasykhova, O. A. Tarasenko, L. I. Talantova, Y. S. Cases like these are useful, given clinical manifestation are only due to pure Nikolaeva, A. L. Koroteev, O. G. Chiryaeva, L. I. Petrova, N. A. Sadik, V. S. Dudkina, T. V. 7q trisomy: however, further molecular studies are needed to determine Kuznetzova; D.O.Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian genes located in this region of the long arm of chromosome 7, and to elu- Federation. cidate the phenotypic correlation of the regions of this chromosome partial trisomy. P03.111 The quantitative fluorescent PCR assay, implemented during the last few Two distinct phenotypes in 11 individuals, demonatrating alternate years, opens the way for common chromosome disorders prenatal diagno- unbalanced recombinants derived from a cryptic paternal balanced ses within a few hours after sampling. Study summarizes 3 years prenatal translocation between chromosomes 10 and 14 diagnosis for chromosome abnormalities by QF-PCR experience. 17 STR A. Mory1, L. Linde2, E. Dagan1,3, N. Hawash-Moustafa1, H. Mandel1,4, R. Gershoni-Baru1,4; 1Rambam Medical Center, Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 2BioRap markers (D21S11, D21S1437 D21S1411, D21S226, D13S628, D13S634, Technologies Ltd. at the Rappaport Institute, Haifa, Israel, 3Department of Nursing, D13S742, D18S380, D18S386, D18S391, D18S535, AMXY, DXS981, DXS6854, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 4The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, X22, P39, XHPRT) were used throughout the study. Altogether 53 aneuploi- Techn‏ion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. dies (34 trisomy 21 cases, 11- trisomy 18, 3 47 XXY, 2 45X and 2 69 XXY) out Background: of total 1105 fetuses were picked up. Submicroscopic polymorphic microsa- tellites duplications were observed in 12 cases as clear trisomic triallelic or Two syndromes, each characterized by a distinct cluster of diallelic patterns for one chromosome-specific STRs. Duplications were de- clinical features, segregated in 11 individuals from one kindred. All affec- tected in two sample for one STR on chromosome 21 (D21S1437), in six ca- ted children were the products of non-consanguineous matings. However, ses for one of the markers selected on chromosome 13 (4 cases for D13S634 all affected individuals shared a common progenitor. The diagnosis of un- and 2 for D13S742), in three sample for STRs on sex chromosome (2 cases balanced chromosomal abnormalities was sought. Yet, cytogenetic studies for X22 and 1 for P39) and in the remaining case with D18S51 marker. The wMeerteh oredpso:rted to be normal. Molecular cytogenetics tools were undertaken maternal duplication origin have been demonstrated idne 5 n coavsoes by QF-PCR to further investigate this prototype of abnormalities. analysis of the same .marker in both parents, in one sample polymorphism Following signed informed consent (parental), blood samples was found as inherited from the father. In three cases origin of du- were drawn, for DNA extraction, from all available patients (n=10) and plication was proved parents (n=6), pertaining to three nuclear families, from one kindred. Clini- The submicroscopic duplications in microsatellites should be treated with cal, neurological and developmental assessments were undertaken in selec- caution as it needs further discrimination for both partial trisomy or full ted patients and two distinct phenotypes, A and B were deliniated, marked autosomal trisomy detected with single informative STR. The analysis of by mental retadation, either moderate or severe, respectively, and salient both parents with the same marker enables rare inherited polymorphism dysmorphic features associated with early scenescence (phenotype B). identification. Whole genome SNP array analysis using the „HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 DNA P03.114 ARnesaulylstiss: BeadChip Kit (Illumina)“ was undertaken on two affected individu- De novo pure subtelomeric microduplications as a cause of als demonstrating distinct phenotypes. dysmorphic syndromes of unexplained etiology Whole genome SNP array analysis identified an unbalanced cryptic M. Kucharczyk, D. Sielska-Rotblum, A. Gutkowska, M. Kugaudo, A. Jezela-Stanek, A. translocation involving a terminal 5 Mb deletion (100273988-106353482) Marczak, M. Białecka, K. Chrzanowska, M. Krajewska-Walasek; of 14q32.2-14Q32.3 and a terminal 5 Mb duplication (125708-5329074) Department of Medical Genetics, The Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. of 10p15.3 -10P15.1 in patient with phenotype A. An alternate unbalan- ced recombinant, namely terminal 5 Mb deletion (125708-C5o3n2c9l0u7si4o)n osf 10p15.3 -10p15 and terminal 5 Mb duplication (100273988-106353482) of 14q32.2-14q32.3, was shown in patient with phenotype B. : Unbalanced chromosomal rearrangements in gene-rich subtelomeric regi- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 127 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ons lead to mental retardation (MR), dysmorphy, multiple congenital ano- and hyperactive behavior. Drug-resistant epilepsy was another consistent malies (MCA) and/or abnormal growth or behavior. The number of reported finding. Genetically, the ring was complete in 6/27 cases, while it showed a deletions is much higher than the number of duplications, which likely re- small terminal deletion, varying in size from 0.3 to 5 Mb, in the other 21. In flects both ascertainment bias and limitations of available diagnostic me- two of these a cryptic 14q duplication of 2.5 and 9.7 Mb, respectively, pro- thods. Duplications may result in milder phenotypes, or certain characteri- ximal to the deleted segment, was also identified. Deleted rings were 75% stic features that are different to those of the corresponding deletions, and paternal and 25% maternal in origin. UPD (14) was excluded in all cases. consequently, patients may not present for clinical evaluation. New molecu- Our observations, along with literature review of additional 39 ring 14 cases lar techniques (MLPA or array-CGH) allow easier identification of subtelo- and 42 linear deletions, led us to map retinal abnormalities and epilepsy to meric microduplications, but their frequency and clinical significance are the proximal 14q11.2- q12 region, and behavior disorders, susceptibility to still largely unknown. Previous studies gave a frequency of subtelomeric infections and typical facial characteristics to the 14q32 region. We consider duplications of 0-2%; most have been described in sporadic cases with their that haploinsufficiency is the most likely underlying mechanism for facial genomic sizes poorly determined. dysmorphisms, susceptibility to infections and behavior disorder, and gene We estimated the frequency of pure subtelomeric microduplications in a silencing for seizures and retinal abnormalities. group of 491 patients with MR, dysmorphy and/or MCA and normal ka- P03.117 ryotype using MLPA and delineated the identified microduplications using ArrayCGH characterisation of ring chromosome 9 formation due array-CGH. In 3 patients (prevalence of ~0,61%), MLPA revealed a subtelo- to inverted duplication and terminal deletion in a patient with sex- meric duplication without a concurrent deletion: duplication of 4p15.2pter reversal (24.91 Mb), 9p13.1pter (38.55 Mb) and 17p13.2pter (5.77 Mb); all had oc- I. Barisic1, L. Morozin Pohovski1, K. Dumic1, I. Petkovic1, M. Riegel2, A. Schinzel2; curred de novo. 1Childrens University Hospital Zagreb, Clinical Hospital Centre Sisters of Mercy, Zagreb, Based on our findings and literature data, pure subtelomeric microduplica- Croatia, 2Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Universität Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. tions are an infrequent cause of dysmorphic syndromes. However, further studies are needed to clinically and molecularly define novel duplication syndromes, what is particularly important for dysmorphology and genetic We present the molecular characterisation of the case of ring (9) chromo- counseling. some arisen as a healing mechanism in a patient with inverted duplication The study was partially supported by the grant of the Polish Ministry of Sci- and terminal deletion. Ring chromosome 9 was initially diagnosed by high ence and Higher Education (Contract No 0605/B/P01/2009/37). resolution karyotyping and shown to have an additional duplication of band P03.115 p23. Fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH), multiplex ligation-dependent Submicroscopic Xq28 deletions are frequent in “MECP2-mutation- probe amplification (MLPA) and quantitative fluorescent-polymerase chain negative” Rett syndrome girls S. G. Vorsanova1,2,3, Y. B. Yurov2,1,3, O. S. Kurinnaia1,2,3, V. Y. Voinova1,3, M. A. Zelenova2,3, A. reaction (QF-PCR) maker analysis were used to characterise additionally the P. Silvanovich2, I. Y. Iourov2,1; aberration and to establish parental origin. The final karyotype was desi- 1Institute of Paediatrics and Paediatric Surgery, Ministry of Health, Moscow, Russian gnated as 46,XY,r(9)(p24.3;q34.3) inv dup(9)(p24.3p22.3)mat. Array-CGH Federation, 2Mental Health Research Center, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, was performed to further map the aberration. The result revealed a com- 3Moscow City University of Psychology and Education, Moscow, Russian Federation. plex rearrangement involving deletion of 841,839 bp the at band 9p24.3, followed by an intact segment approximately 926,106 bp in size, and a large duplication of 12.73 Mb extending from band p24.3 through p22.3. The pa- MECP2 mutations are a well-recognized cause of Rett syndrome (RTT). tient presented overlapping clinical features of the terminal deletion and From 60 to 90% cases of RTT usually demonstrate point or frameshift muta- associated duplication. The deletion involved sex reversal critical region tions of MECP2. In the remainder, the cause of the disease is usually uniden- which resulted in ambiguous external genitalia and bilateral ovotestes. In tified. Occasionally reported cases of Xq28 deletions encompassing MECP2 addition, she presented with growth retardation, dysmorphic features, ce- suggest that at least a small proportion of MECP2-mutation-negative RTT rebellar hypoplasia, a small atrial septal defect and low-normal intellectual cases might result from submicroscopic subtelomeric Xq losses. Using ar- development. There is only one report of a patient with ring chromosome ray comparative genome hybridization (array CGH) with a higher coverage 9 containing an inverted 9p22.3-p24.3 duplication, but without terminal of chromosome X, we have tested whether submicroscopic Xq28 deletions deletion. Phenotypic characteristics are similar to our patient, confirming (encompassing MECP2) contribute to the etiology of RTT in “MECP2-mu- the hypothesis of a separate dup9p22.3-p24.3 phenotype, distinct from the tation-negative” cases. We have found that 4 girls among 28 RTT females well described 9 p duplication syndrome, thus confining its critical region without MECP2 mutations (addressed by direct sequencing) exhibited sub- to 9p22.1-p22.2. microscopic Xq28 deletions. The size of the deletions was estimated to be P03.118 approximately 603kb. It is noteworthy that all the deletion cases demon- Clinical consequences resulting of the ring chromosome 13 strated almost exactly the same breakpoints located at 153.25 and 153.86 configuration Mb of chromosome X according to NCBI Build 37.3. Clinical manifestations R. S. Guilherme1, C. A. Kim2, S. Bragagnolo1, M. A. Ramos1, N. B. Spinner3, L. K. Conlin3, R. in these cases resembled to classical RTT with additional clinical manifesta- Daber3, L. D. Kulikowski2, M. I. Melaragno1; tions such as atypical facial dysmorphisms, congenital heart malformation, 1University Federal of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil, 2University of São Paulo, São Paulo, intrauterine growth retardation, congenital eye malformations probably Brazil, 3Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. due to losses of other genes located at Xq28. Two deletion cases were as- sociated with late-onset regression (at 24 and 38 months). Our data indi- cate that about 14% of MECP2-mutation-negative RTT cases can arise from Ring chromosomes usually result from two terminal breaks in both chromo- submicroscopic Xq28 deletions. This suggests that array CGH (chromosomal some arms followed by fusion but can also be formed by different mechanis- microarray) analysis is warranted in MECP2-mutation-negative RTT cases, ms. We studied thrPeea tpieatniet nI.ts with r(13) karyotyping with G-banding, array regardless of monogenic nature of the disease. (platform Illumina Quad610) and FISH with bacterial artificial chromosome P03.116 probes, as follows. Three year-old boy, preterm, IUGR, microcepha- The ring 14 syndrome: phenotypic map ly, narrow and oblique forehead, upslanting palpebral fissures, ocular hyper- M. Zollino1, E. Ponzi1, G. Gobbi2, G. Neri1; telorism, prominent nasal bridge, high palate, prominent incisors, large and 1Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 2Neuropsichiatria Infantile,IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze dysmorphic ears, peno-scrotal inversion, scrotal hypoplasia, prominent and Neurologiche, Bologna, Italy. large halluces, renal ectopia, hypotonia and severe neuro-psychPoamtioetnotr dIeI-. lay. Cytomolecular results: 46,XY,r(13)(p13q33.1).arr 13q33.1(101,543,509- 103, 001,462)x3,13q33.1q34(103,003,268-114,142,980)x1 The ring 14 syndrome is a rare condition, whose precise clinical and genetic One year-old boy, IUGR, microsomia, microcephaly, micrognathism, bila- characterization is still limited. Pathogenic mechanisms are unknown, with teral epicanthic folds, long eyelashes, small nose, prominent nasal bridge, particular regard to the severe seizure disorder. We analyzed 27 patients long philtrum, broad helices, low set dysmorphic ears, high palate, thin with ring 14 syndrome and 9 patients with linear 14q deletions, affecting upper lip, thoraco-lombar scoliosis, right feet pos-axial polydactyly, hypo- the proximal (n=3) or the distal (n=6) segment. Clinically, the ring14 syndro- tonia and nePuartoi-epnsty IcIhI.o 5motor development delay: 46,XY,r(13)(p13q34). me was characterized by a recognizable phenotype of shortness of stature, arr 13q21.33q34(70,141,036-113, 656,958)x3,13q34(113,759,040-114- distinctive facial appearance, microcephaly, scoliosis, and ocular abnorma- ,123,122)x1. year-old boy, preterm, IGRU, microcephaly, ocular lities, consisting mainly of abnormal retinal pigmentation, but also retinitis hypertelorism, proeminent nasal bridge, long nose, spaced nipples, otitis, pigmentosa, strabismus, glaucoma, and abnormal macula. Nearly all pati- leucopenia, speech delay, hypotonia and neuro-psychomotor development ents presented with severe intellectually disability, and some had aggressive delay: 46,XY,r(13)(p13q34).arr 13q34(110,304,519-114,123,122)x1. The www.eshg.org www.eshg.org128 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 patients I and II present a duplicated segment associated with the terminal SHOX (short stature homeobox-containing gene) is a member of the highly deletion that was inverted in patient II, while the patient III showed simple conserved paired homeobox (HOX) family and is known to control impor- terminal deletion. We can observe the three patients present clinical fea- tant aspects of growth and development. This gene, located in the PAR1 re- tures usually found in del(13q), partial duplication 13q and r(13) conside- gions of chromosomes X and Y, is the first gene shown to be involved in the ring their phenotypes are influenced by many factors such as the size of the development of characteristic features of Turner syndrome. deletion, presence or not of interstitial duplication, ring instability and epi- We present the case of a female patient, the first child of a Caucasian unrela- genetic factors, showing the difficulty in defining a specific phenotype r(13) ted family with mild dysmorphic features, microcephaly, growth and mental patients. (FAPESP) retardation. MLPA analysis of the telomeres revealed an Xpter duplication, P03.119 later confirmed with FISH analysis using commercially available SHOX pro- Robertsonian translocation and consanguinity bes. Also, the blood karyotype investigation showed a deletion on the long T. Cora, N. Kocak, A. Kalaycı, H. Acar; arm of chromosome 13, region q12q14, which includes CDX2, HMGB1, BR- Selcuk University, Selcuklu Medical Faculty, KONYA, Turkey. CA2, KL and TNFSF11 genes. The implications of SHOX duplication and interstitial deletion of 13q for the patient’s phenotype individually and in combination are discussed, along Robertsonian translocation, which occur with a prevalence of ~1 in 1000 in with a short review of the literature. the general population, result from the rearrangement of two acrocentric P03.122 chromosomes. The most common Robertsonian translocation is between High resolution oligo array-CGH analysis of single cells chromosomes 13 and 14. This translocation can occur de novo or be trans- P. Costa, A. De Witte, S. Fulmer-Smentek; mitted by one of the parents. The rearrangement form trivalents at meiosis Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. may result in unbalanced gametes. Zygotes carrying monosomy are not com- patible with life and most translocation trisomy conceptuses are expected to result in the First trimester loss. However, some of them survive beyond the Genomic imbalances are a major cause of constitutional and acquired dis- second trimester and to term. There may be infertility problems and mis- orders. The ability to characterize single cells isolated from solid tumors or carriage in couples carrying these translocations. In the present report, a pre-implantation samples represents an important advancement. FISH and couple was referred to our clinic due to an 8 years history of infertility. The- PCR-based methods have been used to analyze chromosomes of a single cell. re was a first cousin marriage between couple. Their families also present However, these approaches can only analyze a limited number of genetic loci numerous consanguineous marriage. Cytogenetic analyses were done in the simultaneously. By contrast, analysis of genome-wide copy number changes couple and their families. Both couples have a 45,XX,t(13;14)(q10;q10) and at the single-cell level can be performed by comparative genomic hybridi- 45,XY,t(13;14)(q10;q10) karyotypes. Cytogenetic analyses were also exten- zation (CGH). Bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) arrays have been used ded to their parents. Female proband’s mother and male proband’s father for this purpose. However, typically BAC arrays only contain a few thousand were found to be 44,XX,t(13;14),t(13;14) and 44,XY,t(13;14),t(13;14), re- probes and are prone to batch-to-batch variation in performance. spectively, indicating double Robertsonian translocation while their couples Here we deisnc rsiibteu a method for researchers that combines single-cell whole have normal karyotypes. All other possible carriers of Robertsonian translo- genome amplification (WGA) with copy number analysis employing high- cation in the family were analysed. Each couple in this family was given ge- resolution synthesized Agilent SurePrint G3 8x60K oligo CGH mi- netic counselling who has been seeking pregnancy and healthy child. Thus, croarrays. As a proof-of-principle experiment, we assayed the copy number they were taken under preimplantation genetic diagnosis programme. difference between a reference sample and a test sample with a known ab- P03.120 erration, each using amplified DNA that was diluted to single cell levels. We De novo and inherited copy number variants are a common cause of visualized the expected aberrations in Agilent CytoGenomics software. We short stature then assayed the genomic aberrations in single cells biopsied from embryos, D. Zahnleiter1, U. Trautmann1, A. B. Ekici1, D. Wieczorek2, E. Kunstmann3, H. Doerr4, A. in which not only we detected whole chromosome losses or gains, but also Rauch5, C. T. Thiel1; found smaller aberrations of portions of chromosome arms. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, The ability to detect abnormalities involving any of the 24 chromosomes 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Private clinic, represents a major advantage over FISH and PCR-based methods. The high Wurzburg, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University reproducibility of high-resolution oligo CGH microarrays offers new possi- Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 5Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. bilities for research on genetic analysis of single cells. P03.123 SNParray-detected seemingly neutral familial CNVs as causative Shortness of stature is one of the most common paediatric concerns. 3 % pathogenic events of the general population present with a body height below -2 SD score. In M. Trková1, V. Bečvářová1, L. Hnyková1, J. Horáček1, V. Krutílková1, E. Hlavová1, D. Rašková1, M. Hejtmánková1, E. Zemánková2, A. Baxová3, G. Křečková4, D. Čutka5, D. the majority of cases the underlying cause remains unknown. Recent GWAS Stejskal1; found significant evidence for both single nucleotide and copy number po- 1Gennet, Prague, Czech Republic, 2E-med, Benešov, Czech Republic, 3UK 1.LF a VFN, lymorphisms associated with height variation in the general population. Prague, Czech Republic, 4Gennet, Liberec, Czech Republic, 5CLG, České Budějovice, Czech These associations explain only a small fraction of the overall variability of Republic. human height. To identify novel genetic causes of growth retardation under a “rare variant - frequent disease” hypothesis we performed molecular ka- ryotyping in 121 families with idiopathic short stature using Affymetrix SNP SNP array represents a unique technique for the identification of cytogeneti- 6.0 array and scored copy number variants (CNVs) with a minimum size of cally undetectable submicroscopic alterations (microdeletions, microdupli- 10 kb and 5 markers. A total of 4,432 aberrations with an average of 36 copy cations) and copy number neutral events (LOH, UPD). Routine usage of the number changes per individual were identified. After exclusion of common whole genome genotyping by the Illumina HumanCytoSNP-12v2.1 genera- polymorphisms using 820 healthy control individuals and comparison with tes both types of results; the definite pathogenic/benign CNVs and CNVs or known pathogenic CNVs, we carried out a gene-centric analysis by investi- LOH regions of uncertain clinical significance. gating known gene functions, tissue expression and murine knock-out phe- In 686 analysed samples during 2 year period (10/11) the total of 2699 notypes. We found 14 potentially pathogenic CNVs (11.6 %) in 14 patients, CNVs was detected; 913 CNVs in fetuses with abnormal ultrasound fin- including 6 duplications and 8 deletions. All aberrations were larger than dings and 1756 CNVs in children with psychomotoric retardation and/or 100 kb. 6 were de novo with 1 overlapping the 22q11.1 microdeletion regi- genetic stigmatisation: 4.4% (41/913) and 6.6% (116/1756) of clinically on, and 8 inherited from the affected parent, including the 1q21 region in 2 relevant pathogenic CNVs in prenatal and postnatal samples, respectively; cases and 3q29 in 1 case. In conclusion, our data indicate that CNVs are one 3.9% (36/913) and 4.1% (72/1756) CNVs of uncertain clinical significance of the main causes of growth retardation in a frequency comparable to other in prenatal and postnatal samples, respectively. conditions as e.g. intellectual disability. 85 parent samples were analysed to clarify the CNV relevance and 18 of P03.121 CNVs were confirmed as de novo and likely pathogenic microdeletion/ mi- Genetic complexity in a girl with short stature and mental retardation croduplications. Out of the total of 49 maternally or paternally inherited - case report CNVs, 26 were assessed as the genomic variants. Interestingly, 23 of the D. A. Ochiana1, V. Plaiasu1, G. Motei1, E. Neagu2, D. Iancu2, B. Iancu2, L. Barbarii2; parental CNVs are likely pathogenic as different mechanisms of the variab- 1Mother and Child Care Institute „Prof.Dr. Alfred Rusescu, Bucharest, Romania, 2National le expressivity or incomplete penetrance of each of the familial alterations Institute of Legal Medicine „Mina Minovici“, Bucharest, Romania. were documented: mosaics, X-linked CNV, discreet parental phenotype, se- cond hit model, different aberration size and copy number and uncovered www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 129 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 mutation on the second chromosome. Therefore, we conclude that the proof We reported on three female cases with mental retardation and multiple of inheritance of seemingly neutral genetic aberration does not exclude its congenital anomalies and have additional (add) chromosomal segments. The pathogenic role. parents of the three cases have normal karyotype. Karyotype in the 1st case P03.124 was 46,X,add(X)(q), the second 46,XX,dd(2)(q), the third case 46,XX,add(21) Characterization of a postnatal “de novo” sSMC derived from (q). Using the total subtelomere (Vysis), case 1 has an additional segmene of chromosome 20 chromosome 7(q31-36) and deletion of chromosome Xq subtelomere. Case M. García1, M. Guzmán2, M. Sánchez1, E. Abarca1, L. Rodríguez1; 2 has additional segment of chromosome 15(q25-26) and del of chromoso- 1Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética., Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio de Pediatría. Grupo Hospital de me 2q subtelomere. Case 3 has additional segment of chromosome 17q(22- Madrid, Madrid, Spain. 25) and deletion of 21 subtelomere. Deletion of the subtelomere may be mall Supernumera- the underlying mechanism of these abnormalities. The FISH technique can ry Marker Chromosomes) identify to a certain limits the sites and extent of deletion and duplication. A genetic imbalance induced by the presence of a sSMC (S We recommend array CGH to detect the exact copy number of deletion and is the major reason for clinical symptoms in sSMC duplication and this can explain the relation of genotype/phenotype. carriers, although the 44% odf ep nroevnoatally ascertained cases with sSMC are P03.127 familial cases without clinical effect. Nevertheless, the risk of an abnormal Molecular screening for subtelomeric aberrations in Thai patients phenotype associated with a sSMC is 7%-28%. with idiopathic mental retardation and autism by multiplex ligation- sSMCs cannot be easily characterized by conventional cytogenetic banding dependent probe amplification (MLPA) techniques generating a lot of diagnostic problems, nevertheless, the recent S. Rujirabanjerd, O. Plong-on, T. Sripo, P. Limprasert; application of new molecular techniques have resolved the limitations of Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Hat Yai, Songkhla, Thailand. those techniques and therefore increased the right prognosis for all pati- ents. Here we report a 2 months old girl who showed at birth a weight of 2050 Chromosomal rearrangements involving telomeres have been identified to gr p(<3), an OFC of 32cm p(<3), and a length of 43,5 cm p(<3), together account for approximately 5-10% causes of mental retardation (MR). This with hypotonia. She was the second child of a healthy couple with a previous finding leads to the suggestion that all cases of undiagnosed MR should be healthy child and 3 previous miscarriages. Her evolution at home was with screened for subtelomeric aberration. Nevertheless, resolution of standard no gain weight and after 2 months, an intrathoracic stomach with duodenal karyotyping using G-banding is limited and cannot detect this anomaly. bulb infradiaphragmatic, a light colpocephaly and corpus callosum hypopla- Therefore, in this study, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification sia were diagnosed. After surgery she is having good evolution, getting oral (MLPA) technique, was used to screen 129 patients with idiopathic MR. alimentation and at 4 months old she weights 4110 gr. She had a normal Twelve of them were also diagnosed with autistic disorder. We identified 5 prenataglalyin k ainry tohtyep gee: n4e6 ,dXXos baugte a [ mpoisnt(n2a0ta)l( :kpa1r1yo.1ty→pqe1 s1h.o2w1:e)d] aw “hdiec hn owvaos” patients (3.87%) with subtelomeric aberration. All have MR with normal ka- scmonaflilr mmaerdke bry i nF IaSllH c etoll sb: e4 6p,r XeXse +n mt ianr . tThh seS aMpCp.lication of an Array-CGH sho- ryotypes. One patient has a submicroscopic deletion at 1p36.33 which was wed a confirmed by real-time PCR. There are two patients with subtelomeric du- plication at 15q11.2 and 11p15.5 subsequently. Two patients have the same Array-CGH and FISH are essential for diagnosis of sSMC. duplication at Xp22.33. Results were confirmed by using additional MLPA P03.125 probes. Parental samples were also examined when available. Interestingly Structural abnormalities of the sex chromosomes in gonadal the deletion at 1p36.33 and duplication at Xp22.33 fall into the regions whe- dysgenesis re copy number variation (CNV) have been reported. However the patholo- L. Caba1, M. Covic1, C. Rusu1, M. Volosciuc2, L. Butnariu1, E. Braha1, M. Panzaru1, R. gic effect of these aberrations is still inconclusive. Further characterization Popescu1, C. Bujoran2, V. Martiniuc3, M. Gramescu1, I. Ivanov1, A. Sireteanu1, M. Macovei1, of these aberration boundaries and screening in normal population should E. Gorduza1; be performed. Nonetheless this study shows that MLPA technique is able 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Grigore T. Popa“, Iasi, Romania, 2Children to detect subtelomeric aberration in patients with idiopathic MR and may Hospital „Sfanta Maria“, Iasi, Romania, 3“Cuza-Vodă” Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Iasi, Romania. increase diagnostic yield especially where array facility is unavailable. P03.128 De novo supernumerary dicentric marker chromosome 15 with Introduction: Gonadal dysgenesis are characterized by absence or under- contained Prader-Willi Angelman Critical Regions in a girl with a development of the gonads which produce sterility (infertility) and sexual subtle phenotype characteristics remain underdeveloped. They are caused by numerical and A. K. Eek1, L. Strand1, M. Svendsen1, K. O. Clausen1, G. J. Braathen1,2,3; 1Department of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Medical Genetics, Telemark Hospital, structural abnormalities of the sex chromosomes. Skien, Norway, 2Head and Neck Research Group, Research Centre, Akershus University Material and methods: Our group is formed by 23 patients with structu- Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway, 3Campus AHUS, Akershus University Hospital, University of ral abnormalities of the sex chromosomes diagnosed in Medical Genetics Oslo, Nordbyhagen, Norway. Center Iasi, Romania, between January 2001-December 2010 from a num- Background: ber of 2362 karyotypes. Chromosomal analysis was done using cultures of lymphocytes and GTG bands. In selected cases we used fluorescence in situ Supernumerary marker chromosomes (SMC) are structurally hybridization (FISH) postnatal and in one case antenatal FISH discover the abnormal chromosomes that most often are derived from the acrocentric abnormality. chromosomes and especially chromosome 15. Results: There were 20 cases with X chromosome structural abnormalities Large SMC (15) which include the Prader-Willi Angelman Critical Region and just 3 of the Y chromosome, in all cells or in mosaic form. For X chromo- (PWACR) are nearly always sporadic and maternally derived when parental some, the abnormalities were: isochromosome (12 cases of q arm isochro- origin have been established. mosome), ring (5 cases) and deletions (2 for p arm and 1 for q arm). For Most cases with large SMC(15) have a severe phenotype typically including Y chromosome there were three abnormalities: dicentric, ring and marker hypotonia, motor and speech delay, seizures, moderate to severe learning chromosome. disability and autism while dysmorphic features are absent or subtle and Conclusions: Structural abnormalities of X and Y chromosome are less com- growth is usually normal. Hence chromosome analysis may not be thought mon than aneuploidy in gonadal dysgenesis and the most frequent clinical oMf.e Cthasoeds: are most easily ascertained through chromosome and fluorescence picture for female gonadal dysgenesis is Turner syndrome. The karyotype in situ hybridisation (FISH) studies. and FISH are useful for cytogenetic characterization of these abnormalities. A three year old girl from a bilingual family was investigated. She P03.126 had hypotonia, a modest speech delay and unsteady gait due to a foot defor- Subtelomere deletion and additional chromosomal segments in mity. Different genetic methods such as chromosomal analysis, FISH, Mul- mental retardation tiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA), array comparative A. M. Mohamed1,2, A. K. Kamel1, M. O. El-Ruby1, I. H. Mazen1, H. A. Hussein1; gReensoumltisc: hybridization (ACGH) and single nucleotide polymorphism array 1National Research cetre, Cairo, Egypt, 2National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt. (SNP array) were used to elucidate her phenotype. The results will be presented at the meeting. The prevalence of mental retardation is estimated to be 1 to 3% of the gene- ral population. Mental retardation has many etiologies which can be broadly classified into genetic and environmental causes. The condition is common and the cause of MR is still largely unknown in 30-50% of cases. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org130 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.129 P03.132 Deletion of the 3q26 region including the Evi1 and MDS1-gene in a A boy with partial trisomy 10q due to an unbalanced 10q:22p neonate with congenital thrombocytopenia and subsequent aplastic translocation anemia E. TUNCEZ, A. G. ZAMANİ, M. S. YILDIRIM, A. ACAR; M. Nielsen, C. L. Vermont, E. Aten, G. Santen, C. A. Ruivenkamp, M. H. Breuning; Department of Medical Genetics,Meram Medical Faculty, Konya University, Konya, Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. Turkey. Gene-targeting studies in mice showed a key role of EVI-1 protein in maintai- Distal trisomy 10q syndrome is a rare syndrome characterized by micro- nMidnsg1 hemaEtovpi1oiesis and argue for gene dosage requirement of EVI-1 in the cephaly, facial dysmorphism, hypotonia, joint laxitiy, scoliosis, short neck, regulation of hematopoietic stem cells. Furthermore, a fusion transcript of growth retardation, mental motor retardation, cardiac, ocular and renal ab- and was shown to play a critical role in maintaining long-term normalities. Most of the cases are diagnosed in infancy or in childhood and hematopoietic stem ce ll function. Inappropriate activation, usually due to rarely include prenatal findings. a translocation, of EEvVi1I1 a nisd aM wdse1ll known andunfavorable change in several We report a 15 years old boy presented with dysmorphic features such myeloid malignancies.We report for the first time a constitutional deletion as microcephaly, round face, facial hirsutism, frontal upsweep, low frontal encompassing the in a human, and argue that this is causative hairline, hypertelorism, epicanthal folds, blepharophimosis, thick eyebrows, for the congenital bone marrow failure in this patient. long curved eyelashes, flat nasal bridge, hypoplastic alae nasi, macrostomia, P03.130 bow-shaped mouth, malocclusion of teeth, prominent incisors, high palate, A phenotypically normal male carrying an unbalanced translocation gum hypertrophy, micrognathia, simple ear, short neck, kyphosis, scoliosis, 47,XY,+der(22)t(X;22)(q13;q11.2) hypogonadism, fusiform digits, bilateral hallux valgus, short third toes on T. D. Jensen, A. L. Frederiksen, M. Rasmussen, A. A. Rasmussen, A. Bojesen; right foot, syndactyly 2-3 of toes on left foot. The patient also had hypoto- Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark. nisity, growth retardation and mental motor retardation. Echocardiography Background showed pulmonary stenosis and a cranial MR examination revealed thin corpus callosum, small arachnoid cyst on anterior temporal lobe but hearing We have carried out genetic counselling of a pregnant coup- test was normal. After conventional cytogenetic screening the karyotype of le expecting their first child. The mother was nine weeks pregnant at first the proband was described as 46,XY,der(22)t(10;22)(q24;p11). His mother contact. A known translocation, t(X;22)(q13;q11), runs in the father’s fami- is a carrier of a balanced translocation between chromosomes 10 and 22 ly. The father has been told, based on chromosome analysis on a CVS from [46,XX,t(10;22)(q24;p11)]. So our patient has a partial duplication of 10q his mother, that he carries an unbalanced translocation, which may result and partial deletion of 22p. Rearrangement of 22p11->pter does not have in a Klinefelter syndromMe epthheondostype. He is phenotypically normal, also as clinical implications. So clinical features of the proband suggested as a result regards stigmata consistent with Klinefelter syndrome, but has never been of trisomy 10q24->qter. karyotyped postnatally. In light of this, we performed chromoso- This case presented to contribute the literature owing to rarity of the partial me analysis of the father using standard karyotyping, whole-chromosome trisomy 10q syndrome. painting (WCP) with chromosome X and 22 centromeric probes andR efisnualltlys P03.133 SNP-array analysis. CVS taken from the mother was analysed using routine Increased risk of trisomy 21 (T21) in offspring of carriers of balanced rapid qPCR, MLPA subtelomere analysis and standard karyotyping. non-contributing autosomal rearrangement (Rea) is not accounted The results showed that the father carries two normal chromosomes 22, a for by interchromosomal effect (ICE). A post fertilization effect of normal X chromosome and an additional chromosome consisting of X and paternal Rea on segregation of maternal chromosomes is suspected 22 material. His karyotype is 47,XY,+der(22)t(X;22)(q13;q11.2). The deri- N. V. Kovaleva; vative chromosome harbours the X-inactivation center (XIC) at Xq13, which St. Petersburg State Pediatric Medical Academy, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. undoubtedly explains its lack of severe phenotypic impact. The results of the CVS analyses were normal, showing that the parents were expecting a child with a normal 46,XY karyotype. Recent studies showed that chromosomal rearrangement could affect the P03.131 behavior at meiosis of other chromosomes (interchromosomal effect). If Triploidy masaicism in a six -year-old dysmorphic girl with mild ICE makes any appreciable contribution to etiology of aneuploidy, one may mental retardation eOxbpjeecctti vaens :incidence of balanced Rea in parents of aneuploid offspring is in- F. Behjati1,2, S. Ebrahimian Motlagh2, N. Zarbati2, E. Bagherizadeh2, Z. Hadipour2, N. creased over population figure. Mohammadkhani2, M. Asami2, F. Hadipour2, R. Pazhoomand1, Y. Shafeghati2; Meta analysis of own and published data on incidence of autoso- 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, mal balanced Rea in patients with T21, in parents of offspring with T21, and Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sarem Cell Research Center & Department of Medical iRne snuelwtsb: orn controls. Meta analysis of own and published data on parental Genetics, Sarem Hospital,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and cell origin of T21 in offspring of carriers of autosomal balanced Rea. An increase in incidence of reciprocal translocations and inversions (but not of robertsonian translocations) in parents of offspring with T21 A 6 year-old dysmorphic girl with mild mental retardation and dysmorphism (7.1‰ and 2.7‰) compared to controls (1.5‰ and 0.4 ‰), p<0.001 and is described. Clinical features of the chil d included patch y hyper pigmented p<0.01, correspondingly. Absence of typical female predominance among skin, high nasal bridge, short philtrum, microgonathia, simple ear, simian carrier parents (12 females/13 males) and a predominance of paternally crease, brachydactyly and syndactyly in all foot fingers. derived Rea in patients with T21 (5 maternal/9 paternal). Similar propor- Chromosomal study was performed using GTG banding technique on peri- tion of T21 of maternal origin in the affected progeny of both maternal and pheral blood sample and skin biopsy to rule out chromosomal mosaicism. paternal Rea carriers. However when the Rea was maternal, a typical preva- Interphase FISH investigation on Peripheral blood and skin biopsy, using X lence of errors in the 1st meiotic division of oogenesis was observed while and Y chromosome centromeric probes, was carried out. Cino ncaclsuessi ownh:ere the Rea was paternal, the profinlde of errors in oogenesis was The child’s peripheral blood karyotype was triploid with 69, XXX chro- different, with a high proportion of errors in 2 meiotic division. mosome complements. Metaphase spreads obtained from skin biopsy re- We did not find evidence of paternal ICE. Instead, the data obtai- vealed two cell lines: the majority of cells (42 cells, 84%) were 69,XXX and 8 ned allow us speculating about a post fertilization effect of paternal Rea on cells(16%) were 46,XX. FISH result was as follows: interphase cells of cultu- segregation of maternal chromosomes. red peripheral blood revealed 3 signals indicating X chromosomes and none P03.134 for Y signal, in all studied cells and skin biopsy culture showed 34% of cells A prenatal diagnosis case with trisomy 4 confined to placenta with 2 X chromosome signals and 66% with 3 signals confirming mosaicism M. Souto1, P. Correia2, P. Botelho1, R. Nogueira3, M. Martins4, O. Moutinho4,2, R. Pinto for triploidy. Parent’s karyotypes were normal. Leite1; Triploidy is usually an unviable situation unless a normal diploid cell line is 1Laboratório de Citogenética, Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás-os-Montes e present. The peripheral blood karyotype was pure triploidy while the skin Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Serviço de Ginecologia/Obstetrícia, Centro Hospitalar cells demonstrated a mosaic pattern. The interphase FISH showed a higher Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 3Serviço de Anatomia Patológica, CGC, percentage of normal karyotype. This study reiterates the use of cytogenetic Centro de Genética Clínica, Porto, Portugal, 4Serviço de Genética, Centro Hospitalar Trás- os-Montes e Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. studies on skin biopsy and interphase FISH for the evaluation of mosaicism. To our knowledge, this is one of the rare reported cases of triploidy in a patient surviving to the age of 6 year. Confined placental mosaicism (CPM) is diagnosed when some trisomic cells are detected on chorionic villus sampling (CVS) and only normal cells are found on a prenatal test, such as amniocentesis. CPM is detected in appro- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 131 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P03.137 The power of SNP array: incidental diagnosis of paternal uniparental ximately 1-2% of ongoing pregnancies that are studied by CVS at 10 to 12 disomy of chromosome 15 in a child with a large chromosomal weeks of pregnancy. deletion of 11q21q22.3 Most pregnancies that are diagnosed with CPM continue to term with no K. Schlade-Bartusiak1,2, T. Tucker1, T. Oh3, T. Nelson1, P. Eydoux1, M. Van Allen3,2, M. complications and the children develop normally. However, some pregnan- Steinraths3; cies with CPM have complications, due to placental dysfunction, uniparental 1Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, disomy of the fetus and undetected mosaic trisomy of the fetus. The risks for Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Child and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. these settings depend of the origin of error, level of mosaicism and chromo- some involved. The study of CVS in normal karyotype fetus with ultrasound abnormalities may be considered, since in some cases, can help in the diagnosis. Array analysis is a first line diagnostic test used to search for copy number Case report: changes in children with developmental delay and/or congenital anoma- A 31 years-old primigravida was referred to amniocentesis at 25 weeks of lies. SNP-based arrays provide additional information about copy number gestation after the detection of ultrasound abnormalities and intrauterine neutral large contiguous regions of homozygosity (LCSH), which can reflect fetal death (IUFD). The karyotype was 46, XY. The post mortem examina- parental relatedness or uniparental disomy (UPD). A proportion of Prader- tion showed early fetal death with a maturity corresponding to 24 weeks, Willi and Angelman syndromes are caused by maternal and paternal UPD IUGR and short femur, coexisting micrognathia, nuchal edema (2.1mm), of chromosome 15, respectively. Both syndromes have distinct phenotypes mild hydrocephalus, cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, bilateral pyelectasis and and are usually suspected clinically and confirmed with molecular studies. pulmonary hypoplasia. Cytogenetic analysis of placenta sampling showed a Here we report a patient with prenatal onset of growth impairment, de- karyotype of 47, XY, +4 in all cells examined. velopmental delay, bilateral iris colobomas and dysmorphic features. SNP Mosaicism of trisomy 4 is a rare condition, with 8 cases reported in the li- array (Affymetrix) analysis showed a 12.9 Mb deletion of chromosome terature, and usually associated with anomalies. The authors compare the 11q21q22.3, as well as a 25 Mb LCSH on chromosome 15q11.2q21.1. As a cytogenetic and the fetus‘s clinical findings with those described in the li- single LCSH detected on SNP array is suggestive of UPD, molecular analy- terature. sis of the methylation pattern and parental inheritance was performed and confirmed the presence of paternal UPD of chromosome 15. On reevaluati- P03.135 on at 20 months of age, the patient showed global developmental delay but Study of Turner Syndrome and presentation of unique cases within overall good health including no seizures. In general, she was felt clinically the Jordanian population to be doing better than expected for a child with both Angelman syndrome H. Daggag, W. Srour, M. El-Khateeb, K. Ajlouni; National Center for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Genetics, Amman, Jordan. and additional large chromosomal imbalance. This is a first report of a patient with a UPD syndrome and additional, ap- parently unrelated, chromosomal rearrangement. The diagnosis of Angel- Chromosomal number and structure determine the normal gender pheno- man syndrome was not suspected clinically in our patient and represents type in humans. Carrying a copy of the X and Y chromosome determines the a fortuitous finding. This case highlights the power of SNP based arrays in male phenotype and carrying two copies of the X chromosome determines providing relevant clinical diagnosis. the female phenotype. However, in some cases abnormalities in number P03.138 and/or structure of the chromosomes are associated with a wide range of Maternal segmental uniparental disomy 14 in an adult patient with syndromes, including Turner syndrome. Turner syndrome affects approxi- typical upd(14)mat phenotyp mately 1 in 2,500 liveborn females, with the most common karyotype in the D. Niedrist, B. Oneda, A. Baumer, A. Rauch; Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland. affected individuals being 46, XO. The reminder of the patients, however, carry mosaic cell lines containing a second sex chromosome (either X or Y chromosome). In about 6% of the female Turner syndrome patients, the se- cond cell line would contain a structurally abnormal Y chromosome. In the We report on a 26 year old graduate student with short stature (161cm), current study, we have reviewed 136 positive Turner syndrome cases that low birth weight (2010g at term), feeding difficulties in the first 3 years of have been referred to the National Center for Diabetes, Endocrinology and life followed by abiding hunger, truncal obesity, muscular hypotonia, small Genetics, Amman, Jordan. We summarize the data obtained, with a special hands and feet, precocious puberty and hyperlipidemia. Chromosomal ex- focus on 2 cases with unique karyotypes and 16 cases which presSeRnYt with amination revealed a normal male karyotype 46,XY and methylation/dele- structural abnormalities of the Y chromosome. Experimental approaches tion testing on 15q11-q13 gave no clue for Prader-Willi-Syndrome. In the utilized include standard karyotyping, probe-specific FISH and gene following marker testing for upd 14 only 2 out of 4 markers were informati- sequencing. ve and the 2 informative markers showed biparental inheritance. Molecular karyotyping was performed (Affymetrix Cytogenetics 2.7M Array) and no P03.136 Turner syndrome with a ring X chromosome and atypical known chromosomal aberration was found. Howseegvmere onnt aclh mroamteorsnoaml eu n1i4- manifestation ap avreerny tlaoln dgi shoommioez 1yg4oqs2it4y. 2w-qaste sruspicious. We repeated marker testing on E. Braha1, M. Gramescu1, C. Bujoran2, M. Panzaru1, R. Popescu1, M. Volosciuc2, C. Rusu1, chromosome 14 with 7 markers and could verify E. Gorduza1; . The phenotype of our patient fits well for 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Grigore T.Popa“, Iasi, Romania, 2Pediatric maternal uniparental disomy 14. We conclude upd in the region 14q24.2- Hospital „Sfanta Maria“, Iasi, Romania. qter being responsible for the full phenotype of upd (14) mat and emphazise the importance of testing several informative markers in this region in pati- ents with suspected upd 14. Our results are confirmed by different reports Turner syndrome is a disease characterized by ovarian dysgenesia determi- in the literature about patients with epimutations at 14q32.2. nated by partial or complete absence of one X chromosome. Approximately P03.139 6% of patients have ring X chromosome. Clinical features are heterogeneous Simultaneous occurrence of a duplication encompassing the Wolf- and typical physical anomalies are often mild or absent. Hirschhorn-Syndrome critical region 2 and a terminal deletion of The 3 years 10 months old girl was reffered to the genetic department due chromosome 4p in a patient with multiple congenital malformations to myelomeningocele and severe developmental delay. The patient had and developmental delay. short stature, a broad forehead, dysmorphic face Kabuki-like, myelomenin- S. Leubner, S. Anders, S. Demuth, S. Riedel, C. Ramel, A. Junge; gocele, bilateral hydronephrosis, possible cardiac anomalies (heart murmur Mitteldeutscher Praxisverbund Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany. 2/6 degree on left sternal border) and mental retardation. The karyotype showes mosaicism 45,X [51.06%]/ 46,X,r(X) [48.94%] . FISH test for XIST locus is in study. We report on a female patient with multiple congenital malformations (e.g. Patients with r(X) are reported to have a higher incidence of a more seve- anal atresia, tetralogy of Fallot, club foot and cervical spine abnormalities), re phenotype and usually present mental retardation. Some studies have delayed motor skills and language impairment that shows a small duplicati- shown a correlation between the phenotype severity and the presence or on in the short arm of chromosome 4 and a terminal deletion of 4p. absence of a functional XIST. Our patient showed a atypical clinical features Conventional cytogenetic analysis (GTG- banding), Fluorescence- in situ hy- with reminescent features of Kabuki syndrome. The prognosis of the patient bridization (FISH), multiplex ligation- dependent probe amplification ana- is poor, is largely based on the severity of clinical condition. lyses (MLPA) and array- based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) were performed. We used an oligonucleotide- based array with an average probe distance of 100 kb (CytoChip Oligo 2x105k v.1.1, BlueGnome). The aCGH analysis re- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org132 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 vealed a 0.5 Mb duplication, encompassing the Wolf- Hirschhorn- Syndrome We have reported three patients with 20p12.3 microdeletion, without com- critical region 2 (WHSCR-2), and a terminal deletion on 4p16.3 spanning plete penetrance for WPW syndrome and cognitive impairment. Mosaicism 1.6 Mb. might escape detection by array-based karyotyping techniques. This un- According to our current knowledge there are only two cases given in the derscores the importance of employing FISH analysis whenever mosaicism literature with simultaneous occurrence of a duplication of the WHSCR-2 is suspected. and a terminal deletion 4p (reviewed by Roselló et al. 2009). P03.142 The data of our patient help to improve characterization of the phenotype Chromosome Xp deletions- Variable phenotypes within several caused by a duplication of the WHSCR-2 in combination with a terminal de- families letion of chromosome 4p. A. Reches1, R. Sukenik-Halevy1, A. Orr-Ortreger1,2, Y. Yaron1,2, S. Ben-Shachar1; P03.140 1Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel. Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome phenotype due to der(4)t(4;8) Background (p16.1;p23.1) caracterized by aCGH K. T. Abe1, L. M. Formigli1, M. Leyser2, B. L. S. Dias2, L. L. Roese3, M. Schneider1, M. V. : The clinical expression of Xp deletions varies according to Oliveira1, C. E. Speck-Martins1; gMeentdheor,d d: eletion size and genomic content, X inactivation pattern and other 1SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasília - DF, Brazil., Brasilia - DF, Brazil, factors. We describe our experience with female carriers of Xp deletions. 2SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals Rio de Janeiro – RJ – Brazil, Rio de Janeiro, Families of female Xp deletion carriers were assessed. Family hi- Brazil, 3SARAH Network of Rehabilitation Hospitals, Brasília – DF, Brazil., Brasilia - DF, story was obtained and clinical evaluation of family members was prefor- Brazil. med. Karyotype was analyzed for available family members, as well as in the sReetstiunlgts of prenatal diagnosis. Assessment of the X inactivation pattern was evaluated when possible A partial 4p deletion causes a Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (WHS) phenotype. : Three families were assessed. Family 1 consisted of multiple fema- On the other hand, 8p23.1->pter duplication was reported without pheno- le carriers of an Xp22.1 deletion. All had short stature and some had addi- typic effect. We report on 5-year-old female with deletion of 4p and dupli- tional problems such as delayed motor & speech development, emotional cation of 8p presenting WHS phenotype. GTW-banding, FISH and array-CGH oversensitivity, excessive weight gain and attention deficit disorder. Prena- were performed and the karyotype was 46,XX,der(4)t(4;8)(p16.1;p23.1) tal diagnosis was declined. CMA analysis is pending Family 2 was ascertai- dn.arr 4p16.1(130,000-8,202,790)x1,8p23.1(304,160-6,396,578)x3. She ned during pregnancy with a complex fetal heart malformation. The female had developmental delay, seizures and dysmorphisms as long eyelashes, fetus had a terminal deletion at Xp22. The pregnancy was terminated. Both synophrys, malrotated helices of ears, micrognatia, a posterior cleft palate, mother and maternal grandmother, who had short stature, had the same feeding difficulty, cardiac disease and hiper-rotated kidneys. At five years, deletion, as well as 2 female fetuses in subsequent pregnancies. All had a she has no verbal comunication, and does not walk. The patient phenotype skewed X inactivation pattern. Family 3 presented in pregnancy with fetal is likely due to 4p deletion and the GsmATaAll4 8p duplication seen has no phe- short femurs at 22 weeks. Fetal karyotype showed a maternally inherited notypic effect as reported in the literature. A report of the same band regi- on 8p23.1 is refered to interrupt on gene related to congenitalG hAeTaAr4t tCeornmcilnuasli doenlsetion at Xp21.3. Pregnancy was terminated. The couple is in the midst of PGD, so far with low ovarian response defects, however our patient has a 8p duplication started at 5Mb from that : Xp deletions are associated with variable inter and intra-fami- gene, thus we thought that her cardiac disease could not related to lial phenotypes. This difficulty in predicting clinical outcome is a challenging gene. Furthermore, the breakpoint in 8p is related as recurred in the same issue, especially in prenatal counseling. region on patients presenting t(4;8) with about 8 Mb trisomic 8p segment. P03.143 Differently, our patient has an average 6.09 Mb duplication 8p, and lead to The breakpoint sequence of a 10,5Mb Xp22 duplication causing a smaller size duplication than refered in the related reports. Although the developmental disorder in a male patient. basic genomic defect and the phenotype in WHS is heterogeneous, most of T. Bettecken1, B. Nehls1, E. Schellenberger2, W. Kress3; the morphological traits of the hybrid phenotype in the child with der(4) 1Center for Applied Genotyping - CAGT, MPI for psychiatry, München, Germany, t(4;8)(p16.1;q23.1) can be attributed to deletion of 4p16.1, since terminal 2Kinderklinik am Mönchberg, Würzburg, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, duplication of 8p likely have no phenotypic effect. Würzburg, Germany. P03.141 Delineation of syndromic Wolff-Parkinson-White due to a 20p12.3 microdeletion of the BMP2 region in a boy, his sister and their mosaic Microscopically visible segmental duplications of the short arm of the X mother chromosome are relatively rare findings and only a few reports exist. All M. Nystad1, A. Jørgensen1, Ø. Nilssen1,2, V. Marton1,2; male patients reported show mental retardation combined with various ad- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Division of Child and Adolescent Health, University ditional dysmorphic features. Most cases are inherited from a heterozygous Hospital North Norway, NO9038 TROMSOE, Norway, 2Department of Clinical Medicine but otherwise asymptomatic mother. Here, we report on the breakpoint se- – Medical Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Tromsø, NO9037 Tromsø, quence of an Xp22 duplication found in a now 17 year old severely retarded Norway. patient. The duplication was initially seen by classical cytogenetic analysis and confirmed later by molecular karyotyping on Illumina SNP chips. The limits of the duplication could be determined this way to within a few ki- OBJECTIVE: lobases. The duplicated region comprises of about 10.5 Mb on Xp22 and is We report on the clinical and genetic findings in a family with variable phe- containing more than 200 genes. The breakpoints of the duplication were notypic expression of a 20p12.3 microdeletion. The proband was a young determined by sequencing the 5.5 kb amplicon containing the breakpoints man with re-entrant tachycardia due to Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and found to lie in a region of Alu elements of about 300 bp and of very high (WPW), dysmorphic features, skeletal findings and cognitive deficits. homology. METHODS: DNA from the patients, the father and an older, healthy sister of the pro- P03.144 band was analysed using a 105 k (G4425B-014698) Human Genome CGH A report of a new case with Xq chromosome duplication L. I. Butnariu, C. Rusu, L. Caba, M. Panzaru, E. Braha, M. Macovei, M. Gramescu, E. Oligo Microarrays (Agilent Technologies, CA). An additional Affymetrix 2.7 Gorduza; SNP array analysis was performed on DNA from the mother to check for mo- University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Grigore T. Popa”, Department of Medical Genetics, saicism. BFMISPH2-analysis of metaphase chromosomes (>50 metaphases) and Iasi, Romania. interphase nuclei (>100 nuclei) were done using BAC FISH probes (RP11- 184L8 ( -gene) and a control probe RP11-977N11 (20q13.2)) were obtained from Empire Genomics (http://www.empiregenomics.com)B.MP2- Rare duplications can occur on the long arm of the X chromosome and may RESULTS: be familial or de novo. They may lead to different phenotypes, depending on Agilent 105k aCGH analysis revealed a 970 kb deletion, including the the X chromosome region affected. Most dup (Xq) females appear phenoty- gene, with genome position g.(6265313_6333051)_(71B5M8P6272_7235395), at pically normal, or may manifest short stature, facial dysmorphy and gonadal 20p12.3, in the proband, and in the mother. FISH-analysis of the proband dysgenesis.We present the phenotypic findings of one patient with Xq dupli- and his younger sister detected a microdeletion of the -gene in all cells cation: C.I, female, 1 year old who was reffered to our hospital for propor- analyzed. Fifty seven percent of the mother´s blood cells manifested the de- tional dwarfism. Clinical evaluation also revealed craniofacial dysmorphy: letion, revealing a mosaic state. aCGH and SNP array analysis provided no down-slanted palpebral fissures, epichantus, broad nose and lowset ears. calls for mosaicism. Other features were mild pectus excavatum, right hand with clinodactyly of CONCLUSIONS: the fifth finger and mild psychomotor retardation. Paraclinical evaluation: www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 133 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P04.03 High throughput copy number counting in single cells - a method for growth hormone and thyroid hormone levels were normal. the detection of meiotic and mitotic errors The karyotype was abnormal and revelead a Xq duplication: 46,X,dup(X) A. Daser1, E. Day2, B. Konfortov2, A. Immesberger3, H. Turley3, T. Hahn1,3, U. Zechner4, T. (q13q22), who included “critical region” (Xq13-q21) involved in prematu- Haaf5, P. H. Dear2, M. Schorsch1,3; re ovarian failure. The proximal region of Xq contains genes that normally 1SH-Gen Research, Wiesbaden, Germany, 2MRC-Laboratory of Molecular Biology, escape to X chromosome inactivation. In this context we appreciate that the Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Kinderwunschzentrum, Wiesbaden, Germany, 4Institut für Humangenetik, Mainz, Germany, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Würzburg, Germany. patient may have fertility problems such as primary or secondary amenor- rhea. We could not do the karyotypes of the parents, necessary to establish the origin of the chromosomal abnormality, because the child was placed in a Clinical background are the low pregnancy and baby take home rates after institutional care setting. in vitro fertilisation techniques (IVF). Major reason is the high frequency of chromosomally abnormal (i.e. aneuploid) oocytes. Selection of euploid P03.145 oocytes is thus an attractive strategy to increase the number of live births Familial interstitial direct duplication of chromosome (X)(q23q25) following IVF. detected by aCGH associated with phenotypic variability V. Belengeanu1, D. Misceo2, M. Stoian1, N. Andreescu1, S. Farcas1, D. Belengeanu1, T. H. The ploidy status of oocytes can be indirectly investigated by analysing the Gamage2, T. Barøy2, E. Frengen2; chromosome content in polar bodies (PB) I and II which are results of the 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Medical first and second meiotic division before and after fertilisation; errors in Genetics, Olso University Hospital and University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. meiotic divisions are due to chromosome non-disjunction and early sister chromatid separation. Therefore investigation of the chromosome content of PB I and II requires techniques which allow investigation of all chromoso- Chromosomal rearrangements occur frequently in patients with mental re- mes at the resolution of chromatids. tardation associated or not with other anomalies. Two brothers and their In contrast to microarray formats we count chromatids directly - molecular mother were investigated for mental retardation. Initially, a 32 years-old copy number counting (MCC) applied to a single cell, i.e. polar body. MCC man was evaluated due to short stature, facial dysmorphism with progna- is based on limiting dilution of the DNA to a concentration of less than one thism, obesity, hypoplastic genitalia, developmental delay and behaviour molecule per PCR reaction and digital PCR. The number of chromatids per problems, especially with regard to eating. His brother presented with mild chromosome is analysed by counting the numbers of positive PCR reactions facial dysmorphism, mental retardation and misbehaviour. The mother had representing target sequences on all chromosomes. To investigate all chro- milder phenotypic features and mild mental retardation. For this family the mosomes with several markers we run a multiplex PCR followed by single IQ varies from 40 for propositus, to 50 for his brother, and 60 for their mo- marker PCRs with the BioMark system from Fluidigm. ther. This method is simple and applicable to monitor not only meiotic but also Standard cytogenetic analysis for propositus was normal. Because the cli- mitotic cell divisions, copy number changes in general and to establish ha- nical signs were suggestive for Prader-Willi syndrome, FISH analysis was plotypes for regions of interest in any given single cell. performed, but no deletion on 15q11q13 was found. Addional testing P04.04 with MS-MLPA for Prader-Willi syndrome was also negative. Array CGH M2/ANXA5 is a risk factor for recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) in a analysis (180k Agilent) on patient revealed a chromosome X duplication, population undergoing in vitro fertilisation (IVF) chrX:115568872-126991548 bp, hg19. By quantitative Real-Time PCR the F. Tüttelmann1, R. Pavlik2, S. Hecht2, N. Bogdanova1, M. Nothnagel3, T. Balschun3, M. duplication was verified in the proband and also detected in his brother and Krawczak4, C. Thaler2, A. Markoff5; mother. BAC FISH established that the duplication is in situ and has a direct 1Institute of Human Genetics, Münster, Germany, 2Hormone and Fertility Center LMU, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Munich, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, orientation. Result of the X inactivation study in the mother showed 100% UKSH, Kiel, Germany, 4Institute for Medical Informatics and Statistics, UKSH, Kiel, skewing in leukocytes. Germany, 5Institute of Medical Biochemsitry, ZMBE and IZKF, Münster, Germany. In our case the duplicated region Xq23q25 seems be associated with phe- notypic variability. Because the phenotypic variability of the two brothers couldn’t been explained we suspected a possible influence of other genes Carriage of the M2 promoter haplotype of ANXA5 was verified as risk factor on the expression of the genes within Xq23q25 region, as well as epigenetic for RPL in various patient cohorts. M2/ANXA5 results in reduced expression factors influence. levels of the protein in placenta leading to various thrombophilia related P04. Reproductive genetics placental pathologies and ultimately RPL. We performed a risk stratification study in women undergoing IVF. The IVF cohort of 695 women from the Hormone and Fertility Center, Mu- P04.02 nich, 500 fertile female controls from the Institute of Human Genetics, Mün- Partial deletion of DMRT1 causes 46,XY ovotesticular disorder of ster and 533 population controls from the PopGen biobank, Kiel were geno- sexual development (DSD) typed via sequencing. Equal genetic backgrounds were confirmed through S. Ledig1, O. Hiort2, L. Wünsch2, P. Wieacker1; genome-wide SNP analysis. 1Westfälische Wilhelms Universität Münster, Münster, Germany, 2University of Lübeck, Carriers of M2 faced a higher relative risk of 1.2 to belong to the IVF group Lübeck, Germany. compared to population controls and of 1.4 in comparison with fertile women. This overall elevated risk was contributed by a subgroup of wo- men with previous pregnancy losses, where the appropriate relative risks Ovotesticular disorder of sexual development (DSD) is an unusual form of amounted to 2.3 and 3.8 accordingly. Carriage of M1 or M2 was not asso- DSD, characterized by the presence of testicular and ovarian tissue in the ciated with biochemical pregnancy loss, implantation rates, ovary reserve, same individual. In a subset of patients ovotesticular DSD is caused by hormone status, number and quality of egg cells and general embryonal de- 46R,XSXP/O416,XSRYY chimeSrOisXm9 or mosaicism. To date only few monogenetic causes velopment. Interestingly, successful pregnancy outcomes tended to be more are known to be associated with XX and XY ovotesticular DSD like mutations frequent for M1 carriers with comparable losses rate. This would signify a in , and . possible protective function for M1 in pregnancy, as previoulsy suggested. We performed high-resolution array-CGH (comparative genomic hybridiza- In conclusion, the effect of M2/ANXA5 on pregnancy losses was reconfir- tion) in a female patient with 46,XY ovotesticular DSD with testicularD tMisRsTu1e med. This excludes biochemical pregnancy losses and implantation failures. at the one side and an ovary harbouring germ cells on the other. We iden- There is a possible protective effect of M1 carriage on pregnancy outcomes tified in the patient a small deletion affecting exons 3 and 4 of the that needs further evaluation in other patient cohorts. gene. Results obtained by array-CGH were confirmed by RDT-MqRPTC1R (quanta- P04.05 tive PCR). Y chromosome AZF deletions/duplications and spontaneous To this point of time, deletions and missDenMsReT m1utations of are asso- pregnancy loss ciated only with XY gonadal dysgenesis. But according our present findings S. Madjunkova1, A. Kumnova2, K. Stankova3, P. Gerasimova4, M. Madjunkov5, D. Plaseska- we conclude that haploinsufficiency of DM cRaTn1 cause both, XY gonadal Karanfilska1; dysgenesis and XY ovotesticular DSD. Furthermore, to the best of our know- 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of ledge, this is the smallest deletion affecting in a patient with DSD Macedonia, 2Private health organization „Aida“, Gjakovica, Kosovo, Republic of, 3Private health organization „INA“, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 4Private presented to this point of time health organization „Dr. Pavlina Gerasimova“, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 5Clinic for gynecology and obstetrics, Medical faculty, Skopje, The Former www.eshg.org www.eshg.org134 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. loss are important part of ART service. Variation in length of heterochro- Spontaneous abortion (SA) is the most common pathology in obstetrics matin regions, stalks, satellites are described as phenomena without phe- with incidence of 10-15% among clinically recognized pregnancies. The oc- notypic effects, but relationships between chromosome polymorphism and currence in three or more consecutive pregnancies is defined as recurrent reproduction are under investigation. SA with incidence of 0.5-3% in women trying to conceive. The etiology is di- We present the data of chromosome heteromorphism variants (ChrHV) de- verse and multifactorial (uterine abnormalities, autoimmune, infectious, en- tected in couples, referred to ART. docrine, and genetic factors) but still the major part of it (50-60%) remains Among 2148 patients, examined by standard karyotyping during 2010-2011 idiopathic. The male factor has been poorly evaluated in SA. The aim of this years, ChrHV were revealed in 460 cases (22%, sex ratio 1:1). The spectrum study was to determine the association of Y chromosome AZF deletions/ of involved chromosomes included: 1 (2.4%), 9 (6.1%), 13 (23.5%), 14 duplications with spontaneous pregnancy loss. One hundred and seven men (26.3%), 15 (23.5%), 16 (2.2%), 21 (17.7%), 22 (11.5%), Y (3.7%). Hetero- from couples experiencing two or more SA, and 116 fertile men were en- morphism of single chromosome was detected in 82.8%, two chromosomes rolled in this study. DNA extracted from whole blood was tested for presence in 14.6%, three chromosomes in 2.6% cases. Total number of ChrHV was 68. of sex chromosome aneuploidies, AZF deletions, partial AZFc deletions and Single variant (ps+, pss, pstk+, ph, phqh, qh) was revealed in 80.4% patients. duplications using 13-plex quantitative fluorescent PCR and subsequent ca- Association of 2 variants in the same (13pstk+ps+; 14pstk+ps+; 15pstk+ps+, pillary electrophoresis on ABI 3130 Genetyc Analyzer. In total, three partial etc.) or different chromosomes (1qh+,Yqh+; 13ps+,22ps+; 14pstk+, 15pstk+; AZFc deletions (1 gr/gr and 2 b2/b3) and 21 AZFc duplications (12 b2/b4 21pstk+,Yqh-, etc.) was found in 16.1% cases. 3% persons displayed 3 vari- and 9 b2/b3) were detected. Partial AZFc deletions were slightly more fre- ants: 9ph,13pstk+,21pstk+; 9qh-,14pstk+,15pss; 13pstk+,14pstk+,15pstk+; quent among men with SA (1.87%) in comparison to controls (0.86%), while 13pstk+,21pstk+,22pstk+; 14pstk+,15pstk+ps+; 14pstk+,15pstk+,15pstk+; the AZFc partial duplications were more frequent among controls (12.07%) 15pstk+,21pstk+,22pstk+; 21pstk+,22pstk+ps+,etc. One patient showed than in men with SA (6.54%). None of the men with SA and controls had any 4 variants: 46,XX,14pstk+,21pstk+,21pstk+ps+. The common ChHV were: sex chromosome aneuploidy or complete AZF deletions. In conclusion, our 14pstk+ (17,4%), 15pstk+ (13%), 13pstk+ (12,2%), 21pstk+ (9,3%). Poly- study suggests that partial AZFc deletions might represent a male risk factor morphism of heterochromatic segments of chromosomes 1, 9, 16, Y iden- for SA, while partial AZFc duplications might have a protective role. tified in 13% cases. Variants 9phqh, 15pss, var15(q11.2q13) registered P04.07 rarely. Mutation analysis of CYP21A2 gene in couples with unexplained Results demonstrate a wide spectrum of ChHV in infertile couples. For best infertility problems understanding of relationships “ChHV-reproductive failure-outcome pro- S. Stangler Herodez1, B. Zagradisnik1, A. Erjavec Skerget1, V. Vlaisavljević2, M. Dosen3, I. gnosis”, especially in rare sporadic variants, the balance of karyotype is to be Takac4, L. Lokar5, N. Kokalj Vokac1,6; confirmed with suitable methods, including molecular cytogenetic analysis. 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, University Clinical Centre Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, P04.09 Slovenia, 2Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynecologic Endocrinology, Chromosomal outcome of 110 children born after Assisted University Clinical Centre Maribor, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 3Department of Reproductive Technology (ART) Reproductive Medicine and Gynecologic Endocrinology, University Clinical Center S. Zari Moradi, H. Gourabi, A. Mohseni Meybodi, N. Masoudi, K. Anissi Hemaseh; Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 4Department of Gynaecology and Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for Perinatology, University Clinical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, SI-2000 Maribor, reproductive Biomedicine ,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Slovenia, 5Department of Transfusiology, University Clinical Center Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, SI-2000 Maribor, Slovenia, 6Medical Faculty, University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, Maribor, Slovenia. There is a large population of children conceived via Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART), which continues to increase worldwide, without a clear Introduction. Infertility is a worldwide reproductive health problem that af- understanding of associated long-term outcomes. There is growing evidence fects approximately 15% of married couples. Defects in the CYP21A2 gene that ART children seems to be different from naturally conceived children. cause steroid 21-hydroxylase deficiency, which is the most frequent cause For routing through of congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). CAH is a genetic condition that can these differences, we evaluated cytogenetic results occurring in children affect both men and women. In this study we have analyzed mutations of the born after ART, using their cord blood lymphocytes.We investigated the ka- CYP21A2 gene in couples with unexplained fertility problems and healthy ryotypes of 110 samples From January 2010 till January 2012, using stan- controls. dard GTG banding. 5 (4.5%) chromosomal alterations were detected among Methods. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples. Allele speci- these children. 3(2.72%) of these fic PCR was performed for the detection of mutations IVS2-12 A/C>G and aberrations were diagnosed in one of the parents, and 2(1.81%) were de I172N. Gene deletion/conversion was detected with competitive PCR and novo changes. In comparison with the frequency of these abnormalities in capillary electrophoresis. newborns of general population (0.5%-1%), our results shows a slightly RESULTS. 160 couples with unexplained fertility problems and 200 healthy higher incidence of chromosomal changes among children born after ART. controls were included in the study. All three mutations were detected as There is no much higher risk presented in the table. of chromosomal abnormalities due to ART. Therefore, these alterations Cconclusions. The present finding indicates that no significant difference in could be correlated with the underlying parental the prevalence of CYP21A2 mutations can be found in probands with fertili- risk of abnormalities and not with the ART procedure itself. Although ART ty problems when compared with controls without an infertility history. The is now accepted as the treatment of choice for severe infertilities, concerns results also imply that the presence of the most common mutations in the about its safety and the potential risks for the offspring remain. CYP21A2 gene by heterozygote carriers has no influence on their fertility. P04.10 Results of CYP21A2 mutation analysis SEMA7A and SEMA3A in congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism J. Känsäkoski1, E. Laitinen2, R. Fagerholm1, T. Raivio1,2, J. Tommiska1,2; Couples with unexplained fertility Healthy controls Mutations 1University of Helsinki, Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, Helsinki, Finland, 2Children‘s problems (n = 320) (n = 200) Hospital, Helsinki University Central Hospital (HUCH), Helsinki, Finland. IVS2-12 A/C>G 4 3 Exon 4/I172N 1 0 deletion/conversion 3 3 Congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) is characterized by in- Total CYP21A2 mutations 8 6 complete or absent puberty caused by the lack or deficient number of hy- Chi square pothalamic gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) neurons, disturbed (all samples vs. Controls) sSeecmraet3iaon or Saecmtioan7 aof GnRH, or both. Several genes are connected with the 0.11, p = 0,739 (df = 1) disorder, but in S~e7m0a%3a of the cases the genetic cause remains unresolved. P04.08 and Sema m7autant mice have a reduced number of GnRH neurons Spectrum of chromosomal heteromorphism variants of infertile in theSirE bMrAa3inAs, being essential for the patterning of vomeronasal patients undergoing for Assisted Reproductive Technology (ART) axons while in S EmMuAt7anAts the olfactory system remains unaffected. S. Zoukovskaya1, N. Rumiantsava2, L. Savenko2, H. Abramchik1, L. Shamgina1; Thus, is a good candidate gene for Kallmann syndrome (HH and hy- 1Center of Reproductive Medicine, Minsk, Belarus, 2Republican Medical Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. posSmEMiaA/7aAnosmia) and for normosmic HH (nHH). Whole-exome se- quencing of a patient with nHH revealedS Ea MheAt3eArozygoSuEs MmAu7tAation, R148W, in . It was predicted probably damaging by PolyPhen2, and abseSnEt- in 200 controls. Sanger-sequencing of and in 40 other Cytogenetic studies of infertility patients, couples with recurrent pregnancy patients revealed no other rare variants. However, the patient with the www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 135 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 MA7A KISS1R P04.13 The former annotated pseudogene DHFRL1 is expressed and mutation also had a heterozygous mutation, C389X, in KISS1R, a gene functional implicated in autosomal recessive nHH and encoding kisspeptin receptor G. McEntee, S. Minguzzi, K. O‘Brien, N. Ben Larbi, C. Loscher, C. Ó Fágáin, A. Parle- with an important role in regulating GnRH secretion. No other muta- McDermott; tion was found in the patient when genomic DNA and cDNA was sequenced. Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland. We hypothesize that the nHH of this patient could result from a combination oSEf Ma rAe7dAuced number of GnRH neurons and a reduced number of functional kisspeptin receptors in them. Our findings provide support for the role of Dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) is a folate enzyme which reduces dihydro- mutations in the pathogenesis of HH in human, and for the pro- folate into tetrahydrofolate in the presence of NADPH. DHFR was previously posed digenic or oligogenic inheritance in this disorder. thought to be the only enzyme capable of this reaction however we show P04.11 that humans have a second dihydrofolate reductase enzyme encoded by Evidence for expression of Cyp19A1 (cytochrome P450, family 19, the former pseudogene DHFRL1 (dihydrofolate reductase like - 1), located subfamily A, polypeptide1) in human embryonal carcinoma cell line on chromosome 3.We demonstrate that the DHFRL1 gene is expressed and K. Fallah-Zadeh1,2, R. Favaedi1, M. Khosravifar1, P. Afsharian1, M. Nabioni2, M. shares some commonalities with DHFR. Recombinant DHFRL1 can comple- Shahhoseini1; ment a DHFR negative phenotype in both bacterial and mammalian cells. 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Center, Royan Institute for Enzyme kinetics shows that the Km for NADPH is similar for both enzymes Reproductive Biomedic, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Animal but DHFRL1 has a higher Km for dihydrofolate when compared to DHFR, Biology, Faculty of Biological Science, Kharazmi University (TMU), Tehran, Islamic indicating a lower affinity for the substrate. Localization of DHFRL1, visua- Republic of Iran. lized using confocal microscopy, shows that DHFRL1 has a strong presence in the mitochondria, where it is proposed by Anderson et al (2011) to par- Cyp19A1 ticipate in de novo thymidylate synthesis to support mitochondrial DNA re- Introduction plication. We also found that DHFRL1 has the ability to bind its own mRNA is a single copy gene located on chromosome 15q21.2 in human in the same translational auto-regulation method as DHFR; with both enzy- genome which encodes aromatase, the key enzyme for estrogen biosynthe- mes capable of replacing each other. Methotrexate (MTX), a potent inhibitor sis. In the final step of mentioned process, this integral membrane enzyme of DHFR, is known to disrupt this regulation mechanism. We demonstrate catalyzes the removal of 19-methyl group of the A-ring of androgens in an that DHFRL1, which has a lower binding affinity for MTX, requires a high- irreversible manner, resulting in conversion oCf yapn1d9rAo1gen to estrogen which er concentration of the drug to disrupt the protein: RNA binding complex. named aromatization. In human, aromatase gene is expressed in a tissue The identification of a second dihydrofolate reductase enzyme encoded by specific manner, in the way that expression of has been reported in a previously unrecognised retrogene will have a major impact on previous organs such as gonads, brain, skin, placenta and adipose. research surrounding DHFR. Embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells derived from testicular tumors are valuable P04.14 tools for investigating embryogenesis and developmental biology processes. Maternal stress factors associated with Down syndrome birth Since EC cells are malignant but their terminally differentiated derivatives S. K. Dey, S. Ghosh; are not, understanding the expression profile of these embryonal cells may- West Bengal University of Technology, Kolkata, India. be of value for diagnostic and maybe therapeutic pCuyrpp1o9seAs1 in embryology. Material and methods In the current work, the mRNA expression level of gene was evalu- Down syndrome due to trisomy 21 is the most common human chromo- ated in a human EC cell line named NT2/NTERA2, using quantitative real- somal abnormality. In order to gain insight into maternal stress factors time PCR technique. Cyp19A1 responsible for nondisjunction, we genotyped 12 microsatellite markers Result and discussion Cyp19A1 spanning along 21q from centromere to telomere in 138 individuals with Our results clearly showed the expression of in NT2 cell line. Our free trisomy 21 and in their parents and analyzed the association among re- finding implies a dynamic role of aromatase gene in developmental duced recombination, maternal age and nondisjunction. The approach was processes and maybe in cancer. informative for 119 families in determining parental origin with 89.91% P04.12 being maternal and 10.09% is paternal. The distribution of nondisjunction Performance Evaluation of the Celera Cystic Fibrosis Genotyping in maternal meiotic I and meiotic II stages were 81.19% and 19.81% respec- Assay with the 3500xL Genetic Analyzer (RUO*) and Three Nucleic tively. The mean maternal age of nondisjunction in our Indian population Acid Isolation Technologies is 27.58±6.4 years which is significantly lower than that of Caucasians. We K. C. Young, P. P. Wadia, D. A. Bost; created a genetic map of long arm (21q) in maternal meiosis I nondisjoined Celera, Alameda, CA, United States. chromosome 21. The distribution of chiasma shows a difference throughout the length of 21q with more recombination towards telomeric end in com- parison to control data. The telomeric exchange is found to be a significant Cystic Fibrosis is a recessive inherited genetic disorder, resulting from an risk factor for meiotic I nondisjunction, irrespective of the age of the mother. unregulated cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) An increase in both zero- and one exchange events in younger mother (< gene. Detectiionn v oitfr tohis disorder is crucial in deciding timely treatment, lea- 29) suggests reduction of recombination. The linkage map of 21q (39.58cM) ding to a better quality of life. The Celera Cystic Fibrosis Genotyping Assay is was significantly shorter than the control female linkage map, indicating an a qualitative diagnostic device used to genotype a panel of 32 muta- overall reduction of recombination. Telomere length estimation indicates tions (plus poly-T and exon 10 polymorphisms) in the CFTR gene from geno- that telomere length attrition may be associated in some way with meiosis mic DNA isolated from human whole blood. The assay provides information I and meiosis II nondisjunctions of chromosome 21.Reduced recombination intended for use in the carrier screening of adults of reproductive age, as & telomeric exchange are important maternal stress factors . an aid in newborn screening, and in the confirmatory diagnostic testing of P04.15 newborns and children. FMR1Genotype Repeat Size Analysis as a Genetic Test Necessary Prior Due to differences in sample preparation technologies, three different me- Fertility Treatments. thods were used to assess the isolation of genomic DNA from EDTA human R. ESPEJO1, A. ZUÑIGA2, L. PEDROLA2, Y. ROMERO2; whole blood. Two operators independently processed 22 samples on two 1Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain, 2HOSPITAL DE LA RIBERA, ALZIRA days using the MagNA Pure Compact Nucleic Acid Isolation Kit (Roche), the (VALENCIA), Spain. QIAamp DNA Blood Kit (Qiagen), and the Puregene Blood Core Kit (Qiagen). The extracted DNAs were characterized for concentration, purity, and per- formance in the detection of wild-type and mutant alleles using the Celera Premature ovarian failure [POF (MIM 311360)] is an early ovarian dysfunc- Cystic Fibrosis Genotyping Assay with the 3500xL genetic analyzer (Life tion characterized by cessation of menstruation before the age of 40 years. Technologies; RUO*). The aetiology of this disorder is compleFxr aangidle t hXe munendtearll yrientga rgdeanteiotinc dFeMfeRct1s, The results demonstrated that DNA isolated by these sample preparation are largely unknown. It has been estimated that ~21% of FPMOFR 1c ases are as- methods were of sufficient concentration and purity to allow accurate ge- sociated with expanded alleles of the [ notyping by the Celera Cystic Fibrosis Genotyping Assay with the 3500xL FXS (MIM 309550)] gene. Intermediate and pre-mutated alleles may genetic analyzer. become unstable generating a full mutation with further expansion in the *Research Use Only following generations, when passed from a female to her offspring. Such fe- males, also called Fragile X intermediate or pre-mutation carriers, are phe- notypically normal although with an increased risk of POF. We report a case of a healthy, 34-year-old woman who had premature ovarian failure (POF), www.eshg.org www.eshg.org136 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P04.19 The role of thrombophilia in implantation failure and recurrent (FSH measurement = 102,00 mIU/ml, LH measurement = 18,00 mIU/ml). spontaneous abortion Her condition was considered idiopathic because she did not show any of E. Kurvinen1, T. Kahre1,2, Ü. Murumets1, R. Zordania1; the known POF-related conditions such as ovarian surgery, previous che- 1Department of Genetics, United Laboratories, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, motherapy or radiotherapy, or autoimmune disease. Laboratory tests pri- 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. or to initiating a stimulation cycle were normal including karyotype. GnRH and follicle stimulating hormone treatment was recommended but the first in vitro treatment cycle was unsuccessful in inducing ovulation. Before the second It`s accepted, that trombophilia is one of the possible etiological factors of cycle, analysis of FMR1 genotype repeat size was performed and result sho- fertilization (IVF) failure and recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL). We wed a permutated FMR1 allele (90 CogsF MreRp1e ats). Patient was derived to conducted this study to determine the role of thrombophilic inherited and a Preimplantational Genetic Diagnosis Program. The association between acquired factors in the etiology of infertility in 150 families. We analysed premature ovarian failure (POF) and the repeat number has been wi- clinical, laboratory and genealogical data of families in two groups: in the dely investigated and must be taken in account in Reproductive and Infer- first group we enrolled women who had had at least two IVF failure (n=75), tility Programs. but no deliveries. Second group consisted of women (n=75) who had concei- P04.16 ved spontaneously and had uneventful pregnancies (at least two pregnancy Genetic polymorphisms of Glutathione S-transferase M1, T1 and P1 in loss previously ). All the women underwent a complete screening for con- Tunisian infertile men genital (factor V Leiden-FVL, factor II c.20210G>A, antithrombin, proteiin C, M. Cherif1, S. Baklouti1, M. Ghorbel1, N. Zribi2, S. Daoud2, A. Sellami2, N. Chakroun2, F. proteiin S deficiency, MTHFR c.677C>T and c.1298A>C) and acquired (APC Fakhfakh1, L. Ammar-Keskes1; resistancy) thrombophilia risk factors. Conventional cytogenetical analysis 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of Histology, Sfax, was performed in all women and their partners. Inherited thrombophilia Tunisia. mutations were revealed in 82.4% of in the first group versus 64.8% in RPL group. APC resistancy was diagnosed in 3% among IVF failure patients and 30% in RPL patients. About half of the cases in both groups it was caused by Introduction: Genetic causes are responsible of 60% of cases of idiopathic F V Leiden mutation. No differences was found between groups concerning male infertility. Polymorphisms of genes that encode Glutathione S-trans- MTHFR mutations. Combined thrombophilia (the presence of two genetic ferases (GSTs), a group of phase II enzymes that detoxify endogenous and factors of thrombophilia) was present in 5% of first and 12% among second exogenous electrophiles, can affect the biotransformation of toxic com- group of patients. Our data suggest that factor V Leiden mutation alone or pounds to which the male productive system is exposed. Some reports at- combined with acquired factors can have a role in recurrent fetal loss in fa- tested the association of GSTs gene polymorphisms with male infertility. In milies without conceiving problems. order to investigate whether there is an impact of genetic variations of GSTs P04.20 on semen quality and male fertility, we studied three genetic polymorphis- Application of a Scoring System in PGD for late onset diseases and ms in GSTT1, GSTM1 and GSTP1 in infertile men and controls from Tunisia. cancer predispositions. Methods: Participant’s were 159 men with idiopathic infertility and 102 fer- V. Gold1, S. Peleg1, V. Lisiansky1, N. Mey-Raz1, I. Wagman1, D. Ben Yosef1, A. Amit1, Y. tile men. Basic semen analysis was performed including total sperm count Yaron1,2,3, M. Malcov1; and concentration, motility and morphology. Genotyping of GSTM1 and 1Racine IVF Unit, Lis Maternity Hospital. Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, GSTT1 polymorphisms were performed using the multiplex PCR. The GSTP1 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Genetic Institute, Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, Ile 105 Val polymorphism was determined using PCR-RFLP. 3Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Results: GSTM1 null genotype (GSTM1 0/0) was significantly associated Introduction with reduced sperm count in infertile men semen (oligozoospermia) (P=.001) and GSTT1 null genotype (GSTT1 0/0) was significantly associated : PGD is widely used for cancer predisposition mutations with with low sperm motility (P=.001). However, infertile men had a higher pre- variable penetrance and additional late onset diseases. The number of fami- valence of the wide type of GSTP1 allele (GSTP1 Ile 105) than the fertile lies affected by these conditions that opt for PGD increases continuously as group (80.5% and 72.54%, respectively; P=.034) and the presence of the mAiomlecular techniques are advancing. Nonetheless, the indication for PGD in homozygote mutant genotype (GSTP1 Val/Val) was less common in infertile these cases keeps raising ethical issues. men than in fertile group. : to summarize our experience in PGD for couples affected with late on- Conclusion. Our results suggest that both GSTM1 and GSTT1 gene polymor- sMeet tdhiosedasses following the evaluation of each case by a quantitative Scoring phisms have a negative impact on semen quality and are associated with System (SS). male infertility in Tunisia. : PGD was performed by embryo biopsy, followed by single cell P04.18 multiplex nested PCR for the familial predisposition mutation and for 4-8 An association between the IGF2 ApaI polymorphism and flanking polymorphic markers. The devised SS considers disease characte- spontaneous abortion ristics (onset, severity, penetrance, inheritance pattern) and patient clinical B. Tretyak, H. Makukh, D. Zastavna, M. Tyrkus; variables (carrier status, infertility, objection to terminate pregnancy, addi- State institution “Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical Science of tRieosnuallt gsenetic syndrome) resulting in an absolute numeric value for every Ukraine”, Lviv, Ukraine. patient. : the evaluation of 31 couples by the SS showed that some conditions such as FAP or Huntington definitely justify PGD while others like BRCA or The imprinted IGF2 gene encodes insulin-like growth factor II, displays loss HCoNnPcCluCs rieoqnuire the contribution of patient variables in order to justify inclu- of imprinting (LOI) or aberrant imprinting in human diseases is important sion into PGD program. Seven healthy pregnancies were achieved. for human placental development. Accordingly to GWAS, IGF2 is associated : the employment of a SS that takes into account the disease cha- with human longevity and an association between the IGF2 ApaI polymor- racteristics as well as the patients‘ clinical variables allows for the objective phism and body mass index was confirmed. determination wherein PGD is justified. We envision that the continuous The PCR- RFLP analysis has been performed and the distribution of ApaI discovery of cancer predisposition and late onset mutations will highlight IGF2 genotypes was determined in 146 patients with muscle weakness and PGD as the most appropriate reproductive option for preventing the perpe- elevated creatine kinase, in 107 miscarriages’ chorionic villi samples (MCV) tuation of severe inherited predisposition in families with several affected and control samples. RNA from 41 MCV samples was reverse-transcribed or deceased members. and subjected to IGF2 loss of imprinting (LOI) analysis. P04.21 The differences of AG and GG ApaI IGF2 genotypes frequencies between ex- Interleukin 6 polymorphism in recurrent pregnancy loss perimental and control groups were significant. The AG ApaI IGF2 genotype V. Radoi1,2, C. Bara2, L. Bohiltea2; was detected in 69.2% of MCV versus to 22.5% in control and 40.4% in pa- 1Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 2UMF Carol Davila, tients with muscle weakness and significantly increases the risk of sponta- Bucharest, Romania. neous abortion (OR=7.72; CI: 3.30-18.03). MCV samples with confirmed he- Introduction terozygous AG genotype undergo to LOI analysis and expression from both alleles was detected in 37 (90.2%) samples. The revealed deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in the control group can be explained by the About 15 - 20% of clinically recognized pregnancies end in miscarria- possibility that embryos with the AG ApaI IGF2 genotype are more often eli- ge among Caucasians. The etiology of recurrent pregnancy loss remains minated compared with other genotypes that could be realized by the loss unclear and the possible immunological etiologies of pregnancy failure have of imprinting mechanisms. been intensively investigated. The maternal immune system confronts the embryo/ fetus with a host www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 137 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 defense reaction, based on the recognition of paternally derived antigens. but are presumably not involved in maturation arrest at the spermatocyte COybtjoekcitnivees have been described to play a major role in the pathogenesis of stage. SLC25A24 has two transcript variants of which only variant 2 is testis- recurrent miscarriage. specific. Besides multiple heterozygous deletions of the start codon region, we detected one patient with a maturation arrest of spermatogenesis (not We purpose to investigate the relationships between recurrent pregnancy tested by array CGH) who was having a homozygous deletion of this region. lMosast earnida ls ainngdle m neutchleoodtisde polymorphism - 174 G / C in the promoter region More patients and controls are being investigated. In addition, immunohi- of the interleukin 6 gene in Romanian population. stochemistry is performed to determine the localization of the SLC25A24 proteins in testicular tissues. The role of the genes FAM82A1 and C17ORF51 The diagnosis of RPL was based on a documented history of at least two is under investigation. These studies will clarify whether these genes are spontaneous consecutive miscarriages. Each woman underwent a diagno- linked to male infertility. stic work - up to rule out a verifiable cause for the recurrent miscarriage. P04.25 We studied 37 women with recurrent spontaneous abortions (>2) and 40 A methylation-sensitive SNP in PIWIL2 is associated with male women experiencing at least one live birth and no abortions referred to Life infertility Memorial Hospital. DNA extraction and PCR were employed to genotype C. Friemel1, S. Bens1, A. Caliebe1, J. Gutwein1, J. Richter1, A. Schmutzler2, R. Siebert1, O. wReosmueltns for the presence of a polymorphism in the promoter region of in- Ammerpohl1; terleukin 6 gene. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 2Center for Reproductive Medicine, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany. There was a not significant difference in the - 174 C/G genotype frequency ( GCoGn vcsl.u GsCio/nC C) between the women with RPL and controls (p value = 0,47). Epigenetic mechanisms have recently emerged as playing a crucial role in We did not detect any homozygote for C allele in 77 subjects. the pathogenesis of various common diseases. We hypothesized that aber- rant DNA methylation patterns also contribute to the causes of male inferti- The interleukin 6 polymorphism investigated was not associated with re- lity. The aim of this study was to identify CpG loci differentially methylated current pregnancy loss in Romanian population. in infertile men as compared to fertile male controls. P04.22 Using the HumanMethylation450k BeadChip DNA from peripheral blood Iron deficiency and targeted deletion of iron regulatory protein 2 cells obtained from 33 infertile men, as well as 10 fertile male controls was affect sperm motility and male fertility B. Marohn1, P. Grzmil2, E. G. Meyron-Holtz3, J. Schmidtke1, S. Schubert1; analyzed. A total of 596 differentially methylated CpG loci were revealed 1Institute for Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute by this approach (p<0.001). These genes were enriched for PIWIL family for Human Genetics, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany, 3Laboratory for members (Enrichtment=39.32). As PIWILs are involved in the regulation of Molecular Nutrition, Faculty of Biotechnology and Food Engineering, Technion - Israel spermatogenesis, we further focused on this group of genes. Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. Notably, one differently methylated CpG site, which was located in the S- shore region of PIWIL2 showed a significantly lower methylation level in patients as compared to controls (p<0.01). Remarkably, DNA methylation at The iron metabolism is regulated both, at the systemic and cellular level, this site showed a bimodal distribution with very low levels in a subgroup amongst others, by the iron regulatorIyrp p2roteins (IRP) 1 and 2. IRP2 regula- of 8 patients (mean methylation = 37.8% vs. 83.7% in controls). Further tes proteins involved in iron transport and storage such as transferrin recep- evaluation revealed that this site contains a rare single nucleotide polymor- tor 1 (TfR1), ferroportin and ferritin. knock out mice exhibit misregula- phism (SNP) and that lower methylation levels in the affected patient sub- ted expressioInr ple1v+e/-/lsI ropf2 t-h/- ese proteins and develop anemia and a late onset group were reflected by heterozygosity for this SNP. Based on our findings progressive neurodegeneration. we propose that heterozygosity for a methylation-sensitive SNP in PIWIL2 Infertility of breeding pairs and the abundant expression of is associated with male infertility. IRP2 in the testis of wild-type mice indicate an important role of IRP2 in P04.27 the regulation of testicular iron homeostasis. This projeIcrtp 2fo-/c-used on how Y chromosome haplogroups do not confer susceptibility to partial testicular iron metabolism, spermatogenesis and spermiogenesis are affec- AZFc deletions in Tunisan infertile men ted by IRP2 deficiency. Spermatogenesis and fertility of -mice are not M. Ghorbel1, S. Baklouti Gargouri1, N. Zribi1, F. Ben Abdallah1, M. Cherif1, R. Keskes1, N. affected. HIropw2ever, sperm motility of IRP2-deficient males is significantly en- Chakroun2, A. Sellami2, K. McElrevaey3, F. Fakhfakh1, L. Ammar-Keskes1; hanced in com-/-parison to age-matched C57BL/6J wild-type controls. 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, We kept -mice and age-matched controls on a low iron diet in order 2Laboratory of Histology & Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Human Developmental Genetics, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. to analyze if the increased sperm velocity is a result of iron deficiency aInrpd2 if lack of iron could affect spermatogenesis and male fertility in general. While sperm of wIripld2-type mice on a low iron diet mimic the behaviour of - deficient mice under normal conditions, sperm motility and fertility of ho- Introduction: Partial AZFc deletions related to testis-specific gene families mozygous knock out mice on a low iron diet are significantly reduced. are common mutations of the Y chromosome, but their contribution to Whether this effect is mediated by structural abnormalities of the sperm spermatogenic impairment is still unresolved, and the risk factors related flagellum and/or due to a lower ATP production in IRP2-deficient sperm is to the onset of microdeletions remain unknown. With this in mind, we in- currently under investigation. vestigated the possible association between Y chromosome haplogroups and predisposition to partial AZFc deletions a Tunisian population. Materiel P04.24 et methodes : The study involved 216 infertile patients (68 azoospermic, Array-CGH analysis in male infertility W. Lissens1, D. Vandermaelen1, S. Seneca1, B. Menten2, G. Vandyck1, H. Tournaye3, K. 63 oligospermic and 85 normospermic). Identification of haplogroups was Stouffs1; made by PCR using a set of binary markers. We also screened partial mi- 1Center for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel and Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium, crodeletions of Y chromosome AZFc region by polymerase chain reaction 2Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Center for (PCR) according to established protocols. Redultats : Eleven haplogroups Reproductive Medicine, UZ Brussel and Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. were identified (E3b2, J1J*, E1, E3b*, F, G, K, P/Q, R*, R1and R1a1), with a high frequency of E3b2 (35.18%) and J1J* (30.9%), knowing that E3b2 is the most frequent haplogroup in the north African populations. Only 30 In order to identify genetic causes of male infertility, many individual genes patient carried a partial AZFc microdeletion (13.88%). Gr/gr was found in have been studied for the presence of mutations in infertile patients. Howe- 80% of patients (24/30) with seven different haplogroups (E1, E3b*, E3b2, ver, these studies were rather disappointing. Therefore, we looked for the F, J1J*, R1a1* and R1). E3b2 was the most frequent (54.16%). However, the presence of copy number variations (CNVs) in 9 infertile men with a matura- frequency of J1J* was only 16.66%. Conclusion : This study suggests lack of tion arrest of spermatogenesis and in 20 control males with normal sperm significant evidence of increased of AZFc partial microdélétion in a specific parameters. After several elimination steps, 7 regions remained. These re- haplogroupe of Y chromosome in Tunisian infertile men. gions, including four deletions and three duplications, were further investi- P04.28 gated by qPCR in patients and in a large number of controls. The 4 deletions Application of mFISH in identification of supernumerary marker were present in heterozygous form and contained the SLC25A24, FAM82A1, chromosome in a female with infertility C17ORF51 and SIRT4 genes. By sequencing no mutations were detected in T. E. Zerova, M. I. Kononenko, A. S. Dariy, S. V. Denisenko; the non-deleted copies of these genes. The three duplications involved the The Human Reproduction Problems Clinic, Kyiv, Ukraine. genes THRAP3+C1ORF113, SYT6 and PLSCR2. Due to their known function the genes SYT6, PLSCR2 and SIRT4 have a potential role in male infertility www.eshg.org www.eshg.org138 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Results: Supernumerary marker chromosome (SMC) belongs to a heterogeneous Heteroduplexes were repaired in nuclear and whole cell extracts. group of structurally rearranged chromosomes, it is difficult to be identified Control studies in the absence of nuclear and whole cell extracts showed no due to small size. The occurrence of SMCs is 0,1-0,72/1000 in phenotypical- rCeopnacilru. Rsieopna:ir was observed in the mouse blastocysts though the efficiency ly normal individuals (Blennow et al., 1994). was not as high as the nuclear/whole cell extracts. After introduction of multiplex fluorescrence in situ hybridization (mFISH) MMR efficiency in designed mismatched heteroduplexes was it has become possible to investigate origin of SMCs. successfully analysed in the presence of nuclear/whole cell extracts and in In our case a phenotypically normal 27-year-old female with infertility (3 mouse blastocysts. This assay can easily be modified to detect different/ years) was analysed after two unsuccessful ICSI courses. The cytogenetic multiple mismatches with different lengths in addition to modifying the analysis identified mosaicism of cells with SMC. The female patient’s karyo- construct into assessing insertion/deletion loops with different sizes. type was 47,XX,+mar[15]/46,XX[20]. The karyotype of her husband was P04.31 normal. Cytogenetic analysis of 102 missed and spontaneous abortions in the The following banding methods for studing SMC were used: GTG, QFQ, western regions of Ukraine CBG,DA/DAPI. The SMC appeared to be of a small size, metacentric, I. Tkach, N. Huleyuk, H. Beskorovajna, I. Sedneva, O. Lototska-Savchak; bisatellited,DA/DAPI positive at both centromeres. mFISH was performed Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine. using Spectra Vysion Assay (Abbott Inc, USA) and the Applied Imaging Spec- tra Vysion Imaging System. SMC was identified as an inverted duplication of chromosome 15. Background: Approximately 15% to 20% of pregnancies result in sponta- This is the most widespread group of SMCs - approximately 50% of healthy neous miscarriages and missed abortions and most often occur in the first SMCs carriers have SMC derived from chromosome 15(Liehr et al., 2004). trimester. In 60-80% of cases they are caused by chromosomal changes in A review of studies involving this type of SMCs suggested that they can be the embryo/fetus. The present study displays frequency and spectrum of divided into several groups. Our case belongs to the group with those SMCs chromosomal abnormalities in embryos derived from missed and sponta- that are inv dup (15) with breakpoints in 15q11 and contain very little or no neous abortions in the western regions of Ukraine. euchromatic material and exert no phenotypic effect. Methods: The study population consisted of 102 embryo tissues from wo- It should be taken into account that when the next ICSI procedure is suc- men with the final diagnosis of missed (99 cases) or spontaneous (3) abor- cessful, prenatal diagnosis should be subsequently performed. tions. Cytogenetic analysis was performed in the uncultured chorionic villi P04.29 samples, using standard G-banding. Non-disjunction of the bivalent is not the predominant mechanism Results: Karyotype results were obtained in 50 of 102 cases (49%), one leading to aneu-ploidy in humans of them from spontaneous abortion. Among the abortions the gonosomal K. R. Held1, V. Baukloh2, S. Arps3, S. Wittmann1, S. Knebel1; constitution of XY prevailed (n = 36), followed by XX (n=14). Chromosomal 1Reprogenetics Germany, Hamburg, Germany, 2Fertility Center Hamburg, Hamburg, abnormalities were found in 25 cases (50%): autosomal trisomies in 9 ca- Germany, 3MVZ Genteq, Hamburg, Germany. ses (36%), gonosomal trisomies 47,XXY in 2 cases (8%) and triploidy in 14 cases (56%) (9 XXY : 5 XXX). Autosomal trisomies involved chromosome 2 (one case), 16 (tree cases), 19 (one case), 20 (one case, spontaneous abor- Results obtained by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) of tion) and 22 (tree cases). One case of triploid abortion showed mosaicism first polar bodies (PB1) suggested that non-disjunction of the bivalent is with chromosome 20 - 70,XXX,+20/69,XXX. not the predominant mechanism leading to aneuploidy in humans (Gabriel Conclusions: Conventional methods of cytogenetic investigation of material et al., 2011) and that a greater number of chromosome segregation errors from missed abortions produce results in half of the cases. Presence of Y taking place at second meiotic division (MII) compared with first meiotic chromosome in 72% of incidents shows prevalence of male gender in af- division (MI) (Fragouli et al., 2011). The aim of our study was to confirm fected pregnancies. Triploidy was predominant followed by autosomal and both observations by analyzing the segregation errors of chromosomes X, gonosomal trisomy. Among autosomal trisomies, chromosomes 16 (12%) 13, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21 and 22 in PB1 and PB2 in a large cohort of patients and 22 (12%) were prevalent. (3307 cycles) aged 24 to 48 years. P04.32 PBs were analyzed by FISH with 5-chromosome probes (15 846 oocytes Identification of differentiallymethylated genes in the extraembryonic from 2958 cycles) or with 8-chromosome probes adding chromosomes X, tissues of human embryos with mosaictrisomy 16 15 and 17 (1970 oocytes from 394 cycles). The data were allocated to the E. N. Tolmacheva, A. A. Kashevarova, N. A. Skryabin, I. N. Lebedev; age groups ≤ 35 years, 36 to 40 years and > 40 years. Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. Our data confirm the observations by Gabriel et al., 2011, that premature chromatid seperation is the predominant mechanism leading to aneuploidy in humans (Angell’s hypothesis). In oocytes of reproductively older women Chromosomal mosaicism results from mitotic non-disjunction in aneuploid there is an excess of chromosome errors originating from MII compared or primarily euploid cell. However, the inducing factors of mitotic inRstBa1b ility with MI. The data suggest that the decrease in fertility of older women is aPr1e4 pAoRoFrly investigated. Earlier we showed due to a significant increase in segregation errors both in MI and to a larger the high frequency of epimutations of two cell cycle control genes ( and extent in MII. These data were supported by preliminary data from 36 cycles ) in the extraembryonic tissues of miscarriages with mosaic triso- analyzing all chromosomes in PB1 and PB2 from 202 oocytes by aCGH. mies involved different chromosomes. So, we can not exclude that the increa- P04.30 se of a certain chromosome dose may lead to abnormal epigenetic status of Functional assessment of mismatch repair genes. The present work was aimed to identify a spectrum of differentially P. Tulay1, S. Jaroudi2, S. B. SenGupta1; methylated genes in the cytotrophoblast(CT) and in the extraembryonic 1University College London, London, United Kingdom, 2University of Oxford, Oxford, mesoderm (EM) of 13 miscarriages with trisomy 16, and 7 first trimester in- United Kingdom. duced abortions using HumanMethylation27 BeadChip (Illumina). The level Introduction: of aneuploid cells was 4-93% in the CT and 65-98% in the EM. There were no differentially methylated CpG-sites in the CT with pure trisomy (≥90% of Mismatch repair (MMR) plays an important role in repairing trisomic cells) and in the EM, whereas there were 20 hypermethylated CpG- mismatched bases and insertion/deletion of loops. MMR genes were shown sites in 20 genes inA tBhCeC C3T, Pw2iRthY 6m, oPsDaZicD 3tr, isPoKmDyR E(<J, 9S0E%C3 o1fB t, rSisLoCm17icA c4e, lSlsL)-. to be expressed in the early stages of mammalian development. However, TC2h2eAse1 82,0 T dRiPffVe6rentially methylated genAesD bReBl3o,n Pg2 tRoY t6h,e P fDoZllDow3, iPnKg DfuRnEcJtional the gene expression profile alone cannot determine the activity/functionali- groups: transpToHrBt S(4 NOL3 ADRB3, NOL3, ty of the repair pathways. Investigating the repair capacity of MMR proteins TIMP3, TP53TG1), signal transductTioEnC T(A, THBS4 ), cell in preimplantation embryos is important since the rates of cell proliferation proliferation ( ), cell death ( ), response to stress ( and DNA replication are high in the early embryo. This study aims to deve- ), cell adhesion ( ), etc. Thus, hypermethylati- lMope tah ofudnsc:tional assay to assess the efficiency of MMR in preimplantation on of these genes is most likely associated with trisomy rescue events and embryos. mosaicism origin but not to the increase of chromosome 16 dose. This study Complementary synthetic oligonucleotides were used to form was supported by Federal Program P1161. a heteroduplex DNA fragment of 180 base pairs in length. The constructs P04.33 were exposed to nuclear/whole cell extracts. Semi-quantitative analysis of Polymorphism of folate cycle and integrins genes and pregnancy loss the mismatched base was performed by minisequencing. Control studies E. Mashkina1, K. Kovalenko1, N. Fomina2, T. Shkurat1; were carried out in the absence of any nuclear/whole cell extracts. MMR 1Research Institute of Biology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian efficiency was also studied in four mouse blastocysts. MMR efficiency was assessed as described for the nuclear/whole cell extracts. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 139 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Federation, 2Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation. are presented. Technical problems and methodical limitations are discussed. The causes of pregnancy loss are diverse. Polymorphism of candidate ge- Different strategies are shown for practicable and cost effective analyses of nes may influence on the early stages of embryogenesis. The role of gene polar bodies and trophectoderm cells in a clinical setting using 24sure and polymorphisms of folate cycle, and coagulation factors in pregnancy loss 24sure+ Cytochips. is discussed. We analyzed the frequency of gene polymorphism MTHFR Conclusion: Molecular karyotyping by aCGH allows a combined detection of (C677T), MTRR (A66G), MTR (A2756G), ITGB3 (T1565C), ITGA2 (C807T), aneuploidies and structural aberrations and therefore, may help to identify FGB (-455G-A), PAI 1 (-675 5G/4G) among 124 women with pregnancy loss euploid embryos with higher implantation potential. in the first trimester. The control group included 114 women with normal P04.38 pregnancy. The frequency of the investigated genotypes among two groups Detection of PRDM9 variations in patients with meiotic disorders of women is not different. The exception was the gene methionine syntha- A. Alemany-Schmidt, D. Heine-Suñer, M. Navarro-Palou, A. Voltes-Cobo, E. Piñero- Martos, J. Rosell, J. Burgués Gasión, M. Oliver-Bonet; se. The frequence of 2756GG genotype was three times higher in the group Hospital Universitari Son Espases, Palma, Spain. of women with pregnancy loss than control (OR = 3.71). The frequency of allele 2756G MTR gene was 0.26, which exceeds the controls (P = 0.028). The number of homozygotes-455AA FGB was 2.6% in the control group and In the last seven years genetics and molecular biology have begun to uncover 6.5% in the comparison group (OR = 2.79).The combination of gene poly- the role of PRDM9 in mammalian meiosis as a major determinant of meio- morphisms of folate cycle and integrins increase risk of pregnancy loss in tic recombination hotspots. PRDM9 contains an N-terminal KRAB domain, the first trimester. The frequence of integrins polymorphisms did not differ a central SET domain and a C-terminal tandem-repeat zinc-finger array. It in women with pregnancy loss and control group. However the combination is known that the zinc-finger array serves for binding to the DNA and mar- of polymorphisms of three genes (MTRR, MTR ITGB3) increases the risk of king the hotspots and that the H3K4 trimethylase activity of the SET domain pregnancy loss is 5 times. could be responsible for activating these hotspots by chromatin remodeling. P04.36 The zinc-finger array is coded by a variable microsatellite (differences in Birth of healthy twin after implanting a singleton male embryo, a nucleotides and number of microsatellites). hemophilia PGD case Due to its role in homologous recombination, mutations/variations in S. Zeinali1, P. Fouladi2, H. Bagherian2, S. Kianfar2, S. Sarhadi2, F. Zandieh3, F. Ramezanzadeh3, S. Amanpour3, S. Amanpour3; PRDM9 might be associated with different pathologies of meiotic origin. 1Pasteur Institute of Iran & Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Mutations in any of its domains could be the cause of some cases of infer- Republic of Iran, 2Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of tility. Moreover, according to several authors, variation within the PRDM9 Iran, 3Vali Asr Fertility and infertility Research Center, Imam Khomaini Hospital, Tehran zinc-finger domain might be involved in the mechanisms responsible for de University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. novo genomic disorders that result from unequal meiotic exchanges at mi- nisatellites. Therefore, the PRDM9 gene has been sequenced in 3 distinct A family with one hemophiliac child who had come for prenatal diagnosis groups (controls=83, infertile=14, transmitting parents of de novo (PND), requested to have a healthy child via preimplantation genetic dia- rearrangements=20) in order to analyze the presence of mutations/variati- gnosis (PGD). The affected boy’s mutation had been characterized in the ons associated with infertility and the origin of de novo genomic disorders. previous PND and the mother was an obligate carrier. For performing PGD Preliminary results show the presence of SNPs and uncommon variants of we tested several STR markers on the affected boy and his mother’s DNA to the zinc-finger array in all groups. However, this presence has not been as- determine the informative ones. Reprogrammed induction of super-ovula- sociated with any statistical significance. tion was performed by HCG injection and 34 to 36 hours later oocyte were Further studies including a bigger number of analyzed samples will contri- picked up using ultrasound guide. Three days after insemination, embryo bute to determine the role of PRDM9 in pathologies of meiotic origin. biopsy was performed using SATURN laser. The biopsy pipette was inser- P04.39 ted through the hole, and the selected blastomere was removed gently by Investigation of Angiotensin II Type 2 Receptor Gene A1675G aspiration. In total eight cells were removed from eight embryos. Each cell Polymorphism and Distribution of Genotypes in Preeclampsia and was analyzed by two rounds of multiplex nested PCR for STRs and direct Normal Pregnancies DNA sequencing. Only one healthy male and two none carrier female em- L. Özpak1, A. Pazarbaşı1, M. Kasap1, D. Alptekin1, F. T. Özgünen1, C. Bereketoğlu2, M. B. bryos were identified. The mother insisted on the transfer of only the male Yılmaz1, S. K. Sel1, T. Tufan1, G. Cömertpay1, &. N. Uslu1; embryo. Pregnancy progressed well and sonography in week 8 indicated 1Çukurova University, Adana, Turkey, 2Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey. twin pregnancy. The mother was disappointed in having twin boys and de- cided to terminate pregnancy. Intensive counseling was provided and she was persuaded to conthtinue the pregnancy. Both fetuses were checked for Angiotensin II type 2 receptor (AT2R) gene polymorphism in the develop- hemophilia during 11 weeks of gestation using CVS. Chromosomal abnor- ment of preeclampsia in pregnant woman might be thougt to play an active malities were checked by means of QF PCR and karyotyping. The children role. Therefore, we assessed whether AT2R gene A1675G polymorphism were delivered with no complication and later coagulation analysis revealed increase the risk of preeclampsia.The study cohort was a group of 95 wo- no complication. The mother is now happy in deciding to continue the preg- man with preeclampsia and 78 healthy pregnant woman subjects from the nancy to term. general turkish population. We were studied, by RFLP analysis, to validate P04.37 the role that the AT2R gene A1675G polymorphism plays in preeclampsia. Translocation and aneuploidy analyses of polar bodies and Among controls, the AT2R Hyp188III genotypes of G/G, A/G, and A/A were trophectoderm cells using 24sure: First results in a clinical setting observed in 10%, 49%, and 41% , respectively, whereas the G/G, A/G, and M. Stumm1, R. Wegner1, C. König2, M. Schlawinsky2, M. Klein2, J. Gerike3, S. Marr3, M. A/A genotypes were observed in 24%, 45%, and 31% of case patients, re- Bloechle3; spectively. The G/G genotype of the Hyp188III site in the AT2R gene were 1BG Berlin-Genetics GmbH, Berlin, Germany, 2ImaGenes / Source BioScience LifeSciences, associated significantly with the risk of developing preeclampsia.Polymor- Berlin, Germany, 3Kinderwunschzentrum an der Gedaechtniskirche, Berlin, Germany. phisms of AT2R gene in the renin angiotensin system pathway were asso- ciated significantly with preeclampsia risk. P04.40 Objective: Recent studies have shown that biopsy of polar bodies (PB) from A genome-wide expression profile of decidual tissue in preeclampsia oocytes and trophectoderm cells (TE) from blastocysts followed by array E. Trifonova1, N. Ershov2, T. Gabidulina3, V. Stepanov1; comparative genomic hybridisation (aCGH) might be a good strategy for the 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, detection of genomic imbalances in human embryos. The combined detec- Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2The Institute of Cytology and Genetics, The Siberian Branch tion of aneuploidies for all chromosomes and of unbalanced aberrations in of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3IInstitute for just one experiment makes aCGH-analyses very helpful, especially in game- Obstetrics and Gynecology, Siberian Branch of Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation. tes and embryonic cells from translocation carriers. Here, we report our first experiences and data from aCGH analyses in a real clinical setting. Methods: Polar bodies of more than 20 cycles and trophectoderm cells of more than 10 cycles (including different translocation carriers) were biop- Preeclampsia is a common pregnancy-specific disorder with unknown sied. The samples were amplified by whole genome amplification (WGA) etiology diagnosed in 5-17% of pregnancies. It is the leading cause of ma- using the SurePlex Kit [BlueGnome] and their genomes examined by aCGH ternal and perinatal morbidity and mortality. Candidate genes associated using 24sure and 24sure+ Cytochips [BlueGnome]. with preeclampsia have not been fully described. To investigate how the ex- Results: aCGH results of more than 150 PB- and more than 50 TE-samples pression of maternal genes contributes to the mechanisms underlying the www.eshg.org www.eshg.org140 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 progression of the disease, we investigate global placental gene expression unaffected, which led to a transfer of one or two embryos in each cycle. Our in preeclampsia using microarray technology. Genome-wide transcriptio- results of >100 samples clearly demonstrates the reliability of trophecto- nal profiling was performed on decidua basalis tissue from preeclamptic derm biopsy for PGD. Even more, the pregnancy rate strikingly increased to (n=10) and normal (n=11) pregnancies. Among the 26000 genes that were a rate above 60% per embryo transfer. screened, 79 were found to be differentially expressed betwLeEePn, BnHoLrmHBal2 a, SnId- P04.43 GprLeE-Ce6cl, aRmDpHt1ic3 ,t BisCsLu6e,s S. YADmEo1n, g these candidates, 59 were up-regulated and First pregnancy after preimplantation genetic screening (PGS) in 20 were down-regulated. The up-reCgOuRlaOt2edA ,gCeEnBePs Ain, HclKu2ded a balanced translocation carrier with 46,XX,t(4;14)(q25;q32.1) which are well-known differentially expressed karyotype genes for pre-eclampsia, as well as which was recently U. Noss1, S. Bug2, J. Pricelius2, B. Groß1, M. Stecher2, B. Becker2, C. Nevinny-Stickel- proved to be linked with the etiology of this disease. Gene ontology analysis Hinzpeter2; further revealed several biological processes that could be associated with 1Center for Reproductive Medicine, München, Germany, 2synlab Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum Humane Genetik, München, Germany. the development of pre-eclampsia, including response to stress, immune sy- stem process, regulation of cell communication, intracellular signaling cas- cade etc. Furthermore, when our patients were classified as cases of mild or We report on the outcome of assisted reproductive treatment comprising severe pre-eclampsia, the expression of 10 genes could be correlated with PGS of a couple with a healthy daughter and the desire for a second child. the severity of this disorder. This finding may provide insight into the pa- The 33 year old consulter was diagnosed as balanced translocation carrier thophysiology of the disorder and lead to new therapeutic possibilities for of a t(4;14)(q25;q32.1), her non-consanguineous partner showed a normal this disease. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic karyotype. They reported a history of seven pregnancy losses. Cytogenetic Research. diagnostic on the most recent product of conception revealed a genetic cau- P04.41 se demonstrating in the karyotype of 46,XX,der(14)t(4;14)(q25;q32.1)mat. Polymorphisms in the ANXA5 gene promoter in Japanese women with The couple agreed to array based PGS, which was performed by trophecto- pre-eclampsia H. Kurahashi1, H. Miyamura1,2, H. Nishizawa2, S. Ota1, M. Suzuki1, A. Inagaki1,2, H. derm analyses of five day 5-blastocysts. While embryos were vitrified, laser Egusa1,2, S. Nishiyama1,2, Y. Udagawa2; dissected biopsies of two to six cells each were subjected to whole geno- 1Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Comprehensive Medical Science, Fujita me amplification and then hybridized to 24sure+ microarrays utilizing the Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, SurePlex DNA amplification system and the 24sure protocol (BlueGnome, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan. Cambridge, United Kingdom). Although presenting with normal morphology, four of the blastocysts were assigned a minimal potential for nidation and normal development due to Annexin A5 (ANXA5) forms an antithrombotic shield on the apical surface of the presence of multiple aneuploidies. As suspected, three of them displayed syncytiotrophoblasts in the placental villi. A common haplotype called M2 partial and whole chromosome imbalances of chromosomes 4 and 14 ori- consisting of minor alleles of four SNPs in the promoter region of the ANXA5 ginating from maternal derivatives. Interestingly, two of them harboured a gene is more frequent in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. In this stu- plethora of imbalances affecting additional chromosomes, another one a tri- dy, association between the M2 and pre-eclampsia (PE) was examined. Pla- somy 9 as sole abnormality. One biopsy appeared euploid and the respective cental DNAs from 47 Japanese PE patients and 50 normotensive controls embryo was transferred. Ongoing pregnancy was confirmed biochemically were genotyped. The M2 was recorded in 12 out of 47 PE placentas (25.5%) and by ultrasound. This case illustrates the benefit of PGS for translocation but 5 out of 50 controls (10%), and the difference was statistically signi- carriers with chromosomal breakpoints leading to a low risk for the birth of ficant (P=0.04). However, when maternal blood samples were genotyped, a child with imbalanced karyotype but elevated risk for still births or early the M2 was observed only in 7 out of 34 PE patients (17.5%) and 5 out of pregnancy losses. 22 controls (13.2%) (P=0.66). In case of placentas carrying the M2, mothers P04.44 were also found to carry the M2 in 2 out of 4 (50%) in the control group, Cytokine gene expression in women with embryo loss and the frequency was not high in PE group (4 out of 6, 67%). Placental K. Kovalenko, E. Mashkina, I. Pokudina, T. Shkurat; expression of ANXA5 was examined by qRT-PCR, but not different between Research Institute of Biology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian PE and controls (P=0.71). However, the expression levels were lower in M2 Federation. carriers than in non-carriers in each group (P=0.076, P=0.004). Our data might indicate that hypomorphic alleles in the ANXA5 promoter in placenta, not in maternal blood, are essential to the onset of PE, and that the reduced Recurrent miscarriage is often defined as three or more consecutive mis- expression of ANXA5 in placental villi carrying the M2 might be associated carriages. While it has a number of causes, the more important ones relate with local hypercoagulable state possibly leading to the onset of PE. to chromosomal and genetic abnormalities and autoimmunity. An aberrant P04.42 maternal immune response, whereby the requisite adaptations to support Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) after trophectoderm biopsy conceptus development fail, is one likely mechanism contributing to un- - results from 2010 to 2012 explained recurrent miscarriage. In this study, we examined expression of U. Koehler1, U. Schön1, V. Mayer1, A. Stegerer1, K. Sendelbach1, M. Locher1, B. Paulmann2, IL-1β, IL-6, IL-10, and TNF-α in human chorion and endometrium tissues D. Shakeshaft3, R. Suttner3, B. Seifert2, W. Würfel3, E. Holinski-Feder1; from women with normal and miscarriage pregnancies using quantitative 1MGZ - Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2KITZ - Kinderwunsch RT-PCR assays. We found that IL-1β mRNA expression is higher in endo- Therapie im Zentrum, Regensburg, Germany, 3Kinderwunsch Centrum München, Munich, metrium than in the chorion both in miscarriage and normal pregnancy. In Germany. miscarriage expression level is higher than in normal pregnancy (in the cho- rion and endometrium). IL-6 mRNA expression lower than half the samp- les in the endometrium than in the chorion and in miscarriage expression The German Supreme Court (BGH) stated in July 2010 that preimplantation level lower than in normal pregnancy. IL-10 and TNF-α mRNA expression genetic diagnosis, PGD (or PID) is in accordance with the Embryo Protec- in two compared groups did not differ. Inadequate expression of IL-6 and tion Act (ESchG) and can be offered couples at risk for monogenic diseases IL-1β mRNAs in chorion and endometrial tissues may predispose to recur- and chromosomal aberrations. Here we present the results of PGD for mo- rent miscarriage through a perturbed maternal immune response, effects on nogenic diseases as well as for reciprocal and Robertsonian translocations decidual tissue remodeling and angiogenesis, or dysregulated trophoblast employing trophectoderm (TE) cells from day 5 blastocysts. Protocols for differentiation and invasion. mutation analysis for a number of genes involved in severe monogenic in- P04.45 herited disorders were established and optimized to fit into the short time Gene mutations of EG-VEGF and its receptor genes in patients of span of 24 hours between biopsy and embryo transfer. PCR strategies for recurrent pregnancy loss mutation detection involved either indirect methods (linkage analysis with M. Su1, L. Wu2, P. Kuo1; polymorphic markers), or direct mutation detection by sequence or frag- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng-Kung University Hospital, ment length analyses. For couples, who are carrier of a reciprocal or Robert- Tainan, Taiwan, 2Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng sonian translocation, array CGH (24sure technology) was performed. Here, Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. only a minority of TE samples (approx. 33%) revealed an euploid, balan- ced result, whereas the majority of samples (approx. 66%) were aneuploid showing an unbalanced karyotype due to the balanced translocation in the Recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) is a multi-factorial disorder and up to 50% parents, or due to aneuploidies of other chromosomes than expected from of cases remain undetermined causes after detailed clinical examination. the parents´ karyotype. In the majority of cases, at least one embryo was Angiogenesis plays a critical role in early gestation and endocrine gland- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 141 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 derived VEGF (EG-VEGF) is a newly found angiogenesis-associated gene. impltahnitradt icoans egenetic diagnosis in order to select embryos with no genetic The role of EG-VEGF and its two receptor genes (PKR1, PKR2) in human imbalance and hence increase their chances of a successful pregnancy. But early pregnancy was believed to have a direct effect on both endothelial and our describes a couple evaluated for primary sterility - trans- trophoblastic cells and are likely to play important roles in placentation. We location 45,XY,der(13;14) was found in men. The couple had a history of previously found gene polymorphisms of PKR1, PKR2 were significantly as- three unsuccessful attempts on in vitro fertilisation with PGD. Their first sociated with human RPL using tag SNP analysis. We now direct sequenced spontaneous pregnancy ended in miscarriage. It was found karyotype these genes in 100 RPL patients and 100 normal controls, trying to fine map 46,XX,+13,der(13;14)(q10;q10) from the sample. the variation sites that interfere with early pregnancy and further functio- P04.48 nal validate in vitro studies. We found allele and genotype frequencies of Role of TNF-α, IFN-γ, IL-6, TGF-β1 and IL-10 in Pathogenesis of PKR1(I379V) and PKR2(V331M) were significantly higher in the normal Recurrent Pregnancy loss controls and may play protective roles in RPL (p<0.05). Both variants indu- E. Ozturk1, S. Pehlivan2, S. Oguzkan-Balci2, M. G. Ugur1, Y. Ozkan1, O. Balat1; ced nonsynonymous change of amino acids and located in the intracellular 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Obstetric and Gynaecology, C-terminal domains of G protein-coupled receptors. We further demonstra- Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey. ted PKR1(I379V)- and PKR2(V331M)-overexpressed cell had altered intra- cellular calcium influx and significantly higher ability of cell invasiveness in Aim : both HEK293 and JAR (trophoblast) cell lines. We therefore concluded that According to previous investigations, certain cytokines may play a role PKR1(I379V) and PKR2(V331M) may play protective roles in preventing in recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) and also some cytokine gene polymor- RPL by altering intracellular calcium signaling and enhancing trophoblast phisms may affect the level of cytokine production. The aim of our study was cell invasion ability. to investigate the potential associations between IL-6 (-174), IL-10 (-1082, P04.46 The distribution of HLA-G 14 bp insertion/deletion polymorphism -M8e1t9h)o, dIF:N-γ (+874), TGF-β1 (codon 10/25) and TNF-α (- 308) gene poly- morphisms and RPL. and IL-10 SNP -1082G/A,- 592C/A, -819C/T in the case of recurrent pregnancy loss (RPL) Results: A case control study was carried out in 49 RPLpatients and 39 healthy control women. Cytokine genotyping was performed by PCR-SSP. K. Sosnina, D. Zastavna, O. Terpylyak, M. Tyrkus; Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine. RPL patients had significantly higher frequencies of TNF-α poly- morphism in both GA genotype (high expression) (p=0.020) and A allele (p=0.026). No statistically significant differences were observed between Pregnancy prolongation considerably depends on non-classical HLA-G groups in genotype and allele frequencies of IL-6 and IFN-γ genes. The ha- antigen and is associated with HLA-G 14bp (+)insertion/(-)deletion poly- plotypes of TGF-β1 and IL-10 were compared in terms of their expressions morphism. HLA-G gene transcription in trophoblast cells is under control and it was shown that the CC/GC, CC/CC, TT/CC, TC/CC haplotypes (low of cytokines secreted by placenta. The interregulation of HLA-G and IL-10 expression) of TGF-β1 had significantly decreased in the patients (p=0.049), genes expression is discussed. The aim of our research is to analyze the wCohnecreluassi tohne:re were no statisticaly significant differences in the haplotypes distribution of HLA-G 14bp insertion/deletion polymorphism and IL-10 of IL10 (p>0.05). SNP-1082G/A, -592C/A, -819C/T among the families with RPL. Methods: Our results showed that the high expression of TNF-α gene DNA extraction from peripheral blood cells and chorionic villi, PCR, aga- was associated with susceptibility PRL. The low expression of TGF-β1 gene rose gel electrophoresis. Results: 140 women with RPL, 86 spontaneously may be a risk factor for the development of PRL. Thtihs ew foiursldt further help in aborted embryos and 100 reproductively healthy women have been obser- efficient management of immunologically mediated recurrent miscarriages ved. Significantly higher HLA-G gene genotype +14bp/+14bp frequency has a* tE t.Ohe. a snadm Sp.Ple. c/oinndtrivibiduuteadl leeqvueal.l lTyh tios tshtius dwyo wrkh.ich is to search eight been shown in the group of women with RPL (P<0.05) and in the group of polymorphisms of five cytokine genes at the same time in RFLP patients. spontaneously aborted embryos (P<0.05) in comparison with the control group. The presence of this genotype in women, or embryos is associated P04.49 with 3-fold increased risk of RPL (OR = 3.41, CI: 0.98-11.85 and OR = 2.75 DNA fragmentation status in patient’s with necrozoospermia CI: 1.10-6.90). The analysis of distribution of IL-10 SNP-1082G/A, -592C/A, S. Jallad, S. Braham, S. Ibala, A. Saad, M. Ajina, M. Mehdi; Laboratory of Cytogenetic Molecular Biology and Human Biology of Reproduction, -819C/T genotype has shown the significantly higher 1082GG-genotype Soussa, Tunisia. (P<0.01) and 592CC, 819 CC-genotypes (P<0.05) frequency in the group of women with RPL in comparison with the control group. The increasing of risk of RPL up to 4 times with 1082GG-genotype (OR=3.43; CI: 1.72-6.84) Introduction : Necrospermia is still a poorly documented cause of male in- and 592CC, 819 CC-genotypes, (OR=3.87; CI: 1.23-12.20) has been esta- fertility, Several hypothesis have been made forward to explain the relation- blished. Conclusions: HLA gene mutations and changes in the genes which ship between necrospermia and DNA fragmentation. Our aim was to deter- interact with HLA-system can cause the reproductive dysfunction among mine if a relationship exists between the levels of sperm DNA fragmentation women and lead to early fetal loss. and necrospermia in infertile men. P04.47 Patients and methods: Semen samples obtained from 70 infertile men were Problems with Robertsonian translocations between chromosomes analysed according to world health organization guidelines .The eosin-ni- 13 and 14 may also cause problems for men. grosin viability test was performed and the percentage of viable and non A. Klímová; viable sperm were assessed by counting a minimum of 100 spermatozoa. Department of Medical Genetics, Ústí nad Labem, Czech Republic. Patients were subdivided in three groups: normozoospermia, moderate necrozoospermia and severe necrozoospermia. DNA fragmentation was detected by TUNEL assay, approximately 500 cells were counted, and DNA Robertsonian translocation is the most common type of chromosome re- fragmented index (DFI) was calculated. Results: The DFI was 9.28 ± 2.98 arrangement with a prevalence of 1 in 1000 in the general population. The % in patients with normal level of dead spermatozoa, 20.25 ± 3.21 % in most common subtype of Robertsonian translocation is seen between chro- patients with moderate necrozoospermia, and 35.31 ± 5.25 % in patients mosomes 13 and 14. According to available literature, the der(13;14) wo- with severe necrozoospermia. Sperm DNA fragmentation was significantly men have a 1% chance of having a baby with trisomy 13, whereas the males higher in patients with necrozoospermia. A strong correlation was found with any Robertsonian combination have a slim chance - below 1%, of their between the degree of necrozoospermia and sperm DNA fragmentation; In children being affected. addition statistically significant correlations were found between the DFI We present three cases of unbalanced form of RTohbee fritrssot nciaasne translocations level and sperm motility, abnormal sperm morphology. However no evident detected by fluorescent in situ hybridisation, quantitative fluorescent poly- correlation was found between the DFI and sperm count or paternal age. merase chain reaction and spectral karyotyping. is represented Conclusion: our study showed a high DFI in necrozoospermic men, particu- by a fetus in whom trisomy 13 syndrome 46,XY,+13,der(13;14)(q10;10) larly when necrozoospermia exceeding the proportion of 80 %. So severe was revealed during prenatal screening. Consequently, oligohydramnion necrozoospermia is a predictive factor for an increased risk of sperm DNA and cheilognathopalatoschis was observed in the fetus and the pregnancey- damage. wcoansd tcearsme inated. Translocation 45,XX,der(13;14) was found in the mother. Her medical history was significant for eight spontaneous abortions. The s features a fetus with trisomy 13 syndrome 46,XX,+13,der(13;14) (q10;q10). The pregnancy was terminated because of multiple malforma- tions. Balanced translocation 45,XY,der(13;14) was found in the father. In www.eshg.org most cases couples carrying Robertsonian translocation may requweswt pwre.-eshg.org142 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P04.50 Association study of single nucleotide polymorphisms in SLC6A14 Design gene with male infertility non-obstructive azoospermic infertile males in a Turkish population. Z. Moneva1, D. Plasheska-Karanfilska1, P. Noveski1, T. Plasheski2; : Nine exon deep intronic primers belonging to the SYCP3 gene were 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic Engineering dPeastiigennetds: and amplified by PCR, and the nucleotide sequences were identi- and Biotechnology “, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2of fied by automated DNA sequence analysis. Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The Former Seventy-five non-obstructive azoospermic infertile male patients Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. were included in the study. These patients were unrelated to each other and had 46,XY chromosome structure without Y microdeletion. In addition, 75 iMndaiivni dOuuatlsc owmheo sMe feearstiulirtey( ws)a:s proven by reproduction were enrolled in the The gene SLC6A14, encoding for amino acid transporter related to appetite study as controls. control has been found to be in association with X-linked obesity. The re- PCR and automated DNA sequence analysis sults of several studies point to an increased likelihood of abnormal semen tRoe dsuetletsc:t mutations and/or single nucleotide polymorphisms in the SYCP3 parameters among overweight men. Possible association of three single gene. nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the SLC6A14 gene and male infertility No mutations were detected in the 9 exons of SYCP3. A total of 11 was the subject of our study. We have analyzed 123 infertile males of diffe- vCaorniactliuosniso,n hso:wever, were detected: 7 have been identified in the NCBI SNP rent ethnic origin (83 Macedonian, 30 Albanian, 10 of other origin) which database, whereas 4 have not. have previously been diagnosed either with idiopathic azoospermia (50) or Based on the results, we agree with the idea that SYCP3 mu- oligozoospermia (73) in comparison to 127 fertile men (98 Macedonians tations are not associated with the genetic susceptibility for meiotic arrest and 29 Albanians) as controls. The methodology included multiplex PCR fol- in infertile male patients with non-obstructive azoospermia in the Turkish lowed by single nucleotide extension reaction and capillary electrophoresis population and that further studies investigating the other components of on ABI 3130 Genetic Analyzer for detection of SLC6A14 303 A/T (SNP1), the synaptonemal complex protein (SYCP1, SYCP2) should be conducted. 20649 C/T (SNP2) and 22510 C/G (SNP3). The allele frequencies showed P04.53 a significant difference between the infertile patients and fertile controls Factor II G20210A and factor V G1691A mutations and (p=0,044) only for the 22510 C/G SNP located in the 3’ untranslated region methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase C677T polymorphism in 155 of the SLC6A14 gene (0,463 in infertile men versus 0,339 in fertile controls women with repeated pregnancy loss for the minor C allele). The distribution of haplotypes including the three S. Seyedhassani1,2, M. Houshmand2, M. Neshan1,3, F. Saeb1, S. Salari1, M. Saffar4, S. SNPs, as well as only SNPs 2 and 3 that lie less than 2kB apart was also ana- Kalantar4; lyzed. The ACG and CG haplotypes were more frequent among fertile control 1Dr. seyedhassani genetic center, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of men than among infertile patients (0,520 vs. 0,366; p=0, 014 and 0,661 vs. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Yazd welfare 0,537; p=0, 044 respectively). In conclusion, this is the first report that links organization, Yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Yazd medical science university, Yazd, the SLC6A14 polymorphisms with male infertility. Islamic Republic of Iran. P04.51 PRM1 and PRM2 gene polymorphism in Czech and German men with Introduction: pregnancy is the process from the fertilized ovum to the fetus idiopathic oligozoospermia P. Křenková1, F. Tüttelmann2, S. Kliesch3, P. Paulasová1, J. Diblík1, M. Macek jr.1, M. Macek with capability of extra uterine survival. Pregnancy loss is the most common sr.1; complication of pregnancies. About 1 in 300 couples and 0.5-2% of women 1Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of are involved in repeated pregnancy loss (RPL). Various etiological factors Human Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 3Department of Clinical involve in RPL and the main part of them remains unknown. Among them Andrology, Centre of Reproductive Medicine and Andrology, University of Münster, the thrombophilic factors are important. Münster, Germany. Material and methods: Genetic counseling program was done for 158 coup- les suffering from RPL. Three molecular genetic variations were investiga- ted in main thrombophilic agents: G20210A in factor II, G1691A in factor V The aim of our study was to verify the impact of the most frequent ACC haplo- and C677T in MTHFR gene. The method was PCR-RFLP. type formed by PRM1 230A>C and PRM2 298G>C/373C>A variants on sper- Results: No G20210A mutation was found in Factor II gene. Heterozygote matogenesis in Czech and German males with idiopathic oligozoospermia. G1691 mutation in factor V gene was found in 3 women (1.94%). But, C677T PRM1 and PRM2 sequencing was performed on 3130xl Genetic Analyzer polymorphism in MTHFR gene was found in 33 women (21.3%). Among in 52 men with idiopathic oligozoospermia, in 52 normozoospermic and in them, 4 cases (12.12%) were homozygote and 29 cases (87.88%) were he- 75 Czech males with proven fertility. The three SNPs were also analysed by terozygote. Taqman assays in 108 German males with less and 160 with more than 20 Discussion: Assessment of variations in thrombophilic related genes can million sperm per millilitre. be useful in etiologic evaluation and planning of effective treatment in RPL In PRM1 we detected the common variant (230A>C) with an overall minor women. Genetic counseling, clinical aspect of abortions and genotype-phe- allele frequency (MAF) of 28.5% and three rare variants (c.54G>A, c.102G>T notype correlation should be considered for request of molecular thrombo- and c.166C>T) with overall frequencies of 0.56%, 0.28% and 0.28%, respec- philic tests in RPL. tively. In PRM2 we detected the two common polymorphisms (298G>C and P04.54 373C>A) with overall MAFs of 49.1% and 29.3%, respectively, and two rare DNA fragmentation in chromosomal translocation carriers variants (c.201C>T, c.377C>T), both with overall frequencies of 0.28%. E. Shilnikova1,2, I. Fedorova2, A. Gzgzyan2; Despite the ethnical difference the allele prevalences of the most frequent 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s PRM1 and PRM2 polymorphisms are identical in Czech normozoospermic Institution of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. and Czech fertile as well as German normozoospermic males, except the four rare PRM1 and PRM2 SNPs were present only in Czech males. The pre- valence of all detected variants and the ACC haplotype was not significant- Carriers of a chromosomal structural abnormality, as reciprocal or robertso- ly different between men with idiopathic oligozoospermia and controls in nian, have a normal phenotype but often have fertility problems. Infertility Czech and German males. In conclusions, we could not confirm the impact of men with chromosomal translocations could therefore be partly explai- of PRM1 and PRM2 gene variants on sperm counts ned by high DNA fragmentation in sperm. The aim of this study was to ana- Supported by MZ0FNM2005 and CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. lyze the sperm DNA fragmentation in translocation carriers. P04.52 One robertosonian translocation carrier 46,XY,der(13;14)(q10;q10), 3 Investigation of mutations in the Synaptonemal Complex Protein reciprocal translocations carriers: 46,XY,t(6;19)(p22;q12); 46,XY,t(2;3) 3 (SYCP3) gene among azoospermic infertile male patients in the (q33;q29); 46,XY,t(1;5)(p22;q32),t(6;12)(q15;q21) and 5 fertile donors Turkish population were recruited. Semen analysis was evaluated according to WHO guideli- H. Gurkan1, F. Aydın2, A. Kadıoglu3, S. Palanduz4; nes (2010). The method used to assess sperm DNA fragmentation was the 1Trakya University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Edirne, Turkey, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase-mediated dUTP nick-end labeling 2Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, (TUNEL) assay. Turkey, 3Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Andrology, DNA fragmentation frequency in sperm from donors was 0,26±0,09%, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Istanbul University, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetic, Istanbul, Turkey. whereas that from translocation carriers was 0,91±0,53%. Significantly increased rate was seen among oligoasthenoteratoozoospermia patients: Objective: 46,XY,der(13;14)(q10;q10) and 46,XY,t(2;3)(q33;q29) (1,4% and 1,35%, re- spectively). Sperm DNA fragmentation rate in 46,XY,t(6;19)(p22;q12) and To investigate possible mutations and/or single nucleotide po- 46,XY,t(1;5)(p22;q32),t(6;12)(q15;q21) teratozoospermic patients in both lymorphisms in the synaptonemal complex protein 3 (SYCP3) gene among www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 143 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P04.57 Molecular characterisation and analysis of spermatozoa in an cases was 0,45%. In the present study, the DNA fragmentation rates were infertile man with oligozoospermia and mosaicism of an unbalanced significantly different between the carriers of a chromosomal structural ab- Y;autosome translocation normality with abnormal and normal spermogram (p=0,0007). Therefore, A. Röpke1, D. Dossow-Scheele1, Y. Stratis1, S. Kliesch2, P. Wieacker1, F. Tüttelmann1; the present results suggest that the DNA fragmentation rate may depend not 1Institut für Humangenetik, Münster, Germany, 2Centrums für Reproduktionsmedizin only of the presence of a structural abnormality but also on the spermogram und Andrologie, Münster, Germany. parameters. In conclusion, the infertility of men carrying a chromosomal structural ab- normality could be explained by the poor-quality semen, and/or the eleva- We report on an infertile male patient with an unremarkable general medi- ted rate of DNA fragmentation. cal history and clinical examination including genital exam. He had severe Supported by Carlz Zeiss, RFBR, Administration of Saint-Petersburg. oligozoospermia in two semen samples with slightly elevated FSH levels of P04.55 7.6 U/l and otherwise normal hormone values. TSPY1 copy number variation and male infertility Conventional cytogenetic analysis on peripheral lymphocytes revealed a P. Noveski1, L. Chakalova1, T. Plaseski2, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; mosaicism of cells with an unbalanced Y;autosome translocation found in 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of 10 metaphases and in 20 metaphases an apparently normal karyotype sum- Macedonia, 2Clinic of Endocrinology and Metabolic Disorders, Faculty of Medicine, marised as 45,X,der(Y)t(Y;21)(q12;q21),-21[10]/46,XY[20]. FISH analysis Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. demonstrated the presence of the subtelomeric probe DXYS224 on the deri- vative Y chromosome indicating a breakpoint closely to the telomere region of Yqter. CGH analysis using the 400k array set from Agilent revealed loss of Testis-specific protein, Y-linked 1 (TSPY1) gene is located on the short arm 9.2Mb spanning the chromosomal region 21q11.2-q21.2 with loss of 13 ge- of Y chromosome (Yp11.2) and is present as an array of approximately 18- nes. Loss of Y chromosomal material was not observed. Both, FISH and CGH 76 gene copies. It encodes a testis-specific protein that is thought to have also indicated mosaicism with aberrant and normal cells. a role in sperm differentiation and proliferation. It has recently been sug- Furthermore, we analysed spermatozoa by FISH using BAC probes for regi- gested that TSPY1 copy numbers may influence spermatogenic efficiency. on 21q11.2 (inside the deleted region) and 21q22.3 (as control probe) and In this study, we compared the relative TSPY1 copy number between men centromeric probes for the X and Y chromosomes. The FISH results demon- with spermatogenic failure and fertile controls. The study group included 60 strated a normal signal pattern with one normal chromosome 21 and one azoospermic men, 66 men with oligozoospermia and 119 fertile controls of X or one normal Y chromosome in most spermatozoa (73%). On the other similar ethnic origin. Relative TSPY1 copy number was determined by quan- hand, 10% of the analysed spermatozoa showed only one normal chromo- titative PCR compared to a single copy HPRT1 gene. Y chromosome haplo- some 21 without any specific gonosomal signal. These spermatozoa would groups were determined by analysis of 28 single nucleotide polymorphisms lead to fertilised eggs with only one X chromosome. Other signal constellati- (SNPs) by multiplex SNaPshot. Infertile patients showed higher mean dCt ons were only found in few spermatozoa each. values in comparison with the fertile control men with a borderline stati- P04.58 stical significance (p= 0,0785). Oligozoospermic men showed statistically Screening for Microdeletions in the AZF Region of the Y Chromosome higher mean dCt value when compared with the fertile controls (p=0,0170). in Patients with Disorders of Sex Development due to 45,X/46,XY This difference was even higher when Macedonians with oligozoospermia Chromosome Abnormalities were compared with the Macedonian fertile controls (p=0,0098). The dCt M. Y. Nishi, P. T. L. Santos, E. M. F. Costa, B. B. Mendonca, S. Domenice; differed between different Y chromosome haplogroups (p=0,0027), but no Laboratorio de Hormonios e Genetica Molecular LIM42, Hospital das Clinicas da difference was observed between infertile and fertile men with the most Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil. common Y chromosome haplogroups. In conclusion, the initial results of the study investigating relative TSPY1 copy number in infertile men showed an association of TSPY1 gene copy number with oligozoospermia. Our results The etiology of the disorders of sex development (DSD) in patients with also showed that the TSPY1 gene copy number differs between different Y 45,X/46,XY karyotype is not yet completely understood. Deletions of AZF re- chromosome lineages. gion (OAbZFjeac, tAivZeFb and AZFc sub-regions), which might predispose to Y loss, P04.56 have been identified in Klinefelter syndrome (KS) and in 45,X/46,XY sub- Association between ubiquitin-specific protease 26 (USP26) gene jects. : to screen Yq microdeletions in Brazilian patients with DSD variations and male infertility in Iranian men. due to 45,X/46,XY chromosomal abnormalities. Twloecni ty-six 45,X/46,XY or H. Gourabi1, M. Totonchi1, U. Asadpoor1, S. Zari Moradi1, M. Sabbaghian2, M. Sadighi 45,X/46,X,idic(Y) subjects were seleUctTeYd: 16 with mixed gonadal dysgenesis Gilani2, K. Anissi Hemaseh1, H. Hosseinifar1, A. Mohseni Meybodi1; (MGD) anDdA Z11P wPPit1hR T1u2rBnPe1r syndromRee (sTuSlt)s. Eight Y were screened using 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute PCR: DYZ3 (centromere); DYS280, (AZFa); DYS216, DYS231, DYS224 for reproductive Biomedicine,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of (AZFb); , (AZFc). : Yq microdeletions were detec- Andrology, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute for reproductive Biomedicine,ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ted in 6 (22D%is)c puastsieionnts (3 MGD; 3 TS). Regarding MGD patients, the 3 dele- tions span at least 6, 4.5 and 3 Mb. In the 3 TS patients the deletion spans at least 3 Mb. : Yq deletions identified in these patients involved the AZFb and AZFc regions. The longest deletions of Yq were identified in 2 MGD TheU hSuPm26an X chromosome is enriched with testis-specific genes that may be patients with male phenotype. The AZFc region was deleted in all 6 patients. crucial for male fertility. Recently, mutations in ubiquitin specific protease Likely, the AZFc deletions are the most common identified in patients with 26( ) gene have been proposed to be associated with male infertility. This gene locates on Xq26.2. Some mutations and haplotypes on this gene have idiopathic infertility due to oligozoospermia or complete absence of germ cells as in KS. In 45,X/46,XY patients, there are a few reports identifying been proposed to be associated with male infertility. In this study, five diffe- deletions in AZFb/AZFc regions. Extensive studies are needed to establish rent mutations on USP26 were investigated: 1737G>A,1090C>T, 370-371ins the exactly association between Yq microdeletions and the various degrees ACA,494T>C and 1423C>T. The study included 120 infertile men with non- of gonadal dysgenesis in these patients and to confirm the role of this me- obstructive azoospermia and 60 fertile men. Besides family history of re- chanism for the formation of 45,X cell line. production, hormonal evaluation and semen analysis were performed. DNA was extracted from blood samples. PCR-SSCP, PCR-RFLP and PCR Product P05. Prenatal and perinatal genetics Cloning methods were used and resumed by sequencing to insuring about the mutations. Moreover, USP26 gene expression was studied by Real-Time PCR after RNA extraction followed by cDNA synthesis from testis biopsy P05.02 in obstructive and non obstructive azoospermia patients. Surprisingly the Changes in age of pregnant women who undergo amniocentesis mutation frequency was the same in both groups (6.67%). The results in- I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, M. Miklos, K. Crkvenac Gornik, L. Letica, R. Lasan, S. Huljev dicate that there is a haplotype between three observed mutations in Ira- Frkovic, D. Begovic; nian population include:370-371insACA, 1423C>T and 494T>C,as reported Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, before in some other populations.This haplotype was seen in the control Zagreb, Croatia. group as well. Serum testosterone concentrations and testicular volume did not differ in the mutation positive group compared with the non-mutation group. About the USP26 gene expression, there was no significant difference Karyotyping of fetal cells obtained by amniocentesis reveals the number among these two groups. These results indicate that these alterations might and structure of chromosomes. Amniocentesis is offered to all women of ad- not be involved in male infertility in Iranian population and their role in vanced maternal age, in Croatia 35 years of age and older. Serum screening infertility is still controversial. and ultrasonography are noninvasive techniques and can assist all women, www.eshg.org www.eshregg.aordrlgess of their age, in a decision concerning invasive testing. There has 144 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 been an increasing trend among women to delay childbearing, a characteri- approach and its implementation are discussed. stic in the most countries, including Croatia. The reason is associated with P05.05 the increasing number of women wanting to receive higher education and to Chromosome microarray analysis in routine prenatal diagnosis achieve financial independence. practice: a prospective study on 2800 clinical cases During the last two decades the average age of mothers at birth of their child F. Fiorentino1, F. Caiazzo1, S. Napoletano1, L. Spizzichino1, S. Bono1, S. Michiorri1, A. in Croatia increased by 3.3 years. Our results show that the average age of Nuccitelli1, A. Gordon2, G. Rizzo1, M. Sessa1, M. Baldi1; pregnant women who undergo amniocentesis follows the increasing trend 1“GENOMA”- Molecular Genetics Laboratory, ROME, Italy, 2Bluegnome Ltd, Cambridge, United Kingdom. of maternal age by four years, from 33 to 37 years of age. At the same time, the percentage of pregnant women with the single indication for the amnio- Objectives: centesis of advanced maternal age (AMA) is slightly decreased, while those with pathological ultrasound and/or biochemical screening increased. Alt- Although several studieshave demonstrated the usefulness hough the majority of pregnant women who performed amniocentesis were of chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) in clinical prenatal diagnosis aged 35 years or older, during the 15-year period, the proportion of women practice, only limited conclusions could be drawn due to the small size of under 35 increased from 17.5% to 23%. the cohorts analysed. To assess the feasibility of offering CMA for prenatal These results are evidence of an increased access to prenatal diagnosis of diagnosis as a first-line diagnostic test, a large-scale prospective study was younger women in Croatia at increased risk for fetal chromosomal aberra- pMeertfhoromdse:d on a cohort of 2800 consecutive prenatal samples, with parallel tion. Decision about accepting or declining the prenatal testing should be processing for both CMA and conventional cytogenetic analysis. made by pregnant women with their partners after genetic counseling. Women undergoing amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling (CVS) for standard karyotype were offered CMA. A total of 2800 prenatal P05.03 DNA diagnostics of human chromosomes numerical abnormalities sRaemsuplltess: were processed in parallel using both CMA and G-banding for stan- dard karyotyping. using fluorescent quantitative PCR analysis in Belarus Clinically significant copy number variations (CNVs) were identi- T. Asadchuk, K. Mosse; Scientific-Practical Center “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. fied in 94(3.4%) samples, 70(74.5%) of which were also detected by con- ventional karyotyping. In 24 cases (0.9%), CMA identified pathogenic CNVs that would have remained undiagnosed if only a conventional karyotype Numerical abnormalities of human chromosomes are the most frequent had been performed, 16 of which were concerning well-established syndro- cause of congenital human pathology. The frequency of chromosome 21 tri- mes. The selection of an array platform specifically developed for prenatal somy (Down syndrome) constitutes 1:780 in Belarus. applications, allowed us to detect a single occurrence of variation of unclear One of the most effective strategies for molecular diagnostics of aneuploi- sCiognncifliucasniocne.s C: MA was also able to detect chromosomal mosaicisms as lower dies and triploidies is based on quantitative PCR analysis. We selected and as 3.3% level. tested the most informative DNA-markers of chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X. The results of this study demonstrate that CMA improves the For sex determination and Klinefelter syndrome identification we tested the detection of fetal chromosome aberrations than conventional karyotyping, microsatellite markers of chromosome Y. without missing potential pathogenic chromosomal abnormalities, with no On the basis of current molecular genetic technologies there has been deve- appreciable increase in results of unclear clinical relevance. These findings loped a method of DNA diagnostics of the most frequent aneuploidies using provide substantial evidence for the feasibility of introducing CMA into rou- multiplex PCR and automated capillary electrophoresis based on the simul- tine prenatal diagnosis practice as a first-line diagnostic test. taneous testing of 15 microsatellite markers of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, P05.06 Y in a single analysis. The method was tested on samples with chromosomal ArrayCGH as diagnostic tool for genetic analysis of spontaneous pathologies established by karyotype. According to the results of testing abortions DNA samples from fetuses with Down, Edwards, Patau, Turner and Kline- A. Lott, H. Gabriel, M. Gencik; diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany. felter syndromes, changing of quantitative characteristics of the alleles of respective chromosomes was detected in all the samples, indicating a high informative capacity of the developed protocol. Then with this particular test we analyzed 70 DNA samples from fetuses having the risk of chromoso- Spontaneous abortions are common, with 10-15% of all clinically recogni- mal pathology. DNA was extracted from the amniotic fluid cells. Numerical zed pregnancies ending in early pregnancy loss. In 40-50% of these cases, abnormalities of human chromosomes were detected in 5 cases. fetal chromosomal abnormalities are responsible. Identification of these ab- DNA diagnostics of human chromosomes numerical abnormalities using normalities helps to estimate recurrence risks in future pregnancies. fluorescent quantitative PCR analysis has high throughput and low costs, For the last decades chromosome analysis has been the golden standard and DNA analysis results can be obtained in less than 6 hours. to detect genomic imbalances in spontaneous abortions. However, due to culture failure or maternal contamination often no fetal karyotype can be P05.04 obtained. Since DNA-based technologies do not require dividing cells , array Moving from chromosome analysis of cultured amniocytes: comparative genomic hybridization can overcome some of these limitati- implementation of SOGC guidelines for amniotic fluids in a Canadian ons. setting J. McGowan-Jordan1,2, E. McCready1,2, E. Sinclair-Bourque1; To evaluate the efficiency of arrayCGH as an alternative method for iden- 1CHEO, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada. tification of chromosome anomalies in abortion material, we present the results of a study on more than 50 cases referred to our laboratory for cy- togenetic analysis. So far, about 40 percent of our cases show genomic im- Chromosome analysis has been gold standard for prenatal detection of an- balances. We present two cases with an interesting correlation of clinical euploidies for decades. To supplement this procedure many diagnostic labs observation and genomic imbalance. have introduced QF-PCR as a rapid aneuploidy screen for chromosomes 13, P05.07 18, 21, X or Y. There is also an increasing use of microarray testing for more Array-CGH results in fetuses with central nervous system complex prenatal cases with ultrasound abnormalities. In Sept 2011, the So- S. Ergin1, B. Karaman1, B. Satkin1, I. H. Kalelioglu2, H. Kayserili1, A. Yuksel2, S. Basaran1; 1Medical Genetics Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, ciety of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists of Canada (SOGC) and the Canadi- Turkey, 2Obstetrics and Gynecology Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul an College of Medical Geneticists (CCMG) published a joint clinical practice University, Istanbul, Turkey. guideline that supports replacement of conventional karyotyping with QF- PCR whenever prenatal testing is performed solely because of an increased risk of aneuploidy for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X or Y. Implementing this The central nervous system (CNS) anomalies are seen in 1:1000 ratios in major change in analysis criteria at the same time as increased availability new born population. 5-50 % is identified to have chromosome anomalies of prenatal microarray brings its own set of challenges: it is highly desirable referred during antenatal ultrasonography (USG) due to any CNS abnorma- to maintain a DNA source for all pregnancies with normal QF-PCR results to lities. CNS malformations are related to specific chromosome anomalies, enable possible downstream molecular testing. Retention of a DNA source such as ventriculomegaly with trisomy 13, 18, 21, and microduplication of also facilitates testing should anomalies be detected later in the pregnan- 16p; holoprosencephaly with trisomy 13, 18, microdeletions of 7q, 2p, 13q, cy, necessitating microarray. We have developed an algorithm for prenatal 18p, 21q, and microduplication of 3p; hydrocephaly with trisomy 13, 18, 9, testing of pregnancies at risk for trisomy vs those at risk for other genetic microdeletion of 4p, microduplications of 1q, 3q, 5p, 9p and mosaicism of imbalances which allows for the maintenance of a DNA source without ex- trisomy 8; corpus callosum agenesis (CCA) with trisomy 8, 18, 13, microde- tensive culturing. Our approach reduces chromosome analysis of cultured letions of 2q, 6q, 15q, 13q, 1q, 3p, 3q, microduplicatios of 8p, 11q, and tri- amniocytes by 75% while maintaining clinically appropriate testwingw. Twhi.se shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 145 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ploidy; choroid plexus cyst (CPC) with trisomy 18, 21, and 13; Dandy Walker material (i.e. marker chromosomes) will be presented. In total, array-CGH malformation with trisomy 13, 18, microdeletions of 3q, 6q, 13q, 11q and detected clinically relevant chromosomal abnormalities in 13,5 % cases microduplication of 5p, 8p, 8q and triploidy. (9/67). Array-CGH technique specifically designed for molecular karyotyping, which From our four-year experience we can say, that array-CGH is an appropriate is the finest detection method of chromosomal abnormalities enable us to tool with high resolution to detect small changes in the genome and pro- detect the imbalances as low as 5 Mb. vides important diagnostic information for prenatal genetic counselling. It We aimed to investigate 35 fetuses, with various CNS anomalies, for pos- can be applied in cases where amniocytes failed to grow for conventional sible submicroscopic imbalances, with Array-CGH (CGX-720K, NimbleGen- karyotyping, in cases of clonal selection or for detection of sub-microscopic Roche), previously known to have normal karyotypes. Patient collective in- changes caused by inversion/translocation. cludes cases with ventriculomegaly (n:16), holoprosencephaly (n:6), hydro- P05.11 cephaly (n:5), CCA (n:3), CPC (n:3), Dandy-Walker malformation (n:2). Two Limitations of prenatal detection by FISH method - a case report with chromosomal imbalances were revealed in the collection. One was 11.57 Mb a complex chromosomal mosaic with 6 cell lines deletion in 7q35qter in a case with holoprosencephaly and the other was E. Gorduza1, V. Martiniuc2, M. Holicov2, A. Bivoleanu2, M. Volosciuc3, M. Gramescu1, 137.507 Kb deletion in 3p26.1p25 with CCA. C. Bujoran3, E. Braha1, C. Rusu1, L. Caba1, R. Popescu1, M. Macovei1, C. Avatajitei1, M. Final results will be presented. Onofriescu1, M. Stamatin1; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Maternity „Cuza-Voda“, Iasi, P05.09 Romania, 3“St. Mary“ Children Hospital, Iasi, Romania. Optimization and validation of RHD and KELL genotyping for non- invasive prenatal diagnostics J. Böhmova, R. Vodicka, M. Lubusky, R. Kratochvilova, R. Vrtel, M. Studnickova, M. In the period 2004-2011 in Prenatal Diagnosis Laboratory of „Cuza-Voda“ Kvapilova; University Hospital and Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. Maternity Iasi were made 1425 prenatal cytogenetic analysis by FISH me- thod, using Aneuvision probes for chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y. Unfor- Introduction: tunately, conventional chromosomal analysis based on amniocytes culture There are two reasons for establishing a methodology for could not be applied and thus the results were formulated only by FISH. We non-invasive determination of RHD and KELL genotypes in early pregnan- present a case showing one of the limitations of FISH technique in prenatal cy. diagnosis. Pregnant women, aged 26 years, were investigated in our labora- 1) To identify fetuses which are at risk of hemolytic disease of fetus and tory at 16 weeks of pregnancy because of a risk of 1/200 for trisomy 21 at newborn by alloimmunized pregnant women. triple test. Analysis on the UV emission microscope revealed two chromo- 2) To prevent alloimmunization during pregnancy. somal fluorescent signals for chromosomes 13, 18, 21 and X, and one signal There is no method validation on a representative number of samples in the for chromosome Y. Because the XXY trisomy is not a reason for therapeutic CAzimec:h Republic, which would allow to introduce methodology into clinical abortion, pregnancy continued and resulted in the birth of a male child with practice. Project is supported by IGA MZ CR: NT12225. 2750 g weighth and 47 cm length. Neonatal clinical examination showed Evaluate two different cell free fetal (cff) DNA separation procedures scaphocephaly, hypertelorism, epicantus, antevertate nostrils, prominent bMaasteedr ioanl aandsdo mrpetitohno dosn: the surface of silica gel and on the separation on upper lip, micrognathia, bilateral cryptorchidism and hypotonia. In order magnetic particles. Optimize and evaluate RHD and KELL genotyping. to elucidate the causes of facial dysmorphia was made a constitutional chro- We tested both isolation procedures in 76 cffDNA mosomal analysis, which revealed a mosaic with 6 cell lines and chromo- samples. somal formula: 48,XY,+mar,+mar[29]/47,XY,+mar[14]/48,XY,r(X),+mar[10] Together 200 control samples were used for genotype assessment. Optimi- /49,XY,r(X),+mar,+mar[3]/46,XY[3]/50,XY,r(X),r(X),+mar,+mar[3]. By FISH zRaetsiounlt sa:nd calibration of RHD and KELL genotyping was done using Real- technique with probes for centromere of chromosome X the X ring chro- Time PCR and by capillary electrophoresiss minisequencing . mosomes was confirmed, while the origin of marker chromosomes has not There were found significant differences in the yield of cell free been established. Our paper shows the failure of characterization of prena- fetal DNA between the tested cffDNA isolation methods. Silicagel membra- tal chromosomal mosaics by FISH technique and the need for other methods ne based method for isolation of cffDNA shorter molecules is more suitable to confirm the diagnostic. than the magnetic particle one. P05.12 To determine the sensitivity threshold there were performed RHD and KELL The use of chromosome microarray analysis as a first-line test in calibrations by Real time PCR and capillary electrophoresis with a dilution pregnancies with a priori low risk for detection of submicroscopic series RHD and KELL genotypes. Both methods are able to clearly recognize chromosomal abnormalities the fetal genotype. F. Fiorentino1, S. Napoletano1, F. Caiazzo1, M. Sessa1, S. Bono1, L. Spizzichino1, S. Michiorri1, A. Gordon2, A. Nuccitelli1, G. Rizzo1, M. Baldi1; The optimization was further examined to detect RHD and KELL genotypes 1“GENOMA”- Molecular Genetics Laboratory, ROME, Italy, 2Bluegnome Ltd, Cambridge, simultaneously and together with multiplex SNP assay as an internal cffDNA United Kingdom. control. Objectives: P05.10 a priori Clinical application of array-CGH in prenatal diagnosis: case reports In this study we aimed to explore the usefulness of chromoso- of pregnancies with abnormal ultrasound findings and apparently me microarray analysis (CMA) in groups of pregnancies with low normal karyotype risk for detection of submicroscopic chromosome abnormalities, usually not D. Grochova1, Z. Dobsakova1, I. Grochova1, D. Leznarova1, E. Popelinska1, P. Vlasin1,2; 1Cytogenetics laboratory Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Center of prenatal disgnosis, Brno, cMoentshidoedrse:d an indication for testing, in order the assess if CMA improves the prenatal detection rate of chromosomal aberrations. Czech Republic. A total of 2800 prenatal samples were processed. The indicati- ons included: advanced maternal age (AMA), abnormal results of maternal serum screening tests (MSS), abnormal ultrasound findings (AUS), known Conventional G-banding karyotyping is a standard method used in prenatal diagnosis to detect chromosomal abnormalities larger than 5 Mb. However, aRbensourlmts:a l fetal karyotype (AFK), parental anxiety (PA), family history of a genetic condition (FIS), cell culture failure (CCF). many genetic syndromes are often associated with sub-microscopic dele- the use of CMA resulted in an increased detection rate regardless tions or duplications. Array-CGH is a modern method, which allows detec- of the indication for analysis. This was evident in high-risk groups AUS-AFK tion of small variations in the genome. Its application is mainly in postnatal (7/114, 6.1%), and also in low-risk groups, such as AMA (7/1033, 0.7%) diagnosis, where it helps to clarify diagnosis, prevention and prognosis. In and PA (10/1569, 0.6%). A total of 24(0.9%) fetal conditions would have prenatal diagnosis it has limited use. This is mainly because a number of aberrations detected by array-CGH have not been described and their cli- oCtohnecrlwuissieo nbse:e n overlooked if only a standard karyotype had been perfor- med, 17(0.6%) of which if offering CMA to high-risk pregnancies only. nical significance is unknown. Due to this fact we use a BAC-based array The results of this study demonstrate that more widespread (BlueGnome), which is focused on areas in the genome having demonstrable testing by CMA in fetuses would result in a higher detection of chromosome connection with 110 microdeletion syndromes described in the OMIM da- abnormalities prenatally, also in low risk pregnancies. Our findings provide tabase. substantial evidence for the utility of using CMA as a first-line diagnostic We used array-CGH to detect sub-microscopic aberrations in carefully selec- test to all pregnant women undergoing invasive prenatal testing, regardless ted 67 prenatal cases, which were primarily indicated for conventional of risk factors. cytogenetics based on serious ultrasound findings. Case reports, in which array-CGH enabled detection of changes that conventional cytogenetics did not reveal and cases, where array-CGH clarified the origin of a genetic extra- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org146 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 No. No. Samples No. Samples w/ aCGH detection rate of samples. They varied from 8,9-14,2 Mb in size and mapped to various Indication Samples with chr. chr. abn. not det. % chromosomes with very little overlap. A thorough investigation was done to analysed Abn. by conv. abnormal Indic. differentiate pathogenic changes from statistically unusual though benign (%) (%) karyotyping results AUS 59 (2.1) 14 (23.7) 3 21.4 features of the genome. AUS + AMA 31 (1.1) 12 (38.7) 3 9.7 25.0 Overall, even in this relatively small number of cases, aCGH+SNP analysis AMA 1033 36 (3.5) 7 0.7 19.4 picked up aberrations of putative pathological relevance, which were missed (36.9) following standard diagnostic procedure. 1569 PA 25 (1.6) 10 0.6 40.0 P05.15 (56.0) AFK 24 (0.9) 4 (16.7) 1 4.2 25.0 Prenatal array CGH identifies genomic imbalances associated with MSS 27 (1.0) 3 (11.1) 0 0.0 0.0 congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) FIS 24 (0.9) 0 (0.0) 0 0 0 P. D. Brady, E. Mattheeuws, P. DeKoninck, J. P. Fryns, J. A. Deprest, K. Devriendt, J. R. CCF 33 (1.2) 0 (0.0) 0 0 0 Vermeesch; High-risk K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. pregnancies 114 (4.1) 30 (26.3) 7 6.1 23.3 (AUS+AFK) Low-risk pregnancies 2686 (AMA+PA+MSS (95.9) 64 (2.4) 17 0.6 26.6 Congenital Diaphragmatic Hernia (CDH) is caused by a defect in the for- +FIS+CFF) mation or closure of the diaphragm, with incidence of 1.7 - 5.7 per 10,000 Total 2800 94 (3.4) 24 0.9 25.5 live-births. Genetic factors have long been considered to play an important P05.13 role in the pathogenesis of both syndromic as well as isolated CDH. We have Optimization of isolation of cell-free fetal DNA from plasma of previously published our findings from a retrospective study using a targe- pregnant women ted custom design array. Here, we present our findings from both the retro- G. Repiska1, T. Sedlackova1, G. Minarik1,2; 1Comenius University in Bratislava, Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton spective and on-going prospective study into the use of a high-resolution Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. genome-wide oligonucleotide array for prenatal diagnosis. In this study we have now screened over 60 cases of CDH by array CGH and identify 6 ge- nomic imbalances responsible for the diaphragm defect. Interestingly, the Cell-free DNA released from fetal cells (cffDNA) represents important alter- array results highlight duplications of EFNB1 as a cause, and redefine the native source of material for non-invasive prenatal diagnostics. Because of minimal deleted CDH region at 15q26 to a single gene NR2F2. This study the low quantity and increased fragmentation of cffDNA in maternal plasma, provides more insight into the genetic etiology of CDH. the DNA extraction method is crucial step for further analyses of cffDNA. P05.16 The aim of this study was to directly compare the yield of extracted DNA Analysis of CYP21A2 gene in Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia patients after using three commercial kits widely used for isolation of nucleic acids. from Bashkortostan Republic of Russia For cffDNA extraction from plasma of pregnant women carrying male fetu- A. Rakhimkulova1, V. Akhmetova1, I. Gilyazova1, O. Malievsky2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre of RAS, Ufa, Russian ses three commercial kits and corresponding original protocols were used Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. (QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit, QIAamp DSP Virus Kit, QIAamp Circulating Nucleic Acid Kit). Extracted DNA was used for amplification by qPCR. Mar- ker - gene DYS14 located on the Y chromosome was used for comparison of Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) describes a group of autosomal re- circulating fetal DNA recovery. Gene for androgen receptor located on the X cessive disorders caused by complete or partial defects in one of several chromosome was used as a marker for detection of total circulating DNA. Ct steroidogenic enzymes. More than 95% of all CAH cases are caused by 21- values from qPCR were used for determining the relative quantity. Variabi- hydroxylase deficiency. lity between categories was estimated by Repeated measures ANOVA and We analyzed CYP21A2 gene in 101 unrelated CAH patients from Bashkorto- Tukey´s test. stan Republic. The large gene deletions or large gene conversions (delA2/ Statistically significant difference was proved after Ct values comparison LGC) were found in 28.5% of 202 unrelated CAH alleles. The most frequent (F=48.43, p<0.0001). The yield of isolated DNA was significantly higher point mutations were R356W (14.1%), I2splice (13.9%), I172N (6.2%) using Virus Kit than Blood Mini Kit (p<0.0001) and CNA Kit than Blood and Q318X (4%). Other mutations (V281L, P30L and P453S) met rarely Mini Kit (p<0.0001). Virus Kit and CNA Kit did not significantly differ in the with frequency from 2.7% to 0.5%. The clusters of mutations of CYP21A2 amount of isolated cffDNA. gene in one chromosome: Q318X+R356W (5%), I172N+Q318X (1%), According to our finding CNA Kit and Virus Kit are equally suitable for ex- delA2orLGC+V281L (1%), were found in 7 CAH patients. traction of fragmented circulating DNA derived from fetal cells, when yield Furthermore, we identified two additional mutations of CYP21A2 gene in of isolation is important. CAH patients. In one patient with salt wasting form (SW) of CAH we found P05.14 previously described missense mutation R426C in exon 10. The other al- Do uniparental isodisomies or microimbalances lead to early losses of lele carried the I2splice mutation. In another patient with SW we found pregnancy? previously unreported deletion of 3 nucleotides in exon 9 of CYP21A2 gene S. Bug1, B. Solfrank1, J. Pricelius1, C. Andrew2, M. Botcherby2, M. Stecher1, S. Bingemann1, B. Becker1, C. Nevinny-Stickel-Hinzpeter1; that led to the deletion of isoleucine in 384 amino acid sequence. The novel 1synlab Medizinisches Versorgungszentrum Humane Genetik, München, Germany, mutation delIle384 was identified in heterozygous state with delA2/LGC of 2BlueGnome Ltd., Cambridge, United Kingdom. CYP21A2 gene. In conclusion, previously described diagnostically significant CYP21A2 gene mutations were present in about 72.3% of unrelated CAH alleles. The new Aneuploidy is known to be a common cause of spontaneous abortion. We mutation corresponds to 0.5% of mutant alleles in our cohort of 101 pati- designed a combined platform utilizing array based comparative geno- ents. The discovery of the novel mutation increases our knowledge of CAH mic hybridization (aCGH) and single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) to caused by 21-hydroxylase deficiency. further elucidate genetic causes underlying pregnancy losses displaying P05.17 46,XX- or 46,XY-karyotypes. Simultaneous determination of imbalances at A cytogenetic study from chorionic villus of 110 spontaneous high resolution and genome-wide heterozygosity state was performed on a abortions targeted CGH+SNP 8x60K microarray (BlueGnome, Cambridge, UK). Results C. Gug1,2, R. Mihaescu1, V. Dumitrascu1, C. Muresan1, B. Muresan3, D. Stoian1, M. Militaru4, were juxtaposed to those of a second panel displaying aneuploidies. Copy A. Trifa4, O. Marginean1; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2Genetics number imbalance and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) findings were compa- Laboratory Dr. Cristina Gug, Timisoara, Romania, 3Dept. Fetal Medicine, Privat red to cases reported in the literature to determine their clinical relevance. Hospital “President”, Timisoara, Romania, 4University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Iuliu There was no difference in the type or frequency of microimbalances bet- Haţieganu”, Cluj-Napoca, Romania. ween the group of samples with aneuploidies and the group of samples with normal karyotypes. Most small imbalances could be identified as copy number variations, only few unknown variants remained and were equally A total of 110 cases of first trimester spontaneous abortions were analyzed distributed to cases with and without aneuploidy. No aberration associated cytogeneti-cally. A long term culture was used for the chorionic villi. The with any common microdeletion or microduplication syndrome was detec- maternal age ranged from 21-42 years and the gestational age from 6-12 ted in cases with normal karyotype. A complete hydatidiform mole was iden- weeks. In 7 cases, it was not possible to perform the karyotype (in vitro tified showing genome wide uniparental isodisomy. Segmental stretches of culture failed). Abnormal karyotypes were found in 52 cases (47,3%). The copy number neutral LOH occured at comparable frequency in both groups www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 147 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P05.20 Investigation of MTHFR and MTHFD polymorphisms as maternal risk sex ratio (male/female) in chromosomally abnormal abortions was 0,42 factors for Down syndrome and in normal abortions, it was 0,20 which is different from 1,2 found in L. C. Bohiltea, R. Cretu, D. Neagos; earlier studies. The most frequent chromosome abnormalities found were Genetic Department, UMF Carol Davila, Bucharest, Romania. trisomies (61,5%), followed by polyploidy (17,3%), structural anomalies (9,61%) abnormality of gonosomal chromosome (9,61%), double trisomy (1,9%) and monosomy (1,9%). Among the trisomies, the prevalent ones Members of the family of B9 vitamins are commonly known as folates. A were of chromosome 21 (8 cases), followed by chromosome 16 (4 cases), number of studies have associated polymorphisms found in genes involved chromosome 14,19,20 (3 cases each), the chromosome 1,8,13,10,15,17 (6 iMnT foHlFaRte MmTeRta, bRoFlCis1m to aMnT eHleFvDa ted maternal risk for Down syndrome (DS). cases). In one case, there was a double trisomy (48,XY,+13,+15). Although Central role in this process is played by polyploidy is a rare abnormality we detected tetrapoidy in 5 cases, all with , and genes. In this study, we evaluated the role of 92,XXYY and triploidy in 5 cases, with 69,XXX (2 cases) and 69,XXY(2 ca- three common polymorphisms in folate ses). The abnormality of the gonosomal chromosomes were found in 3 ca- metabolizing genes as possible risk factors for having a child with DS. The ses of X monosomy, followed by 2 cases of XXY. Structural anomalies were prevalence of these variant genotypes in mothers of DMS TcHhiFldRren (case mo- represented by Marker chromosomes (2 cases), unbalanced translocations thers) (n=26) was compared with controls (n=46). InvestigMatTeHd FpDolymor- (2 cases) and Robertsonian translocations trob(13;14) with trisomy 13 (1 phisms include methylenetetrahydrofolate reduct aMseT (HFD ) 677C>TM aTnHd- case). Cytogenetic investigations of spontaneous abortions provide valid in- 1FR298A>C and mMetThHylFeRnetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase ( ) 1958 formation as to the cause of abortion. This information may be helpful for G>A. Present results indicate that none of the, 1958G>AM, THFR genetic counseling and could contribute to prenatal diagnosis in subsequent 677C>MTT, HanFdD 12M9T8HAF>RC polymorphisms iMs TaHnF iDndependenMt rTiHsk- pregnancies. FfaRctor for a DS offspring at a MyTouHnFgR maternal MaTgeH. FTDhe combined MTHFR P05.18 1298CC/MTHFD 1958GG, 1298(AC or CC)/ MT 1H9F5R8GG, Prenatal expression of dehydrated hereditary stomatocytosis MT 1H2F9D8AA/MTHFD 1958GA, 1298CC/ 1958GA and G. Morin1,2, S. Blesson3, V. Picard4, B. Demeer1,2, A. Suc5, S. Lanta2, J. Potin6, P. Naepels2, H. 1298CC/ 1958AA genotypes compared with the 1298AA/ Sevestre7, J. Gondry2, A. Toutain3, M. Mathieu1,2; 1958GG genotype was associated with increased DS risk (with rela- 1Clinical Genetic Unit, Amiens, France, 2Prenatal Diagnosis Unit, Amiens, France, ted P values: 0.019, 0.038, 0.046, 0.05 and respectively 0.019). These results 3Clinical Genetic, Tours, France, 4Laboratory of hematology, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, show that maternal polymorphisms of folate metabolism could be implied 5Neonatology, Tours, France, 6Fetal Medecine Unit, Tours, France, 7Pathology, Amiens, in pathogenesis of Down syndrome. France. P05.21 Prenataldiagnosis of a de novo euchromatic variant 16p11.2 V. Lima1, C. Reis1,2, V. Maloney3, A. Neto1, M. Cunha4, P. Maciel5,6, F. Carvalho1, A. Barros1, J. Dehydrated hereditary stomatocytosis belongs to the group of autosomal Oliveira1, S. Dória1; dominant haemolytic anemias. No causative gene is known but a linkage 1Dept. of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, was found with the 16q23-q24 chromosomal region. In addition to chronic 22Department of Medical Genetics, Centro Hospitalar de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, haemolysis, dehydrated stomatocytosis can be responsible of pseudohyper- 3Wessex Regional Genetic Laboratory, Salisbury NHS Foundation Trust, Salisbury, United kalemia, hyperferrinemia and perinatal edema. Kingdom, 44Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Centro Hospitalar de São João, From 1996, 5 families have been reported with prenatal / perinatal ascitis Porto, Portugal, 55Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health or hydrops. The reason of these effusions is not elucidated but the anemia is Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal, 66ICVS/3B‘s - PT Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. probably not the unique mechanism. We present 2 novel families with prenatal ascitis. In the first family, due to the severity of the ascitis, a pregnancy was medically stopped at 28 weeks of amenorrhea. The disease was inherited from the father, presenting with Introduction: Chromosome euchromatic variants most commonly result moderate haemolytic anemia, splenomegaly, hyperkaliemia and hyperfer- from copy number variation (CNV) of gene and pseudogene containing poly- ritinemia. In the second family, the prenatal and neonatal ascitis of the 2 morphic genomic segments that became visible at the cytogenetic level. In- affected children was spontaneously regressive. The affection was inherited trachromosomal rearrangements of the proximal short arm of chromosome from the asymptomatic mother who only presented macrocythemia and hy- 16, leading to 16p+ morphology can raise interpretation problems because perferritinemia. both euchromatic variants (16p11.2v) and unbalandcee dn odvuoplications have In case of unexplained prenatal / perinatal ascitis, the diagnosis of dehy- bee n described in this region.Case report: An amniocentesis performed at drated hereditary stomatocytosis must be considered and the parents in- 16weeks gestation, due to maternal age, revealed a 16p+ chromo- vestigated. some by GTL banding. C banding and N/DAPI staining were negative. WCP labeled all 16p+ chromosome. MLPA analysis with eleven probes for 16p11 P05.19 (kit P343) was normal, while, array CGH pointed to a 1.9 MB duplication in Double trisomy in pregnancy 16p11.2. Fetal ultrasound did not show any morphological defects. Postnatal M. Miklos, I. Tonkovic Djurisevic, K. Crkvenac Gornik, L. Letica, R. Lasan, S. Huljev Frkovic, D. Begovic; FISH study with a panel of RP11 BACs confirmed the presence of a duplica- Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, tion involving the CNVs regions of proximal d1e6 npo1v1o.2 (euchromatic variant) Zagreb, Croatia. and no evidence of a duplication in the autism or development delay regi- on 16p11.2. Discussion: The occurrence of structural euchromatic chromosome abnormalities presents a genetic counseling dilemma, parti- Double trisomy is extremely rare in liveborns, but it is a relatively common cularly when ascertained in the prenatal setting, as the prognosis can be event in pregnancies ending in early abortions and usually involves at least more reliably discussed when the chromosome abnormality is transmitted one nonviable trisomy. Prevalence of double trisomy is higher within first by a phenotypically unaffected parent. Fetal ultrasound, postnatal clinical trimester spontaneous abortions (~2%) than within the second trimester reports, molecular cytogenetic analyses may all contribute with critical data pregnancy (~0.01%). Double trisomy is associated with advanced maternal to the genetic counseling. Professionals involved in prenatal diagnosis and age and mean gestational age has been described to be significantly lower genetic counseling should be aware of the euchromatic variant 16p11.2v in for double trisomy cases than that reported for single trisomy ones. order to establish the differential diagnosis and provide parents with proper Our results of only two double trisomy cases from samples of amniocentesis, information. using routine cytogenetic analysis of cultured amniotic fluid cells with GTG- P05.22 banding confirm the fact that double trisomy in second trimester of pregnan- Indications for Fetal Karyotyping and Ultrasonographic Findings in cy, also in liveborns, usually involves the sex chromosomes in combination Common Trisomies; Alterations in over 2 Decades with potentially viable autosomal trisomies such as 21, 18 and 13. Both of S. Basaran1, B. Karaman1, M. Kirgiz2, G. Toksoy1, I. H. Kalelioglu3, R. Has3, K. Aydinli3, H. them were in mosaic form (48,XXX,+21/46,XX and 48,XXY,+21/47,XY,+21). Ermis3, H. Kayserili1, T. Dehgan2, B. Satkin1, A. Yuksel3; Double trisomies within first trimester of spontaneous abortions, in regular 1Medical Genetics Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty,Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 2PREMED Center for Genetic Diagnosis, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Obstetrics and and mosaic form, were present in 1.86% of cases. These cases were lethal in Gynecology Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty,Istanbul University, Istanbul, first trimester of pregnancy due to the presence of nonviable autosomes in Turkey. double trisomies or combination of autosomal and gonosomal trisomies. Our cases emphasize the importance of genetic counseling to assess the re- current risk of double trisomy. Advanced Maternal Age (AMA) was the first screening parameter of triso- mies at the beginning of prenatal diagnosis era. The developing of the new screening techniques using biochemical parameters in maternal serum (MS) www.eshg.org www.eshg.org148 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 and ultrasonographic (USG) markers allowed us to get higher detection ra- criteria (NT, FA, NB, TR, DV) were analyzed in 538 cases. Based on the re- tes for common trisomies in all pregnancies. sults of the screening we performed 31 invasive procedures: 28 CVS and 3 We retrospectively evaluated the results of 25808 prenatal cases obtained amniocentesis (the amniocentesis cases refused CVS). in 2 periods (from 1989 to 1999 and 2000 to 2011), under the aspect of the Results presence of AMA, MS- biochemical screening and USG findings prior to the Our results are the detection of a number of 7 chromosomal abnormalities cytogenetic diagnosis. This series covered 23427 amniotic fluid and 2381 :T21 - 4, T18 - 1, T13 - 1 and 1 case of triploidy. At a cut-off level at 1: 150 chorionic villi samples in which 462 trisomy 21, 127 trisomy 18 and 51 tri- we obtained a FPR of 3.5% and if we set the cut-off level at 1: 100 - the FPR somy 13 cases were diagnosed. is 2.38%. All the cases with chromosomal abnormalities belong to the group We determined to reveal the alterations of the indications of the fetal ka- of risk > 1: 100. ryotyping over time, and further more to identify the most frequent USG ConclusionThe setting of the cut-off level at 1: 100 and at 1: 150 doesn’t findings detected in trisomies. modifies the rate of detection of chromosomal abnormalities, only the FPR AMA, which was the most common parameter in the 1st period, decreased, increases from 2.38% to 3.5% while MS- biochemical and USG screening tests became more effective over P05.28 time. Investigation of HbQ-Iran in couples referred to Pasteur Institute of The most common observed USG findings was nuchal translucency in all Iran trisomies. Cystic hygroma, ascites in trisomy 21 and 18; cardiac anomalies S. Ahmadi, M. Taghavi basmanj, F. Bayat, A. Valaei, N. Sabokbar, M. Mortezazadeh, in trisomy 18 and 13; urogenital anomalies in trisomy 13; omphalocele in Z. Kainimoghadam, A. Amirian, A. Kordafshari, A. Sanjari, M. Choobini, F. Navab trisomy 18 were more frequently identified USG findings. moghadam, M. Karimipour, S. Zeinali; Pasteur Institue of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Widely usage and increased experience in screening tests led to detect more cases with common aneuploidies with reduced number of prenatal invasive Introduction : procedures in high risk pregnancies. Further more, younger women gained a chance for prenatal diagnosis for chromosome anomalies. Alpha thalassemia is the most common inherited disorder of hemoglobin P05.23 synthesis in the world . Single nucleotide mutation in α1 or α2 genes pro- Non- invasive fetal sex determination using a converntional nested duce abnormal α-chain hemoglobin . Hb Q disorders are regard as rare Hb PCR analysis of fetal DNA inmaternal plasma M. Hashmi1, A. Nazemi2, M. Entezari3; vMaartiaenrtias l.s S &ev Mereatlh Hobd sQ : have been reported sofar including Hb Q-iran , Hb 1Scientific Society of Cellular and Molecular, Centeral Commission of Scientific, Literary Q-thailand , Hb Q-india . and Artistic .Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tonekabon branch, Islamic Azad University, Tonekabon, Islamic In this study one couple refered from primary health care (PHC) centers to Republic of Iran, 3Tehran medical branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Pasteur institute of iran with MCV>80 , MCH>28 , HbA2=2 and Hb variant=14 Republic of Iran. .R Geesnuoltm :ic DNA was extracted by salting out method. DNA sequencing using Big Dye from ABI was used . Prenatal diagnosis is usually performed by collecting fetal samples through A total of 1000 individuals with microcytic hypocromic anemia were amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling. However, these invasive proce- screened for the most common type of α-thalassemia . We investigated dures are associated with some degree of risk to the fetus and/or mother. molecular basis of Hb variant in the couple using multiplex gap PCR , MLPA Therefore, in recent years, considerable effort has been made to develop &Ddisicreucsts DioNnA: sequencing . No deletion was found . DNA sequencing revealed non-invasive prenatal diagnostic procedures. One potential non-invasive ap- codon 75 G>C , Asp>His in α2 gene mutation in both couple . proach involves analysis of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma or serum. The objective of our study was to investigate the feasibility of using fetal Heterozygous individuals for Hb Q -Thailand generally present with mode- DNA in maternal plasma for prenatal diagnosis. rate red cell microcytosis due to the association of the mutation with deleti- For this experimental study, to develop a nested PCR technique for fetal SRY on -α4.2 Kb , but those carrying Hb Q-Iran or Hb Q-India are hematologically gene identification using cell-free fetal DNA in maternal plasma. Peripheral normal and no association with α-thalassemic phenotype has been repor- blood samples were obtained from 32 pregnant women at the gestational ted . Since Hb Q-Iran is usually associated with normal CBC , it may not be period from 8 to 13 weeks and cell-free DNA was extracted by the phenol/ detected through routine National Screening Program , therefore it’s true chloroform method from plasma. The nested PCR was carried out to amplify ferequency can not easily be determined. the fragment of SRY gene by two sets of PCR primer pairs. Analysis was then P05.29 performed on the PCR product. Chromosomal Imbalances in Holoprosencephaly Sequence; Results of Specifically, the presence of Y-chromosome sequences in maternal blood 87 Cases Diagnosed Prenatally plasma indicates that the fetus is male, whereas lack of a signal will indicate B. Karaman1, B. Satkin1, I. H. Kalelioglu2, R. Has2, S. Ergin1, H. Kayserili1, H. Ermis2, A. that the fetus is female. Yuksel2, S. Basaran1; Among the 32 pregnant women bearing male fetuses, SRY sequences were 1Medical Genetics Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, detected in 16 plasma samples after nested PCR amplification, while the 18 Turkey, 2Obstetrics and Gynecology Department of Istanbul Medical Faculty,Istanbul women bearing female fetuses had the positive results. The sensitivity were University, Istanbul, Turkey. 87.5% (28/32). The nested PCR amplification of SRY sequence is a conveni- ent and low-cost approach for the noninvasive early prenatal diagnosis of sex-linked inheritant. Holoprosencephaly sequence (HPE, # MIM 2361000), is the most common P05.24 developmental defect of midline cleavage in human embryonic forebrain, Qualitative analysis of the results from the first trimester screening with a variable phenotypic expression. Several mechanisms play a role in the B. M. Muresan1, C. M. Muresan2, C. Gug2; etiopathogenesis; genetic, environmental, multi-factorial, and unknown. 1Fetal Medicine Centre, President Clinic, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine The rate of chromosome abnormalities is ~ 40 % in patients with HPE. The and Pharmacy Victor Babes, Timisoara, Romania. most common chromosomal abnormality involved is trisomy 13, followed by trisomy 18, triploidy and deletion 7q36.3. In approximately) 18%-25% of cases monogenic syndromes are diagnosed. To date, 12 genes are known Introduction to be associated with HPE. Human Sonic Hedgehog gene (SHH located on The first trimester screening is based on the following criteria - maternal chromosome 7q36 is the best known gene related. age; double test (PAPP-A; free ß-HCG), FHR, nuchal translucency, facial ang- This study comprises the results of cytogenetic, molecular cytogenetic and le, tricuspid flow, ductus venosus flow, nasal bone. molecular karyotyping studies obtained in tissue samples (51 fetal blood,19 Objectives chorionic villus and 17 amniotic fluid) of 87 fetuses diagnosed ultrasonogra- The aim is to estimate a qualitative analysis of the first trimester screening phically as having HPE. based on the rate of detection and on the false positive rate - FPR. Karyotype analysis was performed in all cases. Molecular cytogenetic tech- Material and method nique using subtelomeric probe7q36.3 was applied in 12 cases. Six cases During the aug.2010-dec.2011 we performed the first trimester screening with normal karyotype were investigated by oligonuclotide Array-CGH (Ro- at 671 patients; 37 patients had multiple pregnancies. The ultrasound scree- che-NimbleGen). ning was performed on GEVoluson730Expert, at a fetal CRL of 44-85 mm. Chromosomal abnormalities were detected in 51.7 % of cases (45/87). The The PAPP-A; free ß-HCG was carried out on BRAHMS or Delphia.The cal- predominant chromosomal abnormality was trisomy 13 (n:24), which was culation of risk was evaluated with the FMFsoftware and all the ultrasound followed by trisomy 18 (n:5), and triploidy (n:5). Terminal 7q deletion being www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 149 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 de novo the most frequent structural anomaly observed (n:9), was in 6 cases tromeric regions. and unbalanced product of maternal translocations in 3. Furthermore, dele- We report on a fetus with up to 5 markers of different origin in one cell. tion of 18p and paternally inherited balanced inversion of chromosome 11 Amniocentesis was undertaken for the reason of advanced maternal age. was observed in single cases. Chromosome analysis revealed the occurrence of one to six sSMCs (mean The clinical and laboratory findings will be discussed in view of the litera- 2.6 per cell) in both independent cultures. Molecular karyotyping using an ture. SNP-Array (Affymetrix) revealed amplification of 6.7 Mb from 4p12-q12 P05.30 (arr 4p12q12(46.567.172-53.241.307)x3). FISH using a centromeric probe Prenatal screening for aneuploidies in Iranian families using QF-PCR confirmed the homology to chromosome 4 of one of the sSMCs. The largest P. Rostami, S. Valizadegan, R. Najafi, M. Mahdizadeh, M. Ghalandari, H. Imanian, marker amongst the other sSMCs, probably a ring chromosome, originates S. Almadani, F. Afroozan, S. Keyvani, R. Heydari, A. Kariminejad, R. Kariminejad, H. from chromosome 9 and includes mainly the heterochromatic band of the Najmabadi; long arm: min(9)(:p12→q12:). The remaining markers are very small and Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. contain centromeric material from chromosomes 6, 14 and 22 only. Due to the fact that phenotypic abnormalities have been described in patients with duplications of the 4p12 region, the couple decided to terminate the preg- Quantitative fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) has been in- nancy. The aborted fetus could not be investigated. Chromosome analyses of troduced in a number of genetic laboratories as an inexpensive, rapid and the parents´ lymphocytes were inconspicuous. reliable method for prenatal recognition of aneuploidy in chromosomes 13, The maternal origin of markers from the amplified 4p segment and the diffe- 18, 21, X and Y. The aim of this study was to investigate the efficacy of QF- rent centromeric origin of the sSMCs, point to the possibility that the degra- PCR for the prenatal recognition of common aneuploidies and compared our ding second polar body had been incorporated into the zygote. We compare findings with cytogenetic results in Iran. the present case with previously published cases. A multiplex-PCR involving 15 short tandem repeat (STR) sequences was Supported by Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2011_A42). established for aneuploidy screening and chromosomal study was perfor- P05.33 med for all samples and the results werecompared. Array-CGH identification of de novo mosaic supernumerary marker Total of 654 prenatal samples were analyzed including 616 amniotic fluid chromosome 19 in prenatal diagnosis and 38 chorionic villous samples (CVS). The following abnormalities were A. Zagorac, K. Ogrizek Pelkic, N. Kokalj Vokac; detected in 21 (3.2%) individuals: 11 (1.7%) with Down syndrome, 4 samp- University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. les (0.6%) with Edward syndrome, 2(0.3%) samples with Patau syndrome, 1 (0.15%)sample with Turner syndrome, and 1 (0.15%) 47,XYY. All of the CVS samples were normal. In addition, 2 cases (0.3%)showed triploidies. All Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are relatively rare in the aneuploidies detected by QF-PCR, were confirmed by cytogenetics results. general population, found in approximately in 0,1-1/1000 live births. They Elevensamples (1.7%) shown maternal cell contamination in whichthree of are defined as additional structurally abnormal chromosomes which cannot their results were failed. Additional chromosomal aberrations; inversion 9, be identified with conventional cytogenetic techniques. The frequency of su- t(9;14) and XX/XY mosaicism, were detected in 3 cases by karyotyping. In pernumerary markers found in prenatal diagnosis is about 0,076%. The cli- conclusion,usingQF-PCR with cytogenetic study simultaneously for all pre- nical significance of sSMC varies widely, and the phenotype associated with natal cases provide a rapid andreliable method in families at risk for aneu- presence of a de novo sSMC may differ from normal to severely abnormal. ploidies. We also recommend all families that are seeking prenatal diagnosis We describe a finding of a „de novo“ mosaic supernumerary marker chro- of single gene disorders a QF-PCR to be added to their work up. mosome 19 , its genomic characterisation and its possible impact on the P05.31 phenotype. Prenatal diagnosis of a complex de novo translocation without Amniocentesis was performed on a 33 year old primigravida because of an ultrasound abnormalities increased risk finding at maternal serum and nuchal translucency scree- R. Wimmer1, R. Chaoui2, F. Wagner3, K. R. Heidtke3, D. Liebe1, G. Thiel1; ning. 1Praxis für Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Praxis für Pränataldiagnostik, Berlin, The cytogenetic analysis detected a supernumerary marker chromosome: Germany, 3ATLAS Biolabs GmbH, Berlin, Germany. 47,XY,+mar(56)/46,XY(47), in three independent cultures, confirmed using FISH as chromosome 19. To define the exact duplicated region array-CGH was performed. The aCGH finding indicated three copies of 19q12q13.11, Apparently balanced de novo aberrations without any abnormalities in the 5,05 Mb in range. The final cytogenetic result was: 47,XY,mar.ish der(19) ultrasound at prenatal diagnosis are a challenging setting for genetic coun- (wcp19+).arr 19q12q13.11(32545077-37601048)x3 dn. selling, especially if multiple breaks have occurred. According to involved genes in the duplicated region on 19q carrier could Here, we report on an amniocentesis performed because of advanced mater- have a phenotipic consequences, especially developmental delay. Although nal age that revealed a complex de novo translocation involving chromoso- the ultrasound scan was normal, the parents decided to terminate the preg- me 2, 7 and 18, and showing multiple breakpoints on each of the implicated nancy. chromosomes. The risk for mental retardation in balanced de novo aberra- In order to offer appropriate genetic counselling an accurate identification tions increases by the number of chromosomal breaks. As we could find at of marker chromosomes „de novo“ found in prenatal diagnosis is fundamen- least eight breaks by chromosomal analysis, a high risk for mental retarda- tal. We emphasize the importance of array-CGH in prenatally detected „de tion was assumed even without ultrasound findings. A prenatal microarray novo“ sSMC and determination of genotype-phenotype correlation for bet- analysis was recommended. Four major abnormalities were found, on chro- ter risk evaluation. mosome 2 two deletions (328kb in 2q22.1 and 2415kb in 2q22.1-q22.3) and P05.34 one duplication (777kb in 2q14.3), a further deletion in 18q12.2 (1935kb), Whole genome microarray in clinical practice: Investigation of 2,024 as well as additional minor changes on chromosome 7. The genetic content miscarriage, stillbirth and fetal malformation referrals of the rather large aberrations on chromosome 2 was not helpful with re- M. D. Pertile, R. Oertel, L. Hills, A. Boys, F. Norris, I. Burns, D. L. Bruno, H. R. Slater; gard to the postnatal prognosis. Nevertheless, the deletion in 18q12.2 in- Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia. cluding the gene KIAA1328 was found to be described in association with mental retardation and only mild dysmorphic features. Finally, the parents decided to terminate the pregnancy. We have used whole genome microarray as a replacement for conventional P05.32 chromosome analysis to investigate genomic abnormalities in approximate- Prenatal diagnosis of multiple small supernumerary marker ly 2,000 miscarriage, stillbirth and fetal malformation referrals. NimbleGen chromosomes (sSMCs) of different centromeric origin 135K CGH array was employed in the early phase of the program (1,248 M. Volleth1, T. Liehr2, D. Schanze1, M. Zenker1, P. Muschke1, I. Schanze1; referrals) prior to using Illumina Cyto-SNP12 array (776 referrals). Greater 1Dept. of Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich than 98% of samples yielded informative results, a substantial improvement Schiller University, Jena, Germany. over conventional chromosome analysis which typically has a success rate of 60-95% depending on referral type. Male to female sex ratio was 1.2 in keeping with strict tissue selection protocols. Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMCs) are structurally ab- Whole chromosome aneuploidy predominated, accounting for 578 abnor- normal chromosomes that cannot be identified or characterized unambi- mal results. However, 82 (4.1%) CNVs of unknown, uncertain or pathogenic guously by conventional banding techniques alone (Liehr et al. 2004). Fluo- significance were also identified. Clearly pathogenic genomic disorders were rescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) with centromeric and subcentromeric significantly enriched in this series. These included 7q11.23 (Williams) dele- probes enables the rapid identification of sSMCs originating from pericen- www.eshg.org www.eshtigon. o(2r cgases), 7q11.23 duplication (1 case), 5q35.2q35.3 (Sotos) deletion (1 150 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P05.37 Possibility of MLPA prenatal detection of the most clinically important case), 15q11.2q13 (Angelman) deletion (1 case) and 22q11.21 (Di George) chromosomal abnormalities deletion (2 cases), accounting for approximately 1 in 285 (0.35%) referrals. L. Dvořáková, J. Paděrová, D. Chudoba, D. Novotná, H. Kuželová, P. Křenková, J. Drábová, We found little evidence for submicroscopic, unbalanced rearrangements Z. Zmítková, M. Macek jr., M. Macek sr.; being transmitted by balanced carrier parents. Such rearrangements do not Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic. contribute significantly to the burden of miscarriage or stillbirth. Large (>6 Mb) genomic imbalances were identified in 31 cases. Uniparental disomy (UPD) was rare. One case of paternal isodisomy 14 was identified in 762 The aim of this study is the verification of the possibility to extend of the dia- informative results obtained by SNP array. Chimerism was identified in 4 gnostic spectrum of MLPA by simultaneous implementation of aneuploidy, pregnancies; complete mole in 12 cases. Our data demonstrate that whole centromeric and subtelomeric kits to detect aneuploidies of all chromoso- genome microarray is a powerful tool for investigating genomic abnormali- mes. ties that contribute to miscarriage, stillbirth and fetal abnormality. The 65 samples of fetal cell cultures derived for prenatal diagnosis with nor- P05.35 mal karyotypes (20) and different chromosomal abnormalities (45) were Prenatal diagnosis of microdeletion 17q12 in a fetus with cystic reexamined by MLPA MRC Holland kits. The combination of kits for the ex- kidney disease amination of aneuploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X and Y (PO95-A2), V. Schneider, K. Hoertnagel, C. Daumer-Haas, K. Gloning, S. Minderer, T. Schramm; centromeres (P181-A2/182-B1) and subtelomeres (P036-E1 and P070-B2) Praenatal-Medizin Muenchen, Munich, Germany. was used. MLPA results were identical with karyotypes in all euploid samples as in cultures with trisomies 2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, double trisomy Genomic rearrangements such as deletions, duplications and insertions re- 15 and 18, syndromes XXX, XYY and XXY, except triploidy 69,XXX. Abnor- sult in copy number variation (CNV) that may cause phenotypes by affecting mal clone in mosaics was disclosed in 3/4 cases except 45,X/46,XX. All four dosage-sensitive genes, disrupting genes, creating fusion genes, and other balanced Robertsonian and reciprocal as well as unbalanced Robertsonian mechanisms. Until now, numerous microdeletion and microduplication syn- (13;14, 14;15, 14;21) and 4 reciprocal translocations (3;4, 3;6, 4;21, 9;15) dromes with characteristic phenotypes have been described. were confirmed. The origin of 4 extra marker chromosomes derived from We report a case of a 32-year-old pregnant woman. Sonographic examina- chromosomes X, Y, 15 and 21 was revealed. The 5 cases with the deletions of tion in the 22nd week of gestation showed bilateral cystic kidney disease chromosomes Y, 9p and 18p and 1 case of duplication 3p were disclosed. and oligohydramnios. Amniotic fluid sampling was performed for molecular Only ins(3;4)(p21;q26) and Y chromosome inversion were missed, because genetic testing and karyotyping. The cytogenetic karyotype was normal (46, the breaks were not in the detectable regions of used kits. XY). HNF1B analysis by sequencing showed no mutation but MLPA revealed This pilot study suggests that the MLPA kits combination might allow rapid, a heterozygous deletion of the complete gene. For precise characteriza- reliable prenatal detection of clinically significant abnormalities of all chro- tion of the extent of the deletion Array CGH analysis was done showing a mosomes, except 69,XXX and inversions/insertions. deletion of at least 1,3 Mb corresponding to the cytogenetic region 17q12 Supported by MZ0FNM2005 and CZ.2.16/3.1.00/24022. (arr17q12(34437534x2, 34817422-36168104x1, 36473175x2). This P05.38 contiguous gene deletion syndrome comprises 11 OMIM genes, including Discrepancies between QF-PCR and karyotype results in a rare HNF1B. prenatal case of mosaic trisomy 18 and supernumerary marker Involvement of the HNF1B gene causes cystic renal disease and maturity on- chromosome 18 set diabetes of the young (Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome, RCAD, OMIM A. Pavel1, L. Dimos1, F. Nedelea1,2, I. Gussi3,4, R. Simion1, D. Stambouli1; 137920). According to data of the literature and DECIPHER database, pati- 1Cytogenomic Medical Laboratory, Bucharest, Romania, 2Filantropia Hospital, ents with microdeletion 17q12 may exhibit cognitive impairment, speech Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 4Cantacuzino Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. delay, seizures, autism and psychiatric disorders, possibly due to haploin- sufficiency of the LHX1 gene. Dysmorphic features are reported to be only mild. Chromosomal aneuploidy is a common cause of human genetic disorders The pregnant woman decided to continue pregnancy. Delivery date is in and cytogenetic analysis remain the standard method of diagnosis. Quan- March 2012. The pregnancy outcome will be reported. titative Fluorescence PCR (QF-PCR) is a rapid assay used to identify most This case report underlines the importance of Array CGH analysis in the dia- common aneuploidies of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X, Y. This method uses gnostic work up of prenatally detected fetal anomalies. highly DNA polymorphic markers (STRs) specific for each chromosome, to P05.36 determine the number of alleles of the analyzed chromosomes. In this rare The Efficiency Of Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification case a sample of amniotic fluid was referred for prenatal diagnosis with a Technique In The Diagnosis Of Fetal Chromosomal Abnormalities G. Toksoy1, B. Karaman1, Z. Uyguner1, K. Yılmaz1, R. Has2, H. Kayserili1, S. Basaran1; high risk indication 1:2 for Edwards Syndrome after combined first trime- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, ster screening, in the absence of any detectable fetal malformation. QF-PCR Turkey, 2Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, was followed by cytogenetic analysis of cultured cells. The results of QF-PCR Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. revealed an abnormal pattern of allele ratio suggesting mosaic of three full copies of chromosome 18, whereas cytogenetic analysis revealed a 50% mo- saic of a supernumerary centromeric marker 18. Due to the discrepancy of With standard karyotyping techniques chromosomal abnormalities are de- these results, genetic counseling advised to continue the investigation with tected in only about 20% of patients with multiple congenital abnormali- a second sample either fetal blood or amniotic fluid. Also, array-CGH was ties/mental retardation (MCA/MR). At the 500-600 band level the resolu- recommended to clarify these unusual results. The results of the second am- tion for detection is about 5 Mb. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) niotic fluid sample confirmed the presence of extra marker 18. After coun- technique can unveil submicroscopic aberrations (<5Mb), which increases seling about the associated risk of abnormal outcome, parents decided to the detection rate an additional 4-8% in the etiology of MCA/MR. Molecular continue the pregnancy. Postnatal blood karyotype revealed a third cell line techniques can identify abnormalities <5 Mb. of full trisomy 18 in 5% of peripheral cells, confirming the QF-PCR findings. The clinical findings of MCA/MR cases can guide the clinician toward syn- QF-PCR technique is a trustworthy method for detecting aneuploidies and drome-specific FISH probes. However, this is usually limited for prenatal even mosaics in a low percentage. The results should always be considered cases. Multiple Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) extends the in any circumstances. boundaries of the diagnosis of chromosomal anomalies that are undetectab- P05.39 le by classical methods. Prenatal diagnosis of a case with mosaic 22q11 microdeletion In this study, we aimed to search for subtelomeric aberrations and syndro- syndrome me-related microdeletions/duplications by using SALSA P070 and P245 S. Farcas, V. Belengeanu, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu, A. Ratiu, D. C. Crisan, D. Iacob; probe-sets of MLPA in 66 samples of fetuses with major ultrasonographic University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. abnormalities carrying normal karyotypes with conventional methods. Two microdeletions (18p11.3->pter and 7q11.23) and one microduplicati- on (18q23) were identified (4.5 % - 3/66) by MLPA. Deletions were confir- Mosaic microdeletion syndromes are rarely reported and the prenatal dia- med by FISH and duplication was confirmed by microarray. gnosis of those cases might be difficult because low levels of mosaicism can The advantage of MLPA is the ability of searching multiple loci in one test be easily missdiagnosed. We present a case of a pregnant women who at the run, which could be very helpful in prenatal diagnosis of cases with abnor- 20 weeks of gestation, after a routine ultrasonography screening found po- mal ultrasound findings where the karyotypes were normal. lyhidramnios, intrauterin developmental delay, tetralogy of Fallot, timus hy- poplasia for the fetus. Amniocentesis was performed and FISH analysis was www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 151 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 done. Besides common aneuploidies probes, also LSI TUPLE1 probe (Ab- firmed by the invasive method. bott) for DiGeorge syndrome was used for diagnosis confirmation. A total We conclude that our protocol for RHD genotyping is rapid and feasible. number of 100 cells were evaluated for each probe. Results were normal for Also, the fetal gender determination is currently performed as a useful tool common aneuploidies. In 13 cells a 22q11.2 microdeletion was found and for screening the pregnancies at risk for inheriting an X-linked recessive dis- the finding was conclusive for mosaic 22q11.2 microdeletion (13%). Genetic order. counselling was offered to parents who decided to terminate the pregnancy P05.43 and requested to be informed about the risk for the following pregnancy. Clinical application of non invasive RHD genotyping using cell free The indemn parents were screened for the same deletion by using FISH ana- fetal DNA in maternal plasma lysis which revealed that the father also presents a very low level of mosaic M. Grande1, E. Ordoñez2, A. Payaró3, N. Dominguez4, I. Teixidó1, V. Cirigliano2, A. Borrell1; for microdeletion of chromosome 22q11.2 in his peripheral lymphocytes. 1Department of Maternal-Fetal Medicine, Institute Gynecology, Obstetrics and This case sustains the importance of widening the FISH studies spectrum Neonatology, Hospital Clínic Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, General Lab, Barcelona, Spain, 3ASSIR Manso. Institut Català de la Salut., when ultrasonography shows cardiac malformations in association with Barcelona, Spain, 4ASSIR Numància. Institut Català de la Salut., Barcelona, Spain. other defects which can be a hallmark of a specific chromosomal deffect al- lowing an ethiologic diagnosis. The prenatal diagnosis of an affected fetus facilitated in this case the identification in a parent with normal phenotype To assess the accuracy of non invasive fetal RHD genotyping in the second of a very low level of 22q11.2 microdeletion and allowed an adequate gene- trimester of pregnancy using cell free fetal DNA in maternal plasma and the tic counselling. practicality of avoiding the use of prophylactic antenatal anti-D gammaglo- P05.41 bulin in RhD negative fetuses. Next generation sequencing application for a heterogenous disorder: Fetal RHD genotyping was offered to RhD negative pregnant women atten- a pilot study on inherited peripheral neuropathies ding the West Barcelona Health district. A total of 284 cases were collected C. Buxton1, P. Lunt2, F. Sansbury3, P. Turnpenny3, M. Williams1, T. Antoniadi1; 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Southmead Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Dept at 24-26 weeks of gestation and tested for fetal RhD status using multiplex of Clinical Genetics, St Michaels Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom, 3Dept of Clinical rt-PCR amplification of exons 5, 7 and 10 of the RHD gene. Women carrying Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter Hospital, Exeter, United Kingdom. RhD negative fetuses were counseled about the possibility of avoiding pro- phylactic anti-D immunoglobulin. Diagnostic accuracy and feasibility of routine application of non invasive RHD genotyping were compared with Inherited peripheral neuropathies (IPN) are a heterogeneous group of dis- established postnatal RhD typing in umbilcal cord blood. orders with an overall prevalence of 1 in 2,500 and more than 50 genes im- A total of 183 fetuses were genotyped as RhD positive (64 %) and 96 RhD plicated. Bristol Genetics Laboratory currently provides a specialist UKGTN negative (34%). Two samples were not informative as RhD sequences were Sanger sequencing service for 12 neuropathy genes. detected in amount compatible with a maternal positive genotype. Three The aim of this project is to evaluate the application of targeted capture RHD variants were identified (1%), all results were confirmed in the new- NGS technology to the diagnosis of IPN using a pilot cohort of ten recruited/ borns. No false positive or negative results were observed in sigleton preg- consented patients; three unrelated individuals with a known mutation/ nancies. One false positive result was observed in a twin pregnancy, follow SNP profile including quantitative changes and seven with an uncharacte- up allowed determining a paternal RHD variant as its cause. Antenatal anti-D rized genetic aetiology. A solution-based oligonucleotide capture array was immunoglobuline was only requested in 5 cases of RhD negative fetuses. designed using Agilent eArray (SureSelect) to capture a 450KB target en- Non invasive fetal RHD genotyping in the second trimester of pregnancy compassing coding exons and 5‘ and 3‘ UTRs of 65 neuropathy genes. DNA proved to be efficient and reliable. This approach allowed avoiding unneces- libraries were run on Illumina GAII and MiSeq sequencers for comparison sary use of antenatal immunoglobulin in our population. and to aid in evaluating bioinformatics approaches to variant calling and do- P05.44 sage enumeration. Data analysis will be performed using open source tools Preimplantation genetic diagnosis of metabolic diseases in Gennet (Galaxy). I. Soldatova, M. Putzová, I. Borgulova, V. Krutilkova, J. Mika, R. Křen, D. Stejskal; We aim to assess the quality of genetic data, the extent of genetic variation GENNET, Prague, Czech Republic. in patients with IPN, the utility of current bioinformatics packages and data- bases in assigning variant status, the ability to detect quantitative changes, and potential new genotype-phenotype correlations. In 2007 we completed the first in vitro fertilization cycle (IVF) followed by The experience gained through validating a new technology in a clinical con- preimplantation genetic diagnosis(PGD). Since than , we have performed text and the workup of various approaches to downstream analysis together over 170 cycles with scheduled PGD for 53 different monogenic disorders. with clinically relevant variant findings will be presented. One third of those were metabolic diseases with X-linked and autosomal re- This work will further the knowledge of the genetics of IPN and contribute cessive types of indications. to improved genetic testing for patients with these diseases. PGD in our centre is based on principle of haplotyping analysis for deter- P05.42 mination of disease-associated haplotype derived from family members. The non-invasive prenatal tests available in Romania During the IVF cycle haplotyping technique by multiplex PCR is used on pro- A. M. Stan1, C. Dragomir1, E. Severin2, L. Savu1; ducts of multiple displacement amplification (MDA) from one blastomere 1Genetic Lab S.R.L., Bucharest, Romania, 2UniverMed, Bucharest, Romania. biopsied from the cleavage-stage embryo on the day 3 ( In rare cases of am- biguous result from the blastomere , analysis may be repeated from trophec- toderm and embryo is still managed to be transferred on the day 5). The detection of cell-free fetal DNA in maternal circulation opened a new, PGD is available for a large number of monogenic disorders. Presented group noninvasive approach for prenatal diagnosis (NIPD). The NIPD approach of metabolic disease forms the most frequent group of examinated disor- has been studied for more than a decade. It started with the fetal RHD geno- ders in our centre. We have completed 15 IVF cycles - in 11 cases the embryo typing and gender determination, allowing at the moment the noninvasive was transferred. The success rate of PGD procedures of metabolic diseases detection of specific mutations causing diseases and selected chromosomal is approximately 40% (gravidity confirmed by the fetal heart beat). aneuploidies. PGD is a reproductive option for couples at substantial risk of conceiving We performed the noninvasive detection of fetal RHD genotype in Romania a pregnancy affected with known genetic metabolic diseases who wish to since 2010 and we considered this approach an improvement in the ma- avoid the emotional burden associated with an affected child or termination nagement of mother-fetus RhD incompatibility in our country. of pregnancy. This short study aim was to improve the protocol for non-invasive fetal RHD P05.45 genotyping in our laboratory since we notice a nonspecific amplification Preimplantation genetic diagnosis and polar body diagnosis for band in some RHD negative samples. Fragile X syndrome A three-step method was used for noninvasive fetal RHD genotyping. For A. J. Hehr1, B. Paulmann2, Z. Kowalzyk1, C. Gassner2, B. Seifert2, U. Hehr1,3; the ccftDNA extraction we proceed from 1ml maternal plasma using the 1Center for Human Genetics Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 2KITZ Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 3Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, QIAamp® DSP Virus kit. The fetal RHD genotyping was determined using Regensburg, Germany. specific primers for two sequences in the exon 5 and exon 7 of the RHD gene; we also included the GAPDH, β-globin, DYS14 and SRY sequences detection as internal controls. To overcome our issue, five different PCR reactions were Introduction: Fragile X (FRAXA) syndrome is one of the more frequent indi- performed. The PCR products were automated analyzed by high-resolution cations for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD). However, FRAXA pre- capillary electrophoresis. mutation carriers are at increased risk for premature ovarian failure and We tested 93 plasma samples using both protocols and the results were con- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org152 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 have to cope with significantly lower pregnancy rates per oocyte retrieval ported in the literatTuCrFe4. Most of them result from mutations or intragenic (ESHRE data collection X: 17,5%) when compared to PGD for other single deletions or insertions. In 30 % of cases, PTHS results from submicroscopic gene disorders (ESHRE 22,1%). deletion including and detected by Array-CGH analysTisC. FC4linical re- Methods: 13 oocyte retrieval cycles (ORC) for polar body diagnosis in 8 fa- evaluation found facial features suggestive of PTHS. milies at risk for FRAXA and 26 ORC for 15 families at risk for Cystic Fibrosis This is the first report of a submicroscopic deletion including found af- (CF) as control group. ter prenatal diagnosis of a corpus callosum abnormality. These results allow Results: For the FRAXA group less metaphase II oocytes could be retrieved reassuring genetic counseling for later pregnancies and give the opportuni- (mean 8.31/cycle; CF: 12.15/cycle). With identical embryo transfer rates of ty to discuss the usefulness of Array-CGH in isolated hypoplasia/agenesis of 77% per ORC a significantly lower rate of clinical pregnancies (2/10=20%; the corpus callosum. CF: 9/20=45%) and life births (2; CF: 8 + 1 ongoing pregnancy) was obtai- P05.49 ned in the FRAXA group per embryo transfer cycle when compared to the Study of the methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase and the reduced- CF group. folate carrier-1 gene polymorphism in healthy and severe pre- Discussion: PBD allows the earliest view on oocyte maturation in heterozy- eclamptic patients gous FRAXA carrier females in a diagnostic setting. Our data indicate that G. Szabo, L. Lazar, J. Rigo Jr., B. Nagy; PBD results for FRAXA are at least comparable to PGD on day 3 embryos. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. However, in concordance with the ESHRE PGD data we also observed a re- duced number of metaphase II oocytes, lower impregnation and pregnan- cy rates for Fragile X syndrome when compared to PBD for Cystic Fibrosis, One-carbon cycle is involved in the synthesis of purins and pyrimidines re- which should be emphasized early during genetic counseling. quired for DNA synthesis and repair. These one-carbon groups are served P05.47 by the tetrahydrofolate and the S-adenosylmethionine. Deficiencies of the Virus detection from amniotic fluid and peripheral blood in pregnant folate, and methionine pathway leads to elevated homocysteine levels. The- women se disorders have been implicated in placental diseases. Studies have shown L. Lazar1, M. Csire2, B. Pályi2, E. Barcsay2, M. Takács2, A. Beke2, C. Papp1, B. Nagy1, J. Rigó that homocysteine levels are elevated by patients with severe pre-eclampsia Jr1, G. Berencsi2; than by healthy pregnant normotensive women. Methylenetetrahydrofolate 1Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2National Epidemiological Center, reductase (MTHFR) gene C677T missense mutation is connected with ele- Budapest, Hungary. vated serum homocysteine levels. The mutation G80A of the reduced-folate carrier (RFC-1) gene leads to higher plasma folate levels. We identified po- lymorphisms of these genes by severe pre-eclamptic patients and healthy Background: Transplacental viral infections was widely investigated in last controls. decades. Embryo-fetal infections have been reported to cause recurrent Blood samples were collected from healthy pregnant normotensive women spontaneous abortions, and fetal malformations. The possible mechanisms (n=82) and women with pre-eclampsia (n=75). DNA was isolated and quan- include production of toxic metabolic byproducts, fetal or placental infec- titative real-time PCR method combined with melting curve analysis was tion, chronic endometrial infection, and chorio-amnionitis. The aim of our performed for the detection of the two polymorphisms. study was to detect EBV, CMV, HHV-6, HHV-7, HHV-8,HPV and Torque teno The frequency of A allele in the RFC-1 gene was 46,57% by controls and virus DNA from amniotic fluid samples. 41% by pre-eclamptic patients. Overall distribution of genotypes was not Materials and methods: Amniotic fluid (during artifitial membrane rupture) significantly different between the two groups (p=0.58). In the study groups and periferal blood samples were collected at delivery, from 106 pregnant by the MTHFR gene the frequency of T allele was 32% in pre-eclamptics, women. DNA was isolated with silica adsorption method. Viral DNA was de- 35.92% in controls. The distribution of genotypes was not significantly dif- termined with real time PCR method. IgG and IgM was also determined form ferent between the two study groups (p=0.15).In pre-eclampsia the one-car- peripheral blood samples. bon cycle is disturbed. We studied single nucleotid mutations in the genes Results: Viral DNA was detected in 27 of 106 amniotic flud samples. We de- of two enzymes involved in the cycle and found no significant differences. tected CMV DNA in nine, HHV-7 DNA in eight, HHV-8 DNA in five, EBV DNA Examinations of other genetical compounds help understanding elevated in four amniotic fluid samples. CMV, HHV-7 and EBV positivity was two-two- homocysteine levels in pre-eclampsia. four fold higher in amniotic flud samples than in peripheral blood samples. P05.50 69,81% of maternal blood samples was positive for HHV6 IgG. Preimplantation diagnosis of hearing impairment Conclusions: Our results suggest that viral infections occure more often in D. Raskova1, P. Seeman1, D. Stejskal1, I. Borgulova1, V. Krutilkova1, M. Brandejska1, J. pregnancy, than previously where supposed. In case of abnormal prenatal/ Mika1, M. Malikova2, M. Putzova1; ultrasound findings, and amniotic fluid sampeling rises the possibility of 1Centre for Medical Genetics and Reproductive Medicine GENNET, Prague 7, Czech PCR viral detection from aniotic fluid. Republic, 2Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics,2nd Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague 5, Czech Republic. P05.48 Deletion 18q21.2q21.31 encompassing TCF4 diagnosed by CGH-Array in a fetus presenting with hypoplastic corpus callosum N. Marle1, P. Callier1, A. Mosca-Boidron1, C. Thauvin-Robinet2, N. Laurent3, M. Gérard4, A. In our centre we have been providing preimplantation genetic diagnosis Masurel-Paulet2, T. Rousseau5, M. Payet1, C. Ragon1, F. Mugneret1, L. Olivier-Faivre2; (PGD) since 2007. Up to now we have accomplished 173 IVF cycles followed 1Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU Le Bocage, Dijon, France, 2Département de by PGD in about 50 genetic diseases. We used genetic haplotyping technique Génétique, Hôpital d‘Enfants, Dijon, France, 3Laboratoire d‘Anatomie-Pathologie, CHU by multiplex PCR on products of MDA (multiple displacement amplification) Le Bocage, Dijon, France, 4UF de Génétique Clinique, CHU Robert Debré, Paris, France, from 1 blastomere biopsied from embryo. On average 5-6 embryos were bi- 5Maternité du Bocage, Dijon, France. opsied in one IVF cycle. The success rate of the procedure (calculated on the fetal heart beat pregnancy) is approximately 30%. We present four families in which both parents are heterozygous for 35delG We report on a fetus with subtotal corpus callosum agenesis and bilateral mutation in GJB2 gene (Connexin 26) and have one deaf child, homozygote ventriculomegaly diagnosed by ultrasonography at 25 weeks of gestation. of the same mutation. After MRI confirmation, pregnancy was terminated. Conventional cytoge- One family with Waardenburg syndrome, autosomal dominant inherided, netic analysis on amniotic fluid cell cultures revealed a normal karyotype where the mutation p.Phe45Leu in PAX3 gene was confirmed and the haplo- (46,XY). Fetal autopsy showed hypoplastic corpus callosum with fragmen- typic analysis for PGD is prepared. ted fibers and bilateral ventriculomegaly. Array-CGH analysis (Agilent®, Six IVF cycles was realized in these families undergone PGD, recommended 4x44K) was performed on DNA extracted from frozen fetal tissue samples due to the high risk of recurrence of hearing impairment in offspring. One and showed a 3 Mb interstitial 18q deletion: arr 18q21.2q21.31(49190680- cycle was not followed by embryotransfer. Three pregntha ncies was confir- 521883d6e5 n)ox1vo. FISH on metaphase spreads from aTmCnFi4otic fluid cultures with med. One of them was finished by missed abortion in 9 week. Three hea- RP11-344A12 BAC proTbCeF 4confirmed the deletion. This deletion which oc- ring children were born - one girl and twins, boy and girl. curred , encompasses 10 genes including . One woman patient conceived spontaneously before repeated IVF cycle and Haploinsufficiency of was identified as the underlying cause of Pitt- gave birth to one healthy hearing son. Hopkins syndrome. Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS, OMIM 610954) is cha- racterized by severe intellectual disability, typical facial gestalt and daily episodes of hyperventilation followed by apnea. Other common findings are epilepsy and brain abnormalities such as hypoplastic corpus callosum. About sixty cases of PTHS confirmed by molecular studies have been re- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 153 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P05.51 A generic, fast and flexible protocol for preimplantation HLA-typing alone or in combination with a monogenic disease dard in prenatal diagnosis. In general, results are available 10-12 days after G. Kakourou1, J. Traeger-Synodinos1, C. Vrettou1, A. Destouni1,2, S. Davies3, G. Kokkali4, M. sample reception. To bridge this gap, rapid testing for common aneuploi- Mastrominas3, K. Pantos4, A. Kattamis5, P. Delaporta5, C. Sofokleous1, E. Kanavakis1,2; dies using QF-PCR or FISH is performed. In chorionic villous samples (CVS), 1University of Athens, Department of Medical Genetics, “Aghia Sophia” Children’s direct or short-term incubation preparations are recommended to obtain Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2Research Institute for the Study of Genetic and Malignant an early complete chromosome analysis. However, the labour input is sub- Disorders in Childhood, „Aghia Sophia“ Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, stantial and the results are often of poor quality. As the likelihood for chro- 3Embryogenesis, Assisted Conception Unit, Athens, Greece, 4Genesis Athens Clinic, Center mosomal aberrations other than trisomies 21, 18 and 13 in CVS is higher for Human Reproduction, Athens, Greece, 5Thalassaemia Unit, University of Athens, „Aghia Sophia“ Children‘s Hospital, First Department of Paediatrics, Athens, Greece. as compared to amniocytes, we evaluated the KaryoLite™BACs on Beads™ technology (Perkin Elmer, Turku, Finland) as an alternative testing method in-vitro for aneuploidies and terminal imbalances of all chromosomes within 24 hours. Endpoints of the study were analytic sensitivity and ease of use. HLA-typing of fertilization (IVF) embryos aims to establish a preg- This molecular karyotyping assay consists of 91 BAC coupled beads provi- nancy that is HLA-compatible with an affected sibling who requires haema- ding information about the dosage of proximal and terminal regions of each topoietic stem-cell transplantation. The procedure can be performed with chromosome arm using comparative hybridisation. or without preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) for exclusion of a sin- In this validation study, we investigated 102 CVSs with known aneuploidies gle-gene disorder (SGD). HLA-PGD is, however, a multistep, technically chal- (n=93, autosomal=69, gonosomal=24), polyploidies (n=3) and terminal im- lenging procedure at every stage. To address the aspect of genetic analysis through simplifying patient work-up and PGD application, we developed a balances (n=6) previously analysed by QF-PTCMR and TkMaryotyping. From our data we conclude that Karyolite BoBs provides correct and fast, reliable, accurate HLA-PGD protocol, to allow minimal work-up time rapid results on all aneuploidies and - if covered by the assay - terminal im- and high flexibility for combination with any SGD. balances, based on minute (<50ng) amounts of DNA in a single assay. As Recent HLA-PGD requests included 11 families to treat β-thalassaemia and expected, due to methodological restrictions, female triploidies could not be 1 family each for Diamond-Blackfan anaemia, Chronic Granulomatous disea- diagnosed. The test has an acceptable workload and is easy to use. se, Sideroblastic anaemia and preimplantation-HLA-typing only. For HLA-haplotyping we selected 22 short tandem repeats distributed P05.54 across the entire HLA-locus (4Mb) following published guidelines. PCR pri- Undetected sex chromosome aneuploidy by chromosomal microarray mers were designed with properties allowing multiplex analysis in any com- - practical implications bination. The resulting one-step, single-tube, multiplex fluorescent touch- K. Markus-Bustani1, Y. Yaron1,2, M. Goldstein1, A. Orr-Urtreger1,2, S. Ben-Shachar1; 1The Genetic Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Sackler Faculty down-PCR, was minimally modified to incorporate multiplex protocols for of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, Israel. direct and indirect genotyping of the SGDs, supporting concurrent SGD ex- clusion and HLA-typing. Amplification efficiency and allele-dropout, from single lymphocyte testing, ranged from 97.6-100% and 0-6.2%, respectively. We report on a case of a female fetus found to be mosaic for Turner syn- Five clinical cycles were performed with a diagnosis achieved for 92.8% of drome (45,X) and trisomy X (47,XXX) by karyotype, with 3:1 ratio between amplified biopsied blastomeres. Embryo transfer took place in three cycles the two cell lines respectively. However, chromosomal microarray analysis and one pregnancy was established. (CMA) failed to detect the aneuploidy due to a normal average dosage of the Our protocol enables HLA-typing in a single-PCR, reducing risk of contami- X chromosome in the direct amniotic fluid sample. This case represents an nation and cost and providing faster results. For different SGDs, it requires unusual instance in which CMA may not detect chromosomal aberrations. minimum optimization before clinical application, decreasing the waiting Such a possibility should be taken into consideration in similar cases where time from referral to treatment for all HLA-PGD cases. CMA is used in a clinical setting, and especially in cases suspected for sex P05.52 chromosome aberrations, in which mosaic states are common. Prenatal BoBs complements excellently karyotyping in routine P05.55 prenatal diagnostics Chromosomal mosaicism in invasive prenatal investigations in 1998- N. J. Horelli-Kuitunen, A. M. Slunga-Tallberg, K. J. Kiiski; Medix Laboratories Ltd, Espoo, Finland. 2010 in a fetal medicine department. V. Curtisova, P. Čapková, I. Dhaifalah; Department of Human Genetics and Fetal Medicine, Fakultní nemocnice Olomouc, TM Olomouc, Czech Republic. The new bead-based multiplex assay Prenatal BACs-on-Beads (PN_BoBs ) was validated and utilized for routine use in prenatal diagnostics. PN_BoBs assay detects aneuploidies (13,18,21,X,Y) along with nine of the most com- Counselling after a diagnosis of chromosomal mosaicism in a prenatal inva- mon microdeletion syndromes. The validation contained 57 different fetal sive sample is difficult, as the impact of the finding on the fetus is difficult samples with a success rate of 98.2%. The diagnostic cases included fresh to predict. We review all cases of level II and III mosaicism in our prenatal amniotic fluid (AF), chorion villus (CV) samples (group A) and tissue samp- invasive samples between 1998 and 2010 and present the results. 4803 am- les (skin or placenta) from cases with unexplained fetal loss (group B). We niocentesis (Amnio) were performed with 26 (0,5%) cases of mosaicism, have now studied 118 samples (group A 55 and group B 63 cases) the suc- and 643 CVS with 23 (3,6%) cases of mosaicism. Of 23 ascertained outco- cess rate being 96.6 %. In group A PN_BoBs revealed two microdeletions mes of Amnio pregnancies 4 were terminated, 1 miscarried, 16 resulted in (monosomy 22q11), one monosomy X, trisomy 18, and trisomy 21. No false birth of a normal baby and 2 babies had abnormalities, which were pro- positive results were detected, but one false negative result (69,XXX) was re- bably unrelated to the cytogenetic finding. Of 22 ascertained outcomes of ported, and one sample with maternal cell contamination (MCC) was detec- CVS pregnancies 5 were terminated, 2 miscarried, 14 resulted in a birth of ted. In group B three cases of trisomy 21 and one trisomy 13 were detected. a normal baby and 1 baby had abnormalities, which were unrelated to the The overall abnormality detection rate was 1/12 and the additional detec- cytogenetic finding. Negative outcomes were found in mosiacist variants of tion rate of PN_BoBs over karyotyping was 1/59, revealing two microdele- chromosomal aneuploidies which are in a pure form connected with known tions. The advantage of PN_BoBs is the simultaneous detection of both tri- syndromes (trisomy 21, monosomy X and so on). somies and microdeletions in addition to reliability and quickness. Further- P05.56 more PN_BoBs is unsensitive for MCC and it detects even 30% mosaicism. Fetal RHD genotyping in maternal plasma: 2 years of experience 6/118 had minor interpretation difficulties but in case of abnormalities no E. Guinchard, S. Monnier, C. Marthinet, E. Monier; interpretation difficulties have arised. The reason for failures (3,4%) were EFS Rhône-Alpes site de Lyon-GHE, Bron, France. due to low level of DNA. In conclusion PN_BoBs has additional informational value over QF-PCR as it also detects common microdeletions and therefore it better complements karyotyping. backround P05.53 Fetal RHD genotyping in maternal plasma is carried out for almost 2 years 24 chromosomes in 24 hours: Validation study of a new assay for in the laboratory. rapid detection of aneuploidies and terminal imbalances of all Aims: The analysis performed from 10 weeks of pregnancy involves three chromosomes in chorionic villous samples of the 10 exons of this gene: exons 4, 5 and 10 by real-time PCR. Two genes S. Zahn, S. Kerber, R. Achmann, L. Argyriou, C. Kähler, B. Auber, K. Held; controls are used: SRY and CCR5 gene. MVZ genteQ GmbH, Hamburg, Germany. The criteria for technical and biological validation have been defined. Any negative or abnormal results (absence of amplification of the three exons or amplification of one or two of the three exons) must be controlled on a new Conventional karyotyping after cell culture still represents the gold stan- sample taken 15 days later. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org154 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 The reporting of results is standardized with well-defined biological com- typing. Thus, the percentage of prenatal genetic diagnosis increases, which ments. The report is accompanied by a tracking sheet of pregnancy. The has a strong impact on genetic counselling. We encourage the use of CGH- feedback at birth in the laboratory by the motherhood, (indicating RH1 array for clinical practice in foetuses with ultrasound anomalies and normal phenotype at birth and sex of the child) can be difficult and allows tracking karyotype. of results, and is an quality indicator, the target being the absence of false P05.59 negatives. ‚I do not want my baby to endure as I did‘. Prenatal and Results: Since 2010, 64 analyzes were performed: 38 results were positive, Preimplentation Genetic Diagnosis for BRCA1/2 Mutations 14 negative and 12 undetermined usually corresponding to a maternal RHD E. Dagan1,2, A. Mory1, Y. Goldberg3, R. Gershoni-Baruch1,4; gene variant. In several cases, variant RHD genes were found in the new- 1Rambam Medical Center, Institute of Human Genetics, Haifa, Israel, 2Department of born. Nursing, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel, 3Obstetrics and Gynecological Utrasound Unit, Carmel Medical Center, Haifa, Israel, 4Ruth and Bruce Rappoport Faculty of Medicine, Conclusion: the experience of almost two years shows that this technique Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. guided by procedures and very precise and rigorous criteria of validation is reliable. Situations of maternal variants are the most difficult situations that should lead to careful interpretation of the results. Prenatal and preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PND/PGD) can be employ- The laboratory is also part of a quality initiative, by participating and de- ed to prevent transmission of BRCA1/2 mutations, thereby, obviating ad- veloping an inter-laboratory quality control. verse clinical-psychological associations. It remains debated whether PND/ P05.57 PGD should be offered for low penetrance, late onset syndromes. A case hi- Evaluation of Prenatal BoBs® for the detection of mosaicism in story and issues related to PND/PGD for breast-ovarian cancer syndrome in prenatal diagnosis Israel and across countries is presented. Y. K. Kwok1, Y. K. Y. Cheng1, C. Wong1, H. K. Wong1, K. O. Leung1, A. C. S. Chan1, S. Dallaire2, T. Y. Leung1,3, M. Schermer2, K. W. Choy1,3,4; Sarah, 34 years old, 9-10 weeks spontaneously pregnant seeks PND for BR- 1Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2PerkinElmer, CA1 mutation. She was diagnosed with bilateral breast cancer at 29 and 32 Waltham, MA, United States, 3CUHK-BGI Innovation Institute of Trans-omics, Hong Kong, years of age, respectively, followed by mastectomy, reconstruction, and che- Hong Kong, 4CUHK-Shenzhen Research Institute, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. motherapy. Her mother had breast cancer at age 46; no other case of cancer Objective: in the family was reported. This case history stimulates several questions. How personal and family To evaluate the effectiveness of a new prenatal diag®nostic plat- history of cancer should be regarded in the context of PGD/PND; does the form ®- prenatal bacterial artificial chromosomes-on-Beads (Prenatal gender of the fetus, or the carrier status (whether due to a BRCA1 or BRCA2 BMoeBthso)d isn: detecting mosaicism and comparing® it‘s performance with quan- mutation) should be considered; is it ethical to allow PGD or PND for late titative fluorescence polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) onset diseases with incomplete penetrance. A validation study of Prenatal BoBs was firstly performed using PGD/PND for hereditary breast-ovarian and bowel cancer was considered artificially constructing mosaic samples involving various aneuploidies and in 2006, in UK. Israel and Germany advocate and ban, respectively, PGD/ microdeletion ®c onditions. Furthermore, we compared the accuracy between PND for cancer susceptibilities, whilst other Western countries are some- PRreesnualttasl: BoBs and QF-PCR in 16 archived real clinical mosaic cases accor- where in between. The criteria that each country adopts in favor or against ding to the conventional karyotype results. ® PGD/PND, for late onset diseases may reflect the complex social and family In the validation study, Prenatal BoBs allowed the detection of ethical values regarding the technology of assistance reproduction. Compre- mosaicism at a level of 20 to 40%. Among 16 real clin®ical mosaic cases, 4 hensively, with genetic diagnosis at hand these days, PND/PGD for BRCA1/2 (25%)cases could be® identified by both Prenatal BoBs and QF-PCR but 8 mutation carriers is at the front door and becomes relevant within the cli- (50.3%) cases were missed by both t®ests. Three cases (18.8%) were detec- nical setting. ted by Prenatal BoBs but missed by QF-PCR, while QF-PCR detected 1 case P05.60 which was missed by Prenatal BoBs due to the mosaic regio®n did not ha- Unexpected findings in prenatal diagnosis of fetal ultrasound ving probe covered. The overall sensitivity of Prenatal BoBs in detecting abnormalities using SNP array mCoonscaliucissimon i:s 43.8% (7/16)® which is slightly higher than 31.3% (5/16) of J. Knijnenburg, M. I. Srebniak, G. Oudesluijs, R. H. Galjaard, D. Van Opstal; QF-PCR. Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. ® Prenatal BoBs has a sensitivity of 44% in the detection of real clinical mosaic cases. The threshold mosaic level to be detectable by Pre- natal BoBs is 20% according to the validation study. This assay is likely Objective: To get insight into the frequency and nature of the so-called “un- superior in detecting mosaicism. expected findings” when using SNP array in prenatal diagnosis. This is im- P05.58 portant for setting-up a good pre-test counseling. Clinical use of array-CGH in foetuses with ultrasound anomalies and Methods: We performed HumanCytoSNP-12 array (Illumina) analysis of un- normal karyotype cultured amniotic fluid cells and LTC-villi in 344 cases of fetal anomalies L. Gwanmesia1, S. Gimelli1, K. Aliferis1, M. Billieux2, I. Eperon2, V. Mirlesse2, J. after exclusion of the common aneuploidies and triploidy. For correct in- Pellegrinelli2, R. Robyr3, P. Extermann4, E. Antonelli5, E. Ranza1, S. Dahoun1, F. Sloan- terpretation, simultaneous analysis of both parents was performed in most Béna1, S. Fokstuen1; cases. According to our policy, only clinically relevant copy number variants 1Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department (CNVs) were reported to the clinical geneticist who counselled the parents. of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, Results: On a total of 344 arrays, 36 (10,5 %) CNVs were found that were 3Echofemme, Centre for Prenatal Diagnosis and Echography, Geneva, Switzerland, 4Dianecho, Centre for Obstetrical and Gynecological Echography, Geneva, Switzerland, interpreted as clinically relevant based on current knowledge. 24 (7 %) 5Gynecology and Obstetrics, Private Practice, Geneva, Switzerland. were most probably causative explaining the ultrasound abnormalities and 12 (3,5 %) were so-called “unexpected findings” that are most likely not di- rectly associated with the fetal anomalies. In the latter cases the involved Prospective application of array-CGH in pregnancies with ultrasound ano- CNVs were risk factors for mental disability, autism spectrum disorder, schi- malies and to a lesser extent in pregnancies referred for other reasons has zophrenia etc. CNVs involving genes like DMD or BRCA2 were not found so recently become a common investigation in clinical practice. We summari- far. ze our experience on prenatal array-CGH analysis performed on 40 preg- Conclusions: These findings stress the importance of a pre-test counseling nancies with foetuses presenting isolated or multiple malformations, and/ with special attention for this type of risk factors, taking into account that or intrauterine growth retardation detected by ultrasound and with a nor- risk figures are based upon postnatal studies and that the prenatal manife- mal karyotype on chorionic villi or amniotic fluid samples. All parents re- station of such factors is not yet studied. In our opinion, the pregnant wo- ceived genetic counselling and gave their informed consent. We used the man should get the opportunity to decide whether she wants to be informed 44k Agilent-based oligonucleotides array and performed 3 hybridisation about these CNVs, which may potentially complicate decision-making on experiments per case: the DNA samples of the foetus and both parents were continuation or termination of the pregnancy. independently co-hybridized with a reference commercialised DNA. Eight P05.61 out of 40 samples (20%) carried copy number variations (CNVs). The rate The results of the Pilot Project for prenatal diagnostics of fetal of clinically significant de novo alterations was 1/40 (2.5%) as was the rate malformations in Tomsk region of de novo findings with uncertain clinical significance. We found a single L. P. Nazarenko, A. A. Rudko, K. V. Puzyrev, S. L. Vovk, V. P. Puzyrev; State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. inherited CNV in two foetuses while 3 other foetuses each carried 2 inheri- ted variants . Our results support the ability of array CGH to identify cryptic chromosomal abnormalities which cannot be detected by standarwd kwarwyo.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 155 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 In 2010, the Russian Government has appointed Tomsk region as the parti- allele in Down syndrome group G(6G9G.1% vs. 3A0G.9G%, 1)7, ,h6i%gh AeAr Gwhat we expAeAcAt cipant in the Pilot Project for prenatal diagnostics of child malformation on having three alleles from chromosomGeG 21. AccoGrAdingly it was AsAimilar with the basis of integrated (ultrasonic and biochemical) screening in the first the genDotisycpuesss. Wioen found 31.8% , 40.6% and 9.8% trimester of pregnancy. The sonographic marker of chromosomal anoma- genotypes in Down group and 28.4% , 51.4% and 20.2% in control lies (CA) in this Program was the measure of nuchal translucency by 3D group. : Polymorphism in the folate metabolism enzymes could ultrasonic apparatus accompanied by the maternal serum markers of free increase the risk of chromosomal segregation and the risk of development beta-HCG and PAPP-A. On the basis of these parameters we calculate the Down syndrome. We detected high frequency of G alleles in Down syndrome cumulative risk of CA and form the group of expectant mothers with high cases. risk for birth of a child with defects. These women are recommended to pass P05.64 the invasive diagnostics. Lack of association between plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 4G/5G During the first year of realization of this Project in Tomsk Region we ex- polymorphism and retinopathy of prematurity in premature neonates amined 9.575 expectant mothers (93.5% out of women registered in first I. Akalin1,2, D. Armangil3, Y. Aslan4, B. Saygin4, H. Erdöl5, M. Yurdakök6; trimester or 73.4% out of all pregnant women). 1Trabzon Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Genetic Diseases Diagnosis Center, Trabzon, As a result of prenatal screening, 124 women were selected to high-risk Turkey, 2Istanbul Medeniyet University, Medical Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 3Trabzon Women‘s and Children‘s Hospital, Neonatology Unit, Trabzon, Turkey, 4Karadeniz group of CA (1.4 % of all examined). We carried out 119 invasive manipula- Technical University, Faculty of Medicine, Neonatology Unit, Trabzon, Turkey, tions for karyotyping of fetal cells. In 34 cases (28.6%) CA was diagnosed by 5Karadeniz Technical University, Faculty of Medicine, Ophthalmology Unit, Trabzon, cytogenetic methods, including FISH. Down syndrome was the most com- Turkey, 6Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Neonatology Unit, Ankara, Turkey. mon among the detected fetal CA (17 cases). Edwards syndrome was detec- INTRODUCTION: ted in 5 cases; Patau syndrome was found in 3 cases; Klinefelter syndrome was observed in 4 cases; Turner syndrome was detected in 2 cases. Other Retinopathy of prematurity (ROP) is a proliferative vas- chromosomal anomalies were detected in 2 fetus. cular disorder in premature neonates. Due to differences in individual re- Thus the “Prenatal Diagnostics” program allows effectively diagnosing the sponses to the treatment, various genetic factors have been investigated in fetal malformations and preventing the birth of children with CA. tMhEe TetHioOlDogSy: of ROP. We investigated the gene polymorphism of plasminogen P05.62 activator inhibitor (PAI-1) 4G/5 as a risk factor of ROP development. XXY by QF-PCR- is it always Klinefelter? 73 neonates with ROP and 101 controls were enrolled to study. R. Raynova1, I. Bradinova1, R. Vazharova1, V. Dimitrova2, M. Tzankova3, A. Savov1; The mean gestational ages were 29.4±0.8 weeks and 30±1.4 weeks, respec- 1National Genetics Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, tively. The mean birth weight was 1322±431 g and 1414±313 g, respec- Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Fetal Medicine, University Hospital of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Maternal Risk Department, University Hospital of tRivEeSlUy.L GTeSn:otyping was analyzed using real time polymerase chain reaction Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria. methods. p We found no significant differences in allele frequency of the PAI-1 genes between control group and neonates with ROP ( =0.540 and p=0.527, Quantitative Fluorescent PCR analysis (QF-PCR) is now widely used for pre- respectively). The proportion of 4G/4G, 4G/5G and 5G/5G genotypes did natal detection of the most common autosome aneuploidies - trisomy 21, not differ statistically between the ROP and control groups (p>0.05). Having trisomy 18, trisomy 13 and some of the sex chromosomes aneuploidies. It PAI-1 4G/4G genotype polymorphism seems to developed the risk of ROP provides rapid and accurate results. Aneuploidies involving sex chromoso- (OR =0,702; 95% CI: 0.300-1.639) less than PAI-1 4G/5G polymorphisms mes detected by QF-PCR could reflect different types of underlying chromo- (OR =1.064; 95% CI: 0.469-2.410). 4G/4G genotype frequency was decrea- somal rearrangements including mosaics and structural abnormalities. sCiOnNg CaLs UthSeIO sNta:ges of ROP were increasing though there was no statistically We report two prenatal cases of XX disomy in male fetuses (SRY positive) de- significant difference between proportion of genotypes and ROP stages. tected by QF-PCR on uncultivated amniocytes. Both patients were referred This study showed that PAI-1 4G/5G genotype which is for amniocentesis because of positive maternal serum screening. known as a risk factor for angiogenesis is not a predisposing factor for ROP DNA was extracted from uncultivated amniocytes, amplified with commer- development. Our study is the first report to investigate the association of cial QF-PCR kit Aneufast (Molgentix SL, Barcelona, Spain) and analyzed on PAI-1 gene polymorphisms on retinal angiogenesis and given clues of de- ABI 3110 XL Karyotyping was performed on cultured amniocytes using creased risk for ROP development within the 4G homozygous neonates. standard protocol. P05.65 QF-PCR showed results consistent with sex chromosomes aneuploidy, SRY The reliability of maternal serum triple screening for the prenatal was present. Pseudoautosomal markers AMEL, X22, DXYS218 were in di- diagnosis of fetal chromosomal abnormalities in Turkish women allelic trisomic pattern in case 1. Markers AMEL, DXYS218, DXYS267 were A. Pazarbasi1, O. Demirhan1, M. Kasap1, D. Alptekin1, U. Luleyap1, B. Yilmaz1, A. I. Guzel2, S. K. Sel1, E. Tunc1, L. Özpak1, F. T. Özgunen3, H. Kasap1; in diallelic trisomic pattern in case 2. Markers on chromosome X were in 1Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Adana, Turkey, hemizygous pattern in both cases. Cytogenetic analysis revealed 45, X/46, 2Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Rize, Turkey, 3Faculty XY - [75%]/ [25%] karyotype in case 1 and 45, X in case 2. of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Adana, Turkey. The wide range of clinical manifestations of 45, X/46, XY mosaics is a genetic counseling challenge during pregnancy. Pathological QF-PCR results involving the sex chromosomes require addi- The purpose of this study was to evaluate the reliability of maternal serum tional cytogenetic analysis in order to clarify the underlying chromosomal triple marker screening of alpha-fetoprotein, human chorionic gonadotro- rearrangement. pin, and unconjugated estriol for the prenatal diagnosis of fetal chromo- P05.63 somal abnormalities in Turkish pregnant women. Medical records were Study of the reduced folate carrier-1 (RFC-1) A90G polymorphism in used to analyze indications of amniocentesis and quantitative fluorescent- Down syndrome polymerase chain reaction. A total of 1725 pregnancies with chromosomal B. Nagy, J. Schönléber, G. Szabó, L. Lázár, J. Rigó Jr; abnormality risk according to triple test screening were accepted for fetal Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary. chromosome analysis and quantitative fluorescent-polymerase chain reac- RFC-1 tion. Weeks of pregnancy of the subjects ranged between 13 and 22. Chro- mosomal aberrations were observed in 56 (3.2%) cases. About 44.6% of gene encodes the reduced folate carrier 1 protein which plays role the abnormalities detected were numerical aberrations; however, 55.3% of in the folic acid adsorption by transporting 5-methyleneteRtrFaCh-1ydArofoGlate to the abnormalities were structural aberrations. Abnormalities detected were cells. Polymorphisms in folate metabolic genes have been associated with inversion of chromosome 9 in 20 cases, trisomy 21 in 14 cases, 46,XX/47,XX, Mthae tdeerviaellso pamnde nmt eotf hDoodwsn syndrome. We determined the 80 poly- + 21 in 1 case, trisomy 18 in 2 cases, trisomy 13 in 1 case, 47,XXY, in 1 case, morphism in Down syndrome. 45,X, in 1 case, structural abnormalities in 12 cases, and mosaic or tetraplo- : DNA was isolated from amniotic fluid of 92 Down idy in 6 cases. syndrome and 76 heaRtFhCy- 1cases by silica adsorption method (High Pure Second trimester triple test is an effective screening tool for detecting fetal PCR Template Preparation Kit, Roche, Germany). PCR was performed with Down syndrome in Turkish women. LightSnip mixture of (TibMolbiol, Germany) with LightCycler DNA Master HybProbe kit (Roche). Following melting curve analysis aleles were aRsessigunltesd and statistical analysis was performed to compare thGe allele and genotypAe frequencies. G : The melting point of the PCR product was 55 ºC for the , and 65 ºC for the allele. We observed significant difference in the frequency of the www.eshg.org www.eshg.org156 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P05.66 The relationship between haplotype & IVSII-745 mutation in β-thalassemia associated with an abnormally large, cystic placenta with histological fea- A. Amirian1, M. Taghavi1, F. Bayat1, A. Valaei1, F. Navvabmoghaddam1, S. Ahmadi1, M. tures known as partial hydatidiform mole (Type I). The digynic phenotype Mortezazadeh1, Z. Kaeinimoghaddam1, A. Kordafshari1, F. Maryami1, M. Karimipour1, S. is characterised by marked asymmetric intrauterine growth restriction I. R. O. Zeinali2; (IUGR), marked adrenal hypoplasia, and a very small, non-molar placenta 1Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pasteur Institute of Iran & (Type II). Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. We present chromosomal, fetal ultrasound and pathological findings in two The relationship between haplotype & IVSII-745 cases of triploidy diagnosed prenatally. The parental origin of the additional haploid chromosome set was determined based on a range of highly poly- morphic microsatellite markers. In the first case, the fetal karyotype was The hemoglobin disorders are a group of autosomal recessive disorders cau- 69,XXY and the histological investigation showed bilateral cystic renal dys- ses anemia with different severities. plasia. There were external and internal fetal anomalies, and marked IUGR β-thalassemia is one of the commonest genetic disorders characterized by in the second case of triploidy (69,XXX). The parental origin of the triploi- either absence or reduced β-globin chains synthesis. One of the mutations dies was found to be maternal and both triploidies were screen positive for causing β-thalassemia especially in south and north of Iran is IVSII-745. The- trisomy 18. re are numerous polymorphic base substitutions within the β -glibin-gene It has been published that digynic triploidy predominates in fetuses, and di- cluster, that are in linkage disequilibrium with β -globin-gene mutations. andry accounts for about 50-60% of early triploid spontaneous abortions. TMhaet earimia losf atnhids Msteutdhyo wdass: to analyze the relationship between β-globin clu- P05.69 ster haplotype and IVSII-745 mutation. Screening for prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities C. M. Muresan1, B. M. Muresan2, C. Gug1; After obtaining informal consent, DNA was extracted from 5 ml of peri- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy V. Babes , Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Fetal pheral blood of β-thalassemia carriers referred from primary health care Medicine Centre, President Clinic, Timisoara, Romania. centers(PHC). ARMS- PCR was performed for detecting the common mutati- ons. Haplotype analysis was done by using PCR-RFLP in three different sites. PRoelsyumltosr apnhids mDiss cinucslsuidoend:: GγHindIII, 3ψβHincII, AvaII/β. Polymorphisms Introduction: Invasive procedures for prenatal diagnosis can be performed were done by digesting PCR products by aproprate restriction enzyme. on different reasons: at demand of the patient, usually advanced maternal age; determined by the results of biochemical test; combined screening, In this study, 35 β- thalassemia carriers and their parents with IVSII-745 which includes specialized ultrasonography (visualization of fetal anoma- mutation were studied. Total of 35 cases with IVSII-745(C>G) , 30% had the lies or soft markers). pattern type I and type V (- - +). In the remaining cases that have informa- Objectives: The aim is to establish the qualitative analysis from the indica- tive pattern ( 70%) had haplotype VII (- - -). Rest of the cases didn‘t have tions of invasive testing for prenatal diagnosis (detection rate of chromoso- informative pattern. mal abnormalities and the false positive rate - FPR). Our study showed that based on haplotype analysis, it became apparent that Material and method: During ian.2010-dec.2011 we examined a number of non-random association of polymorphic restriction sites in the β-gene clu- 947 pregnant patients. We performed a number of 86 invasive procedures ster occurs within the mutations in β-globin gene like IVSII-745. in order to determine fetal karyotype: 15 - advanced maternal age; 20 - bio- P05.67 chemical risk + maternal age; 51 - ultrasound criteria + maternal age ± bio- Prenatal diagnosis by array CGH of a fetus with Thrombocytopenia- chemistry. Absent Radius (TAR) syndrome in the first trimester The calculated risk was estimatesdt by introduction of data in the software E. Manolakos1, M. B. Petersen1, S. Orru2, V. Bacoulas3, I. Papoulidis4; Astraia. Tndh e cut-off level for the 1 trimester screening was set at 1: 150 and 1Eurogenetica, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Cagliari, for the 2 trimester - at 1:250. Cagliari, Italy, 3Fetal Medicine Centre, Athens, Greece, 4Eurogenetica, Thessaloniki, Results: Prenatal diagnosis revealed 10 chromosomal abnormalities (T21 - Greece. 4, T18 - 3, T13 - 2 and 1 case of triploidy). All this cases belong to the group with ultrasound exam. For the same rate of detection, the FPR is 8% for all invasive procedures. If we exclude the invasive diagnosis on demand, the Thrombocytopenia-Absent Radius (TAR) syndrome (MIM 274000) is a very FPR is 6.44% and if we analyze only the cases (51 pregnancies) with ultra- rare condition (0.5:100,000) characterized by absence of the radii with the sound screening - the FPR is 4.3%. presence of both thumbs and thrombocytopenia. However, other congenital Conclusion: We observe that if we analyze pregnancies including ultrasound anomalies can occur, and affect the skeletal, cardiac, gastrointestinal, and ge- screening, the FPR drops almost to the half value (from 8% to 4.3%). nitourinary systems. The mode of inheritance of TAR syndrome is unknown. P05.70 Presence of a minimally deleted 200-kb region at chromosome band 1q21.1 Paternal uniparental diploidy mosaicism in a fetus with multiple is necessary but not sufficient to cause the phenotype. One or more as-yet- abnormalities including findings of Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome unknown modifiers are thought to be necessary for the expression of the F. Stellmer1, K. Schoner2, R. Bald3, W. Schmitt4, S. Kerber1, B. Auber1, K. Held1, R. TAR syndrome phenotype. Whereas TAR syndrome has been described in Achmann1; numerous patients, a very limited number of prenatally diagnosed cases 1MVZ genteQ GmbH, Hamburg, Germany, 2Universitätsklinikum Giessen und Marburg, have been reported and only five cases have been genetically tested and ve- Marburg, Germany, 3Klinikum Leverkusen, Leverkusen, Germany, 4Zentrum für rified the microdeletion in the 1q21.1 region. We report clinical, molecular Reproduktionsmedizin, Medizinische Genetik, Pränataldiagnostik, Würzburg, Germany. and cytogenetic studies of a prenatally diagnosed fetus with TAR syndrome with a small (334 kb) deletion characterized by the array-CGH technique and emphasize that array-CGH remains a useful tool in the precise descripti- We describe a fetus with multiple abnormalities in prenatal ultrasound, es- on of TAR syndrome as well as other haploinsufficiency syndromes. pecially hydrops, hepatomegaly and a retroperitoneal tumour. After fetal ka- P05.68 ryotyping following amniocentesis showed a normal female karyotype, uni- Triploidies identified at prenatal diagnosis parental disomy was suspected and analysis of microsatellites for chromo- V. Cejnova1, M. Wilimska1, V. Harmas1, J. Mareckova2, A. Klimova1, M. Soukupova1, M. somes 13, 18 and 21 was performed, comparing fetus and parents. Results Stara1, J. Lastuvkova1; were suspicious for a mosaic paternal uniparental diploidy with a normal 1Regional Health Corporation, Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department of biparental cell line. The rate of uniparental cells was about 80%. Uniparen- Medical Genetics, Usti nad Labem, Czech Republic, 2Regional Health Corporation, tal diploidy was also found in fetal blood and after induced abortion in fetal Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem, Department of Pathology, Usti nad Labem, Czech tissue with variant frequencies. Autopsy revealed macroglossy, hemihyper- Republic. trophy and viszeromegaly of liver, pancreas, adrenal glands, ovaries and ske- lettal musculature. Furthermore the fetus showed multiple tumours concer- ning heterotopic tissue of the adrenal glands, nodular nephroblastomatosis Triploidy, the presence of an extra haploid set of chromosomes, is one of the of the kidneys and haemangioma of the heart. All features resembling Beck- most frequent chromosomal abnormalities affecting human gestation. Its with-Wiedemann Syndrome. There are few reports on fetuses with mosaic prevalence among all pregnancies has been estimated to be approximately uniparental diploidy. Analysis for genome-wide uniparental disomy should 1% to 3%. Triploidy may be the result of either digyny (extra haploid set be considered in fetuses with an atypical phenotype. from mother) or diandry (extra haploid set from father). Two distinct phenotypes observed in triploid fetuses have been shown to be associated with parental origin of the triploidy (McFadden and Kalousek 1991). The diandric phenotype is characterised by a normally sized or mild- ly symmetrically growth retarded fetus with normal adrenal glandws, wanwd i.se shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 157 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06. Cancer genetics on (Internal Tandem Duplication) that codes juxamembrane region in FLT3 receptor and also the point mutation that is P06.001 coded by exon 17 in that is FLT3 receptor kinase region .ITD mutation in Frequency of the DPYD * 2A allele in the Czech population FLT3 receptor was analyzed by PCR in 11,12 exons and M. Koudová1, M. Bittóová1, R. Vlčková1, R. Alánová1,2, I. Slepičková1, E. Lavická1, M. 11 intron , using designed primers. For analysis of point mutation of Exon 17 Hlaváčová1, V. Indráková1, M. Hrabíková1, L. Pavlíčková1; in FLT3 receptor gene ,the genomic DNA of patient was amplified using the 1GHC Genetics, ltd. - Private Medical Facility, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute for the PCR. Resulted PCR products were studied by ECOR V enzyme and RFLP In Care of Mother and Child, Prague, Czech Republic. cases of positive ITD, the Sequencing Method was applied. ITD mutation was observed in 7 cases of 91 studied acute leukemia patients. Under investigation the 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) is uDsePdY Dfor chemotherapy of many tumors. Enzyme sequence of PCR products in the mutation samples showed that different DPD (dihydropyrimidine dehydrog eDnPaYsDe) has a key function for 5-FU meta- insertions of ‚s‘ are seen in JM region. bolism and is encoded by gene. Mutant allele DPYD * 2A is caused by Also, 2 of 91 patients, studied had point mutation of in which their (D835) inherited mutation IVS14 +1 G> A gene and produce non-functional distributions in were not identical in FAB subtypes.Studying history of these enzyme, so the 5-FU treatment leads to toxic reactions. patients, it was cleared that there was not significant relation between 212 males and 210 females (age 18-69 years) of the Czech population were chromosome variations and induction of mutation and it can be decided tested. DNA was isolated from oral mucosa or blood by using QIAmp DNA about the treatment by molecular diagnosis of this mutaions independent Minikit / DNA QuickGene 810. DPYD * 2 allele was tested by using certifica- of FAB classification and before the treatment get started. ted method strip assay (PGX-5FU) and by new created metod High-Resoluti- P06.004 on Melting. Were compared to results of both methods with each other and B-cell activating factor: variability of selected exonic regions and assessed allele frequency in the Czech population. association with acute lymphoblastic leukemia in paediatric patients DPYD * 2A allele was demonstrated in a heterozygous state in 3/422 (0.7%), D. Kalina1, V. Nordheim1, Z. Splichal1, J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, J. Tomandl2, M. Jurajda1, P. in the homozygous state was not found. Czech frequency of DPYP * 2A allele Bienert1, Z. Krenova3, J. Sterba3, A. Vasku1; 0.36% is 2.5 times lower than the reported frequency 0.91% in the Euro- 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, pean population. The results of both methods were completely identical. Czech Republic, 2Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, New cheaper method for detectioDnP DYDPYD * 2A was introduced and validated. Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Paediatric Oncology, University affiliated Hospital, Low frequency of DPYD *T 2YAM aSl,l MelTe HinF Rthe Czech population assume the pre- Masaryk university, Brno, Czech Republic. sence of other mutations in the gene and in other genes affecting the metabolism of 5-FU (eg . ). Genetic test is recommended prior to cancer treatment by 5-FU, because are suitable the lower doses in the Introduction: There is emerging evidence that B-lineage neoplasms have heterozygotes and choose other chemotherapy for the homozygotes with aberrant expression of B-cell activating factor (BAFF, TNFSF13B) that enab- risk of toxic reaction. les the B cells to escape apoptosis. The aim of our study was to investigate circulating levels of BAFF in paediatric malignancies related to B-cell grow- P06.002 th, i.e. B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (B-ALL) and B-lineage lympho- Concordant change of the 5-hydroxymethylcytosine status and mRNA mas. expression at the LZTS1 loci in breast cancer W. Liou, M. Wielscher, W. Pulverer, A. Weinhäusel; Materials and methods: This cross-sectional study included the total of Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria. 18 children with B-lineage neoplasms (11 children with B-cell lymphoma, mean age at onset ± SD: 11.4 ± 4.8 y) and 7 children with B-cell precursor ALL, mean age at onset ± SD: 6.1 ± 6.1 y) whose serum levels of BAFF before Analysis of 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) patterns in DNA for the identification the start of the treatment were examined using the ELISA-based methodo- of epigenetic dysregulation in cancer is well established whereas elucida- logy. Exons 1, 4 and 5 of BAFF gene were investigated using the direct se- tion of the role of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine has yet to be unravelled. TET- quencing in all patients. proteins convert 5-mC, usually found in CpG context, to 5-hmC, which is Results: We observed significant differences in circulating levels of BAFF assumed to be involved in gene expression regulation and might prove to between the B-ALL patients and B-cell lymphoma patients (Bcp-ALL: 7764 be intriguing for cancer diagnostics. DNA samples from breast cancer tis- ± 6329 pg/ml, B-cell lymphoma: 2675 ± 1544 pg/ml; p = 0.0268), the circu- sue (n=6) and blood samples from healthy patients (n=6) were glucosylated lating levels of BAFF being substantially higher in B-ALL cases than in B-cell with 5-hydroxymethylcytosineglucosyltransferase and digested with the re- lymphoma cases. However, no genetic variability was observed in any of ex- striction endonuclease MspI. As control reaction each sample was treated amined exonic regions of BAFF gene. with MspI without prior glucosylation. Thus, the selective glycosylation Discussion: This is the first study to report elevated BAFF levels in acute of 5-hmC to glucosyl-5-hydroxymethylcytosine (glu-5-hmC) enabled us to lymphoblastic leukemia in children. Although highly limited in number of distinguish between 5-hmC and methylated or unmodified cytosine. After cases, our study provides a potential basis for further evaluation of BAFF as digestion, the samples were analysed for 5-hmC in 325 loci by a targeted a diagnostic and/or prognostic marker in B-ALL. microarray. Through this approach the detection of one potential gene loci P06.005 with a significant difference (P<0.05) was achieved. The marker LZTS1was SNP rs4132601 as a possible risk allele of acute lymphoblastic validated with qPCR on breast cancer samples (n=32) and normal tissue leukaemia development in children (n=6), showing a higher level of 5-hmC in normal breast tissue. As next step M. Kreile1,2, L. Piekuse1, B. Lace3, Z. Kovalova2, G. Medne2, E. Cebura2, M. Grutupa2, A. the mRNA expression of LZTS1 was monitored in the validation set, which Krumina3; 1Riga Stradins University, Riga, Latvia, 2Children’s Clinical University Hospital, Riga, enabled us to detect a significant decrease of mRNA expression of the tumor Latvia, 3Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia. suppressor gene LZTS1 in cancerous tissue. Our detection of 5-hmC DNA changes might contribute to understand possible functions of 5-hmC as an epigenetic regulator, because to our best knowledge we are the first that Background. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is the most common show a direct connection between 5-hmC alterations and a changed mRNA- cancer among children, with an annual incidence rate of approximateIlKy Z3F.91 expression on experimental basis. per 1 00 000 children. Recent case control genome wide association studies P06.003 confirmed single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs4132601T>G of Analysis of FLT3 mutations in infant acute leukemia gene,which is located on chromosome 7, to increase significantly risk of F. Zaker1, M. Hashemi2, M. Sheikhi3; developing childhood ALL. There are no available data about rs4132601. 1Tehran Medical University,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad G allele is a risk allele froImKZ fFa1m ilial studies evaluating allelic transmission University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. distortion. Aim. To confirm role of gene rs4132601G allele in relationship to childhood ALL development. FLT3-gene mutations cause leukemic cells to proliferate uncontrollabely Material and methods. Eighteen pre-B ALL patient’ case-parent trios were and leads to a poor prognosis.The aim of this study is to explore appropriate rMebcoruIited at Children’s Clinical University Hospital. The presence of poly- at diagnostic molecular tests and to screen morphism was analyzed using PCR with subsequent restriction enzyme mutations that occur in patients with acute leukemia. digestion and visualized in polyacrylamide gel. Transmission distorti- 91 infant Acute Myeloid Leukemia and Acute Lymphoid Leukemiaof pati- on test was performed as implemented in PLINK 1.07. ents investigate for FLT3- gene mutations in acute leukemia and ITD mutati- Results. SNP rs4132601 G allele frequency in patients was 0,472. Four out of www.eshg.org www.eshg.org158 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 18 patients were homozygous for the risk allele. There was not found signi- T1 and M1 (GSTP1, GSTT1, GSTM1) on the outcome of ALL treatment. ficant association between analyzed SNP in ALL familial studies (p=0.449, Patients and Methods OR=0.75, CI95% 0.35-1.58). Samples from 310 ALL patients treated with 2 consecutive BFM-based pro- Conclusions. In present study, we could not confirm any significant evidence tocols were analyzed. Genetic variants in TPMT, MTHFR, GSTP1, GSTM1 y about rs4132601 G allele as a risk allele. However HapMap project in Euro- GSTT1 were identified by PCR-RFLP or allele-specific PCR. Toxicity was eva- pean samples observed allele frequency was 0.301, thus justifying further luated in 165 patients during con2solidation phase according to WHO crite- studies in a larger sample of ALL patients’ parents’ trios. ria. Children received 2 or 5 g/m/day of methotrexate (MTX) accor2ding to P06.006 risk group, inmunophenotype and protocol, together with 25 mg/m/day of Detection of DNMT3A Mutation in Iranian patients with acute myeloid 6-Mercaptopurine. Patients allocated in High Risk Group also received the leukemia so-called High-risk blocks. The association between toxicity and genotypes L. Kokabee1, A. Ahmadzadeh2, M. Kokabee2, M. Karimipoor1; was assessed by Fisher-exact Test. The pEFS was estimated by Kaplan-Meier 1Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shariati Hospital, Tehran, and differences were assessed by log-rank test. Islamic Republic of Iran. Results Children who received 2 g/m²/day of MTX and carried at least one 677T allele variant in MTHFR showed an increased risk of developing severe Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease with marked heterogeneity in leukopenia (p=0.004) and neutropenia (p=0.003) during the consolidation both response to therapy and survival.The advent of molecular diagnostics phase. MTHFR polymorphisms did not seem to modulate MTX toxicity at has heralded an explosion in new prognostic factors, including mutations in 5g/m²/day. None of the variants evaluated influenced treatment efficacy DNMT3A gene that encodes DNA methyltransferase. significantly. Nevertheless, in the intermediate group risk the pEFS for pati- In this study, mutation in exon 20 of DNMT3A gene of 25 untreated cyto- ents with heterozygous genotype for TPMT was higher than that for the wild genetic normal AML patients (The mean age of patients was 39 year) were type group (87% vs. 71%). analyzed. For this purpose, genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral Conclusions blood (referred to Shariati hospital, Tehran, Iran) by standard methods. PCR Further studies would be necessary to validate these results in order to bet- amplification and DNA Sequencing was performed for exon 20 of the DN- ter define MTX and 6-Mercaptopurine doses in ALL treatment. MT3A gene. P06.009 DNA sequencing at two patients showed 2 different missense mutations in Anti-mutagenic and Pro-apoptotic Effects of Apigenin on Human exon 20 of DNMT3A gene. These missense mutations were predicted to af- Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia fect amino acid R882 (Polyphen 2). A patient had the R882H (CGC to CAC) M. Nouri Long, M. Hashemi, M. Entezari; variant and another one had R882P (CGC to CCC). These two patients had Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. a normal cytogenetic profile and their white-cell counts were significantly higher than other patients. In any case, DNMT3A mutations are associated with poor overall survival, Diet can play a vital role in cancer prevention. Nowadays the scientists are suggesting that they have an important common effect on the potential of looking for food materials which can potentially prevent the cancer oc- AML cells to cause lethal disease. Recent study showed that older AML pati- currence. The purpose of this research is to examine antimutagenic and apo- ents with R882-DNMT3A mutation has shorter disease free survival (DFS), ptotic effects of apigenin in human lymphoma cells. In present study human while in younger patients (<60 years) non R882-DNMT3A mutation have chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Eheb cell line) were cultured in RPMI 1640 shorter DFS. (Sigma), supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum, penicillin-streptomycin, P06.007 L-glutamine and incubated at 37 ºC for 2 days. In addition cancer cell line The simultaneous usage of BAC based high throughput FISH analysis was treated by and apigenin and cellular vital capacity was determined by and the Real-Time PCR technology at the diagnosis of the adult MTT assay. myeloid leukemia cases Then effect of apigenin in human lymphoma B cells was examined by flow D. Yavuz, N. Uzulmez, D. Sunnetci, N. Cine, H. Savli; cytometry techniques. The apigenin was subsequently evaluated in terms Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey. of anti-mutagenic properties by a standard reverse mutation assay (Ames : test).This was performed with histidine auxotroph strain of Salmonella typhimurium (TA100). Thus, it requires histidine from a foreign supply to Introduction Leukemia occurs as a result of limitless and uncontrollable ensure its growth. The aforementioned strain gives rise to reverted colo- production of the blood cells. Among Myeloid Leukemias, CML and AML take nies when expose to sodium azide as a carcinogen substance. During MTT place. In our study, Real-Time PCR and BAC Based High Throughput FISH assay, human chronic lymphocytic leukemia revealed to have a meaningful Analysis methods are utilized simultaneously at the diagnosis of the adult cell death when compared with controls (P<0.01) Apoptosis was induced myeloid leukemia cases and it is aimed to determine the aberrations that suitably after 48 hours by flow cytometry assay. In Ames test apigenin pre- occur in the genome level. vented the reverted mutations and the hindrance percent of apigenin was Materials and Methods:Without a gender consideration, peripheral blood 98.17%.These results have revealed apigenin induced apoptosis in human samples taken from 47 AML or CML diagnosed individuals between ages 18- lymphoma B cells in vitro. 80 are examined with the Real-Time PCR method in the RNA level and with P06.010 the BAC Based High Throughput FISH Analysis method in the DNA level and The APC gene polymorphisms and implication in colorectal cancer scanned to see where most of the genetic damages take place. susceptibility Results:As a result of the Real-Time PCR studies; translocation in 10 pati- M. L. TOMA1, M. Stavarachi1, P. Apostol1, S. Spandole1, T. Burcos2, L. Belusica3, I. Radu1, D. ents (21,3%) and as a result of the FISH Analysis; aberrations with several Cimponeriu1; sizes in various of the genome in 13 patients (27,7%) were encountered. In 1Department of genetics Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Coltea Hospital, Bucharest, 27 patients (54,4%) no existence of genetic damages were seen with either Romania, 3“Prof. Dr. Dimitrie Gerota” Hospital, Bucharest, Romania. methods. The most frequent aberration is the trisomy 8 and loss of Y chro- mosome which was stated in 3 (6,4%) AML cases. Conclusion: The simultaneous usage of these two methods for the diagnosis Colorectal cancer (CRC) is a complex genetic disease, which results from in- of the leukemia cases provides a new approach to hematology in terms of teractions between multiple genes and environmental factors without any supporting the diagnosis and determine the prognosis. single factor having strong independent effects. The goal of the analysis was P06.008 to determine if exist an associations between four polymorphism of APC Pharmacogenetic study in Argentinean children with Acute gene (rs41116, rs465899, rs2229992 and rs2019720) and colorectal can- lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) cer patients. Blood samples were obtained, after informed consent, from in- H. V. Aráoz1, M. E. Foncuberta1, K. D´Aloi2, C. Alonso2, M. S. Felice2, L. P. Chertkoff1; dividuals with CRC (M:F=95:85) and healthy persons (M:F=27:33). Genomic 1Hospital de Pediatría „Prof. Dr. Juan P. Garrahan“. Servicio de Genética, Buenos Aires, DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes using commercial kits Argentina, 2Hospital de Pediatría „Prof Dr. Juan P Garrahan“. Servicio de Hemato- and the APC gene polymorphisms were assessed by PCR-RFLP. Among the oncología, Buenos Aires, Argentina. analyzed polymorphisms, we observed significant differences between pati- ents and control group for polymorphism rs2019720 in terms of the distri- bution of genotypes and alleles. For this polymorphism from the promoter The aim of this study was to evaluate the influence of the most common ge- region of the APC gene we obtained an association with disease. Thus, the CC netic variants in the genes methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR), genotype (OR 2.307) and allele C (OR 1.843) are associated with increased thiopurine methyltransferase (TPMT), and glutathione-S-transferases P1, risk, while the AA genotype (OR 0.453) and allele (OR 0.543) are associated www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 159 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Rammer1, H. Rumpold3, G. Webersinke1; 1Laboratory for Molecular Biology and Tumorcytogenetics, Department of Internal with decreased risk for CRC. In this study, APC polymorphism rs2019720 Medicine, Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria, 2Department of Pathology, may contribute to CRC susceptibility in Romanian patients. Thus, this po- Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria, 3Department of Internal Medicine I, Hospital Barmherzige Schwestern, Linz, Austria. tential link must be evaluated between in much powerful studies. This study was supported by Grant CNCSIS TD 224/2008. P06.011 B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) is frequently accompanied by A novel pathogenic germline mutation in the adenomatous polyposis characteristic cytogenetic abnormalities. Nevertheless, the molecular me- coli gene in a tunisian family with FAP I. M. Abdennadher1, R. A. Dammak1, A. Amouri2, L. Ayadi3, S. Ellouze3, R. Gargouri1; chanisms underlying the disease remain largely unknown. 1Centre de biotechnologie de Sfax, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Hopital Hédi chaker, Sfax, Tunisia, We investigated a translocation between chromosomes 12 and 14 in a pa- 3Hopital Habib Bourguiba, Sfax, Tunisia. tient with B-CLL. FISH confirmed the involvement of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) locus on chromosome 14 in the translocation. The bre- akpoint region on deCr1iv2aotrifv4e2 chromAoSsCoLm1 e 12 was amplified using long di- Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disorder stance inverse PCR and sequenced. Chromosome 12 was disrupted in the which typically presents with colorectal cancer in early adult life, secondary region between the and (Achaete-scute complex homolog to extensive adenomatous polyps of the colon. In addition to the colonic 1) geAnSeCsL. 1The breakpoint on chromosome 14 was located in the switch regi- manifestations, the syndrome presents several extracolonic features inclu- on upstream of the IgH Cµ sequence. As a consequence of the rearrangement ding, congenital hypertrophy of the retinal pigment, osteoma and desmoid the gene was brought into proximity of the enhancer downstream tumors. In this study, we aimed to investigate the clinical and genetic fea- of the IgH joining region and was highly expressed in the bone marrow of tures in a Tunisian family with FAP. Sequence of the APC gene (Adenoma- tAhSeC Lp1atient in comparison to normal bone marrow and that of other B-CLL tous Polyposis Coli) revealed a novel mutation (c.2016-2017 del TA) in exon patients. 15,present in all affected individuals in an heterozygous state. The frames- codes for a basic helix-loop-helix transcription faAcStCoLr1 involved in neu- hift mutation generates a premature stop codon at amino acid 677 of the ral development. The gene is overexpressed in neuroendocrine cancers like APC protein (p. H672Qfs X5). The unaffected family members did not harbor small cell lung cancer and medullary thyroid cancer. plays a role in this mutation, however, a first degree relative of the patient aged of 32 year- cell proliAfeSrCaLti1on and differentiation and interacts directly or through its tar- old was phenotypically normal but carries the c.2016-2017 del TA mutation. gets with members of the NOTCH, the WNT and the SHH pathways. This discrepancy can be explained by the effect of modifier gene which can Though activation in B-CLL seems to be a rare event, deregulation affect the expressivity of the disease. Moreover an other first degree relative of some of its downstream targets or interaction partners, due to different who is the patient’s daughter, aged 8 year-old carries the mutation in an he- molecular mechanisms, could play a role in the genesis of B-CLL. terozygous state and should benefit of a colonoscopical follow-up knowing P06.014 the phenotypic variability in her family. Gene expression profiling of B-CLL in Ukrainian patients exposed to P06.012 low doses of ionizing radiation in post-Chernobyl period Aurora Kinase A (AURKA) and Never in Mitosis GeneA-Related Kinase H. Savli1, D. Sunnetci1, N. Cine1, D. Gluzman2, M. Zavelevich2, L. Sklyarenko2, V. 6 (NEK6) Up- regulated Gene Using cDNA Microarray and Real-time Nadgornaya2, S. Koval2; 1Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, KOCAELİ, Turkey, Reverse Transcription-PCR in Erosive Esophagitis and Esophageal 2RE Kavetsky Institute of Experimental Pathology Oncology and Radiobiology, Kyiv, Adenocarcinoma. Ukraine. E. Kasap1, S. Örenay2, M. Korkmaz3, E. Sarıtaş Yüksel4, B. Ünsal5, E. Kahraman3, Ö. Özütemiz6, H. Yuceyar1; 1Celal Bayar University, Medical Faculty, Department of Gastroenterology, Manisa, Turkey, 2Celal Bayar University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Introduction: After Chernobyl accident, B-cell Chronic Lymphocytic Leuke- Manisa, Turkey, 3Celal Bayar University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical mia (B-CLL) became a predominant form of hematopoietic malignanices in Biology, Manisa, Turkey, 4Ataturk Research and Training Hospital,Department of clean-up workers. We have analyzed gene expression patterns in B-CLL pa- Gastroenterology, İzmir, Turkey, 54Ataturk Research and Training Hospital,Department tients exposed to low doses of ionizing radiation in post-Chernobyl period of Gastroenterology, İzmir, Turkey, 65Ege University, Medical Faculty, Department of with the aims to identify genes associated with disease progression in order Gastroenterology, İzmir, Turkey. to shed light on the biology of progression. Background and Aim: Materials and methods: The samples of the peripheral blood and bone mar- row of 44 Ukrainian B-CLL patients were analyzed morphologically and im- Gastroesophageal Reflux disease is a risk factor for munocytochemically according to new WHO classification. Total RNA was esophageal adenocarcinoma but the studies that investigate the relation- isolated, gene expression levels were determined by microarray method ship between erosive esophagitis and esophageal adenocarcinoma usually comparing with 17 healthy donors. focus on symptom-related evidence or on polymorphism but there are not Results: We investigated interactions using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis any epigenetic gene expression studies on this topic. In this study we aimed (IPA) software and found 1191 network eligible up-regulated genes and tMoe etvhaoludast:eT thhee H ruemlataino nEsphigipe noef teirco Cshivreo mesaotpinh Magoitdiisf iacnadti oenso Epnhzaygmeeasl aRdTe2n Porcoafri-- 3398 Functions/Pathways eligible up-regulated genes, 1225 network eli- cleinrToMm PaCsR i fA trhraerye is a genetic tendency for EAC. gible down-regulated genes and 2657 Functions/Pathways eligible down- regulated genes. Gene networks identified around MYC, HNF1A, and HNF4A, was used to detect the expression of 84 key genes encoding YWHAG, NF-κB1 and SP1 as up-regulated; CEBPA, YWHAG, SATB1 and RB1 enzymes. It was used in 60 patients prospectively (20 patients with control as down-regulated. G protein coupled receptor signaling, Arachidonic Acid gRreosuupl,t s2:0 patients with erosive esophagitis and 20 patients with esophageal and Linoleic Acid metabolsims, calcium signaling, metabolsim of Xenobio- adenocarcinoma). tics by cytochrome P450 are significant up-regulated pathways. Eif2 and AURKA, AURKB, NEK6 were expressed at significantly higher levels Cdc42 signaling, regulation of eIF4 and p70S6k signaling, protein ubiqui- in the esophageal adenocarcinoma than the control group. MBD2, were ex- tination pathway and oxidative phosphorylation are the most significant pressed significantly lower in esophageal adenocarcinoma than the control down-regulated pathways obtained in our study. group. AURKA, AURKC, HDAC9, NEK6, were expressed at significantly higher Conclusion: Our study represents one of the rare genomic studies concer- levels in erosive esophagitis than control group. There was no upregulated ning relationship between ionizing radiation and B-CLL. NF-κB gene net- gene difference between erosive esophagitis and esophageal adenocarcino- work was conspicuous in terms of being determined also in our previous ma. MBD2 was significantly downregulated in esophageal adenocarcinoma studies about the gene expression on prostate cancer and acute myeloid than erosive esophagitis. The NEK6 and AURKA were significantly upregu- leukemia. lCaotendc lguesnioens :in esophageal adenocarcinomas and erosive esophagitis than P06.015 control groups. Frequencies of BCR-ABL1 fusion transcripts among Iranian patients This is the first and pioneering study about the genetic ten- with leukemia dency of erosive esophagitis and esophageal adenocarcinoma. AURKA and M. Hamid1, M. Akbari2; NEK6 are two promising genetic markers for erosive esophagitis and eso- 1Molecular Medicine Division, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, phageal adenocarcinoma. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical P06.013 Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ASCL1 activation as a consequence of a t(12;14)(q23.2;q32) in B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia T. Malli1, H. Bösmüller2, R. Marschon1, W. Kranewitter1, M. Erdel1, S. Deutschbauer1, M. In this study, we report the frequencies of BCR-ABL fusion transcript vari- ants studied in leukemia patients from Iran. The leukemia patients inclu- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org160 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ding 348 chronic myloid leukemia (CML), 72 acute lymphoblastic leukemia Background and Objective: Bladder cancer (BC) is multifactorial disorder (ALL), 34 acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 25 myelodysplastic syndromes and genetic changes may be a crucial etiologic factor. Interleukin-18 and In- (MDS), and 7 chronic lymphoid leukemia (CLL) were enrolled in this stu- terleukin-12 plays an important role as immunomodulatory factors1 i3n7 cGa/nC- dy. Peripheral blood samples were analyzed by multiplex RT-PCR from 486 c-6e0r 7pCa/tAhogenIeLs1is2 (t-h1a6t9 a7u4g)mA/eCnt IFN-γ secretion. To test this hypothesis, we leukemia patients to detect different types of BCR-ABL transcripts.The iMnvaetestriigaalt eadn das Msoectihatoiodns :of IL-18 gene promoter polymorphisms at - , BCR-ABL transcript frequencies for CML, ALL, AML, CLL and MDS patients and with the risk of BC in a North Indian cohort. were 92.0% , 12.5%, 26.4%, 14.2% and 4% respectively for all transcripts. Genetic polymorphisms were analyzed in 200 BC The majority of CML patients with positive BCR-ABL expressed one of the patients and 200 age, ethnicity and sex-matched controls, using Restriction p210BCR-ABL transcripts (86.6%) while the remaining showed other tran- Fragment Length Polymorphism and Amplification refractory mutation spe- scripts (p190BCR-ABL 25 (7.8%)) and p230BCR-ABL 2 (0.6%)). The rate of cRiefiscu-pltosl:y merase chain reaction. The concentrations oILf 1IL8-(1-183 i7n) sGe/rCu m were co-expression of the p190/p210 transcripts were 16(5%). In other types of determined by ELISA. leukemia patients the rates of expression of those transcripts were different. Significant association was observed with IL18h(e-t6e0r7o)- we didn‘t observe a significant correlation between BCR-ABL1 variants, sex zCy/gAo,us genotype having 1.96 folds risk of BC as well as C allele carrieIrL 1a2n(d- type, age and WBC count of studied leukemia patients. v1a6r9i7a4n)t Aal/lCe le having 2 fold and 1.6 fold risk for BC respectively. P06.016 CA genotype also showIeLd1 8a( -h1i3g7h) rGi/sCk (OR=1.59) for BC. While AHR, AHRR, ARNT gene polymorphisms role in bladder cancer heterozygote genotype and C allele carrier showed reduced risk development for BC. Hetero genotype of was associated with risk of re- L. Akhmadishina1, M. Urmantsev2, A. Izmailov2, S. Izmailova2, G. Korytina1, O. currence (HR= 2.35) in BC patients receiving BCG treatment showing least Kochetova1, V. Pavlov2, T. Viktorova1,2; sCuornvcivluasl.i Soenr:um IL-18 levels were significantly higher in BC patients than in 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, Russian Federation, the healthy subjects (p=0.025). 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Our results suggest functional IL-18 polymorphism contribu- tes to the bladder cancer susceptibility. A relation between IL-18 gene poly- morphism and serum content with cancer progression has been registered To assess c.1661 G>A AHR, c.565C>G AHRR, c.522G>C ARNT gene poly- in present study. Further confirmation in large population based studies is morphisms contribution in the development and severity of bladder cancer needed. we carried out a study 220 DNA bladder cancer patients samples and 216 P06.020 healthy individuals DNA samples. No association with disease was obser- Analysis of mitochondrial DNA and p53 gene mutations in bladder ved for AHR polymorphism. It has been established that with increasing tumors c.565C>G AHRR G allele dose, increased its protective effect (additive mo- T. Avcilar1, D. Kirac2, D. Ergec1, G. Koc1, K. Ulucan1, Z. Kaya Atabey3, E. C. Kaspar4, L. del, OR=0.61, [p=0.02). It has been shown ARNT GC genotype is a resistance Turkeri5, A. I. Guney1; factor to disease development (OR=0.56, 95%CI (0.38-0.85), p=0.005). Thus 1Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul, we can assume AHRR and ARNT polymorphisms make a definite contribu- Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, tion to the development and severity of bladder cancer However, the results Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical should be confirmed in replication. Biology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of P06.018 Urology, Istanbul, Turkey. Expression profile of bladder cancer cell lines after treatment with Introduction: potential new drug- Helix lucorum hemocyanin (HlH) O. S. Boyanova1, P. Dolashka2, L. Velkova2, B. Rukova1, I. Dimova1, S. Hadjidekova1, D. The effect of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations and p53 Toncheva1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University- Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Institute of gene mutations have been investigated separately in various tumors; howe- Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phitochemistry, BAS, Sofia, Bulgaria. ver, both of these factors were not investigated in bladder tumors. There- fore, to understand the significance of mtDNA and p53 gene mutations in bMlaedthdoerd sc:a ncer development, these mutations were investigated in bladder Urinary bladder cancer is socially significant healthcare problem- negative cancer patients. environmental factor, infections and aging of the world population are re- Bladder cancer tissues were obtained by radical cystectomy or sponsible for its growing incidence. This requires elaboration of new drug transurethral resection from 30 patients and 27 controls. After the isola- development. Such a potential new drug is Helix lucorum haemocyanin tion of DNA from peripheral blood, exon 5,6,7 and 8 of p53 gene as well as (HlH) - a highly immunogenic glycoprotein with xenogenic nature and a lot ATPase6, Cytb, ND1, and D310 regions of mtDNA were amplified by PCR. of mannose residues. MReustuatlitosn:s were detected with direct sequencing. Results were evaluated The anti-tumor effect of HlH was investigated on CAL-29 and T-24 bladder statistically. tumor cell line and results suggest 35%-50% inhibition of cancer cell viabi- In patient group, 33 mtDNA gene mutations were found in which lity in a dose 500ug/ml of HlH after 72h of incubation. six of them are novel and14 of them cause amino acid changes. Also G8697A, Gene expression profiling of the tumor cells before and after HlH treatment G14905A, C15452A and A15607G mutations were found statistically signi- using the panel for 84 genes for Human Inflammatory cytokines and recep- ficant in patients when compared to controls. Additionally, in patient group tors was performed. three, p53 gene mutations were detected in which two of them are novel. In Results presume more than 10 times upregulation of genes for inflammato- nCoovnecll umsuiotant:ions, adenine insertion at 12570 was found statistically signi- ry response activation, cell mediated immunity and proinflommatory cyto- ficant in patients when compared to controls (66%). kines: C4A, CCR4, CARD-18, IL36A, IL37, CXCR1, IL9, LTA, MIF and TNF in Especially high incidence of the novel mutation at position CAL-29 cell line treated with HlH (G1). In the same group more than 4 time 12570 in p53 gene may be an important marker for the detection of bladder overexpression of TOLLIP gene was achieved. tumors. Therefore it should be investigated with further studies. Also high In T-24 cell line treated with HlH (G2): IFNA2, IL37, CXCR1, IL36B, IL5 and incidence of other mtDNA mutations and p53 gene mutations in patients AIMP1 genes were significantly overexpressed. In the both group CXCR1 suggests that mitochondria and p53 gene could play an important role in gene (for IL8 receptor) had the highest expression. carcinogenesis. Gene for CXCL1 was notably downregulated compare to ABCF1, BCL6, IL1A, P06.021 IL1B in both groups. Distribution of mutations in breast/ovarian cancer susceptibility Our results suggest that HlH can perform both: growth inhibiting effect (on genes in the north-east of Spain. cell line level) and immune response activation (according gene expression M. Infante Sanz1, E. M. Esteban Cardeñosa1, E. A. Velasco Sampedro1, E. Lastra Aras2, profile) in bladder cancer. G. Marcos García3, L. Hernández Sanz1, N. Martínez Martín1, M. Durán Domínguez1, C. Miner Pino1; Acknowledgements: Grant TK01-496/2009 Bulgarian National Science 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Servicio de Oncología, Complejo Hospitalario de Burgos, Fund, Erasmus, DAAD. Burgos, Spain, 3Servicio de Oncología, Hospital Río Hortega, Valladolid, Spain. P06.019 Association of Gene Variants of IL-12 & IL-18 and Serum IL-18 with BRCA1 BRCA2 Bladder Cancer Risk in North Indian Cohort Mutations in susceptibilitybreast/ovarian cancer (BOC) genes show diffe- P. K. Jaiswal, V. Singh, P. Srivastava, R. Kapoor, R. D. Mittal; rent spectra according to geographic origin. To date, few and Sanjay Gandhi Postgradute Institute of Medical Sciences Lucknow India, Lucknow, India. mutations are described as founder in Spanish population, intriguingly lin- ked to geographic distribution. Other susceptibility genes that share key ro- www.eshlegs. ion rFganconi Anemia pathway are now being scanned for mutations. www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 161 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 A total of 1275 unrelated families have been tested for BRCA mutations in sequencing. These results should be compared with those obtained by the the IBGM. Samples and written informed consent of BOC cases and relatives proposed clinical diagnostic tests (eg cobas 4800 BRAF V600 Mutation Test were collected at the Genetic Counselling Units of East CyL. DNA was scruti- Roche©). nized for BRCA mutations by HA-CAE and subsequently sequence analysis of Our previous results show the necessary standardization of the methods of abnPoArLmB2al paRttAeDrn5s1.C Additionally, MLPA was performed in high-risk patients detection of somatic mutations, especially in cases where the determined with familial history of BOC without point mutations. Moreover, other genes result to apply the therapy to the patient. as or were tested in families with specific cancer features. P06.024 Seventy-four different deleterious DNA changes in BRCA genes have Comprehensive BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutational profile in Lithuania been identified in our laboratory in 186 unrelated families (6B9R CBAR1CA1+ R. Janavicius1, V. Rudaitis2, L. Griskevicius3; and 117 BRCA2+ families). Spanish founder mutations were predoBmRi-- 1Vilnius university hospital Santariskiu clinics, Hematology, oncology and transfusion CnAan2t in our samples: 330A>G, 5B2R4C2AC1>A and 5272-1G>A in and medicine center, Vilnius, Lithuania, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Vilnius university hostpital Santariskiu Clinics Centre of Women Health and Disease, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Vilnius 3036_3039delACAA, 5374_5377delTATG and 9254_9258delATCAT in university hospital Santariskiu clinics, Hematology, oncology and transfusion medicine . Remarkably, 187_188delAG- mutation was absent in our regi- center, Vilnius, Lithuania. on. Five different laRrgAeD r5e1aCrranPgAeLmBe2nts in seven ovarian unrelated patients have been detected during MLPA analysisB. RNCoA p1atholoBgRiCcaAl2 mutations were identified in either or . The germline mutations in BRCA1/2 genes are the most significant and well Our target population shows a particular and mutation spec- characterized genetic risk factors for breast and/or ovarian cancer. Detec- tra where Spanish founder mutations are leading. Although mutations in tion of mutations in these genes is an effective method of cancer prevention other susceptibility BOC genes do not yield results so far, comprehensive and early detection. Different ethnic and geographical regions may have dif- studies with larger number of samples would be performed. ferent BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation spectrum and prevalence due to founder P06.022 effect. The population of Lithuania has over several centuries undergone Identification of mutations in patients with bone marrow failure limited mixing with surrounding populations and is mostly of indigenous syndromes associated with the development and progression of MDS Baltic origin, which is different from Slavs. The aim of our study was to asses and acute leukemia full BRCA1/2 mutational profile in Lithuanian population. D. Steinemann1, M. Stanulla2, J. Skokowa3, K. Welte3, B. Schlegelberger1; We performed comprehensive mutation analysis of BRCA1/2 genes in 567 1Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of General Pediatrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany, 3Institute of Molecular unrelated breast and/or ovarian cancer patients (with/without family histo- Haematopoesis, Hannover, Germany. ry) and predictive unaffected patients using high resolution melting (HRM) screening followed by direct sequencing and MLPA for large genomic rear- rangements (LGRs). RESULTS. Overall, we have identified 23 different muta- Most bone marrow failure syndromes (bmfs) are associated with a marked tions (14 in BRCA1 and 9 in BRCA2 genes). Seven frequent pathogenic mu- propensity to transform into myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) or acute leu- tations in BRCA1 gene comprised 51%, 27%, 9%, 3%, 2%, 1,5% and 1,5% kemia, with a cumulative rate of transformation that may exceed 20% (e.g., respectively of all BRCA1 mutations; a single BRCA2 mutation (c.658delGT) in the case of severe congenital neutropenia). The genetic (and epigenetic) comprised 42% of all mutations in this gene. Four novel BRCA1 and 4 novel changes that contribute to malignant transformation in bmfs patients are BRCA2 genes mutations; 2 different LGRs were found in BRCA1. The most largely unknown. common c.4035delA (47% of all BRCA1/2 mutations) appears to be true To elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms of cancer susceptibility Lithuanian (Baltic) founder mutation. Characterization of BRCA1/2 muta- and progression in secondary MDS or acute leukemia in bmfs patients we tional profile in Lithuania enabled to develop screening protocol using HRM conducted a comprehensive genome-wide characterization of genetic aber- for 7 common BRCA1/2 point mutations, which comprise 89% of all muta- rations in the malignant cells at high-resolution level. We used high density tions detected in our country. DNA microarray (Agilent 400k/180 k) and direct sequencing of putative P06.025 cancer genes to analyze a series of 30 CN patients at different time points Analysis of breast cancer predisposition genes by direct sequencing during the progression into MDS and AML (50 samples in total). LargUe GgeTn2oB- and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification technique mGSiTc Ta1lteHraEtAioTnRs4, namely monosomy 7/-7q, +21q or +3q were associated with f. keshavarzi; sanandaj branch, Islamic Azad University , Iran andGenetics Laboratory of Dr.Zeinali, leukemic progression. Beside common copy number variants like , Kawsar Human Genetics, sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran. , , no microdeletions or microduplications werReU dNeXte1c/tAeMd Lin1 the primary or secondary diseases. However, we found recurrent somatic missenseR aUnNdX f1ra/mAMesLh1i ft mutations in the transcription factor Objective: In hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) families, a large in 10% of the patients. RUNX1/AML1 percentage of cases are attributable to hereditary factors compatibles with Notably, mutations have recently been described in Fanconi autosomal transmission of a major tumor suppressor gene with incomple- anemia during leukemic progression. may have a more ge- te penetrance. Screening for BRCA1 mutations is now standard practice for neral role in the malignant transformation of patients with bone marrow HBOC cases in world, and permits medical follow-up. Estimates in different failure syndromes like congenital neutropenia. countries range from 5 to 15% the BRCA1 related cases of hereditary breast P06.023 cancer due to copy number changes of one or more exons of this gene. Exon Detection by HRM and COLD-PCR-HRM BRAF mutational status in deletions and amplifications will usually not be detected by sequence analy- paraffin blocks of melanoma patients sis of the complete BRCA1 gene, therefore MLPA screening is needed. E. Esteban Cardeñosa1, M. Durán Domínguez1, M. Infante Sanz1, G. Martínez García2, C. Miner Pino1; Materials and methods: Hundred probands were fully screened for small 1Instituto Biología y Genética Molecular IBGM-CSIC-UVA), Valladolid, Spain, 2Hospital mutations, and cases for which no causative abnormality were found (n=34) Clínico Universitario, Valladolid, Spain. were screened by MLPA. Results: A total of 5 pathogenic rearrangements in the BRCA1/2 gene were found, accounting for 7% of all mutations and the families with the disease- Over 50% of melanoma tumors have BRAF oncogene mutation. In 2011 causing mutations were 16 percent of all families to review allocated. In we have obtained the first results of clinical trials of targeted therapy with addition, more than 80 percent of reassortments are related to the BRCA1 molecules that act on BRAF signaling pathway (Ras / Raf / MEK / ERK). gene and less than 20 percent due to mutations in the BRCA2 gene. Vemurafenib and GSK2118436 showed an increase in overall survival and CBoRnCcAl,usion: These data demonstrate that dosage analysis is an essential disease-free in p.V600E BRAF carriers patients. In the coming months, these component of genetic screening for cancer predisposition genes. molecules will be approved for clinical use in Europe. MLPA, HBOC The application of analytical methods of high sensitivity in determining the P06.026 mutational status of BRAF will be crucial to the imminent clinical applicati- BRCA diagnostics on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue on of new drugs, as the results will select patients eligible for or untreated. A. Gehrig, C. R. Müller; We have studied the 11 and 15 exons of BRAF by HRM-sequencing, and Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany. COLD-PCR-HRM-sequencing in 20 paraffin blocks of melanoma, previously studied by Sanger sequencing. Mutation was detected p.V600E of exon 15 in 9 of them for HRM, and 11 by Introduction: BRCA1 BRCA2 COLD-HRM, compared to 8 previously detected by sequencing. In about 25% cases, hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (HBOC) is caused The sensitivity of such methods as HRM and COLD-PCR-HRM is greater than by a mutation in the or gene. Therefore, analysis of carrier www.eshg.org www.eshg.org162 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 status in a family should begin with an individual that has been diagnosed by Sanger sequencing with diagnostic primers from patients‘ genomic DNA. with HBOC to maximize the chances of identifying the familial mutation. Of the 8 mutations, 3 were genomic deletions detected by read depth from In many HBOC families, all affected individuals are deceased and the only BROCA data. In addition to the 8 patients with confirmed damaging mutati- material available for genetic analysis is archived pathological specimens. ons, 5 other patients harbored mutations at splice sites, in ATM, BRCA2, and Sanger sequencing of DNA extracted from FFPE tissue is time-consuming RAD51C. These splice variants have been confirmed in genomic DNA; their and expensive due to the comparatively small amounts and high degree of effects on transcripts are being evaluated. We conclude that among Greek DNA fragmentation. patients with familial breast cancer, the mutational spectrum is highly hete- Methods: rogeneous with respect to both loci and alleles. These patients are well ser- Genomic DNA from tumor-free and tumor FFPE tissues from differeBnRtC iAn1- ved by an approach that detects all classes of mutations in all known breast dividBuRaClsA 2was isolated using the QIAamp DNA FFPE Tissue Kit (Qiagen) cancer genes. according to the manufacturer´s instructions. All coding regions of P06.029 and were amplified with the multiplex PCR Kit BRCA-MASTR v2.1 BRCA1 mutation screening in brazilian hereditary breast cancer and (Multiplicom). Next generation sequencing was performed using the 454 ovary syndrome using High Resolution Melting sequencing kit on a GS Junior (Roche). Data were analysed by NEXTGENe N. M. Cury1,2, V. E. F. Ferraz1, M. R. Luizon1, C. A. Ferreira2, A. A. Marques2, W. A. Silva Jr1,2; software (Softgenetics). 1Medical School of Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Brazil, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, Results: 2National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and Cell Therapy (INCTC), Regional Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. In all samples, data analysis showed an even coverage over both genes of aBtR lCeAa2st 15-fold. In the tumor-free sample, no pathogenic mutation was de- tected. Analysis of the tumor sample revealed a “homozygous” variation in About 10% of cases of breast and/or ovary cancer are characterized as here- that could be verified as heterozygous germline variation in DNA iso- ditary, where the presence of germline mutations in BRCA1 gene increases lated from the individual’s lymphocytes. the risk of developing these cancers during woman’s lifetime. The present Conclusions: study aims to characterize BRCA1 gene mutations associated with Heredi- NGS is a powerful tool for the determination of germline variations in frag- tary Breast/Ovary Cancer Syndrome (HBOC). The twenty two coding exons mented DNA from FFPE tissue. of BRCA1 were analyzed using High Resolution Melting method, followed by P06.027 DNA sequencing. MLPA technique was also used to detect gross deletions. We Meiotic drive at the BRCAs loci in Spanish families with breast/ investigated 41 patients from the Cancer Genetic Counseling Service of the ovarian hereditary cancer. A. Lasa1, J. Salazar1, T. Ramón y Cajal2, L. González1, L. Alías1, M. Cornet1, A. Iturbe1, M. HCFMRP-USP that fulfilled the criteria for genetic testing according to NCCN Baiget1; Clinical Practice Guidelines in Oncology v.1.2010. A total of 21 mutations 1Genetics Department,CIBERER U-705. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 2Oncology were identified, two of which are pathogenic: deletion of exons 17-18 and Departement. Hospital Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. deletion of exon 19. Both of them are located in the BRCT domain of BRCA1 Objective BRCA gene, impairing the binding of essential phosphoproteins critical for the ac- tivation of DNA repair complex. Because four missense mutations (Pro871- : To analyse the sex and segregation ratios in families with Leu, Glu1038Gly, Lis1183Arg, Ser1613Gly) occurred simultaneously in half bMreetahsot dans:d /or ovarian cancer in whom pathogenic mutations were identi- of patients, we analyzed the presence of the possible haplotypes also in 82 fied. BRCA healthy controls and verified that the haplotype Leu-Gly-Arg-Gly, composed From the breasBt RaCnAd/or ovarian cancer families referred to our of all the mutated residues, showed significant difference (p <0.05) between hospital, we selected couples that were proven carriers of a mutation. the groups suggesting a possible association with increased risk for HBOC. RWees cuoltms:p ared the sex and allele transmission ratios from 305vs descen- This study suggests that haplotypes consisting of non-synonymous mutati- dents aBsRsuCmA1ing an equal (1:1) distribution. BRCA2 ons can confer increased risk for HBOC due to the cumulative effect of these We found a 2.2 folBdR eCxAc1ess of female births (101 females 49 ma- mutations on the BRCA1 protein structure. Financial Support: Capes, FUND- les for and 110 females vs 45 males for ) in our pedigrees. We HERP, INCTC/CNPq. observed that the mutated allele svesgregated more often than the wild P06.030 type allele (ratio 3:1) in the female oBfRfsCpAr1in g and that the number of carriers Germline BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations in Croatian families with was higher than expected (74% cavrsriers 24% non-carriers). IBnRteCrAe2stingly, breast/ovarian cancer predisposition: Identification of three novel in the male offspring the wild type allele segregated more often than mutations the mutated allele (37% carriers 63% non-carriers). For the gene, V. Musani1, M. Levačić Cvok2, I. Sušac3, M. Sabol1, P. Ozretić1, D. Car1, D. Eljuga4, S. the mutated allele segregated more often than the wild type allele in the Levanat1; fCeomnaclleu soifofsnpsring (carriers 68% vs non-carriers 32%) whereas in the male 1Rudjer Boskovic Institute, Zagreb, Croatia, 2Rudjer Medikol Diagnostics ltd, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Eljuga Polyclinic, Zagreb, Croatia, 4Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, offspring we did not observe TRD. University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia. : The results observed in the female offspring of BRCA1/2 car- riers suggest a clear tendency to transmit the mutated allele (ratio 3:1). The finding of a high proportion of female carriers may have important implica- Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women after non-melanoma tions for the genetic counselling of these families. Prezygote events, meiotic skin cancer, and it is the leading cause of cancer deaths in Croatia. Ovarian drive, survival of gametes or preferential fertilisation are possible explana- cancer is in the fifth place, both in incidence and mortality. About 5-10% tions for the observed TRD. of all breast and/or ovarian cancer cases are hereditary, and germline mu- P06.028 tations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 account for the majority of hereditary breast Genomic capture and massively parallel sequencing identifies and ovarian cancers. The contribution of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations to accurately inherited mutations in several genes in BRCA1 & 2 negative hereditary breast and ovarian cancer in Croatia is unknown. The purpose families with strong breast/ovarian cancer history of this study was to estimate the incidence and spectrum of pathogenic F. Fostira1, T. Walsh2, A. Stavropoulou1, M. Tsitlaidou1, S. Casadei1, S. Glentis1, G. Fountzilas3, I. Konstantopoulou1, M. King2, D. Yannoukakos1; mutations in BRCA1/2 genes in high risk women in Croatia. BRCA1/2 ge- 1NSCR Demokritos, Athens, Greece, Greece, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, nes from 167 candidates (145 families) were scanned for mutations using United States, 3Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece, Greece. High-resolution melting analysis (HRMA), direct sequencing and Quantitati- ve multiplex PCR of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF). We identified 14 pathogenic point mutations in 17 candidates, 9 in BRCA1 and 5 in BRCA2. Of Inherited germline mutations in known and yet to be discovered genes those, 11 have been previously described and three were novel (c.5335C>T predispose for breast and/or ovarian cancer. Mutations within BRCA1 and in BRCA1, and c.4139_4140dupTT and c.8175G>A in BRCA2). No large de- BRCA2 are the most common, but within the last years more than twenty letions or duplications involving BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes were identified. different genes have been linked to breast and/or ovarian cancer suscepti- Two common BRCA1 sequence variants: c.2077G>A and c.4956G>A, were bility. Using BROCA to capture and sequence 21 known breast cancer genes found more frequently in mutation carriers compared to healthy controls. In in one test, we screened genomic DNA from 42 Greek patients with breast silico analyses identified one BRCA1 sequence variant (c.4039A>G) and two cancer diagnosed before the age of 40 and with a family history of breast or BRCA2 variants (c.5986G>A and c.6884G>C) as harmful with high proba- ovarian cancer. Patients had been previously screened for BRCA1 and BR- bility and inconclusive results were obtained for one novel BRCA2 variant: CA2 by Sanger sequencing. Truncating mutations or missenses previously c.3864_3866delTAA. Combination of QMPSF and HRMA methods provides established as damaging were identified in 8 patients, in BRCA1, BRCA2, high detection rate and complete coverage of BRCA1/2 genes. CHEK2, PALB2, and MSH2. All mutations were different. All were confirmed www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 163 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.031 Leiden, Netherlands. Identification of BRCA1/2 mutations in an unselected breast cancer population and referral to the Clinical Genetic Center A. J. van den Broek1, K. de Ruiter1, L. J. van ’t Veer2, R. A. E. M. Tollenaar3, F. E. van Multiplicom’s MASTR assays allow multiplexed PCR amplification of nu- Leeuwen1, S. Verhoef4, M. K. Schmidt1,2; merous target sequences and therefore substantially reduce processing cost 1Psychosocial Research and Epidemiology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, and front-end workload in combination with massive parallel sequencing Netherlands, 2Molecuar Pathology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, (MPS) platforms. This is demonstrated by the fast uptake of the BRCA MA- Netherlands, 3Surgery, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Family Cancer Clinics, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. STR assay in European clinical diagnostic laboratories resulting from the facts that (i) only 5 robust PCR reactions are required to amplify all coding BRCA1/2 exons of BRCA1/2 and (ii) multiple DNA samples can be processed simulta- BRCA1/2 neously. Additionally, processing cost is reduced by a factor 2-5, compared -screening guidelines are aiming to select wBoRmCAe1n/ w2ho have a high to Sanger based sequencing resulting from the combination of highly spe- prior probability to be a mutation carrier. We screened mutations cific amplification (> 96% on target specificity) and a narrow spread factor in research setting and evaluated Dutch diagnostic -screening cri- (i.e. average number of all reads divided by the read number of the lower- teria in a consecutive, hospital-based series of breast cancer patients <50 most amplicon) of 2,5. years. To increase the accessibility of MPS in clinical diagnostics, we worked out We collected clinico-pathological data of 5433 invasive breast cancer pati- and performed a protocol to sequence the BRCA MASTR assay amplicons ents, dBiaRgCnAo1s/e2d <50 years in ten hospitals between 1970 and 2003. Germli- on an Ion PGM Sequencer. Hereto, amplicons from each of 14 DNA samples ne DNA isolated from FFPE-tissue was tested for the most prevalent patho- were enzymatically sheared followed by ligation of individual PGM adap- genic mutations. For 1539 cases from 5 hospitals complete family ters. After mixing the adapter ligated samples, an OneTouch based 100 bp history and hormone receBpRtoCrA 1st/a2tus (ER, PR, HER2) data was available. For ePCR was performed. The resulting ePCR library was sequenced using the patients from one hospital (NKI-AVL; n=1588) we identified those referred 100 bp sequencing kit in combination with a single “Ion316 chip”. The obtai- to the CGC for diagnBoRsCtiAc1 /2 -screening. ned sequencing data showed excellent characteristics and in depth analysis Results shown are preliminary, final results will be available at ESHG 2012. was performed for coverage uniformity on the one hand and base calling We identified 4.9% carriers in this unselected breast cancer cohort. accuracy on the other. We will present detailed conclusions related to the Following current Dutch screening criteria, 60% of these carriers could have performance characteristics and points for future improvements. been identified (sensitivity 58.7%; specificity 78%). Selection of not only patients diagnosed with a triple-negative tumorB RatC Aag1e/ 2<40 years, but also P06.034 those with a triple-negative tumor diagnosed at age 40-50 years increased Study of several hormone receptor gene polymorphisms in breast sensitivity to 73.3% (specificity 71.4%). Of 83 mutation carriers cancer patients fBrRoCmA the NKI-AVL, 46% had been referred to the CGC (data linkage ongoing); A. Belengeanu, D. Stoicanescu, M. Stoian, N. Andreescu, A. Anghel; University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. of those not referred, the 8 carriers diagnosedB aRfCteAr1 1/9294 (discovery of the genes) were less likely to meet the criteria for referral. A more optimal sensitivity and specificity for -screening of breast Androgen receptor gene polymorphisms and PROGINS have been related to cancer patients may be achieved based on age and tumor criteria. a lower risk of breast cancer. The aim of the present study was identifying P06.032 polymorphisms in the structure of the genes that code for progesterone and Validation of three BRCA1/2 mutation-carrier probability models androgen receptors, variations that with or without those of estrogen recep- Myriad, BRCAPRO and BOADICEA in a population-based series of 183 tors, could be correlated with breast cancer. 60 tumor samples from breast German families cancer cases were analyzed in order to find out several polymorphisms in the M. Shoukier1, S. Schneegans1, A. Rosenberger2, U. Engel1, M. Sander3, G. Emons3; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Georg August University, structure of the genes coding for progesterone and androgen receptors and Göttingen, Germany, 2Department of Genetic Epidemiology, University Medical compared to results obtained from the blood analysis of healthy subjects. Center, Georg August University, Göttingen, Germany, 3Department of Gynecology and The number of CAG repeats in the androgen receptor gene ranged from 8 to Obstetrics, University Medical Center, Georg August University Göttingen, Göttingen, 27 repeats. The majority of cases had a range between 17 and 24, the size Germany. of the PCR products being around 230 bp. 15 alleles (12.5%) had less than 16 CAG repeats and 9 alleles (7.5%) had 25 or 27 CAG repeats. Considering the lower number of CAG tandem repeats, all cases with 11/8 repeats were Many studies have evaluated the performance of risk assessment models for in stage III and from the 2 cases with 11/9 repeats, 1 was in stage II and the BRCA1/2 mutation carrier probabilities in different populations, but to our other one in stage IV. The size of the PCR products of PROGINS receptor gene knowledge very few studies have been conducted in the German population was 175 bp for the majority of the cases, only 6 (5%) longer alleles with 481 so far. In the recent study, we validated the performance of three risk calcu- bp were detected. One of the detected cases was in stage IV of malignancy, lation models by names BRCAPRO, Myriad and BOADICEA in 183 German the others were in stage III and all had ductal carcinoma. The obtained data families who had undergone molecular testing of mutations in BRCA1 and are important for developing early detection and treatment strategies. BRCA2 with an indication based on clinical criteria regarding their family P06.035 history of cancer. The sensitivity and specificity at the conventional thres- Bcl-2 gene expression level in tumor and non tumor breast tissues hold of 10% as well as for a threshold of 20% were evaluated. The ability to l. Rostamizadeh1, E. Sakhinia2, S. Hosseini3, M. Sakhinia4; discriminate between carriers and non-carriers was judged by the area un- 1Department of Medical Genetic,Tabriz science medical university, Tabriz, Islamic der the receiver operating characteristics curve. We further focused on the Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz, Islamic performance characteristic of these models in patients carrying large geno- Republic of Iran, 3Research assistant, Genetics & Genomics Department, UAB, USA, Florida, FL, United States, 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom, mic rearrangements as a subtype of mutations which is currently gaining Liverpool, United Kingdom. increasing importance. BRCAPRO and BOADICEA performed almost equally well in our patient population, but we found a lack of agreement to Myriad. The results obtained from this study were consistent with previously pu- Breast cancer is the most common non-skin cancer and the second most blished results from other population and racial/ethnic groups. We suggest frequent cause of death due to cancer among women. There has been much using model specific decision thresholds instead of the recommended uni- interest in the development and use of molecular-based research aimed versal value of 10%. We further suggest integrating the CaGene5 software at identifying biologic markers for the diagnosis of the disease, whilst the package, which includes BRCAPRO and Myriad, in the genetic counselling treatment of breast cancer has progressively improved. This development of German families with suspected inherited breast and ovarian cancer be- is underpinned by the knowledge of the genetic molecular alterations in the cause of the good performance of BRCAPRO and the substantial ease of use patient tissues. Several genes responsible for expression have been identi- of this software. fied by cDNA microarray study in breast cancer, with the Bcl-2 gene indica- P06.033 ted as a likely candidate. In this study, we studied bcl-2 gene expression level MASTR assays on the Ion PGM Sequencer, streamlining the diagnostic in parallel tumor and non tumor breast tissues. Forty samples including 19 workflow tumor, 18 non tumor (marginal) and 3 benign breast tissues which were D. Goossens1, H. P. J. Buermans2, A. Buffone3, J. T. den Dunnen4, R. H. Vossen2, G. Giannini3, J. Del-Favero1; all pathologically diagnosed, were subjected to RNA extraction and polyA 1Multiplicom N.V., Niel, Belgium, 2LGTC, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, RT-PCR with the expression level of bcl-2 quantified using real-time PCR. By Netherlands, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, comparing tumor with non tumor tissues we found bcl-2 over-expression in 4LGTC, Leiden University Medical Center and Center for human and Clinical Genetics, all of the timorous tissues. Our data suggests that dysregulated bcl-2 gene expression is potentially involved in the pathogenesis of breast cancer. In conclusion, using gene expression analysis may significantly improve our www.eshg.org www.eshg.org164 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 BRCA2 PALB2 ability for screening cancer patients and will prove a powerful tool in dia- and but these genes explain only a minority of cases. Germ-line mu- gnosis, prognostic and cooperative group trials in the bcl-2based therapy tations in , encoding the pPaArLtnBe2r and localizer of BRCA2, have also project. been identified as breast cancer susceptibility alleles, andP AthLeB 2geographical P06.036 spread and risks associated with mutations are subject of intense in- Search for novel hereditary breast cancer (BC) genes suggests a vestigation. We have scanned thPeA wLhBo2l e coding region of using high- causative role of heterozygous BLM mutation resolution melting analysis and direct sequencing of genomic DNA samples E. N. Suspitsin1,2, A. P. Sokolenko1,2, A. G. Iyevleva1,2, N. V. Mityushkina1, S. N. Abysheva1, D. to investigate the prevalence of mutations in a series of 158 German E. Matsko1, E. N. Imyanitov1,2; patients with bilateral breast cancer anPdA iLnB a2 second series of 253 unselec- 1N.N. Petrov Institute of Oncology, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St.-Petersburg ted patients with epithelial ovarian cancer from Bashkortostan. 17 sequence State Pediatric Medical Academy, St.-Petersburg, Russian Federation. alterations were identified. Truncating mutations were identified in 2/158 (1.3%) bilateral breast cancer patients and in 1/253 (0.4%) ova- rian cancer patients. One nonsense mutation, p.E545X was new, whereas Sequencing analysis of candidate genes involved in the maintenance of ge- the two other mutations, c.509_510delGA and c.172_175delTTGT had been nome integrity (CHEK1, PARP1, PARP2, BRIP1, BLM, DDB, RNF8, FANCG, previously described. The c.172_175delTTGT deletion, found in one Russi- BARD1, RAD51C) in 95 hereditary BRCA1/BRCA2/NBS1/PALB2/TP53 an ovarian cancer/ melanoma patient, was subsequently screened in 365 mutation-negative BC cases has revealed 2 women with clearly inactivating bPAreLaBs2t cancer cases from Bashkortostan, and two further carriers were de- genetic event. Both cases were heterozygous for c.1642 C>T (Q548X) muta- tected among patients of Russian descent (0.5%). Our results indicate that tion in the Bloom Syndrome gene, BLM. The subsequent extended study has germ-line mutations account for a small but not negligible fraction of confirmed frequent occurrence and BC-predisposing role of the above allele breast cancer, though they make a minor contribution to ovarian cancer. The (17/1498 (1.1%) BC patients vs. 2/1093 (0.2%) healthy females, p = 0.004). observation that two of the three identified truncating mutations have been As expected for hereditary BC gene, the BLM heterozygotes tended to be described in different studies, may provide a rationale for mutation-specific overrepresented in patients with family history of the disease, younger age screening approaches in extended series of Eastern and Central European at onset, or BC bilaterality. Unlike BRCA1-related hereditary tumors, BLM- cancer patients. associated BC were frequently hormone receptor positive (13/18, 72%). P06.040 While virtually all BC arising in BRCA1/2 carriers contain somatic deletion Associations Between HER2/neu ,TOP2A ,Chromosome 17 Copy of the remaining wild-type allele, none of BLM-driven cancers demonstra- Numbers and RASSF1A , APC Gene Promotor Hypermethylations of ted loss of heterozygosity at BLM locus. 5 patients carrying BLM mutation Patients with Breast Cancer were treated by neoadjuvant therapy and therefore were available for im- A. Nursal, O. Cilingir, M. Ozdemir, S. Artan, B. Durak Aras, E. Ciftci; mediate evaluation of tumor chemosensitivity: 3 showed nearly complete Eskişehir Osmangazi University, Eskişehir, Turkey. pathological response, and 2 experienced partial clinical response. Elevated frequency of BLM Q548X mutations in Russian (Slavic) subjects allows to expect noticeable occurrence of Bloom Syndrome in Russia and neighboring Associations Between HER2/neu ,TOP2A ,Chromosome 17 Copy Numbers countries; absence of appropriate clinical records in major Russian genetic and RASSF1A , APC Gene Promotor Hypermethylations of Patients with Bre- centers suggests that at least some of these patients remain undiagnosed ast Cancer and/or have relatively mild presentation of this disease. Backround: Breast cancer is an important public health problem worldwide. P06.037 The HER2 /neu protooncogene is amplified and overexpressed in approxi- Whole genome expression, canonical pathway and gene network mately 25-30% of invasive breast carcinomas. DNA topoisomerase 2-alpha analysis in breast cancer enzyme controls and alters the topologic states of DNA during transcription. D. Sunnetci1, N. Canturk2, N. Cine1, C. Ercin3, T. Simsek2, H. Savli1; RASSF1A and APC gene are putative tumor-suppressor genes that are fre- 1Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, KOCAELİ, Turkey, quently inactivated epigenetically in breast cancer. 2Department of General Surgery, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, KOCAELİ, Method: In this study we analysed retrospective HER2, TOP2A gene and Turkey, 3Pathology Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, KOCAELİ, Turkey. CEP17 copy number alterations by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in primary tumor core biopsies from 60 high-risk primary breast cancer pa- tients (tumors ≥2 cm and/or lenfatic metastase and/or distant metastases and/or under 40 years) . The methylation levels of the RASSF1A, APC gene Introduction: Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women and con- promoters were assessed Methylation Sensitive High Resolution Melting stitutes 23% of all female cancers. Despite advances in treatment options, Analysis (MS-HRM). such as surgery and chemotherapy, breast cancer still remains being the Results: In our study, HER2/neu amplifications were identified in 25% and most deadly second malignancy in women. Therefore, requirement of new TOP2A coamplications in 53.4% and deletions in 13.3% of patients. HER2/ prognostic markers is increasing. For this purpose, we studied gene expres- neu gen amplification is found to be associated with high grade, ER negativi- sion profiles of breast cancer. ty and PR negativity. Polysomy17 was present in 23.3% of patients. RASSF1A Materials and Methods: RNA samples were obtained from healthy and can- and APC methylation frequencies were 96.6% and 43.3%. HER2/neu gene cerous tissues taken from twenty patients diagnosed as breast cancer. These amplification was found to be high RASSF1A promotor methylation levels. RNA samples were hybridized with microarray chips (Agilent Human 4 X Conclusions:. Our study is important as being the first study that analyzes 44K Oligo Microarrays). Gene expression, canonical pathway and network association between HER2/neu, TOP2A gene copy numbers and RASSF1A, analysis were performed using GeneSpring GX 11.0 software. APC gene promotor methylation status in Turkish population. Results: In our study, we found 585 downregulated and 413 upregulated ge- Key words: Breast cancer, HER2/neu gene, TOP2A gene, FISH, RASSF1A nes. The canonical pathways significantly regulated were process of the im- gene, APC gene, Methylation, MS-HRM Analysis mune system, T cell differentiation, T cell activation, lymphocyte activation, leukocyte activation, lymphocyte differentiation, leukocyte differentiation, P06.041 immune system development, cell activation, hematopoietic or lymphoid Necessity of HPV genome screening in women due to its role in breast organ development, hematopoiesis, signal transduction, immune response, cancer signal transmission, the signal process, part of the plasma membrane, T cell K. Haratian1, A. Mohseni Meybodi2; 1Department of Pathobiology,Alborz University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic receptor complex. Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetics,Reproductive Biomedicine Research Conclusion: In this study, FOXM1, IFNG and MMP9 pathways has been iden- Center,Royan Institute for Reproduction Biomedicine, ACECR., Tehran, Islamic Republic tified among the data sets. These candidate pathways are important for the of Iran. development of new biomarker panels to use for breast cancer prognosis in clinical practice. P06.038 It seems, there is an increment document that high-risk human papilloma vi- Contribution of truncating PALB2 mutations to breast and ovarian rus (HPV) is involved in tumors in over just cervical cancer. For instances, it cancer is already almost accepted that some HPVs have a major role in a significant N. Bogdanova1,2, D. Prokofyeva3,1, T. Dörk1; proportion of head and neck tumors.It also has long been hypothesized that 1Gynaecology Research Unit, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Clinics some tumorigenic viruses, such as HPV, may have etiological or even helping of Radiation Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Institute of role in some human breast cancers. A number of reports have indicated HPV Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Science Center, Ufa, Russian Federation. DNA in breast cancer tissue specimens and some normal or pre-cancerous BRCA1 breast tissues. Many of them rely on standard polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which is criticized for its tendency for contamination. We examined Familial breast and ovarian cancer is associated with mutations iwn ww.e shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 165 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.044 Association of polymorphisms in low-penetrance genes with breast the presence, genotype, viral load, and physical status of HPV in a number of cancer risk in Bulgarian cohort of familial cases and controls Iranian patients with breast carcinoma utilizing Real-time PCR setting (with R. Dodova1,2, D. Kachakova1,2, A. Vlahova3, T. Dikov3, S. Christova3, S. Valev4, M. sequencing), and immunohistochemistry based on HER2/neu overexpres- Taushanova4, C. Timcheva4, V. Mitev1,2, R. Kaneva1,2, A. Mitkova1,2; sion. In this presentation, we attempt to summaries our achievements in 1Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department of Medical Chemistry and using mentioned technologies to explore how HPVs may help to cause or Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of General and Clinical Pathology University Hospital “Aleksandrovska”, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, progress malignancies especially in those that are affected by some other 4Medical Oncology Clinic National Oncology Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. tumorigenic factors. Finally, the exigency of women screening for HPV and its potential importance in developing breast cancer, will be discussed. Background: BRCA1/2 P06.042 Although the germ-line mutations in and other bre- Multiplex single-nucleotide primer extension assay for detection of ast cancer susceptible genes account for up to 10% of the familial cases, low-penetrance breast cancer susceptibility polymorphisms the majority of patients with this diagnosis do not harbour mutations in the I. Maleva1, G. Bozhinovski1, E. Smickova2, G. Kondov3, Z. Spirovski3, D. Plaseska- Karanfilska1; main disease associated loci. This observation has led to the proposal that 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of tMhae tseursiacelsp taibnidli tmy etoth bordesast cancer is determined by a large number of loci, Macedonia, 2Institute of Radiotherapy and Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, University “Ss each with a small effect on the breast cancer risk. Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Clinic for : We have performed a case-control study of eight Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, University “St. Cyril and Methodius”, SNPs, previously associated with breast cancer in extensive GWASs. The stu- Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. died group consisted of 191 Bulgarian patients with family history of breast cancer and 151 healthy controls. The genotyping was performed by TaqMan tReecshunlotslo agny da nddis cthues srieosnu:lts analysed using Plink and VassarStat Statistical Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers among women in develo- Calculator. FGFR2 ped countries. Approximately 10% of sufferers have a genetic predisposition Three of the studied polymorphisms: rs2981579 and 25% of patients with familial breast cancer carry mutations in BRCA1 and rs2981582 in gene and rs3757318 in C6orf9, demonstrated or BRCA2 high-penetrance genes. Recently, genome-wide association stu- significant association with breast cancer risk. The genotype A/A of both dies have identified several SNPs as low-penetrance breast cancer suscep- rs2981579 (OR=1.668; p=0.007) and rs2981582 (OR=1.782; p=0.005) ap- tibility polymorphisms. The aim of this study was to develop an easy, rapid peared to increase the risk of breast cancer. The homozygosity for the G al- and cost-effective method for genotyping of low-penetrance breast cancer lele in rs3757318 (OR=1.678; p=0.03) was also associated with increased susceptibility polymorphisms within six genes and gene-free genomic regi- risk, while the genotype A/G appeared to have protective effect (OR=0.472; ons. We have designed a multiplex single-nucleotide primer extension assay pCo=n0c.0lu03si)o. nTsh:e other studied SNPs did not show any statistically significant to genotype rs2981582 (FGFR2), rs3817198 (LSP1), rs889312 (MAP3K1), association with brFeGasFtR c2ancer in the investigated sample. rs3803662 (TNRC9/LOC643714), rs1328615 (8q) and rs1045485 (CASP8) Our results demonstrated significant association of rs2981579 in a single reaction. Using this method, we analyzed 92 breast cancer patients, and rs2981582 in , and rs3757318 in C6orf9 with increased breast of which 26 with familial breast cancer and 86 controls from the general po- cancer risk which is in concordance with previous GWASs. pulation. Our results showed that SNP rs1045485 in CASP8 is significantly P06.045 associated with decreased breast cancer risk [p=0.0081; OR (95%CI)=2.37 Oestrogen Receptor-α Gene Polymorphism (T392C) in Iranian Women (1.24-4.56)], while rs889312 in MAP3K1 showed a significant association with Breast Cancer with increased breast cancer risk [p=0.0151; OR (95%CI)=2.31 (1.16-4.61)] S. Abbasi; only among patients with positive family history of breast cancer. In conclu- Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sion, we present an effective new genotyping method that can be applied in medium-scale association studies. P06.043 Background: Receptor-mediated oestrogen activation plays a part in the Evaluation of cisplatin and cisplatin nanoparticles on the MCF-7 cell development and progression of breast cancer. Evidence suggests that al- line terations in oestrogen signalling pathways, including oestrogen receptor-α M. J. Mokhtari1, A. Akbarzadeh2, M. Hashemi3, R. Mahdian4, G. Javadi3, Z. Hoseineian3, H. (ESR1) oc cur during breast cancer development. Mohammadi5; progression of breast cancer. 1Department of Biology, Zarghan Branch, Islamic Azad University, Zarghan, Islamic Methods:The ESR1 gene was analysed in 150 Iranian patients who were Republic of Iran, 2Pilot Biotechnology Department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic newly diagnosed with invasive breast tumours and in 147 healthy individu- Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Molecular Medicine, als. Single -strand conformation polymorphism PCR and direct sequencing Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic were done. of Iran, 5Young Researchers Club, Kermanshah Branch, Islamic Azad University, Findings: Silent single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), as reported in Kermanshah, Islamic Republic of Iran. previous studies, were found but at significantly different frequencies. Introduction The frequency of allele C/C in codon 10 rs2077647 (T/C, S392S) of exon 1 was significantly higher in patients with breast cancer (45.7%) than in : Breast cancer is one of leading causes of mortality worldwi- the controls (39.8%; p=0.148). We found that allele C/C in codon 10 was de. Cisplatin is a traditional cancer drug commonly used in chemotherapy significantly more common in patients with breast cancer who had a fa- for killing breast cancer cells. Modulation at the mRNA levels of apoptotic mily history of breast cancer (78.9%) than in those without such a history related genes often correlate with the sensitivity of various types of cancer (40.8%; p=0.001). The allele 1 in codon 10 showed an association with the cells to chemotherapeutic agents. Nanoparticulate drug delivery systems occurrence of lymph node metastasis (58.7% and 43.3% with and without aMrae tbeeriinagl daenvde lmopeetdh otod sdeliver smaller doses of chemotherapeutic agents in lymph node me tastases, respectively). Therefore, this SNP marker further an effective from and control drug distribution with in the body. increased predictive accuracy in the Iranian population. : In the present study, we synthesized the magne- Interpretation:Our data suggest that ESR1 polymorphisms correlated with tic nanoparticles. Then nanoparticles were loaded by cisplatin. ThenB,C cLe2l-l various aspects of breast cancer in Iranian women, as determined during toxicity was evaluated by the MTT assay. Finally, we compared the effect of pre-surgical assessment, might represent a surrogate marker for predicting Rciespsulalttin and cisplatin nanoparticles on the mRNA expression levels breast cancer. gene in MCF-7 breast cancer cell line. P06.046 : Our initial results indicate that nanoparticles are effective antican- Prognostic significance of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator cDeirs caugsesnitosn. We also found that cisplatin nanoparticles induce apoptosis in (uPA) and its inhibitors (PAI-1 and PAI-2) mRNA expression in Iranian hinu vmitarno breast cancer cell line. breast cancer : In the present study, we have shown that the strongly increased L. Kokabee1, R. Esmaeili2, K. Majidzadeh-A2, R. Mahdian1, M. Karimipoor1; cytotoxicity of cisplatin nanoparticles compared with the freine vdirvuog 1Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Center for Breast in MCF-7 cell line. In summary, our results indicate that cisplatin nanoparti- Cancer (ICBC), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cles are effective anticancer agents and justify study of these agents . One of the most thoroughly studied systems in relation to prognostic re- levance in breast cancer is the plasminogen activation system. The system comprises of the urokinase Plasminogen Activator (uPA) and its inhibitors, the Plasminogen Activator Inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) and Plasminogen Activator www.eshg.org www.eshg.org166 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Inhibitor-2 (PAI-2). In this study, we are investigating the prognostic value 5 months in non-mutated cases. The effect of the newly found aberration on of the expression level of uPA and PAI-1 and PAI-2 in 30 sporadic breast protein structure and function should be studied further. cancer patients. P06.049 The mRNA expression level of uPA, PAI-1 and PAI-2 was analyzed in tumor Investigation of the telomerase expression level in colon cancer tissues and its adjacent normal tissues from 30 patients by quantitative PCR. patients and its relation with multi drug resistance. Gene fragments were amplified in a ABI 7300 real-time PCR system using s. shabani, f. mahjoubi; gene-specific primers and Taq Man probe. The results were normalized to national institute of genetic engineering and biotechnology, tehran, Islamic Republic of TFRC and ACTB mRNA. The data of real-time RT-PCR will be compared with Iran. clinical course of the disease (three years follow up). Quantitative real-time RT-PCR is a highly sensitive, reproducible, and fast method for measuring gene expression of uPA, PAI-1 and PAI-2 ini nb rveiatrsot One of the most common causes of mortality in the world is cancer. In spite cancer. Some studies have shown the relationship between high expression of recent advances in the treatments of cancer, the clinical outcome is far of UPA system and aggressive course of breast cancer. In addition away from expectation yet. Drug resistant remains a major obstacle to the studies of high expression of UPA have been shown the modulation of an- effective cure of almost all cancers. We aimed to investigate the possible as- giogenesis. sociation between telomerase expression level and multidrug resistance in P06.047 colon cancer patients. Real-Time Analysis of the expression of isoforms angionegnicaanti- In this regards tumor and adjacent normal tissues of 80 colon cancer pa- and pro-angiogenic in breast cancer. tients were assessed for the expression level of telomerase by Real Time R. CASTRO1, P. M. Biselli-Chicote1, V. R. Regiani1, D. S. Neto1,2, V. R. Regiani1, N. A. B. RT-PCR. Junior1,3, J. L. E. Francisco1,3, É. C. Pavarino1, D. A. P. C. Zuccari1,4, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo1; Here we are presenting our data regarding to the correlation between telo- 1Faculty of Medicine of Sao Jose do Rio Preto, SÃO JOSÉ DO RIO PRETO, Brazil, merase level and failure to chemotherapy in this group of Iranian colon can- 2Pathology Service, Hospital de Base, São josé do rio preto, Brazil, 3Department of cer patients. To our best knowledge, this is the first data derived from an in Gynecology and Obstetrics, Hospital de Base, São josé do rio preto, Brazil, 4Center for vivo study. Our data will be compared with other published reports which Studies and Research on Cancer Faculty of Medicine, São josé do rio preto, Brazil. had the focus on only in vitro (cell lines) system. P06.050 Impact of cancer-testis antigens crosstalk with self-renewal cell Breast cancer is the most frenquently diagnosed cancer and the leading cau- signaling pathways in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma se of cancer death in females. About half breast cancer cases and 60% of the M. R. Abbaszadegan, M. M. Forghanifard; deaths are estimated to occur in economically developing countries. Angio- Human Genetics Division, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, genesis plays a critical role in local growth of solid tumors and subsequent- Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. ly in the process of distant spread. Numerous studies have demonstrated the importance of angiogenesis in cancer. Nevertheless, 3’ alternative splice site selection in exon 8 of VEGF gene results in a sister family of isoforms, Aberrant expression of cancer-testis antigens (CTAs) is reported in variety VEGFxxxb, which are anti-angiogenic and downregulated in tumor tissu- of tumor cell types, but their functions and related pathways in tumorigene- es. We quantitatively analyzed the expression of pro-angiogenic and anti- sis are poorly understood. Several CTAs are expressed in human cancers as angiogenic VEGF isoforms in breast carcinoma and adjacent normal tissue well as human mesenchymal stem cells. CTAs play a role at earlier stages of samples. For that purpose, total RNA from 16 tumor samples and their re- embryonic development, stem cell self-renewal and tumorigenicity. Role of spective margins were obtained and synthesized cDNA from. We designed CTAs was examined in tumorigenesis of esophageal squamous cell carcino- and synthesized primers and specific probes for each isoform, which were ma (ESCC) with respect to cell signaling pathways. Gene expression analysis used for the analyses of expression by real time PCR. So far, were observed of MAGE-A4, LAGE1 and NY-ESO1, EGFR, TWIST1, PYGO2 and MAML1 were different expression between the anti- and pro- angiogenic isoforms in the performed using comparative real-time RT-PCR in 44 ESCC patients. Over- tumor samples compared to normal tissue. These results evidence that the expression of all genes was detected in 90.2%, 39%, 41.5%, 43.9%, 41.5%, selection of different splicing sites may actually interfere in tumor angioge- 36.6% and 43.9% of samples, respectively. There are significant correlations nesis and consequent tumor progression and metastasis. A bigger sample among gene transcripts expression as it was shown in the table below. MA- size might help in more advanced studies and collaborate to better deve- GE-A4, TWIST1 and MAML-1 expression were significantly correlated with lopment of researches on tumor angiogenesis involving VEGF gene. Studies lymph node metastasis, MAGE-A4 was significantly correlated with tumor approaching control of VEGF splicing in order to promote the selection of staging and TWIST1 expression was significantly correlated with tumor the distal splicing site (anti-angiogenic) instead of proximal site (pro-angio- invasion (p<0.05). Hierarchical gene clustering data revealed that TWIST1 genic) might promote an efficient therapy for breast cancer. is related to CTA genes. Correlated overexpression of CTAs and key factors P06.048 of cell signaling pathways imply a strong cross talk between them through A novel missense mutation in IDH2 gene of a glioma patient tumorigenesis in ESCC. Interactions of CTAs with Twist1 could trigger epi- G. Stancheva1,2, T. Goranova2, M. Laleva3, M. Kamenova4, A. Mitkova1,2, N. Velinov3, R. thelial-to-mesenchymal transition and favor metastasis of tumor cells. This Kaneva1,2, G. Poptodorov3, V. Mitev1,2, N. Gabrovsky3; provides a support for role of CTAs in the self-renewal and differentiation 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University, Sofia, of tumor cells. Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Neurosurgery, University Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment and Emergency Gene expression correlations between CTAs and Self-Renewal Genes Medicine “N.I.Pirogov”, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Pathology, University LAGE1 MAGEA4 NY-ESO1 EGFR MAML1 PYGO2 TWIST1 Multiprofile Hospital for Active Treatment and Emergency Medicine “N.I.Pirogov”, Sofia, LAGE1 0.008 0.011 Bulgaria. MAGEA4 0.008 0.018 0.016 NY-ESO1 0.018 0.043 IDH2 gene encodes mitochondrial NADP-dependent isocitrate dehydroge- EGFR 0.011 0.001 nase - an enzyme that catalyzes the oxidative decarboxilation of isocitrate MAML1 0.006 0.0041 to α-ketoglutarate. Mutations in IDH2 and its cytosolic isoform - IDH1, were PYGO2 0.001 0.006 found in brain tumours and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While the data TWIST1 0.016 0.043 0.041 about survival benefit of AML patients with mutations are controversial, IDH1 and IDH2 aberrations in gliomas are associated with better progno- sis. P06.051 A recent analysis by direct sequencing of exon 4 of IDH2 gene in brain tu- SDHB germline mutation in a patient with Carney-Stratakis syndrome mour tissues, including astrocytomas and oligodendrogliomas, revealed a M. Thalhammer1, E. Heitzer2, B. Liegl-Atzwanger3, M. Auer2, M. R. Speicher2, J. B. Geigl2; 1Division of General Surgery, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 2Institute of new mutation in IDH2 gene that was not described to date. It was a homozy- Human Genetics, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria, 3Institute of Pathology, Medical gous one-nucleotide A-to-G substitution at position 386 which caused ami- University Graz, Graz, Austria. no acid change lysine to arginine (c.386A>G, K129R). The aberration was in a highly conserved region of the protein which suggested that it might be associated with the development of the brain tumour. The mutation was Carney-Stratakis syndrome is a recently described, very rare familial syn- detected in one patient with glioblastoma (grade IV) who had overall survi- drome characterized by gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) and pa- val of 30.3 months. This was similar to median survival time in our group of ragangliomas. The majority of cases are caused by germline mutations of patients with already known IDH2 or IDH1 mutations - about 32 months vs. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 167 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 SDHB, SDHC SDHD the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) subunit genes and . Widely known as a sexually transmitted agent, genital human papilloma- Tumor predisposition is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with virus (HPV) is considered to be major factor in the development of cervi- incomplete penetrance. cal intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical carcinoma. HPV can be associated Here, we present a 47-year old patient with a gastrointestinal stromal tu- with benign warts (HPV types 6 and 11) and related to anogenital tumors mor (GIST) diagnosed at the age of 17 years. Because of severe anemia, total (HPV types 16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 45 ). Practically 100% of cervical cancer - the gastrectomy was performed at the age of 45 years, exhaustive clinical scree- second most common tumor in women worldwide, contain DNA sequences ning revealed a non-functioning, abdominal, extra-adrenal paraganglioma. of high-risk oncogenic genital papillomavirus. Effective diagnosis of these As a consequence, the patient was referred to our genetic service and mole- infections today is almost entirely related to the use of molecular techniques cular genetic diagnosis was initiated. Family history did not reveal the pre- for detection of viral DNA and identification of viral genotypes. sence of any paragangliomas, gastric stSrDoHmBal sarcomas or further tumor The objective of our study was to investigate the incidence and type of ge- entities. Molecular genetic analysis by direct DNA sequencing showed a pu- nomic imbalances in cervical lesions with different HPV status. We have tative splice mutation c.287-2A>G in the -gene. This mutation has been applied array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array CGH) in selected reported previously in patients with inherited paraganglioma but never in groups. In HPV16 positive cervical cancer samples we discovered pathologic the context of Carney-Stratakis syndrome. The damaging effect of the muta- deletions in 11q22.1, 1p36.23 and 3q deletion, as well as some benign po- tion in mRNA splicing could be confirmed on the basis of cDNA analysis. By lymorphisms. In the group of cervical cancer, positive for low risk HPV, we array-CGH we identified the most frequently reported genetic alteration in found only polymorphic copy number variations. In samples with cervical paraganglioma, i.e. loss of chromosome 1q. In addition, we observed a loss dysplasia, positive for HPV16, pathologic imbalances were detected such as of chromosome 11. deletions in 4p16.2, 17p13.3 and 22q13.33. As a consequence, especially in young patients with GIST and/or paragan- This report summarizes and complements the current information on the gliomas molecular diagnostics should be offered to identify germline mu- prevalence of human papillomaviruses in the Bulgarian population and tations in SDH genes. This is of high relevance as mutated tumours in most presents the results of our research on benign, precancerous and cancerous cases do not respond to treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. changes using array CGH analysis. P06.052 P06.055 Evaluation of Caspase-8 -652 6N ins/del polymorphism in breast Importance of SULT1E1 in the cervical carcinogenesis cancer C. Backsch, K. Grabert, A. Schneider, L. Jansen, I. B. Runnebaum, M. Dürst; M. Hashemi, E. Eskandari Nasab, M. Taheri, H. Rezaei, M. Mashhadi, F. arbabi, S. Klinik für Frauenheilkunde und Geburtshilfe, Universitätsklinikum Jena, Jena, Germany. Hashemi, M. Jahantigh; Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran. Background: Persistent infection with a high-risk human papillomavirus type is a pre- In the present study, we examined the impact of CASP8 -652 6N ins/del requisite for the development of cervical cancer (CxCa). However, additio- (rs3834129) and the risk of breast cancer in a sample of Iranian population. nal genetic alterations, including the reactivation of telomerase activity, are This case control study was done on 236 breast cancer patients and 203 required. Our previous studies (microcell-mediated chromosome transfer, cancer free healthy female. Bi-directional PCR allele-specific amplification microarray-analysis, loss of heterozygosity analysis) revealed a role of the (Bi-PASA) was used for detection of CASP8 -652 6N ins/del polymorphism. chromosomal region 4q13 in the regulation of telomerase. Our findings indicated that the CASP8 -652 6N del/dl genotype was inverse- Objectives: ly associated with breast cancer risk (OR=0.33, 95% CI=0.17-0.65, p=0.001). The aim of the present study was to validate the differential expression of The frequency of del allele in cases and controls were 29.1% and 38.6%, one of our candidate genes, SULT1E1, located within 4q13 in biopsy materi- respectively. An inverse association between CASP8 6N del variant and the al. Furthermore the ability of SULT1E1 to suppress telomerase activity and risk of breast cancer (OR=0.66, 95% CI=0.66-0.87, p=0.002) was found. to induce senescence in different functional assays is investigated. In conclusion, the finding suggests that the CASP8 -652 6N del polymor- Methods: phism plays a protective role in susceptibility to breast cancer in our po- Gene expression of SULT1E1 and hTERT was validated by real-time PCR in pulation. normal cervical tissues, high-grade lesions (CIN2/3) and CxCa. SULT1E1 P06.053 was expressed stably in various cell lines in order to analyze its effects on Evaluating of CBX8 Gene Expression in Gastric cancer telomerase activity, telomere length and senescence using telomerase PCR M. Ghalandari, M. Behmanesh, M. Sadeghizadeh; ELISA kit, telomere length kit and ß-galactosidase staining, respectively. tarbiat modares university, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Results and Conclusions: The mRNA expression level of SULT1E1 was significantly (p<0,05) lower in CxCa as compared to CIN2/3 or normal tissue. Only low levels of SULT1E1 Cbx8 is a member of polycomb group proteins which their functions in de- were detected in the cervical carcinoma cell lines SiHa, ME180 and SW756. velopment and progression of cancer has been investigated a lot. CBX8 re- Reconstitution of SULT1E1 via lentiviral-mediated gene transfer in these cell gulates proliferation of diploid human and mouse fibroblasts and its ectopic lines resulted in a slightly decreased telomerase activity in SiHa and ME180 expression leads to repression of the Ink4a-Arf locus and cellular immorta- cells. Telomere length assays and senescence tests are still ongoing. lization. Regarding to the function of this gene in regulation of Senescence Our first results thus far suggest that SULT1E1 maybe a putative telomerase we studied the expression of CBX8 in gastric tumors one of the most cause of suppressor gene and loss of its function may contribute to the transforma- cancer death worldwide. Using real-time quantitative reverse transcription- tion process. PCR assay based on SYBER green we evaluated the expression of CBX8 gene P06.056 in thirty gastric cancer specimens in comparison with their normal margi- A new combined approach at the diagnosis of childhood Acute nal tissues . Despite the differences in the expression of this genes found on Lymphoblastic Leukemia patients: Real Time PCR and BAC based high each pair samples between tumor and marginal tissues, statistical analysis throughput FISH analysis didn’t show significant differences in the mean expression of CBX8 between Z. Ilkay, N. Cine, D. Sunnetci, N. Uzulmez, D. Yavuz, H. Savli; tumor and marginal in total . But it was possible to divide the data into two Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, KOCAELİ, Turkey. group; group1 in which the gene was overexpressed in tumor and group Introduction: 2 in which the gene was downregulated in tumor samples. On each group the difference in CBX8 gene expression was significant between tumor and Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a disease characteri- marginal tissues. Our data suggest that this variation in the gene expression zed by the accumulation and leukemic transformation of immature lympho- pattern may be due to different origin of gastric cancer. id cells in the blood and bone marrow. Aim of this study was to determine P06.054 genomic level aberrations for the diagnosis of childhood ALL patients using Detection of genomic imbalances in cervical lesions positive for HPV qMuaatnetriitaaltsiv ea nrde aMl etitmhoe dPsC: R (Q-RT-PCR) and high throughput BAC based by microarray comparative genomic hybridization molecular FISH analysis simultaneously. P. Grozdanov1, A. S. Galabov1, V. Zlatkov2, G. Ganchev3, I. Dimova4, S. Hadjidekova4, D. In this study, Q-RT-PCR was performed on RNA Toncheva4; samples and high throughput BAC based molecular FISH analysis was per- 1Department of Virology, Institute of Microbiology “Stephan Angeloff”, Sofia, Bulgaria, formed on DNA samples obtained from peripherial blood and bone marrow 2G&O “Majchin Dom” Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Institute of Oncology and Hematology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Department of Medical genetics, Medical University, Sofia, oRfe 2su9l tpsr:e -diagnosed ALL patients between the ages of 0-18 regardless of Bulgaria. gender. As a result of high throughput BAC based molecular FISH analy- www.eshg.org www.eshsigs, .aobregrrations with various sizes were detected in various regions of the 168 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.059 Chronic myeloid leukemia: molecular monitoring of residual disease genome in 17 (58,6%) patients. The presence of MLL-AF4 fusion gene was by genomic DNA compared to conventional cytogenetic and mRNA identified in a patient (3,4%) among 17 patients using Q-RT-PCR method in analysis in follow-ups up to 8 years. addition to the found aberrations. The presence of MLL-AF4 and BCR-ABL I. S. Pagani1, O. Spinelli2, C. Pirrone1, A. Bussini2, T. Intermesoli2, F. Pasquali1, F. Lo Curto1, fusion genes were found using Q-RT-PCR as an only result in 2 (6,9%) pati- A. Lanfranchi3, F. Porta3, A. Rambaldi2, G. Porta1; ents. Using both methods no aberrations were found in 10 (34,5%) patients. 1University of Insubria, Varese, Italy, 2USC Hematology, Ospedali Riuniti di Bergamo, Gain of chromosomes X and 21 in a frequency of 20,7%, loss of chromoso- Bergamo, Italy, 3Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy. mCoensc 9lups ainodn :6 q in a frequency of 10,3% were the most common chromoso- mal aberrations detected in our study. We think that rapid diagnosis and increased sensitivity is the Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a clonal myeloproliferative disorder re- significance of the simultaneous use of these two methods in hematological sulting from a balanced reciprocal translocation, producing the BCR-ABL1 malignancies. fusion gene in the Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome. The first line therapy of P06.057 CML is Imatinib mesylate, which targets Bcr-Abl protein. The gold standard Dysregulation of FAS and FASL in Chordoma: Study of their Role in for diagnosing CML is cytogenetic analysis, a direct not-sensitive method to Zebrafish Notochord Development and Regression detect Ph-positive cells. The real-time reverse transcriptase PCR (qRT-PCR) L. Ferrari1, A. Pistocchi2, N. Boari3, P. Mortini3, F. Cotelli2, P. Riva1; is a sensitive quantitative manner to monitor residual leukemia, evaluating 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Studi levels of BCR-ABL1 transcripts. Undetectable levels of mRNA, however, can di Milano, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia Sezione di Citologia e Istologia, reflect either an effective elimination of leukemia cells, or the presence of Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Neurochirurgia, San quiescent leukemia stem cells transcriptionally silent. Raffaele Scientific Institute - Vita-Salute University, Milan, Italy. We developed a novel highly sensitive method to identify quiescent leuke- mic cells through quantitative real-time PCR (Q-PCR) based on the DNA. We monitored eight CML patients in the early chronic phase and in follow- Chordoma is a rare malignant bone tumor arising from notochord remnants, ups up to 8 years under Imatinib treatment. We carried out patient specific characterized by local invasiveness and variable tendency for recurrence. As Q-PCR assays to monitor minimal residual disease, testing the same samples the apoptotic pathway mediated by FAS-FASL was found to be involved in no- in parallel by cytogenetic analysis and by standard qRT-PCR. In all positive tochordal cells regression, we studied their expression in 34 chordomas and samples for chimeric transcript we measured positive levels of correspon- observed that most of them express FAS, but not FASL. To verify a possible ding genomic DNA. In 13% of samples, with undetectable levels of mRNA, implication of FAS/FASL pathway dysfunction during development leading we showed the persistence of quiescent leukemic cells with Q-PCR. Finally to tumorigenesis, we started in vivo studies on zebrafish, firstly investiga- we showed a patient with undetectable levels of both mRNA and correspon- ting fas-fasl horthologue genes expression by RT-PCR in whole embryos and dent DNA in three several consecutive follow-ups during the last year. larvae. While fas was maternally and zigotycally expressed, fasl showed a In conclusion the DNA genomic Q-PCR is a sensitive and direct technique to stage-specific expression. Following microinjection of a GFP-construct acti- identify quiescent leukemic cells and possible candidates to stop imatinib vated by the twhh promoter, we specifically sorted by FACS the GFP-positive therapy. notochordal cells at different developmental stages in which we studied fas- P06.060 fasl expression by means of RT-PCR. We observed that fas was expressed at Measurement of concentration of differentially fragmented DNA with all the analyzed stages, while fasl is modulated during development. Immu- commonly used methods nohistochemical experiments showed notochord fasl expression at 48 hpf, T. Sedlackova1, G. Repiska1, G. Minarik1,2; 3 and 5 days post fertilization (dpf) and at 9 mm. fasl expression seems to 1Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton, decrease when notochordal cells disappear during chord regression, sug- Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia. gesting the activity of apoptotic mechanisms fas-fasl-mediated. Studies on Introduction fas and fasl silencing, by means of morpholino oligos injections, allowed us to observe notochord anomalies such as packed notochordal cells, curved : Circulating nucleic acids are curently studied as potential body and bent tail. Further analysis will be performed to verify whether the diagnostic markers of oncological diseases as well as in relation to pree- reactivation of fas-fasl pathway might rescue the normal phenotype, allo- clampsia pathogenesis. Fragmentation and concentration are limiting cha- wing to unravel the role of this mechanism in chordoma development. racteristic features of circulating nucleic acids. Aim of our study was to P06.058 dMeetethrmodinse possible impact of DNA fragmentation on measurement of DNA The role of microRNAs in resistance to imatinib in chronic myeloid concentration. leukemia patients : DNA originated from blood of 10 volunteers was isolated using I. R. Minniakhmetov1, D. Islamgulov1, N. Ryabchikova2, A. Karunas1, E. Khusnutdinova1; QIAamp® DNA Blood Mini Kit according to the manufacturers protocol. The 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical DNA samples were fragmented by ultrasound with use of Covaris S220 to University, Ufa, Russian Federation. obtain DNA fragments with various length (150 - 1500 bp). DNA concentra- tion was quantified with three methods: absorbance measurement at 260 nRmes, ufllutsorescence measurement with PicoGreen® and qPCR with Alu based Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is a myeloproliferative disorder charac- assay. DNA fragmentation was checked on agarose gel. terized by the expression of the BCR-ABL oncoprotein, which is essential : DNA quantification with PicoGreen® was affected by degree of for the pathogenesis of the disease. Imatinib, an ATP-competitive selective fragmentation. DNA concentration significantly decreased as the level of inhibitor of BCR-ABL, has unprecedented efficacy for the treatment of CML. DNA degradation increased (p< 0,0001; F= 65,34). The A260-based quanti- Nevertheless resistance to imatinib is observed in over 30% cases of CML. fication was not influenced by the fragment length (p= ns). Regarding the Several cellular and genetic mechanisms of imatinib resistance have been qPCR measurement, DNA concentration of fragments with length above 500 proposed, including overexpression of the BCR-ABL gene, the tyrosine kina- bp was not affected by the fragmentation degree. However, concentration se domain mutations, pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic factors. iCno snacmlupslieosn with 150 bp fragments was significantly decreased (p< 0,0001; The purpose of this study was to investigate the mechanisms of resistance F= 55,61). to imatinib in CML patients. We have analyzed mRNA level of BCR-ABL gene : Our study showed, that accuracy of DNA quantification by fluo- by quantitative real time RT-PCR in 114 patients and have studied BCR-ABL rescence and qPCR depends on the level of DNA fragmentation, while the mutations in patients with high level of expression of fusion gene. Muta- spectrophotometric measurement of DNA concentration is not affected by tion status was studied by direct sequencing of BCR-ABL cDNA samples. DNA fragmentation. Therefore, non-fragmented DNA should be quantified, BCR-ABL mutations were founded in 16 (32%) patients with resistance to especially when short fragments are crucial for downstream applications imatinib treatment. The mutation spectrum included four missense mutati- (for example next generation sequencing). on: M351T (7 cases), T315I (4), T315I+M351T (2), M244V (1) and H396R P06.061 (1). Next we conducted a search for microRNAs specifically targeting 3’UTR Identification of Epstein-Barr virus mixtures associated with Notch1 of BCR-ABL, using the miRBASE program to scan human genome (http:// expression in pediatric patients with Hodgkin‘s Lymphoma microrna.sanger.ac.uk/) and analyzed microRNAs expression profile. The I. Palma1,2, A. Sanchez3, J. Arellano4, A. Contreras5, Y. Pena6, A. Alfaro7, G. Gutierrez8, N. down-regulation of miR-203-b (25-fold), mir-323 (4-fold) and miR-196-b Nájera3, P. Mercado3, M. P. Estrella3, D. I. Martinez3; (2-fold) in the group of patients with resistance was discovered. In conclusi- 1Molecular and Celular Morphology Laboratory, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto on, our data showed that mutations in the BCR-ABL kinase domain may cau- Politécnico Nacional., México DF, Mexico, 2Morphology Department, Facultad de se, or contribute to, resistance to tyrosine kinase inhibitors in CML patients, Medicina Veterinaria y Zootecnia, UNAM, Mexico DF, Mexico, 3Molecular and Celular Morphology Laboratory, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto Politécnico Nacional., but resistance mechanisms might also be regulated by microRNAs. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 169 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 México City, Mexico, 4Virology Department, Hospital Infantil de México Federico Gómez, México City, Mexico, 5Biology Development Department. Hospital Infantil de CDH1, México Federico Gómez, México City, Mexico, 6Instituto de Diagnóstico y Referencia tCiDonHs1 a nd orofacial clefts (OFC) has been observed, suggesting that E-cadhe- Epidemiológicos. Secretaría de Salud., México City, Mexico, 7Unidad de Medicina rin, the protein encoded by is involved in lip and palate development. Genómica del Hospital General de México, México City, Mexico, 8Medicina Regenerativa is a reasonable candidate gene for OFC because E-cadherin plays an Laboratory, Escuela Superior de Medicina, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, México City, Mexico. important role in cell adChDeHsi1on and the protein is expressed in the lip and palate region dCuDrHin1g the critical stages of embryonic development. To determine whether is a susceptibility gene for OFC and to as- Classic Hodgkin lymphoma (cHL) is a lymphoid malignancy characterized sess whethCeDr H1 mutation screening in OFC patients allows identifica- tion of families at risk for HDGC, direct sequencing of the full coding se- by the presence of Reed-Sternberg cells. Approximately 40-60% of cHL have quence of was performed in a cohort of 56 children with different been associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection. Transcription fac- types of non-syndromic OFC. Two putative pathogenic variants, c.1108G>T tors of the B lineage are not expressed in RS cells but these may express other markers of hematopoietic cell lines. In an effort to identify the par- (p.(Asp370Tyr)) and c.2413G>A (p.(Asp805Asn)) were detectedC iDn Htw1o pa- ticipation of Pax5, NOTCH1 and the latent state genes of EBV involved in tients. Functional assays on these variants are cuCDrrHen1tly ongoing. In conclusion, two putative pathogenic germline variants of the gene the cHL oncogenic process, 58 lymph node samples of Mexican pediatric have been found in a cohort of 56 OFC patients. mutation screening in patients were analyzed. Detection and genotyping of EBV was performed by patients with OFC might increase the chance to identify individuals at risk PCR and in situ hybridation. Expression of NOTCH1, Pax5 and LMP1B was for hereditary gastric and breast cancer whom could benefit from intensive identified by immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence. NOTCH1 ex- clinical surveillance. pression was detected in 85.3% of cHL cases. 80% of cases of cHL were po- P06.064 sitive for EBV, B subtype had the highest presentation. With these results we TNIP1 is a novel fusion partner gene to PDGFRB in chronic concluded that RS cells have an aberrant immunophenotype in comparison myelomonocytic leukemia associated with eosinophilia to their cells of origin (B lymphocytes), due to molecular mechanisms invol- S. Moshir1, T. von Kanel1, N. Cantoni2, A. Huber1, B. Röthlisberger1; ved in the loss of expression of transcription factors of B lineage (Pax5). The 1Center of laboratory medicine, division of medical genetics, Aarau, Switzerland, 2Center expression of LMP1 and LMP2 that constitutively activate Notch1 signaling of oncology/haematology, cantonal hospital Aarau, Aarau, Switzerland. pathway, induces changes in the identity of B cells, a mechanism suggested in animal models and cell lines. The presence of B subtype in the majority of the cases may suggest a poor prognosis, as it enhances proliferation and Gene fusions involving the catalytic domain of Tyrosine Kinases (TKsP) DaGre- immortalization of RS cells. We identified 4 cases with A and B subtypes in fFoRuAndP DinG aF Rvβariety FoGf FhRa1ematological malignancies. A significant minority of the same sample, which is very interesting since this has only been reported patients with CloPnDaGlF ERoβsinophilia carry abnormal gene fusions linking in HIV patients. , , and . Rearrangements of Platelet Derived Growth Factor P06.062 Receptor beta ( ), a Transmembrane Tyrosine Kinase receptor, are Role of VHL gene mutations and loss of heterozygosity in human renal rare bu t recurrent in patie nts with Eo sPinDoGpFhRilia-associated Atypical Myelo- cell carcinoma development in patients from Bashkortostan Republic proliferative Neoplasie (Eos-MPNs). Using fluorescence in situ hybridization of Russia (FISH)we found a crypticdeletion of tumβo u(5r qn3e3c-r3o4si)s ifna cat oMrP αN- ipnadtuiceendt I. Gilyazova1, L. Kutlyeva1, R. Khusainova1,2, A. Zagidullin2, A. Khaliullin2, E. Klimentova3, wpriothte ianb 3n-oirnmtearla cEtoinsign porpohtieliina. 1A (rTraNyI PC1G)H in bone marrow tissue confirmed A. Shafigina3, V. Pavlov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; the deletion and led to identification of 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics,Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, TNIaPs1 fusion partner. In aP nDeGxFtR step, we Ufa, Russian Federation. characterized the genomic breakpoints by gap-PCR and sequencing, reve- aling that the fusion gene comprises P eDxoGnFsR 1 to 12 and β exons 12 to 23. If accurately spliced, this fusion gene does not contain premature Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) tumour sVuHpLpressor gene inactivation is associated stop codons, and the catalytic domain of β is fully maintained. Re- with clear cell renal cell carcinomVHa L(ccRCC)development. The aim of the stu- verse transcription PCR and quantitative PCR finally revealed that the fusion dy was to provide tVhHeL analysis of inactivation in ccRCC tumors and to gene is expressed both in the bone marrow andT NinI Pt1heP bDlGoFoRd sample of the evaluate relationships between inactivation and tumor hystopathologi- patient. PDGFR cal characteristics. geVneHtLic inactivation was examined among 92 spora- To our knowledge, this is the first report of a - β fusion gene. dic ccRCC cases from Bashkortostan Republic using SSCVPH-aLnalDys3iSs1 f0o3ll8owed Patients with β fusions genes are excellent candidates for treatment bDy3 SS1a3n1g7erR sAeSqSuFe1nciDn3gS o9f6 6 geDn3eS.1 B5e6s8idFeHs,I TlossD 3oSf 1h2e3t4erozygDo3siSt1y3 (0L0OH) with Tyrosin Kinases inhibitors (TKI). The patient is currently treated with studies were performed using microsatellite markers ( - and Imatinib (400 mg/day). , VH - L and , - and RASSF)1 of P06.065 region 3FpH1IT2-p26 on pVaHirLed noRrAmSaSlF-t1umor tissues. Analysis of microsatel- Frequency of germ line MUTYH mutations in patients diagnosed with lite markers of gene revealed deletionFs HinIT 32,5% of ccRCC, - colorectal cancer in Castilla y León (Spain). 30,4%, - 22,6%. and gene deletions frVeHqLuency was almost M. Tascón1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Infante1, E. Velasco1, E. Lastra2, G. Marcos3, E. Esteban-Cardeñosa1, C. Miner1, M. Durán1; equal in groups with stages I, II and III,IV. gene deletVioHnLs frequency 1IBGM, Valladolid, Spain, 2Oncología Médica, Hospital General Yagüe, Burgos, Spain, was higher in patients with stages I and II (P=0,008). mutations were 3Oncología Médica, Hospital Rio Hortega, Valladolid, Spain. revealed in 20 tumor tissues. Not a single normVHaLl tissue had mutations. The majority of mutations were deletions reported previously and tsotuchinngd HIF binding β-domain. We have also detected deletions in the 1 and 2 MUTYH-associated polyposis (MAP) is an autosomal recessive cancer pre- exons haven’t been described previously: c.185_195del(p.Val62_Ser65del), disposition syndrome associated with the development of colorectal tumors c.216_228del (p.Gln73_Phe76del), c.402_407del (p.Leu135_Phe136del). It and colonic polyps at an early age. MAP syndrome is associated to germli- is known that exon 2-encoded residues are involved in two functVioHnLs: sub- ne biallelic mutations in the MUTYH gene which lead to deficient DNA re- strate protein recognition and transcription-dependent nuclear/cytoplas- pair through the base-excision repair system and accumulation of G:C→T:A mic trafficking. WVHe Lalso found 6 undescribed deletions in the third exon; transversions. Occurrence of such mutations in oncogenes and tumor sup- their roles are to be determined. It is supposed that different domain muta- pressor genes drives colorectal carcinogenesis and is associated with the tions inactivate function differently that may reflect clinical outcome. development of colonic polyps. The aim of this study was to assess the P06.063 frequency of germline MUTYH mutations in patients with MAP and other Identification of germline alterations in the cancer predisposing gene hereditary colorectal cancer (CRC) phenotypes. A total of 30 patients were CDH1 in patients with orofacial clefts included. Samples were screened for the MUTYH germline mutations by I. Vogelaar1, J. Figueiredo2, I. van Rooij1, S. Melo2, C. Carels1, R. van der Post1, J. Simoes- capillary array electrophoresis (HA_CAE) method. In all mutation-positive Correia3, R. Seruca2, M. Ligtenberg1, N. Hoogerbrugge1; 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute of cases, results were confirmed by sequencing. Biallelic germline MUTYH mu- Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, tations were identified in 2 of 30 (6.6%) patients with a phenotype of here- 3Institute for Biomedical Research in Light and Image, Faculty of Medicine, University of ditary colorectal cancer. Besides, four monoallelic variants were detected Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. in different samples that are described in LOVD database (MUTYH_00078, CDH1 MUTYH_00005, MUTYH_00063, MUTYH_00086). A genotype-phenotype correlation has found in these patientns. Germline MUTYH mutation scree- mutation carriers have a lifetime risk of hereditary diffuseC gDaHst1ric can- ning should be considered in the differential diagnosis of hereditary colo- cer (HDGC) up to 80% and in addition females have a lifetime risk of lobular rectal syndromes, we are considering the validity and applicability of MU- breast cancer up to 60%. Furthermore, an association between muta- TYH mutation screening in our population. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org170 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.066 Pharmacogenetic Markers Associated with Adverse Events in Colorectal Cancer patients treated with 5-FU prodrugs ment is a major challenge for molecular oncology today. Loss of heterozi- K. Toome1, A. Mägi2, H. Roomere1, J. Jaal2; gosity (LOH) at several chromosomal regions harboring tumor suppressor 1Asper Biotech, Tartu, Estonia, 2Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. genes or oncogenes, is one of the most promising molecular markers with prognostic significance for colorectal cancer (CRC). Aim: To evaluate the involvement of 18q LOH in colorectal carcinogenesis Intravenous fluorouracil (5-FU) has been used for the treatment of colo- and its value as a prognostic molecular marker. rectal cancer over 40 years. Lately, oral 5-FU prodrugs have been additio- Materials and Methods: A total of 314 randomly selected patients under- nally developed. However, only a fraction of the administred capecitabine going colon and/or rectum resection for pathohistologically confirmed CRC reaches its target cells and is transformed into active metabolites which were included in the study. LOH analysis was performed using fluorescence cause permanent inhibition of the enzyme thymidylate synthase (TYMS) multiplex PCR with 4 microsatelite markers: D18S46, D18S58, D18S61 and and further DNA synthesis. Polymorphisms in TYMS and MTHFR genes pre- D18S535, and subsequent capillary gel electrophoresis on AbiPrism310. sumably affect the clinical response of 5-FU. Results: LOH at 18q defined as loss at any of the evaluated markers is detec- Retrospective pharmacogenetic study was performed to investigate germ- ted in 57% of tumor samples. Most efficient molecular marker is D18S46, line polymorphisms of the two genes involved in fluorouracil pathway and conferring LOH status to 65% of cancers with this type of chromosomal their potential association with toxicities in patients treated with capecita- instability. Cancers with 18q LOH are prone to development of distal meta- bine. stases (OR=6.35, 95%CI=1.183-34.042, p=0.02), which is considered a pa- The germline DNA of 36 patients treated with capecitabine was genotyped thohystological criterion for poor outcome. LOH at this chromosomal region for two variants (677C>T; 1298A>C) in MTHFR gene and one variant in is also associated with tumor size, though without statistical significance TYMS (28-bp tandem-repeat) gene. The 28-bp tandem-repeat was geno- (p=0.25). typed by PCR amplification to discriminate between 2R and 3R alleles, PCR Conclusion: Our results identifying association between 18qLOH and deve- fragments were separated by eletrophoresis on 2.5% agarose gels. MTHFR lopment of metastases indirectly support the hypothesis that 18qLOH is a polymorphisms were genotyped using APEX based microarray. molecular marker of poor outcome in CRC. Further studies investigating the Adverse events were more frequent in patients heterozygoys for TYMS 5-year survival in our patients will be performed to confirm these findings 2R/3R. Patients carrying the 1298C/C genotype had a low risk of develo- and provide additional details for the observed association. ping side effects compared to patients with the A/C or A/A genotype when P06.069 treated with capecitabine. Similarly, diplotype (CA-CA) showed a negative Study of expression of cancer/testis Antigens PAGE4, SPANX, and effect on the incidence of adverse events. In contrast, MTHFR haplotype SCP-1 as putative biomarkers to predict liver metastasis in colorectal (677C-1298C) showed a protective effect. cancer (CRC) in Iranian CRC patients In conclusion, in colorectal cancer patients, the incidence of side-effects R. Molania1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, S. Khatami2, B. Mahjoubi3; induced by capecitabine might be genetically predicted. However, these 1National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,Medical Biotechnology preliminary findings must be confirmed in larger and prospective clinical Division., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Genetics Department, School of Science, Chamran University., Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Surgery Department, studies. Rasoul Hospital., Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. P06.067 Genetic Screening of Colorectal Cancer Patients to Detect Hereditary Colorectal Cancer Syndromes in Estonian Population Cancer testis antigens (CTAs) are a large family of tumor-associated anti- M. Kask1, K. Toome2, J. Jaal3, J. Soplepmann3, V. Afanasjev3, P. Laidre3, T. Erm3, K. Raime2, gens that mainly express in testis and placenta and in some human cancers K. Vaidla2, H. Roomere2; 1The University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Asper Biotech, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tartu University with different histological origin. CTAs are considered promising target Hospital, Tartu, Estonia. molecules for early diagnosis, prognostic and immunotherapy. In this study we aimed to employ conventional RT-PCR and Quantitative real-time RT-PCR to examined whether or not PAGE4, SPANX, SCP-1 anti- About 700 new colorectal cancer cases are diagnosed in Estonia annually, gens are express in colorectal tumors. In this regards, 70 tumor samples and which places the incidence of colorectal cancer to the third place of all can- adjacent normal tissues of patients with colorectal cancer were evaluated. cer cases. In this presentation we will discuss our data in regards to use of these CTAs Aim of the study was to detect hereditary syndromes in patients diagnosed as putative prognostic marker for liver metastasis in CRC patients. with colorectal cancer to improve screening strategy in Estonia and provide P06.070 genetic testing and counceling to family members of the patients. Identification and confirmation of DNA methylation markers for The study involved a systematic analysis of 180 patients diagnosed with colorectal cancer testing colorectal cancer. MSI testing, BRAF V600E mutation detection, immunohi- M. Hofner1, W. Pulverer1, M. Sonntagbauer1, C. Noehammer1, T. Bachleitner-Hofmann2, G. stochemistry and mutation analysis of MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2, APC and Egger2, A. Weinhaeusel1; 1AIT - Austrian Institute of Technology GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University MUTYH genes were performed. MSI and BRAF analyses were performed on Vienna, Vienna, Austria. tumors from all the patients. Based on revised Bethesda guidelines and the results of MSI and BRAF analyses, samples were chosen for IHC analysis and DNA sequencing of MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2. Patients subjected to the Early diagnosis of colorectal cancer (CRC) is of high importance because pro- sequencing of APC and MUTYH genes were chosen based on family history gnosis for patients with CRC depends on stage at time of diagnosis. Thus the- and histologically described polyposis. The analysis of family history and re is great need to identify novel biomarkers for diagnostic improvements of previous diseases revealed six patients with an indication for hereditary CRC. Patients at risk for CRC are identified by screening programs using the breast and ovarian cancer testing. FOBT (fecal occult blood test) which provides 61-96% sensitivity and 91- MSI-H and BRAF mutation were observed in 30 and 28 out of all cases, re- 98% specificity. However recall rate due to many false positives are leading spectively. Several polymorphisms in MLH1 (13); MSH2 (11); MSH6 (10) and to unnecessary colonoscopy and anxiety. This causes also a high workload PMS2 (15) genes, and a few previously not described variants of unknown for confirmatory initial diagnosis by colonoscopy. There remains a need for significance were found. Deleterious germline mutation was found in APC a minimally invasive, cost-effective procedure that could be used alongside gene. One polymorphism was found in BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51 and also in FOBT screening and eventually prior colonoscopy to improve screening sen- CHEK2 gene using Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer Assay. Significance sitivity. To improve CRC initial diagnosis we have elucidated a panel of can- of these findings will be further evaluated. didate DNA methylation biomarkers from tissue DNA testing (tumors: n=18; P06.068 normal tissue: n=18) using a targeted DNA methylation microarray. The top Association between 18q LOH and metastatic potential of colorectal 24 candidates were then subjected to qPCR based confirmation of microar- cancer ray data. DNA from blood (n=8) was also included in qPCR analyses; based M. Hiljadnikova Bajro1, T. Josifovski2,3, M. Panovski2, A. J. Dimovski1; on these data the minimal set of markers for perfect classification could 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University SS Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2University Clinic for Digestive Surgery, Medical Faculty, Ss. Cyril be reduced to a single gene enabling 100% correct classification (AUC=1). and Methodius University, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Clinical Further we designed qMSP for bisulfite based confirmation of findings. By Hospital Sistina, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. qMSP 96-100% of all different samples were classified correctly. Thus we have elucidated candidate markers which should be validated on different sample cohorts and might be good targets for minimal invasive CRC testing Background: Identification of genetic markers to complement clinicopatho- using cell free DNA from serum. Collaborations for validation of markers are logical evaluation in cancer diagnosis and selection of appropriate treat- envisioned. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 171 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.071 Siebert1, O. Ammerpohl1; Intermediate- and low-methylation epigenotypes do not correspond 1Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, to CpG island methylator phenotype (low and -zero) in colorectal 2Institute of Internal Medicine I, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 3Department of General and Thoracic Surgery, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, cancer Germany, 4Institute for Experimental Oncology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel, P. Karpinski1, M. Walter2, E. Szmida1, D. Ramsey3, B. Misiak1, J. Kozlowska1, M. Bebenek4, Z. Germany. Grzebieniak1, N. Blin1, M. M. Sasiadek1; 1Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany, 3University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland, 4Lower Silesian Oncology Center, Wroclaw, Poland. Colorectal carcinoma (CRC) is still a leading cause for cancer related death in the western world [1]. At molecular level colorectal carcinoma is charac- terized by both, genetic aberrations and extensive alterations in the gene Most recent genome-wide studies on the CpG island methylation in colo- expression pattern. rectal cancer (CRC) have led to the discovery of at least three distinct me- Epigenetic mechanisms and particularly DNA methylation are well known thylation clusters. However, there remains an uncertainty whether the CRC to contribute to the stability of the genome and to the establishment of tis- clusters identified in these studies represent compatible phenotypes. sue specific gene expression patterns [2]. Consequently, alterations in the We performed comprehensive genome-scale DNA methylation profiling by methylome are a typical hallmark of cancer, contributing the malignant phe- Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation27 of 21 DNA pools that represent 84 notype, e.g. in CRC [3]. CRC samples divided according to their high-, intermediate-, and low-me- In this study we included genomic DNA isolated from 117 CRC tissue samp- thylation epigenotypes (HME, IME, and LME, respectively) and 70 normal- les and the corresponding control tissue from the same patients. Detailed adjacent colonic tissues. We have also examined the relationship between clinical, histological as well as molecular data (e.g. age at diagnosis, treat- three epigenotypes and chromosomal gains and deletions (assessed by ment regimen, MSI status) were available from all patients. Comparative Genomic Hybridization) in a group of 100 CRC samples. Within the BMBF funded NGFN-Network „Integrated genomic investigation HME subgroup showed features associated with CpG island methylator phe- of colorectal carcinoma“ we used Illumina‘s HumanMethylation450k Bead- notype - high (CIMP-high) including methylation of specific CpG sites (CpGs) Chip to identify genes aberrantly methylated in CRC as compared to nor- as well as significantly lower mean number of chromosomal imbalances mal colon tissue. This array is designed to assay the methylation status of when compared to other epigenotypes. IME subgroup displayed lowest 485,577 CpG loci in parallel. number of methylated CpGs (717 versus 2399 and 2679 in HME and LME, By this approach we have identified more than 1,380 CpG loci correspon- respectively) and highest mean number of chromosomal imbalances when ding to more than 640 genes aberrantly methylated in CRC. Furthermore, compared to HME (p = 0.001) and LME (p = 0.004). A comparison between hierarchical cluster analysis based on these loci separated the samples into the methylation profiles of three epigenotypes revealed more similarities two different CRC subentities and the controls. The putative use for diagno- between the HME and LME (1669 methylated CpGs overlapped) than HME stic, prognostic or therapeutic purposes is currently under investigation. and IME (673 methylated CpGs overlapped). [1] Siegel R et al. CA Cancer J Clin. 2012 Jan;62(1):10-29. Our results provide evidence that IME and LME CRCs show opposite fea- [2] Song F, Smith JF. PNAS. 2005;102:3336 tures to those that have been previously attributed to CIMP-low and CIMP-0 [3] Feinberg AP, Tycko B. Nat Rev Cancer. 2004;4:143 CRCs. These discrepancies should be considered when interpreting the data P06.074 from a particular epigenotyping method. Dual blockade of IGF-IR and EGFR sensitizes colorectal cancer cells to P06.072 5-FU-based radiochemotherapy Tumor-specific age-dependent DNA methylation of RUNX3, CDKN2A S. Kaulfuß1, H. Seemann1, R. Oberthür1, J. Scharf2, P. Burfeind1; and CACNA1G genes in colorectal cancer 1Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 2Department of Internal Medicine, E. Hernández-Illán1, A. Castillejo1, A. Martínez-Cantó1, M. I. Castillejo1, E. Irles1, V. M. HELIOS-Klinikum, Erfurt, Germany. Barberá1, R. Lázaro2, E. Ochoa3, J. L. Soto1; 1Hospital Universitario Elche, Elche, Spain, 2Hospital La Plana Castellón, Villarreal, Spain, 3Hospital Provincial Castellón, Castellón, Spain. Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) are known to be key players in the de- velopment of colorectal cancer (CRC). Recently, we could show that inhibi- tion of the RTKs insulin-like growth factor-I receptor (IGF-IR) and epider- Promoter methylation of tumor suppressor genes has a crucial role in tumo- mal growth factor receptor (EGFR) in CRC cells by siRNA approach or by rigenesis. It is widely assumed that epigenetic alterations that accumulate small molecule inhibitors NVP-AEW541 and erlotinib, respectively, results during aging might be involved in aging-related pathologies. However, little in decreased proliferation and induction of apoptosis, with having additive is known about the cross-talk between aging and cancer in terms of DNA effects when both receptors were blocked simultaneously. In the present methylation. study we analysed the effect of RTK inhibition in the context of 5-Fluorou- We aimed to explore the association between the methylation status of mar- racil-based radiochemotherapy (RCT). Inhibition of IGF-IR and EGFR using ker genes in normal and tumor tissues with age in colorectal cancer (CRC) NVP-AEW541 and erlotinib results in a sensitization of CRC cells (DLD-1, patients. SW837 and Caco-2) to RCT and a poor survival in therapy treatments. In A cohort of 197 unselected CRC patients was studied (median age=71; range addition, dual blockade of both receptors in CRC cells enhanced the therapy 30-94 years). Tumor R(nU=N1X937, ) CaAnCdN nAo1rGm, aIl G(Fn2=,2 0M)L cHo1lo, nN tEisUsuReOsG w1,e rCeR aAnBaPly1-, success. To identify the molecular mechanisms underlying this sensitization zSeOdC Sfo1r, the pCaDnKeNl o2fA e. ight markers used to assess the CpG Island Methylator of CRC cells we analysed the DNA repair mechanisms. Phospho-H2AX stai- Phenotype (CIMP): BRAF ning as marker for double strand breaks revealed impairment of DNA repair and This study was approached by Methylation Sensitive in single inhibitor treatments 24h after RCT and even more pronounced MLPA. Microsatellite instability (MSI) and V600E mutation were also effects were observed when both receptors were inhibited simultaneously. analyzed. BRAF Furthermore, we could show using proximity ligation and co-immuopreci- We found 22.84% (45/197) of tumors with CIMP+ (cutoff: five positive pitation assays that IGF-IR and EGFR form heterodimers in CRC cells in a markers); 5.08% (10/197) with mutation and 9.64% (19/197) with ligand-dependent manner. Taken together, these results indicate that the MSI. None of the 20 matched normal tissues analyzed from patients with RTKs EGFR and IGF-IR play important roles in the resistance of CRC patients CIMP+ tumors showed significant methylation (10 patientBs RoAldFer and 10 to neoadjuvant RCT and that simultaneous treatment of RCT resistant pati- younger than the median age). CIMP+ tumors were associated to older pa- ents with a combination of RTK inhibitors can circumvent these problems. tienRtUs N(XO3R =2.23; p=0.022); proCxDimKaNl2 lAocation (p=0.002); CmAuCtNatAi1oGn P06.075 (p<0.001) and MSI (p<0.001). Tumor methylation age-dependent was given KRAS mutation genotypes and prometer methylation of tumor by (OR=3.53; p<0.001); RU (NOXR3=2C.2D6K;N p2=A0.007C) AaCnNdA 1G suppressor genes in cancer tissue and peripheral blood in colorectal (OR=2.46; p=0.018). cancer patients Our results suggest that methylation at , and genes F. Ozen1, N. Kocak2, C. Ulasoglu3, &. Sezgin4, A. Colak5, O. Ozdemir6; is tumor specific and age dependent in CRC patients. The epigenetic landsca- 1Medeniyet University Göztepe Training and Research Hospital, Medical Genetics, pe of CRC might be different depending on patient age. Istanbul, Turkey, 2Konya Selçuk University Medical Faculty, Konya, Turkey, 3Medeniyet University Göztepe Training and Research Hospital, Gastroenterology, Istanbul, Turkey, P06.073 4Sivas Cumhuriyet University, Medical Faculty, Medical Genetics, Sivas, Turkey, 5Sivas A DNA methylation survey of 117 tumor samples and corresponding Cumhuriyet University , Medical Genetics, Sivas, Turkey, 618 Mart University Medical Tıp normal controls revealed more than 640 genes aberrantly methylated Faculty, Medical Genetics, Canakkale, Turkey. in colorectal cancer Objective: J. Kolarova1, J. Gutwein1, O. von Kampen2, C. Schafmayer3, H. Kalthoff4, J. Hampe2, R. The aim was to evaluate the value of testing KRAS mutation geno- www.eshg.org www.eshtygp.eos rangd methylation of tumor suppressor genes(TSG) in peripheral blood 172 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Materials and Methods: samples besides colorectal cancer tumor tissue. ly). Furthermore, we found higher miR-21 expression levels in microsatelli- The promoter methylation status of TSG in tu- te and chromosomal stable tumors (p=0.039) which suggests the possibility mor tissue and peripheral blood samples in 89 colorectal cancer patients for distinct mechanism in CRC etiopathogenesis mediated by dysregulation (32F/57M) were evaluated by sodium bisulfite conversion and DNA ampli- of proto-oncogene miRNAs that predominantly occurs in MSI-/CIN-/CIMP- fRiceastuioltns :with methylation specific multiplex PCR technique.Also, KRAS in tumors. In addition, our results indicate correlation between the miR-21 ex- codons 12 and 13 were analyzed for possible genotypic mutations. pression levels and CRC clinical stage (p<0.001). The expression of miR-21 TSG was inactivated in 6 samples in 32 females and 11 of 57 males progressively increases with average fold-change of 1.79, 5.65, 11.59 and in peripheral blood (p>0.05).Testing of tumor tissue revealed a positivity of 33.85 (stage I,II,II and IV respectively) compared to the control group. This TSG inactivation in 17 females and 29 males (p>0.05).KRAS mutation was illustrates the potential use of miR-21 expression levels in providing higher present in 7 females and 22 males in blood samples (p>0.05) and 20 vs 36 accuracy of staging on initial biopsies and identifying candidates for more for females and males,respectively in biopsy specimen. Overall KRAS muta- aggressive initial therapies. tion or TSG inactivation was 8/32 vs 27/57 for females and males (p<0.02). P06.078 TCootnacl luasltieorna:tions were 82% vs 41.5% for tissue and blood,respectively MiRNA genes constitute new targets for microsatellite instability in (p<0.001). Total mutant KRAS ratio in tissue was 63%. colorectal cancer Genes exhibit tumor suppressor activities in tissue and periphe- N. El-Murr1,2, Z. Abidi1,2, K. Wanherdrick1,2, M. Svrcek1,2,3, M. Gaub4, J. Fléjou1,2,3, R. ral blood samples. The treatment choice depending on these results should Hamelin1,2, A. Duval1,2, T. Lesuffleur1,2; be further evaluated.Screening KRAS and inactivated TSG from tumoral and 1INSERM, UMRS 938 – INSERM, UMRS 938 – Centre de Recherche Saint-Antoine, Equipe “Instabilité des Microsatellites et Cancers“, F-75012, Paris, France, 2UPMC – blood samples may give clinical clues. Mutation or inactivation over 80% Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France, 3AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Service and significant gender difference need to be verified by large series. d‘Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, Paris, France, 4INSERM, U682, Développement et P06.076 Physiopathologie de l‘Intestin et du Pancréas, 67200 Strasbourg, France. Interlaboratory comparison of the K-ras mutation testing techniques F. A. Amosenko1,2, I. V. Karpov3, V. A. Shamanin3, S. P. Kovalenko3, L. N. Lyubchenko2, A. V. Polyakov1; Mismatch repair-deficient colorectal cancers (CRC) display widespread 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2N.N. Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical instability at DNA microsatellite sequences (MSI). Although MSI has been Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Laboratory of Gene Diagnostics Ltd, Novosibirsk, reported to commonly occur at coding repeats, leading to alterations in the Russian Federation. function of a number of genes encoding cancer-related proteins, nothing is known about the impact such a process could have on microRNAs. In miR- base V15, we identified few human microRNA genes with mono- or di-nu- TK-rreaastment of metastatic colon cancer with the anti-EGFR antibodies, cetu- cleotide repeats (n=27). Out of the 24 microRNA genes successfully studied, ximab and panitumumab, iKs- rraesported to be ineffective in carcinomas with 15 were found unstable in a large series of MSI CRC cell lines and primary point mutations in codons 12 or 13. We compared four the most fre- tumors. Frequencies of instability ranged from 2.5% to 100%. Following a quently used methods for testing: ACRS, SSCP, allele-specific RT PCR maximum likelihood statistical method, microRNA genes were separated and Sanger sequencing in clinical practice. Samples from 62 colorectal can- into two groups that differed significantly in their mutation frequencies and cer patients (frozen tissues after manual dissection) were tested in different in their tendency to represent mutations that may be or not under selective laboratories. pressures during MSI tumoral progression. The first group included 21 ge- The results, received with ACRS, SSCP and allele-specific RT PCR have coin- nes that disphlasaye-md inr-o1 o3r0 3few mutations in CRC. The second group contained cided for 59 carcinomas (95.2 %). To investigate the apparent discrepant re- 3 genes with frequent (≥80%) and sometimes bi-allelic mutations in MSI sults between these methods for three samples we used commercial TheraS- tumors. For , the only miR expressed in colonic tissues, no di- creen KRAS Kit (DxS Ltd, Manchester, England). Specificity and sensitivity of rect link was found between the presence or nhosta o-mf miRo-n1o3 0o3r bi-allelic altera- allele-specific RT PCR were 100 % (34/34) and 96.4 % (27/28) respectively tions and the levels of mature miR expression in MSI cell lines. Any impact and with the use of ACRS or SSCP- 94.1 % (32/34) and 100 % (28/28) re- MSI might have on the reliable processing of , and potentially spectively. Falsely positive findings were absent with allele-specific RT PCR, the production of mutant miRs is still to be determined. Overall, our results but were discovered in two cases with ACRS or SSCP analysis (5.9 %). The provide evidence that DNA repeats contained in human miRNA genes are single falsely negative result was received with allele-specific RT PCR (3.6 relatively rare and preserved from MSI mutations in MMR-deficient cancer %). Sensitivity of direct sequencing was significantly lower than with the cells. use of ACRS, SSCP or allele-specific RT PCR: 78.6 % (22/28). P06.079 Allele-specific RT PCR, ACRS and SSCP showed higKh- raansd similar diagnostic Molecular characterization of Solid Tumors by 454 Sequencing sensitivity and specificity (from 94 to100 %) for the studied series of samp- T. Hinrichsen1, O. Wachter1, B. Dockhorn-Dworniczak2, H. G. Klein1; les. These techniques are able to detect somatic mutations in DNA 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine Dr. Klein and Dr. Rost, Martinsried, Germany, 2Institute of Pathology Kempten, Kempten, Germany. samples when the mutant DNA represents at least 5 % of total DNA. P06.077 Introduction miR-21 expression in tumor tissue progressively increases during the development of colorectal cancer N. Matevska1, A. Eftimov1, T. Josifovski2, N. Jankulovski3, M. Panovski2, A. J. Dimovski1; The success of a treatment with monoclonal antibodies (mAB) or ,,small 1Center for Biomolecular Pharmaceutical Analyses, Faculty od Pharmacy, Skopje, The mMoalteecruialelss“ a (ned.g M. teytrhosoidnse kinase inhibitor, TKI) depends on the mutational Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2University Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, status of tumor-relevant genes in solid tumors (tab.1). Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 3Universtiy Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic NGS is applied for mutational screening (tab.1) in 40 CRC, 34 NSCLC, 2 Mela- of Macedonia. noma, 2 GIST. DNA was isolated from FFPE-tumor tissue, amplicons (300bp) were prepared and multiplex identifiers (MID) were added manually. After pRuersiufilctastion, the pooled library was sequenced using the GS junior (454 Life MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenously expressed noncoding RNAs with Sciences, Branford, CT, UKSRAA)S with an aimed coverage oBf R1A0F00-fold. important posttranscriptional regulatory functions. Recent data suggest c-KIT EGFR that miRNAs may play significant roles in carcinogenesis.The aim of this 17/40 CRC showed a -mutKaRtiAoSn, 5/40 CRC a -mutation. Both study was to identify the differential miRNA expression patterns associated KGRISATSs had a -mutation. In 9/34 NSCLC an -mutation could be de- with colorectal cancer (CRC) in Republic of Macedonia and to evaluate their tected and another three had a -mutation. One melanoma showed a diagnostic and/or prognostic potential. We assessed the expression levels Concl-umsuiotantion. Some of these mutations only could be detected due to the of eleven miRNAs (miR-17-3p,miR-18a,miR-20a,miR-21,miR-92a,miR-106- high coverage. a,miR-125b,miR-137,miR-143,miR-145 and miR-200c) in 89 CRC and 40 normal colon tissues. We observed statistically significant up-regulation of Our data show that NGS is a feasible method in routine molecular patholo- miR-18a, miR-20a, miR-21 and miR-200c and down-regulation of miR-145 gy to examine mutational status of tumor-relevant genes in a cost effective in CRC compared to normal mucosa (p<0.001). Multivariate analysis sho- and comprehensive manner. In contrast, conventional capillary sequencing wed that miR-20, miR-21 and miR-145 are independent variables for discri- techniques often lack the sensitivity and cost effectiveness to detect tumor mination between normal and tumor tissues (p<0.001). Combination of the mutations occurring at less than 20% frequency. With 454-sequencing, mu- later three miRNAs as biomarkers for diagnosis increases the power of the tations can be detected against a wildtype-background of 95% (Coverage test and enables higher accuracy for overall correct classification (95.35%) 1000x), which is very important in solid tumors. With NGS, we were able to compared with their separate use (86.05%, 89.92% and 67.44% rewspewctwive.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 173 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 TGFBR1 improve our mutation detection rate, an important step towards personali- tance of the H2 haplotype and ASE. These results support the hy- zed medicine. pothesis that the allelic architecture of cancer genes, rather than individual Tumor Entity tab.1:Therapy-relevant bRieolmataerdk eGre inne solAidf fteucmteodr sE xon Allel polymorphisms, more accurately defines the CRC risk. Colorectal Carcinoma (*CaRlsCo) mutations leadinKgR tAoS resistance P06.083 BRAF 2,3 Wildtype Constitutional mismatch repair-deficiency syndrome and high-grade Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC) EGFR 15 Wildtype brain tumors in siblings with biallelic MSH6 mutations KRAS 18, 19, 20, 21 mutated* D. Ilencikova1, D. Sejnova2, L. Kovacs1, P. Babal3; Gastrointestinal Tumors (GIST) c-KIT 1II. Pediatric Department of Children University Hospital, Comenius University, 2, 3 Wildtype PDGFRa Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Pediatric Oncology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius 9, 11, 13, 17 mutated* BRAF University – Medical School and University Children´s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 12, 14, 18 mutated* 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Comenius University, Bratislava, Malignant Melanoma 15 mutated* Slovakia. P06.080 Exome sequencing reveals genetic predisposition in pediatric colorectal cancer. Constitutional mismatch repair-deficiency syndrome (CMMR-D) is a rare M. C. J. Jongmans1, L. Yuniati1, F. N. van Leeuwen1, H. K. Schackert2, G. Fitze2, L. E. L. autosomal recessive disease, first reported in 1999. It is characterized by M. Vissers1, H. Venselaar1, E. T. P. Verwiel1, E. J. Kamping1, A. Geurts van Kessel1, P. M. Hoogerbrugge1, M. W. M. te Loo1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, R. P. Kuiper1, N. Hoogerbrugge1; hematological malignancies,c barféa ianu t ulamitors and tumors of the large intestine 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Technische with an early formation. Skin maculae with diffuse margins and irregular Universitat Dresden, Dresden, Germany. pigmentation are similar to present in neurofibromatosis 1, and they may occur together with hypopigmented areas. Development of this sMyLnHd1ro, mMSeH is2 ,c MauSsHe6d by biPaMlleSl2ic mutations in genes that are associated with Childhood colorectal cancer (CCRC) is a rare condition, mainly characterized Lynch syndrome (hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer - HNPCC). by non-polyposis, microsatellite-stable tumors with a higher frequency of and genes belong to the mismatch repair system signet ring cell histology than in adults, suggesting a different biology. In and play a basic role in the genome integrity. In the heterozygous state, the many patients the genetic cause remains unknown. mutation of one of these genes causes HNPCC. Biallelic mutations of the afo- We performed whole exome sequencing on germline DNA of four children rementioned genes are characWteirmizmede rby ocKcruartrzence of the first malignan- with CRC, diagnosed between age 13 and 15. Per patient, we validated an cies (brain tumors, leukemias) at the age of 2 and occurrence of other types average of 45 candidate BpRatChAo2genic variants by Sanger sequencing , aPnAdR tPe1- of tumors with increasing age. and summarized data from 52 sted parental DNA to reveal the modes of inheritance. reports covering 92 CMMR-DM pSaHti6ents and performed genotype-phenotype In one child a paternal mutation and a maternal change in correlation output from the last 12 years. We present a case with CMMR-D were identified. The co-occurrence of these two muStaEtCio3n1sB appears relevant, caused by novel homozygous mutations leading to gliomatosis cerebri since both proteins are involved in DNA repair. The second patient, a child and T-ALL in an 11-year-old female and glioblastoma multiforme in her 10- of distantly related parenDtes ,n coavroried a homozygous variant. In yeast, year-old brother, both with rapid progression of the diseases. A literature Sec31p is involved in cell cycle progression and therefoCrCeD mC1ig3ht play a role review on brain tumors in CMMR-D families shows that they are treatment- in cancer development. mutations were idSOenSt2i,f ied in two patients, resistant and lead to early death. Identification of patients with CMMR-D affecting highliyn c voitnrsoerved protein-coding positions in , a gene with is critical, and specific cancer screening programs with early surgery are unknown function and in the RAS pathway gene respectively. In the recommended. latter patient, expression of this mutant in HEK293 cells revealed an P06.084 increase of RAS activity, suggesting a gain-of-function effect. Lack of association between ERCC2 K751Q polymorphism and thyroid Our data indicate that exome sequencing is a powerful tool for unraveling cancer risk genetic predisposition in CCRC, which turns out to be a heterogeneous con- J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, S. Hryhorowicz2, M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, L. Jakubowska-Burek3, K. dition with different models of inheritance. Elucidating the genetic cause of Ziemnicka4, J. Sowiński4, R. Słomski1,5; 1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2The CCRC will facilitate decisions on surveillance of patients and relatives and Nanobiomedical Center, Poznań, Poland, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Human might reveal new treatment targets. Nutrition and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, P06.082 4Department of Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical TGFBR1 Intralocus Epistatic Interaction as a Risk Factor for Colorectal Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 5Department of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Cancer Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland. A. Martínez-Cantó1, A. Castillejo1, T. Mata-Balaguer1, M. I. Castillejo1, E. Hernández-Illán1, E. Irles1, V. M. Barberá1, C. M. Egoavil1, C. Guarinos2, C. Alenda3, E. Ochoa4, R. Lázaro5, S. Fajardo1, J. Lacueva6, R. Calpena6, J. L. Soto1; Thyroid carcinomas belong to tumors with well prognosis, slow progress 1Molecular Oncology Group. Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 2Research Unit. and low benignity but with tendency to recurrences and regional or remote Alicante University Hospital, Alicante, Spain, 3Pathology Department. Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain, 4Molecular Biopathology Unit. Castellon Provincial Hospital, metastasis. Papillary and follicular thyroid cancer are the most frequent in Castellon, Spain, 5Pathology Department. La Plana Hospital, Villareal, Spain, 6Surgery endocrine system with unidentified genetic background. Department. Elche University Hospital, Elche, Spain. In this focus searching for molecular markers of disease course, good or poor prognosis and response on medical treatment is fundamental. It is expected that SNP polymorphisms research in genes demonstrating association with In colorectal cancer (CRC), an inherited susceptibility risk affects about neoplastic diseases will be helpful in understanding of molecular mechanis- 35% of patients, whereas high-penetrance germline mutations account for ms of thyroid gland tumors development and allow to better diagnosing. < 6% of cases. A considerable proportion of sporadic tumors could be ex- The published data on the association ERCC2 K751Q polymorphism with plained by the coinheritance of multipleT GcoFmBRm1on low-penetrance variants. cancer remained controversial. We assessed the susceptibility to CRC conferred by 14 polymorphisms and We analyzed polymorphism K751Q in ERCC2 gene (c.2251A>C, rs13181) the allele-specific expression (ASE) of in a case-control designed in group of 451 Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer and 560 study (504 controls and 521 patients with sporadic CRC). Polymorphisms individuals from Polish population. Sequence variants were determined by were genotyped with the iPLEX Gold (MassARRAY-Sequenom) technology. pyrosequencing. Descriptive analyses of the polymorphisms and association studies were We didn’t observed significant differences in allele frequencies in patient performedT GwFiBthR 1the SNPator workpackage. No relevant associations were with thyroid cancer and population group (p=0,64). In DTC patient group detected between individual polymorphisms or haplotypes and the risk of allele A was present with frequency 0,61 and allele C with frequency 0,39. In CRC. The *9A/6A polymorphism was used for the ASE analysis by population frequency for allele A was 0,59 and for allele C 0,41. fragment analysis using cDNA from normal tissue. The relative level of al- Project supported by Polish National Science Center grant NN402287436. lelic expression was extrapolated from a standard curve. ASE was found in 25.4% of patients and 16.4% of controls. No significant differences between the ASE values of patients and controls were identified. Interestingly, a com- bined analysis of the polymorphisms and ASE for the association with CRC occurrence revealed that ASE-positive individuals carrying one of the most common haplotypes (H2: 20.7%) showed remarkable susceptibility to CRC (RR: 5.25; 95% CI: 2.547-5.250; p < 0.001) with a synergy factor of 3.7. In www.eshg.org our study, 54.1% of sporadic CRC cases were attributable to the cwoinwhewri.-eshg.org174 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.085 Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Spontaneous and dioxidine-induced DNA damage in cultured human multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells and peripheral blood lymphocytes Background: There is a lack of suitable markers for the early and reliable A. Chausheva, V. Nikitina, E. Voronina, S. Smirnikhina, A. Zhanataev; detection of malignant tumors, including non-small cell lung cancer (NS- Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the CLC). We’ve performed a genome-wide analysis in early NSCLC to find DNA Russian Academy of, Moscow, Russian Federation. methylation-based biomarker candidates. Methods: We’ve analysed samples from 48 patients with stage I NSCLC and 18 matching cancer-free lung samples using microarrays that cover the pro- Numerous studies have shown the possibility of genetic transformation of moter regions of more than 14,500 genes. DNA methylation changes were multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC). The DNA damage can lead correlated with gene expression levels. In addition, survival analysis was to chromosomal abnormalities and gene mutations associated with risk of performed. The gene expression and DNA methylation changes were valida- malignization. To determine the genetic stability and sensitivity of MSCs to ted with real-time qPCR analysis and bisulfite sequencing with HiSeq 2000 the ROS-mediated DNA-damage, we have studied spontaneous and dioxidi- instrument (Illumina). ne-induced DNA damage in cultured human MSCs from adipose tissue and Results: We observed hypermethylation of 496 CpGs in 379 genes and hy- compared it with cultured peripheral blood lymphocytes. pomethylation of 373 CpGs in 335 genes in NSCLC. 378 of 869 (43.5%) CpGs Dioxidine is a mutagen with prooxidative type of genotoxic action. The pe- discriminating the NSCLC and control samples showed the expected inverse ripheral blood lymphocytes from 5 healthy donors and MSCs from adipose correlation between CpG methylation and gene expression levels. As a result tissue of 8 healthy donors were exposed during 24 h to dioxidine in concen- of a survival analysis, we found 10 CpGs in 10 genes, in which the methylati- trations 0.01mg/ml and 0.1mg/ml. The levels of DNA damage have determi- on level differs in different survival groups. ned as %tail DNA in alkaline comet assay. Conclusions: We have identified a set of genes with altered methylation in The mean value of spontaneous DNA damage in cultured lymphocytes NSCLC. We also found a set of genes that associated with the survival of the was higher than that in cultured MSCs (7.7±0.5% vs. 4.8±0.5 %DNA in tail, patients. These marker candidates of NSCLC will need a further analysis in p≤0.05). The mean values of dioxidine-induced DNA damage in concentra- order to determine their clinical utility. tion of 0.01 mg/ml were 10.9±0.70 % DNA in tail in the lymphocytes and P06.088 13.0±0.9 %DNA in tail in MSCs. After the exposure to dioxidine in concentra- XPD Lys751Gln polymorphism in Romanian patients with tion of 0.1 mg/ml, 17.1±1.9 %DNA in tail in the lymphocytes and 16.7±2.0 myelodisplastic syndrome %DNA in tail in MSCs were observed. So, although end-point values of ge- C. Duicu1, C. Banescu2, I. Macarie1, M. Dobreanu1; notoxic effect of dioxidine was similar for both type of cells (p>0.05), MSCs 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 2Genetic showed greater sensitivity, particularly when agent in lower concentration Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, was used. Romania. In conclusion, spontaneous level of DNA damage in the MSCs was lower compared with lymphocytes, but MSCs indicated higher response to ROS- mediated DNA-damage. P06.086 Polymorphisms in DNA repair genes have been associated to repair DNA Dioxidine influence on whole-genome methylation status in damages, and might contribute to the individual susceptibility toX PdDev elop peripheral blood lymphocytes in vitro different types of malignant hemopathias. One of the most studied DNA re- S. A. Smirnikhina1, E. S. Voronina2, L. D. Katosova2, V. I. Platonova2, A. V. Lavrov2; pair systemX iPnD humans is nucleotide excision repair pathway. The gene 1Federal State Budgetary Institution ï¿½Research Centre for Medical Geneticsï¿½ of the (xeroderma pigmentosum group D) is involved in nucleotide excision repair Russian Academy of, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Federal State Budgetary Institution system. An variant in exon 23 leading to a Lys75X1PGD1n aminoacid substi- “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the Russian Academy of, Moscow, Russian tution has been associated with reduced DNA repair capacity. Federation. To investigate the possible association between the Lys751G1n and the risk of myelodisplastic syndrome in a Romanian popu- lationXP, wDe analyzed DNA samples from a case-control study of 26 MDS cases Introduction. Chemical mutagens can lead to genes mutations and chromo- and 50 healthy subjects as a control group. somal aberrations as well as to epigenetic changes. Toxins and other exo- The codon 751 genotypes were determined XuPsDing a PCR-RFLP techni- genous agents can cause nonspecific (whole-genome DNA hypomethylation que. No statistically significant difference was found for the genXoPtyDp ic and and histone deacetylation) and specific (hypo- and hypermethylation of se- allelic distributions of the polymorphisms in the gene between the pa- veral genes) modifications of genome. Dioxidine is well-studied agent with tients and the control subjects. In conclusion polymorphism in codon proved mutagenic activity. Frequency of chromosomal aberrations in peri- 751 is not associated with the development of MDS. pheral blood lymphocytes increases from spontaneous level of 2.25±0.17% Acknowledgement: This paper is partly supported by the Sectorial operatio- to 8.06±0.37% and 17.00±0.86% after dioxidine exposure in concentrations nal programme human resources development (SOP HRD), of 0.01 and 0.1 mg/ml respectively. The aim of this study was to estimate financed from the European social Fund and by the Romanian Government dioxidine influence on whole-genome methylation status in human peri- under the contract number POSDRU 60782. pheral blood lymphocytes. Materials and Methods. Samples of peripheral P06.089 blooHdp awere obtMaisnped from 14 healthy donors. DNA methylation was analy- DNA repair XRCC3 polymorphism and acute myeloid leukemia zed using methyl-sensitive Comet assay with additional step of restriction C. Banescu1, C. Duicu2, I. Benedek2, I. Pascanu2, K. Csep2, A. Todoran2, M. Dobreanu2; by II and I enzymes. DNA methylation in lymphocytes was esti- 1Genetic Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania, mated before cultivation, after 25-hours cultivation without dioxidine and 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Tg. Mures, Romania. with dioxidine addition in final concentrations of 0.01 aHnpda 0.1 mg/ml after XRCC3 24-hours Mcuslptivation of whole blood. DNA methylation level was defined as the ratio of mean of DNA value in comet’s tails after II restriction to The X-ray repair cross-complementing group 3 ( ), has an important that after I restriction. Results. DNA methylation levels in lymphocytes role in homologous recombination (HR), one of the main pathways for the before and after cultivation didn’t differ (45.28% and 44.80% respectively repair of DNA double strand breaks and mXRaCinCt3e nance of genomic integrity. p>0.4). Lymphocytes after the cultivation with low dioxidine concentration Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is characterized by genetic instability. We have shown the increased DNA methylation level up to 46.14% (p<0.001) hypothesized that polymorpXhRiCsCm3s in the repair gene may lead to ge- however high dioxidine concentration causes DNA hypomethylation down netic instability and subsequent AML. The aim of this study was to deter- to 42.31% (p<0.001). Conclusion. Nonspecific hypomethylation caused by mine the frequency of the Thr241Met polymorphisms among AML dioxidine exposure can result in genome instability and diseases including patients. Therefore we performed a case-control study including 50 de novo cancer. AML patients and 50 healthy subjects as a control group. P06.087 Genotyping was performed by polymerase chain reaction-restriction frag- Altered DNA methylation in early-stage non-small-cell lung cancer ment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP), with the digestion of restriction N. Tõnisson1,2, K. Lokk1,2, T. Vooder1,3, R. Kolde4, K. Välk1, R. Roosipuu5, U. Võsa1, L. Milani6, endonuclease NlaIII. The restricted products were analyzed XoRnC 2C%3 agarose K. Fischer6, M. Koltsina1, E. Urgard1, T. Annilo1, A. Metspalu1,6; gel stained with ethidium bromide and analyzed under UV light. We found 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Dept. of Genetics, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Lung Clinic, Tartu University a signifiXcaRnCtCly3 higher frequency of the polymorphic variants Thr241- Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Met genes in AML cases, when compared with cXoRnCtrCo3ls (P = 0.04; odds ratio Estonia, 5Dept. of Pathology, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 6Estonian Genome =2.54). 241Met allele is associated with an increased risk for AML. In conclusion, we consider that polymorphism Thr241Met polymor- www.eshpghi.somr gmay be a risk factor for the development of AML. www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 175 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.092 Expression of Selected Drug Resistance Genes in Breast and Colon Acknowledgement: This paper is partly supported by the Sectorial operatio- Cancer Patients nal programme human resources development (SOP HRD), financed from J. Markus, E. Weismanova, J. Palaj, K. Rauova, V. Lehoczka, S. Spanik; the European social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the con- St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. tract number POSDRU 60782. P06.090 DNMT3B C46359T and SHMT1 C1420T polymorphisms in The ABC transporters have been studied extensively for over two decades. carcinogenesis of head and neck Their structure and function is well described as well as their involvement T. B. Castro, M. Succi, A. L. S. Galbiatti, L. M. R. B. Silva, J. N. G. Silva, J. V. Maniglia, É. C. in the resistance of cancers to therapy. Despite being one of the best stu- Pavarino, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo; died protein families with important effect on the cancer therapy, the ABC São José do Rio Preto Medical School, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil. transporters are not routinely diagnosed in clinical practice. This has many Introduction: reasons, one of them being lack of relevant clinical data or their inconclu- siveness. The main aim of this study was to collect more information about Folate is an essential nutrient for the synthesis, repair, and the relevance of the relationship between the drug-resistance genes and methylOabtijoenc toifv DesN:A. PolymorphDiNsmMsT 3inB g enes involved in folate metaSbHoMlisTm1 therapy response. We have analyzed expression of selected ABC transporter may alter these processes and, consequently, modulate the cancer develop- genes in the tissues of breast and colon cancer patients. Analysis was perfor- ment. Investigate C46359T (rs2424913) and med in over 200 patient samples, with diagnoses ranging from benign lesi- C1420T (rs1979277) polymorphisms related to folate pathway Mine htheaodd sa:n d ons to invasive cancers. Our real-time PCR-based analysis revealed frequent neck cancer risk and the association between these polymorphisms with overexpression of certain ABC genes in all types of cancers. Most frequent- gender, risk factors and clinical histopathological parameters. A ly overexpressed genes included ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCC5 and ABCC11. The case-control study was conducted in 725 individuals in a Brazilian popula- expression status of ABC genes was subsequently correlated to the clinical tion (237 patients with head and neck cancer and 488 control individuals data of the patient. The effects of the ABC genes expression on the therapy without cancer history). The Real-Time PCR techniqRuees uwltass: performed for outcome will be discussed. genotyping the polymorphisms. Chi-square test and multiple logistic re- P06.093 gression test were used in the statistical analysis. No significant Comprehensive genomic study in ductal breast cancer difference in genotypes distribution was observed betwPeen groups in both I. Dimova1, R. Panov2, G. Antov3, D. Nesheva1, S. Maslyankov4, D. Toncheva1; polymorphisms evaluated. Male gender and tobacco consumption were as- 1Medical University - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Tokuda Hospital Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, sociated with increased risk for head and neck cancer ( <0.05). There were 3Institute of Genetics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Specialized Hospital of Oncology, Veliko Tarnovo, no significSaHnMt Tas1sociations between the poPlymorphisms and risk of disease, Bulgaria. however, the tobacScHoM aTn1d alcohol habits analyzed together showed associa- tion with C1420T polymorphiPsm ( <0.C0o5n).c Fluors icolinn:ical histopatholo- gical parameters, C1420T polymorphism was less frequent in pati- Despite of the large number of molecular studies in breast cancer, the data ents that had larynx as primary site ( <0.05). The male gender are still insufficient for understanding its molecular pathogenesis. In this and tobacco habit may be predictors of the head and neck cancer and the study we have performed whole genome analysis by DNA microarrays for polymorphisms investigated have no association with head and neck cancer determining the type, incidence and fine mapping of unbalanced genomic rFiisnka. nHcoiwale svuepr, pfuorrtth:er studies involving genes related to folate metabolism aberrations in ten ductal breast cancers. Trisomies of whole chromosomes mSuapyp coorntt:ribute to the understanding of this cancer type development. or chromosome arms with the highest frequency were observed for chro- Fapesp, CNPq, Capes mosomes 20 (80%) and 7 (40%), the most common monosomies were dis- FAMERP/FUNFARME/HB. covered for chromosomes 8 and 15 (60%), followed by 4, 18 and 21 (50%). P06.091 Significant micro-aberrations were determined by selection of aberrant Developmental pluripotency associated-2 (DPPA2) gene may be a clones with more than 40% frequency and detection of alterations of high metastatic marker for colorectal cancer amplitude in more than 30% of tumors. Doing this, we detected significa nt R. Raeisossadati1, M. M. Forghanifard1, S. Sardari1, A. Tavassoli2, M. Moghbeli1, M. R. aberrations for known tumor-driving genes such as MUC1 in 1q21, LASP1 Abbaszadegan3; (in 17q11-q21.3) and HER-2 (17q21.1), ZNF217 and AURKA (STK6) in 1Department of Biology, Mashhad Branch, Islamic Azad University, Mashhad, Islamic 20q13.2-q13.3. In addition, we suggest as new potential oncogenes TNS1 Republic of Iran, 2Endoscopic and Minimally Invasive Research Center, Qaem Hospital, (2q35), SH3BP5 (3p25), HSPB1 (7q11), and ZNF503 (10q22). The genes, lo- Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research cated in the most significant deleted small overlapping regions, were: EPS15 Center, Avicenna Research Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Mashhad, (1p32), ARL15 (5q11), CD2AP (6p12), IKBKB (8p11), KIF11 (10q23), ATM Islamic Republic of Iran. (11q22), CYP27B1 (12q13), EFTUD1 (15q26), and CHAF1B (21q22). Our results showed at a high resolution the unbalanced genomic aberrations for whole genome along all chromosomal regions and complement with addi- Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most frequent malignancy in the world. tional data the genomic characteristics of ductal breast cancer. Cancer cells have countless behaviors of pluripotent embryonic and germ line cells, such as unlimited proliferation and the capacity of self-renewal P06.094 as well as migration. Active embryonic genes in tumor cells may be asso- Absence of epidermal growth factor receptor gene mutations in ciated with invasiveness and indefinite growth of such cells. Developmental patients with first diagnosis of prostate cancer B. Zagradisnik, K. Zerjavic, T. Hajdinjak, G. Hlebic, D. Bratus, N. Kokalj Vokac; pluripotency associated-2 (DPPA2) is implicated in regulatory pathways University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. maintaining the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. DPPA2 expression in human germ line and early stage embryo is also being extended to a signi- ficant subset of malignant tumors. However, its expression in CRC remains BACKGROUND: Mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain of the epidermal to be clarified. In this study, the expression level of DPPA2 in 38 CRC samp- growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene are known for a variety of human can- les was compared with related normal tissues by real-time PCR assay. Ex- cers. In prostate cancer they represent a rare event although the increased pressional analysis represented the overexpression of DPPA2 in 31.5% of tyrosine phosphorylation is an important feature of advanced prostate can- tumor specimens. In the advanced stages (III/IV) of tumor development, the cer. In this study we investigated the presence of most common somatic mu- overexpression of DPPA2 was significantly correlated with the lymph node tations in the EGFR gene in patients with first diagnosis of prostate cancer. metastasis of tumor cells (p<0.05). These results not only emphasize on the The aim was to evaluate the utility of EGFR mutation analysis for early iden- probable role of DPPA2 gene overexpression in the development of CRC tu- tification of prostate cancers with aggressive growth potential. mors through advanced stages but also draw attention to the possible func- METHODS: First voided urine was collected from patients after digital rectal tion of this gene in epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) of colorectal examination. RNA was extracted from urine sediment and used for cDNA tumor cells. In summary, having revealed the clinical relevance of DPPA2 synthesis. Exon 19 deletions were detected with polymerase chain reaction expression in CRC, we extrapolate the potential of this gene as a promising and capillary electrophoresis. The L858R mutation was detected with PCR marker to evaluate the risk of lymph node metastasis and a possible thera- followed by MscI digestion and agarose electrophoresis. peutic target to prevent functional metastasis. RESULTS: Study sample included 65 patients. All had confirmed diagnosis of prostate cancer with positive biopsy and samples were collected before planed surgery. Gleason score 6 was determined for all cases. No frame shift mutations in exon 19 of the EGFR gene were detected and the L858R muta- tion was also absent, CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that EGFR mutations did not occur in these www.eshg.org www.eshg.org176 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Background: patients suggesting these mutations may be very rare events in early phase Top of Form of prostate cancer. Consequently the analysis of EGFR mutations appears Nasal polyposis (NP) is a common chronic inflammatory di- not to be informative for evaluation of growth potential of prostate cancer sease of the nasal mucosa. Although NP occurs 4% of population, the exact and for disease prognosis. mechanisms leading its development are still unknown. On histopatological P06.095 examination, tissue eosinophilia is a hallmark of NP. Recent studies exami- Prolonged HPV infection can produce chronic inflammation and link ning eosinophyl biology have focused on delineating the molecular basis of to ESCC in Iran FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene Considering the eosinophils are the most im- F. Biramijamal1, A. Hossein-Nezhad2, M. Soltani1, G. Irvanloo3; portant cells in NP and the role of FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion gene in the ethio- 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Endocrinology and Metabolism Research lMogeyth oofd hsy: per eosinophilic syndrome, it was aimed to investigate FIP1L1- Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Cancer Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of PDGFRA fusion gene at the NP. Iran. We enrolled the NP patients to this translational study approved by the institutional ethical comittee of Ankara Atatürk Hospital. All indivi- duals provided informed consent, The nasal polyp tissue and normal nasal Prolonged inflammation, or chronic inflammation, can lead to cancer. This mucosa biopsy materials were obtained from 20 patients who had undergo- process can be occurred in present of prolonged infections or irritants. Now, ne a NP operation in the Hospital ENT Clinic. Fluorescent in-situ hybridisa- it is clear that tumor microenvironment is accompanied by inflammatory tion (FISH) was performed using LSI 4q12 Tri-Color Rearrangement probe cells which their production including cytokines can promote tumor pro- (Vysis, 05N52-020) on touch-samples slides prepared from fresh biopsies gression. FISH was also performed on nasal mucosa biopsy samples of 20 patients In previous study, we showed that chronic inflammation is involved in de- wRehsou wltes:r e operated for nasal septal deviation as control group. Laboratory veloping of esophageal cancer, esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC), studies were carried out as blinded. in Iran. The incidence of ESCC is high in northern Iran. Environmental ex- The FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion was not found .The nasal polyp tissue posure to polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) has been suggested to aCnodn cnloursmioanl sn:a sal mucosa biopsy materials were obtained from 20 patients. provoke inflammation. They are easily distributed throughout the human The control specimens were all normal. body and produce PAH-DNA adducts which are risk factors for ESCC. Also, it Further prospective, longitudinal studies are required to is shown that human papillomavirus (HPV) genome integrate into the host establish whether FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion and the other eosinophilia rela- cell chromosomep a5n3d lead to malignant cell transformation. This infection ted biomarkers play role in the pathogenesis of NP. can be contributed to carcinogenesis by inactivating the p53 protein in oral P06.098 cancers through gene mutation. Longitudinal study of t(14;18) positive Follicular Lymphomas We assessed the HPV infections in ESCC tissues. The samples (tumor and identifies different patterns of genetic and epigentic evolution control tissues) were collected from Tehran and the HPV infections were A. Haake1, M. Kreuz2, H. Trautmann3, L. Theil1, M. Szczepanowski4, K. Koch4, D. determined by in situ hybridization analysis. Herrmann3,1, R. Küppers5, R. Scholtysik5, W. Klapper4, C. Arnold6, D. Hasenclever2, M. Our data showed that the presence of type of 16 or 18 HPV in esophage- Löffler2, C. Pott3, R. Siebert1; al cancerous tissues. Based on above results, it can be concluded that pro- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel/ longed HPV infection accompanied by presence of PAHs may produce chro- Christian Albrecht University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Informatics, nic inflammation and link to ESCC in Iran. Statistics and Epidemiology (IMISE), University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 3Medical Clinic II/Clinic and Policlinic, University of Schleswig-Holstein Kiel, Kiel, Germany, P06.096 4Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel/Christian Mutation screening in Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC) gene in Albrecht University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 5Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), patients clinically diagnosed as Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Universtity Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 6Bioinformatics Group, Department of (FAP) Computer Science, and Interdisciplinary Center for Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig, O. C. Vincenzi1,2, G. A. Molfetta1,2, C. A. Ferreira1,3, W. A. Silva Jr1,2; Leipzig, Germany. 1University of São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 2National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and Cell Therapy, Regional Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 3National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem Cell and Follicular Lymphomas (FLs) are germinal center-derived B-cell lymphomas Cell Therapy, Regional Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, Ribeirão which in the vast majority of cases carry a t(14;18)(q32;q21). This translo- Preto, Brazil. cation juxtaposes the enhancers of the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus at 14q32 to the BCL2 gene at 18q21. Although crucial in the initiation of the malignant process, the t(14;18) translocation alone is not sufficient to Colorectal cancer is an important malignant neoplasm. Its development in- drive lymphomagenesis. As a prerequisite to model the pathogenesis of FL volves storage of mutations in oncogenes and in tumoral supressor genes, as from initiation to disease progression we here investigated the clonal evolu- well as epigenetic changes. One of these abnormal genes is the Adenomatous tion in t(14;18) positive FLs. To this end, we performed morphologic, immu- Polyposis Coli (APC), a tumor suppressor that presents mutations which nohistochemic, interphase cytogenetic, mutational and epigenetic studies in may be associated to colorectal adenomas that develop into adenocarcino- pairs of initial and relapsed FL tumor biopsies within the framework of the mas. Defects in this gene cause Familial Adenomatous Polyposis (FAP), an BMBF-funded HaematoSys Systems Biology Network. We studied genomic autosomal dominant pre-malignant disease that usually progress to mali- copy number changes using SNP 6.0-Chips, chromosomal translocations gnancy. Its main characteristic is the large development of pre-cancerous with fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), mutations of immunoglobu- colonic polyps in the intestines, which invariably evolve for the installment lin (IG)- and non-IG genes via cloning and sequencing and additionally next of cancer. The goals of this project are the screening for mutations in the APC generation sequencing as well as DNA-methylation by 27K BeadArrays. In- gene (GenBank M74088) using High Resolution Melting technique and DNA tegrated analysis of the first 16 tumor pairs obtained after an interval of sequencing, and the search for deletions using MLPA. The research includes between 12 and 101 months provide evidence for different modes of lym- 16 patients with clinical suspicion of FAP which were attended at the Uni- phoma progression. In particular, phylogenetic trees derived from mutatio- versity Hospital and have signed for the consented forms. Of the 15 exons, nal and cytogenetic studies showed different ways of branching which cor- 14 were screened so far and a nonsense mutation was found (Arg302Stop), related with patterns of differential DNA methylation. Our findings suggest producing an inactive protein of reduced size. This mutation was trans- that genetic and epigenetic changes might interact in the pathogenesis and mitted from mother to both children. We also found a deletion detected by evolution of t(14;18)-positive FLs. MLPA in another family; the proband showed deletions of the entire exon P06.099 1 and 12 of the APC gene, besides a deletion of the exon 1 of MUTYH gene. Abnormal methylation of tumor-related genes in gastric carcinomas All exons of APC and MUTYH will be screened and genetic counseling will and their adjacent nontumor areas. be offered to the families carrying mutations. Financial support: FAPESP N. Chekunova, I. Bykov, T. Kchorobrich, M. Nemtsova; (2011/11456-0), INCTC. I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. P06.097 Does FIP1L1-PDGFRA fusion play role in pathogenesis of nasal polyposis? Gastric cancer (GC) is the second leading cause of cancer death and the G. Yalçıner1, K. Bozdemir2, N. Y. Kutlay3, A. S. Bilgen2, B. Tarlak2, A. Tükün3, A. Kutluhan2; fourth most common malignant tumor in the world. GC develops through 1Ankara Atatürk Training and Research Hospital, ENT Clinic,, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara Atatürk Training and Research Hospital, ENT Clinic, Ankara, Turkey, 3Ankara University, the accumulation of genetic and epigenetic alterations. Epigenetic silencing Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. of tumor-related genes, due to hypermethylation of the CpG sites in the pro- moter regions, has emerged as one of the main genetic alterations in cancer development. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 177 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 WCeD Hex1a, mRAinSeSdF 11A0,6 M frLoHz1e,n N g3a3st, rDicA cPaKrcinoma tissues and their adjacent non- We report the spectrum and frequency of detected genomic rearrangements tumor areas for CpG-island hypermethylation in 5 tumor-related genes of BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 gene and also the potential founder origin of ( ) by methyl-sensitive PCR. Samples for rare complete BRCA1 deletion in Slovak HBOC families. detecting hypermethylaEt-icoand hine rthine nNo3n3tu mor tDisAsPuKes were located no farther Array-CGH supported by grant IGA MZ NT11089-4/2010 than 4 cm from tumor. RASSF1A hMLH1 P06.102 Hypermethylation of , CDH1a, nNd3 3, DAP K(61%, 66% and 48%) Mutation analysis of cKit and PDGFRα genes in GIST patients from was detected more frequently than that of and (25% an d Slovakia R20A%SS)F 1inA ,c MarLcHin1oma tissues. Genes were methylated both G. Minarik1,2, Z. Lasabova3, T. Szemes4,2, T. Burjanivova3, P. Szepe3, V. Buzalkova3, D. in tumor tissues and in the adjacent nontumor areas. Hypermethylationof Porubsky4, J. Sufliarsky5, L. Plank3; were detected in gastric carcinomas only. 1Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Geneton, Ltd., Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Comenius University in Bratislava Jessenius Faculty of The current study shows that hypermethylation of multiple tumor-related Medicine, Martin, Slovakia, 4Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Natural genes is detected frequently in gastric carcinoma as well as in adjacent nor- Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5National Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia. mal tissues. Our findings suggest that a mechanism leading to CpG-island methylation is likely to be involved in the early gastric carcinogenesis pro- cess, by establishing field cancerization in gastric mucosa. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) represent most common mesenchy- P06.100 mal neoplasms. In 1998 activating mutations in gene coding cKit tyrosine CpG-island hypermethylation in 5 tumor-related genes (CDH1, kinase (KIT) were identified to be present in most of GIST tumors. Later on RASSF1A, MLH1, N33, DAPK) as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers mutations in other tyrosine kinase - PDGFRα (PDGFRA), were identified as for gastric cancer. causative in GISTs. Mutation analysis of KIT and PDGFRA could be used in A. Udilova, I. Bykov, T. Kchorobrich, M. Nemtsova; GIST therapy decision and in clinical prognosis of GISTs, therefore KIT and I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. PDGFRA mutation analysis is currently a predictivelly important step in dia- gnostic protocol with its both prognostic and predictive consequences. In our study KIT and PDGFRA mutation status was analyzed during diffe- Promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppression genes is a central mecha- rential diagnosis protocol applied to GIST bioptic material in Slovakia. We nism for epigenetic inactivation and silencing of these genes in cancer cells. have performed mutation analysis of most commonly mutated exons in KIT Analyses of the promoter hypermethylation patterns in different genes have (9, 11, 13, 17) and PDGFRA (12, 14, 18) genes in patients and combined the identified specific alterations that may serve as useful diagnostic and pro- data with most important clinical parameters. gnostic biomarkers.We investigated the clinical and prognostic importance Totally 278 GIST suspect patients have been screened for mutations in of CpG-island hypermethylation in 5 tumor-related genes (CDH1, RASSF1A, analyzed exons of KIT and PDGFRA. According to information from other MLH1, N33, DAPK) for gastric cancer patients. We examined abnormal me- publications as well as in silico analysis with PolyPhen-2 predictor 233 pa- thylation and methylation index (MI) in 106 gastric cancer patients. Me- tients have been identified with GIST causal mutation. Of those most pre- thylation index (MI) was defined as the ratio between the numbers of me- valent mutations were deletions present in KIT exon 11 with proportion of thylated genes to total number of examined genes in each sample. Statistical 41.20%. The most frequent single mutation was KIT exon 9 p. 503-504_dup2 significance was evaluated using the Mann Whitney U-test. with proportion 9.44%. Genotype-phenotype correlation analysis reveal the There wCaDsH a1 signiNfic3a3n t difference in the frequency of hypermethylation of statistically significant association between intestinal localization of tumors these genes among different clinical groups of patients. AbnormCaDlH m1ethyla- and presence of KIT exon 9 p. 503-504_dup2 mutation (p<0.001) and ga- tion of and genes is related to the progress of gastric cancer and stric localization of tumors and presence of PDGFRA exon 18 p. D842V mu- meDtaAsPtaKsis to lymph nodes (p < 0.05). Abnormal methylation of is spe- tation (p=0,021). cifically associated with diffuse-type GC (p< 0,05). Abnormal methylation P06.103 of gene, in contrast, is a marker of favorable prognosis, being more Expression analysis of KIT gene splice variants Kit+ and KitA+ in frequently methylated in non-metastatic gastric carcinomas (p< 0,05). The- gastrointestinal stromal tumors. re was no significant difference between groups of patients with IM> 0,5 A. V. Gaponova1,2, T. Kekeeva1, L. Zavalishina1, Y. Andreeva1, G. Frank1; and IM< 0,5. 1Herzen Moscow Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Russian The use of molecular genetic markers, such as promoter hypermethylation State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. of tumor suppression genes, may be an additional factor of the diagnosis and prognosis for gastric cancer. P06.101 Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are the most common mesenchymal tu- Genomic rearrangements in Slovak BRCA1/2 families: rare deletion of mors of the gastrointestinal tract. 5% of GISTs are caused by oncogenic mu- complete BRCA1 gene represents a potential founder mutation tations in PDGFRA gene, 60-89% by mutations in KIT gene. Exon 10 KIT M. Konecny1, V. Vranova2, K. Zavodna1, Z. Bartosova1; pre-mRNA contains splice site. Alternative splicing results in the presence 1Department of Clinical Genetics, St. Elizabeth Cancer Institute, Bratislava, Slovakia, of two mRNAs KIT isoforms: KitA+ and Kit+, containing an in-frame GNNK 2Laboratory of Molecular Cytogenetics, Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of deletion. Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. We investigated mutational status of KIT and PDGFRA genes and Kit+/KitA+ mRNA isoforms expression from 25 GIST patients. Analysis of mutations in KIT exons 9, 11 and PDGFRA exon 18 was conducted by PCR following by Germline mutations in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes account for a major propor- sequencing. cDNA from normal testicle tissue was used as control. Isoform tion of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer cases. Most of these mutations expression analysis was perfomed by RT-PCR. consist of point mutations: deletions, insertions, nonsense or missense mu- We observed mutations in 21/25 (84%) tumors (KIT exon 9 - 8%, KIT exon tations, and splice variants, however an increasing number of large genomic 11 - 52%, PDGFRA exon 18 - 20 %). Kit+ expression is dominate over KitA+ rearrangements have been identified. In Slovak HBOC families large geno- expression in 21 samples, 2 samples demonstrate equal expression of both mic rearrangements are responsible for approximately 10% of BRCA1/2 isoforms, only Kit+ expression was detected in 2 samples. It’s interesting positive families. that equal expression of both isoforms or only Kit+ expression are detec- Genomic BRCA1, BRCA2 and CHEK2 rearrangements were analysed by ted in specimens with KIT exon 9 and PDGFRA exon 18 mutations only. It MLPA (Multiplex Ligation-Dependent Probe Amplification) and in some ca- is known that these mutations are connected with unfavourable prognosis ses approved by Plexamp (DNA Quantitative Multiplex Amplification System and low response to Gleevec. No correlation was observed between expres- by Prestagen). The complete deletion of BRCA1 gene was closer characteri- sion level of isoforms and intensity of IHC staining of c-kit. zed by special BRCA1 region MLPA kit and oligonucleotide array based com- Our data suggests the possible correlation between the isoforms expression parative genomic hybridization (aCGH). and the mutational status of GISTs. Further investigation may be helpful for Large genomic rearrangements were identified altogether in 5 families, the isoform role in GIST development and tumor response to target thera- while no LGR was indentified in BRCA2 gene, one deletion of exons 9 and 10 py. was identified in CHEK2 gene and two different deletions were detected in BRCA1 gene. Deletion of exons 21 and 22 of BRCA1 was previously descri- bed in Czech HBOC population and was detected in one family. Complete deletion of BRCA1 gene was previously reported in two Spanish and one German HBOC family and was identified in 3 Slovak families. This deletion was further characterized; however exact breakpoints have not been detec- ted yet. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org178 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.104 Cisplatin induces apoptosis in U87MG and A172 glioblastoma cell lines via up regulation of bax gene and down regulation of bcl-2 gene level were investigated only in some glioblastoma patients studies. M. S. Taghavi1, A. Akbarzadeh2, R. Mahdian3, K. Azadmanesh4, G. Javadi1, M. J. Mokhtari5, Where, hypoalbuminaemia was associated with significantly reduced me- S. Ghassemi2, Z. Hosseinian1; dian survival. The aim of this study was to investigate MGMT promoter me- 1Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, thylation status in histologically confirmed glioblastoma Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pilot Biotechnology department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, samples and pre-operative serum albumin level of 70 glioblastoma patients. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology MGMT promoter methylation status were determined by MS PCR. Survival Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Virology was determinated by using the Kaplan-Meier method and a multivariate Cox department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Department of Biology, Zarghan Branch, Islamic Azad University, Zarghan, Islamic Republic of Iran. regression model (SPSS). This study shows that MGMT promoter methylation and serum albumin are significant predictors of survival in glioblastoma patients. Cancer cell apoptosis can be induced by Cis-diamminedichloroplatinum II P06.107 (cisplatin), an efficient anticancer agent. bcl-2 and bax are members of the New insights into glioblastoma development by integrative genetic bcl-2 family that play key roles in the regulation of apoptosis. The ratio bet- analysis of multifocal glioblastoma multiforme ween bax and bcl2 often determines whether a cell will live or die. In this K. Becker1, D. Krex2, E. Gerlach1, K. Hackmann1, A. Rump1, G. Schackert2, L. Kaderali3, E. Schrock1, B. Klink1; study, U87MG and A172 cells were treated with various concentrations of 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, cisplatin for different times (24, 48 and 72 h). Then, cell viability was as- Dresden, Germany, 2Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurochirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Carl sessed using MTT assay and IC50 was determined. The two glioma cell lines Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 3Institut für Medizinische Informatik und were treated with IC50 dose of cisplatin at 48 h for different times(24, 48 Biometrie, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany. and 72 h), RNA was extracted and cDNA was synthesized. Quantity of bcl-2 and bax genes expression compare to tbp gene were analyzed using very sensitive quantitative Real-time PCR. bcl-2 gene expression was decreased Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and malignant type of and bax gene was increased in a time-dependent manner by cisplatin, that brain tumor in adults with an average survival time of less than 12 months was statistically significant (P<0.05). The results showed that cisplatin exer- and targeted therapies are not yet available. Therefore, we investigated dif- ted a time-dependent inhibitory effect on the viability, via up regulation of ferent foci in multifocal GBM by an integrative approach in order to identify bax and down regulation of bcl-2 gene, in U87MG and A172 cells. markers of tumor initiation and progression as well as potential therapeutic P06.105 targets. We combined high resolution array CGH and expressiPoTnE aNrrays on Molecular alterations of EGFR and PTEN genes in primary fresh frozen tissue from 11 tumor foci from 6 patients with spectral karyoty- glioblastoma: associations with prognostic ping (SKY) on corresponding primary cell cultures. Moreover, Sanger I. Rodríguez-Hernández1, I. Matos-García2, R. García-Valiente1, J. Gonzalez-Valero3, Á. sequencing was performed. Array CGH-analysis detected multiple aberrati- Santos-Briz4, J. Gómez-Moreta5, J. García3, R. González-Sarmiento1; ons in the tumors investigated. Additionally, SKY-analysis revealed multiple 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, Salamanca, translocations including complex rearrangements. We found that different Spain, 2Department of Oncology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, tumor foci derived from the same patients shared the majority of aberrati- 3IBMCC, Center for Cancer Research (USAL-CSIC), Salamanca, Spain, 4Department of Anatomopathology, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Department ons detected, indicating that these aberrations had probably emerged early of Neurosurgery, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. in tumorigenesis. Interestingly however, some of the aberrations differed between the tumor foci from the same patient and thus must have occurred later in tumor development. These observations support the hypothesis that EGFR is frequently amplified, overexpressed or mutated in glioblastoma, different tumor foci in multifocal GBM are of monoclonal origin and then de- the most common and devastating malignant brain tumor. Commonly lost velop PinTdEeNpendently of each other by clonal evolution. In PaTccEoNrdance with in these tumors is also PTEN, an inhibitor of the PI3K signaling pathway this hypothesis, some of the tumor foci from the same patient shared the activated by EGFR. same mutation whereas others displayed different mutations. In this study, we aimed to characterize the molecular alterations of EGFR We are currently analyzing the expression data which will also be presented. and PTEN in 60 patients diagnosed with primary glioblastoma. We analyzed Taken together, multifocal GBM provide an excellent model for investigating mutational status of PTEN and EGFR tyrosine kinase domain; we evaluated tumor progression and might help distinguishing between driver and pas- EGFR amplification and PTEN deletion by FISH and we determined EGFRvIII senger alterations in GBM. expression by RT-PCR. P06.108 20.8% patients showed pathogenic mutations in PTEN and 68.2% tumors High Frequency of Mutations in the PIK3CA Gene Helical and Kinase presented PTEN locus deletion. 20% patients with PTEN deletion showed Coding Regions in a Group of Iranian Patients with High Grade additionally PTEN mutation. Regards to EFGR, no mutations were detected Glioblastomas: Five Novel Mutations in the tyrosine kinase domain, whereas 32.7% glioblastomas showed EGFR P. Derakhshandeh-Peykar1,2, J. Alivi2, A. Hosseinnejad3, B. Rautenstrauss1, R. amplification and 31.7% expressed EGFRvIII truncated variant. 46.1% pati- Ebrahimzadeh Vesal2, A. Doriani2; 1Medizinisch Genetischen Zentrum (MGZ), München, Germany, 2Tehran University of ents with EGFRvIII expression showed EGFR amplification, resulting in the Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shariati hospital, Tehran overexpression of constitutively active EGFR lacking I and II extracellular University of Medical Sciences (TUMS), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. domains. Furthermore, we have found 5 novel EGFR non canonical splice variants in the extracellular domain. Four were truncated proteins and only one generated an in-frame protein lacking aminoacids 20-251 in a tumor Glioblastoma multiform (GBM; WHO grade IV) and Anaplastic Astrocyto- with EGFR amplification. In summary, 73.3% of glioblastomas analyzed pre- mas (AA; WHO ,g rade III) are highly aggressive and lethal astrocytic brain sented any alteration in PTEN and/or EGFR. tumors. To detect cancer specific somatic mutations in two hot-spot regions Finally, we investigated the prognostic impact of these alterations in pati- of PIK3CA gene the helical and kinase domains (encoded by exons 9 and ent outcome. EGFRvIII expression was a significant prognostic factor (HR = 20, respectively) in G BM and AA, we examined the respective sequences 31 2.56, 95% C.I. 1.17-5.57, p = 0.018). Patients with EGFRvIII variant expressi- paraffin-embedded samples (23 GBM and 8 AA). The samples were obtai- on had a higher median survival than those without it (16.7 months vs. 10.1 ned from a group ofIranian patients affected with high grade glioblasto- months)(Supported by FIS PI10/00219). ma (HGG). The overall prevalence of PIK3CA mutations was 23% (7/31) P06.106 for both tumor types (22% in GBM, and 25% in AA). Five mutations were MGMT methylation and serum albumin in survival for glioblastoma detected in exon 20, p.Arg992Gln (c.2976G>A), p.Met1005Val (c.3014A>G), patients p.Ile1019>Val (c.305P65A3>G), p.Ser1008Cys (c.3024C>G), p. Asn1044Asp V. Asmoniene1, D. Skiriute1, A. Tamasauskas1, A. Sinkus2; 1Laboratory of Neurooncology and Genetics, Neuroscience Institute, Kaunas, Lithuania, (c.3130A>G), an dP oIKn3eC mAutation in exon 9, p.Glu545Ala (c.1634A>C). Addi- tionally exons 4-8 of gene in four unrelated young patients, who showed 2Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania. no mutations in exons 9 and 20, were analyzed. Three mutations were identified: p.PPIrKo37C2AAla (c.214C>G), g.11608G>T (homozygote splice mutation), and p.Thr170Thr (c.510G>A silent mutation). In conclusion mu- Glioblastoma is the most malignant astrocytic brain tumor (astrocytoma tation detection in in patients with a high degree of malignancy and WHO grade IV) with very poor prognosis of a median survival of 14-15 early age at diagnosis should be included in molecular diagnostic protocols, months after diagnosis, despite applied treatment (surgery, chemothera- also with regard to possible upcoming therapies. py, radiotherapy). Till now, only MGMT (O(6)-methylguanine-DNA methyl- transferase) promoter methylation is confirmed molecular prognostic fac- tor and helpful marker for chemotherapy of glioblastoma. Serum albumin www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 179 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.109 Germany, 2Medical Centre of the Johannes Gutenberg-University Mainz, Centre for Genetic Analysis of Long-Term Survivors with High-Grade Gliomas Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mainz, Germany, 3Medical Centre of the Johannes L. Roque1, C. Martins1, I. Francisco1, C. Albuquerque1, S. Esteves2, A. Azevedo3, D. Salgado3, Gutenberg University Mainz, III. Department of Internal Medicine, Mainz, Germany. I. Costa3, T. Pimentel3, J. Nunes3, J. M. Bravo-Marques3, V. Moura-Nunes1, C. Faria4, M. Santos4, J. Lobo Antunes4, J. Pimentel5, P. Castanho6, M. Mafra7; 1UIPM-Portuguese Cancer Institute, Lisbon, Portugal, 2Clinical Cancer Research- The Wilms tumour protein 1 (WT1) is essential for male sex determination. Portuguese Cancer Institute, Lisbon, Portugal, 3Neurology Department-Portuguese Not much is known about it’s expression and function in the embryonic and Cancer Institute, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Neurosurgery Department - Hospital de Santa adult female genital tract and if WT1 can trigger ovarian tumorgenesis. Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 5Neuropathology Department - Hospital de Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 6Neurosurgery Department - Hospital de S.José, Lisbon, Portugal, To this end, we generated two different conditional mouse models, both 7Neuropathology Department - Hospital de S.José, Lisbon, Portugal. based on an inducible Wt1 tTA knockin effector line carrying a tetracycli- ne-dependant activator (tTA) in place of the first exon of the endogenous Background: murine Wt1 locus. In the first model, tripel transgenic animals bearing a High-grade gliomas have poor prognosis. Only 3-5% survive tetracycline-responsive transgene for Cre-recombinase, and the Cre repor- mAiomre: than five years being referred as long-term survivors. Factors determi- ter line ROSA26 lacZ, the fate of WT1-positive cells was followed in vivo by ning this outcome are largely unknown. tetracycline administration using beta-galactosidase to identify cells and Meth oIddesn:tify specific genetic parameters that might be associated to long- tissues derived from WT1-positive precursors. In tripel transgenic animals term survival. of the second model, the Wt1 tTA knockin effector line and the tetracycline- Evaluation of genomic imbalances by chromosomal CGH and of responsive Cre-recombinase should excise the third exon of Ctnnb1 (βCat- MGMT and MMR genes methylation levels (%) by MLPA analysis in 3 groups Flox-Ex3), which may in that case trigger ovarian tumorgenesis. of patients. Group 1: 13 long-term survivors; Group 2: 17 patients with an Histochemical staining of embryos demonstrated earliest Wt1 expression in overall survival (OS)< 5 years and MGMTav ≥ 25%; Group 3: 29 patients the urogenital ridge at day 10.5 post coitum (d.p.c.). When the fate of Wt1- with OS<5years and MGMTav<25%. Statistical analysis was performed using positive cells was analysed in the ovaries of adult mice, beta-galactosidase MReasnunl-tWs: hitney and Fisher’s Exact tests with p-value adjustment for multiple activity could be detected in oocytes, stromal and granulosa cells. Tripel tests (Bonferroni). transgenic mice of the second model developed huge ovarian carcinoma. Multiple chromosomal imbalances were observed in all groups Molecular and histological analysis suggested that this is due to Ctnnb1 ove- being gains at 7p/q regions the most frequent alteration. Novn.se. of the long- rexpression and that the carcinoma were granulosa cell tumours. term survivors had 7p12 (EGFR) amplifications and loss of 10q23 (PTEN) Our results show that WT1 has an essential function in the female genital region were significantly less frequent: 23,1% in group 1 88,7% and tract and present a new mouse model for granulosa cell tumours. 86,2% in groups 2 and 3. MS-MLPA analysis revealed that MGMT and 4 of P06.112 the MMR genes were significantly more methylated in the long-term sur- Evaluation of methylation status in glutation S-transferase P1(GSTP1) vivor group than in the others. Accordingly for groups 1, 2 and 3 mean me- gene promoter in human breast cancer and it’s relation to tumor thylation levels were respectively for MGMT (70,6%; 54,1%; 8,6%), MSH2 grade and stage (C6o,n8%clu; s0i,o8n%s;: 0,8%), MSH6 (25,3%; 22,4%; 4,7%); PMS2 (24,7%; 5,5%; S. A. S. Shargh1, H. Yazdi2; 1Azad Islamic University of Chalous, Chalous, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Consultor of 2,2%) and MLH3 (56,5%; 11,2%; 3,1%) academic research, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Our data underlies that long-term survival is associated to an absence of 7p12 (EGFR) amplification, infrequent 10q23 (PTEN) loss and higher levels of MGMT; MSH2, MSH6, PMS2 and MLH3 methylation. Glutation S-transferase P1 (GSTP1) gene methylation in promoter CpG is- P06.110 lands has been described as a specific biomarker for many types of cancer Association of different ovarian tumor types in a patient with Gorlin including breast cancer as a tumor suppressor gene . At presents study we Syndrome found the GSTP1 gene promoter to be methylated in breast cancer tissues. G. Tortora1, P. De Iaco2, M. Procaccini2, A. Pellegrini2, M. Rossi2, I. Neri3, D. Santini4, L. Pastorino5, G. Bianchi-Scarrà5, M. Lima6, D. Turchetti1; To study the difference of sequence in hypermethylated GSTP1 promoter 1U.O. Genetica Medica, Policlinico S.Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 2SSD Oncologia in cancer tissues and non methylated status in normal tissues, we analy- Ginecologica, Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 3U.O. Dermatologia, zed the cytosine methylation status as epigenetic changes in 50 tumors Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 4U.O. Anatomia e Istologia Patologica, from patient’s with breast cancer and 50 normal breast tissues that obtai- Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 5U.O. Laboratorio di Genetica dei ned from the same breast tumor in adjacent region. In order to study the Tumori Ereditari, Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy, 6U.O. promoter methylation status for GSTP1 gene in breast cancer, 40 CpG sites Chirurgia Pediatrica, Policlinico Sant’Orsola-Malpighi, Bologna, Italy. [nucleotide(nt) 197,190,187,185,183,182,176,162,155,152,148,145,141,13 2,127,124,112,109,101,99,81,77,74,71,54,53,48,47,43,42,40,38,23,22,15,1 4,13,11,8,4] were screened. The GSTP1 methylation was detected in %.41.3 A 29 years old woman came to our attention with the suspicion of Gorlin of breast tumors which was associated with higher tumor grade (p=0.467) Syndrome (GS). At age 15 she had undergone unilateral oophorectomy for and tumor stage(p=0.048) . a large mass of the right ovary and excision of several masses of the left P06.113 ovary, diagnosed as fibromas; at age 18 she had multiple fibromas of the left Histone deacetylases activate the HGF/c-Met pathway via repression ovary removed and two years later she underwent surgery for an uterine of microRNA-449 in human hepatocellular carcinoma septum. Recently, she has undergone left oophorectomy for a large cystic R. Buurman1, E. Gürlevik2, V. Schäffer1, M. Eilers1, M. Sandbothe1, H. Kreipe3, L. Wilkens1,3, mass: pathological examination revealed a granulosa cell tumor with theca- B. Schlegelberger1, F. Kühnel2, B. Skawran1; cell areas. 1Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Maternal family history was unremarkable, whereas paternal family history Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover, Germany, 3Institute of was largely unknown, except for hysterectomy in her grandmother. The pro- Pathology, Hannover, Germany. band has two healthy younger brothers (27 and 18 years old); her mother had three spontaneous miscarriages. Physical examination showed coarse face with hypertelorism and three skin lesions, of recent onset, which were BACKGROUND & AIMS: Histone deacetylation represents an important removed and diagnosed as basal cell carcinomas. To confirm the suspicion epigenetic modification in cancer development and is responsible for chro- of GS, the search for germline mutations in PTCH1 gene was carried out, matin remodeling. In this study, we aimed to identify microRNAs affected which detected the heterozygous mutation c.1067_1067+3>TT, already re- by histone deacetylation and to understand functional consequences. ME- ported in GS patients. Although ovarian cysts and ovarian fibromas, often THODS: HCC cell lines and immortalized liver cell lines were treated with bilateral, are reported in 25-50% of GS female patients, to our knowledge, the histone deacetylase inhibitor TSA. Differentially expressed mRNAs and this is the first case of a granulosa cell tumor associated to multiple ovari- miRNAs were identified using mRNA and miRNA expression profiling. Fin- an fibromas in a GS patient, whose clinical manifestations were mainly and dings were validated by siRNA mediated silencing of HDAC1-3, transfection heavily affecting ovaries. of miR-449 into a HCC cell line, Western blotting and by luciferase reporter Other investigations (X-rays of the skull and ortopantogram) are ongoing, as assays. RESULTS: Here we show that HDAC1-3 are consistently up-regulated well as molecular analysis in parents and sibs. in primary HCC. MiRNA profiling identified hsa-miR-449a to be significantly P06.111 up-regulated after HDAC inhibition. c-MET encoding the receptor tyrosine A conditional mouse model for granulosa cell tumour driven by WT1 kinase for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is a putative target gene of miR- C. Steinwender1, S. Fees1, C. Spangenberg1, D. Prawitt2, E. Bockkamp3, R. Keppler1, K. 449. Indeed, HDAC inhibition and miR-449 transfection resulted in reduced Reicherter1, B. Zabel1, E. Lausch1; expression of c-MET. Increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation after 1University of Freiburg, Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg, histone deacetylation and miR-449 upregulation confirmed the miR-449 tumor suppressive role. MiR-449 was found to bind directly to c-MET. Im- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org180 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 portantly, primary human HCC showed reduced expression of miR-449 and comprehensively characterize HBV in 48 HCC patients. Our data suggest increased expression of c-MET. CONCLUSIONS: This work opens up new preferential integration of HBV into genic regions and many are predicted avenues for targeted therapies of HCC, either via treatment with histone to alter gene regulation. Notably, integration of HBV into tumor tissues is deacetylase inhibitors or, possibly by direct transfer of specific miRNA-449. less random than integration into the adjacent non-tumorous tissues. In tu- P06.114 mor tissues, there is preferential integration of HBV into selected chromo- Detection of EGFR expression levels in tissues of head and neck somes. Within the HBV genome, the preferred region involved in integration cancer patients and cell lines is at the 3’end of the HBX gene and the 5’ of the precore/core protein. The A. Kalayci1, T. Cora1, H. Acar1, B. Keles2, K. Ozturk2; 3’end of the HBx is often deleted upon integration. The most common type 1University of Selcuk, Selcuklu Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, of chimeric transcript observed is the HBx-human transcripts which can be Turkey, 2University of Selcuk, Selcuklu Medical Faculty, Department of Otolaryngology, expressed. This study represents a comprehensive characterization of HBV Konya, Turkey. in HCC patients at the genetic level which may facilitate our understanding of the potential role of HBV in HCC development. P06.117 Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is the sixth most common Functional analysis of 30 putative BRCA1 splicing mutations in cancer worldwide and includes epithelial malignancies of the oral cavity, German families with hereditary breast and ovarian cancer pharynx and larynx. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is involved in J. Hauke1,2, A. A. Becker1,3, S. Engert4, J. Köhler1,3, N. Arnold5, E. Hahnen1,3, A. Meindl4, R. K. tumor development and is highly expressed in head and neck squamous cell Schmutzler1,3, B. Wappenschmidt1,3; carcinomas. EGFR is a 170-kDa transmembrane glycoprotein with an extra- 1Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, cellular ligand-binding and a cytoplasmic domain with intrinsic tyrosine ki- Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), University of Cologne, nase activity. EGFR overexpression has been observed in both premalignant Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (CMMC), lesions and malignant head and neck tumors. Eventhough there are several University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 4Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar at the Technical University, Munich, Germany, 5Department of studies which are analysing the expression of EGFR in malignant tumors, Gynaecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Christian-Albrechts- we have very limited information about their expression and activation in Universität Kiel, Kiel, Germany. adjacent normal tissue from head and neck cancer patients. Therefore, we have investigated the differential expression of EGFR a) in tumor tissue b) BRCA1 BRCA2 in adjacent normal tissue c) blood tissue in head and neck cancer patients Since 1997, more than 4500 families fulfilling the criteria for hereditary bre- and d) SCCL-MT1 and USC-HN2 cell lines by using RT-PCR. At tumor and ast and/or ovarian cancer were screened for and B mRuCtAa1tions at adjacent normal tissues, the amount of EGFR mRNA wasn’t different than the German consortium of hereditary breast and ovarian cancer (GC-HBOC) eachother. Also, there weren’t any EGFR mRNA levels in blood tissues. This centres Cologne, Munich and Kiel. More than 1200 different muta- findings are shown that expressions of the other variations of EGFR also can tions have been described as disease-causing. Variants disrupting invari- be effective on head and neck cancers. ant splice sites are gBeRnCeAra1lly considered as clinically significant. However, P06.115 numerous intronic and exBoRnCicA v1ariants outside invariant splice sites with Polymorphism of GSTT1, GSM1 and GSTP1 genes investigated in uncertain affect on pre-mRNA processing have been detected. We patients with head and neck squamous cell carcinoma characterized 30 distinct variants, which have not been sufficient- A. Russo, P. R. Francelin, M. A. Palmejani, A. L. S. Galbiatti, L. S. Raposo, G. D. Ferreira, É. ly described before on transcript level, by quantitative PCR and sequencing C. Pavarino, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo; using mRNA extracted from blood lymphocytes. 13 variants disrupt invari- São José do Rio Preto Medical School, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil. ant splice sites, resulting in exon skippiinn gs ialnicdo/or activation of cryptic splice sites. Experimental analysis oHf ummoarne dSpislticainntg i nFtirnodneirc or exonic variants is mandatory and can be supported by analyses. Ten intronic muta- Variations of activation and detoxification of chemical compounds in the xe- nobiotics metabolism are involved in head and neck tumorigenesis, even as tions were tested using the predictionin asillgiocorithm and analyzed for aberrant splicing. Four mutations caused splicing defects polymorphisms in genes of the glutathione S-transferase superfamily, which act in phase II of this metabolic pathway. Aim: To investigate the A313G and while thBeR rCeAm1aining ones were neutral, which was in-line with pre- dictions. Interestingly, we identified 5 out of 7 exonic variants analyzed af- C341T GSTP1 polymorphisms, GSTT1 and GSTM1 null genotype in patients fecting pre-mRNA processing (silent: c.710C>T; missense: c.787A>G, with head and neck cancer and compare with subjects with no history of c.4794G>A, c.5193G>C, c.5527G>C). Those variants were located close (≤ cancer to evaluate the association between these polymorphisms and the risk factors (smoking and drinking) and the histopathologic characters of 3bp) to the respective intron/exon borders, highBliRgChAti1ng the importance of splicing analysis even for silent mutations. In conclusion, our results con- the tumor. Methods: Were included 775 individuals, 261 patients and 514 tribute to the recent knowledge of deleterious splicing mutations. controls. Molecular analysis was performed by PCR-RFLP. For statistical The clinical consequence of mutations with only minor effects on alternative analysis we used the chi-square and multiple logistic regression. Results: splicing remains to be explored. The significant results with p< 0.05 showed that age ≥48 years, smoking and P06.118 drinking and the presence of A313G GSTP1 polymorphisms were predictors Mutation screening of RAD51D in non-BRCA breast/ovarian cancer for the development of cancer of the head and neck. In individuals with the families from Spain. GSTM1 null genotype and age <48 years; the A313G GSTP1 polymorphism O. Diez1,2, M. de la Hoya3, G. Ruiz de Garibay3, J. Balmaña4, A. Tenés2, G. Montalbán1, M. and age ≥48 years, smoking and drinking; the GSTT1 null genotype and pri- Masas2, R. Moreno1, N. Gadea4, N. Bosch4, S. Bonache5, T. Caldés3, P. Pérez-Segura6, S. mary anatomical sites pharynx and larynx present increased chances for the Gutiérrez-Enríquez2; development of head and neck cancer. Conclusion: In conclusion, the pres- 1University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, Spain, 2Vall d‘Hebron Institute of Oncology ence of GSTP1 A313G variant is associated with decreased risk for head and (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain, 3Laboratorio de Oncología Molecular. Hospital Clínico San neck cancer and age ≥ 48 years, male gender and smoking and drinking; Carlos. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, GSTM1 null genotype and age <48 years; GSTT1 null genotype and primary Spain, 4Medical Oncology Department, University Hospital Vall d’Hebron, Barcelona, anatomical sites pharynx and larynx are associated with increased chances Spain, 5Vall d’Hebron Institute of Research (VHIR), Barcelona, Spain, 6Servicio de Oncología Médica. Hospital Clínico San Carlos. Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del for developing this disease. Hospital San Carlos (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain. P06.116 Introduction BRCA1 BRCA2 Deep Sequencing of Hepatitis B Virus in Hepatocellular Carcinoma Patients : Mutations in the and genes are involved in C. G. Lee1,2,3, S. Toh2, L. Liu2, Y. Jin2, J. Wang2, F. Babrzadeh4, B. Gharizadeh4, M. Ronaghi4, H. Toh1, P. Chow3, A. Chung5, L. Ooi5; approximately 25% of hereditary breast/ovariaRn AcDan51ceDr families and pre- 1National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University of Singapore, disposition to the syndrome may be attributed to mutations in genes of Singapore, Singapore, 3DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore, Singapore, mObojdeecrtaivtee risk. Recently, germ line mutations in were idReAnDti5f1ied in 4Stanford Genome Technology Centre, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 5Singapore General families with breast and ovarian cancer cases. Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. Bs:R WCAe1 aBimRCeAd/ t2o determine the prevalence of germ line mu- tMateitohnosd ins Spanish breast/ovarian cancer families previously found to be ne- gative for mutations. Chronic infection by Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) is one of the most aetiological- : We performed mutational analysis in 289 index patients: 144 ly associated risk factor for the development of hepatocellular carcinoma from breast cancer families and 123 from families with breast and ovarían (HCC). However, the role of HBV in HCC remains unclear due to technolo- cancer cases. Mutation detection was performed with High resolution mel- gical limitation. Here, we employ novel enrichment and pooling strategy ting curve analysis (HRM) or Sanger sequencing, and MLPA for large rear- coupled with the next generation state-of-the-art FLX deep sequewncwingw t.oe shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 181 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 University of Medical Science,, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tabriz Molecular Results Diagnosis Center,Tabriz University of Medical Science,, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, rangements. 4Tabriz Molecular Diagnosis Center,Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic : We found one nonsense mutation (c.674C>T; p.Arg232X) in a pati- Republic of Iran, 5Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases Research Center,Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Department of Pathology,Faculty of ent with ovarian cancer diagnosed at 44 years of age and no family history. Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. WCoen acllsuos dioentescted some common polymorphisms and missense variants. The clinical significanceR oAfD a5ll1 dDetected variants is currently under evaluation. : Our preliminary data suggest a very low frequency of delete- Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death for both women and men. rious mutations in in our study population. The results support the Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) represents more than 80% of lung can- association of mutations in this gene with the presence of ovarian cancer. cers and is sub grouped in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), adenocarcino- P06.119 mas (ADC) and large cell carcinoma(LCC). SCC accounts for about 30% of HIWI as a prognostic marker for early stages of colorectal cancer all cases of patients with NSCLC. Mutations in ras oncogens appear to play M. Moghbeli1, M. M. Forghanifard1, R. Raeisossadati1, S. Boroumand2, M. R. Abbaszadegan3; a significant role in the development of NSCLC. The role of HPV infection 1Department of Biology, Mashhad Branch, Islamic Azad University, Mashhad, Islamic in the development of carcinomas was also demonstrated. The aim of this Republic of Iran, 2Department of Pathology, Omid Hospital, Mashhad University of study was to determine the association between HPV infection and K-ras Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Division of Human Genetics, mutations in patients with SCC. DNA was isolated from Fifty patients with Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, Mashhad University of histologically confirmed SCC. HPV typing was done by Nested-PCR and di- Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. rect sequencing. High risk HPV was detected in 9 (18 %) patients. HPV-18 was the most frequent type in the cases. To investigate gene- virus interac- tions, DNA from the 9 HPV positive and 9 HPV negative patients, as controls, Dysregulation of self-renewal pathways is likely a requirement for cancer were subjected to mutation analysis in exons 2 and 3 of the K-ras gene using development. HIWI proteins and their interaction with piRNAs have indica- direct sequencing. Among the two K-ras exons tested, no mutation was ted their key function in stem cell development. Although Hiwi overexpres- found in two groups. Our overall findings demonstrate that the HPV infec- sion has been observed in several cancers, the relationship between Hiwi tion has a significant impact on NSCLC. However, due to the small number of and colorectal cancer (CRC) is unclear. In this study, we assessed the Hiwi patients, our finding could not demonstrate a positive association between mRNA expression in 38 CRC patients (20Male/18Female, Mean age 56) by HPV-infection and K-ras mutation in patients with lung SCC. Our results are comparative real-time PCR. Overexpression of Hiwi mRNA transcripts ob- preliminary and larger cohorts are needed for better understanding the served in 35% (13/38) of patients. There was not any significant correlation contribution of genetic alternations and HPV infection in lung SCC. between mRNA expression and patients’ survival, tumor size and location. P06.122 However, it was observed that the stage of tumor has a significant correlati- Comparison of Methylation-Specific qPCR (MS-qPCR) and on with hiwi expression, in which the hiwi overexpression prohibits the tu- pyrosequencing for the analysis of p16/INK4a in lymph node samples mor extension toward the higher stages (P=0.034). Furthermore, significant L. De Chiara1, V. Leiro-Fernández2, M. Botana-Rial2, C. Represas-Represas2, A. Fernández- correlations were observed between overexpression of either Hiwi and self- Villar2, D. Valverde1; renewal marker SALL4 (p=0.002) or HIWI and cancer testis antigen DPPA2 1Universidad de Vigo. Departamento de Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología, Vigo, (p=0.019). Few target molecules have been identified that enable the pro- Spain, 2Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Vigo. Servicio de Neumología, Vigo, gnosis of colorectal cancer with a high sensitivity and specificity, especially Spain. in the early clinical stages of cancer. This report emphasizes the importance of HIWI as a proper candidate for use in the proggnosis of colorectal cancer in the early stages, and represents a complex network between Hiwi and Introduction: Promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor gene p16/IN- other self renewal markers such as Dppa2 and Sall4 in colorectal cancer. K4a has been found in a wide variety of neoplasia, suggesting in some cases its P06.120 utility as diagnostic or prognostic tool. The aim of this study was to compare Alterations of the human β defensin-1 gene in Acute Myeloid two methods (MS-qPCR and pyrosequencing) for the quantitative methylation Leukemia: association with FLT3 gene analysis of this gene. H. Kim, N. Yu; Methods: 62 patients with confirmed diagnosis of non-small cell lung cancer laboratory medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of. were included (56.9% with ganglionar metastasis). DNA from lymph nodes INTRODUCTION: was extracted and sodium bisulfite modification, required for both techniques, was accomplished. The same portion of CpG island containing 11 CpG sites Defensins are a family of antimicrobial peptides produced was independently analyzed using both techniques. For the MS-qPCR, pre- by WBCs and epithelial cells that fuFnmctsions in the host innate defense. Both amplification with universal primers followed by TaqMan-based qPCR with HBD1 and HBD2 have been shown to induce the migration of immature den- methylation-specific primers and probe was used. The relative methylation drite cells (DC) and memory T cells. -like tyrosine kinase-3 (FLT3) provi- percent was estimated based on a standard curve build with variable proporti- des an important stimulus for resident DC production in vivo and indicating ons of fully-methylated/unmethylated control and using MYOD1 to normalize its important in migratory DC generation. We then analyzed the frequency the DNA input. On the other hand, templates for pyrosequencing were obtai- distribution of promoter polymorphisms and determined the effect of these ned amplifying bisulfite-treated DNA with biotinylated primers. Methylation bMaEsTe HchOaDnSges on transcriptional activity of the HBD1 promoter and the pre- percent was calculated by averaging across all CpG sites interrogated. valence of FLT3 mutation in patients with various AML. Results: Differences in the methylation percent were found between the two : Genomic DNA was isolated from a BM slide or BM aspiration techniques, resulting in different cut-offs for MS-qPCR and pyrosequencing with various 47 AML patienNtlsa andH 4g3a controSlcsr Fusing QIAamp DNA kit (Qia- (2.25 and 9.95 methylation percent, respectively). According to MS-qPCR, RgeEnS, UHLiTldSe:n , Germany). The PCR products of hBD-1 gene were then digested p16/INK4a promoter was considered hypermethylated in 33.33% of the cases by the restriction enzymes IV, I, and I, respectively. with metastasis, and in 24.24% for pyrosequencing. AML patients had significantly different mutation frequency of at Conclusion: Pyrosequencing and MS-qPCR show good linearity for known me- position -44 and -20 in the 5‘-UTR (, p=0.000, p=0.05, respectively). Of the thylation percents. In this cohort positive predictive value was 100% for MS- 47 patients with AML, alterations in FLT3 gene were detected in 13 (27.6%) qPCR and pyrosequencing. patients. These mutations included FLT3/ITD in 9 (19.1%) and FLT3/TKD FIS-ISCIII PI09/90, Consellería Industria 09CSA053905PR, Samples from RE- mutation in 4 (8.5%) patients. Statistically significant differences for -44 al- TIC-FIS-ISCIII (RD09/0076/00011). lCeOleN fCreLqUuSeInOcNieSs: were found between patients with AML with the mutation P06.123 of FLT3/ITD and the wild types of FLT3/ITD. Inflammatory Response Evaluation in EGFR Mutation Negative Lung These data suggest that HBD-1 is a potential tumor sup- Adenocarcinomas pressor gene for AML. Promoter point mutations may be responsible for M. C. Stoicea, A. G. M. Grigore, F. L. Cionca, G. Cardos; AML-specific loss of HBD-1 expression. „Victor Babes“ National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania. P06.121 Human Papilloma Virus infection and KRAS mutations in lung squamous cell carcinoma patients from Iran Activation of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) constitutes a ma- L. Emrahi Govar1, E. Sakhinia2, R. Ahangari3, A. Ebrahimi4, K. Nejati-Koshki1, R. jor molecular pathway involved in the carcinogenesis of nonsmall cell lung Gharehmohammadlou5, A. Fakhrjou6; carcinomas. In EGFR mutation negative cases, K-ras activation represents 1Department of Genetic,Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Science, an alternative molecular pathway responsible for primary resistance to ty- Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetic,Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz rosine kinase inhibitors. We investigated a number of 34 randomly selected cases of advanced lung adenocarcinomas from patients with a long history www.eshg.org www.eshg.org182 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 of active smoking. The DNA samples extracted from formalin fixed, paraffin form. In previous studies, the JAK2 mutation was identified in 60-70% pati- embedded tumoral material were initially tested for EGFR mutations by PCR ents with PV, 30-40% of ET patients and 11-14% of patients with idiopathic and sequencing of exons 18, 19 and 21. Since the studied cases showed no myelofibrosis and the range of heterozygosity and homozygosity in patients mutations on any of the EGFR exons, they were subsequently tested for K- with PV were 48% and 25%, respectively. The difference between our re- ras mutations in codons 12 and 13 using the PCR-RFLP method. K-ras codon sults and the other studies could be due to the misdiagnosis of the patients 12 mutation was identified in 12 lung adenocarcinomas (35.29%). Conside- by the physicians who referred the patients for molecular diagnosis in Iran. ring the worse prognosis in K-ras positive cases, we further assessed the tu- P06.126 moral associated inflammatory response compared to EGFR-negative, K-ras Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer Panel - Accurate and Sensitive Detection of negative patients. The inflammatory infiltrate was significantly increased in Over 700 Somatic Mutations in a Single Day K-ras negative tumors, opposed to K-ras positive cases where inflammatory M. Andersen1, R. Wicki2, J. Rothberg1; cells showed reduced counts. Our findings indicate a medium negative cor- 1Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany. relation (r = -0.35) between K-ras mutational status and the inflammatory response in EGFR-negative advanced lung adenocarcinomas, which was sta- tistically relevant (p = 0.001). These findings indicate a possible impact of Selective enrichment of the coding regions from genomic DNA has proven K-ras mutation on tumoral biology in diminishing the level of inflammation beneficial in the detection of genetic disorders without the cost, labor, and elicited by the tumor, favouring cancer progression and lowering progno- time associated with sequencing the entire genome. Widespread diagnostic sis. utilization of whole exome sequencing has been has been limited by the ex- P06.124 tensive time required for typical hybridization-based exon capture strate- Identification of candidate genes involved in maintaining Interstitial gies, which can take several days. We have developed a quick, easy-to-use, Cajal Cells and Interstitial Cajal-like Cells in mutant mice multiplex PCR based, enrichment method for next-generation sequencing. G. Cardos1, A. M. Niculescu2; The process combines the speed and specificity of PCR reactions with the 1„Victor Babes” National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania, 2SC Agilrom efficiency of unprecedented levels of plexy. The Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer Pa- Scientific SRL, Bucharest, Romania. nel consists of 190 amplicons and surveys 739 known cosmic mutations in approximately 20 kb of sequence from 46 genes including EGFR, KRAS and BRAF. This kit is ideally suited for both fresh and archival (FFPE) samples, Interstitial Cajal Cells (ICC) are involved in gastro-digestive tract motility requiring only 10ng of DNA per reaction. When the libraries are processed and neurotransmission, but also in gastro-intestinal tumors (GIST) patho- and sequenced with the Ion OneTouch™ and PGM™ Sequencer, mutations genesis. Other extra-digestive organs (gallbladder, heart, uterus, etc) have at only 5% frequency can be quantified from DNA to results in less than 12 been shown to contain Interstitial Cajal-like Cells (ICLC), whose function is hours. yet unknown. Both cell types express the Kit protein, a tyrosine-kinase re- The Ion AmpliSeq™ Cancer panel was tested using FFPE preserved, KRAS ceptor with essential role in maintaining these phenotypes. mutation containing cells lines mixed together at various concentrations. Our study was focused on comparative investigation of gene expression in Several known mutations were verified and quantified down to 5% frequen- normal and mutant mice by DNA microarray, in order to contribute in un- cy. The results were further confirmed by CAST PCR. derstanding the physiology of ICC and ICLC. Ion AmpliSeq™ Primer Panels are available in custom assay sets and scalable Total RNA was extracted by RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) from heart and gallb- to over 1,000 amplicons per tube. With barcode compatibility, and multiple ladder tissues sampled from control and Kit mutant mice (WBB6F1/J-KitW/ chip capacities, this technology enables rapid and efficient focused sequen- KitW-v/J strain) and analyzed by Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). DNA cing in a variety of settings. microarrays from Whole Mouse Genome Microarray Kit (Agilent Technolo- P06.127 gies) hybridized and scanned by Agilent DNA Microarray Scanner were ana- Combined point mutations in codon 12 and 13 of KRAS oncogene in lyzed by Feature Extraction5.1.1. and GeneSpring GX10 Software (Agilent prostate carcinomas with high gleason score Technologies). F. Silan1, S. Atik1, Y. Gultekin2, D. Kılınc2, C. Alan3, A. Uludag1, A. Colak4, O. Ozdemir1; In the myocardium, three genes demonstrated differential expression by >2 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart fold (p<0,05) in mutant versus control mice and may be involved in maintai- University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Urology,Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet ning ICC and ICLC phenotypes: the Timp4 and Dnaja1 genes down-regulated University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Urology, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 4Department of Medical Biology and and the Serpinb2 gene up-regulated. Genetics,Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey. Of the 22 genes different expressed in the gallbladder, only one was found down-regulated in mutant mice (the PYCARD gene, involved in apoptosis); some of the 21 over-expressed genes are involved in different metabolic The G to T transversions in codon 12 and C to T transitions in codon 13 processes: signal transduction, cell adhesion, proteolysis (NOS1AP, ITGB3, of KRAS proto-oncogene are predominant point mutations that occur in Ctsj genes), etc. about 20% of different cancers in human. It was aimed to investigate the Some of these genes may become candidate biomarkers for studying ICC, prevalence and predictive significance of KRAS mutations in patients with ICLC and associated pathology in humans. prostate carcinomas. In a total of 30 fresh tumoural tissue specimens were Financial support: PN 09.33.02.09 Project. investigated in patinet with prostate carcinomas of different scores(GS). All P06.125 tumoural specimens were histo-pathologically diagnosed and genotyped for Detection of the JAK2V617F mutation in polycythemia vera and other codon 12, 13 KRAS point mutations by reverse hybridisation and direct se- myeloproliferative disorders in Iranian patients quencing methods. KRAS mutations were found in 12 (40%) samples with S. Vlizadegan, R. Najafi, S. Khalili, G. Esmailnia, M. Ghalandari, P. Rostami, H. Imanian, 29 samples deriving from adenocarcinomas and 1 sample was small cell H. Najmabadi; Kariminejad – Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. prostate carcinoma. In 1 (3.44%) sample codon 12 was found to be mutated and in 2 (6.8%) samples codon 13 and in 9 (31%) samples combined codon 12 and 13 were found to be mutated particularly in higher grade of tumoural A somatic mutation in the JH2 autoinhibitory domain of the Janus kinase 2 tissues. Current preliminary results indicate that combined point mutations (JAK2) tyrosine kinase have been implicated in polycythemia vera (PV), es- in codons 12 and 13 KRAS gene play crucial role in prostate carcinomas with sential thrombocythemia (ET), myelofibrosis as well as other myeloprolife- high GS. rative disorders. This mutation, (V617F) a change of valine to phenylalanine P06.128 at the 617 position, appears to render hematopoietic cells more sensitive to Study of HER-1 497K polymorphism in EGFR gene in patients with growth factors such as erythropoietin and thrombopoietin. laryngeal cancer The aim of this study was identification of JAK2 mutations among patients J. Fernández Mateos1, E. Sánchez Tapia1, J. Gómez González2, E. del Barco Morillo3, J. Cruz Hernández3, R. González Sarmiento4; with PV , ET and idiopathic myelofibrosis who were refered to our center 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Servicio de Otorrinolaringología. since 2008. We have analyzed leukemic patients by ARMS-PCR method for Hospital Clínico de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de oncología. Hospital screening of patients for a single point mutation. Clínico de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento The JAK2 (V617F) mutation was studied in 236 patients, of whom 33 (34%) de Medicina. Universidad de Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain. out of 97 patients with PV were identified, 64 (49.2%) out of 130 patients with ET and 1 (11.1%) of 9 patients with idiopathic myelofibrosis were de- tected. In PV patients 14.5% were homozygous and 19.5% were heterozy- Introduction and aim gous, these values were 9.2% and 40% among ET patients and all of the Head and neck squamous-cell carcinoma is the sixth most frequent neo- mutant alleles detected for myelofibrosis patients were in heterwozwygwou.se shpgla.soiar wgorldwide and the most malignant tumour in the superior aero-di- www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 183 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.131 Prognostic impact of del(17p) and del(22q) as assessed by interphase gestive tract. The highest rates in the whole world of laryngeal cancer are FISH in sporadic colorectal carcinomas encountered in Spain, especially in men, although the number of women is M. Gonzalez-Gonzalez1, L. Muñoz-Bellvis2, C. Mackintosh1, C. Fontanillo1, M. Gutierrez1, rapidly increasing. 95% of laryngeal cancer is developed in men between 45 M. Abad2, O. Bengoechea2, O. Blanco2, E. Fonseca2, M. Fuentes1, J. De las Rivas1, A. Orfao1, and 70 years old, with a maximum of incidence in the sixth decade. It has J. Sayagues1,2; been described that EGFR is over expressed in the epidermoid carcinoma of 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer (IBMCC-CSIC/USAL), Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. the larynx, and the HER-1 497K polymorphism has been associated with a higher risk of mortality in these tumours. In this study we have analysed the possible association between this poly- morphism and the developing of laryngeal cancer. Purpose: Most sporadic colorectal cancer (sCRC) deaths are caused by me- Methods tastatic dissemination of the primary tumor. New advances in genetic pro- Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes by standard filing of sCRC suggest that the primary tumor may comprehend a cell popu- techniques. We selected 65 patients from Salamanca (Spain) with cancer lation with metastatic potential. Here we compare the cytogenetic profile of of the larynx and 385 healthy subjects as controls. Clinical characteristics primary tumors from metastatic versus non-metastatic sCRC. have also been studied. The HER-1 497K polymorphism in the EGFR gene Patients and Methods: We prospectively analyzed the frequency of numeri- was realised by DHPLC (Denaturing High Performance Liquid Chromatogra- cal/structural abnormalities of chromosomes 1,7, 8, 13, 14, 17, 18, 20, and phy). 22 in 58 sCRC patients (31 non-metastatic vs. 27 metastatic) through FISH Statistical analysis was performed comparing the different distribution of analysis. the polymorphism in the EGFR gene in subgroups of patients and controls. Results: From a total of 18 probes, significant differences emerged only for Results and conclusion 17p11.2 and 22q11.2. Patients with metastatic sCRC showed an increased No statistical differences have been shown in the distribution of the HER-1 frequency of del(17p11.2) (10% vs. 67%;p<.001) and del(22q11.2) (0% vs. 497K polymorphism comparing cases and controls (p<0.05). 22%;p=.02) as compared to non-metastatic cases. Multivariate analysis of Our results do not support the hypothesis that the HER-1 497K polymor- prognostic factors for overall survival (OS) showed that the only clinical and phism is associated with increased susceptibility to suffer laryngeal cancer. cytogenetic alterations that had an independent impact on patient outco- Supported by FIS PI 10/00219 and PI 11/00519 me were the presence vs. absence of del(17p) with a 17p11.2 breakpoint and del(22q11.2). Based on these two cytogenetic variables patients were P06.129 classified into three groups: low- (no adverse features), intermediate- (one In vitro sensitivity profile of Laryngeal cell carcinoma A. L. S. Galbiatti1,2, H. C. Caldas1,2, J. A. Padovani Junior1,2, É. C. Pavarino1,2, E. M. Goloni- adverse features) and high-risk (two adverse features)- with significantly Bertollo1,2; different OS rates at 5-years (p<.001): 92%, 53% and 0%, respectively. 1Faculdade de Medicina de São José do Rio Preto, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2FAMERP, Conclusion: Our results unravel the potential implication of del(17p11.2) São José do Rio Preto - SP, Brazil. and del(22q11.2) chromosomal abnormalities in the sCRC pathogenesis, as these are intrinsically related to an increased metastatic potential and extremely poor outcome. Additional prospective studies in larger series of Introduction: The research of chemosensitivity is important to screen new patients are necessary to confirm the clinical utility of the new prognostic therapeutic agents, identify patterns of chemosensitivity for different tumor markers identified. types and to identify chemotherapy regimens to patients because antineo- P06.132 pHleaps-t2ic agents increase acute toxicity and side effects and tumors mina vyi terxohi- The Relationship of Metalloproteinase Gene Polymorphisms with bit resistance to chemotherapeutic. Objectives: To evaluate the sensitivity of Disease and Prognosis in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients cells line (Laryngeal carcinoma) to MTX chemotherapeutic in Undergoing Resection three different concentrations5. Methods: Cells were plated in six-well cultu- M. Sanli1, E. Akar1, S. Pehlivan2, K. Bakir3, B. Tuncozgur1, A. F. Isik1, L. Elbeyli1, M. re plates at a density of 1 × 10/well and incubated with three different con- Pehlivan4; centrations 0.25 μM, 25 μM, and 75 μM of the Metrotexate for 24 hours at 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Thoracic Surgery, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep,Faculty of Medicine, Department of 37 °C. Cell Apoptosis was evaluated by double staining with fluorescein iso- Medical Biology and Genetics, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty thiocyanate (FITC) label Bcl-2 (100: sc-509) by Flow Cytometry Technique. of Medicine, Department of Pathology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, Statistical analysis was performed by Chi square test (X2) to compare the Division of Hematology, Faculty of Medicine,, GAZIANTEP, Turkey. cell viability. Correlation coefficient of Pearson (R2) between the concen- trations also was measured. Results: For the treatment with 0.25 uM, 25.0 uM and 75.0 uM MTX concentration, the viable cells were 85,43%, 22.46% In this study, we searched the relationship of matrix metalloproteinase and 8.42%, respectively. There was positive association between the 0.25 (MMP) 2, 7, 13 gene expressions and polymorphisms with susceptibility mM (X2=55.001; p<0.0001), 25 mM (X2=2991.3; p<0.0001) and 75 mM and prognosis in patients operated for NSCLCs. The study group consisted (X2=5091.7; p<0.0001) MTX concentrations. There was a good correlation of 132 patients who had undergone radical surgery in our clinic from 1997 between cell viability and the different doses of the chemotherapy (R2 = to 2008. In the pathology arm of the study, sections were obtained from 0.9276). Conclusions: According to the dose was increasing, the cells beca- paraffin embedded blocks and then were analyzed immunohistochemically me more sensitive and lower resistant to the MTX chemotherapeutic. Mo- after treatment with MMP 2, 7 and 13 antibodies by using streptavidine- reover, there are a positive correlation between cell viability and the three biotin method. In the genetic arm of the study, DNA samples were isolated different doses of the MTX chemotherapeutic. Financial support: Fapesp, from pathology blocks for NSCLC and from blood samples for the control CNPq, Capes FAMERP/FUNFARME. group. MMP gene polymorphisms were analysed by PCR-RFLP method. P06.130 The obtained results were compared with those of the control group to The Expression of RLIP76 in Leukemia Cell Lines evaluate disease susceptibility, correlation with other clinical parameters A. TOYLU1, O. Altiok Clark1, A. Irfanoglu Timuragaoglu2; and with survival and prognosis by using appropriate statistical methods. 1Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Medical Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, When MMP polymorphisms are compared in healthy and NSCLC DNA, a de- 2Akdeniz University School of Medicine Department of Haematology, Antalya, Turkey. crease was seen in MMP2(-735) GG genotype and increases were seen in MMP13(A77G) AG and GG genotypes (p=0.008, p=0.047, p=0.047 respec- tively). Median overall survival time was found as 29.5 months in MMP13 RLIP76 is a membrane-located protein mediating the transport of multiple AA/AG genotypes and 9.3 months in GG genotype. MMP2, 7, and 13 expres- molecules, including both glutathione-conjugated or lipid-oxidized metabo- sions were not found to have a statistically significant influence on the pro- lites and drugs. gnosis of the patients. Decreases in MMP2(-735) GG genotype and increases Besides this transport function, RLIP76 acts as an anti-apoptotic protein, in MMP13(A77G) polymorphism AG and GG genotypes increase the risk for interacting with Ras/Ral and EGF-R signaling. Studies have shown that there NSCLC. Furthermore, the presence of MMP13(A77G)GG genotype is an un- is an increased expression of RLIP76 in several types of cancer cells and that favorable prognostic factor. it plays a prominent role in drug resistance. The expression of RLIP76 in P06.133 leukemia cells has also been reported, but the cell type and differentiation- Human Papilloma Virus in Lung Cancer Patients From Iran related alterations are not yet known. H. Jafari1, E. Sakhinia1,2,3, A. Fakhrjou4, R. Gharemohammadlou5, I. Asvadi Kermani2, S. The aim of this study was to investigate RLIP76 expression in leukemia cells. seifi2, R. Dolatkhah2, A. Ebrahimi6, K. Nejati6; The analysis of RLIP76 expression was performed at the mRNA level on se- 1Human Genetics Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical veral leukemia cell lines by using quantitative PCR. Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Haematology and Oncology Research Center, Our results suggest that the expression of RLIP76 may exhibit a differential pattern in several types of leukemia cells. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org184 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Tabriz Molecular Diagnosis Center and Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Pathology Department, Faculty Results: Among the cervical cancers 5 were adenocarcinoma and 2 were of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, squamous cell carcinoma. There were full correlation between the muta- 5Intenal Disease Department, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, tion in the family and the loss of either MLH1p or MSH2 expression. Loss of Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Tabriz Molecular Diagnosis Center, Tabriz University of expression of MMR genes was found in 5 of 7 (71%) cases of cervical carci- Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. noma but in only one of the carcinoma in situ ( =0.007). All samples positive of HPV were detected in squamous cell carcinoma in situ. Conclusions: The results indicate a relation between the MMR mutation found in families and Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths across the world. loss of MMR genes in cervical tumors. Our data also suggest that women Prevalent inconsistencies in the association of the high-risk Human Papillo- with Lynch syndrome are at higher risk of developing adenocarcinomas ma Virus (HPV) infection with lung cancer were found amongst recent stu- than the background population. Loss of MMR gene expression seems to dies.We evaluated the frequency of HPV positivity in NSCLC in an open case be a late event in the carcinogenesis of cervical cancer. Further research is control study.50 recently diagnosed patients with squamous cell carcinoma needed to determine the precise relationship between Lynch syndrome and of the lung were selected for HPV DNA extraction from paraffin-embedded cervical cancer. blocks HPV DNA was the detected by nested-PCR. DNA amplification was P06.136 initially performed using MY09/MY11 as the outer and GP5+/GP6+ as the ALC1 as a candidate oncogene in human malignant glioma inner primers. DNA was then sequenced for the determination of high-risk V. Riehmer1,2, R. Wagener2,3, A. Heimbach2, E. Littmann2, V. H. Hans4, A. Brockschmidt2, R. HPV types.Saliva samples of 94 control cancer-free subjects were collected G. Weber1,2; for DNA analysis. High risk HPV was detected in 9 (18 %) patients and 6 1Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, (5.3%) control subjects, which was proven to be statistically significant. 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute of HPV-18 was the most frequent type both in the cases and controls. HPV-6 Human Genetics, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4Department of Neuropathology, DNA was detected in one patient from each of the case group and the con- Evangelisches Krankenhaus Bielefeld, Bielefeld, Germany. trols. In conclusion, HPV infection has a significant impact on NSCLC. De- spite HPV-16 having a stronger impact, HPV-18 is more likely to cause ma- lignant degeneration in such cancers amongst some communities. It is vital Copy number gain of chromosomal arm 1q is quite a frequent aberration in to introduce and conduct immunization schedules in health care systems to malignant glioma. Therefore, we aimed to identify novel glioma-relevant on- protect communities to some extent. cogenes located on 1q. We screenAeLdC g1lioblastoma cell lines by array-based P06.134 comparative AgeLnCo1mic hybCrHidDi1zLation (array-CGH) and detected an amplifica- Human papillomavirus DNA and abnormal p53 Tumor Suppressor tion in 1q21.1 encompassing the (amplified in liver cancer 1) gene in Gene in lung carcinoma LN308 cells. (syn.: ) encodes the chromodomain helicase DNA- H. Jafari1, E. Sakhinia1,2,3, A. Fakhrjou4, R. Gharemohammadlou5,3, A. Ebrahimi2, K. binding protein 1-like protAeLinC,1 a chromatin-remodeling enzyme implicated Nejati2; as an oncogene with a majoArL iCm1pact in hepatocellular carcinoma develop- 1Human Genetics Department, Medicine School, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, ment. To explore whether is of relevance for the tumorigenesis of ma- Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tabriz Molecular Diagnosis Center, Tabriz University of lignAaLnCt1 glioma, we analyzed copy number, mRNA and protein expressi- Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Lung Diseases Research Center, Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Pathology Department, on in 28 glAioLbCl1astomas and 11 AgLliCo1blastoma cell lines, and functional effects Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of of overexpression. Array-CGH detected a copy number gain of 1q21.1 Iran, 5Intenal Disease Department, Faculty of Medicine , Tabriz University of Medical including and increased mRNA levels compared to astAroLcCy1t es in Sciences, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. around 20% of glioblastomas, and protein expression was significantly in- creased in glioblastoma cell lines compared to astrocytes. While ove- rexpression showed a significant increase in viability of glioblastoma cells, A powerful relationship has been established between high-risk human which was reversible by RNAi, no significant influence on proliferation was papillomaviruses (HPV) and lung cancer. Inactivation of P53 is the most detected by determination of growth cAuLrvCe1 and cell cycle analysis, and col- common genetic abnormality in lung cancer. We evaluate the frequency of ony formation and migration capacity were decreased in some glioblasto- HPV types and TP53 mutations in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of lung, ma cell lines. No regulatory effects of overexpression were observed among patients from the north-west of Iran. 50 Paraffin embedded blocks on epitAhLeCli1al (E-cadherin, α-E-catenin and β-catenin) or mesenchymal (N- of lung SCC were selected for detection of HPV DNA by Nested PCR with the cadherin, vimentin, fibronektin, α-SMA, snail and slug) marker expression. MY09/11 and GP5+/6+ primer sets, Then DNA sequenced for HPV typing. WALhCi1le showed copy number gain and increased mRNA and protein Equal numbers of positive and negative samples for the HPV DNA were ex- expression in a fraction of glioblastomas, no important functional effects of amined for the presence of mutations in exons 5-7 of the TP53 gene by PCR overexpression were detected. and direct sequencing. 9 (18%) out of 50 samples presented the HPV DNA: P06.137 eight were HPV-18 and one was HPV-6. TP53 mutations were found in 5 Increased gene copy number of MET in the bronchial mucosa of samples (27.7%). Of these, 4 cases showed mutations in exon 5 and one case patients with malignant pleural mesothelioma contained a mutation in exon 7. One of HPV negative samples had a mutation A. G. Zamani1, A. Zamani2, T. F. Eroglu1, S. Yildirim1, G. Durakbasi-Dursun3; in exon 5. Three of the HPV positive cases demonstrated a mutation in exon 1Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty,Konya University, Konya, Turkey, 2Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Meram Medical Faculty,Konya University, 5 and one in exon 7. The frequent mutation in exon 5 was the C to G trans- Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Biology, Meram Medical Faculty,Konya version (c.409C>G), and the T to A tansversion (c.770T>A) in exon 7. Both University, Konya, Turkey. anomalies were missense mutations, L137V and L257Q respectively. Our Background: study showed that HPV-18 is more likely to result in the development of lung cancer in some communities. Genetic alterations, alongside environmental c-Met has been shown to be overexpressed in malignant pleu- factors, thus play a significant role in the pathogenesis of lung SCC. ral mesothelioma (MPM) tumor tissues as compared with normal pleura. P06.135 HOobwjeecvteivr,e tsh: e amplification of this proto-oncogene in the airways of patients Cervical cancer as a part of Lynch Syndrome? with MPM has not been reported. K. Rønlund1, A. Skytte1, D. G. Crüger1, I. Bernstein2, M. Waldstrøm3; 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Vejle, Denmark, 2The Danish HNPCC Method: To investigate the amplification of c-Met in bronchial mucosa of Register, Department of Surgical Gastroenterology, Hvidrove Hospital, Hvidovre, patients with MPM. Denmark, 3Department of Pathology, Vejle Hospital, Denmark., Vejle, Denmark. Bronchial mucosa biopsy specimens obtained bronchoscopically from three patients with histologically proven MPM, were subjected to in- terphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis. The cell touch Background: Pedigrees from Lynch families often include cases of cervical preparations were obtained by lightly pressing fresh tissue onto slides. cancer. Cervical cancer is however not defined as an extra colonic cancer in FISH was performed according to standard procedures using a c-Met probe Lynch syndrome. Therefore we set out to investigate if cervical cancer could in combination with a chromosome 7-specific centromere probe (CEP-7). be a part of the Lynch syndrome. SRpeescuilmtsen s were considered to be amplified if the gene copy number was ≥3 Materials and method: We used data from the Danish HNPCC register on wo- tCiomnecsl uthseio pno:o led mean for corresponding normal tissue. men from Lynch families with in situ carcinoma in cervical tissue (CIN III) :Increased c-Met copy number was identified in all patients. or cervical cancers. We obtained tishsuume asanm pappleilsl ofrmoam v 2ir0u sout of 29 patients. Our findings demonstrate that amplification of c-Met is not We conducted immunohistochemical staining for MMR genes (MLH1, PMS2, restricted to the MPM tumor tissue, but is also amplified in the bronchial MSH2 and MSH6). We used a HPV ( ) genotyping ana- mucosa. lysis to identify infection. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 185 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.138 MC1R gene variants and Malignant Melanoma susceptibility in the Canary Islands population to identify mutations in an Iranian pedigree with MEN1. In this report, we E. Córdoba-Lanús1, J. Hernández-Jiménez1, C. Medina-Coello1, A. Espinoza-Jiménez1, presented a male patient who was diagnosed at 44-year-old with a primary A. González-Hernández1, M. C. Rodríguez-Pérez1, G. Carretero2, A. Perera-Molinero3, J. hyperparathyroidism (PHPT), parathyroid tumor, recurrent renal stones, Suárez-Hernández4, R. Fernández-de-Misa1,4; maxilla giant cell granuloma, thymic tumor, diabetes mellitus, and develo- 1Research Unit, Hospital Universitario N/S de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, ped Cushing syndrome secondary to hypersecretion from neuroendocrine Spain, 2Dermatology Department, Hospital Universitario Dr. Negrin, Las Palmas de tumor. Genetic analysis revealed a novel germline frame shift mutation in Gran Canaria, Spain, 3Anatomy Pathology, Hospital Universitario N/S de Candelaria, exon 10 of the MEN1 gene, c.1642-1648dup. This heterozygote mutation Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain, 4Dermatology Department, Hospital Universitario N/S de Candelaria, Santa Cruz de Tenerife, Spain. is a duplication of seven nucleotideMsE (NG1GTCCAG) which results in a prema- ture termination codon at 558 (p.Val550fs). Three generation of his family MC1R members were also evaluated for gene, and the same mutation was MC1R detected in one of his sons. Menin truncated protein due to the premature Several variants are associated with increased risk of malignant mela- stop codon in MEN1 gene seems to prevent interaction with various cellular noma (MM) in a variety of populations. The high diversity within the proteins, inhibiting tumor suppress activity of menin protein and increa- gene observed in populations living in higher latitudes is explained by either sing the potential for tumorgenesis. Finding the same mutation in a younger relaxation oMf Cse1lRective pressure or by selection for lighter pigmentation in member of this patient’s family allows for prophylactic thymectomy and ho- countries with reduced ultraviolet radiation. We aim to examine the influ- pefully the avoidance of the malignant course seen in this patient. We sug- ence of the variants (red-hair colour, RHC: D84E, R151C, R160W and gest that in patients with ACTH-producing thymic NETS, the possibility of Non-RHC: V60L, R163Q, T314T) on the MM risk in Caucasians and then re- MEN1 should be considered. strict the analysis to a well defined population (Canary IsMlaCn1dRs), adjusting for the main phenotypic pigmentation features. P06.141 Methods: 938 Caucasian individuals were genotyped for variants by New epigenetic markers of breast cancer identified by unbiased SNaPshot® and direct sequencing. 447 were MM patients (350 with three screening of differential methylation of the genomes generation of Canarian ancestors) and 491 were healthy control subjects V. V. Rudenko1, A. S. Tanas1, E. B. Kuznetsova1, T. V. Kekeeva1,2, D. V. Zaletayev1, V. V. Strelnikov1; (296 Canarians) from general population. The analysis was adjusted for age, 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Moscow Hertzen sex, hair colour, eye colour, skin phototype and ancestry. Research Oncological Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. Results: Carriers of the R151C and R163Q variants were at an increased risk of melanoma (OR=2.78 (1.58-4.90) and OR=5.45 (2.44-12.18), respectively) in the overall cohort. We observed similar results In the Canarian sample for We have performed screening of 100 breast cancer (BC) samples and adja- carriers of the R151C variant but the R163Q variant showed even a higher cent tissues by use of a method for unbiased screening of differential me- risk for MM (OR=7.15; 2.38-21.52). The risk of carrying RHC variants was thylation that integrates amplification of intermethylated sites, capillary 3.12 (1.92-5.05) in the Caucasian population and 2.27 (1.31-3.91) in the Ca- electrophoresis and computational biology and is designated AFLOAT (Am- narian individuals. plified FraLgAmMenBt1 ,L ReAnIg1th, K OCrNieHn8t,e DdO ACnKa6l,y GsiPsC T2e, cShHn3iKqBueP)1. ,T PhPiPs 2hRa5sC a, lPloHwFe1d, A uTs- Conclusion: R151C and R163Q variants confer an increased risk of MM in MtoI iNd,e Cn2tiCfyD 2a,b TnAoFrm4, aKl ImAAet1h3y2l4atLi,o InQ oSfE CCp2,G A iXsl7a4n6d7s2 b5e/lAoKng1i2n7g1 t2o4 d, TifMferEeMn1t 7re6gAi/- the analysed population. Our results highlight the importance of the sample TonMsE oMf 1th7e6 B, FOXM1/HKMT1188 population selection in this kind of studies. P06.139 SH3KBP1 PHF15 genes and intergenic CpG islands located Heading for a more effective and individualized patient care in on 1p33, 5p15.33, 12q13.13, 13q32.1. multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) GPC2 and genes demonstrate significantly more frequent me- L. Schaaf1, S. Noe1,2, M. E. N. 1 Study Group1; thylation in BC neoplastic grade 2 (G2) compared to G3. At the same time, 1Max-PLanck-Institute of Psychiatry , Endocrinology, Munich / München, Germany, reveals differences within G2, which is in agreement with the anxiety 2Klinikum Rechts der Isar, munich/ München, Germany. of other researchers regarding the subjectivity and insufficient reproducibi- lity of the grading. Possibly, molecular markers might supplement morpho- logical characteristics in defining neoplastic grade. MEN1 is an autosomal-dominant inherited disorder characterized by the Methylation markers panel incorporating all of the 20 genes demonstrates combined occurrence of primary hyperparathyroidism (pHPT), gastroen- 83,7% sensitivity and 93,9% specificity in discriminating BC against adja- teropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors (GEP), adenomas of the pituitary cent tissues. Exclusion of the least informative markers has led to the deve- (APA), adrenal cortical tumors (ADR) and other tumors. As the tumors ap- lopment of two systems that are optimized by the number of markers. The pear in an unpredictable schedule, uncertainty about screening programs first includes 13 markers and is characterized by a sensitivity of 93.9% and and genotype-phenotype correlation is persisting. In the German database a specificity of 93.9%, the second consists of seven markers, with a sensiti- a total of 683 tumors occurred consisting of 273 pHPT, 138 APA, 166 GEP, vity of 89.8% and a specificity of 100%. 57 ADR, 24 thymic - and bronchial-carcinoids as well as 25 neoplasms of Methylation frequencies of loci under study; other tissues. 13 7 n / s - the differences not statistically significant The age-related penetrance was determined as 10 % , 35%, 67 % , 81 % Methylation markersmarkers and 100 % at 20, 30, 40, 50 and 65 years respectively. Although pHPT being Methylation Methylation in nor. syste m system Loci in breast in adj. p the most frequent first manifestation (41 % ), also GEP (22 % ) or APA (21 LAMB1 mammary cancer, % tissue, % %) were found to be the first presentation.To initiate a supranational data TAF4 gland, % RAI1 (17q31.1) 16 9 n / s 0(0/4) - - base, statutes have been elaborated to ensure a consistent data collection KCNH(82 0q13.33) 100 88 <0,01 100 (4/4) + + to define the influences of epigenetic factors in manifestation and progres- DOCK(61 7p11.2) 72 0 <0,01 0(0/4) + + sion of the syndrome.As a first step a summary file of 10 major items was GPC2 (3p24.3) 81 12 <0,05 0(0/4) + + SH3KBP(11 9p13.2) 35 3 <0,01 0(0/4) + + developed. Every interested center is invited to an active collaboration. The (7q22.1) 56 9 <0,01 0(0/4) + + aims are 1.) a multidisciplinary approach comprising clinicians of different (Xp22.12) 64 55 n / s 0 (0/4) - - specialities as well as basic scientists involved in the field 2.) providing dia- 1PpP3P32R5C 79 17 <0,01 0(0/4) + + gnostic certificates and folders to all known European MEN 1 patients and P5Hp1F51.53 3 87 39 <0,01 0(0/4) + + ATMIN (14q32.31) 15 0 <0,01 0 (0/4) + - 3.) the implementation of a supranational MEN1 patient association and a C2CD2 (5q31.1) 19 0 <0,01 0 (0/4) + - data base. KIAA13(2146Lq 23.2) 18 0 <0,01 0 (0/4) + - P06.140 IQSEC2( 21q22.3) 7 3 n / s 0 (0/4) - - (7q21.12) 60 50 n / s 0 (0/4) - - Identification of a new frameshift mutation in the MEN I gene (Xp11.12) 27 3 <0,01 0 (4/4) + - M. Hedayati; A12Xq714637.1235/AK127124 23 6 <0,01 0 (0/4) + - RIES, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 13q32.1 15 6 n / s 0 (0/4) - - TMEM 176A/176B 8 6 n / s 0 (0/4) - - (2q21.1) FOXM1/HKMT1188 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an uncommon autosomal 27 9 <0,05 0 (0/4) + - (7q36.1) dominant cancer syndrome. The classical form of MEN1 is characterized 8 6 n / s 0 (0/4) - - by tumors of the parathyroid, pituitary, and pancreas. MEN1 is a tumor (12p13.33) suppressor gene whose germline mutations have been reported in MEN1 syndrome. Although hyperparathyroidism in MEN1 syndrome is the most common manifestation, parathyroid carcinoma is rare. This study aimed www.eshg.org www.eshg.org186 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.142 Evaluation of methylation pattern in promoter region of E-cadherin in Iranian Patients with Squamous Cell Carcinoma of Esophagus (SCCE) gion, are a cause of gene inactivation and they are associated with better S. Mohammad Ganji1, E. Samei2, F. Rastgar-Jazii3, A. Sahebghadam-Lotfi4, F. Fereidooni5, prognosis and benefit from alkylating agents. Assessing promoter hyperme- S. Irani6; thylation of MGMT is therefore of great interest because it might have pro- 1Department of Microbiology, Faculty of sciences, Azad Islamic University, Ghom gnostic value, or be a predictive marker for therapy responses. unit, Ghom, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Genetics, , Science and Research We examined the promoter methylation status of 103 glioma patients by branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Methylation-Sensitive High Resolution Melting (MS-HRM). After DNA ex- tissue engineering and cell culture, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and traction from paraffin-embedded tumour tissues, genomic DNA was bisulfi- Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of tissue engineering and cell culture, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology,, Tehran, te modified. Initially a PCR was run using primers specific for modified DNA Islamic Republic of Iran, 53- Department of Pathology. Cancer Institute, Imam Khomeini but with no effective CpG nucleotides, then the HRM was performed. Finally, Hospitals Complex, Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 62- Department the data were statistically analyzed. of Genetics, Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic MS-HRM demonstrated positive methylation of MGMT in 80 patients (77.7 Republic of Iran. %) and no methylation in 23 patients (22.3%). In the group of long-term survivors MGMT methylation frequency was even higher (14 out of 15 pa- tients, 93.3%). However, no statistical significance was reached comparing It has proven that E-cadherin to be widely down-regulated and tightly as- the methylated and unmethylated groups according to the overall survival - sociated with tumor invasion and metastasis in multiple human cancer ty- the median survival was 10.5 and 8.2 months for the methylated and the un- pes. Recent researches have shown that aberrant methylation around gene methylated group, respectively (p>0.05). Also, no significant survival benefit promoter region attributes to E-cadherin silencing. However, the detailed was found in the methylated group of patients treated with chemotherapy information about this epigenetic inactivation in squamous cell carcinoma or radiotherapy. of esophagus (SCCE) is rare. For this reason, we studied for methylation at Our results agree with the high MGMT methylation frequency shown in ana- the E-cadherin gene promoters on 44 fresh tumor tissues and 19 non-tumor logue reports but contrary to them the methylated group in our study did adjacent normal tissues, obtained from 44 patients affected by squamous not show any survival benefit. cell carcinoma of esophagus in Iran. Up to now, we have done DNA extrac- P06.145 tion with phenol- chloroform method on tissue samples and the bisulfate Deletions of the MGMT gene region on chromosome 10q26.3 in treatment on DNAs for carrying up methylation-specific polymerase chain gliomas reaction assay (MS-PCR). MS-PCR has done with two set of specific primers E. Alekseeva1,2, O. Babenko1,2, V. Zemlyakova1,2, E. Kuznetsova1,2, A. Smolin3, E. for methylated and unmethylated status of E-cadherin gene promoter. Mo- Prozorenko4, D. Zaletayev1,2, V. Strelnikov1,2; reover, we have examined the expression of this gene by RT-PCR with two 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov set of specific primers for and β- actin. For this step, we tried to synthesis the First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Academician N.N. cDNA on RNAs Extracted from above tissues. Though, we have finished the- Burdenko Main Military Clinical Hospital, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4N.N. Blockin Russian Research Center for Oncology, Moscow, Russian Federation. se experiments on most of samples, the results showed the 40%Methylation at the E-cadherin gene promoter in the tumor samples, while none of the non-tumor tissues exhibited the aberrant methylation. Also, RT-PCR experi- ments confirmed the expression of E-cadherin in all of non-tumor samples Sensitivity of gliomas to alkylating agent6s is determined to a great extent by and unmethylated tissues. These data suggest that epigenetic silencing via the activity of the DNA repair protein MOG-MmTethylguanine-DNA-methyltrans- ferase (MGMT) in the tumor cells: high activity of this protein forms the re- aberrant methylation of the E-cadherin promoter is a common cause of in- activation of this gene in SCCE. sistaMnGt MpThenotype of the tumor. The gene located on chromosome P06.143 10q26.3 is a classic tumor suppressor gene. It is known that meMthGyMlaTtion of the promoter leads to both inactivation of the gene and increase of the Hypermethylation of TWIST1 and NID2 in tumor tissues and voided tumor’s sensitivity towards alkylating drugs. Methylation of the gene urine in urinary bladder cancer patients Z. Yegin, S. Gunes, R. Buyukalpelli; promoter isM cuGrMreTntly considered to be the main marker of the tumour’s sen- Ondokuz Mayis University, Samsun, Turkey. sitivity to the alkylating agent temozolomide. Deletion of 10q26.3 locus con- taining the M gGeMneT can be an alternative mechanism of its inactivation. Purpose: We have been the first to conduct a targeted analysis of loss of heterozygo- sity (LOH) at the gene region on chromosome 10q26.3 in gliomas. A We aimed to investigate the methylation patterns of TWIST1 and panel of microsatellite markers to detect LOH in the area under study, which NMIeDt2h ogedn: es in bladder cancer and assess the use of these epigenetic changes includes four intragenic and five flanking microsatellite polymorphisms, in urine for sensitive/spesific detection of bladder cancer. The methylation status of 2 genes (TWIST1 and NID2) was analy- has been develoMpeGdM aTnd characterized. Frequency of LMOHGM eTvaluated by this assay in gliomas equals 51% (18/35). In all cases the deletion size excee- zed by methylation-spesific PCR (MSP) in 56 cases of urinary bladder cell carcinoma samples. 24 cases had paired voided urine samples for analysis. ded that of the MGMT gene. Thus, the deletion of the gene happens more frequently than the methylation of the gene’s promotor. Substantial IRne saudldtist:i on, 15 normal voided urine samples from sex- and age-matched frequency of the gene’s deletions calls for more detailed research as (±5) controls were included. a potential marker of the gliomas sensitivity to alkylating drugs. Methylation of TWIST1 was detected in %98.2 (55/56) of the ca- ses and methylation of NID2 was detected in %96.4 (54/56) of the cases P06.146 in urinary bladder tumor tissues. Furthermore, methylation of TWIST1 and miRNA expression in two colon cancer cell lines treated with an NID2 could be detected in %87.5 (21/24) and %95.8 (23/24) of the voided histone deacetylase inhibitor urine samples of bladder cancer patients, respectively. In 15 normal urine C. Jimenez Criado, A. Pascual Rodriguez, R. Gonzalez Sarmiento; Centro de Investigacion del Cancer, Salamanca, Spain. controls, no aberrant methylation was detected except for TWIST1 methyla- tion in only 1 normal urine sample (%6.6). The comparison of methylation aCnoanlcylsuiss iwonit:h urine cytology for cancer detection is one of the issues that Introduction: the presence of HDAC is necessary for the normal regulation will be explained at the presentation of the study. of gene expression. Multiple studies have already revealed that inhibition This two-gene biomarker panel seems as a promising candida- of these proteins may lead to deregulation of gene expression and increase te for non-invasive detection of bladder cancer. in cell proliferation. We have analyzed the effect of a histone deacetylase P06.144 inhibitor (HDACI) in colon cancer cells, measuring miRNA expression in cell MGMT promoter hypermethylation is a frequent event in glioma cultures after treatment. patients but has no prognostic value Experimental design: we performed an array expression analysis of miRNA. S. Pierini1, T. Goranova1, G. Stancheva1,2, M. Laleva3, M. Kamenova4, A. Mitkova1,2, N. Velinov3, R. Kaneva1,2, G. Poptodorov3, V. Mitev1,2, N. Gabrovsky3; Previously, we quantified the amount of miRNA using a comercial Small RNA 1Molecular Medicine Center, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Dept. Medical kit (Agilent Technologies) allowing miRNA quantified in total RNA. Chemistry and Biochemistry, MU - Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Dept. Neurosurgery, University Results: array expression analysis using bioinformatic programmes showed Hospital N.I.Pirogov, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Dept. Patholgy, University Hospital N.I.Pirogov, that after treatment with the histone deacetylase inhibitor, the miRNA were Sofia, Bulgaria. grouped in 7 different expression clusters. These clusters group the miRNA with a similar expression throughout the treatment. Conclusion: Analysis of expression of these clusters will allow to check if im- O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) gene encodes a DNA- portant pathways are modified for cell viability after treatment with these repair protein that removes alkyl groups from the O6 position of guanine. inhibitors. Epigenetic modifications, such as hypermethylation along the promoter re- Supported by FIS PI 10/00219 www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 187 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.148 Matrix Metalloproteinase-9 as Prognostic Marker of Cancer D. Schveigert, J. Didziapetriene; mastroctomy between October 2007 and Nov 2009. No patients had recei- Institute of Oncology, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania. ved any preoperative chemotherapy and or radiotherapy. Follow-uRpe swualst caonndt icnounecdl uusnitoiln J:an 2012.We searched for mtDNA alterations of G13397A, 12308G and G10398A were analyzed by means of PCR sequencing. MMPs are being studied in a variety of tumor systems to ascertain their role The G13397A mutation was not seen for all patient in- in tumor progression. MMPs contribute in multiple ways to all stages of ma- cluding metastasis and non-metastasis.It has not been found any role for lignant progression, including tumor invasion, metastases and angiogene- G13397A mutation in involvement in metastasis on IRANIAN breast cancer sis. The aim of this study was to investigate MMP-9 gene expression and to patients. The frequency of 12308 G alteration was 28 %( 8 0f 31) for meta- identify MMP-9 (-1562 C/MT)a gteerniea lpsr oamndo tmere vtahroiadtsi:o ns in breast, non-small stasis patients. The rate of mtDNA alteration G10398A was 50 %( 17 of 34) cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients’ blood and tumor samples, and in prosta- for BC patients including 9 of 15 (60.3%) for metastasis subjects and 8 of 19 te cancer patients blood. A total of 188 patients (42.1%) for non-metastasis subjects. with histopathologically diagnosed breast, NSCLC or prostate cancer tumors P06.151 were enrolled to the study. MMP-9 gene expression was assessed by reverse MTHFR gene C677T polymorphism is associated with the increased transcription-PCR method. The MMP- R9 e(-s1u5lt6s2: C/T) polymorphism variants risk of cervical cancer in Russians were determined by the polymerase chain reaction-based restriction frag- N. A. Nigmatullina, A. A. Arkhipova, B. G. Begiev, I. I. Ahmetov; ment length polymorphism method. MMP-9 expression in breast Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. cancer patients’ blood correlated with disease stage (p=0.041) and tumor differentiation grade (p=0.037). Also a significant association (p=0.018) between clinical stage and MMP-9 polymorphism was found. MMP-9 expres- Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) catalyzes the synthesis of sion and all polymorphism variants (CC, CT, TT) were detected in all NSCLC 5-methyltetrahydrofolate, which is involved in the methylation of homocy- patients’ samples, but without statistical correlations. For prostate cancer steine to methionine. A common variant of this enzyme, resulting from a patients with identified CC or CT MMP-9 polymorphism varianCt osnucrlvuivsai-l 677C>T (Ala>Val) substitution in the gene, has been shown to have reduced toinmse: was longer compared with those patients with TT variant (p<0,001). activity and is associated with hyperhomocysteinemia. Altered homocystei- There were no statistical correlations with Gleason score or PSA. ne levels, a functional marker of folate inadequacy, might contribute to the MMP-9 expression and identification of polymorphisms variants could carcinogenic process. There is a growing body of epidemiological evidence serve as prognostic marker for breast and prostate cancer. Additional stu- suggesting that the MTHFR 677T allele and reduced dietary folate may in- dies with larger population are warranted for NSCLC. crease the risk of cervical cancer. The aim of the study was to examine the P06.149 association of the MTHFR genotype with the odds ratio (OR) for cervical Expression of MRP1 and LRP in breast cancer patients: Correlation cancer among women. MTHFR gene variants were determined in 127 wo- with response to chemotherapy treatment men with cervical cancer and 175 healthy controls (all Caucasians and citi- M. Taheri1,2, F. Mahjoubi1, R. Omranipour3; zens of Russia). The MTHFR 677T allele frequency was significantly higher 1Department of Clinical Genetic, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and in women with the cervical cancer compared to controls (36.2 vs 22.0%; Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22Department of Genetics, P = 0.0002). Those women with TT genotype were at six times the risk for School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of cervical cancer [OR, 5.948; 95% CI, 2.406-14.704] compared to women with Iran, 3Institute of Cancer, Imam Khomeini Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the homozygous MTHFR CC genotype. In conclusion, the MTHFR 677T allele and TT genotype are associated with the increased risk of cervical cancer in Russian women. Background: Drug resistance is still a great obstacle to the success treat- P06.152 ment of breast cancer. In this study we attempted to investigate the possible What about the relatives who have MTHFR C677T polymorphism? correlation between MRP1 and LRP and clinical response in women with A. Uudag1, F. Silan2, A. Uludag2, C. Silan3, S. Atik2, E. M. Sahin1, O. Ozdemir2; breast cancer. 1Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,Canakkale Onsekiz Mart Materials and Methods: Tumor and adjacent normal tissues from 54 breast University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, cancer patients were assessed for the expression level of MRP1 and LRP by Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 3Department of Pharmacology, Real Time RT-PCR. Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey. Results: A statistically significant increase in MRP1 and LRP expression le- vel was observed when tumor tissues were compared with normal breast tissues. Furthermore, MRP1 and LRP expression levels were significantly Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) which affects both DNA different in patients responding to chemotherapy compared to norespon- synthesis/repair and methylation, plays a crucial role in regulating folate ding patients. metabolism. MTHR C677T polymorphism has a role about cardiovasculer Conclusion: Our results suggest that MRP1 and LRP in human breast can- diasease, stroke, early pregnacy loss and in puplished datas show that MTH- cer cells may affect the clinical response to treatment and determination FR C677T polymorphism can be responsable some of malignancies such as of MRP1 and LRP (either alone or in combination) may be valuable for the lung and breast cancer. prediction of the chemotherapy outcome in breast cancer patients which We examined if the patients whose MTHFR C677T polymorphism had been remains to be cleared. studied have any malignancy stories in their family. We called 18 female and P06.150 7 male who have homozygote mutant genotype, 31 female and 25 male who The Frequency of mtDNA Alterations of G13397A, 12308G and have heterozygote genotype and 32 female and 24 male homozygote wild G10398A in Involvement of Metastasis on IRANIAN Breast Cancer genotype for MTHR C677T polymorphism. Patients In homozygote mutant group(n:25) ; there are 14 relatives have malignancy M. Ghaffarpour1,2,3, F. Fereidooni4, N. Moazami2, M. Houshmand1,3; stories, 7 relatives had lung cancer and 3 relatives have breast cancer. 56%, 1Medical genetics department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and OR 3,8, p:0,007 (Compared to wild group) Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iranian Research Organization for In heterozygote group(n: 56); there are 17 relatives have malignancy sto- Science and Technology(IROST), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special Medical ries, 3 relatives had lung cancer, 3 relatives had meningioma, 2 relatives Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4The cancer Institute of Iran ,Imam Khomeini had prostate cancer and 2 relatives had leukemia. 30 %, OR 1,308 p: 0,526 ( Hospital Complex, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Compared to wild group) Background and aim: In wild group(n:56); there are 14 relatives have malignancy stories, 5 relati- ves had lung cancer and 5 relatives had breast cancer. 25 % The role of mtDNA alteration is recognized as being Published data on the association between the MTHFR C677T gene poly- in carcinogenesis. mtDNA alteration G13397A and alteration of 12308 in morphism and malignancy stories in their family who have MTHFR gene po- tRNA Leu gene have been reported in involvement in metastasis but to date lymorphisms are inconclusive. We need further studies lead us understan- there was not shown on clinical breast cancer samples as a prognosis fac- ding of the role of the MTHFR polymorphism and the mechanism of cancer tors. It has been also shown that mtDNA alteration G10398A in breast can- development. cer patients correlated with increased breast cancer risks and metastasis. The aim of this studPya wtiaesn ttos aadnddr etsisss tuhee qspueesctiimone nifs the mtDNA alterations of G13397A, 12308G&G10398A can play a role in promoting of tumor and lea- ding to metastasis. ; 69 paired Fresh tumor and adjacent normal samples were obtained from patients with BC (31of 69 metastasis and 38 of 69 non metastasis) who underwent surgery for mama www.eshg.org www.eshg.org188 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.154 Lynch-Syndrome or not? MUTYH associated polyposis in patients with BRCA1 NBN MSI-H tumors and immunohistochemical loss of MMR proteins the DNA damage response in two different breast cancer epithelial cell lines M. Locher1,2, M. Morak2,1, B. Heidenreich2, G. Keller3, A. Laner1, E. Holinski-Feder1,2; from patients with germ-line mutations in or , respectively. 1MGZ – Medizinisch Genetisches Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 2Medizinische Klinik We performed immuncytochemical assays to monitor the cellular response - Campus Innenstadt, Klinikum der LMU München, Munich, Germany, 3Institute of after irradiation with different doses (1.5GNyB, N6Gy) and after different time- Pathology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. points (0.5hrs, 24 hrs, 48hrs). There was a dramatically reduced level of gammaH2AX and MDC1 foci formation in -BdReCfiAc1ie-nt breast cancer cells at 30 min after irradiation in comparison toN BwNild-type, while 53BP1 foci Lynch-syndrome is caused by germline mutations in DNA mismatch repair were two-fold reduced but clearly detected. deficient breast can- (MMR) genes predisposing for early-onset colorectal cancer/associated tu- cer cells, in comparison with wild-type and -deficient cells, showed a mors with microsatellite instability, negative immunohistochemical staining heightened response to irradiation with an up to two-fold increase of gam- and dominant inheritance, but in ~10-15% without germline mutation de- maH2AX, 53BP1 and MDC1 foci formation 0.5 hrs after treatment (1.5Gy, tection. 6Gy). In addition, these cells showed a prominent delay in repair kinetics The recessively inherited MUTYH associated polyposis (MAP) shows a va- after irradiation. riable phenotype which can overlap with Lynch-syndrome. We analysed the In summary, the present results indicate a defective DNA damage response two common MUTYH mutations p.Tyr197Cys and p.Gly396Asp in 83 MMR- in two breast cancer cell lines with genetic mutations in double-strand break gene mutation-negative patients with MSI-H tumours showing loss of MMR repair pathway genes. However, these deficiencies manifest at differential protein staining. stages and time-points, suggesting that breast cancer can be functionally We detected the pathogenic MUTYH mutation p.Tyr197Cys homozygously dissected according to the underlying germ-line mutations. in one patient with clinical presentation of two adenocarcinomas and rectal P06.157 adenomas (56 years), urinary bladder carcinoma, sebaceous gland carcino- Analysis of the nucleotide sequence diversity within the SUZ12 gene ma (revealing loss of MSH2 and MSH6 proteins and MSI-H) (66 years) and and its pseudogene SUZ12P to investigate the signature of nonallelic positive family history. Tumor sequencing of the sebaceous gland carcinoma homologous gene conversion showed two somatic pathogenic transversion mutations in MSH2, other tu- T. Mußotter1, J. Vogt1, K. Bengesser1, D. N. Cooper2, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; mors had transversions in KRAS. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, In three patients with MLH1-deficient tumors a heterozygous, monoallelic United Kingdom. mutation in MUTYH was identified, but no second mutation or deletion in MUTYH, OGG1 and MTH1. The incidence of 1,2% for biallelic MUTYH mutations in unsolved patients Nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) and nonallelic homologous shows that two somatic mutations in MMR genes due to a base excision re- gene conversion (NAHGC) are alternative processes depending upon whe- pair deficiency is rare, but can mimick Lynch-Syndrome. ther the respective recombination intermediates are resolved with or wit- P06.155 hout crossover. Since NAHR events give rise to genomic rearrangements, it Promoter hypermethylation of tumor suppressor genes in serum is likely that recombination intermediates are more frequently resolved by as potential biomarker for the early diagnosis of nasopharyngeal the non-crossover pathways associated with NAHGC. Low-copy repeats ex- carcinoma hibiting meiotic NAHR activity have been shown to be involved in frequent F. Tian, S. P. Yip, W. C. Wu; NAHGC-mediated sequence exchange. In addition, the LCRs located within The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Kowloon, Hong Kong. the NF1 gene region (termed NF1-REPs), which mediate meiotic NAHR causing type-1 NF1 microdeletions, manifest an increased SNP frequency suggestive of frequent NAHGC. In this study, we have investigated whether Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common head and neck cancer in NAHGC might also operate between the SUZ12 gene and its pseudogene Southern China. Studies have shown that promoter hypermethylation of tu- (SUZ12P), duplicated sequences that flank the NF1-REPs and undergo mi- mor suppressor genes may serve as a promising epigenetic biomarker for totic NAHR giving rise to type-2 NF1 microdeletions. To this end, we deter- early diagnosis of NPC, which is of great significance in improving patient’s mined the pattern of variation (SNP density and occurrence of shared SNPs survival rate. Resulting from DNA leakage due to tumor necrosis or apopto- between SUZ12 and SUZ12P) within the NAHR breakpoint cluster regions sis, cell-free circulating DNA in blood has been proven sharing a similar hy- observed in patients with type-2 NF1 microdeletions. We did not however permethylation status as the primary tumor. Therefore, cancer-derived DNA identify a significant increase in SNP frequency within the analysed NAHR in serum may be used for promoter hypermethylation status screening of breakpoint clusters of 20 healthy individuals of European descent above the tumor suppressor genes. genomic average SNP frequency of 1 SNP/kb. Furthermore, no evidence was In this study, cell-free circulating DNA is extracted from 4R0A NSSPFC1 pAa tCieDnKtsN b2eA- noted of greater homology between SUZ12 and SUZ12P within the NAHR fDoLrEe Ct1re aDtAmPeKnt andU C4H0 La1ge- and sex-matched healthy subjects. Promoter hy- breakpoint clusters that would have been indicative of concerted evolution. permethylation status of five tumor suppressor genes ( , , We conclude that, in contrast to the flanking NF1-REPs, the SUZ12 gene and , and ) was assessed by methylation-specific polymerase its pseudogene SUZ12P are not involved in frequent sequence transfer by chain reaction assay (MSP) after sodium bisulfite conversion. Differences of NAHGC. methylation status of five tumour suppressor genes and clinicopathological P06.158 parameters (staging, age) between NPC patients and healthy subject would Investigation of the gene conversion patterns associated with mitotic be compared. RASSF1A CDKN2A DLEC1 DAPK NAHR in the neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1) gene region causing NF1 To date, promoter hypermethylation status of four genes has been analy- microdeletions zed in 19 NPC samples. , , and were found K. Bengesser1, J. Vogt1, T. Mußotter1, K. Claes2, K. Wimmer3, L. Messiaen4, V. Mautner5, L. to be methylated in 5.3%, 0%, 5.3% and 5.3% patients, respectively. Hy- Kluwe5,6, D. Cooper7, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; permethylation of at least one gene was observed in 15% of the patients. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Center for Medical Preliminary data suggest that the sensitivity of promoter hypermethylation Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 3Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Medical Genomics Laboratory, detection of these fours genes in serum samples was low. A more definite Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, conclusion has yet to be testified by future study. United States, 5Department of Neurology, University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, P06.156 Hamburg, Germany, 6Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Centre, Differential DNA damage response in breast cancer cells with genetic Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany, 7Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff deficiencies in BRCA1 or NBN University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. B. Schröder-Heurich1, N. Bogdanova1,2, B. Wieland1, T. Dörk1; 1Gynaecology Research Unit, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Clinics or Radiation Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) is an important mutational BRCA1 BRCA2 mechanism underlying polymorphic and pathogenic copy number variation in the human genome. It is generally assumed that NAHR is mechanistically Genetic predisposition towards breast cancer includes and similar to allelic homologous recombination (AHR) between homologous mutations but also mutations in genes encoding the MRE11-RAD50-NBN chromosomes during meiosis. AHR-associated crossovers are processed by (MRN) complex which plays a major role in radiation-induced DNA damage Holliday junction intermediates. Where interacting homologous DNA se- response (DDR). Double-strand breaks initiate localization of DDR proteins quences exhibit nucleotide differences, mismatches in the recombining he- such as gammaH2AX, 53BP1 and MDC1 forming nuclear foci which provide teroduplex DNAs are to be expected. Recombination-associated mismatch a platform for subsequent assembly of signalling proteins and disappear af- repair is typically biased, with the unbroken DNA-strand being used as a ter successful double-strand break repair. Here we comparatively wanwalywse.de shmgis.omratgch repair template. This results in regions of marker loss in the bro- www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 189 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ken DNA-strand, which are termed conversion tracts. Since mismatch repair hing between type-2 and certain atypical NF1 deletions is impossible using frequently proceeds via an excision-based mechanism, AHR-associated con- this MLPA-kit. In this study, we have developed an improved set of MLPA- version tracts are usually continuous. However, the breakpoint regions of probes that allows the unambiguous identification of type-2 NF1 deletions several meiotic NAHR-mediated rearrangements have been shown to exhi- and potentiates breakpoint-mapping by PCR. Using a combination of this bit a pattern of discontinuous or ‘patchy’ conversions. In order to investigate improved MLPA-technique and breakpoint-spanning PCR, we analysed 29 whether patchy gene conversion is also a feature of mitotic NAHR events, NF1 microdeletions initially considered to be type-2 deletions according to we investigated the sequence characteristics of the breakpoint regions of results obtained with the MLPA-kit P122-C1. We determined that 23 of the 25 type-2 NF1 microdeletions mediated by postzygotic (mitotic) NAHR bet- 29 deletions were indeed classical type-2 microdeletions, with breakpoints ween the SUZ12 gene and its pseudogene, SUZ12P. However, instead of pat- located in the SUZ12 gene and its pseudogene SUZ12P. However, 6 deletions chy gene conversion, we observed precise transitions between sequences turned out to be atypical exhibiting only one of both breakpoints within the derived from SUZ12P and SUZ12, respectively, as evidenced by the analysis SUZ12 sequences. Taken together with 16 previously identified type-2 de- of paralogous sequence variants and SNPs. Further, we did not observe di- letions whose breakpoints have been localized, the analysis of a total of 37 stinct types of breakpoint-spanning fragments which would have been in- type-2 NF1 deletions revealed a significant clustering of breakpoints within dicative of uncorrected mismatches resulting from the recombination. We the SUZ12 sequences. conclude that recombination-associated gene conversion events resulting P06.161 from heteroduplex-associated mismatch-repair are likely to be differently BRCA1 and BRCA2 diagnosis by next-generation sequencing: A highly processed during meiotic versus mitotic NAHR. efficient methodology P06.159 L. Pérez-Cabornero1, F. Ruiz-Espejo2, A. Sarabia Meseguer2, I. Tovar Zapata2, M. Vargas Mechanisms underlying non-recurrent microdeletions causing de los Monteros3, M. La Calle Marto3, I. Trigo Sanchez3, L. de la Cruz3, C. Castellanos Maroto4, B. Sánchez Vega4, A. Fontalba5, R. Serrano Blanch6, N. Chavarria Piudo7, E. neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1) Jimenez Orozco7, P. Sánchez Rovira8, M. Sánchez-Hombre9, M. Orera Clemente9, V. Felipe1, J. Vogt1, K. Bengesser1, K. Claes2, K. Wimmer3, L. Messiaen4, L. Kluwe5,6, V. Mautner5, H. M. Lázaro1, V. Fernández-Pedrosa1, C. Collado1, S. Zúñiga-Trejos1, J. Rosa-Rosa1, M. Gil1, S. Kehrer-Sawatzki1; Santillán1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Center for Medical 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Hospital U. Virgen Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 3Division of Human Genetics, 3Hospital U. Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Spain, 4GEMOLAB, Madrid, Spain, 5Hospital U. Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Medical Genomics Laboratory, Marqués de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain, 6Hospital Reina Sofía, Córdoba, Spain, 7Hospital Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United de Jerez de la Frontera, Cádiz, Spain, 8-, Jaén, Spain, 9CGCGenetics/CircaGen, Madrid, States, 5Department of Neurology, University Hospital Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Spain. Germany, 6Department of Maxillofacial Surgery, University Medical Center, Hamburg- Eppendorf, Germany. BRCA1 and BRCA2 are the most important breast cancer susceptibility ge- NF1 microdeletions encompassing the NF1 gene region at 17q11.2 are nes. The conventional BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation screening, performed by present in 5-10% of patients with NF1. In particular recurrent NF1 micro- heteroduplex analysis and/or Sanger sequencing, is time consuming and deletions have been investigated in detail. However, the mechanism under- has relatively high costs due to the absence of hot spots and to the high num- lying non-recurrent (atypical) NF1 microdeletions are not well delineated. ber of exons per gene. Usually, several months are necessary to complete NF1 microdeletions with non-recurrent breakpoints are heterogeneous in the diagnosis. To overcome these limitations and to reduce the time needed terms of their size, breakpoint position and number of deleted genes. Fur- for diagnosis, we designed a next generation sequencing protocol enabling thermore, extended sequence homology is not observed in the respective simultaneous detection of variants in the two genes. breakpoint regions. In this study, we have analysed 12 atypical NF1 dele- For resequencing BRCA1 and BRCA2, we used Multiplex Amplification (MA- tions using high resolution custom made array CGH. We could assign the STR by Multiplicom) and the 454 GS Junior DNA sequencing instrument (Ro- breakpoints to regions of 1.2-6 kb. In six of these 12 atypical NF1 deletions, che Diagnostics), which is based on pyrosequencing. Bioinformatic analysis we identified the breakpoints at basepair level. Four of these six deletions was performed by two complementary approaches: Our pipeline (which were mediated by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) as concluded by the comprises mapping and comparing reads against the reference sequence, absence of or only minor (1-2bp) homology at the breakpoints. Two of these aligning reads, classifying and identifying of SNPs and mutations), and by six NF1 deletions exhibited microhomologies of 24 and 33 bp at the bre- the Amplicon Variant Analyzer (AVA) software from Roche. We successfully akpoint sites indicative of microhomology-mediated end joining (MMEJ) as validated this technology with a set of 6 cases carrying known mutations underlying mechanism. We conclude that NHEJ or MMEJ are the prevailing previously detected by Sanger Sequencing, and a reference HapMap sample mechanisms underlying non-recurrent NF1 deletions that lack any comple- (NA12144). xity at the deletion breakpoint sites. However, three of the 12 NF1 deletions The application of this technology in 51 cases with suspected hereditary investigated by us represent complex rearrangements most likely caused by breast cancer, allowed the identification of 11 pathogenic mutations (3 mis- replication associated erroneous template switches. Our study indicates for sense, 1 novel nonsense, 6 frameshift and 1 splice variant), 6 unclassified the first time, that also non-recurrent NF1 microdeletions are mediated by variants and a high number of polymorphisms.Massive parallel resequen- a variety of mutagenic processes including mechanisms of double strand re- cing of the BRCA1/BRCA2 genes is effective as a high throughput, rapid and pair such as NHEJ and replication based mechanisms such as Fork stalling cost-effective methodology for routine diagnosis of hereditary breast and and template switches (FoSTeS). ovarian cancer. P06.160 P06.162 Improved detection of type-2 NF1 microdeletions and identification Participation of miRNAs in conditioning of the colon polyposis of breakpoint clusters P. Borun1, T. Banasiewicz2, J. Paszkowski2, R. Slomski1, A. Plawski1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, H. Kehrer-Sawatzki1, J. Vogt1, T. Mußotter1, K. Bengesser1, C. Fu2, K. Claes3, D. N. Cooper4, Poland. L. Messiaen2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Medical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States, 3Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Two types of miRNA: miR135a and miR-135b, encoded by three genes, are Gent, Belgium, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, involved in the regulation of APC gene expression. The miRNA genes are lo- Cardiff, United Kingdom. cated respectively, on chromosomes 3, 12 and 1. The miR135a and miR-135b interact with the 3‘ UTR sequences of the APC mRNA on the basis of partial complementarity and lead to its degradation. It was assumed that changes Neurofibromatosis type-1 (NF1) is an autosomal dominant inherited disea- in the sequences encoding miR135a and miR-135b can affect their affinity se that occurs with a frequency of 1:3000. Whereas 95% of all NF1 patients to the 3 ‚UTR of APC gene mRNA and, by increasing its degradation, cause harbour mutations within the NF1-gene, 5% of NF1 patients exhibit large a decrease in amount of functional APC protein, which can cause similar to deletions of the NF1-gene and its flanking regions (termed NF1 microde- haploinsufficiency effects. In addition, changes in the 3 ‚UTR sequences may letions). Four types of NF1 microdeletions have been identified (type-1, influence the affinity to the sites recognized by miRNA or induce the forma- type-2, type-3 and atypical) that differ with respect to breakpoint localiza- tion of new sites complementary to the miRNA sequences leading to faster tion and the underlying causative mechanism. Multiplex-ligation-dependent degradation of mRNA. The study group consisted of 300 patients with FAP probe-amplification (MLPA) has frequently been employed to identify NF1 without detected mutation in APC gene and 300 healthy controls. The se- microdeletions. However, the unambiguous typing of NF1 deletions is im- quence of genes encoding miR135a and miR-135b, and 3 ‚end sequence of possible in many instances due to the spacing of the probes included in the the APC gene were tested. We analyzed occurrence of mutations in the stu- currently available MLPA-kit (P122-C1, MRC-Holland). Indeed, distinguis- died fragments and compared frequencies of polymorphisms in the studied www.eshg.org www.eshg.org190 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 groups. The research was funded by Polish Ministry of Science and Higher wDiisthciuns sEiGoFnR: gene. Since 07/2011 till 12/2011, 54 patients were analyzed Education, project number N401 331936. for ALK gene rearrangement. This change has been proven in 2 cases. P06.163 Activating mutations of the EGFR gene correlate with therapeu- Effect of the PARP-inhibitor PJ34 on NIS expression and epigenetics tic response to tyrosin kinase inhibitors. Frequency of mutations within the modifications in human thyroid tumour cells EGFR gene is 5 - 20 %. ALK gene rearrangement can predict therapeutic re- E. Lavarone1, N. Passon2, C. Puppin1, G. Damante1,2; spons.e for ALK inhibitors. These rearrangements are found approximately 1Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche, Università di Udine, Udine, Italy, 2Istituto in 5 % of NSCLC patients. Our results correlate with abovementioned fin- di Genetica, Azienda Ospedialiero-Universitaria di Udine, Udine, Italy. dings Occurrence of certain mutations, e.g. T790M, as well as KRAS gene mCountacltuiosnios nasn:d ALK gene rearrangements predicts resistance to TKIs the- rapy. Sodium iodide symporter (NIS) expression is crucialfor the management of Determination of tumor mutational status can provide power- thyroid patologies, cancer in particular. Unfortunately NIS expression is of- ful tool for setting up strategy and therapeutic protocols in NSCLC patients. ten reduced in thyroid cancer; in many cases also his functionality is dama- P06.166 ged. Since PARP-1 is supposed to be part of a multimeric repressor involved Extending the spectrum of PTPN11 germline mutations associated in cancer NIS uderexpression, in this study various human thyroid tumour with juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia in children with Noonan cell lines (TPC1, BCPAP, FRO, WRO) were treated with the PARP-inhibitor syndrome PJ34, and the effects on the expression of NIS and several thyroid-specific M. Strullu1, A. Caye2, J. Lachenaud3, B. Cassinat4, O. Fenneteau5, S. Gazal6, C. Bauman7, B. transcription factors, together with the activity of NIS promoter, were eva- Isidor8, Y. Bertarnd9, A. Baruchel3, C. Chomienne10, M. Zenker11,12, A. Verloes7, H. Cavé13,14; luated. PJ34 treatment didn’t affect thyroid-specific transcription factors ex- 1Oncologie-Hématologie Pédiatrique, CHU Nantes-Hôpital Mère-Enfants, Nantes, France, pression, whereas we observed a strong increase in NIS mRNA levels in all 2Unité de Biologie moléculaire, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 3Hématologie the cell lines. Accordingly, in transfection experiments performed in TPC1 Pédiatrique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 4Unité de biologie cellulaire, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France, 5Hématologie biologique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, cells, treatment with PJ34 increased NIS promoter activity. It is well known 6Plateforme de Génétique constitutionnelle-GHU Nord, Paris, France, 7Département de that post-translational histone modifications are involved in the control of Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 8Département de Génétique gene transcription. Thus, we have also investigated the epigenetic status of Clinique, Hôpital Mère-Enfants, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, 9Institut d‘Hématologie et NIS promoter after PJ34 treatment in TPC1 cell line. In addition to an increa- d‘Oncologie Pédiatrique, CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, 10INSERM U940, Hôpital Saint-Louis, se of activatory histone modifications (H3K9K14ac, H3K4me3) surprisingly Paris, France, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of Magdeburg, Magdeburg, we observed also an increase of H3K27me3, a classical repressive mark. Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen- We concluded that PJ34 action, that implies mechanisms acting on epigene- Nuremberg, Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 13Unité de biologie moléclaire, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 14INSERM U940, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, Austria. tic marks, is specific on NIS expression, suggesting it as a potential strategy to induce radioiodine sensitivity in human thyroid tumours. P06.164 Introduction Noonan syndrome (NS) is a genetic disorder caused by a germ- Whole genome microarray analysis in non-small cell lung cancer line mutation in the PTPN11 gene in about 40% of cases. These patients M. Alzeyadi, I. Dimova, V. Ranchich, B. Rukova, D. Nesheva, Z. Hamude, S. Georgiev, D. Petrov, D. Toncheva; are predisposed to develop a myeloproliferative-myelodysplastic syndrome Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. (MPD), the juvenile myelo-monocytic leukemia (JMML). To date, few data concerning its incidence and prognosis are available. Methods 562 patients carrying a germline mutation of PTPN11 have been Lung cancer is a serious health problem, since it is the leading cause for studied. JMML was diagnosed in 21 of them (NS-JMML). In 11 other patients, death world widely. Molecular-cytogenetic studies could provide with re- hematologic anomalies suggestive of a MPD have been noted. Cytologic, ge- liable data about genetic alterations which could be related to disease pa- netic and clinical features of these 2 groups of patients have been compared thogenesis and used for better prognosis and treatment strategies. We have with 24 patients presenting a PTPN11-associated sporadic JMML. performed whole genome oligonucleotide microarrays- based comparative Results Hematological anomalies are found in 32/562 (5.7%) of NS patients genomic hybridization in ten samples of non-small cel,l lung cancer. Triso- and encompass a broad phenotypic spectrum ranging from transient MPD mies were discovered for chromosomes 1, 13, 18 and 20.Affected by genetic to JMML. Hematologic presentation of NS-MPD and NS-JMML is not different gain were chromosome arms 5p, 7p, 11q, 20q and Xq and by genetic los- from sporadic JMML but the overall survival is considerably altered in NS- ses - 1p, 5q, 10q and 15q. Microstructural (<5 Mbp) genomic aberrations JMML patients and boys. The mutation D61H of PTPN11, never reported in were revealed in regions 7p (containing EGFR) and 12p (containing KRAS) NS, is found in 2 patients with a particularly severe neonatal course. More for gains andN iBnP 3Fp426 and 4q3E4T foVr1 loAsGsRes3. BaseTdS oPnA Nhi1g3h amplitude of alte- generally, the spectrum of PTPN11 mutations is narrower in NS-MPD and rSaOtXio5ns andF GsFmRa1llO oPv2erlapping regions, newG pPoCt6ential oncogenes have been NS-JMML patients than in the whole cohort of NS patients, with an increased suggested - (1p13.3); , and (7p21.3 -7p21.1); incidence of mutations of the 61, 139 and 506 codons. We were not able to DPYD and CLD N(1222p, 1C2L.D1N-1224p, 1I1N.2G22), ; CASP3 ,( 1S3OqR3B2S.21). Significant ge- identify additional recurrent genetic alteration with the SNP array analysis nDeEtFicB losses we.r e assumed as containing potential tumor-suppressor genes: of 12 NS-JMML patients. (1p21.3); (4q34.2-q35.1); Conclusion Some PTPN11 mutations are associated with an increased risk (8p23.1) Our results complement the picture of genomic characteri- of JMML. Additional cooperating factors may explain the genotype-pheno- zation of non-small cell lung cancer. type correlation in the other cases. P06.165 P06.167 Molecular genetic testing in patients with Non-Small Cell Lung Platform comparison of expression data and identification of novel Carcinoma mutations in CIC in oligodendrogliomas D. Konvalinka1, J. Šimová1,2, B. Kubová1, I. Urbanovská1, M. Jalůvková1, J. Žmolíková1, I. S. Schauer1, K. Szafranski2, J. A. Campos Valenzuela3, A. Rump1, K. Hackmann1, D. Krex4, Žebráková1, R. Skalíková1, M. Uvírová1, J. Dvořáčková2; E. M. Gerlach1, G. Schackert4, L. Kaderali3, M. Platzer2, E. Schrock1, B. Klink1; 1CGB laboratory Inc., Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Faculty of Medicine, University of 1Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 2Leibniz Institute for Age Research – Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI), Jena, Germany, 3Institut für Medizinische Informatik und Introduction: Biometrie, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 4Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurochirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Carl Non-Small Cell Lung Carcinoma (NSCLC) is one of the most Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany. serious cancers. For targeted biological treatment, sensitive and specific identification of genetic changes is necessary. Identification of genetic chan- gMeast (emriuatla tainonds M) weitthhoind sE:GFR, KRAS and ALK oncogenes, associated with NS- Various studies ind.icate that the success of treatment and thus the overall CLC, allows choosing the patients, which benefit from biological therapy. survival time of patients suffering from gliomas depend on molecular fea- DNA is isolated from biopsy and cytology speci- tures of the tumor mens with verified histological diagnosis. Mutation detection is performed We analyzed 17 oligodendroglial tumors by high resolution array CGH (Agi- by real-time PCR, fragment analysis, primer-extension analysis and mutant- lent 400K) and for the first time by systematic comparison of platforms for enriched PCR. Wt-EGFR patients (e.g. with no mutation detected) are tested gene expression analysis. We performed transcriptome next generation se- fRoers AuLltKs :gene rearrangement, causing the EML4-ALK fusion gene formation. quencing (RNA-Seq) using a 2x100nt paired-end approach on the Illumina- Analyses are performed on histological slides using the FISH method. H(IiDSHeq12I0D0H02-pClaItCfoFrUmB, Pm1i)RNA array, 8x60k expression array and Exon ar- Since 10/2010 till 12/2011, 199 DNA samples were analyzed. Out ray analyses (Agilent). Additionally, Sanger sequencing of candidate genes of these, 12 patients (6 %) were found to be positive for activating mutations , , , was carried out. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 191 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.170 Vitamin D receptor gene polymorphism as prognostic indicator for Array CGH rCeIvCe aled structural changes including the previously described oral cancer 1p/19q-codeletion in 11/17 tumors (69%). We identified seven novel muta- K. Zeljic1,2, G. Supic2, M. Stamenkovic Radak1, Z. Magic2; tions in tIhDeH 1 gene on 19q (altogether 9/17), including one exon-spanning 1Faculty of Biology, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Institute for Medical deletion. In the latter, RNA-Seq revealeFdU Ba Pn1o tably decreased gene expressi- Research, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia. on. The c.395A>G mutation was the most frequent alteration found in 14/17 tumors (82%). Sequencing of on 1p uncovered mutaCtiIoCns in ItDhrHe1e cases. It has been reported that genetic polymorphisms in the vitamin D receptor This let CuIsC observe a strong aIsDsoHc1ia tion between the presence of and gene (VDR) could influence the risk of oral cancer. Among numerous iden- mutation and the 1CpI/C19q-cIoDdHe1letion, since all tumors showing muta- tified polymorphisms in the VDR gene, FokI (rs2228570) is considered as tions in also containCeICd the mutation as well as the 1p/19q-codele- functional polymorphism and results in synthesis of 427 amino acids long tion except for one case ( and mutation only). These results empha- protein, while mutated form results in synthesis of protein shorter for three size the critical role of for the development of oligodendroglioma. amino acids. It could be assumed that this functional polymorphism has in- RNA-Seq data will help to identify aberrant mRNAs and new fusion-genes. fluence on survival and may be used as oral cancer prognostic indicator. The In the long run, these studies aim to contribute to the understanding of the goal of this study was to investigate the association of VDR FokI polymor- complex tumorigenesis of oligodendrogliomas and the finding of molecular phism with oral cancer survival. The study was performed in 110 patients targets for directed therapy. with diagnosed oral cancer. Genotypes were determined by the PCR-RFLP P06.168 method. All data were statistically anwaliyldz etdyp uesing the SPSS software. The Genotype-fenotype correlation in optic nerve gliomas in Slovak NF1 VDR FokI polymorphism was associated with a decreased overall survival patients (p=0.042, log-rank test). Patients with ff genotype had significantly A. Rybarova1, M. Nemethova2, A. Zatkova3, A. Hlavata1, L. Kovacs1, L. Kadasi2, D. worse survival (p=0.012, log-rank testw) icldo mtyppaered to the heterozygous and Ilencikova1; mutated variants together. Stratified analysis by the lymph node involve- 12nd Department of Pediatrics, Comenius University, Medical School and University ment and tumor stage revealed that ff genotype was associated Children‘s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of with the poor survival in groups with and without lymph node involvement Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Laboratory of Genetics, (p=0.025, p=0.040, respectively) and in stage III tumors (p=0.026). Multi- Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, Slovakia. variate Cox’s regression analysis revealed that VDR FokI could be conside- Introduction: red as independent prognostic factor (HR=0.600, 95% confidence interval= 0.377-0.954, p=0.031). Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1; OMIM 162200) is in 15% of Our data suggest that VDR FokI polymorphism is associated with the sur- cases complicated by optic nerve gliomas (ONG). Genotype-fenotype corre- vival and could be considered as independent prognostic indicator for oral lMataiotenrsi ainls p aantide nmtse wthitohd Ns:F1 and ONG help to determine the risk group for cancer. developing a severe form of NF1. P06.171 We evaluated 51 Slovak patients with NF1 and Ovarian carcinoma - profiling of the gene expression and candidates divided then inNtFo1 t gweon egroups 1) with ONG (21 patients), 2) without ONG for targeted therapy (R3e0s uplattsi:e nts). All of them underwent a clinical examination and molecular D. N. Nikolova1, N. Doganov2, R. Dimitrov2, K. Angelov3, S. Low4, I. Dimova1, D. Toncheva1, diagnostics of using protocol based on RNA. Y. Nakamura4, H. Zembutsu4; In the group with ONG patients, there was a significantly higher 1Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital of Obstetrics and incidence of freckling (95%), brain hamartomas (71%) and nNeFu1r ogefinberomas Gynecology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Hospital of Oncology, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Human (70%), compared to group without ONG. A half of mutations in the ONG Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo University, Tokyo, Japan. Dgriosucup swsieorne :l ocated in the first 5’t ertile (first 16 exons) of the . The- re NwFe1reg 1e5ne novel mutations identified. Our results confirmthe clustering of mutations in the 5’ tertile Ovarian cancer is the second most common gynecologic malignancy and the of in patients with optic nerve glioma and sugguest the incidence fifth leading cause of cancer deaths in women. The genome-wide microarray of a more severe form of NF1. This may contribute to prognosis prediction. consisting of approximately 38,500 transcripts enabled us to obtain com- P06.169 prehensive gene expression profiles related to phenotypic and biological The contribution of MLPA and aCGH to establish the genetic profile of information in cancer cells. We have identified multiple targets that may Oral cancer be applicable for development of novel anti-cancer drugs and/or diagno- I. M. Carreira1, I. P. Ribeiro1, F. Marques2, I. P. Baptista2, J. Ferrão1, J. B. Melo1; stic biomarkers. Through gene-expression profile analysis of 22 epithelial 1Cytogenetics and Genomics Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, ovarian cancers coupled with purification of cancer cell population by laser Coimbra, Portugal, 2Department of Dentistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra, microbeam microdissection (LMM) on a microarray, we identified a num- Coimbra, Portugal. ber of transcripts that were over-expressed in ovarian cancers. Altogether, we identified 273 transcripts that were commonly up-regulated and 387 transcripts that were down-regulated in ovarian carcinomas. Among these Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is one of the most common mali- 273 transcripts identified, only 87 (31.9%) transcripts were reported as up- gnant lesions of head and neck. Besides technologic advances, the genetic regulated genes in previous microarray studies, in which bulk cancer tissues mechanisms involved in the pathogenesis and progression of this disease and normal ovarian tissues were used foCrH tMheP 4aCn alysis. We further propose a are still not clear; thus the improvement in the diagnosis and treatment is number of genes probable to be good candidates for a target therapy of ova- limited, which means scarce benefit to the patients. The main goal of this rian cancer. Among them we focus on (chromatin-modifying pro- study was to characterize the genetic profile of the OSCC by Multiplex Li- tein 4C) that was over-expressed very commonly in ovarian carcinoma, but gation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA). We also applied array-CGH, were not expressed in the normal human tissues examined. Our data should not only to corroborate the MLPA results but also to identify putative key be helpful for a better understanding of the tumorigenesis of ovarian cancer regions associated to OSCC. To achieve these purposes, biopsies of tumor and should contribute to the development of diagnostic tumor markers and and biopsies from resection margin of the same patient, were acquir ed from molecular-targeting therapy for patients with ovarian cancer. 23 patients with diagnosis of OSCC. Tissue from healthy donors was used as P06.172 control. The array-CGH from tumor biopsies was performed using a4x180K Clinical trials for p53 marker validation oligonucleotide microarray. With the MLPA we detected frequently losses in B. Wolf1, S. Kappel1, D. Kandioler2; chromosomes regions of 3p, 4q, 5q, 8p, 9p, 11q and gains in chromosomes 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Research Laboratories, Vienna, regions of 3q, 6p, 8q, 11q, 16p, 16q, 19q and 20q. The analysis of the tissue Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, Austria. from resection margin identified alterations spread over several chromo- somes, namely in 6p, 9p, 16p, 17p, and 19q. With array-CGH we detected imbalances in all chromosomes. In conclusion, this kind of studies improves The moderate efficacy of cancer therapy is still the major challenge in sur- the understanding of these devastating tumors through identification of key gical oncology. chromosomal regions involved in tumor biology, which may be very useful The use of genetic markers has been suggested to improve treatment ef- to the follow-up of these patients and also allows the development of novel ficacy. However, a clear algorithm for the clinical evaluation of a potential therapeutic targets. marker is currently lacking. Based on the well-established phase I-III clinical trials we present an algo- rithm, which we propose for reliable clinical evaluation of genetic markers like p53. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org192 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Phase I marker studies aim to demonstrate the robustness, specificity and During this study, we found novel p53 gene mutations at codon 65 prevalence of the potential new marker and the formulation of a marker (AGA→AAA) and codon 100 (CAG→ CAA) among patients. hypothesis. Phase II marker studies focus on the marker test; concerning re- Additionally, we assessed protein expression of p53 and MDM2 in esopha- producibility, sensitivity and specificity of the test, and the result interpreta- geal tumor tissues by immunohistochemistry method. We found that abnor- tion. Phase I and phase II marker studies may be performed retrospectively mal accumulation of the p53 protein was not associated with MDM2 protein using adequately collected samples. Phase III marker trials aim to confirm expression. the clinical relevance of the marker providing a high level of evidence (level The p53 and MDM2 proteins are related to cancer. The p53 protein prevents I). The latter trials have to be prospective, randomised, controlled investi- tumor growth, but, MDM2 promotes proliferation of tumor cells. It is descri- gations taking the qualified trial design into particular consideration. The bed that MDM2 protein can bind to prolin-rich region in p53 protein (resi- clinical utility of a marker depends on its ability to guide three therapeutic dues 61-94). So, p53 point mutation at codon 65 may modify MDM2-p53 decisions: “Who to treat”, “How to treat” and “How much to treat”. These interaction. questions have to be answered by different marker types -prognostic, pre- P06.175 dictive and pharmacodynamic- implicating that the projected phase III trial Whole genome expression, canonical pathway and gene network endpoints have to be different. As a marker, p53 has passed phase I and II. analysis in the cases of papillary thyroid cancer Currently phase III trials evaluating p53 are missing probably because it is N. Cine1, I. Tarkun2, N. Canturk3, Y. Gurbuz4, D. Sunnetci1, H. Savli1; not clear whether p53 should be evaluated as prognostic or predictive mar- 1Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, ker. 2Department of Internal Medicine, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey, 3Department of General Surgery, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, P06.173 Turkey, 4Pathology Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey. Phase II clinical trial for optimising radiotherapy for rectal cancer Introduction: using genetic markers S. Kappel1, B. Wolf1, C. Brostjan1, I. Kührer2, B. Teleky2, R. Schmid3, M. Mittlböck4, C. Kulinna-Cosentini5, F. Wrba6, D. Kandioler2; Papillary carcinoma is the most frequent thyroid cancer and 1Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery/ Surgical Research, Vienna, constitutes % 75-80 of thyroid cancers. Finding of scientific markers for Austria, 2Medical University of Vienna, Department of Surgery, Vienna, Austria, 3Medical papillary thyroid cancer and its variants can make easier to confirm the re- University of Vienna, Department of Radiotherapy, Vienna, Austria, 4Medical University sults taken from Fine Needle Aspiration cytology. The objective of this study of Vienna, Center for Medical Statistics, Informatics and Intelligent Systems, Vienna, consists in elucidating the role of genetic factors in the mechanisms of the Austria, 5Medical University of Vienna, Department of Radiology, Vienna, Austria, dMeavteelroipamlse natn dof Mpaepthiloladrsy: thyroid cancer and to screen patterns of whole 6Medical University of Vienna, Department of Clinical Pathology, Vienna, Austria. genome expressions in patients with papillary thyroid cancer. RNA samples were obtained from healthy and cancerous tissues taken from cancer detected nodule from eight patients In rectal cancer preoperative radiation plus surgery has proven superiority diagnosed as papillary thyroid cancer. These RNA samples were hybridized to surgery alone and is widely accepted as standard therapy. However, a si- with microarray chips (Agilent Human 4 X 44K Oligo Microarrays). Gene ex- gnificant reduction in local recurrence has been achieved by a questionable pRreessuslitosn: , canonical pathway and network analyisis were performed using risk/benefit ratio. GeneSpring GX 11.0 software. Radiation therapy is suggested to depend on sufficient tumour oxygenation 40 downregulated and 124 upregulated genes were detected in and to act via induction of apoptosis. TP53 gene mutations represent a cru- our study. The canonical pathways significantly regulated were extracellular cial defect in the apoptosis pathway, are involved in regulation of tumour rCeogniocnlu, scioolnla:gen, multicellular organismal process, cell adhesion, biological vascularisation and are present in 60% of rectal cancers. adhesion and multicellular organismal development. The study aims to correlate pathological tumour-response to radiation Upregulation of HMGA2 gene which was reported before as a therapy with three parameters: the genetic status of the marker TP53, novel molecular marker in development of thyroid carcinoma is noteworthy differences in perfusion MRI results eight weeks after radiation treatment in our study. This gene is upregulated in malignant forms of thyroid cancers and differences in the concentration of circulating angiogenesis factors in has been reported. It’s suggested that HMGA2 might be used as a molecular blood. marker for classification of thyroid tumors in terms of being malignant or Eligible patients in our study receive standard preoperative short-term benign forms. radiation for 5 days followed by surgery after a delay of eight weeks. The P06.176 sample size calculation is based on an estimated 40% difference in response Characterization of PMS2 rearrangements in Lynch syndrome rates comparing patients with TP53 normal and mutant tumours. The re- patients uncovers the first deleterious PMS2-PMS2CL hybrid allele quired patient number to reach the study endpoint is 60. A. Wernstedt1, E. Valtorta2, F. Armelao3, R. Togni4, S. Girlando4, M. Baudis5, K. The TP53 status is analysed in tumour tissue from diagnostic biopsies. Tu- Heinimann6, L. Messiaen7, N. Staehli2, J. Zschocke1, G. Marra2, K. Wimmer1; mour stage is assessed by MRI at time of diagnosis and immediately before 1Division of Human Genetics, Medical University Innsbruck, Austria, Innsbruck, Austria, surgery. MRI staging will be compared to pathohistological staging. Con- 2Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland, Zurich, centrations of circulating angiogenesis factors are assessed at several time Switzerland, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Ospedale S. Chiara, Azienda Provinciale points. per I Servizi Sanitari, Trento, Italy, Trento, Italy, 4Department of Pathology, Ospedale S. Chiara, Azienda Provinciale per I Servizi Sanitari, Trento, Italy, Trento, Italy, 5Institute of The trial prepares the way for interventional trials and offers potential re- Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Switzerland, Zurich, Switzerland, 6Research striction of preoperative radiation for rectal cancer to those patients who Group Human Genetics, Department of Biomedicine, University of Basel, Switzerland, will benefit, saving patients from negative side effects. Basel, Switzerland, 7Medical Genomics Laboratory, Department of Genetics, University of P06.174 Alabama at Birmingham, USA, Birmingham, AL, United States. Novel p53 gene mutations at codons 65 and 100 among Iranian PMS2 esophageal cancer patients: it may modify MDM2-p53 interaction PMS2 F. Biramijamal1, M. Soltani1,2, G. Irvanloo3; Heterozygous germline mutatioPnMsS a2rCeL associated with Lynch syndro- 1NIGEB, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Azad University, Karaj, Islamic Republic of me. Up to one third of mutations are genomPMic Sd2eletions. Their detec- Iran, 3Caner Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. tion is complicated by a pseudogene ( ), which-owing to extensive in- terparalog sequence excPhManSg2e -closely resembles downstream to exon 12. A recently re-designed multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification The incidence pattern of esophageal cancer is different among Iranian popu- (MLPA) assay identifies copy number alterations with improved relia- lation and up to 171/100000 in Northern Iran. In previous study, we showed bility when used with appropArliuate reference DNAs. We used this assay to that p53 gene mutations occurred in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma study 13 patients with PMPSM2-Sd2efective colorectal tumors. Three presenAteldu (ESCC) from Iran frequently. The p53 protein has an important role in tu- deleterious alterations: (i) An -mediated deletion strengthening the view morgenesis in various types of cancer. This protein is a transcription factor that the high frequency of deletions is related to a high density of and it can induce apoptosis to prevent the development of cancer or tumor elements within the genomic sequence of the gene. (ii) A 125-kb delPeMtioSn2 growth. Also, Several studies were described the p53 genetic polymorphism encompassing at least two further genes with tumor suppressing functions in exon 4, at codon 72, and susceptibility to several types of cancer and di- in a young colorectadl eclaentecreior upsatient. TPhiMs Sr2aises the possibility that seases. We studied association of the p53 genotypes at codon 72 with eso- mutations of this type may confPeMr aS 2h igherP MpeSn2eCtLr,a nce of tumor suscepti- phageal cancer risk in Iran. bility. (iii) The first hybrid allele produced by recombi- To investigate the p53 Pro72Arg genotype among healthy controls and ESCC nation with crossover between and with the breakpoint in patients, we collected samples from blood and tumor tissues. The p53 geno- intron 10 (the most 5‘ breakpoint of its kind reported thus far). We discuss types were determined by direct DNA sequencing and PCR-RFLP analysis. mechanisms that might generate this allele in different chromosomal confi- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 193 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 guratioPnMs S(2and their diagnostic implications) andP MdeSs2cribe an allele-specific the last decades. Yet, therapeutic options are limited. The BMBF supported PCR assay that facilitates its detection. Our data indicaPteM tSh2at, for gDNA- project ‘IndividuaLIVER’ aims at establishing an individualized immunothe- based mutation analysis, the re-designed MLPA assay is a valid rapy for primary liver cancers. first-line option that can identify roughly a quarter of all mutations. This approach is based on the detection of somatic mutations in tumor tis- P06.177 sue. Hence, we sequenced a pair of tumor tissue and blood sample in one pa- Mutation of the PPP2R1A gene as part of the sporadic endometrial tient suitable for vaccination. Both samples were conditioned and sequen- serous carcinoma genetic profile ced using a targeted whole-exome resequencing approach. The on-target V. Streinu1, C. Cieza-Borrella1,2, M. Nuñez-Lozano1, M. Sancho-de-Salas3,2, R. Lozano- ratio was 0.79 / 0.77 (tumor / blood), overall coverage at a depth of 10x was Mejorada4,2, A. Garcia-Iglesias5,2, J. J. Cruz-Hernandez4,2,6, R. Gonzalez-Sarmiento1,2,6; 91.6 % / 90.44 %. With stringent filter criteria, we were able to detect a to- 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Salamanca, tal of 23 somatic sequence changes suitable for vaccination. The laboratory Salamanca, Spain, 2IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 3Anatomo-Pathology Service, University turnaround time is estimated to be 6-7 weeks. Validation was carried out Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 4Oncology Service, University Hospital of using a second bioinformatic analysis method and a deep-sequencing ap- Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 5Gynecology Service, University Hospital of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain, 6Institute of Cellular and Molecular Biology of Cancer (USAL-CSIC), proach with customized targets (av. depth: 728x). We were able to confirm Salamanca, Spain. 12 somatic variants. All sequence changes were further prioritized by an HLA-allele-specific SYFPEITHI-score. Taken together a total of 3 sequence Introduction and Aim: changes were rated suitable for HLA and mutation specific vaccination. Endometrial serous carcinoma (ESC) is the most Using this approach, we are able to detect somatic sequence changes within aggressive subtype of endometrial carcinoma. Some of its mainly mutated tumor tissue that might lead to successful individualized immunotherapy genes are p53, p16, E-Cadherin, accompanied sometimes by mutations in within a reasonable time frame. The next steps will be design and admini- PTEN, PIK3CA, KRAS, BRAF. Recent studies show the involvement of PP- stration of an individualized multi-peptide anti-cancer vaccine. P2R1A in the pathogenesis of ESC. PPP2R1A encodes a constant regulato- P06.179 ry subunit of Ser/Thr phosphatase 2 implicated in the negative control of S-adenosylmethionine alters the transcription profile in prostate cell growth and division. Although its role in carcinogenesis remains still cancer cells unveiled, molecular studies indicate that its mutation may be a factor to T. Schmidt, P. Burfeind, W. Engel; take into consideration when doing a genetic mapping, thus influencing the Department of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany. treatment of the disease. OPautri eanimts awnads Mtheet hsotudsd:y of the PPP2R1A gene in order to determine the fre- quency of mutations in the sporadic ESC in Spanish patients. Epigenetic alterations are critical steps in cancerogenesis. DNA hypom- A set of 12 patients with sporadic endometrial carci- ethylation in cancer cells is probably as frequent as DNA hypermethylation noma with serous component was studied through analysis of the tumoural and might activate oncogene transcription. Recent studies point to a role for DReNsAul btsy: PCR, CSGE, cloning and automatic sequencing of the full coding regi- S-adenosylmethionine (SAMe), a major methyl donor in biological transme- on and the exon-intron boundaries. thylation events, as a demethylation inhibitor. In prostate cancer cells, treat- The results are annexed in the table. We found 4 previously repor- ment with SAMe leads to increased methylation levels of promoters from tCeodn cPlPuPsi2oRn1s:A pathogenic mutations (33.33%), two of the patients carry ad- several genes like the urokinase plasminogen activator and thus causes the ditional gene mutations. downregulation of the respective genes. To gain a more general overview The study indicates that PPP2R1A gene mutations play an im- concerning the effects of SAMe treatment on cancer cells, we performed portant role in the carcinogenesis of sporadic ESC in Spanish patients and as whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing on prostate cancer cells treated such should be included in its molecular profile. with SAMe. We found altered transcription levels of 160 genes, 90 of which Supported by FIS PI 10/000219 were downregulated. Most of these genes are associated with biological Table: Pathogenic (*) and unknown significance mutations processes critical in cancerogenesis e.g. epithelial-mesenchymal-transition, found in the studied genes. (H) Homozygous invasion, migration and proliferation of cells. The expression levels of some PPP2R1A PTEN P16 TP53 CDH1 PIK3CA BRAF KRAS genes (e.g. KLF8, BDNF, S100P etc.) were confirmed by realtime PCR and Pat. 1 wt wt wt wt wt wt wt wt methylation specific PCR was carried out. Treatment of prostate cancer cells Pat. 2 wt wt wt c.G818A; wt wt wt wt with SAMe was found to result in an increased global methylation status p.R273H (H)* of the DNA suggesting that reversing DNA hypomethylation might be one c.C388G; c.G38A; Pat. 3 wt p.R130G* wt wt wt wt wt p.G13D* major mechanism of SAMe action. Next, we performed functional studies Pat. 4 wt wt wt wt wt wt wt wt with SAMe-treated cancer cells as well as human fibroblasts and discove- c.G513C; c.458_459ins G; red a decreased potential for proliferation, migration and invasion of cancer Pat. 5 wt p.Q171H wt p.153fsX179* wt wt wt wt cells but not of fibroblasts. Taken together, we provide a more comprehen- c.C832T; (H)* sive overview of effects caused by SAMe and present novel target genes for p.P278S* c.C767T; c.G744A; c.G271A: therapeutic options in prostate cancer. Pat. 6 wt wt wt wt wt p.S256F* p.R248Q* p.R90Q P06.180 Pat. 7 wt wt wt c.T821C; wt wt wt wt Can mycoplasma-mediated oncogenesis be responsible for formation p.V274A* of prostate cancer? c.C536G; Pat. 8 wt wt wt wt wt wt wt S. Erturhan1, H. Ozgul1, S. Pehlivan2, O. Bayrak1, I. Seckiner1, T. Sever2, M. Karakok3; p.P179R* c.A715G; 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Urology, GAZIANTEP, Pat. 9 wt wt wt p.N239D wt wt wt wt Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology c.C536G; and Genetics, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Pat. 10 p.P179R* wt wt IVS6+2T>C* wt wt wt wt Department of Pathology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey. Pat. 11 wt wt wt wt wt wt wt wt Aim : c.G796A; c.C536G; p.G266R Pat. 12 wt wt wt wt wt wt The origin of chronic inflammation preceding the development of pro- p.P179R* c.G524A; state cancer (PCa) remains unknown and chronic inflammation associated p.R175H* P06.178 with infections has been defined as an important cancer-promoting conditi- First steps towards an individualized immunotherapy for primary oMne. tIhno odu:r study, to investigate relationship between mycoplasma sp. infec- liver cancers. tion and PCa were aimed. C. Schroeder1, M. Sturm1, S. Junker1, M. Löffler2, M. Walzer2, M. Günder2, S. Stevanovic2, Benign prostate hyperplasia and tumor tissue samples from 31 H. Rammensee2, P. Horvath3, D. Zieker3, S. Nadalin3, A. Königsrainer3, F. Fend4, O. Riess1, patients with PCa and healthy control groups ( benign prostate hyperplasia) P. Bauer1; were studied. Moleculer DNA analyses was done after nested-PCR perfor- 1Deptartment. of Medical Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Department of Immunology, mReesdu ilnts t:w o steps with seven primers (four auter and three iner) that can re- Tuebingen, Germany, 3Department of General Visceral and Transplant Surgery, cognize at least 15 different Mycoplasma using two different PCR methods. Tuebingen, Germany, 4Department of Pathology, Tuebingen, Germany. Mycoplasma sp. DNA was detected in benign prostate hyperplasia, prostate tumor tissue samples at ratio 12.9% (4/31) and 35.9% (11/31), rCeosnpcelcutsivieolny.: No mycoplasma DNA was determined in tissues of 31 healthy Primary liver cancer is within the top ten most common cancers worldwide. control group. Over 500‘000 patients are diagnosed with hepatocellular carcinoma each The relationship between mycoplasma sp. infection and Pro- year. The prevalence in Europe and the USA has been rising constantly over state cancer has been investigated for the second time in literature, and a si- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org194 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 gnificantly high existence of Mycoplasma sp. In conclusion, our data suggest the disease. The analysis of the V89L polymorphism showedS sRigDn5iAfi2ca*Vn/t Vdif- that mycoplasma infections could be play a role in the etiology (mycoplas- ferences in the distribution of allele and genotype frequencies between PC ma-mediated multistage carcinogenesis) of prostate cancer. Further expe- patients and healthy individuals. The frequency of genotype SRD5A 2in* rimental and clinical studies are needed for development of a tool for early pL/a tLients was significantly higher (54.1%) than in controls (36.5%, χ2=4,27, diagnosis and treatment of prostate cancer. p=0,04, OR=2,05, CI95% =1,03-4,09). The frequency of genotype P06.181 in control group was higher (18.9%) compared with patients (8.23%), Search for prognostic biomarkers in prostate cancer patients after but differences were not statistically significant (P>0.05). radical prostatectomy The V89L variant wasS RnoDt5 Aas2s*oVc/iVated with the grSaRdDe 5oAr2 s*tVage of prostate S. Wyder1, F. Huber2, M. Schindler1, R. Jaggi1, G. Kristiansen2,3; cancer, or with patient age. 1University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland, 2University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, Thus, the genotype of and allele and are showed to 3University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. be markers of the increased risk for prostate cancer development in Bash- kortostan Republic. Further large-sample studies will be required to confirm the association and to assess any interactions with environmental factors. New biomarkers are needed to better predict the clinical outcome of pati- P06.184 ents with clinically localized prostate cancer. The available clinical and hi- The TMPRSS2/ERG fusion gene expression in tumor epithelium and stopathological variables currently used lack accuracy to predict the course tumor-associated stromal cells in prostate cancer. of the disease often leading to over- or under-treatment. Molecular scores T. V. Kekeeva1,2, L. Zavalishina1, Y. Andreeva1, G. Frank1, D. Zaletaev2; have the potential to improve risk-stratification with respect to timing and 1Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov intensity of treatment. We have developed an mRNA-based expression si- Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. gnature in a cohort of more than 150 patients who underwent radical pro- statectomy between 1993 and 2006. We measured the expression of approx. 200 genes in RNA derived of for- Due to intensive investigations for the last ten years it has become increa- malin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumour samples. We used the Na- singly clear that tumor microenvironment plays a critical role in prostate nostring nCounter gene expression system, a digital, enzyme-free technolo- carcinogenesis. Tumor microenvironment undergoes significant modifica- gy which features excellent reproducibility and high sensitivity on partially tion such as protein expression alterations and various genetic changes of degraded RNA extracted from archival FFPE tumour samples. We identified stromal cells. Accumulation of multiplicity genetic alterations is typical not several genes that significantly predicted biochemical relapse in univariate for only cancer epithelial cells but tumor-associated fibroblasts and endo- analysis. A multi-gene molecular score was developed which predicts bio- thelial cells as weTlMl. PFuRrStSh2e/rE mRGore these stromal cell alterations are not tu- chemical relapse in univariate and multivariate analyses when controlling mor epithelium specific. for clinical and pathologic variables. The prognostic value of the score is cur- We investigated fusion gene expression in prostate cancer rently being retrospectively assessed in an independent cohort. and tumor microenvironment. Tumor epithelia and tumor-associated stro- P06.182 maT 3M4P pRrSoSs2tatectToMmPyR sSpSe2c/imEReGns from patients with pT1-T4 stage prostate Expression of the SHBgene in prostate cancer cancer were isolated using laser capture microdissection. mRNA expression J. Mares1, M. Schmidt1, J. Mudrunka1, J. Soukup1, S. Vesely1, M. Klabanova2, L. Jarolim1; of TM aPnRdS S2/ERG significant in prostate carcinogenesis were 1Charles University, Prague 5 , Czech Republic, 2Diana Lucina, Prague 4, Czech Republic. investigated using RT-PCR following by sequencing. TMPRSS2 We found expression only in 65% (22/34) tumor epithelium samples and neither of adjacTeMntP tRuSmS2or stroma. Also we detected SHB (Src homology 2 domain-containing adapter protein B) is involved in expression in all tumor epithelium samples and 5/34 stroma specimens. receptor tyrosine kinase signaling, angiogenesis, apoptosis and cell regulati- The possible explanation of expression in the microenvironment on regulation. A detailed analysis of expression of the SHB gene has not been is the presence of single tumor cells, which we observed by cytokeratine IHC conducted in prostate cancer so far. We aimed to compare the SHB expressi- staining. Nevertheless the fusion gene expression is not characteristic for on in prostate cancer and benign prostatic hyperplasia with clinicopatholo- the tumor-associated stroma. gical data and evaluate its diagnostic and prognostic potential. The finding of frequent genetic alterations in tumor-associated stroma Isolation of mRNA from prostate cancer in 56 patients has been performed suggests a more important role for stromal fibroblasts in prostTatMeP cRaSnSc2e/- in period 2008 - 2011. As a control group, 26 patients with benign prostate rEoRgGenesis than was previously appreciated. Some molecular alterations are hyperplasia were used. common for prostate cancer and tumor microenvironment but Statistically significant lower relative expression of SHB in prostate cancer fusion gene is the tumor feature only. tissue was detected (p< 0.001). In comparison of patients distributed to lo- P06.185 calized (T2) and locally advanced (T3, T4) groups, decreased expression in Genome-wide increase in differential DNA methylations in locally advanced disease with statistical significance (p< 0.0236). In compa- TMPRSS:ERG fusiongene negative prostate tumours rison of groups divided by Gleason score (GS <7 and GS ≥ 7), age and PSA, S. T. Börno1,2, A. Fischer3, M. Kerick3, M. Fälth4, M. Laible4, J. C. Brase4, R. Kuner4, A. Dahl5, no differences have been detected. According to our results the level of SHB C. Grimm3, M. Isau3,6, C. Röhr3,2, A. Wunderlich3,2, R. Claus7, C. Plass7, M. Graefen8, R. expression analysed by using RT-PCR in patients with prostate cancer can Simon9, F. Demichelis6, M. A. Rubin6, G. Sauter9, T. Schlomm8, H. Sültmann4, H. Lehrach3, give additional prognostic information. M. R. Schweiger3; 1Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, The project was supported by Diana Lucina and by grants MSM 0021620808 Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Biology, Chemistry and Pharmacy, Free University, and GAUK 200090. Berlin, Germany, 3Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for P06.183 Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany, 4Cancer Genome Research, Analysis of V89L polymorphism of the testosterone 5-alpha-reductase German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) and National Center for Tumor Diseases, II gene in prostate cancer patients from Bashkortostan Republic of Heidelberg, Germany, 5Biotechnology Center, Technical University Dresden, Dresden, Russia Germany, 6Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical R. Zubairov1, I. Gilyazova1, A. Mustafin2, A. Papoyan2, I. Sultanov2, D. Zapevalova3, V. College of Cornell University, New York, NY, United States, 7Division of Epigenomics and Pavlov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Science Center, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 8Martini Clinic, Prostate Cancer Center, University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, Hamburg, Germany, 9Institute of Pathology, University Medical Centre Hamburg- Ufa, Russian Federation. Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. Prostate cancer (PC) is one of the most common visceral malignancies in Prostate cancer is the second most common cancer among men worldwide. human. In recent years, its incidence has increased in Russia. The study was Despite intensive scientific efforts basic molecular reasons mostly remained performedS RtoD 5inAv2estigate the role of various genotypes involved in steroid obscure. Lately, it became evident that alterations in the DNA methylation metabolism and synthesis in the causation of prostate cancer. We investi- pattern can be one of the leading causes for tumour formation. Therefore, gated the gene Ala49Thr (rs9282858), Val89Leu (rs523349) poly- we initiated the first high throughput sequencing study investigating geno- morphisms and variation of TA)n repeats in a cohort of 91 PC patients and me-wide DNA methylation patterns in a large cohort of 104 human prostate 100 controls, matched for sex, age and area of residence. The enzyme 5α- tissues including normal controls using MeDIP-Seq. Comparative analyses reductase, which converts testosterone to dihydrotestosterone (DHT), per- identified more than 147,000 cancer-associated epigenetic alterations, af- forms key functions in the androgen receptor signaling pathway. There were fecting more than 75% of homeobox genes and 50% of the known cancer no significant correlations of A49T polymorphism and (TA)n repeats with associated genes in their promoter region. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 195 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.188 Identification of new diagnostic markers for renal cell carcinoma We could show that the increased expression of EZH2, originating in about S. Schmidt1,2, S. Erb2, S. Burghoff1, S. Leisz2, K. Hoffmann1, B. Seliger2; 50% of prostate tumours in an ERG involving fusiongene (TMPRSS2:ERG), 1Institute for Human Genetics, Martin-Luther University Halle-Wittenberg, Halle/ might explain the remarkable differences in DNA methylation between tu- Saale, Germany, 2Institute for Medical Immunology, Martin-Luther University Halle- mour and normal tissues. The methylation patterns, however, are strikingly Wittenberg, Halle/Saale, Germany. more dissimilar in TMPRSS2:ERG fusiongene negative samples to normal prostate tissues than those in fusiongene positive tissues. We identified a mechanism of hypermethylation of miRNA-26a as an alternative pathway The renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is one of the most frequent malignant tu- of ERG independent EZH2 activation which in turn can explain the observed mours and is often associated with the loss of function of the von-Hippel- increase in differential methylation in fusiongene negative tumours. Lindau gene (VHL). The ubiquitin ligase VHL triggers the degradation of P06.186 the hypoxia-inducible factor α (HIFα) under normoxic conditions. HIF is the Interaction of the RAD51 paralogs in the mammalian 2/3 hybrid major transcription factor reacting to hypoxia. As in the majority of cases system this tumour is resistant to chemotherapy. Therefore, the aim of the study D. Endt, A. Niklaus, D. Schindler; was to identify possible new diagnostic and therapeutic target genes, like Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. VHL, in the HIF pathway in 24 RCC cell lines derived from patient tumour tissue. The cell lines were characterized with respect to mutations in VHL, the expression profile of HIF associated genes (HAF, FIH, VEGF, CMET, MITF, The five RAD51 paralogs, RAD51B, RAD51C, RAD51D, XRCC2 and XRCC3, EGFR, TGFβR) at RNA and protein level, proliferation, anchorage indepen- play an important role in homologous recombination, a process crucial for dent growth and activation of signalling pathways. The cell lines show a high the error-free removal of DNA double-strand lesions. These proteins share variability concerning generation time in general and with respect to serum 20-30% homology and interact with each other and the RAD51 recombi- reduction and anchorage independent growing. The identified expression nase, an ortholog of E. coli RecA. Previous investigations in the yeast two- profile of HIF associated genes reveals possible target candidates for dia- hybrid system, co-immunoprecipitations from human cell extracts and co- gnostics. VHL sequencing identified both known and unknown mutations. expression in the baculovirus system have shown that the paralogs form Most of the VHL mutations were found in exon 1. 11 of 18 analysed cell li- two complexes, RAD51C/XRCC3 and RAD51B/RAD51C/RAD51D/XRCC2. nes had no VHL mutations in exon 2 and 3. First results gained by linking RAD51B has been reported to stabilize the interaction of RAD51D and immune blots and expression profiling suggest a correlation of FIH protein XRCC2. Here we aimed at extending these findings in a human cellular envi- expression with HIF target gene vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) ronment. For that purpose we used the mammalian two- and three-hybrid expression. New possible targets associated with HIF for example FIH were system (M2/3H). We cloned full-length cDNA of each of the five RAD51 pa- identified to diagnose RCC and could be therapeutically relevant. ralogs into the pM and pVP16 vectors. In M3H studies, the additional ex- P06.189 pression vector pCMV-Tag3b was used. Firefly luciferase (pGl4.31) served Vitamin D receptor polymorphisms and renal cancer risk in as reporter gene for the assay. As control for transfection efficiency we co- Bashkortostan Republic of Russia transfected renilla luciferase (pRL-null). As internal standard and positive L. Kutlyeva1, I. Gilyazova1, R. Khusainova1, A. Zagidullin2, A. Khaliullin2, E. Klimentova3, control we employed the reported interaction of FANCA and FANCG. In M2H A. Shafigina3, V. Pavlov2, E. Khusnutdinova1; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Science Centre, RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, studies the previously reported interactions were confirmed, except that 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, of RAD51C and RAD51D. This weak interaction required the presence of Ufa, Russian Federation. RAD51B for activation or stabilization, whereas XRCC2 did not boost it. Li- kewise, some of the other interactions were be influenced by a third paralog in M3H studies. Additional RAD51 protein seemed not to effect interactions Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is the most common neoplasm affecting the of RAD51C/RAD51D and RAD51D/XRCC2 but those of RAD51C/XRCC3 and adult kidney. One of the most important events in RCC is metabolism of vit- RAD51C/RAD51B. Bidirectional testing showed slight differences in inter- amin D, which exerts its activity through binding to the nuclear vitamin D action strength. receptor (VDR). VDR P06.187 The aim of investigation was to analyze risk of RCC in patients from Bash- Detection of micro-metastases of renal cell carcinoma by CA9 marker kortostan Republic depending on polymorphisms. A case-coVnDtRrol as- using Real-time PCR sociation study included 176 RCC patients and 165 controls, matched for B. Bajelan1, M. Hashemi2, H. Ghaffari3; age, sex and area of residence. We used PCR-RFLP genotyping of gene 1Islamic Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, polymorphisms at tree localizations rs731236 (TagI), rs7975232 (ApaI), 3Oncology and Stem Cell Research Center of Shariati Hospital, Tehran University of rs1544410 (BsmI), rs2228570 (FokI). Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Statistically significant differences were observed in the TagI genotype t/t between RCC patients and controls (p=0.024, OR=2.93 (95%CI 1.13-7.87)). Analysis of other gene polymorphisms didn‘t show significant differences The global prognosis of renal cell carcinoma (RCC (remains poor, about 40% between patients anBd scmoIn, tArpoalsI , (Tpa>q0I.05)V DinR g eneral cohort and taking into of patients will develop metastasis after nephrectomy. There is a strong consideration sex, pathological stage and histological grade of RCC. need to identify the early metastasis with conventional and molecular risk The polymorphisms VDR of gene demonstrated strong lin- factor. The analysis of molecular markers provides a new tool for prediction kage disequilibrium (D‘>30%). The FokI wasn’t in linkage disequilibrium of prognosis for early metastasis. The present study aimed to test if analysis with any of the other examined polymorphisms (D‘<30%). of the CA9 gene in peripheral blood can provide useful information to pre- Haplotype analysis showed that hap-5lotypes tAB (p=0.0030), tAb (p=0.0125), dict Micro metastasis. TAB (p=0.0393), TaB (p=1.9606e ) were significantly prevalent in RCC In this experimental study, patients (n=30) with a renal cell carcinoma were patients. The most patients with lowerV DstRage of RCC had haplotype tAb evaluated for peripheral blood CA9 expression none randomly. Data of tu- (p=0.002), whereas patients with higher stage had haplotype tAB (p=0.02). mor grade were received from pathologists. Total RNA extraction and cDNA We revealed haplotype tAb (p=0.002V) DoRf gene to be a risk factor for RCC synthesis was performed and CA9 gene expression level were compared development in males. between patients and normal group (n=16) by Real-time PCR. The analysis of genetic variation in gene may provide insight into the Six of patients show high CA9 expression (3 in grade I, 2 in grade II and 1 in role of vitamin D in RCC development. grade III) but no significant difference was found between CA9 expression P06.190 level and tumor grade. After one year follow up 4 patients were found to Amplicon-Based Ultra-Deep Next-Generation Sequencing and have a metastasis, but no significant difference was found between CA9 ex- its application to characterize mutated transcripts of RB1 gene pression level and metastatic patients. (p>0/05) in peripheral blood cells of childern patients with germinal Ca9 is a tumor-specific marker for RCC with a high degree of expression in retinoblastoma the conventional renal cell carcinoma. On the basis of the results of this stu- I. Valášková1,2, J. Kadlecová1,2, S. Dudová1,2, M. Vaňásková1, J. Zrůstová1, T. Kepák3, R. dy, the detection of Ca9 gene expression in the peripheral blood of patients Gaillyová1,2; 1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dpt., Brno, Czech Republic, 2Masaryk with RCC may prediction factor for increasing risk of micro metastasis. University, Faculty of Medicine, Brno, Czech Republic, 3University Hospital Brno, Clinic of Pediatric Oncology, Brno, Czech Republic. Introduction: RB1 (gene controlling cell division) mutations constitute a www.eshg.org www.eshdigse.oasreg-defining molecular aberration in Retinoblastoma, the most common 196 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 primary ocular malignancy (retina cancer) of childhood. In germinal retino- formed for RHOXF1, CASP8, BCL2 and HPRT genes. blastoma (40% of all retinoblastomas) a germline RB1 cancer-predisposing Results: Decreased RHOXF1 expression was confirmed in cells after trans- mutation is present in all of the body‘s cells. Therefore molecular diagno- fection. shRNA mediated knock down of RHOXF1 resulted in significant stics of germinal retinoblastoma is performed by PCR assays targeting the decrease in BCL2 expression in both cell lines but no change in CASP8 ex- RB1 gene with genomic DNA, obtained from peripheral blood. Mutational pression. analysis of RB1 transcripts obtained from peripheral blood using current se- Discussion: RHOXF1 can mediate transcriptional activation of the BCL2 in quencing standard - Sanger capillary sequencing (which sensitivity is about cancers, so render tumor cells resistant to apoptotic cell death induced by 15%) is complicated by the nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD), an anticancer therapies. shRNA targeting RHOXF1was shown to specifically mRNA surveillance pathway that ensures the rapid degradation of mRNAs mediate the RHOXF1 gene silencing. shRNA mediated knock down of RHO- containing premature translation termination codons. The Next-Generation XF1 can be effective in induction of apoptotic pathway in cancer cells via Sequencing (NGS) - technology Roche 454 is based on pyrosequencing. It BCL2 downregulation, so it can have potential therapeutic usefulness in hu- mMeeathnos dth:at each sequenced fragment is clonally copied. This allows increa- man breast cancer. sing of sensitivity under 1% P06.193 In amplicon covering transcript of RB1 gene we applied the 454 Evaluation of silibinin on CD82 gene in prostate cancer PC-3 cells Titanium chemistry assay (454 Life Sciences) to perform ultra-deep sequen- using quantitative Real-time PCR cing of specific cDNA PCR products using the GS Junior System sequencer M. Mokhtari1, M. Hashemi2, M. Shokrgozar3, N. Motamed4; from Roche’s 454 Life Sciences. In median, 5 446 reads per amplicon were 1Islamic Azad University,Zargan Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Islamic Azad generated, thereby allowing a highly sensitive assessment of mutational University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 33Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4University College of Science, University of bCuorndcelun siino Rn:B1transcripts of retinoblastoma patients. To assess sequencing Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. error rates, we included a control amplicon from the normal transcript. We here demonstrate that amplicon-based ultra-deep NGS is a suitable method to accurately detect and quantify the variety of transcript Prostate cancer is one of the most common cancer in developed countries. aberrations with high sensitivity and enables an individualized monitoring Most of cancer deaths are due to the development of metastasis. Hence, the of disease. prevention of metastasis process is critical. Silibinin is a flavonoid compo- P06.191 nent that inhibits cell proliferation and causes cell death of human prostate Renal tumour after maternal transmission in a SDHD-linked pedigree cancer. In this study, the expression of CD82 gene in PC-3 cells treated with E. Beristain1, M. Vicente1, I. Guerra1, B. Gutierrez1, B. Catón2, J. de Diego2, G. Pérez de Nanclares1; escalating concentrations of silibinin was evaluated that can result in new 1Hospital Txagorritxu, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Hospital Santiago Apóstol, Vitoria- view for prostate cancer therapy. Gasteiz, Spain. In this study, PC-3 cells were treated with different concentrations of sili- binin at 24h. The IC50 was determined. RNA was extracted by trizol. Then cDNA was synthesized. Precise primers were designed for CD82 and GAPDH The succinate dehydrogenase complex-subunit D (SDHD) gene, located on genes by specific software. Quantity of CD82 gene expression compare to chromosome 11q23, encodes an anchoring subunit of the mitochondrial GAPDH gene in different concentrations of silibilin was analyzed using very respiratory chain complex II. It functions as a tumour suppressor gene and sensitive quantitative Realtime PCR. CD82 gene expression in PC-3 cells causes hereditary paraganglioma type 1 when mutated. Renal tumours have treated by 100, 150 and 200μg/ml of silibinin at 24h were increased as also been associated to SDHD mutations. 1.97±0.26 (P<0.05), 3.00±0.26 and 3.43±0.43 (P<0.01), respectively. Mutations in SDHD exhibit a clear parent-of-origin effect, with autosomal The results of quantitative Real-time PCR indicated that silibinin can pro- dominant paraganglioma occurring only with paternal transmission, though bably decrease metastasis, by up-expression of CD82 metastasis suppressor maternal transmission has been rarely described. Since the maternal allele gene in PC-3 cells. of SDHD is not methylated, a number of hypothetical mechanisms have been P06.195 suggested to explain the observed transmission pattern: 1) an unidentified The ancestral haplotype 8.1 (AH8.1) in the major histocompatibility tumour suppressor gene is inactivated in the imprinted region on chromo- complex (MHC) region is a strong and selective risk factor for small some 11p15; 2) the maternally derived SDHD is partially inactivated; 3) tis- cell lung cancer sue-specific quantitative imprinting of SDHD confers subtle allele-specific G. Füst1, I. Aladzsity1, Á. Szilágyi1, Z. Prohászka1, B. Takács1, L. Tamási2, G. Gálffy2, N. expression differences. Gyulai2, L. Kalabay3, R. Ádány4, Z. Orosz5, Z. Bártfai6, B. Dóme7, G. Ostoros7, É. Mórocz8, L. Gráf1, J. Kocsis1; Our aim was to characterise the inheritance pattern of SDHD-Trp5Stop mu- 13rd Dept Intern Med, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 2Dept Pulmonology, tation in a 4-generation family, mainly affected with paraganglioma. Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Family Medicine, Twelve microsatellite markers on 11p15 and 11q13-q23 were genotyped in Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 45Medical and Health Science Centre, germline DNA from 15 mutation carriers, as well as in tumoral DNA from the Debrecen, Hungary, 54Department of Radiology and Oncotherapy, Semmelweis 6 patients (4 paraganglioma, 1 pheocromocytoma, 1 renal tumour). All the University, Budapest, Hungary, 66Department of Pulmonology, Erzsébet Teaching tumours, except the renal one had paternal inheritance of the mutation and Hospital,, Sopron, Hungary, 7Department of Oncology, Korányi National Institute of TB showed LOH of the twelve microsatellites. The mutation was inherited from and Pulmonology, Budapest, Hungary, 8Pulmonology Hospital, Törökbálint, Hungary, Budapest, Hungary. the mother in the patient with a renal tumour, who also had prostate cancer. In the latter, LOH of the twelve microsatellites was found in the renal but not in the prostate tumour, which confirms that maternal inheritance of SDHD mutations can cause this disorder. AH8.1 is a haplotype which extends through the whole MHC region in the short arm of chromosome 6. It is the most frequent, very conservative P06.192 haplotype in the Caucasian population. Previously we have reported on a shRNA Mediated RHOXF1 Knock Down in Breast Cancer Cell Lines strong association of AH8.1 and colorectal cancer with an odds ratio of 2.51 S. Ghafouri-Fard, D. Zare Abdollahi, M. Omrani; Department of Medical Genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, which was higher in subjects of <65 years (4.07) or among women (3.77). Islamic Republic of Iran. It is far higher than any risk reported for SNPs in the GWAS or candidate gene studies. Literature data indicate that AH8.1 is a strong risk factor for ovarian cancer and for non-Hodgkin lymphoma as well. Here we have deter- Background: RHOXF1 has been shown to be expressed in embryonic stem mined the carrier state of AH8.1 in 105 patients with small cell lung cancer cells, adult germline stem cells and some cancer lines. It has been proposed (SCLC) (61.6+7.8 years), 91 patients with non- SCLC (58.7+9.0 years) and as a candidate gene to encode transcription factors regulating downstream 252 age-matched control subjects (66.7+7.3 years). Subjects carrying all the genes in the human testis with an antiapoptotic effect. Its expression in can- four marker alleles of AH8.1 (C allele of AGER 429T>C, G allele of HSP70-2 cer cell lines has implied a similar role for it in the process of tumorigenesis. 1267A>G, A allele of TNFalpha -308G>A as well as G allele of LTA 252A>G Method: The human breast cancer cell lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 were polymorphisms) were considered as AH8.1 carriers. 23/105 (22%) SCLC cultured in DMEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum,100 patients, 13/91 (14%) non-SCLC patients and 32/252 (13%) healthy con- U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin. Cells were transfected with trols carried the AH8.1 haplotype. Odds ratio of the AH8.1 carriers for SCLC pGFP-V-RS plasmid having RHOX1 specific shRNA cassette and plasmid with was 1.93 (1.07-3.49), p=0.036) (for men: 3.15 (1.23-8.07) p=0.025), while scrambled sequence cassette as the negative control. Transfection efficien- for non-SCLC it was not significant. These findings indicate that carriers of cy was monitored by the expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP) 24 the AH8.1 haplotype are at increased risk for SCLC similarly to colorectal hours post transfection. RNA was extracted from cells 48 hours after trans- and other types of cancer. This high risk is most probably due to the altered fection and cDNA was synthesized. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was per- immune system of the AH8.1 carriers. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 197 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P06.196 Splicing functional assays of a single minigene with eight exons of the BRCA2 gene mation of oncogenic SS18-SSX1 or SS18-SSX2 fusions. In a typical SS18-SSX A. Acedo, B. Díez-Gómez, Á. Curiel, C. Hernández-Moro, M. Infante, C. Miner, M. Durán, E. fusion transcript, exon 10 of SS18 is fused to exon 6 of SSX1/2. However, se- A. Velasco; veral variant fusion transcripts have been already described. In the present Instituto de Biología y Genética Molecular (CSIC-UVa), Valladolid, Spain. study, we examined the fusion transcript type in a series of 40 primary un- treated SS tumor specimens using reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). We detected SS18-SSX1 transcript in 22 (55%) patients Splicing disruptions is one key pathogenic mechanism in inherited diseases. and SS18-SSX2 transcript in 17 (42,5%) patients, while in one patient none We are currently investigating the contribution of aberrant splicing of of SS18-SSX1/2 fusion transcripts were identified. Among the cases under BRCA1/2 genes to hereditary breast/ovarian cancer. A powerful approach study, two tumors carried novel SS18-SSX1 and SS18-SSX2 variant transloca- to study the splicing outcomes of DNA variants is a splicing reporter mini- tions that were allegedly created by an alternative splicing and in additional gene especially when patient RNA is not available. We constructed a single case an unusual translocation variant previously described by other group minigene of 8 BRCA2 exons (19 to 26) in a pSPL3-derived plasmid in 5 clo- was found. Our data suggest that alternative splicing may play an important ning steps, which is, as far as we know, the largest BRCA2 minigene ever role in novel fusion transcript formation and additionally we show that it reported. The genomic fragment from exons 19 to 26 is more than 27 kb in may be a recurrent event in SS. Furthermore, we describe the first case of a length that was reduced to a final insert of 4.7 kb with internal deletions of complex rearrangement possibly linking SS to REPS2 gene. introns 20, 21, 24 and 25.This construction was transfected in HeLa cells P06.199 and we observed a main RNA isoform of the expected size of 1.5 Kb that con- Genomic and epigenomic characterization of T-cell prolymphocytic tained the vector constitutive exons and BRCA2 exons 19 to 26. Several spli- leukemia (T-PLL) cing variants of each exon were generated in the wild type minigene by PCR A. K. Bergmann1,2, O. Ammerpohl1, J. Dürig3, I. Ringshausen4, M. Seifert5, A. Teske6, U. mutagenesis and assayed to demonstrate the usefulness and reliability of Dührsen3, R. Küppers5, R. Siebert1; this large construction. Splicing reporter minigenes are straightforward and 1University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Institute of Human Genetics, Kiel, Germany, robust tools to distinguish between pathogenic mutations and innocuous 2Department of General Pediatrics, Kiel, Germany, 3University Hospital Essen, Department of Hematology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Technical variants. The use of minigenes with several exons facilitates the analysis of University Munich, Department of Hematology and Oncology, Munich, Germany, putative splicing variants in a single minigene and emulates the physiologi- 5Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen, Medical cal genomic context where the splicing reactions take place. School, Essen, Germany, 6Complete Genomics Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States. Acknowledgments: Grants CSI004A10-2 and BIO39/VA27/10 (Junta de Ca- stilla y León) and Grant PI10/2910 (Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Ministerio Dürig et al., Leukemia, de Ciencia e Innovación, Spain) T2-0P0L7L is an aggressive postthymic T-cell malignancy with distinctive clini- P06.197 cal, morphologic, cytogenetic and molecular features ( Application of High Resolution Melting Technique for detection of ). We have initiated a comprehensive genetic and epigenetic profiling of Germ Line single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in STK11 Gene among T-PLL. First, we investigated the presence of the hallmark changes inv(14) Patients with Various Gastrointestinal Cancers (q11q32)/t(14;14)(q11;q32) and t(X;14)(q28;q11) by interphase FISH S. Hosseini1, A. Nazemi1, M. Hashemi2; using probes for the TCRAD locus in 14q11 and its both partners involved in 1Islamic Azad University,Tonekabon Branch, Tonekabon, Islamic Republic of Iran, the named changes, i.e. TCL1 in 14q32 and MTCP1 in Xq28. In 43 cases with 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. features of T-PLL acquired over the last 25 years we identified TCRAD breaks in 93%, TCL1 breaks in 74% and MTCP1 breaks in 14%. TCL1 and MTCP1 breaks were mutually exclusive. Two cases contained a TCRAD break with a High Resolution Melting is a method that analyzes genetic variations such partner other than TCL1 and MTCP1 and 3 cases did not show breaks in any as Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms in PCR amplicons. Since HRM characte- of these three loci. To determine the pattern of secondary genetic changes rizes nucleic acid samples based on their disassociation (melting) behavior, on a base pair level we have performed custom full genome sequencing of the nucleotide sequence of amplicon is an important factors affecting the flow-sorted T-PLL cells and corresponding non-T-cells of the same patients melting curve.The STK11 gene encodes a member of the serine/threonine using Complete Genomics* technology. Initial analyses of the first three pa- kinase and regulates cell polarity and function as a tumor suppressor gene. tients suggest the genomic landscape of T-PLL to be highly complex with a The germ-line mutations in this gene are associated with Peutz-Jeghers syn- mean number of 150 protein-changing somatic single nucleotide mutations drome. The patients with this syndrome are prone to some types of neo- and in-dels. Validation of these findings and extension into the full cohort plasm. is ongoing and supplemented by DNA-methylation profiling using Illumina Genomic DNA was extracted from the whole blood samples of 56 patients 450K Methylation BeadArrays. We are confident that the combined geno- with various gastrointestinal cancers. The nucleotide changes in the entire mic and epigenomic profiling of T-PLL will identify potentially druggable STK11 gene were analyzed by Real-time PCR and HRM technique. pathways in this still poor-prognosis disease. The nucleotide screening by HRM technique showed two types of SNPs in *supported by a grant from Complete Genomics introns 6 and 7 of STK11 gene in 10 patients. Four patients had C / T substi- P06.200 tution [cluster id/dsSNP/rs9282860] with homozygous genotype in intron Genetic replication study of susceptibility loci for testicular germ cell 6, and six patients showed a C/G substitution [cluster id/dsSNP/rs2075607] cancer in the Croatian population with heterozygous genotype in intron 7. The direct sequencing of the frag- D. Lessel1, M. Gamulin2, T. Kulis2, M. R. Toliat3, M. Grgic2, Z. Kastelan2, P. Nürnberg3, C. ments confirmed that the results obtained by HRM were 100% reliable. Kubisch1; In this study we found no SNP in exons of STK11 gene. However, two SNPs 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany, 2Clinical Hospital Centre were found in the introns of this gene. Our results show that the primary Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 3Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, screening of the STK11gene by the HRM technique is easily applicable to Germany. detect the unknown germ line and somatic mutations in patients with neo- plasia at a relatively low cost. P06.198 Testicular germ cell tumour (TGCT) is the most common cancer in young Recurrent and novel SS18-SSX fusion transcripts in synovial sarcoma: men showing a pronounced degree of heritability. Recent genome-wide description of three new cases association analyses in British and US samples have identified six suscep- J. Przybyl1,2,3, R. Sciot4, P. Rutkowski5, J. A. Siedlecki1, V. Vanspauwen6, I. Samson7, M. tibility loci of genome-wide significance. The goal of our study was to per- Debiec-Rychter6; form a genetic replication analysis of these loci in an independent European 1Department of Molecular Biology, The Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer population. We therefore analyzed six single nucleotide polymorphisms Centre and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland, 2Postgraduate School of Molecular [rs2900333 (ATF7IP), rs210138 (BAK1), rs755383 (DMRT1), rs995030 Medicine, Warsaw, Poland, 3Doctoral School of Biomedical Sciences, K.U. Leuven, (KITLG), rs4624820 (SPRY4), and rs4635969 (TERT/ CLPTM1L)], each Leuven, Belgium, 4Department of Pathology, K.U. Leuven and University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of Soft Tissue/Bone Sarcoma and Melanoma, The representing one of the published susceptibility loci, in a Croatian case- Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Centre and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw, control sample consisting of 331 tumour-free male controls (> 50 years of Poland, 6Department of Human Genetics, K.U. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 7Department of age) and 325 cases. Indeed, five of these SNPs were found to be associated Orthopedic Surgery, K.U. Leuven and University Hospitals, Leuven, Belgium. in the Croatian population: rs995030 (OR 2.94, p=1.835e-10), rs755383 (OR 1.53, p=0.00023), rs210138 (OR 1.68, p=0.00031), rs4624820 (OR 1.50, p=0.00041) and rs4635969 (OR 1.35, p=0.01739), a finding which is Synovial sarcoma (SS) is an aggressive type of tumor, comprising approxi- still significant after conservative correction for multiple testing. Similar to mately 10% of soft tissue sarcomas. Over 90% of SS cases are characterized previous studies, the association was comparable for different histological www.eshg.org by the t(X;18)(p11.2;q11.2) translocation, which results mainly inw thwe fwor.-eshsugb.toypregs. Moreover, we evaluated if any SNP was associated with aggres-198 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Background and Aim siveness of TGCT measured by different staging categories. Interestingly, : Homeodomain transcription factors play a central while rs2900333 near ATF7IP just showed borderline association with all- role in expression of genomic information in all organisms. TGIFX homeo- TGCT [OR 1.26, p=0.062], it showed significant association with the more box gene was originally discovered in the human adult testis. Our previous aggressive forms of the tumour [OR 1.55, p=0.0067]. In summary, our data study suggested that TGIFLX could be involved in prostate cancer and azoo- provide further evidence that the previously identified loci are involved in spermia. The main aim of our study is to analyze the function of TGIFLX the susceptibility for TGCT and suggest a possible role of ATF7IP in regula- protein. One way to analyze transcription fact ors in eukaryotic cells is to ting the progression of TGCT, although it has to be confirmed in independent study their nuclear localization, as reported for various organisms such as samples. hMuemthaond asnd land plants using pEGFP-N1 vector,a euTkGaIrFyLoXti c expression vec- P06.201 tor encoding EGFP. Comprehensive mutation screening of miRNA loci in testicular germ : We cloned entire coding sequence of TGIFLXgene into above cell tumours plasmid and subsequently, SW48 and Caco2 colorectal cancer cell lines was S. de Boer1, A. Notini1, R. Hersmus2, Y. van der Zwan2, L. Looijenga2, S. White1; transfected with the recombinant vector harboring cDNA. Gene ex- 1Monash Institute for Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 2Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, pRreessuslitosn analysis of TGIFLX verified using RT-PCR and western blot techni- Netherlands. ques. TGIFLX: The TGIFLX expression was confirmed by microscopic analysis and RT-PCR technique. Following molecular cloning and characterization of MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small non-protein coding RNAs transcription factor in stab le cell lines , we then for first time studied which regulate basic cellular processes. There is considerable evidence that the nuclear localization and expression of TGIFTLGXI FinL Xc olorectal cancer cell expression of miRNA genes is deregulated in human cancer, and specific lines (SW48, Caco2) by means ofimaging and tracking of GFP molecules. over- or underexpression has been shown to correlate with particular can- CInotnercelustsiinognly, we found aberrant expression of mRNA in SW48 but cer types. not in the Caco2 cell line. Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) are the most common malignancy af- : This is the first report to perform visualizTaGtIioFnLX of nuclear loca- fecting males between the ages of 15 and 45 years, and are associated with lization of TGIFLX transcription factor by establishing new colorectal cancer significant morbidity including infertility. These cancers are most common- cell lines with this gene and potential involvement of gene dysregu- ly formed from undifferentiated fetal germ cells contained within the testis. lation in human colorectal cancer cancers. There are several methods for identifying variants in DNA. High-resoluti- P06.204 on melting curve (HRM) analysis and multiplex ligation-dependent probe Analysis of frequency CHK2 gene sequence variants: R145W and amplification (MLPA) are two sensitive, cost effective and high throughput I157L in Polish patients with differentiated thyroid cancer and Polish techniques for rapidly screening a large number of DNA samples. To identify population point mutations we performed HRM analysis on eight miRNA loci implica- M. Kaczmarek-Ryś1, S. Hryhorowicz2, J. Hoppe-Gołębiewska1, B. Sobiak3, K. Ziemnicka4, J. ted in either testis cancer and/or pluripotency. To identify deletions and du- Sowiński5, R. Słomski1,6; plications we developed an MLPA mix containing probes that recognize 50 1Institut of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 22. The miRNA sequences that have been identified as being deleted or duplicated Nanobiomedical Center, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznań, Poland, 35. Department in tumours. of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Agriculture, Poznań, Poland, 44. Department of Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical We have carried out a pilot study using these two approaches on 48 TGCT Sciencess, Poznań, Poland, 54. Department of Endocrinology and Internal Diseases, samples. To date we have identified a number of potential variants that we University School of Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 65. Department of Biochemistry are currently confirming with independent techniques. Given the success and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, Poznań, Poland. of this initial screen we plan to study an additional 100 DNA samples. Our findings will give a better understanding of the genetic basis of testis cancer, and may lead to improved diagnostic or therapeutic protocols. Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) originate from thyroid follicular C cells P06.202 and belong to group of slowly progressing benign tumors with good progno- Whole exome analysis of testicular germ cell tumours sis. Very serious problems are recurrences and regional or remote metasta- S. White1, S. de Boer1, A. Notini1, R. Hersmus2, Y. van der Zwan2, D. Belluoccio3, L. sis. Numerous cases of osteolytic, cerebral and pulmonary metastasis were Looijenga2, P. Western1; observed. Progression from well differentiated thyroid cancer to malignant 1Monash Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 2Erasmus Medical Center, anaplastic carcinoma is possible. Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Agilent Technologies, Melbourne, Australia. Very important seems to be searching for molecular markers of disease course, good or poor prognosis and response on medical treatment. SNP po- lymorphisms research in genes associated with neoplastic diseases will be Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) are the most common cancer in ado- helpful in understanding of molecular mechanisms of thyroid gland tumors lescents and young men, with a median age of diagnosis of approximately development and allow to better diagnosing. 30 years. Although the majority of cases can be successfully treated with Mutations in CHK2 gene are thought to predispose to sarcomas, breast can- radical surgery and/or chemotherapy, these treatments have significant un- cer, and brain tumors. Protein product of this gene is a cell cycle checkpoint desirable side effects including renal, vascular, neural toxicity and negative regulator and tumor suppressor and is a member of the CDS1 subfamily of effects on fertility. There is also compelling evidence for long term increased serine/threonine protein kinases. risks of secondary malignancies, cardiovascular disease and metabolic syn- We examined two sequence variants in CHK2 gene in group of 516 Polish drome. patients with differentiated thyroid cancer and 500 individuals from popu- Despite the frequency with which TGCTs occur, little is known about the lation group. I157T and R145W variants were analyzed by pyrosequencing. genetics underlying TGCT initiation and progression. In order to obtain a There were differences in allele and genotype frequencies in analysis of better understanding of this condition we have performed whole exome I157T variation. Allele C was present with frequency 0,05 and allele T - 0,95 analysis on DNA from two TGCT samples, plus matched non-tumour mate- in patient with thyroid cancer, compared with 0,03 and 0,097 in control in- rial. Exome capture was carried out with the SureSelect Human All Exon kit dividuals respectively. The differences in allele frequencies were statistically from Agilent, which targets 44 Mb of exonic regions, and sequencing was significant (p=0,0072).We didn’t observed any variability in R145 position performed on an Illumina HiSeq 2000 instrument. neither in DTC patients nor population group. Project supported by Polish Data analysis identified several potentially de novo variants that we are National Science Center grant NN402287436. currently validating, and we are planning to screen a larger cohort of TGCT P06.205 samples for specific genes. This study will improve our understanding of the Evaluation of CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 gene polymorphisms in genetic basis of TGCT, with implications for diagnosis and therapy. thyroid cancer P06.203 A. Uludag1, S. Ozdemir2, C. Silan3, A. Uludag4, S. Atik1, F. Silan1, O. Ozdemir1; Nuclear localization of human homeodomain TGIFLX gene and its 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart mRNA expression in stable cancer cell lines University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Nuclear Medicine, Faculty of A. Ghaffari Novin1, M. Noori-Dalooii1, M. Famil- Tokhmehchi2, R. Raoofian1, M. Heidari1; Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 3Department of 1Department of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Sciences, Tehran, I, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Eye Research Center, Rassul Akram Turkey, 4Department of Family Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, I, Tehran, University, Canakkale, Turkey. Islamic Republic of Iran. Thyroid cancer incidence has increased worldwide during the previous www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 199 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 years. Incidence of thyroid cancer is 33599 in European Union countries. It discriminatory power for the differentially methylated genomic regions. is 1,4 % of all cancers. Mortality of tyhroid cancer is 0,3%. P06.208 CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 genes have been reported to be coding the miR-106b is down-regulated in follicular carcinomas and may enzymes responsible for the metabolism of many drugs, including warfarin modulate the expression of C1orf24 in thyroid carcinoma cell lines and other drugs with a narrow therapeutic index. Realising the importance G. Carvalheira, B. Nozima, J. M. Cerutti; of inter-individual differences in the genetic profile in determining the out- UNIFESP, São Paulo, Brazil. come of a drug therapy. This study was conducted to explore the types and frequencies of CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and CYP2D6 alleles in healthy controls and thyroid cancer patients. We have previously showed that C1orf24 (alias NIBAN) is highly expressed Total genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples with EDTA in thyroid carcinomas compared to benign lesions. However, the molecu- and spin column method. A total of 103 subjects including 49 healty control lar mechanism underlying its expression remains unclear. One of the post- and 53 thyroid cancer patients were recruited into the study. CYP2C9 allele transcriptional mechanisms of gene regulation is the action of the microR- *1, *2, *3, CYP2C19 allele *1, *2, *3 and CYP2D6 allele *1, *2, *3, *4,*5 have NA. microRNA expression varies according tissue, development stage and been studied by real time PCR method for both two groups. cancer types. Therefore, we used miRBase Sequence database to identify In thyroid cancer group allel frequency of CYP2C9 *2 was 4,62%, *3 was microRNAs that potentially regulate C1orf24 expression. miR106b was 19,44%. CYP2C19 *2 and *3 allel frequencies were 17,59% and 0% respec- selected for further validation by quantitative PCR in 64 thyroid nodules tively. Those ratios were 9,18%, 6,12%, 11,22% and 5,10% respectively. (09 CVPTC, 18 FVPTC, 11 FTC, 11 HCA and 15 FTA). The data obtained by According to our study, genes have roles in drug methoblism like CYP genes qPCR showed that the expression of miR106b was down-regulated in mali- may act an important role in cancer ethiopathogenesis and further studies gnant lesions compared to benign lesions (p value 0.0060), while C1orf24 including larger control and patient groups are needed. expression presented high levels in malignant ones (p value 0.0018). There- P06.206 fore, to investigate whether miR106b modulates the C1orf24 expression, The possible role of the xenobiotic transporter P-glycoprotein miR106b was transiently transfected into a follicular thyroid carcinoma cell polymorphism that encoded by the MDR1 3435 C>T gene in the line (WRO), which we have previously show to have high levels of C1orf24 susceptibility of differentiated thyroid cancer expression. The results showed that the ectopic expression (30nM at 72hr) S. Ozdemir1, A. Uludag2, F. Silan2, S. Atik2, B. Turgut3, O. Ozdemir2,4; of miR106b decreases both C1orf24 mRNAs (p value < 0.05) and proteins le- 1Department of Nuclear Medicine,Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department vels when compared to negative control. These finds suggest that miR106b of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, may modulate C1orf24 gene expression and may play an important role in Turkey, 3Department of Nuclear Medicine,Faculty of Medicine,Cumhuriyet University, thyroid tumorigenesis. Additionally, it may help understand the molecular Sivas, Turkey, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet mechanisms underlying its activation in other tumor subtypes where it was University, Sivas, Turkey. found highly expressed. P06.209 Comparison of genetic changes in schistosome-related transitional P-glycoprotein (Pgp), encoded by the multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) gene is and squamous bladder cancers using fluorescence in situ an efflux transporter and plays an important role in pharmacokinetics. The hybridization. current preliminary study was designed to determine association between M. S. Aly1,2, A. A. Mahmoud2; germ-line polymorphism in MDR1 gene with differentiated thyroid carcino- 1Faculty of Science, Beni Suef University, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Science, Jazan ma (DTC). In the current case-control study of 60 thyroid carcinomas (TC); University, Jazan, Saudi Arabia. 45 papillary TC (PTC), 9 follicular TC(FTC) and 6 differentiated TC(DTC) of well-differentiated TC of uncertain malignant potential were examined. Ge- nomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood with EDTA, target gene was In western countries, more than 90% of primary bladder carcinomas are genotyped by multiplex Real-time PCR and PCR-based reverse-hybridization transitional cell carcinoma (TCC), whereas squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) StripAssay method. Carriers of the variant allele of MDR1 exon 26 polymor- comprises less thSacth 1is0to%so. Cmaar chienmomatao ooifu tmhe urinary bladder is the most com- phism were at 2.8-fold higher risk of DTC than the control group(odds ratio mon malignancy in many tropical and subtropical countries due to ende- [OR]: 0.3805, 95% confidence interval [Cl]: 0.1597-0.9065.There was an as- mic infection by . Compared with non-schistosome sociation between DTC and MDR1 C3435T polymorphism in the presented bladder cancer, schistosome-related bladder cancer has different clinical results(p> 0.046). Presented results showed that the homozygous MDR1 and pathological features. 3435TT genotype increases the risk factor to develop differentiated thyroid In this study, dual-color FISH cytogenetic analysis was performed using cancer and large-scale studies are needed to validate this association. two oncogenes (HER-2/neu and MCY) and a tumor suppressor gene (p53) P06.207 in relation to chromosomes 8 and 17 centromeres in a group of patients Exploring the methylome of thyroid cancer at single C resolution: presenting with schistosomal associated squamous and transitional cell From screening to clinical diagnostics carcinoma. W. Pulverer1, K. Vierlinger1, O. Koperek2, K. Kaserer2, A. Weinhäusel1; To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to compare genetic alte- 1Austrian Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, 2Medical University Vienna, Vienna, Austria. rations in both transitional and squamous subgroups of schistosHomera2l /bnlaedu- der cancers in Egyptian patients u5s3ing the FISH technique. Thirty-sex percent of SCC cases showed gene amplification for . On the other hand, for the gene p , 68% had gene deletion. Whereas 29% Thyroid nodules are endemic in iodine deficient areas, like Europe’s alpine regions, where they have a prevalence of 10-20 %. Since 5% of these nodules of the cases show gene amplificatioPn5 f3or c-myc gene. In TCC cases, 8 caPs5e3s are malignant, all thyroid nodules have to be clinically evaluated to discern (23.5%) had gene amplificatCio-mn fyocr Her2/neu gene. On the other hand, 50% of cases had two copies of the gene , and the other (50%) had gene benign from malignant cases. The current method of choice for diagnosis is deleted. While for the gene , 9 cases (26.4%) show gene amplificati- based on fine needle aspiration (FNA) followed by cytological evaluation. on. Despite many advances in the diagnosis and treatment of thyroid nodules Our data showed that different histologic subgroups of bladder tumors are this method has a high rate of suspicious or indeterminate (e.g. follicular characterized by distinct patterns of genetic alterations. The genetic chan- neoplasia) diagnosis. Patients with such a suspicious diagnosis will undergo ges found in the transitional cell group are differing from tumors exhibiting surgery. The consequence is an extensive overtreatment of patients, as only squamous differentiation. approximately 20% of the indeterminate cases will be identified as mali- P06.210 gnant at surgery. TSPY and TSPX gene copy number assessment in patients with In the present study we address the call for minimally invasive diagnostics gonadal tumours, prostatic cell lines and control groups based on state of the art molecular techniques to clearly discriminate bet- M. Kvapilova, R. Vodicka, R. Vrtel, K. Krizova, J. Böhmova, H. Filipova, J. Santavy; ween the different benign and malignant thyroid entities. Therefore we em- Faculty of Medicine Palacky University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czech Republic. ployed 48 thyroid nodules, consisting of follicular thyroid adenomas/car- cinomas (FTA/FTC), papillary thyroid carcinomas (PTC) and struma nodosa (SN) to a whole genome methylation screening using Illuminas Infinium Background: TSPY gene is localized on Y chromosome and have a homo- 450k BeadArrays. The data gave first insights in the methylome of thyroid logue TSPX on X chromosome. TSPY is specific expressed in testes. TSPX nodules at single C resolution at a whole genome scale. We could clearly dif- is normally expressed in ovaries and testis. Over expression of TSPY was ferentiate between the different histological groups based on their methyla- discovered in tumour tissues. Product of TSPY accelerates a pass trough tion patterns. We present a bioinformatics analysis and assessment of the G2/M phase via cycline D2 and positively affects the cell proliferation. Over- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org200 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 expression of TSPX or SET leads to cell retaining in G2/M. amplicon sequencing can be used to detect low proportion of tumor DNA in Aim: Quantification of TSPX/X gene copy number and study of potential plasma. This biomarker might thus be helpful to measure tumour burden changes in the TSPY/X copies and their mutual ratios. and to monitor anti-metastatic treatment. Method: There were assessed 10 women and 8 men patients with gonadal P06.213 tumours, 5 prostatic cell lines (DU-145, LAPC-4, PC-3, RWPE-I, LNCeP), 80 Valproic acid achieves its anticancer activity by re-expression of cyclin woman and 80 man controls in the study. The study was supported by IGA D2 UPOL LF_2011_004. D. Witt1, P. Burfeind1, S. von Hardenberg1, L. Opitz2, G. Salinas-Riester2, S. Schweyer3, P. Relative copy number of TSPY/X genes was quantified by capillary electro- Thelen4, S. Kaulfuß1; phoresis in comparison to one-copy genes AMELY/X. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 2Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Göttingen, Germany, 3Department of Pathology, Göttingen, Germany, Results: We observed more TSPY gene copies in patients with seminomas 4Department of Urology, Göttingen, Germany. compare to TSPX gene than in control group. Number of TSPX gene copies in men control group is higher than in patients with seminomas. More variabi- lity in TSPX gene copies was indicated in women with ovary carcinoma com- Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) are widely known as remedies pare to controls. The women control group has more TSPX gene copies than against epilepsy. But in the last years, HDACi research in the field of cancer patients with tumours in average. In prostatic cell lines DU-145, LAPC-4 and expanded. In this study we demonstrated that the treatment of primary mu- LNCeP was significantly increased amount of TSPY copies compare to con- rine prostate cancer (PCa) cells derived from the well-established TRAMP trol group. (transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate) model with the HDACi val- Conclusion: Obtained data could contribute to understanding of TSPY/X proic acid (VPA) has an anti-proliferative, anti-migrative and anti-invasive gene role in tumor-genesis process in gametogenetic tissues. effect on the cells. P06.211 To our knowledge this is the first study that identified that treatment of PCa Evidences of the association between UCP2 gene expression with cells with VPA leads to the re-expression of cyclin D2, which is known to be Obesity, Family history of cancer and Metabolism frequently inactive in patients with PCa. Additionally, we could demonstrate K. Mirzaei1,2, A. Hossein-nezhad1, H. Ansar1, S. Emamgholipour1, s. Keshavarz2; 1Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical that VPA specifically induces re-expression of cyclin D2 in human colorectal Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Nutrition and and mammary gland adenocarcinoma cell lines, whereas VPA treatment has Biochemistry, school of Public Health and institute of public health research, Tehran no effect in NIH/3T3 fibroblasts. Moreover, the intensity of re-expression is University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dependent on the inhibition of proliferation, because for NIH/3T3 cells no inhibition of proliferation after VPA treatment was observed. The re-expression of cyclin D2 can also be achieved by other HDACis. The Increased risk of cancer is one of the consequences of obesity. UCP2 has conclusion that cyclin D2 re-expression observed in cancer cells after the been implicated in free radical scavenging relevant to pathological proces- treatment with VPA is activated by an increase of histone acetylation was ses, including obesity and has a unique role in energy balance and their re- shown by chromatin immunoprecipitation studies for the promoter region sponses to inflammatory stimUCuPli2. UCP2P eGxCp1rαession was changed iinn vhiturmoan of the cyclin D2 gene. However, the re-expression seems not to be due to cancer and may correlate with the degree of oxidative stress. The aim of changes in the methylation status of the cyclin D2 promoter region. In sum- study was measurement of and gene expressions in mary, our results propose VPA as an anticancer therapeutic option in tumors samples of PBMCs derived from all participants in a cellular model and to with epigenetically repressed cyclin D2 expression. investigate their potential correlation with family history of cancer. P06.214 A total of 220 obese subjects were included in study. The PBMCs were se- Current variant of uncertain significance rates in BRCA1/2 and Lynch parated, total cellular RNA was extracted and the cDNA was synthesized. Syndrome testing (MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2) Real-time PCR using specific primer pairs was performed. We analyzed our J. M. Eggington1, L. Burbidge1, K. Copeland2, B. B. Roa1, D. Pruss2, K. Bowles1, E. findings according to categorized group: group with a family history of can- Rosenthal1, L. Esterling1, R. J. Wenstrup1; cer and Individuals without a family history of any cancer. 1Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 2Myriad Genetics, Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States. Of the 220 participants, 20 (9.09 %) had a family history of cancer and 200 (90.91%) hadnU’tC fPam2ily history of any ca2ncer. The mean of age and BMI were 36.99±9.02years and 34.99±4.13kg/m respectively. We found significantly lower relative gene expression in group with a familyP hGiCs1toαry of can- Laboratories that provide full gene sequencing frequently detect Genetic cer. The estimatedU CfaPm2 iglye nheis etxoprrye ossf icoanncer relative risk attributable to UCP2 Variants of Uncertain Significance (VUSs). VUSs present a challenge to the gene expression was 1.46%. We found significantly lower gene ex- clinician in how to appropriately guide the medical care of their patient in pressions in low group. the context of an inconclusive test result. While the majority of VUSs are It seems that the relative expression of involved genes in energy balance eventually discovered to be non-disease causing, some are pathogenic. may have important role in cancer risk in obese subjects. Myriad Genetic Laboratories, Inc. has pursued protBoRcCoAls1 /to2 collect suffici- ent data to appropriately reclassify VUSs. Statistical techniques that lead to P06.212 Detection of GNAQ and GNA11 mutations in plasma of metastasized VUS reclassification have been developed on a large dBaRtaCsAe1t./ W2hile uveal melanoma patients by deep amplicon sequencing the basis of these statistical techniquesA hPaCs been published, they have been M. Zeschnigk1, C. H. D. Metz2, N. Bornfeld2, D. R. Lohmann1; furBthReCrA r1e/f2ined such thMaLtH th1eyM aSrHe2 noMwS Hap6plicable to notP oMnSly2 , but 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, also Lynch Syndrome genes as well as . We report the current VUS rate 2Department of Ophthalmology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. in as 3.0%, + + as 7.3% and as 4.4%. The continual drop in VUS rate through time reflects the success of these VUS GNAQ GNA11 reclassification techniques and Variant Classification Programs. In recent Elevated levels of DNA are frequently found in the cell free plasma of cancer years theB aRpCpAl1ic/a2tion of these techniques has also led to significant drops in patients. Activating mutations in and are highly specific for VUS rates in non-European ethnic groups, with the most prominent change uveGaNl AmQe lanGoNmAa1. 1To establish a reliable assay which might allow for early de- being in . Characterizing VUSs gives the clinician the required infor- tection and monitoring of metastatic disease we determined the proportion mation to appropriately manage their patient. of or mutant reads in DNA from cell free plasma of uvGeNaAl Qm ela- P06.215 GnoNmA1a1 p atients by ultra-deep sequencing. We isolated cell-free DNA from 23 Investigation of the VDR gene polymorphisms and expression blood samples from patients with metastasized uveal melanoma. and association with Family history of cancer in obesity regions of interest were amplified on 6 ng DNA. To detect even low A. Hossein-nezhad1, K. Mirzaei1,2, H. Ansar1, S. Emamgholipour1, s. Keshavarz2; proportion of mutant sequence reads ultra deep sequencing of amplicons 1Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Nutrition and was performed (Roche GS Junior).Levels of DNA ranged from 20 to 1550 Biochemistry, school of Public Health and institute of public health research, Tehran ng per ml of plasma. On average about 2600 sequence reads were obtained University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. for each amplicon (range: 281 to 6191). We detected either GNAQ Q209 or GNA11 Q209 mutations in the plasma from 9 out of 23 patients. The propor- FokI tion of mutant reads ranged from 2 to 38 %. However, the background noise Population-based study demonstrated thatV DVRDR gene variiant ivointr, oespecially (0.5% at any given nucleotide position) limited the sensitivity of detection. SNPs owing to its functional significance, may influence risk of some We found no correlation between amount of cell-free DNA in plasma and the cancer. The aim of this study is to measure expression in samp- proportion of mutant reads. This suggests that at least in some patients ele- les of PBMCs derived from all participants in a cellular model and to inve- vated DNA levels in the plasma do not originate from tumor cells. Ultra-deep www.eshsgtig.aoter gtheir potential correlation with family history of cancer. We analyzed www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 201 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 rs VDR FolkI polymorphism ( 10735810) and its correlation with VDR gene Here, we present two Vhl knockin mouse models with endogenous tumour expressions in obese subjects with and without a famFilOyK hIistory of cancer formation. The effect of Vhl type IIB (V2B) and type IIC (V2C) germline mu- separately. tations was analyzed over several generations. Additionally, Vhl knockin A total of 190 obese subjects were included in study. was genotyped mutations were also combined with hemizygous inactivation of Pten, and and the PBMCs were separated by Ficoll-hypaque technique. Total cellular the impact on tumour spectrum, incidence and tumour progression was in- RNA was extracted and Real-time PCR performed. We analyzed our findings vestigated in over 300 mice of the distinct genotypes at the ages of 3 to 12 according to categorized group: group with a family history of cancer and months. Pten knockout mice developed various tumours at 9 to 12 months Individuals without a family history of any cancer. independent of the Vhl genotype. Furthermore, V2B mice displayed a clear 23 (12.1 %) had a family history of cancer and 167 (87.89%) hadn’t family Vhl genotype dependent effect on the development of renal cysts. Additio- history of any can2cer. The mean of age and BMI were 35.32±8.31years and nally, we observed a significantly increase in incidence and tumour mass of 33.32±3.24kg/VmDR respectively. The frequency of ff genotype was significant- PCCs in V2B and V2C compound hemizygous mice. ly higher in subjectVs DwRith family history of cancer. We found significantly P06.218 lower relative gene expression in group with a family history of cancer Variability in von Hippel-Lindau disease-Manifestation rate (p<0.05). However expressions were low in ff genotype in group wit- throughout life hout a family history of cancer, but its expression were low inV DeRvery three M. M. Poulsen, E. Budtz-Jørgensen, M. Bisgaard; genotypes in group with a family history of cancer. Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen It seems that the having ff genotype and lower expression of could be N, Denmark. associated with risk of cancer. Background P06.216 Overexpression of VEGF isoforms generated by alternative splicing in head and neck cancer Clinical management and counseling of von Hippel-Lindau (vHL) families is P. M. Biselli-Chicote1, G. H. Marucci1, R. Castro1, B. R. Cunha2, J. Maniglia3, D. S. Neto4, E. complicated by variable phenotypic expression. Natural history of disease H. Tajara5, É. C. Pavarino6, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo6; progression is not fully understood, and better knowledge of specific fac- 1Genetics and Molecular Biology Research Unit – UPGEM, Sao Jose do Rio Preto Medical tors’ influence would greatly benefit vHL management. We aim to describe School - FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2Sao Jose do Rio Preto Medical School - tMheet hvaordisability in vHL-manifestation development throughout life and to as- FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 3Department of Othorrinolaringology and Head sess association to gender and genotype. VHL and Neck Surgery, Sao Jose do Rio Preto Medical School - FAMERP, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 4Patology Service, Hospital de Base, Sao Jose do Rio Preto – FAMERP, Sao Paulo, Brazil, São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 5Department of Molecular Biology, Sao Jose do Full medical records were collected from 52 mutation carriers, 26 fe- Rio Preto Medical School – FAMERP, Sao Jose do Rio Preto Medical School - FAMERP, male and 26 male. Patients were followed from birth, and age-dependent São José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 6Genetics and Molecular Biology Research Unit – UPGEM, manifestation rates were analyzed using Poisson regression. Relative rates Department of Molecular Biology, Sao Jose do Rio Preto Medical School - FAMERP, São between age groups were compared using robust standard errors which al- José do Rio Preto, Brazil. lowed for heterogeneity between patients. Effects on manifestation rates of gReensudletsr and genotype (truncating mutation versus missense mutation) were determined. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a potent mitogen for endothe- lial cells and itVsE oGvFerexpression is associated with tumor growth and me- Overall, 381 manifestations were diagnosed in 42 subjects, while 10 were tastasis. However, the selection of a alternative splicing site at the end of asymptomatic mutation carriers. Maximum manifestation rate was reached the exon 8 of gene results in a sister-VfaEmGFily of isoforms, VEGFxxxb, in the 30-34 year age-group with 0.880 manifestations per year ((95% CI: that seems to have anti-angiogenic proprieties. The aim of this work was 0.57-1.36). Compared to the 30-34 year group, the relative rates of esVpHeL- to quantitatively analyze the expressions of gene isoforms generated cially the younger, but also of older groups were lower. We found a trend by alternative splicing in samples of head and neck squamous celVlsE cGaFrcino- of a higher relative manifestation rate among patients with truncating ma and adjacent normal tissues, and to determine the effect of regulatory mCountcaltuisoinosn scompared to those with missense mutations (p= 0.060) and less proteins (SRp55, SRp40, ASF/SF2 and SRPK1) in the control of gene when comparing men and women (p= 0.58). splicing. The overexpression of both VEGF isoforms was observed in head VHL and neck squamous cells carcinoma related to normal tissue samples. Positi- Rate of manifestation development is associated to age, increasing from ve correlation between VEGFxxx and VEGFxxxb expression was observed in birth to the 30’ies. Also, truncating mutation carriers seem to have a head and neck tumors. SF/SF2 presented higher expression in tumors when higher rate of tumor development. Better knowledge of factors influencing compared to normal tissues. Pharynx tumors presented overexpression of phenotypic variability will facilitate surveillance targeting and counseling VEGFxxx. VEGFxxxb was underexpressed in oral cavity tumors. Overexpres- of affected families. sion of both VEGF isoforms was observed in aggressive tumors. There was a positive correlation among ASF/SF2, SRp55 and SRp40 proteins and both P07. Cancer Cytogenetics VEGF isoforms, and among SRPK1 protein and ASF/SF2, SRp55 and SRp40 in tumor tissues. The results suggest that both VEGF isoforms play a role in angiogenesis promotion in head and neck tumors. VEGF isoforms present P07.01 differential expression related to the anatomic sites of tumor and tumor ag- CIZ Gene Rearrangements in Pediatric CD10-Negative Acute gressiveness. ASF/SF2, SRp55 and SRp40 proteins are involved in the regu- Lymphoblastic Leukemia M. Shago1, G. Maire2, O. Abla1, J. Hitzler1, S. Weitzman1, M. Abdelhaleem1; lation of the VEGF gene splicing mechanism. 1The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, P06.217 ON, Canada. The additional effect of VHL and PTEN mutations in tumour CIZ (ZNF384) TEL (ETV6) development R. Keppler, C. Steinwender, K. Reicherter, B. Zabel, E. Lausch; Centre for Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, The gene, located distal to thCeI Z gene at 12p13.31, Germany. is a putative zinc finger transcription factor wChIZich is recurrently reaCrIrZanged in acute leukemia. RearrangTeAmF1en5ts of the gene resuElWt iSnR a1ttachment of various 5’ pEa2rtAner gene sequences t o form fusion genes. The gene The von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) protein is well described as an ubiquitin E3 li- has three known pCaIrZtners: at 17q12 (16 cases), at 22q12 (4 cases), and at 19p13 (3 cases).We present seven new pediatric pre-B gase for HIFalpha subunits but plays also a role in microtubule stability, ECM formation and cilia assembly. Due to germline mutations in the VHL gene ALL patMieLnLts with gene rearrangement. Our patients had lymphoblasts with a CD10-negative immunophenotype, similar to the antigenic profile patients develop retinal and CNS haemangioblastomas (HBs), pheochromo- cytomas (PCCs) and clear cell renal carcinomas (ccRCCs). Interestingly, cy- seen in gene-rearranged ALLs. Followup on the patients ranges froEm2A 3 stic lesions of VHL patients possess an increased activation of phosphoino- CtoIZ 5 yearsE,W anSdR 1none of the patients have relapsEe2dA. I-dCeIZntification of the rear- sitide-3 kinase (PI3K) pathway and downstream mTOR signaling. The PI3K rangements wEaWs fSaRci1li-tCaItZed using dual-colour breakapart probes forC tIhZe , , and loci. Four of the patients had gene rearrangement pathway is negatively regulated by PTEN which is one of the most frequently inactivated tumour suppressor genes. Partial deletion of Pten in mice results and one haCdIZ gene rearrangement. Two patients had gene rearrangement involving regions on chromosomes 6 and 22, suggestive of in tumour formation in a tissue specific manner. As PCCs are also part of the additional partner genes. Copy number and expression microarray ana- PTEN associated tumour spectrum, we hypothesized that VHL and PTEN lyses have been performed, and results comparing the genomic and gene may interact functionally in tumour suppression. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org202 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 CIZ CIZ expression changes in rearrangement ALL to that of other ALL subtypes cells. Instead, nuclei with lymphoma-specific translocations in vessels could will be presented. Our dataC IsZuggests that gene rearrangement may have exist due to vessel-invading neoplastic lymphocytic cells. an incidence of ~3% in pediatrMicL ALLL, with an incidence of atC lIeZast 18% in P07.04 CD10-negative pre-B ALL. gene rearrangement may be associated with a Determination Of Genotoxic Effects Of Boric Acid In Cervical more favorable prognosis than gene rearrangement, and FISH ana- Carcinoma Cell Lines lysis is recommended in patients with CD10-low/negative ALL. E. Kahraman1, M. Korkmaz1, I. Deliloglu Gurhan2; P07.02 1Celal Bayar University, Manisa, Turkey, 2Aegean University, Izmir, Turkey. Chromosome 11 as a target of breakpoint mapping in acute myeloid leukemia I. Sarova1, J. Brezinova1, D. Bystricka2, Z. Zemanova2, Z. Krejcik1, J. Cermak1, J. Vydra3, A. Aim: It has been shown that boron could be anti-carcinogenic effects in li- Jonasova4, K. Michalova2,1; mited number of epidemiological and in vitro studies. In this context, par- 1Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 2Center of ticularly its preventive and therapeutic potential for prostate and cervical Oncocytogenetics, Prague 2, Czech Republic, 3Faculty Hospital Kralovske Vinohrady, cancer gaining power by the day. In this study that planned, investigated the Prague, Czech Republic, 41st Department of Internal Medicine of General University cytogenetic effects of boron in cervical carcinoma cell lines. Hospital and 1st Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic. Methods And Materials: In our study, HTB-32 (from ATCC) and CCL-62 (HeLa contaminant, from ATCC) that cervical carcinoma cell lines were MLL used. On this cell lines were treated 250 µM, 500 µM, 1000 µM doses of Boric In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), chromosome 11 breakpoints are typical- acid. For estimate of genotoxicity while chromosome abnormalities in sha- ly localized at chromosomal band 11q23.3 where a proto-oncogene pe (CAs) were evaluated in terms of frequency, also Micronucleus (MN) fre- (myeloid/lymphoid leukemia) is frequently altered. However, recurrent quency were calculated. Number of MN calculated for each boron doses in aberrations of other regions of chromosome 11 without identification of al- 1000 pieces binucleotid cells. For chromosome analysis, numbers of break tered gene have been described. The aim of this study was characterization and gap were evaluated for each dose in 50 pieces metaphase. The data that of chromosome 11 aberrations in bone marrow and peripheral blood cells obtained, compared with the control group by applying the chi-square in of AML patients and mapping of recurrent breakpoints using conventional SPSS 16.0 program. and molecular cytogenetic methods (FISH with BAC probes, mFISH, mBAND Results And Discussion: In conclusion, statisticaly we didn’t find significant and aCGH). genotoxic effects of boric acid when compaired with control group in human During years 2006-2011, chromosome 11 aberrations were proved in 55 servical carcinoma cell lines (p>0.05). Our data suggested that boric acid (17%) out of 318 newly diagnosed AML patients. We identified approximate- no effects that increase or decrease on incidence of MN and CAs in human ly 30 different chromosome 11 bMreLaLkpoints, 13 as re NcuUrPr9e8nt (in chromoso- cervical carcinoma cell lines. mal bands 11p15, 11p13, 11p12-p11.2, 11q13.2, 11q14.2, 11q21, 11q22.3, P07.05 11q23.3) and two altered genes: (11q23.3) and (11p15). A functional assay for the identification of DNA double strand break In conclusion, chromosome 11 aberratio MnsL Lare the most frequent cytoge- (DNA-DSB) repair deficiency in heterozygous carriers of BRCA2 and netic abnormalities in AML with many repeated as welMl aLsL sporadic break- RAD51C mutations points on both short and long arm. The gene is famous for the great A. A. Becker1,2, J. Weimer3, M. K. Graeser1, C. Landwehr4, T. Hilger5, R. G. Weber6, B. number of partner fusion genes. We identified two new gene transloca- Wappenschmidt1,2, A. Meindl7, N. Arnold3, R. K. Schmutzler1,2; tions. The breakpoint localization in chromosomal regions without known 1Division of Molecular Gynaeco-Oncology, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, gene associated with leukemogenesis predicts their involvement in mali- University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne gnant process. However, the reason for breakage and role of genes localized (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 3Department of Gynaecology and at the breakpoint for cancer origin and progression is still under discussion. Obstetrics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Christian-Albrechts-Universität Therefore, the significance of new chromosomal breakpoints could be re- Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 4Institute for Medical Diagnostics, Berlin-Steglitz, Germany, Berlin, Germany, 5Department of Radiation Therapy, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, vealed by further studies only. Germany, 6Department of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Supported by grants MZOUHKT2005, MZOVFN2005, COST EuGESMA. Germany, 7Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Klinikum rechts der Isar at the P07.03 Technical University, Munich, Germany. Do vessel-forming endothelial cells in B-cell lymphomas carry the hallmark chromosomal translocation and belong to the tumor cell clon? Mutations in breast cancer gene 1 and 2 (BRCA1/2) account for 50% of the K. Korte1, W. Klapper2, R. Zühlke-Jenisch1, R. Siebert1; familial aggregation of breast and ovarian cancer. Numerous allelic variants 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel/ are of unknown clinical relevance (unclassified variants, UCV). We recently Christian Albrecht U, Kiel, Germany, 2Institute of Pathology, University Hospital identified RAD51C as a third high penetrance gene. Like BRCA1/2, RAD51C Schleswig-Holstein Campus Kiel/ Christian Albrecht University Kiel, Germany, Kiel, Germany. is also involved in homologous recombination repair (HRR) in response to DNA-DSB. Patient lymphocytes carrying a pathogenic BRCA1/2 variant ex- hibit an increased level of chromosomal damage after irradiation. We aimed Angiogenesis is one of the hallmark features of cancer. Recently it has been at developing a reliable functional test system which allows the evaluation suggested that vessel-forming endothelial cells in B-cell lymphomas could of HRR deficiency in heterozygous patient lymphocytes. Carriers of patho- be derived from clonal tumor-cells (Streubel et al., 2004). This hypothesis genic BRCA2 mutations, pathogenic RAD51C mutations, healthy controls as was based among others on the observation that the hallmark chromoso- well as BRCA2 UCV carriers were γ-irradiated in G2 phase to introduce DNA- mal translocations in these lymphomas, i.e. t(14;18) in follicular lymphoma, DSB. Repair capacity was subsequently assessed on metaphase chromoso- t(8;14) in Burkitt lymphoma and t(11;14) in mantle cell lymphoma, were de- mes stained by multicolour fluorescence in situ hybridisation. Chromosomal tectable in microvascular endothelial cells of various B-cell lymphomas. To translocations and breakages were counted per mitosis and referred to total independently corroborate these findings we here investigated vessel nuclei chromosomal number. Lymphocytes from carriers of pathogenic BRCA2 and by means of interphase FISH for the presence of t(8;14)(q24;32), t(14;18) RAD51C mutations revealed a significantly higher mean aberration frequen- (q32;q21) or t(11;14)(q13;q32) in 28 B-cell lymphomas known to carry cy than from controls (p<0.001, student’s t-test). Patients carrying an UCV these characteristic translocations. Simultaneous immunofluorescence stai- in BRCA2 could be allocated to either the pathogenic or the control group. ning of endothelial cells using a vWF-antibody and of B-lymphocytes using a In summary, our assay may enable the identification of HRR deficiency irre- PAX5-antibody was performed to accurately distinguish these cell populati- spective of the underlying gene defect and may also serve as a biomarker for ons from each other. All investigated samples carried the hallmark translo- sensitivity to PARP inhibition. cations in a significant number of B-lymphocytes. Additionally, we observed P07.06 FISH patterns suggesting presence of these translocations in cells surroun- Chromosomal aberration in cervical cancer: FISH or chips? ding blood vessels as well as in some vascular intraluminal and intramural V. Vranova1,2, L. Moukova3, I. Slamova1, H. Filkova2, P. Kuglik1,2; 1Institute of Experimental Biology, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech nuclei. Nevertheless, we failed to unambiguously distinguish nuclei from en- Republic, 2Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, dothelial cells from lymphocyte nuclei. Thus, we investigated whether clonal 3Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute, Brno, B-lymphocytes invading blood vessel carrying the entity typical hallmark Czech Republic. translocation could be mistaken for endothelial cells. Indeed, immunofluo- rescence staining showed intramural and intraluminal PAX5-positive cells in vessels and vessel walls. In summary, we failed to unambiguously assign Cervical tumorigenesis is linked with numerous chromosomal aberrations. clonal cells carrying the lymphoma-specific translocations to endothelial Different studies investigated alterations in this cancer mainly by fluo- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 203 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 in situ rescence hybridization (FISH) or metaphase comparative genomic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL), occurring in more than 50% of CLL cases. It hybridization (mCGH). Currently, high throughput methods such as array- is found predominantly as an interstitial deletion, less frequently in a form comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) together with single nu- of reciprocal translocation with deletion at 13q14 breakpoint. The parallel cleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays are available to study genome-wide presence of two clones with the different forms of 13q14 deletion has been aberrations. noticed only once so far. By detailed metaphase analysis (G-banding, FISH) We identified highly complex large-scale alterations of 13 cervical tumors on IL2 and DSP30 stimulated CLL cells, we revealed the translocation form (spinocellular carcinoma stage IA-IIIB) using genome-wide microarrays of 13q14 deletion in 13 of 135 patients with 13q14 deletion (13/135; 10%). (Agilent). The most common regions of copy number gain were 3q22qter The coexistence of a clone with the deletion at reciprocal translocation bre- (6/13), 20q11q13.3 (5/13) and 8q21.3qter (4/13) and of copy number loss akpoint and another clone with the interstitial deletion was found in 5 of 13q11q21.2 (4/13), 3q and 4q (3/13). Patients with lymph nodes positive the translocation cases (5/13; 38%). In one of them a subsequent clonal for metastases had often duplications in regions 2p, 5p and 19p and deletion analysis proved an independent origin of the both coexisting clones, giving at 3p compared to patients with lymph nodes negative for metastases. the evidence of their purely coincidental presence. We showed the coexi- However, array-CGH was not able to detect gains at 3q26 and 8q21 in four stence of clones with the translocation form of 13q14 deletion and clones patients as compared to resultsh ToEbRtaCi ned by CerviMcaYlC FCISH Probe Kit (Ab- with the interstitial deletion not to be rare. As a mark of clonal evolution bott). This kit allows simultaneous identification of HPV-infected cells and it could signify an increased risk of disease progression. Based on our pre- copy number aberration of the (3q26) and genes (8q21). Fai- sented results we assume that 13q14 reciprocal translocation with deletion lure of array-CGH in detecting these aberrations can be probably explained at the breakpoint could be formed independently from formation of more by their presence in HPV-infected cells only whose abundance was very low common interstitial deletion also in other translocation cases. in the four patients. P07.09 Array-CGH represents a perspective method for whole-genome screening Detection of chromosomal abnormalities in chronic lymphocytic and identification of potential biomarkers, which may enable a better risk leukemia (CLL): FISH or MLPA? stratification of HPV-positive women. A. Busch, A. Glaser; Nevertheless, reliable determination of DNA copy number aberrations re- Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany. quires either tissue sections from representative regions of tumor or FISH analyses of selected genes. Supported by grant IGA MZ NT11089-4/2010 Chronic lymphoid leukaemia (CLL) is a genetically heterogeneous disease P07.07 with recurrent chromosomal aberrations of prognostic significance. Current Mapping of the minimal deleted region in 13q in chronic lymphocytic strategies for detecting chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) include Fluo- leukaemia with concomitant translocation-deletion of 13q14 by rescence In Situ Hybridisation (FISH) and cytogenetics. Multiplex Ligation- mBAND technique dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) is a multiplex PCR method detecting L. L. P. Siu, K. F. Wong; abnormal copy numbers in genomic DNA. Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong. We studied a cohort of bone marrow samples from suspected leukemia pati- Background: ents and compared the results of FISH with cytogenetics and MLPA. We used in situ a panel of 7 FISH hybridisation probes known to be of diagnostic relevance We have previously demonstrated by interphase fluorescence in CLL. Concordance between MLPA and FISH was excellent, when the ab- hybridization (I-FISH) submicroscopic 13q deletion in chronic lym- normal clone was present more than 50% of the cell population. The use of phocytic leukaemia (CLL) with 13q14 translocation. In this study, we em- MLPA allowed the identification of small alterations undetected by FISH, but ployed multi-colour banding technique (mBAND) to further elucidate the e.g. translocations remain undetected. MLPA additional with cytogenetics tMraenthsloodcast aionnd b Rreeaskuplto:i nt and map the minimal deleted region in chromo- represents a useful technique for the characterization of genomic changes some 13. in CLL. It is easy to use, faster and less cost intensive than FISH. 6 cases of CLL with 13q14 translocation diagnosed . during 1997-2011 were available for study (Table 1). mBAND hybridizati- P07.10 on with direct fluorochrome-labeled region-specific partial chromosome Correlation between interphase FISH and real-time quantitative PCR paints on chromosome 13 (mB13) was performed on fixed cytogenetic for the therapeutic monitoring of chronic myeloid leukaemia preparations. Metaphases were captured on Carl Zeiss Z2 microscope using W. S. Wong, L. L. P. Siu, H. F. Wong, K. F. Wong; Isis/mFISH imaging software (MetaSystems, Altlussheim, Germany) after Haematology Laboratory, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong. overnight hybridization. Analysis was based on fluorescent banded pro- Background file along the length of individual chromosome. Metaphases showing 13q translocation provided positive identification of the tumour clone. Deleted 1C3oqn cwluass isohno:w n in 5 cases with the deleted 13q breakpoints unambiguously Both interphase FISH (I-FISH) and real-time quantitative PCR (RQPCR) have identified. The minimal deleted region was mapped to 13q14.3q21.1. been used for the monitoring of patients with chronic myeloid leukaemia mBAND is a high-resolution tool for genetic study at single-cell (CML) on tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) therapy. We compared the interna- single-metaphase level with a high sensitivity and specificity. It can refine tMioentahlo sdtasn adnadr dRizeesdu lrtatio (ISR) from the RQPCR test with I-FISH on patients the breakpoints for a more definitive karyotype. Our study has helped con- with standard 9;22 reciprocal translocation and variant 9;22. fTiarmbl eth 1e: fCrLeqLu wenitth o 1cc3uqr1r4en tcrea nosf ldoeclaettieodn 13q in CLL with 13q translocation, and map the minimal deleted region to 13q14.3q21.I1-F.ISH 1B0C4R s-AamBLp1le]sA frBoLm1 54 patients with CML on TKI were studied during 2B0C0R8- CaseG-band karyotype for mBAND for A- B2L011 1. 14 patients have ≥3 serial samples. ISR was derived from ratio of chromosome 13 13q14 [ / transcript. I-FISH was performed with dual-fusion probes. ISR and I-FISH results were analyzed according to the cytoge- 1 46,XY,t(11;13)(q12;q14)[10]/46,XY[10] deleted del(13) (q14.3q21.3) netics response (Table 1). ISR showed wide inter-individual variation for the 2 46,XY,t(7;13)(p15;q14)[4]/46,XY,inv(14) deleted del(13)(q14.2q22) same tumor load as shown by I-FISH. The time to reach major molecular re- (q11q32)[2]/46,XY[18] and del(13)(q31q34) 46,XY,-10,t(10;13;14)(q26;q14;q24),+12,der(17)t(10;17) no del(13)(q21.3q22) sponse (ISR ≤ 0.1%) ranged from 152 - 744 days after complete cytogenetic 3 (q11;p12)[17]/45,XY,idem,dic(4;6)(p12;:?:;p23)[2]/46,XY[1] deletion no deletion rCeomnicslsuisoino ans shown by I-FISH. The falling trend of I-FISH correlated with ISR 46,XY,del(2)(p21),t(11;17)(q13;q25), 4 deleted del(13)(q14.1q21.1) except in 2 patients, with one of them having a variant 9;22 translocation. t(13;15)(q14;q26)[15]/46,XY[5] 5 46,XY,t(10;13)(p11.2;q14)[2]/46,XY, deleted del(13)(q14.3q21.3) BCR-ABL1 t(14;22)(q11.2,q13)[1]/46,XY[17] I-FISH is a better indicator of the tumour load especially in patients with 6 46,XY,?ins(21;13)(q11.2;q12q14)[2]/46,XY[17] deleted del(13)(q14.1q21.3) variant 9;22 translocation while RQPCR is sensitive to detect fu- P07.08 sion. Further study is required to determine the relationship between ISR Independent coexistence of clones with 13q14 deletion at reciprocal values and cytogenetic responses as previous studies were mostly based on translocation breakpoint and 13q14 interstitial deletion in chronic the latter. lymphocytic leukemia Table 1. Correlation of ISR and I-FISH in classical and variant 9;22 translo- M. Hruba, P. Dvorak, L. Weberova, I. Subrt; cation. Institute of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and University Hospital in Pilsen, Pilsen, Czech Republic. 13q14 deletion is the most frequent chromosomal aberration in chronic www.eshg.org www.eshg.org204 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P07.13 Cytogenetic studies on a chronic myeloid leukemia case developing Group N = I-FISH, % ISR into acute myeloid leukemia after treatment with imatinib. CCgR, FISH: 0% 36 W. G. Kroes1, E. den Ouden1, E. Kok1, J. Kerkhoffs2; CCgR, classical 9;22 31 0 0 - 1.481, median = 0.141 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2HAGA Hospital, The Hague, (1/31, ISR = 10.243) Netherlands. CCgR, variant 9;22 5 0 0.006 - 1.962, median = 0.126 PCgR, FISH: <35% 31 PCgR, classical 9;22 25 1 - 33.5 0.303 - 18.669, median = 2.02 PCgR, variant 9;22 6 2.5 - 29.5 1.431 - 10.337, median = 3.548 A 34-year-old male was diagnosed with CML in April 2006. At the time of No CgR, FISH >= 35% 37 diagnosis all metaphases in the bone marrow showed t(9;22)(q34;q11.2). No CCgR, classical 9;22 22 49 - 100 3.58 - 63.583, median = 26.497 After one year of daily treatment with 400 mg imatinib no Philadelphia- No CCgR, variant 9;22 15 41.5 - 99.510.823 - 56.845, median = 18.962 chromosome positive metaphases were found in the bone marrow. FISH P07.11 showed 2.5% of the 200 interphase nuclei positive for BCR/ABL1. Surpri- Intermittent Dosing of Imatinib Mesylate in the Treatment of singly, a monosomy 7 was detected in 15 out of 20 metaphases, whereas at Childhood Chronic Myeloid Leukemia: a Case Report. this time no clinical signs of MDS or AML were present. Three months later, M. Adamaki1, A. Athanasiadou1, Y. P. Ktena1, A. Divane2, M. Moschovi1; cytogenetic studies of bone marrow demonstrated 3 clones: 46,XY,t(9;22) 1Hematology-Oncology Unit, First Department of Pediatrics, National University of (q34;q11.2)[2]/45,XY,-7[13]46,XY[5]. There were still no morphological Athens, Aghia Sofia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2“Life Code”, Genetic Centre for signs of MDS or AML. After three more years, monosomy 7 was detected in Research and Diagnosis, Athens, Greece. all metaphases and by FISH in 90% of 200 interphase nuclei. Again FISH for Introduction: BCR/ABL1 was negative. This time bone marrow cytology showed AML. The patient received one cycle of induction therapy with cytarabine and dau- Chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is rare in childhood (less norubicine till now. than 5% of all childhood leukemias). The main characteristic is the Philadel- Transformation of a Ph-negative clone with monosomy 7 and no clinical pPhuirap cohsreo:mosome and the tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate is the signs of MDS into overt AML is a rare but recurrent phenomenon. Therefore treatment of choice. patients showing monosomy 7 during imatinib treatment should be closely Material- MToe tihnvoeds:t igate whether intermittent dosing of imatinib is also an monitored both cytogenetically and clinically for signs of MDS or AML. effective treatment in minimizing the adverse effect. P07.14 A9 6-year-old girl presented with abdo9minal pain, leu- Effect of new tubulin inhibitors drugs in colon cancer cells kocytosis (27.8x10/L) and thrombocytosis (1.072x10/L). Bone mar- A. Pascual-Rodriguez1, C. Jimenez Criado1, R. Álvarez Lozano2, E. Caballero Salvador2, row studies suggested the diagnosis of CML. Cytogenetic studies revealed R. González Sarmiento1; 46,XX,t(9;22)(q34;q11). The translocation was confirmed b2y FISH and RT- 1Centro de Investigación del Cáncer, Salamanca, Spain, 2Departamento de Química PCR. Treatment with imatinib was initiated at 400mg/m/day, followed Farmaceútica. Universidad de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. 200mg/m2/day when minimal residual disease (MRD) was unde2tectable. MRD reappeared positive, so the dose was adjusted to 400mg/m/day but tRhees upalttsie: nt experienced dry skin and significant hair loss. To avoid toxicity, Introduction: Cell cytoskeleton is composed of microtubules formed by po- the drug was given on alternate months (one on/one off). lymerization of tubulin. Antitumor drugs that perform on the microtubules ConclusioMnRsD: is undetectable and the patient is in stable remission three are divided in three groups according to the zone of interaction: Vinca, Col- years following the end of the treatment. chicine and Taxan-binding domain. First and second one prevent tubulin po- No guidelines exist regarding dosage and duration of treat- lymerization. Paclitaxel is a microtubule stabilizing agent. We have studied ment with imatinib, especially for childhood CML. In this report, intermit- the effect of three new molecules that bind on the colchicine domain in two tent administration of imatinib proved efficient, both in achieving complete cell lines of colon cancer. stable remission and in minimizing toxicity. Experimental design: Cell lines were treated with drugs A, B and C, derived P07.12 from the isocombretastatin and Paclitaxel with a concentration of 50 nm. Clonal Evolution in Chronic Lymphocytic Leukaemia The cells were collected at times 24, 48 and 72h after incubation with the C. Lopez1,2, D. Costa1,2, J. Delgado3,2, C. Gómez1,2, A. Arias1,2, C. Muñoz1,2, M. Rozman1,2, D. drug, using as negative control untreated cells (0h). Protein were removed Colomer1,2, N. Villamor1,2, E. Campo1,2, A. Carrió1,2; from each culture and we prepared cultures for immunofluorescence analy- 1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut d‘Investigacions sis. Expression studies of tubulin was performed by Western Blot. We per- Biomédiques Agustí Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain, 3Hematology Department. formed a study of cell death by flow cytometry. Finally, we made a study of Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. immunolocalization and stability of microtubules by immunofluorescence. INTRODUCTION: Results: Our results show that none of the new drugs reduce or increase the amount of tubulin. The viability study showed that Drug A and B not induce Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is characterized by va- apoptosis, however, Paclitaxel and Drug C significantly increased apoptosis riable clinical course. The most frequent chromosomal abnormalities are after 24 hours of exposure. Drug A does not induce changes in the microtu- trisomy 12, deletion of 13q14.3, 11q22.3 and 17p13; all of these are a rele- bules at 72h, Drug C and Drug B produce a destabilization of microtubules vant prognostic factor. Clonal evolution (CE) is defined as acquired aberrati- and inhibit tubulin polymerization. on during the disease course. Conclusion: None of these drugs improve the effect of paclitaxel. The goal of this study is to determine the frequency of CE in CLL patients Supported by FIS PI 10/00219 uMsAinTgE RcoIAnvLe AnNtiDon MalE aTnHdO mDSo:l ecular cytogenetics and its relationship with prognostic markers such as CD38 and ZAP70. P07.15 Seventy-three patients with CLL were analysed Detection of donor cells with a clonal abnormality 20 years after by conventional and molecular cytogenetics (FISH) at diagnosis and during transplantation: Is this evidence of Donor Cell Leukemia (DCL)? G. V. N. Velagaleti, V. Ortega, D. Means; follow-up. Median time of observation after first analysis was 32 months University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, United States. (range 5 -116). The second study was undertaken at follow-up (n=34), at cli- nRiEcSaUl pLTroSg: ression before treatment (n=24), and at relapse after treatment (n=15). DCL is a rare complication following BMT with unknown etiology. We report CE was observed in 38/73 (52%) of the patients using both tech- a patient who showed no cytogenetic evidence of engraftment for 20 years niques. The 70% (14/20) of patients with CE by conventional cytogenetics following which donor cells were detected with a clonal abnormality. A 59- had normal karyotype at diagnosis. On the other hand, the 63% (19/30) of year-old female diagnosed with CML in 1986 underwent an allogenic BMT patients with CE by molecular cytogenetics had FISH abnormalities at dia- from her brother in 1987. Subsequently, she developed graft-versus-host gnosis. disease in 1990, suggesting possible rejection of donor cells. Afte rrelapse in CE was detected during follow-up (14/34); at progression before treatment 2000 her chromosome analysis demonstrated the karyotype 46,X,-X, t(1;7) (12/24); and relapse after treatment (12/15) which was correlated with CE (p10;p10), add(4)(p16),t(9;22) (q34;q11.2),-15,+3mar[16]/46,XX,der(9) (CpO=N0C.0L4U2S)I. OInN r: elation to ZAP-70, it was differentially expressed in patients add(9)(p24)t(9;22)(q34;q11), add(18)(p11.3),-19,der(22)t(9;22)[4]. Since with CE (p=0.039). Gleevec treatment was unsuccessful due to intolerance, follow-up studies in Clonal evolution is a significant event in CLL patients. Con- 2006 revealed persistence of known Ph+ clones and an additional Ph+ clone. ventional and molecular cytogenetics were necessary to detect clonal evolu- Upon treatment with dasatinib she achieved partial remission and chromo- tion. We believe that CE could be a new prognostic factor and an indicator of some studies in 2007 showed, for the first time, donor cells with trisomy 8 change in clinical course of the disease. (T8) and recipient cells with the Ph+ clone; 46,XX,t(9;19)(p24;p13.1),t(9;22) (q34;q11.2),t(14;18)(q24;11.2)[2] www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 205 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 //47,XY,+8[3]/46,XY[20]. Subsequent studies demonstrated donor cells Pasu arnp oadsed:itional adverse risk factor, among other prognostic markers, in leu- with T8 in 15-35% of metaphases. Constitutional T8 was ruled out as the kemia. donor’s blood karyotype was normal. T8 is an additional anomaly in 10% of To present the case of a pediatric patient with BCR/ABL1 positive CML cases emerging at the time of acute transformation and after imatinib CML who was treated with imatinib and achieved remission, but transfor- treatment. Although engraftment is an immediate response, the cytogenetic mMeadte troia lly-mMpehthooidd :b last crisis (BC) with detected deletion of Ikaros within evidence of donor cells did not become apparent due to the proliferative do- 205 days following diagnosis. minance of Ph+ clones. Dasatinib treatment in our patient effectively remo- A 12,5-year-old girl presented with leukocytosis and ved the dominant Ph+ clones, facilitating the detection of donor cells with bone marrow (BM) studies suggested the diagnosis of chronic phase (CP) T8. Since the etiology of DCL and the significance of the T8 in donor cells in RCMesLu. lCtsy:t ogenetic analysis demonstrated 246,XX,t(9;22)(q34;q11). The pati- our patient are unclear, the patient is monitored closely for secondary MDS ent was treated withth imatinib (400mg/m/day) and achieved remission. /AML. On the 205 day, the blood test revealed a 73% blast count and BM P07.16 studies suggested a diagnosis of B-cell ALL. Cytogenetic findings revealed Variant chromosomal translocation in Ewings Sacoma 46,XX,der(3)t(1;3)(q12;p26),t(9;22)(q34;q11). FISH analyses were negati- S. K. Kousar Jahan1,2; ve for translocations, but three copies of PBX1 were detected. MLPA analysis 1Al Jawhara Center for Molecular Medicine Bahrain, Manama, Bahrain, 2Kidwai revealed a deletion in Ikaros, including exons 4-8, and in the EBF1 gene, in Memorial Iinstitute of Oncology, Bangalore, India. exon 1. No copy number variation was found in the BM sample from the CML diagnosis. The patient received chemotherapy according to the ALL IC-BFM 2C0o0n9cl pursoiotoncso:l plus imatinib (400mg/m²/day), but failed to achieve comple- This study reports the cytogenetic findings on a fine needle aspiration te remission and the duration of survival from the onset of BC was 75 days. (FNA) specimen from ten patients with Ewing’s Sarcoma (ES) using G-ban- Abnormalities of Ikaros are associated with a very poor out- ding technique. Out of ten ES cases t(11;22)(q24;q12) was observed in 6 come and a high rate of relapse in childhood leukemia. Deletion of Ikaros cases(60%), only del(22)(q12) in one case(10%) and variant translocation was not detected in CP-CML, but was identified as an acquired lesion in the t(1;11;22)(q31;q24;q12), t(11;12;22)(q24;p13;q12) & t(4;22)(q35;q12) in BC-CML sample. This finding suggests that alterations in Ikaros contribute 3 cases (30%). In third variant case only chromosome 22q12 was involved to the pathogenesis of BCR/ABL1 ALL. in translocation and del (22) (q12) (EVS gene) in another suggests that the P07.19 rearrangement of 22q12 is the cytogenetic hallmark of ES. Specific chromo- Prognostic Genetic Markers in Glial Tumors somal abnormalities often correlate with particular morphologic or pheno- C. Karakurt1, M. Ozdemir1, A. Arslantas2, E. Ciftci3, B. Durak Aras1, O. Cilingir1, A. I. typic subtypes of tumor and play an important role in prognosis. Gurler1, S. Artan1; P07.17 1Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, Gain of the short arm of chromosome 2 in Chronic Lymphocytic Eskisehir, Turkey, 2Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Department of Neurosurgery, Eskisehir, Turkey, 3Eskisehir Osmangazi University, Medical Faculty, Leukaemia Department of Pathology, Eskisehir, Turkey. M. Stoklasova1, T. Sablaturova1, A. Strnkova1, L. Dostalova1, M. Brejcha2, Y. Brychtova3, J. Malcikova3, D. Adamova4, V. Heinzova4, M. Urbankova5, J. Zivna6, I. Zygulova4, N. Rytikova7, M. Matuska8; 1P+R LAB a.s., Novy Jicin, Czech Republic, 2Hospital Novy Jicin a.s, Novy Jicin, Czech Glioblastoma is the most common primary brain tumor in adults and the Republic, 3University Hospital Brno and Faculty of Medicine Masaryk University, most malignant types of human cancers with median survival time of <1 year Department of Internal Medicine – Hematology and Oncology, Brno, Czech Republic, detected in a population-based study. Although histopathological diagnosis 4Silesian Hospital in Opava, Opava, Czech Republic, 5Hospital Sumperk a.s., Sumperk, of GBM is known as a gold standard, the primary and secondary subtypes Czech Republic, 6Hospital Hranice a.s, Hranice na Morave, Czech Republic, 7Hospital that have at least two distinct pathways contributing to the tumorigenesis Krnov, Krnov, Czech Republic, 8Faculty Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic. of GBM, are histologically indistinguishable and molecular markers are ne- cessary for prognostic predictions of the GBM cases. Frequent mutations of the genes involved in G1-S cell cycle transition control have been previously Background: Chromosomal abnormalities are important prognostic factors reported in both subtypes of the GBM. This study was planned to determine in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL). Interphase FISH (I-FISH) is stan- prognostic values of growth-control molecules including MDM2, CDK4 pro- dard method for detection of important aberrations in CLL. However, pro- tooncogenes and RB1tumor suppressor gene in primary GBMs. Of 40 cases, gress in cultivation technique such as application of CpG-oligonucleotides 26 were male and 14 were females and the mean age was 55.45+/- 2.25. and IL-2 as B-cell mitogens allows to reveal another chromosomal aberrati- Since no brain tumor history, the GBM subtype of all was primary GBM. The ons. Recently, gain of the short arm of chromosome 2 (2p) was found as one genomic copy aberrations of the genes were determined by the FISH assay of recurrent aberrations. in tumor sections of the cases. Of 40 cases, no gene copy number aberrations Aims: Metaphase cytogenetic and molecular-cytogenetic analyses were per- was seen in four cases whereas the MDM2, CDK4 gene amplifications and formed in 477 CLL-patients from 2008 to 2011 to find out gain of 2p. RB1 gene deletion were detected in 62,5%, 60.0% and 47.5% of the cases, Methods: Conventional cytogenetics was performed on peripheral blood or respectively. The copy number alterations for all analysed genes were seen bone marrow samples cultured in medium with stimulants. I-FISH was per- in seven cases. However, no significant differences between the worse survi- formed on unstimulated cells for detection of trisomy 12, del(11q), del(13q), val and genetic markers was highlighted. Further detailed study related with del(17p). Gain of 2p was confirmed by multicolor FISH, the range of the gain genetic and epigenetic markers in larger population is necessary for clinical was determined by multicolor banding. outcome of patients with primary GBM. Results: Gain of 2p was detected in 20/477 (4,2 %) cases. In 17/20 cases, . the partial trisomy of 2p was identified as a result of unbalanced transloca- P07.20 tion with other chromosomes and direct duplication of 2p was presented in Genotoxicity of hepatitis B virus 3/20 cases. Four of all these cases had jumping translocation of 2p (in one H. G. Durakbasi-Dursun1, A. G. Zamani2, O. Ural3, D. Fındık4, M. N. Somuncu5; case together with direct duplication of 2p). I-FISH revealed aberrations in 1Department of Medical Biology Meram Medical Faculty, Konya University, Konya, 19/20 cases. The most frequent abnormalities were del(13q) and del(11q). Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Meram Medical Faculty, Konya University, Conclusion: Mitotic stimulation using CpG-oligonucleotides and IL-2 is an Konya, Turkey, 3Department of Infectious Diseases Selcuklu Medical Faculty, Selcuk efficient method that can improve quality of cytogenetic analysis. Detection University, Konya, Turkey, 4Department of Microbiology, Selcuklu Medical Faculty, Selcuk of another aberrations i.e. gain of 2p provide new prognostic information in University, Konya, Turkey, 5Department of Medical Genetics Meram Medical Faculty, CLL. These findings can significantly modify prognosis of patients evaluated Konya University, Konya, Turkey. by FISH. Background: P07.18 A pediatric chronic myeloid leukemia case progressing to blast crisis Chronic hepatitis B is one of the major causes of cirrhosis and characterized by the deletion of Ikaros. hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide. An estimated more than 350 million A. Athanasiadou1, M. Adamaki1, G. Lambrou1, Y. P. Ktena1, V. Papasavva2, K. people are chronically infected with hepatitis B virus (HBV), characterized Dioikitopoulou2, A. Divane2, M. Moschovi1; with various clinical states. Although HBV shows mainly pathologic effect 1Hematology-Oncology Unit, First Department of Pediatrics, National University of on liver, it can also infect peripheral mononuclear cells. Since HBV has the Athens, Aghia Sofia Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2“Life Code”, Genetic Centre for capability of integrating in the human genome and causing chromosomal Research and Diagnosis, Athens, Greece. rearrangements, it might act as a clastogenic factor and exert a direct geno- Introduction: toxic effect on lymphocytes. Aim: In this study, potential genotoxic effect of HBV was investigated on www.eshg.org Rearrangements in the gene IKZF1 (Ikaros) are conwsiwderwed.e shpegr.iophregral lymphocytes in chronic HBV patients ,HBV carriers and normal 206 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 2Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Oncology, Warsaw, Poland. controls by the micronucleus (MN) technique, is used as an index of chro- mosomal damage. Medulloblastoma (MB) is a highly malignant primary brain tumor that origi- Method: The MN assay was performed on peripheral blood lymphocyte cul- nates in the cerebellum or posterior fossa and the most common malignant tures from chronic HBV patients, HBV carriers and controls. The cells with brain tumor in childhood. The exact pathogenesis of MB remains unclear. 1-4 nuclei and micronucleated cells were scored. Then frequency of micro- Up to date multiple molecular dysfunctions are known to be responsible nuclei and cytokinesis- blocked proliferation index (CBPI) were calculated. for medulloblastoma formation, including aberrant activation of the Sonic The obtained data were compaired between HBV patients, HBV carriers and Hedgehog or Wingless signaling pathways as well as mutational inactivation controls. of DNA repair genes results in genome instability. The most common genetic Results: There were no differences among HBV patients, HBV carriers and alterations identified in medulloblastoma is isochromosome 17 (currently controls in terms of MN frequency and CBPI. reported in 30-50% of patients). Others less common chromosomal changes Conclusion: Our findings suggest that HBV does not show genotoxic effect at observed in MB include chromosome 6, 8, 9q, 16, 18 and X. least as MN formation and CBPI. In our project on medulloblastoma’s genetic background we determined P07.22 the frequency of the most common chromosomal aberrations in Polish The detection rate of chromosomal abnormalities in mature patients with MB. We screened a total of 21 patients, using a multiplex lymphocytic neoplasms is increased by adding CpG oligonucleotide ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis (MLPA) and identified 11 DSP30 and IL-2 to the culture medium carriers (52,3%) of chromosome 17 aberrations (including 8 patients with H. Devos, A. De Backer, S. Scheers, J. Wauters, G. Mortier, E. Van Assche; isochromosome - 38%) and 5 carriers (29,4%) with abnormalities within Center of Medical Genetics, Edegem, Belgium. chromosome 6. All the identified changes were somatic mutations. These findings suggest that the identified common chromosomal aberrations are the consequence of another molecular mechanism involved in the pathoge- It has been shown that the addition of the CpG-oligodeoxynucleotides DSP30 nesis of medulloblastoma. The analysis on the genetic background of MB in and IL-2 to the culture medium increases the mitotic activity of chronic lym- the Polish population will be continued. phatic leukemia cells and consequently the detection rate of chromosomal The study was financed by the National Science Centre, project no. 6917/B/ abnormalities in this malignant haematological disorder. With this study we P01/2011/40. aimed to investigate the effect of this addition in the diagnosis of a broader P07.25 group of mature lymphoid malignancies. From January till December 2010, Comprehensive high-resolution genomic profiling and cytogenetics of bone marrow samples for staging of lymphoid malignancies were cultured two pediatric and one adult medulloblastoma in either a conventional medium or in a medium with DSP30 and IL-2. Bet- L. Xu1,2, H. Holland1, P. Ahnert1,3,4, H. Kirsten1,3,4, R. Koschny5, M. Bauer6, R. Schober6, J. ween 5 and 20 G-banded metaphases were analysed in each sample. Meixensberger2, W. Krupp2; Classification of the chromosomes and definition of a clone were made ac- 1Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine (TRM), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, cording to ISCN (2009). In total, 233 samples were included in the study. In Germany, 2Department of Neurosurgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 99% of the samples a successful stimulation for metaphase generation was 3Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 4LIFE Center (Leipzig Interdisciplinary Research Cluster of Genetic obtained. In 34/233 samples an abnormal karyotype was observed, sugge- Factors, Phenotypes and Environment), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, stive for invasion of lymphoid malignant cells into the bone marrow. In 15 5Department of Internal Medicine, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, of those 34 abnormal samples, the aberration was only found in the cultures 6Division of Neuropathology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. with added DSP30 and IL2. However, in one sample the chromosomal ab- normality was only observed in cultures with the conventional medium and not in those with DSP30 and IL2. For this patient, the final diagnosis was not Medulloblastoma (WHO grade IV) is a rare malignant, invasive embryonal a lymphoid neoplasm but acute myeloid leukemia. tumor which mainly occurs in children and represents less than 1% of all Our findings confirm that stimulation of cultures with DSP30 and IL-2 in adult brain tumors. Systematical comprehensive cytogenetic and molecular case of mature lymphoid malignancies results in an increased detection rate biological analyses on medulloblastomas are very limited but necessary to of clonal abnormalities. provide more detailed information. P07.23 Therefore, we performed comprehensive cytogenetic analyses (blood and A new type of karyotype evolution? tissue) of two pediatric and one adult medulloblastoma, WHO grade IV, using K. Shirneshan, J. Schanz, C. Ganster, F. Braulke, D. Haase; trypsin-Giemsa staining (GTG-banding), spectral karyotyping (SKY, only tis- Department of Hematology and Oncology, Goettingen, Germany. sues), and molecular karyotyping using genome wide 6.0 SNP-arrays. We confirmed frequently detected chromosomal aberrations in medullobla- stoma, such as +7q, -8p/q, -9q, -11q, -12q, +17q, and identified novel gene- Cytogenetic findings play an important role in the diagnosis and assessment tic events. Applying SNP array, we identified constitutional de novo losses of prognosis of myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and are emerging as an 5q21.1, 15q11.2, 17q21.31, 19p12, (pediatric medulloblastoma), 9p21.1. important factor in treatment allocation and in selection and monitoring 19p12, 19q13.3, 21q11.2 (adult medulloblstoma) and gains 16p11.1-16- response to therapy. Abnormalities involving chromosome 7 are frequent p11.2, 18p11.32, Yq11.223-Yq11.23 (pediatric medulloblastoma), Xp22.31 in MDS and suggest an intermediate to poor prognosis. In 2% of MDS pa- (adult medulloblastoma), possibly representing inherited causal events tients we observed a coexistence of monosomy 7 and 7q-deletions at the for medulloblastoma formation. We show evidence for somatic segmental same time by FISH analysis of CD34+ peripheral blood cells. Two patients uniparental disomy in regions 1p36, 6q16.3, 6q24.1, 14q21.2, 17p13.3 and showed an increase of -7 clone size parallel to a decrease of 7q- clone size 17q22, not previously described for primary medulloblastoma. during progress. Now we report a case of a 72-year old man with suspected Analyses of tumors and matched normal tissues (blood) with a combination MDS. Analysis of bone marrow revealed MDS RA. Banding analysis of bone of SNP arrays and complementary techniques will help to further elucidate marrow cells showed three clones with different chromosome 7 abnorma- potentially causal genetic events for tumorigenesis of pediatric and adult lities: del 7q in 22%, ring chromosome 7 in 22% and monosomy 7 in 11% medulloblastoma. of the metaphases. P07.26 We hypothesize that chromosome 7 is subject to karyotype evolution during Analysis of chromosomal abnormalities in phenotypically normal MDS progression. Due to the existence of the third clone with r(7) we assu- plasma cells detected by I-FISH in monoclonal gammopathy of me that r(7) is a transitional stage of karyotype evolution between 7q- and undetermined significance -7 which is resulting of loss of telomere ends in 7q- cells. FISH analysis con- A. Mikulasova1,2,3, P. Kuglik1,2, J. Smetana1,2, H. Greslikova1,2, R. Kupska1, P. Nemec1,2, L. firmed deletion of telomeres in r(7). Follow up analyses of this patient will Rihova1,3, M. Klincova3, R. Hajek1,3,4; allow further examination of karyotype evolution involving chromosome 7 1Babak Myeloma Group, Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, abnormalities. Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Experimental Biology, P07.24 Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 3Laboratory of The molecular background of the medulloblastoma - identification of Experimental Hematology and Cell Immunotherapy, Department of Clinical Hematology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic, 4Department of Internal Medicine – the most common chromosomal aberrations in Polish patients. Hematooncology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. J. Trubicka1, A. Tańska1, M. Perek-Polnik2, D. Abramczuk-Piekutowska1, E. Ciara1, D. Jurkiewicz1, S. Łuczak1, M. Pelc1, M. Borucka-Mankiewicz1, P. Kowalski1, K. Chrzanowska1, M. Krajewska-Walasek1; 1Children’s Memorial Health Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, Warsaw, Poland, Monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) is a prema- lignant stage of multiple myeloma. MGUS consists of phenotypically normal (nPCs; CD138+19+56-) and abnormal malign plasma cells (aPCs; CD138+19- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 207 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 56+/-). Combination of fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) and inter- in one or more of the major myeloid cell lines, ineffective haematopo iesis, phase fluorescence in situ hybridization (I-FISH) allows monitoring of spe- and an increased risk of developing acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).Chro- cific chromosomal abnormalities in separate PCs populations. We hypothe- mosomal abnormalities are detected in half of patients with the novo MDS. sized that there should not be any chromosomal abnormalities in nPCs. The infrequency of balanced translocations in MDS makes their identificati- By I-FISH we examined following chromosomal alterations in nPCs and on and reporting imperative for the recognition of the recurrent ones. This aPCs: del(13)(q14), del(17)(p13), IGH rearrangement, 1q21 gain and hy- increases the likelihood of identifying which genes are possibly involved in perdiploidy (+5, +9 and +15). In this study, we chose MGUS patients from the pathogenesis of the neoplasia. whom it was possible to separate nPCs and aPCs and who had IGH rear- OBJECTIVE: Identify the frequency of balanced translocations in a series of rangement in aPCs (n=15). In the nPCs we found only IGH disruption. Total 1,850 patients with MDS included in the database of the Spanish group of of 27% (4/15) and 73% (11/15) MGUS patients have more than 20% and myelodysplastic syndromes (GESMD). 10% aberrant PCs bearing IGH rearrangement not only in aPCs, but also in RESULTS: Two hundred and twelve (11%) balanced translocations were nPCs, respectively. Other chromosomal abnormalities were detected only in diagnosed in 1,850 SMD patients. The chromosomes more frequently invol- aPCs: del(13)(q14) was found in 20% (3/15), 1q21 gain in 7% (1/15) and ved were chromosome 1 (n=34), 2 (n=31), 3 (n=30) and 5 (n=16). All chro- hyperdiploidy in 13% (2/15). mosomes were involved in the translocations, with the exception of chro- In conclusion, we found IGH rearrangement in phenotypically nPCs defined mosomes 19, 20 ,22 and Y. Half of the translocations were found as a part of by CD138+CD19+CD56- and thus we assume that the separation according a complex karyotype (>=3 chromosomal abnormalities). One hundred and to this phenotype is not sufficinent to separate genetically nPCs. seventy-six (83%) translocations were not previously described neither in Support: The study was supported by grants MSM0021622434, MDS nor AML. Nine new apparently recurrent translocations were found in MSM0021622415, GAP304/10/1395, NT11154, NT12425, NT12130. our series. P07.27 CONCLUSION: Balanced translocations were found in 11% of MDS patients, Combination of FISH and array-CGH technique provide powerful half of them being involved in complex karyotypes. diagnostic toll in multiple myeloma: single centre experience P07.29 J. Smetana1,2, J. Frohlich2, R. Zaoralova2, V. Vranova2,3, P. Nemec1,2, H. Greslikova1, R. The low level clones of BM cells with BCR-ABL fusion gene Kupska1, A. Mikulasova1,2, M. Almasi1,4, R. Hajek1,4,5, P. Kuglik1,2,3; amplification have unfavorable influence on CML imatinib therapy 1Babak Myeloma Group, Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, outcome Masaryk University,, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Experimental Biology, S. Mordanov1, A. Zeltzer1, E. Grankina1, O. Ustaeva1, T. Kungurova1, Y. Shatokhin1, S. Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Republic, Kutsev2,3; 3Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech 1Rostov State Medical University, Rostov-on-Don, Russian Federation, 2Federal State Republic, 4Department of Clinical Hematology, University Hospital Brno, Czech Republic, Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the Russian Academy Brno, Czech Republic, 5Department of Internal Hematooncology, University Hospital of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Russian National Research Medical Brno, Czech Republic, Brno, Czech Republic. University named after N.I.Pirogov, Moscow, Russian Federation. Multiple myeloma (MM) is a hematological disease caused by malignant Imatinib CML therapy have shown the high effectiveness but primary and proliferation of clonal plasma cells (PCs). Identification of copy number secondary resistance is observed in some cases. The aimof this study was aberrations (CNAs) in genome of PCs plays a key role in MM pathogenesis to elucidate the influence of low level clones of BM cells with BCR-ABL gene and is supposed to have important prognostic significance for MM patients. amplification (GA) to the results of CML imatinib treatment. Combined utilization of array-CGH technique and FISH proved to be a po- Bone marrow samples from 174 CML patients (pts) were analyzed by cyto- werful toll in MM diagnostic. There are two major genetic entities in MM. genetic and FISH analysis. 200 interphase nuclei were analyzed after hybri- Hyperdiploid group (H-MIgMH), which include about 50% of MM patients and dization with dual color/dual fusion BCR-ABL gene probe (“Vysis”) in each have is commonly characterized by gains of odd-numbered chromosomIgeHs case. According to the ELN criteria (2009) 51 pts have achieved optimal or and lower prevalence oFfG FR3 transMloMcaStEioTns. Non-hyCpCeNrdDi1ploid (NH-MMM)A cFa- suboptimal response, 86 pts have failure and 37 pts have loss of achieved ses are connected with frequent incidence of one of several recurrent response. translocations: 4p16 ( and ), 11q13 ( ) or 16q23 ( ) FISH did not revealed BCR-ABL GA in pts with optimal and suboptimal re- and are associated with adverse prognosis. Using combination of array-CGH sponses. Additional copies of BCR-ABL gene (from 1 to 7) were found in 32 and FISH technique, we found CNAs in 100% of cases (106/106). Most com- (37,2%) pts with primary resistance and in 12 (32,4%) pts with secondary mon CNAs were found in 1p, 1q, 6p, 8p, 13q, 14q, 16q and 22q along with resistance. The probability of complete cytogenetic response (CCyR) achie- gain of extra copies of odd-numbered chromosomes. Hyperdiploidy was vement in pts with BCR-ABL GA was significantly lower than in pts without found in nearly half of the cases (48%) with subgroup of cases with +11 it (31,6% vs. 63,8%, p=0,000025). All Pts with additional copies of BCR-ABL and with gain(1q) anTdP d53el(13q) Translocation t(4;14)(p16;q32) was found gene were subdivided in 4 quartiles (Q) in accordance with % of BM cells in 12% (14/81 cases)and it was more common in non-hyperdiploid cases with BCR-ABL GA. The probability of CCyR achievements in pts of Q1-Q2 (P=0.041), deletion was observed in 14% (15/106). Most common (1-6% BM cells with BCR-ABL GA) do not differ from pts of Q3-Q4 (7-72% homozygous deletions were found 1p32.3, 11q22, 13q14 and 16q22. We BM cells with BCR-ABL GA) (p=0, 86454). conclude that simultaneous utilization of FISH and array-CGH technique In conclusion, the pts with low level clones with BCR-ABL GA have the same provides powerful toll for identification of CNAs in MM patients. This study unfavorable prognosis as well as pts with high level clones. was supported by grants LC06027, MSM0021622434, NS10207, NT11154 P07.30 and NT12130 The clone with trisomy 8 in the culturing bone marrow mesenchymal P07.28 stem cells of healthy donors Balanced translocations in a series of 1,850 patients with V. A. Nikitina, L. D. Katosova; myelodysplastic syndromes. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. D. Costa1, C. Muñoz1, A. Carrió1, D. Berneaga1, C. Gómez1, A. Arias1, M. Belkaid2, E. Campo1, E. Luño3, T. Vallespí4, J. Cervera5, L. Benlloch5, G. Sanz5, J. Hernández6, I. Granada7, A. Insunza8, M. Calasanz9, M. Ardañaz10, F. Solé11, J. Sánchez12, M. Martín13, J. Bargay14, V. Gómez15, C. Cervero16, M. Allegue17, R. Collado18, B. Nomdedeu2; It has been clearly recognized that the hematopoietic microenvironment 1Hematopathology Unit. Hospital Clínic., Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 2Hematology plays a key role in the physiology of the hematopoietic system. Mesenchy- Department. Hospital Clínic., Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 3Hospital Central de Asturias, mal stem cells (MSC) are key components of the hematopoietic microenvi- Asturias, Spain, 4Hospital Vall D‘Hebrón, Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 5Hospital ronment. Several studies have shown that MSC play important role in the Universitario La Fe, Valencia., Spain, 6Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, genesis of some hematological disorders. Spain, 7Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 8Hospital Marqués We have investigated the bone marrow MSCs from healthy donors (n=20), de Valdecillas, Santander, Spain, 9Universidad de Navarra, Navarra, Spain, 10Hospital intended for allogeneic transplantations recipients with hematological dis- Txagorritxu, Vitoria, Spain, 11Hospital de Mar, Barcelona. Catalonia, Spain, 12Hospital Reina Sofía, Madrid, Spain, 13Hospital Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain, 14Hospital orders. We have analyzed the characteristics of bone marrow MSC including Son LLàtzer, Mallorca, Spain, 15Hospital Universitario de la Princesa, Madrid, Spain, the growth pattern, the immunophenotype and their cytogenetic characte- 16Hospital Virgen de la Luz, Cuenca, Spain, 17Complexo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, rization by GTG-banding and FISH with centromere-specific DNA-probes for Pontevedra, Spain, 18Hospital General de Valencia, Valencia., Spain. chromosomes X and 8. Despite decrease proliferation possibilities from the third to the 12 passa- ges, cells kept typical MSC immunophenotype. There were two bmMSC cul- INTRODUCTION: Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) are a group of clonal tures with abnormal clones: clone with trisomthy 8 and monosomy X. Culture haematopoietic stem cell diseases characterized by cytopenia(s), dysplasia with trisomy 8 was explored three times. In 4 passage 24% of all analyzed www.eshg.org www.eshg.org208 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P07.33 th Secondary acute myeloid leukemia after treatment for Neuroblastoma cells had ethxtra chromosome 8. In 6 passage their amount increased to 34% stage III. A Case Report. and in 12 passage it decreased to 16%. In other case the culture of bmMSC M. Moschovi1, A. Athanasiadou1, M. Adamaki1, Y. P. Ktena1, M. I. Rompola2, A. of healthtyh woman had clone with one X chromosome. Tthhe amount of such Karytianou2, A. Divane2; cells in 4 passage was 12% and increased to 91% in 10 passage. 1Hematology-Oncology Unit, First Department of Pediatrics National University of Thereby, the cytogenetic analysis revealed the presence of genetic abnormal Athens, Aghia Sofia Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece, 2“Life Code”, Genetic Centre for Research and Diagnosis, Athens, Greece. cells clones in early passages and persisted till late stages of cultivation. In one of the cultures of healthy donor’s bmMSC was found the clone with tri- Introduction: somy 8, chromosomal abnormality, which is strongly associated with mye- loid malignancies. Therapeutic advances in the treatment of pediatric neoplas- ms have improved the prognosis but increased the risk of developing second P07.31 Micronucleus (MNs) induction and FISH analysis in peripheral mPuarlipgonsaen:t neoplasms (SMNs). Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is the most likely SMN to occur during the first 5 years following treatment. lymphocytes of Tunisian pathology and anatomy laboratory workers To describe the case of a pediatric patient with Neuroblastoma exposed to Formaldehyde (FA) S. Bouraoui1, S. Mougou1, A. Brahem2, H. Benkhelifa1, N. Bouali1, R. Berguiga1, I. Ben M(NaBtLe)r isatla-gMee ItIhI,o wdh: o developed secondary AML at 4 years following cessa- abdallah1, S. Brahem1, O. Mamai1, M. Gribaa1, D. Hmida1, N. Mrizek2, F. Tabka2, H. tion of treatment. Elghezal1, A. Saad1; A 2,5-year-old boy was diagnosed with stage III NBL on 1Department of Cytogenetic and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached University the adrenal and received chemotherapy. No cytogenetic study to NBL was Teaching Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia, 2Department of occupational and environmental performed. The mass progressively decreased and 1 year later the follow-up medicine, Farhat Hached University Teaching Hospital. Sousse, Tunisia, Sousse, Tunisia. was negative. Eight months after the cessation of treatment, a local relapse of NBL was revealed and treated with partial resection, radiotherapy and cRheesmulottsh:erapy. One year later, a second local relapse was revealed and a to- Formaldehyde is an important industrial compound but it is also a naturally tal resectomy of the mass achieved complete remission. occurring biological compound present in all cells and body fluids. The Inter- Four years following the cessation of treatment (eight years after national Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) classified FA as carcinogenic NBL diagnosis), the patient was admitted with anaemia (Hb 7,3 gr/dl) and to humans (group I) based on the studies indicating an increased incidence thrombocytopenia (PLTs 5000/μl). A secondary AML was diagnosed. FISH of nasopharyngeal cancer in populations occupationally exposed to FA. analysis revealed MLL rearrangement in 60% of the nuclei and cytogenetic A genotoxic effect of (FA), in particular micronucleus induction, has been analysis showed 46,XY,t(11;19)(q23;p13.3). The patient received chemo- shown in several studies. The aim of our study was to assess the frequency tChoenrcalpuys aioccnosr:ding to AML-BFM-2004 protocol and MLL rearrangement was of (MNs) and to identify the type of chromosomal damage in Tunisian staff detected in 29.4% on the 15th day of treatment. from pathologic anatomy laboratory of Farhat Hached hospital (Sousse, Tu- NBL is the most common solid tumors in childhood. However, nisia). little is known about the factors that determine the long-term risk of SMN Assessment of chromosomal damage was carried out in peripheral lympho- following this type of cancer. The risk of AML was significantly increased cytes of 31 exposed to (FA). We used 31 controls from the administrative after combined radiation and chemotherapy. department of the same hospital. The clastogenic/ aneugenic effect of FA P07.34 was evaluated using the standard MN assay in combination with the fluo- T/C-FISH studies on telomere length of derivative chromosomes in rescence in situ hybridization (FISH) technique. HeLa cells The results showed a significant increase of the MN frequency in lymphocy- J. Döhla, E. Kornmann, B. Fritz; tes of exposed workers compared with the control group (25.35 ‰± 6.28 Institut für Humangenetik, Marburg, Germany. versus 7.08 ‰± 4.62). As assessed by FISH, the frequency of centromeric micronuclei (C+MN) was higher in exposed subjects than in controls (18.38 ‰±5.94 versus Telomeres play an essential role in preserving chromosomal integrity and 5.03‰±3.64). Among the (C+MN), the frequency of MN containing one cen- genomic stability. To achive a better understanding of telomere length and tromere was significantly higher in pathologist/anatomists than in controls its possible impact on development of chromosome aberrations, we analy- (15.35 ‰ ± 6.0 versus 3.33 ‰±2.74). zed the telomere length of the karyotypically well characterized HeLa cell The increase of the frequency of centromeric micronuclei observed in ex- line. HeLa cells have a hypertriploid chromosome number with specific posed group may suggest a slight aneugenic effect of exposure to FA. numerical deviations and clonally abnormal chromosomes known as HeLa P07.32 signature chromosomes. Karyotypic heterogenity is also present exhibiting Evidence for a pre-malignant cell line in a skin biopsy from a patient ‘shared’ and ‘unique’ karyotypic alterations. To measure the telomere length with Nijmegen Breakage Syndrome (NBS) of individual chromosomes we did sequential analysis of metaphase spreads R. Habib1, H. Neitzel1, B. Goryluk-Kozakiewicz2, K. Chrzanowska2, K. Sperling1; using telomere/centromere fluorescence in situ hybridisation (T/C-FISH) 1Institute of Medical and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2The Children´s Memorial as well as multi-colour-FISH (M-FISH) to identify the marker chromosomes Hospital, Warsaw, Poland. unequivocally. In the present study, individual telomere length was highly heterogeneous. Telomere length was associated with both frequency and type of chromosomal aberrations. The telomere length of derivative chromo- The chromosomal instability disorder, Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS), somes, which were present in almost all metaphases did not differ from the is characterized by microcephaly, growth retardaNtiBoNn, immunodeficiency, average telomere length. However, derivative chromosomes appearing only hypersensitivity to X-irradiation, and predisposition to malignant tumours, in few cells showed great variability in telomere length (0% up to +643%) especially lymphomas. Nibrin, the product of the gene, is part of the compared to the average telomere length. Regarding the type of chromo- MRE11/RAD50 complex, which is involved, amongst others, in the repair of some aberration small marker chromosomes and isochromosomes showed DNA doNuBbNle strand breaks (DSBs). The majority of NBS patients are of Cen- significantly longer telomeres than deletions and complex translocations. tral and Eastern European origin and carry the common founder mutation Our results imply that recurrent aberrations have passed the point of short in the gene, 657del5. Skin fibroblasts, derived from a 9 year old NBS telomeres and high instability. Their telomeres may be stabilized and even patient showed a mosaic of normal diploid cells and those with an unbalan- increase in length possibly depending on the type of aberration. ced translocation, resulting in partial monosomy for 6q and 13q21→qter, and partial trisomy for 20q11.2→qter, as confirmed by G-banding, CGH and P08. Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage chromosome painting. The relative proportion of these aberrant cells in- and association methods creased during propagation of the cell line. This was due to a faster cell cycle, as shown after BrdU labelling and is paralleled by a shorter telomere length, as demonstrated by T/C-FISH (telomere/centromere-FISH). Moreover, after P08.01 treatment with 0.5 and 1.0 Gy the aberrant cells showed significantly more Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-2 -418 G/C gene chromosomal aberrations than the diploid cells in the same flask. This chan- polymorphism and abdominal aortic aneurysm ce observation proves that the aberrant cell line has a selective advantage J. Mikołajczyk-Stecyna1, A. Korcz1, R. Słomski1, M. Gabriel2, K. Pawlaczyk3, G. Oszkinis2; and thus may represent a first step in malignant transformation. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 22Department of Vascular Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 33Department of Hypertension, Internal Medicine, and Vascular Diseases, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 209 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Objective and design. Pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) spinal fluid (CSF) biomarker profiles in AD patients. We additionaly investi- is connected with abnormal extracellular matrix remodeling with the assi- gated association with AD related neurofibrillary changes. stance of extracellular matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Tissue inhibitors We have performed SNP genotyping in the PICALM locus in 1047 patients of metalloproteinases (TIMPs) inhibit their activity. Any imbalance in the and 858 healthy control individuals. In addition CSF levels of β-amyloid pep- MMPs/TIMPs ratio may cause various disorders. A decrease of tissue inhibi- tide (Aβ1-42), total tau protein (T-tau) and tau phosphorylated at threonine tor of metalloproteinases-2 (TIMP2) gene expression was detected in AAA 181 (P-tau181P) were available for 308 patients. Quantitative scoring of tau patients. Recently, a -418 G/C (rs8179090) polimorphism of the TIMP2 gene path PoIloCgAyL Mwas performed on immunohistochemical stained brain sections promoter, influencing the transcription rate of the gene has been described. of autopsied AD patients. Our results show The aim of this study was to investigate whether -418 G/C gene polimor- two SNPs (SNP 2, SNP 4), both located in the 5’ region, with nomi- phism was associated with AAA in the Polish population. nal association with AD. Interestingly, SNP 4 showed borderline significance Methods. TIMP2 gene promoter polymorphism was evaluated by polyme- with T-tau in CSF of AD patients, while SNP 2 was significantly associated rase chain reaction followed by restriction enzyme analysis and pyrose- with P-tau181P. No significant association could be identified for AD related quencing in 128 patients affected with AAA and 180 individuals treated as neurofibrillary tau pathology, probabPlyIC bAeLcMause of limited statistical power references. The control group was directly matched to patients according to due to a small sample size (N = 24 ). common risk factors of vascular diseases. We were able to fine-map PthICe AGLWMAS association signal in the Flan- Results. The genotypes distribution was 17 CC, 5 CG, 106 GG in the 128 ders-Belgian cohort. Furthermore, this study strengthens the observation AAA cases and 12 CC, 0 CG, 168 GG in the 180 control subjects. The fre- that genetic variations in aPfIfCeActL MAD risk and that these variations quency of the C allele was significantly higher in the AAA patients than in represent genuine AD susceptibility factors. Of specific interest, our study the control group (P=.0005, OR=2.516). The distribution of genotypes also highlights a possible implication of in tau biology in AD. differed significantly between the studied groups (CC+CG vs. GG: P=.0037, P08.04 OR=2.906) or was close to being significantly different (CC vs. GG+GC: Association of Angiotensinogen M235T polymorphism in Tunisian P=.0501, OR=2.144). patients with dilated cardiomyopathy Conclusion. This study supports the hypothesis that TIMP2 and -418G/C S. Mehri, m. hammami; polymorphism located in promoter of TIMP2 gene are important in AAA Laboratory of Nutrition and Vascular Health, Faculty of Medicine, monastir, Tunisia. pathophysiology. P08.02 Analysis of polymorphisms in GABRA2 and AUTS2 genes in patients Background: Angiotensinogen (AGT) is a liver protein that interacts with with alcoholism from Russia renin to produce angiotensin I, the pro-hormone of angiotensin II (Ang II). G. Faskhutdinova, A. Asadullin, E. Khusnutdinova; The aim of this study was to determine the association of Angiotensinogen Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Academy of (M235T AGT) polymorphism with the risk of dilated cardiomyopathy in a Sciencies, Ufa, Russian Federation, Ufa, Russian Federation. Tunisian population. Methods: A total of 73 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy was compared to 149 ethnically, age- and gender-matched controls. Family, twin and adoption studies have provided evidence of a genetic Results: The frequencies of the TT genotype and T allele were significantly component (40-60%) in the origins of addictive disorders. One of very higher in patients as compared with controls, and were associated with in- few confirmed genetiGc AaBssRoAc2iation findings differentiating alcoholics from creased risk of dilated cardiomyopathy (AGT TT versus MT and MM: OR = non-alcoholics is with variants in the inhibitory gamma-amino butyric acid 4.1 (95% CI, 2.78-6.24; p = 0.018)); T versus M: OR = 1,3 (95% CI: 1.25-3.27; aA2U rTeSc2eptor subunit ( ) gene. Also according to the recent genome- p = 0.008)). No association was found between the combined genotypes wide association study variation in autism susceptibility candidate 2 gene (TT+MT) or T allele and left ventricular end diastolic diameter in dilated ( ) was strongly associated with alcohol consumption. Population cardiomyopathy patients with severe and moderate clinical phenotypes. stratification and ancestry differences within populations may compromise Conclusion: TTgenotype and T allele of Angiotensinogen (M235T) gene po- the success of association studies. Therefore analysis of genes variants in lymorphism are associated with increased risk of dilated cardiomyopathy in homogeneous ethGnAiBcR gAro2ups is of great impoArUtTanS2ce. a Tunisian population but do not influence the cardiac phenotype severity We designed a classical case-control association study for two polymorphis- P08.05 ms: rs279858 in and rs6943555 in that were tested for asso- Estimating the prevalence of TRIC gene mutations in 144 Iranian ciation with alcoholism. 307 men with ICD-10 diagnosis of alcoholism (112 families with non-syndromic autosomal recessive hearing loss Russians, 91 Tatars, 100 Bashkirs), and matched control groups w*Gere typed M. Babanejad1, Z. Fattahi1, N. Nikzat1, N. Bazazzadegan1, K. Kahrizi1, R. J. Smith2, H. for the above-mentioned gene variants using PCR-RFLP technique. Najmabadi1; In Russian population the frequency of individuals carrying the allele of 1Genetics Research Center , University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, rs279858 polymGoArBpRhAis2m*A /w*aAs significantly higher in patients with early- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 22) Molecular Otolaryngology & Renal Research Laboratories, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, onset alcoholism as compared with the healthy controls (p=0.03;OR=A1U.4T0S)2. Iowa, IA, United States. The carriers* Tof genotype were found to be at low-risk of al- coholism development (p=0.04;OR=0,57). In Tatars the frequency of rs6943555 allele was higher in group of alcoholics with acute alcohol Hereditary hearing impairment is a genetically heterogeneous disorder, psychosis (0.74) as compGaAreBdR wA2ith controls (0.64). However observed diffe- which affects about 1 in 1000 newborns. So far, over 90 loci and 40 genes rences were not statistically significant. have been mapped for autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss Our results suggest that genetic variation might be involved in the (ARNSHL). development of alcoholism in Russians. This work was supported by Russi- an Foundation for Basic Research (#11-04-97032-r_povolzhye_a). OMnAeR VoEf LthDe2 loci related to ARNSHL, DFNB49, is located on the long arm of chromosome 5. The gene responsible for the hearing loss in this locus is P08.03 , which encodes an essential protein called TRIC. Fine-mapping of the PICALM locus, CSF biomarker profile analysis and DFNB49 was firMstA RdVesEcLrDib2ed in our neighboring country, Pakistan, and is neurofibrillary pathology in a Flanders-Belgian Alzheimer cohort C. Van Cauwenberghe1,2, K. Bettens1,2, A. Sieben1,2,3, S. Engelborghs2,4, N. Le Bastard4, R. estimated that approximately 1.06M%A RoVf EthLeD c2auses of ARNSHL in this popu- Vandenberghe5, P. De Deyn2, J. Martin2, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2, K. Sleegers1,2; lation, is due to gene mutations. 1VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge, To determine the contribution of gene in Iranian deaf populati- University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, University Hospital on, one hundred and forty four ARNSHL families with two or more affected Ghent and University of Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology and Memory individuals originated from different ethnic groups of Iran were choseMn AfoRr- Clinic, Hospital Network Antwerp Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp, Belgium, VthEeL Dsc2reening of this gene’s mutations. AmongT RthICese families, which were 5Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven Gasthuisberg and University of subjected to homozygosity mapping using flanking STR markers of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. , one family showed linkage to DFNB49. gene sequencing in this family led to the identification of a novel mutation (c.1543delA) in exon 6 which causes a premature stop codon [p. (Lys517ArgfsX16)M].ARVELD2 Genome-wide associaPtiIoCnA LstMu dies (.GWAS) have identified significant gene- According to our result, it is computed that 0.7% of families with ARNSHL in tic association of Alzheimer disease (APDIC) AwLiMth genetic variations located 5’ our country manifest hearing loss due to mutations in the gene upstream of the gene gene We used a high-density single nucleoti- and it shows the low contribution of this gene in Iranian population. de polymorphism (SNP) map of the locus in a Flanders-Belgian patient-control cohort and analyzed the effect of SNP genotypes on cerebro- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org210 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P08.06 University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 9Department of Pediatrics, University of Erlangen- MEFV gene mutations are associated with Behçet’s Disease Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, 10Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Charité University A. Rüstemoğlu1, S. Yiğit1, Ü. Gül2, T. Taşlıyurt3, Ö. Ateş1; Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 11Section of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, 1Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, TOKAT, University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA, United States, 12Division of Pediatric Turkey, 2Ankara Numune Education and Research Hospital, Second Dermatology Clinic, Urology, The James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute, Johns Hopkins University ANKARA, Turkey, 3Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Internal School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, United States, 13Institute of Medical Informatics, Medicine, TOKAT, Turkey. Biometry, and Epidemiology, University Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 14Department of Woman and Child Health, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 15Department of Pediatric Surgery, Astrid Lindgren Children Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 16Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Mutations in MEFV, the gene encoding pyrin, play majority role an autoin- 17Department of Neonatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 18Institute for flammatory disease Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF). Behçet’s disease Genomic Mathematics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 19Channing Laboratory, is a chronic inflammatory multisystemic disorder of unknown cause. In re- Brigham and Women‘s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. cent years, prevalence MEFV gene mutations in Behçet’s disease (BD) has been reported significantly higher compared with general population. We were investigated prevalence of five MEFV gene mutations (M694V, M680I, Classic bladder exstrophy (CBE) is part of the bladder exstrophy and epi- V726A, E148Q and P369S) in BD patients and comparison with controls. spadias complex (BEEC), a spectrum of urogenital anomalies in which part DNA samples were collected from 207 BD patients and 200 control subjects or all of the distal urinary tract fails to close. Birth prevalence, including ter- were used. MEFV gene mutations were detected by PCR-RFLP method. SPSS minated pregnancies, has been estimated to be 1 in 37 000. Isolated BEEC 16.0 Software was utilized to estimate OR and Chi-square tests. is assumed to be multifactorial involving both genetic and environmental All investigated mutations were detected higher in BD patients. But only two factors. mutations, M680I and E148Q, were out of significantly higher than controls. For the purpose of a genome-wide association study (GWAS) 127 CBE pati- Especially E148Q mutation found remarkable way higher in BD patients ents of Central European ancestry were genotyped using Illumina’s Bead- (14.49% in BD patients vs 4.50% in control; p=0.001; OR, 3.60; 95% CI, 1.66- chips and compared to 525 ethnically matched population based controls. 7.77). This mutation contains approximately 35% of the observed total mu- After standard Quality Control (QC) procedures the data set was subjected tations in BD patients. Additionally, total mutation rate was detected higher to imputing based on 1000 Genomes Project reference panels. After app- in BD patients (p=0.00001; OR, 2.74; 95% CI, 1.75-4.29). On the other hand, lying post-imputation QC, single marker analysis was conducted using a lo- compound heterozygosites were found higher in BD patients than controls gistiScA rLeLg1ression (additive model). Our analySsAisL yLi1elded p-r8omising results, (2.90% vs 0.50%), but statistically significant not found (p>0.05). including a genome-wide significant finding (P = 4.55 x 10 ) for a SNP near Our study showed that, MEFV gene mutations associated with BD. Especial- the gene. Interestingly, mutations in have been reported to ly E148Q and M680I mutations may play a role in BD susceptibility. cause Townes-Brocks syndrome, a rare genetic disease with (among others) P08.07 anorectal and urogenital/renal malformations. Currently, replication of the Breast Cancer Risk Assessment in a High Risk Cohort: Which top associated SNPs (n=88) is been carried out in additional 200 cases and covariates are associated with differential model performance? ethnically matched controls (n=500). SALL1 A. S. Quante1,2, A. S. Whittemore3, T. Shriver4, J. Flom4, M. Terry4,5; Our data provide the first GWAS for CBE patients in a reasonable large co- 1Institut für Genetische Epidemiologie, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, hort with this rare malformation. While our top finding represents an Germany, 2IBE, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, München, Germany, excellent candidate for urogenital malformations, further studies are war- 3Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, ranted to verify these findings. Stanford, CA, United States, 4Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, 5Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia Medical P08.09 Center, New York, NY, United States. Catechol-O-methyltransferase Val158Met polymorphism and uterine leiomyoma Background: O. Ates1, F. Demirturk2, M. Toprak2, S. Sezer1, S. Yigit1; 1Gaziosmanpasa University Medical Faculty Department of Medical Biology, Tokat, Clinical prediction models estimating lifetime risk of breast Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa University Medical Faculty Department of Obstetrics and cMaentcheor dvsa:r y widely in their estimates. There is a need to communicate to the Gynecology, Tokat, Turkey. medical community this variation and reasons for the differences. Using a NYC cohort (N=1,857 women) we evaluated the model performance between two prediction models including non-genetic and Uterine leiomyoma (ULM) is the most common gynecological benign tumors genetic risk factors (BCRAT and IBIS), by assessing accuracy through the that affecting around 20% to %50 of women over age of 30 years. Although Hosmer-Lemeshow goodness of fit statistic and discrimination by the area- their molecular pathogenesis is still unknown, ULM has a multifactorial under-the-receiver-operating (AUC) characteristic curve. We assessed dif- etiology determined by both genetics and environmental factors. The pre- fReerseuntltiasl: model performance (accuracy and discrimination) in subgroups sent study was designed to find out whether Val158Met polymorphism in defined by broad covariates. the Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) gene are associated with the risk We observed substantial difference between the two models in of ULM. estimating lifetime-risk: IBIS was better calibrated and showed greater We analyzed COMT Val158Met polymorphism in 105 ULMs patients and discrimination than BCRAT. Additionally we compared the discrimination 105 healthy subjects by using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based re- and accuracy of the two models for covariate specific subgroups. The obser- striction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) assay. We found remarkab- ved/ predicted ratio was better for IBIS than for BCRAT for all subgroups ly similar frequencies in ULM compared with controls for COMT Val158Met except those defined by race. In addition, IBIS was better than BCRAT in genotypes and alleles, and no association was found between ULM and this iCdoennctlifuysiinogn w:omen who went on to develop cancer except for the subgroup polymorphism (p=0.482). COMT 158 Met allele in patients with large (≥5 of women with at least one breast biopsy. cm) fibroids was higher than in patients with small (<2 cm) fibroids, and There is a need for a single accurate model that performs well significant association was found between fibroid size and COMT 158 Met for all women. In our cohort, we found that overall prediction was better in allele (p=0.021 O.R 0.54 95%CI 0.30- 0.97). IBIS for almost all covariate-specific subgroups of women, including women Our results reflect that COMT Val158Met polymorphism is not associated who were not gene carriers and who had a more limited family history. Thus, with increased risk of ULMs but Val158Met polymorphism may be risk fac- enhancing existing models such as IBIS with additional risk factors (number tor for development of large fibroids in Turkish patients with ULM. of biopsies and race/ ethnicity) may further improve the performance. P08.10 P08.08 Relationship between cytokine gene polymorphisms and graft- First genome-wide association study of classic bladder exstrophy versus-host disease after allogeneic stem cell transplantation in an M. Draaken1,2, S. Herms1,2, E. Bartels1, D. Schmidt1,3, T. M. Boemers4, A. Ebert5, K. Hirsch6, Iranian population W. Rösch5, E. Schmiedeke1,7, R. Stein8, B. Utsch9,10, S. A. Boyadjiev11,12, S. Moebus13, A. Nordenskjöld14,15, M. Nöthen1,2, M. Ludwig16, H. Reutter1,17, M. Mattheisen2,18,19; M. R. Noori-Daloii1, N. Jalilian1, P. Izadi1, M. Sobhani1, Z. Rabii Gilani1, M. S. Yekaninejad2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Center, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric Surgery, Campus Virchow Clinic, Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biostatics, School of Public Charité University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Department of Pediatric Surgery Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. and Pediatric Urology, Children’s Hospital of Cologne, Berlin, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Urology, St. Hedwig Hospital Barmherzige Brüder, Regensburg, Germany, 6Division of Paediatric Urology, Clinic of Urology, University of Erlangen-Nürnberg, Despite advances in post-transplant immunosuppressive strategies GVHD Erlangen, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Center for Child and is a major complication of allogeneic HSCT, leading to serious morbidity Adolescent Health, Hospital Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 8Department of Urology, and mortality. In this retrospective, case-control investigation, 91 subjects were recruited, including Iranian patients and their HLA matched siblings. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 211 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Donor/recipient pairs were genotyped for cytokine polymorphisms inclu- tiple testing adjustment. ding IL-1α -889, IL-1β -511, IL-1β +3962, IL-1R pst1 1970, IL-1RA mspa1 For about 5% of settings the most efficient strategy is single-marker ana- 11100, IL-4Rα +1902, IL-12 -1188, IFN-γ +874(A/T), TGF-β codons 10 and lysis, typically when allele frequencies are high or causal variant tagging is 25, TNF-α -308, TNF-α -238, IL-2+166, IL-2 -330, IL-4 -1098, IL-4 -590, -33, poor. For another 5% of models the most powerful strategy is testing for IL-6 -174, IL-6 nt565, and IL-10 -1082, -819, and -592. Cytokine typing was interaction without inclusion of marginal effects provided that a case-only performed by PCR-SSP assay. test is used. Genotypic case-only test is typically more powerful than alle- Negative association was found between aGVHD and donor IL-10 GCC ha- lic case-only test. In the remaining majority of scenarios, a hybrid strategy plotype or donor IL-4Ra A allele in the whole population studied. When we is most suitable: genome-wide interaction analysis with a combined case- compared within the leukemia subgroup, we observed positive association only-interaction/marginal-effects test; follow-up analysis of the significant between recipient IL-1α -889/C allele and negative association between re- pairs with a test for interaction excluding the strongest marginal effect but cipient IL-10 CAA haplotype and donor IL-4Ra A allele and development of allowing for marginal effect of the second potential SNP. aGVHD. We also observed possible positive and negative association for dif- P08.13 ferent genotypes and aGVHD; however, on multivariate analysis only donor The power of meta-analysis of RNA-seq datasets for eQTL IL-4Ra and donor IL-12 showed significant association. We conclude that se- identification veral cytokine polymorphisms are positively and negatively associated with D. V. Zhernakova1, H. Westra1, R. Jansen2, E. de Geus3, D. Boomsma3, B. Penninx3, C. aGVHD in Iranian HLA matched siblings, of which IL-4Ra and IL-12 may play Wijmenga1, G. B. van Ommen4, P. A. C. ‘t Hoen4, L. Franke1; important roles. 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Psychiatry, Netherlands Study of Depression P08.11 and Anxiety, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Department Identifying genetic determinants of congenital heart defect in Down of Biological psychology, Netherlands Twin Registry, VU University, Amsterdam, syndrome Netherlands, 4Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, M. R. Sailani1, P. Makrythanasis1, S. Deutsch1, A. Valsesia2, E. Migliavacca1, F. Santoni1, A. Netherlands. Sharp1, C. Serra-Juhe3, S. Vicari4, R. Rabionet5, Y. Grattau6, G. Dembour7, A. Megarbane8,6, R. Touraine9, S. Kitsiou10, C. Chatzisevastou-louKidou10, H. Fryssira10, E. Kanavakis10, G. Merla11, L. Perez-Jurado3, X. Estivill5, J. Delabar12, S. E. Antonarakis1; 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Many genetic variants affect gene expression levels, although the exact me- Switzerland, 3Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of chanism through which this works is still mostly unclear. Previously, nu- Neuroscience, Children‘s Hospital Bambino Gesù,, Rome, Italy, 5Centre for Genomic merous expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) mapping studies have Regulation, Biomedical Research Park (PRBB), Barcelona, Spain, 6Institut Jerome been performed using microarray data. Recently, through next generation Lejeune, Paris, France, 7Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, UCL, Bruxelles, Belgium, sequencing gene expression level quantitation has become possible (RNA- 8Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon, 9CHU de Saint-Etienne, hôpital Nord, Saint- seq) and it has shown to be a very powerful approach of quantifying the Etienne, Cedex, France, 10Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, Athens, transcriptome. Greece, 11Medical Genetics Unit, Hospital, IRCCS, Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 12de Biologie However, various RNA-seq strategies have been proposed, but it is still Fonctionnelle et Adaptative (BFA), CNRS EAC 4413, Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France. unclear what the best strategy for eQTL mapping is and how to combine eQTL data that has been generated by different technologies. Here, we used three different types of RNA-seq data: paired-end RNA-seq Congenital heart defect (CHD) is a common developmental defect of Down (56 samples), single-end RNA-seq (64 samples) and deepSAGE data (94 syndrome (DS) occurring in 40% of cases. While carrying three copies of ge- samples). eQTL mapping (FDR = 0.05) on each dataset yielded 1287 unique nes or other functional genomic elements on chromosome 21 increases the genes for single-end RNA-seq, 601 unique genes for paired-end RNA-seq risk for CHD, trisomy 21 itself is not sufficient to cause CHD. Thus additio- and 1188 unique genes for deepSAGE data. We show that a meta-analysis nal genetic variation and/or environmental factors could contribute to CHD on different types of data can be performed to increase statistical power, risk. Here we use association studies to identify genomic variations that in permitting us to identify significant associations to 3504 unique genes. concert with trisomy 21, determine the risk for CHD in DS. This case-control We compared the eQTLs that had been identified using RNA-seq and array GWAS includes 187 DS with CHD (AVSD=69, ASD=53, VSD=65) as cases, and based data and observed a concordance of 95% in allelic directions, indica- 151 DS without CHD as controls. Chromosome 21 specific association study ting highly consistent results. revealed rs2832616 and rs1943950 (both cis-eQTLs for KRTAP7-1 gene) Our study indicates that different types of RNA-seq datasets can be well as CHD risk alleles (adjusted p-values < 0.05). Furthermore rs2183593 and combined and that meta-analysis of RNA-seq is a logical step forward to gain rs7282991 (both cis-eQTLs for ADARB1 gene) were identified as risk fac- better insight into the genetic regulation of gene expression variation. tors for ASD. Since DS is likely to be a disorder of gene expression, 2-locus P08.14 interaction was applied for whole genome eQTLs. A pair of interacting Alternative splicing in the Fanconi anemia candidate gene FAAP100 eQTL on chr2 and chr11 was identified. Furthermore, a search for chr21 J. Kuehl1, B. Schuster1, W. Wang2, D. Schindler1; 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, risk CNVs for CHD was performed using a customized chr21 array of 135K 2Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, probes across 55 DS-CHD and 53 DS controls. It revealed two CNV regions Baltimore, MD, United States. (FDR=0.04) located in the region previously associated with CHD risk in DS and another CNV region (FDR=0.03) upstream of POFUT2 gene. We propose that the CHD risk of DS is determined by specific SNPs and CNVs variations Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal or X-chromosomal recessive disea- on chr21 and interaction of non-chr 21 genomic variants. se that can be regarded as a model for genomic instability, premature aging P08.12 and tumorgenesis. Each of the 15 genes, whose products are members of Recommendations for genome-wide search for epistatic loci the FA/BRCA pathway for genomic maintenance, have been identified to be T. Vaitsiakhovich1, C. Herold2, D. Drichel2, A. Lacour2, V. Schüller1, T. Becker2,1; causative for FA. FAAP100 is an additional member of the FA core complex 1Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. but has not yet been found to be mutated in FA patients. It forms a subcom- plex with FANCL and FANCB and protects both components for proteolytic degradation. After siRNA depletion or gene knockout FAAP100-deficient cells show features comparable to other FA cells defective of FANCD2 mo- Various strategies to identify interacting SNPs in GWAS studies were evalu- noubiquitination. Because FAAP100 is a FA candidate gene, we screened se- ated. Series of „realistic“ disease models were defined on a 2-SNP-genotype ven FANCD2 monoubiquitination deficient cell lines by Sanger sequencing table by specification of allele frequencies, penetrances, minimal distance of all exons and adjacent introns portions. We detected eight common SNPs between available and causal SNPs. We compared single-marker analysis registered in the dbSNP database and a non-annotated heterozygous syn- with multi-marker analysis, investigated performance of tests for inter- onymous single-base substitution in exon 9 which cannot be causative for action and tests including both marginal and interaction effects, so-called FA. Additionally, we found an alternative splicing event via sequencing cDNA „tests allowing for interaction“. We compared case-only with case-control of the FA cell lines. This event occurs because of the presence of a cryptical tests for interaction and contrasted the performance of allelic and genotypic splice donor and results in skipping of 414 bp (c.1760_2173del414). In or- models. der to test an association with FA we examined FAAP100 transcripts in a A subtle problem is that tests including marginal effects may become signi- control cell line. Since we detected the same alternative splicing event in the ficant because of the marginal effect of just one SNP from a pair. Since our control it seems not likely to be causative for FA. The alternative transcripts goal was to detect both SNPs, we embedded tests allowing for interaction could be involved in cell cycle-dependent or tissue-specific gene regulation, in a two-step strategy: analysis of all pairs with a test with marginal effects, a role that will be studied in further experiments. followed up by an interaction test on significant pairs remained after mul- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org212 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P08.15 PPARA ACE Novel method of CNV analysis in FcγR locus and its application to immune-related diseases polymorphisms in combination with which is the gene candidate A. Zhernakova1,2, L. Franke1, A. Ioan2, G. Trynka1, K. Fransen1, R. Weersma3, S. Rantapää- for footballers’ performance research by others. GenotAypCiEn g was performed Dahlqvist4, P. Gregersen5, C. Wijmenga1, T. Huizinga2, R. Toes2; using the methods of polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment 1Department of Genetics, University medical centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, length polymorphism. The results showed that vtsh.e genotype distri- 2Department of Rheumatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, bution w=as significantly different between the total football players group 3Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Medical Center Groningen and University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Department of Public Health and the controAlsC E(II-23.6%,ID-46.7%,DD-29.6% II-24.6%,ID-29.9%,DD- and Clinical Medicine/Rheumatology, Umea University, Umea, Sweden, 5The Feinstein 45.5%, P 0.002). We revealed that in defenders (P=0.033) aPnPdA mRGidCf1ieAlders Institute for Medical Research, North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, (PPP=A0R.A012) the ID frequency was higher although DD genotype frequen- Manhasset,, New York, NY, United States. cy was lower than in coPnPtrAoRlG. AC1ccAording to the analysis of vs. and polymorphisms, significant diPffPeArRenAces were determined between fvosr.wards and controls ( : GG-54.6%,GA-29.5%,AA- 15.9% GG- Genetic variants near the FC-gamma receptor (FcγR) locus are associated 4P9PA.7R%G,CG1AA-44.3%,AAP-P6A.R0%A, P=0.044; : GG-52.3%,GC-40.9%,CC-6.8% with several immune-related diseases. However, most FcγR genes are loca- GG-72.4%,GC-24.6%,CC-3.0%, P=0A.0C3E4 ). TPhPeAreR Awere no athletes with ted in complex regions of segmental duplications (SD) and they are there- AA and CC genotypeA aCmEong PthPAe RrGesCe1aArched goalkeepers. fore not well covered by the genotyping platforms. To be able to identify In the whole cohortA, tChEe odPdPsA rRatAio of [ ID+ GG] being a footballer copy-number variants (CNVs) in this locus, we first developed a method to was 1.69 (95%CI 1.04-2.74), and of [ ID+ ACE GG] 1.93 (95%CI analyse CNVs using principal component analysis of the raw intensity values 1.10-3.37), aPnPdA oRfG [C1A II+ GPPCA] R2A.83 (95%CI 1.02-7.91) compared to of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) genotyped on the Immunochip controls. In conclusion, the above data suggest that I allele in combi- platform. This platform includes 1,159 SNPs in the SD block of FcγR genes; nation with G allele or G allele is associated with football of these 1,019 (88%) failed our quality control for SNP analysis but their players’ ability. intensity values are informative for the CNVs estimation. We identified se- P08.18 veral CNV loci in the FcγR block. Second, we confirmed our results via an HLA class II (DRB1 and DQB1) genes associated in Tunisian patients independent method - arrayCGH genotyping - and observed a perfect cor- with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy relation in CNV estimation between both methods. Third, we applied our S. Zarrouk-Mahjoub1,2, S. Mehri2, M. Hammami2; method to an RA cohort (3,326 cases; 3,397 controls). We found no asso- 1Faculty of Medicine, Unit of Epidemiology Genetics and Molecular, Tunis, Tunisia, 2Faculty of Medicine, Biochemistry Laboratory, Research Unit ‘Human Nutrition & ciations between these CNVs with RA (p > 0.05). We are now applying our Metabolic Disorders’, Monastir, Tunisia. method to cohorts of celiac disease and inflammatory bowel disease, in total ~20,000 subjects. Fourth, by performing functional studies we observed a correlation between the number of FCGR3A gene copies and FCGR3 (CD16) There is growing evidence of an important immunologic/ autoimmune expression on T-cells. component to idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (dCMP) disease, with ab- Conclusion: We have developed a method to accurately estimate CNVs based normalities in both humoral and cellular response that is becoming the ma- on SNP intensity data that can be extended to other SD loci in the human jor pathogenic hypothesis for myocardial damage. Owing to the important genome. participation of the immune system in the development of the CMP, gene- P08.16 tic factors implied on its onset could include genes located on the Human Study allelic variants G-2548A of the gene LEP and G223A gene LEPR Leukocyte Antigen (HLA). The present study was the first report to eva- in individuals with different levels of the main indicators of lipid luate the relationship between class II HLA genes HLA (DRB1 and DQB1) profile and the genetic susceptibility to idiopathic dCMP in Tunisian patients. The L. Kayumova, E. Yakshembitova, R. Kayumova, E. Vorobieva, V. Gorbunova; HLA (DRB1, DQB1) alleles were analyzed in 76 patients with idiopathic Bashkir State Pedagogical University from after M. Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. dCMP and 111 ethnically m. atcPh e<d h.ealthy controls using polymeras.e chPa in re.action-sequence specific primers te.chniPq ue. A.n increased frequencies of HLA-DRB1*0401 (OR = 267, 0001), HLA-DQB1*0302 (OR = 328, = It is known that structural and functional properties of lipoproteins are controlled by genetic factors. In this regard, the current association of po- 0001) a.nd HP L<A -D.QB1*0401 (OR = 626, = 0005) .allelPe s we.re found in patients compared with healthy controls. Individuals with HLA-DRB1*1301 lymorphic variants of genes with the level of serum lipids are the subject of (OR = 024, 0001) and HLA-DQB1*0201 (OR = 049, = 0002) alleles intense attention. We examined polymorphic variants of the gene G-2548A LEP and leptin receptor gene G223A LEPR leptin in patients with different have a p.rotePc tive. effect against idiopathic dCMP. Two haplo.typePs we.re as- sociated with increased risk of idiopathic dCMP: DRB1*0401/DQB1*0302 levels of the major lipid profile. (OR = 453, = 0002) and DRB1*0401/DQB1*0401 (OR = 942, = 0004). The material for the study included DNA samples from 434 healthy indi- In conclusion, our data suggest that the variation in class II HLA alleles could viduals. Determining the level of the main indicators of lipid profile (total be a genetic factor involved in the susceptibility to idiopathic dCMP in the cholesterol, triglycerides, low density lipoprotein, high density lipoprotein, Tunisian population. atherogenic index and body mass index) was performed by standard en- P08.19 zymatic methods. Analysis of polymorphic DNA loci of LEP and LEPR was Genetic data fusion: combining sequence and array data for improved performed by PCR-RFLP. genotype calling The study found that significantly more frequent in individuals with high le- J. M. O‘Connell1, J. Marchini2,1; vels of total cholesterol (64,58% vs. 50,82% in the group of individuals with 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of total cholesterol levels within the physiological norm; p=0,0189), triglyceri- Statistics, Oxford, United Kingdom. des (55,45% vs. 41,67% in the group of individuals with triglyceride levels in normal; p=0,0408) and body mass index (85,71% vs. 41,67% in group of persons with BMI within the physiological norm; p=0,0524) alleles found Data sets containing large cohorts of individuals who have been genotyped LEPR A and LEP A, and in individuals with a level of performance within on microarrays as well as sequenced at low coverage are now becoming the physiological norm - alleles of LEP G, LEPR G and the genotype of LEP available. Whilst the genotype calls coming from modern arrays are of high G/G (23,36% vs. 8,33% in the group of individuals with total cholesterol is quality, accuracy and call rate can still be improved by incorporating se- normal; p=0,0321). quence data into calls. This is particularly true for low frequency variants P08.17 where very few observations are available to identify clusters for the rare Association of ACE, PPARGC1A and PPARA Genotypes with Footballers genotypes. Higher quality genotype calls and better call rates will reduce Performance time spent on quality control and decrease Type I and II error in genome V. Ginevičienė1, A. Jakaitienė1, L. Tubelis2, V. Kučinskas1; wide association studies. 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Lithuanian Olympic We present a Bayesian mixture model for genotype calling from array al- Sports Centre, Vilnius, Lithuania. lele signal intensities, with parameter estimation and calls augmented by ACE PPARGC1A genotype likelihoods from sequence data. The method successfully identi- PPARA fies and discards spurious data and is capable of handling individuals with The aim of this study was to determine the impact of (I/D), missing values, for example, a subset of individuals may have only been as- (G/A), (G/C) polymorphisms on footballers performance among 199 sayed on an array and not sequenced. This results in genotype calls with Lithuanian professional fnootballers and 167n sedentary, healthyn men (con- greater accuracy and a higher call rate than standard array-only methods. trols). Thne football players were divided into groups according toP tPhAeR pGoCs1itAi- The implementation requires similar computational time to standard soft- on in the field: forwards ( =44), defenders ( =63), midfielders ( =75), goal- ware for array-only based genotyping, providing higher quality genotype keepers ( =17). The novelty of the study is association analysis of www.e, shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 213 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P08.22 Analysis of association between age and JAK-STAT signaling pathway calls for minimal extra time and effort. We demonstrate these capabilities gene polymorphism on 1000 Genomes Phase 1 data which have been genotyped on the Illumina V. V. Erdman, R. S. Somova, T. R. Nasibullin, I. A. Tuktarova, O. E. Mustafina; HumanOmni2.5S chip as well as sequenced at 4X coverage. Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. P08.20 eQTL analysis of glucocorticoid regulated gene expression: new insight in the genetics of mood and anxiety disorders Aim of study was to estimate alleles and genotypes frequencies dynamic of J. Arloth, A. Menke, T. Klengel, B. Müller-Myhsok, E. B. Binder; STAT5A (rs9889323), JAK1 (rs310216) and JAK3 (rs3212780) genes with Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. age. Total group (1678 unrelated individuals, from 1 to 109 years, ethnic Tatars from Russia) was divided into young (1-20), middle-age I (21-35), middle- Abnormal hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis regulation is a key neurobio- age II (36-55), aged (56-74), senile (75-89) and long-living (90-109) per- logical characteristic of depression. Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) function sons. Gene polymorphism was analyzed by PCR-RFLP. For comparison of has been shown to be disturbed in depression, hence polymorphisms alte- age groups was used Fisher’s two-tailed exact test. Search of genetic mar- ring the transcriptional effects of GR-activation might be interesting candi- kers associations with age was performed using logistic regression analysis dates for this disorder. cis (SPSS18.0). The aim of this study was to identify SNPs associated with glucocorticoid In female there was an increase of JAK3*C/*T genotype frequency in age from (GC)-induced gene expression changes ( -eQTLs) in peripheral blood. 30 until 80 years (p=0.045, OR=1.019). In middle-age I group STAT5A*C/*C 160 male Caucasians (69 cases, 91 controls) were genotyped using Illumina genotype frequency was lower than in aged (P=0.005), senile (P=0.005) and Human660W-Quad BeadChips. Imputation was performed using IMPUTE- long-livers groups (P=0.002). Frequencies of STAT5A*C/*T and STAT5A*T/*T v2 with HapMap III and 1,000 Genomes Project as reference panels. Baseli- genotypes differed between aged individuals, in one hand, and senile and ne and stimulated (1.5 mg dexamethasone) gene expression was analyzed long-lived persons, on the other (p<0.01). STAT5A*T/*T genotype frequen- using Illumina Human HT12v3c iasrray. Quality control checks, filtering, batch cy was decreasing with age in both male (57-98 years, p=0.033, OR=0.971) corrections and linear regression analysis was performed in PLINK and R. and female (44-87 years, p=0.005, OR=0.976); also only in female there was Of a total of 4,395 significant -eQTLs, 2,364 significant response-eQTLs, increasing of STAT5A*C/*T genotype frequency in 44-87 years (p=0.002, namely loci associated with GC-stimulated gene expression variation were OR=1.029). identified after multiple testing corrections. Over 44% of response-eSNPs Thus, STAT5A (rs9889323) and JAK3 (rs3212780) gene polymorphisms were located >200kb from the probe, indicating long-range regulation of are important for achieve of senile age in both male and female; STAT5A gene expression by GCs. This was accompanied by significant enrichment of (rs9889323) polymorphic marker may be associated with longevity in GR response elements (GREs) within the response-eQTLs. We also observed male. differences in the affinity of GREs between the opposite SNP alleles. Further, Supported by grant RFBR 10-04-0164a. response-eQTLs were significantly more likely to be associated with unipo- P08.23 lar depression susceptibility loci from a recent meta-analysis than baseline Identifying additional variants associated to celiac disease by eQTLs. Interestingly, the majority of these enriched eSNPs alter the gene ex- imputation-based GWAS pression of more distant genes. A. Kanterakis1, I. Ricaño-Ponce2, J. Gutierrez2, H. Westra2, L. Franke2, C. Wijmenga2, M. In conclusion our data suggest that GC-stimulated eQTLs could expand our A. Swertz1; understanding of the genetic basis of stress-related disorders, in which GR- 1Genomic Coordination Center, Groningen, Netherlands, 2UMC Groningen, Groningen, function plays an important pathophysiologic role. Netherlands. P08.21 Atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome in a large population with a single CFH (complement factor H) gene mutation: modified Celiac Disease (CeD) is a complex immune-mediated disorder caused by an penetrance data including a newly discovered family, based on unknown number of genetic variants. To date, 39 non-HLA loci have been mutation testing and family history. identified by GWAS that explain 15% of the heritability. Previous GWAS F. H. Sansbury1,2, G. Bromilow1, C. J. Shaw-Smith1,2, C. Bingham3,2, L. Smyth3, L. Strain4, T. studies in CeD were limited to directly genotyped SNPs. This study aims to H. J. Goodship5,4, P. D. Turnpenny1,2; boost the GWAS’ power through imputation. Genotyping data for four Eu- 1Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, ropean CeD collections of cases (3,796) and controls (8,154) used in the Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Peninsula College of Medicine & Dentistry, Universities of previous GWAS study will be imputed with the pilot version of the Genome Exeter & Plymouth, Exeter, United Kingdom, 3Renal Medicine, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS of the Netherlands (GoNL). GoNL consists of whole genome, high coverage Foundation Trust, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4The Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS (12), sequencing data from 250 Dutch trios. Additionally, we will assess the Foundation Trust, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 5Newcastle University, Newcastle, United added value of using a population specific dataset (GoNL) compared with Kingdom. the multi-ethnic 1000 Genomes Project (1KG) reference. We did obtain our first results with the GoNL pilot data of 48 trio’s. Preliminary results in chromosome 20 indicate that GoNL contains genotypes for 99.3% of the Atypical haemolytic uraemic syndrome (aHUS) can have high morbidity and HapMap550 SNP-set, whereas 1KG covers only 72%. The imputation R2 va- mortality. Usually it is due to mutations in the Factor H, Factor I, or mem- lues were similar between the two reference panels for common markers brane cofactor protein genes, which play a role in the alternative pathway of (MAF > 5%) but exhibit a significant increase for GoNL in rare variants. We complement activation. The trigger events for an episode of HUS leading to also measured the concordance between imputation with HapMap2 and renal failure are unknown. We have previously presented initial penetran- GoNL and a validation dataset consisting of 1,758 samples genotyped on ce data for four families with over 400 individuals, mainly resident in one1 Immunochip in chromosome 3. GoNL imputation showed an average increa- region, who carry the same Factor H mutation [c.3643 C>G (p. R1215G)]. se from 97% to 99% in the concordance and showed suggestive association Previously we knew of three families whom we have been unable to link to for 4 novel variants in the CRR locus (not present in HM2) that are not in date. A fourth branch has now come to light. linkage disequilibrium with a previous associated SNP. We have constructed updated Kaplan-Meier survival curves for this muta- tion to estimate the penetrance. In the current generation we have a large P08.24 number of unaffected carriers. We have very few obligate unaffected carri- Evaluation of the performance of several imputation strategies in an ers in previous generations, as consanguinity means we cannot clearly trace admixed sample from Mexico City S. Krithika1, A. Valladares-Salgado2, J. Escobedo-de La Peña3, J. Kumate-Rodríguez4, M. the line of descent of the mutation. We have therefore estimated the pene- Cruz2, E. J. Parra1; trance by including family members at 50 % and 25 % risk with appropriate 1University of Toronto Mississauga, Mississauga, ON, Canada, 2Unidad de Investigacion weighting. Including such members lowers the penetrance from a lifetime Medica en Bioquimica, Hospital de Especialidades, Centro Medico Nacional Siglo XXI, risk of around 2/3 to just under 1/2 (0.45; i.e. 4/9). The penetrance of aHUS Mexico City, Mexico, 3Unidad de Investigacion en Epidemiologia Clinica, Hospital General by adulthood falls from 1/3 to 1/4. We compare this approach with other Regional 1, Dr Carlos McGregor, IMSS, Mexico City, Mexico, 4Fundacion IMSS, Mexico methods of estiemt aatli.ng historical carrier frequency in less than fully pene- City, Mexico. trant conditions. 1. Sansbury FH J Med Genet 2010:47 (Supplement 1). Background: We explored the imputation performance of the program IM- PUTE in an admixed sample from Mexico City (N=1,310). We evaluated the: (a) impact of different reference panels on imputation; (b) potential diffe- rences in imputation performance between single-step and two-step ap- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org214 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 proaches; and (c) effect of different INFO score thresholds on imputation 7.085 x 10-22. However, after permutation testing the result was found to be performance. only marginally significant. Methods: The samples were genotyped with the Affymetrix 5.0 array. We Conclusion: Haplotype association analysis of CVD risk phenotypes show randomly masked 5% of the markers directly genotyped on chromosome 12 marginally significant association of LEPR gene only with waist circumfe- (n=1,046) and compared the imputed genotypes with the microarray geno- rence. type calls. The concordance rates between imputed and observed genotypes P08.27 reflect imputation accuracy and the proportion of non-missing genotypes Allele-based N-Test in linkage analysis indicate imputation efficacy. S. Khan1, S. Manzoor1, S. Shah2; Results: Using an INFO threshold of 0.9 to define valid genotypes, the single- 1Department of Statistics, Islamia College University Peshawar, Peshawar, Pakistan, step imputation approach produced slightly higher concordance rates than 2Department of Statistics & Operations Research, College of Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. the two-step strategy (99.1% vs. 98.4% - HapMap phase II combined panel), but at the expense of a lower proportion of non-missing genotypes (85.5% vs. 90.1%). The 1,000 Genomes panel produced similar concordance rates There are many tests of inheritance based upon sibling information for di- to the HapMap phase II panel (98.4%), but increased substantially the pro- seases that have late onset. The N-test (Green et al. 1983) is one of these portion of non-missing genotypes (94.7% vs. 90.1%). The average INFO tests, which utilizes information from affected siblings. The N-test is the scores of alleles with frequencies <1% was much lower than the scores for count in affected siblings of the most frequently occurring haplotype from alleles >5%. the father plus the analogous count from the mother. When applied to ha- Conclusions: The program IMPUTE had an excellent imputation perfor- plotypes, the N-test excludes recombinant families from the analysis. In this mance for common alleles. Genotype concordances were higher than 98.4% study we modified the N-test to be based on alleles instead of haplotypes. using all the imputation strategies. The best balance of imputation accuracy This modified allele-based N-test can include all families (recombinant as and efficiency was obtained with the 1,000 Genomes panel. However, rare well as non-recombinant). We carried out a simulation study to find the alleles were not captured effectively by any of the panels. thresholds and powers. P08.25 P08.28 Insersion/Deletion Polymorphism of The Angiotensin-Converting A robustness study of parametric and non-parametric tests in Model- Enzyme Gene And Knee Osteoarthritis S. Yigit1, A. Inanir2, S. Akkanet1, O. Cecen2, N. Bozkurt1, A. Rustemoglu1; Based Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction for epistasis detection 1Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Biology, Tokat, J. M. Mahachie John, E. S. Gusareva, F. Van Lishout, K. Van Steen; Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Physical Medicine Montefiore Institute, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium. and Rehabilitation, Tokat, Turkey. Objective/Aim: Model-Based Multifactor Dimensionality Reduction (MB-MDR) is data mining technique that enables the fast identification of epistasis, without Knee Osteoarthritis (OA) is a multi-factorial disease. Various genetic po- the need to make restrictive assumptions about the modes of inheritance. lymorphisms have been reported that they might be associated with OA. The most commonly used implementation of MB-MDR involves testing one Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) is a critical component of the renin- multi-locus genotype cell versus the remaining cells. By construction, this angiotensin system, and a large body of evidence indicates its proinflamm- procedure creates two imbalanced genetic groups that subsequently need atory role. The aim of the present study was to examine the possible role of to be compared. To date, for continuous traits, we have adopted a standard Manegtieorteianls ainn-dco Mnveethrtoindg: enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion (I/D) gene poly- F-test to make such group comparisons. However, when either the assump- morphism as a risk factor in the development of knee OA. tion of normality or homoscedasticity or both are violated, highly inflated polymorphism type I errors and false positives are to be expected. In this study, we assess, In this study, we studied 102 (60 women, 42 men) patients with knee OA and through simulations, the effects of aforementioned model violations on the 1Fi5n0d (i8n7g sw: omen, 63 men) healty control groups. ACE I/D performance of MB-MDR to detect epistasis signals, and propose remedial were analyzed by using PCR (Polymerase Chain Reaction) method. measures in order to maintain efficiency. Since important lower order ge- DD, DI and II genotype frequencies of ACE I/D polymorphism was netic effects can also give rise to inflated type I errors or false positive epi- detected 27 %, 58%, and 15 % in patient group and 32 %, 50 %, and 18 % in static effects, we restrict our simulation study to pure epistasis models. In control group, respectively. There were not significant differences in geno- particular, we consider normal, chi-square and t-distributions with constant tRyepseu/latllele frequencies of ACE gene po lymorphism between patients with and non-constant phenotypic variances. In all simulating settings, we apply knee OA and controls (p=0.24). the standard F-test , as well as a novel implementation based on the Welch’s : Our results reflect that ACE I/Dpolymorphism does not have a role F-test .The original traits were either left untransformed or first transfor- in susceptibility to Knee OA in Turkish patients. Currently, we continue to med into new traits via rank and logarithm transformation, or via a rank- testing higher number of people in both patient and control groups to obtain transformation to normality. more data. In conclusion, when performing MB-MDR screening for gene-gene interac- P08.26 tions with quantitative traits, we recommend to first rank-transformtraits to Association analysis of the leptin receptor gene haplotypes with normality, prior to classical F-testing. cardiovascular risk phenotypes P08.29 Ž. Tomas, M. Zajc Petranović, T. Škarić-Jurić, N. Smolej Narančić; Association of TNF polymorphism rs1800629 with Multisomatoform Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia, Zagreb, Croatia. Disorder in a group of German patients and healthy controls K. C. Harms1, K. P. Kapitza2,3, L. Pahl1, M. Karst3, M. Stuhrmann1, M. Bernateck3; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, Aims: Leptin is an adipocyte-derived protein with an important role in re- 2Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, 3Department of Anesthesiology, Pain Clinic, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, gulation of food intake, metabolism, reproductive and immune function. It Germany. acts through its specific receptor which is predominantly expressed in hy- pothalamus. Aim of this study was to investigate association of haplotypes of the leptin receptor gene (LEPR) with several cardiovascular (CVD) risk Causes of MSD are not sufficiently elucidated yet, but genetic factors are phenotypes, namely, body mass index, waist circumference, serum lipid, fi- suspected to influence MSD pathogenesis. The main symptom MSD pati- brinogen and C-reactive protein levels. ents suffer from is pain. As prior studies have demonstrated that genetic Methods: We selected 43 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in and polymorphisms of different proinflammatory cytokines are associated with near LEPR gene from genome-wide association study data (Human Hap300 pain, our goal was to find out whether cytokine polymorphisms are also as- Illumina platform) of 986 inhabitants of the island of Vis, Croatia. We used sociated with MSD. Blood from 148 MSD patients and 149 demographically Haploview software to assess linkage disequilibrium (LD) structure in geno- matched healthy controls was used for genotyping of nine polymorphisms mic region of LEPR gene and Unphased software for haplotype association located on seven cytokine genes. Thereafter statistical analysis was perfor- analysis. med. In addition to the examination of possible associations with MSD, we Results: SNPs were grouped into nine blocks according to LD structu- searched for correlations with individual thermal and mechanical detection re. Although none of the single markers in LD block comprised of six and pain thresholds, which were determined by quantitative sensory testing SNPs (rs1782754, rs1171269, rs1022981, rs6673324, rs3790426 and (QST). Association with MSD was found for alleles and genotypes of rs16944 rs1049338) was individually associated with waist circumference, haploty- (interleukin 1β), rs1800629 (tumor necrosis factor α) and rs909253 (lym- pe A-C-A-A-G-A of this LD block showed the strongest association signal, p= www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 215 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P08.32 Association of FOXE1 in nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft photoxin α). Due to multiple testing we corrected the results using Bonfer- palate in Central European and Mesoamerican populations roni method, which caused only the association of rs1800629 with MSD to A. C. Böhmer1,2, K. U. Ludwig1,2, S. Herms1,2, T. AlChawa1,2, E. Nasser1,2, P. Wahle1,2, D. remain significant. The rare A-allele occurred more often in MSD patients C. Tradowsky1,2, S. Nowak1,3, M. A. Alblas1,2, B. Lippke1,2, S. Barth1,2, H. Reutter1, M. M. while the G-allele could be found more frequently in the control group Nöthen1,2, A. Rojas-Martinez4,5, M. Knapp6, R. Steegers-Theunissen7,8, E. Mangold1; (p=0.007). Genotype distribution was in line with those results as genotype 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Oral GG correlated with being healthy (p=0.004) and AG was associated with and Maxillofacial Surgery, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 4Department MSD (p=0.008). We could not detect correlations for any of the tested poly- of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, School of Medicine, Universidad Autonoma de morphisms with the investigated QST parameters. To conclude, we assume Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico, 5Centro de Investigacion y Desarrollo en Ciencias de la the A-allele of SNP rs1800629 (TNF) to be a risk factor for MSD while the Salud, Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo Leon, Monterrey, Mexico, 6Institute of Medical G-allele appears to have a protective effect. Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Erasmus P08.30 Medical Center, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 8Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands. The association of the MYF6 gene polymorphism with size and composition of muscle fibers A. Druzhevskaya1, I. Astratenkova2, F. Magi3, D. Caporossi3; 1Research Institute of Physical Culture, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2St. Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (NSCL/P) is one of the Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3University of Rome most common birth defects. Its etiology is multifactorial, with both genetic „Foro Italico“, Rome, Italy. and environmentalI RfaFc6tors contributing to this craniofacial malformation. Several genes have been suggested to play a rFoOleX Ein1 NSCL/P development. However, only the gene has shown a convincing degree of consistency Transcription factor myf6 regulates expression of many genes involved in across studies. Recently, the forkhead box E1 ( ) gene on chromosome development, maturing and work of human skeletal muscle. The results of 9q22 has emerged as promising candidate gene (Moreno et al., 2009). In our previous studies showed that frequency of MYF6 964TT genotype and that stuFdOy,X cEo1m, prehensive genetic analyses in NSCL/P samFpolxees1 from diffe- 964T allele was significantly higher in endurance athletes in comparison rent ethnicities revealed two markers, located inside a 70 kb LDFO-bXlEo1ck con- with control subjects. The 964T allele carriers had 5% bigger cross-sec- taining to be strongly associated with NSCL/P. Also, knockout- tional area (CSA) of m. rectus femoris in comparison with 964CC genotype FmOicXeE s1h iow a clefting phenotype, providing further evidence for being carries. a susceptibility gene for NSCL/P. However, so farF, OthXeE 1genetic findings on In the present study the DNA of 8 young healthy physical active males and n NSCL/P have not been convincingly replicated. 26 elite ice-skaters was genotyped using PCR-RFLP method. Histomorpho- In order to further elucidate the contribution of to NSCL/P, we in- logical and immunohistochemical analyses were conducted. Percentage vestigated the two most strongly associated markers of the initial study composition and CSA of muscle fibers were measured. (rs3758249, rs4460498) in two case-control samples of Central European Average CSA of muscle fibers in young males was almost two times larger (949 NSCL/P cases, 1,163 controls) and Mayan Mesoamerican (156P NSCL/P among TT genotype carriers (41385 ± 14636 mkm²) in comparison with CC cPases, 338 controlsP) descent. We obtained significant associations for both homozygotes (23065 ± 20691 mkm²) and heterozygotes (25642 ± 20084 variants in both-0 6samples, with rs4460498 providing the lowest -values mkm²), (P < 0.0001). Content of fast muscle fibers in ice-skaters was 40.7 ± ( Europe=6.50x10 , Mayan=0.0151). Furthermore, we obtainFeOdX eEv1i dence that 2.4% and content of slow fibers was 66.4 ± 2.5%, which did not differ among the effect size increases for homozygous carriers of the risk alleles, sug- MYF6 genotypes. In TT homozygotes average CSA of both types of muscle gesting a recessive effect. Our data conclusively identify as second fibers was larger than in CC homozygotes and heterozygotes (TT - 6278.8 confirmed candidate gene for NSCL/P and give rise to further investigations ± 1560.4 mm², CC - 5500.7 ± 852.7 mm², CT - 5195.4 ± 1278.8 mm²; P = into its underlying functional basis. 0.04). P08.33 In conclusion, the results of this study in two independent samples have Analysis of association of polymorphic variants of D5S422 and shown the association of 964TT genotype with larger CSA of muscle fibers. D5S402 receptor gene gamma-aminobutyric acid GABRG2 with the It is necessary to conduct repetition studies of the MYF6 C964T polymor- level of intellectual development of man. phism in greater samples of elite athletes. A. Maraleva, O. Gumerova; P08.31 Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmully, Ufa, Russian Federation. New genes for normal hearing function and age-related hearing loss by genome-wide association and expression studies G. Girotto1, M. Lewis2, A. Buniello2, B. Lorente-Cánovas2, N. Pirastu1, K. P. Steel2, P. INTRODUCTION: gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) is the basic type of Gasparini1; inhibitory neurotransmitters in humans, providing a process of inhibition 1Med Genet, IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo Children Hospital,Univ.Trieste, (Trieste-Italy), Trieste, of the central nervous system by using three types of receptors. The gene Italy, 2Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, GABRG2 (5q34) encodes the alpha subunit of the gamma receptor GABA and Cambridge-Uk, Hinxton-Uk, United Kingdom. contains 9 exons. This gene has two polymorphic site (D5S422, D5S402), affecting gene expression and alter the permeability of the membrane for the transmission of nerve impulses. The analysis of polymorphic variants of Little is known about the molecular bases of normal hearing function and D5S422 and D5S402 on the GABRG2 gene in individuals with different levels age-related hearing loss (ARHL) or presbycusis. Thus, research still needs of intellectual development. to study hearing as a complex trait and to understand genetic factors un- METHODS: The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) carried out an analysis derlying ARHL. To reach this goal an integrated strategy has been designed D5S422 and D5S402 polymorphisms of the gene receptor gamma-amino- based on: A) GWAS on hearing quantitative traits as well as on ARHL qua- butyric acid GABRG2 in 180 unrelated individuals. The level of intellectual litative traits, and B) expression studies in wildtype mice (at 4 and 5 days development (IQ) in subjects determined by the method of Cattell. In accor- postnatal) using immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy of genes dance with the performance IQ subjects were divided into two groups: those identified by the GWAS. Up to now, for hearing quantitative traits we have with high (above 140 points) and low (below 95 points) level of intellectual run 2 meta-analyses of GWAS data (one with 6 isolated European populati- development. ons and 1 adding samples from Caucasus and Central Asia), while for ARHL RESULTS: Analysis of associations of polymorphic loci studied showed (qualitative traits) a candidate gene analysis has been performed. Matching a significant reduction in the frequency of allele D5S422 * 15 (7.61% vs. all the data we defined a list of 27 candidate genes that have been chosen for 21.15% in the group with low IQ; P = 0.0009, x2 = 13.3887), and increased expression analysis. 5 candidate genes show strikingly specific expression frequency of allele D5S402 * 2 (57.89% vs. 28.84%, P = 0.0031, x2 = 9.3491) in the cochlea (e.g at the top of sensory hair cells and in the marginal cells in the group with a high level of intellectual development. of the stria vascularis) while the other 12 are located in multiple cell types P08.34 in the cochlea. Additional studies now in progress include the identification Comparison of running time of variance-component based methods of variants in genes confirmed by expression analysis, the development of for whole genome association analysis mouse models, and replication of the data. G. R. Svishcheva, N. M. Belonogova, T. I. Axenovich, Y. S. Aulchenko; In conclusion, preliminary results prove the useful combination of GWAS Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. and expression studies in providing new insights into the molecular basis of hearing function and ARHL, and may suggest new targets for hearing im- pairment treatment and prevention. One of the most flexible and powerful methods of accounting for genetic substructures in genetic association testing is the variance component (VC) approach based on the mixed models. To decrease the computational com- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org216 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 plexity of this method, it was proposed using a two-stage score test instead via 1.28±0.89, P<0.001). of the standard likelihood ratio test. Several fast implementations of the Conclusions: Our results confirmed the association between the TGF-β1 score test, including approximate ones, have been developed recently. These polymorphisms and risk of AMI which suggest that genetic polymorphisms methods differ in their computational speed and the accuracy of the SNP in TGF-β1 might be helpful for determining susceptibility to AMI in Iranian effect estimation. We compared the running time of the different implemen- patients. There are also significant relationship between serum TGF-β1 and tations of score test (mmscore, EMMAX, FaST-LMM, GRAMMAR-Gamma), occurrence of AMI and susceptibility to AMI might be related to TGF-β1 gene using simulated data. The GRAMMAR-Gamma implementation provides the expression which affects serum levels. fastest means to run genome wide association study using mixed models. P08.37 Compared with EMMAX and the FaST-LMM, GRAMMAR-Gamma achieved a Genetic causes of Primary microcephaly in Iranian population speed-up of more than 30 and 10 times, respectively, for the data studied. H. Najmabadi1, L. Musante2, F. Larti1, Z. Fattahi1, M. Garshasbi2, S. Abedini1, M. Hosseini1, The more individuals and genetic markers are analyzed, the larger is the ex- A. Tzschach2, F. Behjati1, T. Wineker2, K. Kahrizi1, H. Ropers2; pected speed-up of GRAMMAR-Gamma compared to other methods. While 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Max Planck the scenario above assumes use of an SNP array, one of the current challen- Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. ges in statistical genomics is the analysis of whole-genome re-sequencing data. We investigated a scenario in which 36.5 millions of SNPs in 3,000 people were analyzed. Using GRAMMAR-Gamma method, the analysis of The volume of human brain through evolution has been tripled since the di- this data set was completed in 38 min. vergence from chimpanzees. This change has resulted in much higher com- We conclude that GRAMMAR-Gamma is a fast tool for the analysis of human plex wiring and physiology of the human brain. In primary microcephaly, GWA scans. Its role will increase in the future with the availability of larger reduction in brain size-without gross abnormalities in brain architecture or sample sizes and increased number of genetic markers. gyral formation-results in intellectual disabilities in majority of cases. So far, P08.35 seven genetic loci (MCPH1-7) with their genes have been mapped and ad- Linkage analysis of quantitative traits with a spike in the distribution ditional four novel genes (CAPN10, CNKSR1, HIST1H4B, and ZBTB40) have T. I. Axenovich1, I. V. Zorkoltseva1, C. M. van Duijn2; 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Erasmus Medical been identified by our group for this disorder. Identification of these genes, Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. which result in microcephaly, can explore the understanding of evolution of human brain size. Total of 114 families with two or more affected individuals with ID and pri- Quantitative data coming from proteomics and metabolomics studies often mary microcephaly have been recruited at Genetics Research Center since have irregular distribution, characterized by presence of a proportion of ob- 2004 of which 18 families had ataxia or other minor neurological symptoms. servations in the point-mass (spike) at zero and some continuous distribu- Short stature was observed in 12 families and the remaining families did not tion of non-negative values. Thus these data contain information about both show any additional features. In addition, all the affected individuals with the binary (zero or not) and continuous components. The general approach MCPH 5 gene regardless of their mutation had short stature. All the known to simultaneous analyses of these components was proposed by Broman genes have been excluded and the causative mutation in MCPH genes was (2003). However, his method focuses on experimental crosses. We intro- detected only in 20% of the families. For the rest large families, autozygo- duced Broman’s approach in the parametric linkage analysis of pedigree sity mapping was performed and one affected from each familiy has been data, which is applicable to large human pedigrees of arbitrary structure. subjected to exome sequencing. So far, we have identified number of novel We developed GADS software, which implements this method. Our software loci on chromosome 2, 4, 14, 17, and 21. Our results indicate that there are package includes not only the programs for parametric linkage analysis, but additional genes involved in microcephaly and there is high heterogeneity also the program for complex segregation analysis, which allows the esti- among the microcephaly families. mation of the model parameters used in linkage. We tested our method on P08.38 the real data about vertical cup-to-disc ratio, the important characteristic Analyses of MEFV Mutations in Patients with The Rheumatoid of the optic disc associated with glaucoma, in a large pedigree from a Dutch Arthritis genetically isolated population. Significant linkage signal was obtained on A. Inanir1, S. Yigit2, A. Habiboglu1, A. Rustemoglu2, O. Ates2; 1Gaziosmanpasa University Medical Faculty, Department of Physical Medicine and chromosome 6q23-q24 (LOD = 3.33) with the help of GADS, whereas the Rehabilitation, Tokat, Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa University Medical Faculty, Department analysis of the continiously distributed values demonstrated only a sug- of Medical Biology, Tokat, Turkey. gestive linkage to this chromosome. Our results support the feasibility of the simultaneous analyses of the point-mass observations and continuous measurements for the QTL mapping. The software GADS is freely available Objective/Aim: Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), a systemic, inflammatory, auto- at http://mga.bionet.nsc.ru/soft/index.html immune disorder, is called a complex genetic disease, meaning that several P08.36 genes and enviromental factors act in concert to cause pathological events. Implication of two transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta) gene Immum system genes including MEditerranean FeVer (MEFV) gene may af- polymorphisms in TGF-beta serum levels and susceptibility to acute fect the phenotype of RA. Therefore, we aimed to investigate the relation- myocardial infarction ships of MEFV gene mutations (M694V, M680I, V726A, P369S and E148Q A. Tabatabaei Panah1, R. Akbarzadeh Najar2, S. Ghaderian2; and ) and Rheumatoid Arthritis in Turkish population. 1Department of Biology, Islamic Azad University, East Tehran Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti Material And Method: In this study, we studied 110 (63 women, 47 men) University of Medical Sciences and Health Services, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. patients with RA and 140 (77 women, 63 men) healty control groups. MEFV mutations were analyzed by using PCR (polymerase chain reaction) and RFLP (Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphisms) methods. Purpose: Transforming growth factor beta-1 (TGF-β1) gene plays an im- Findings: The frequencies of MEFV gene mutations were detected 27/110 portant role in acute myocardial infarction (AMI), however little is known (24.5%) and 15 (10,7 %) in patient group and control group, respective- about the relation of variations within the gene and risk of cardiovascular ly. Our results showed that there were no significant differences between diseases. In this study, we evaluated the influence of TGF-β1 polymorphisms MEFV gene mutations and Rheumatoid Arthritis (p=0.006). on the onset and progression of AMI. Result: Our results reflect that MEFV mutations have a role in susceptibility Methods: Genomic DNA and peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) to Rheumatoid Arthritis in Turkish patients. Currently, we continue to te- of 900 enrolled patients with AMI and 900 control subjects were extracted. sting higher number of people in both patient and control groups to obtain The -509 C/T and 913G/C TGF-β1 polymorphisms as well as mRNA expres- more data. sion and serum levels of TGF-β1 were detected. P08.39 Results: The frequency of ‘T’allele in -509 C/T and ‘C’ allele in 913G/C po- Genome-wide, permutation-based rare variant analysis with lymorphisms were significantly higher in the patients than control subjects INTERSNP-RARE (P<0.001). There were significant differences in circulating levels of TGF-β1 D. Drichel1, A. Lacour1, C. Herold1, V. Schueller2, T. Vaitsiakhovich2, M. Leber2, M. Angisch2, T. Becker1,2; in the patients than in control subjects (34.96±1.74 via 30.46±1.46 respec- 1DZNE - German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute for tively, P<0.001) which these concentrations are associated with its gene po- Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany. lymorphism. There was a significant increase in serum levels in the patients who carry the ‘T’ allele in -509 C/T and ‘C’ allele in 913G/C, respectively (P<0.001). The mRNA expression levels of TGF-β1 were significantly higher Due to growing accessibility to comprehensive, genome-wide data, systema- in the patient serums compared with controls (TGF-β1/β-actin, 2.86±1.02 www.eshtigc .ionvregstigation of disease association with rare variants (MAF<5%) beco- www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 217 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 mes increasingly appealing. Methods: DNA was extracted using standard phenol-chloroform method. We present INTERSNP-RARE, a software for genome-wide rare-variant The screening of mentioned polymorphisms was performed using PCR- testing using different testing procedures: CMAT (cumulative minor allele RFLP procedure. A case- control association study was performed (rhinitis test), COLL (collapsing test, a version of CMC) and FR (Fisher_rare, a version group; n=300 and control group; n=160). Chi- square test was performed of the Fisher combination test). We offer an implementation of correspon- to compare proportions of subjects with different clinical features among ding extensions to variable-threshold (VT) tests using a method based on subjects with different genotypes.(All statistical analyses were performed permutations. Combined with permutation-based determination of p-value, using SPSS). this approach promises maximized power without overcorrection for mul- Result: There was significant association between rs2275913; IL17A and tiple testing while accounting for LD structure. allergic rhinitis (p=0.025) but no association between rs763780; IL17F and All rare-variant tests operate on bins, physically continuous chromosomal cited disease in Chaharmahal va Bakhtiari province was found (p=0.468). segments. Bins can be created algorithmically, using on distance or number Conclusions: Our data indicated that the IL17A may play an important role of (rare) SNPs. Additionally, creating bins from on user-supplied data in va- in the inflammatory response and promoting allergic rhinitis and rs 763780; rious formats is supported, facilitating binning strategies based on a priori 1L17F have no role in rhinitis in Iran. information like LD block structure or genomic function. Various functions P08.42 for bin modification, like merging and flanking are supported. Contribution of APO E allleles and ACE I/D polymorphism in the Results from our power study using simulated data offer insights into development of hypertension (HT) in Sleep Apnea-Hipoapnea strengths and shortcomings of implemented tests under different conditi- patients ons. Using 20 to 60 causal, protective or neutral rare SNPs per bin, we find M. Alonso1, J. De Frutos2, C. Arroyo2, M. Durán1, I. Ferandez1, F. Del Campo2; that the single-marker analysis outperforms other approaches in some 1SIyBnGdMr (oImnsetituto de Bioloogía y Genética Molecular), Valladolid, Spain, 2H.U.Rio Hortega, scenarios, in particular for relatively large MAFs and few causal markers Valladolid, Spain. (~10%), while CMAT and COLL have excellent power in models with ~30- 50% damaging and up to 20-30% protective variants. FR is well-powered even for a low fraction of causal SNPs (upwards from 10%) and highly ro- Sleep apnea/hypopnea syndrome (SAHS) is a common condition affecting bust with increasing number of protective markers. approximately 0.3-4% of the middle-aged population and is defined on the P08.40 basis of symptoms of daytime sleepiness and objective measures of disor- Explore the association between cytokines, cytokine related genes dered breathing and antidepressant in major depressive disorder: a Bayesian during sleep. . Several studies have identified SAHS as a risk factor for hy- approach pertension, but a direct etiologic link between these disorders has not been W. Chien1,2, Y. Chang3, I. Lin1, Y. Bai3, M. Lin1,4; established definitively. 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Deparment Aims: Evaluate the influence of polymorphisms on the APO E gene and the of Life Sciences and Institute of Genome Sciences, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, I/D polymorphism on ACEI in the presence of hypertension (HT) In Sleep Taiwan, 3Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, Apnea - Hipoapnea Syndrome patients. 4Department of Medical Research & Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Methods: APO E and ACEI I/D genotypes were obtained from 99 controls Taiwan. and 114 patients with a diagnosis of sleep apnea-hipoapnea sindrome after polysomnography in the Sleep unit of the Rio Hortega Hospital. Results: There were not any difference in the APO E alleles frequency bet- With the recent advance in pharmacogenetics, how to combine data of ge- ween patients and controls, but SAHS patients carrying the APO E ε4 allele netic markers and biomarkers to predict treatment response in diseases showed an increased frequency of HT 3,145 higher than ε3 homozygous has become an important issue in population health sciences. This kind of and ε2 carriers(CI 1.269-7.79 ). These findings keep significant even after studies generally contain data from a number of subjects, each of whom has correction for sex . The ACE I/D genotypes were in Hardy-Weinberg equili- been observed on one or more times, with a binary or continuous response brium (p<0.05) and they seem don´t have any influence on the development and possibly some covariates recorded for ea ch subject on every time. Thus, of HT in these patients (DD OR 0,478 (CI 0,21-1,08) the issue of the correlation of repeated measures in a single subject has to Conclusions:. Our results demonstrate that the presence of the ε4 allele in- be taken into account in statistical analysis.For binary outcomes with re- creases the probability to develop HT in Sleep Apnea patients. We suggested peated measurements, one of the most commonly used analysis methods that this allele could be useful as a biological marker for identification of a is generalized linear mixed model (GLMM) and the parameter estimation subgroup of SAHS patients who are more likely to have HT. in GLMM typically involves maximum likelihood. However, for small samp- P08.43 le sizes, likelihood-based estimation can be unreliable and their variance SVM-based generalized multifactor dimensionality reduction components are difficult to estimate. To overcome such problems, we ap- approaches for detecting gene-gene interactions in family studies ply the Bayesian framework in the GLMM by assigning prior distributions Y. Chiu, Y. Fang; for the fixed effects, random effects as well as for variance components. Af- Institute of Population Health Sciences, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, ter deriving posterior distributions of these parameters, we can generate Taiwan. posterior samples by MCMC to make inferences. The performance of the proposed procedures was compared with likelihood-based methods by si- mulation studies. Finally, we applied our proposed model to a case-control Gene-gene interaction plays an important role in the etiology of complex major depression study with twelve week treatment of antidepressants to diseases, which may exist without a genetic main effect. Most current sta- evaluate whether cytokines and their related genes might play some role in tistical approaches, however, focus on assessing an interaction effect in the susceptibility to depressive disorders as well as in the treatment response presence of the gene’s main effects. It would be very helpful to develop me- of antidepressant. thods that can detect not only the gene’s main effects but also gene-gene P08.41 interaction effects regardless of the existence of the gene’s main effects Analysis of IL-17 A and IL17F Genetic Polymorphisms as Risk Factors while adjusting for confounding factors. In addition, when a disease variant for Allergic Rhinitis is rare or when the sample size is quite limited, the statistical asymptotic F. Fatahi, H. Khazraei, A. Salehi, N. Bagheri, K. Kihan Ghatreh, M. Hashemzadeh; properties are not applicable; therefore, approaches based on a reasonable Cell and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, and applicable computational framework would be practical and frequently Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. applied. In this study, we have developed an extended support vector ma- chine (SVM) method and an SVM-based pedigree based generalized mul- tifactor dimensionality reduction (PGMDR) method to study interactions Background and Aims: The development of allergic rhinitis entails a com- in the presence or absence of main effects of genes with an adjustment for plex interaction between genetic predisposition and environmental expos- covariates using limited samples of families. A new test statistic is proposed ure to different factors that allergens are the most important. Responding for classifying the affected and the unaffected in the SVM-based PGMDR ap- molecules are; chemokine’s and their receptors, interleukins and their re- proach to improve performance in detecting gene-gene interactions. Simu- ceptors, eosinophil peroxidase and leukotriene’s, among others. The inter- lation studies under various scenarios have been performed to compare the leukin-17 cytokines (IL17A and IL17F) are emerging as critical players in performances of the proposed and the original methods. The proposed and host defense responses and inflammatory diseases. This study investigated original approaches have been applied to a real data example for illustration the association between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in IL17A and comparison. Both the simulation and real data studies show that the gene promoter (rs2275913, IL17 G152A) and IL17F exon 3(rs763780 IL17F proposed SVM and SVM-based PGMDR methods have great prediction accu- 161His-Arg) and Rhinitis-related traits among the patients in Iran. racies, consistencies, and power in detecting gene-gene interactions. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org218 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P08.44 The frequency of common α-deletions among β-thalassemia minor VEGF +405G>C HIF1A 1771C>T ( , 1790G>A individuals and the importance of it in blood indexes change by T(he four SNPs in geHnMesO iXn1v o-4lv1e3dA i>nT t he hypoxia-re lated signaling pathway: comparing data in an Iranian population. (rs2010963), rs11549465) A. Moosavi, M. Karimipoor; rs11549467) and (rs2071746)were analyzed in search Molecular Medicine Department,Biotechnology Research Center,Pasteur Istitute of IRAN, for the functional differences predisposing either to the aneurysmal or to Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the occlusive type of arterial diseases. The case-control study was designed, in which the series of 535 patients with abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), 365 patients with aortoiliac occlu- β-thalassemia is the most common monogenic disorder in Iran, and one of sive disease (AOID) and 316 persons without symptoms of vascular diseases the challenges in the screening of the carriers is the coinheritance of alpha were analyzed. AsVsoEcGiaFt+io4n0s5 bCe tween studied alleles/haplotypes and the in- thalassemia mutations. Alfa-thalassemia acts as a secondary modifier in cli- termediate traits related to the vascular diseases were also examined. nical manifestations of beta thalassemia. In the view of high prevalence of The frequency of allele carriers in the AAA (50,6%) and AIOD alfa - thalassemia mutations in many parts of the country, its coinheritance (49,3%) groups was 1,4-fold higher thHaMn OthXa1t -i4n1 t3hTe control group (41, 6%; with beta-thal may cause misdiagnosis. p=0,01 and p=0,048, respectively). AIOD patients significantly differ from The aim of this study was to determine the carrier frequency of alpha dele- the other groups in the frequency of allele carriers; theob- tions in carriers of beta-thalassemia with known mutations in beta-globin serHvMedO fXr1e q-4u1e3nTcies were: 61,8% (AIOD) << 71,3% (AAA, p=0,003) < 74,8% gene and compare some data of them to interpret the importance of these (controls; p=0,0004). In patients, weak positive correlations between dose coinheritances. of allele and fasting glucose (β=0,074; p=0,037) and triglyce- The study includes families referred from different primary health care cen- ride (β=0,070; p=0,04) levels were foundH (MadOjXu1s ted for age , gender and type ters with microcytic hypochromic anemia [MCV<80fl; MCH<27pg] and A2> of vascular disease). However those associations should be considered ca- 3.5. After providing informed consent, genomic DNA was extracted from refully because theVrEeG wFa+s4 a0 d5eCv iation in genotypedistribution from peripheral blood leukocytes by salting out method. Allele-specic PCR was HWE in twHo MouOtX o1f -t4h1r3eTe studied groups. exp;oited for common β-mutations. Then common alpha deletions (-α3.7, In conclusion, 1) allele is the risk factor of large arteries di- -α4.2, -α20.5 and seases, 2) allele may be involved in AAA pathogenesis by in- - MED) were screened by multiplex gap PCR. creasing the predisposition to diabetes and dyslipidemia. Supported by the Among 227 β-thalassemia minor individuals we found alfa thal mutations National Science Centre grant NN403_250440. in 43 cases: 37 heterozygote -α3.7(16.3%), 5 homo -α3.7 (2.2%)and 1 -MED P09.002 (0.44%). ICAM-1 and CCR5 gene polymorphism and susceptibility to abdominal The results show the high prevalence of the coinheritance of alfa- and beta- aortic aneurysm or aortoiliac occlusive disease thal in a selected Iranian population and the changes are different. There- A. Korcz1, S. Hryhorowicz2, O. Zakerska2, K. Pawlaczyk3, M. Molinska-Glura3, G. Oszkinis3, fore, it is highly recommended that physicians and genetic counselors in- R. Slomski1, M. Gabriel3; volved in the screening program of beta-thalassemia major in the country 1Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, consider this phenomenon. Poland, 3Poznan University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. P08.45 A novel gene-gene interaction: the role of SPRY2 and SPRY4 in tooth Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) is a life-threatening condition affecting agenesis susceptibility M. F. Alves-Ferreira1, T. Pinho2, A. Sousa1,3, J. Sequeiros1,3,4, C. Lemos1,3, I. Alonso1,3; 4-9% of population with a risk increasing with age. Aortoiliac occlusive 1UnIGENe, IBMC, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2CICS, ISCS-N/CESPU, Portugal, disease (AIOD) is characterized by aortoiliac obstruction and is caused by Paredes, Portugal, 3ICBAS, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 4CGPP, IBMC, University advanced atherosclerosis. Both of these common vascular disorders are of Porto, Porto, Portugal. considered to have multifactorial etiology with both genetic and environ- mental risk factors involved. Destructive remodeling of extracellular matrix and histological signs of chronic inflammation associates both of these pa- Tooth agenesis affects 20% of the world population and agenesis of maxilla- thologies. ry lateral incisors (MLIA) is one of the most frequent subtypes, characteri- ICAM1 and chemokine CCR5 are mediators of inflammatory process. The zed by the absence of formation of deciduous or permanent lateral incisors. CCR5_32 deletion genetic variant was found to be associated with AAA in Odontogenesis is a complex mechanism regulated by sequential and reci- Italian population. The ICAM1 (K469E) genetic variant was characterized procal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Disturbances in FGF signalling as potentially affecting the autoimmunity process.The purpose of the pre- can lead to abnormalities in odontogenesis, resulting in alterations in the sent study was to determine if there is an association between the ICAM1 formation of the normal number of teeth. Sprouty family members function (nt+469) or CCR5_32 deletion gene polymorphisms and susceptibility to as a negative feedback regulator of FGF signalling. AAA or AIOD in Polish patients. Genotyping was performed by PCR and gel Therefore, our aim was to study for the first time the involvement of SPRY2 electrophoresis for CCR5 and by pyroseqencing for ICAM1 in three selected and SPRY4 genes in MLIA susceptibility and to explore a possible gene-gene groups: 300 patients with AAA and 305 patients with AIOD who underwent interaction. surgery; 310 individuals from control group. Genotypes were compared A case-control study, in a total of 306 individuals, is underway; a case-control with demographic and clinical data of subjects and analyzed in relation to ratio of 1:2 was achieved in order to increase the study statistical power. We risk factors. No significant differences in genotype distribution and allele selected 10 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which were frequencies of ICAM1 (nt+469) or CCR5_32 deletion were found between genotyped by SNaPshot, using a multiplex approach. patients with AAA or AIOD and control group. Conclusion: We found no evi- We found that the GA genotype of rs504122 in SPRY2 gene leads to an in- dence of association of ICAM1 (nt+469) or CCR5_32 gene polymorphisms creased risk in individuals with MLIA (p=0.008). Noteworthy, we uncovered and AAA or AIOD in Polish patients. a strong synergistic interaction between these two genes and MLIA liabili- P09.003 ty. Correlation between polymorphism of ACE gene and Insulin-like Although the molecular mechanisms involved in tooth agenesis remain Growth Factor-l (IGF-1) in malnourished children unknown, our results provide the first evidence of the involvement of sp- O. C. Marginean1, C. Duicu2, C. Banescu3; routy genes in MLIA susceptibility, leading to a better understanding of the 1Pediatric Department No 1, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, genetic mechanisms underlying this trait. Tg. Mures, Romania, 2Pediatric Department No 2, University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania, 3Genetic Department, University of Medicine P09. Complex traits and polygenic disorders and Pharmacy Tg. Mures, Romania, Tg. Mures, Romania. P09.001 Malnutrition is a clinical problem caused by inadequate intake of one or Polymorphisms in genes involved in the hypoxia-related signaling more nutritional elements, and it is one of the most important health pro- pathway are associated with abdominal aortic aneurysm and blems in developing countries. The aim of this study is to determine the re- aortoiliac occlusive disease Mlataiotenrsihailp a anmd omnge tbhooddy weight, concentrations of IGF-1 and ACE gene poly- E. Strauss1, K. Waliszewski2, R. Staniszewski2, K. Milanowska1, R. Slomski1; morphisms in malnourished children. 1Institute of Human Genetics the Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, : The study group consisted of 50 children diagnosed 2Department of General and Vascular Surgery, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, wReitshu lmtsalnoutrition. Fifty healthy children were enrolled as the control Poznan, Poland. group. All children were genotyped for I/D gene ACE polymorphism. : Three genotypes of 16th intron of ACE gene(D/D,D/I,I/I) were de- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 219 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 tected. The distribution of ACE DD, ID, and II genotypes in malnourished Results: Adipophilin was constantly secreted into breast milk during the patients were 32; 50 and 18%, respectively; while for the control group whole period of the study. The maternal serum circulating levels were ex- were 44; 44 and 12% respectively. Compared with control subjects, I-allele tremely low (<0.8 ug/l), while the adipophilin levels in breast milk substan- frequency and I/D+I/I frequency of ACE gene were higher in malnourished tially exceeded serum levels at the given timepoints (p = 0.03). Two SNPs children (43% and 68%, respectively; P>0.05). in exonic sequence of PLIN2 gene were identified, synonymous rs2228416 Malnourished children had significantly lower body weight, height, mid-arm and missense rs35568725 that were not associated with maternal serum / cCiorcnucmlufseiroennsce, skinfold thickness, mean serum IGF-1 levels compared with breast milk levels of adipophilin. healthy subjects (P<0.05). Conclusion: This is the first study to demonstrate that adipophilin is secre- : There is polymorphism of the ACE gene in healthy and mal- ted into human breast milk during the whole 6 months after the birth. We nourished children. Malnutrition is characterized by the important de- do not report major association of investigated exonic variations of PLIN2 creases in the IGF-1 level. ACE polymorphism is not a significant factor for gene with adipophilin levels in maternal serum / breast milk in the Central- nAucktrnitoiownlaeld dgiesmorednertss :a n,,Tdh diso epsa npoert cios nptrairbtuiatell yt os tuhpep oordtdesd obf ym tahlne oSuetcrtitoiroanl European population. iOnp cehrailtdiorenna.l Programme Human Resources Development, financed from the P09.007 European Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract The impact of CFH, ARMS2 and APOE gene polymorphisms in Greek number POSDRU/89/1.5/S/60782” age related macular degeneration patients M. B. Petersen1, I. Skalidakis2, A. Velissari3, M. Apostolopoulos2, M. Stefaniotou4, G. Kitsos4, H. Kokotas1, C. Kroupis3; 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s Hospital, P09.004 Athens, Greece, 21st Department of Ophthalmology, ‘G. Gennimatas’ Hospital, Athens First systematic association study for achalasia points to a strong University Medical School, Athens, Greece, 3Department of Clinical Biochemistry, involvement of the HLA region within the disease process Attikon Hospital, Athens University Medical School, Athens, Greece, 4Department of J. Becker1,2, M. Knapp3, M. M. Wouters4, C. Wijmenga5, G. Trynka5, G. E. Boeckxstaens4,6, M. Ophthalmology, Ioannina University Medical School, Ioannina, Greece. M. Nöthen1,2, I. Gockel7, J. Schumacher1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Age related macular degeneration (ARMD) is a degenerative ocular disease, 4Research Center for Gastrointestinal Disorders, Catholic University of Leuven, Leuven, which may lead to serious loss of central vision. Genetic background seems Belgium, 5Genetics Department, University Medical Center and University of Groningen, to have an impact on the onset and progress of the disease. The aim of the Groningen, Netherlands, 6Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal research, Academic present study was to assess the association between ARMD and the single Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 7Department of General and Abdominal nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) Y402H (rs1061170) in the CFH gene, Surgery, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. A69S (rs10490924) in the ARMS2 gene and APOE2 (rs7412) in the APOE gene. Genotyping was performed on isolated DNAs from peripheral blood samples from 27 patients with ARMD and 34 age-matched controls, all of Ideopathic achalasia is a rare esophageal motility disorder with a lifetime whom were clinically evaluated with optical acuity measurement and fun- prevalence of 1:10,000. It is a neurodegenerative disorder in which the neu- duscopy. A real-time PCR-melting curve analysis methodology in the Light- rons of the myenteric plexus are lost, leading to dysfunction of the lower Cycler (Roche) was developed for the Y402H SNP genotyping. Genotyping of esophageal sphincter (LES) and to a derangement of esophageal peristalsis. the A69S and APOE2 SNPs was performed with PCR-RFLP methods. Statisti- In the final stage of achalasia, esophageal motility is irreversibly impaired, cally significant association was found for Y402H SNP (OR=2.68, p=0.012). and complications ensue because of the retention of food that is no longer The association between ARMD and the A69S and APOE2 SNPs did not re- transported into the stomach. The cause of achalasia is mainly unknown, but ach levels of statistical significance. The present study confirmed the repor- autoimmune processes appear to be involved in individuals with a geente atilc. ted association between Y402H SNP and ARMD in the Greek population as susceptibility. In the present study, we performed the first systematic asso- well. The potential association of the A69S and APOE2 SNPs with the disea- ciation analysis for achalasia using Illumina´s Immunochip (Trynka, G. , se amidst Greek population needs further evaluation on larger samples. Nature Genetics 2011), enriched for immune-relevant loci. To the best of our P09.008 knowledge, we analyzed the largest achalasia case-control sample that has Modelling the genetic risk in age-related macular degeneration been studied so far. The sample consisted of 633 cases with ideopathic acha- F. Grassmann1, L. G. Fritsche1, C. Keilhauer2, I. M. Heid3, B. H. F. Weber1; lasia and 2,653 population-based controls from Germany, Belgium, and The 1Institute for Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany, 2University Eye Hospital Netherlands. After quality control 126,899 markers from the Immunochip Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, 3Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, remained for assocHiaLtAion testing and the analysis yielded a total of 24 mar- Regensburg, Germany. kPers reaching genome-wide significance. All of the asPsociated markers are locatedP wit-h15in the region and the most significant finding (r-s151794265; =7.53x10 ) yiel-d3ed a stHroLnAger signal in females ( =H2L.8A3x10 ) than in Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a common sight-threatening di- males ( =1.94x10 ). Further analyses to determine how many independent sease of the central retina affecting approximately 1 in 30 Caucasians. Besi- findings are present in the region and to assess the alleles that may des age and smoking, genetic variants from nine gene loci have reproducibly be involved in the disease process are ongoing and will be presented at the been associated with this condition and likely explain a large proportion of congress. disease. Here, we genotyped 16 AMD risk variants from 8 gene loci in 986 P09.005 late stage AMD patients and 796 controls. We developed a risk model for Adipophilin (ADRP/ADPH/PLIN2): Variability in Exonic Regions and AMD based on a genetic risk score (GRS) calculated from a parsimonious set Secretion of Adipophilin into Breast Milk of thirteen variants from eight AMD loci. The model exhibited good discri- Z. Splichal1, L. Fauveau1, J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, J. Tomandl2, M. Tomandlova2, Z. minative accuracy (area under the receiver-operating curve = 0.820). We Hodicka3, P. Ventruba3, A. Vasku1, P. Bienert1; present a five-category risk classification with the relative risk for AMD of 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, individuals in the highest category (GRS >3.44, about 0.5% of general po- Czech Republic, 2Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, pulation) being 70.4 compared to subjects with the most common genetic Brno, Czech Republic, 3Clinic of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University affiliated Hospital, background (GRS -0.05-1.70, 40.2% of general population). Noteworthy, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. younger AMD patients with an age below 75 years had a significantly higher genetic risk score (1.87, 95% CI: 1.69-2.05) than patients aged 75 and above in the same risk groups (1.45, 95% CI: 1.36-1.54). Our findings underscore Introduction: Adipophilin (ADRP/ADPH/PLIN2), a member of the perilipin the large proportion of AMD explained by genetics particularly for younger (PAT) family of lipid droplet proteins, is believed to play a crucial role in both AMD patients. Our risk classification could be useful for therapeutic strati- formation and secretion of milk lipids in mammals. The aim of our study was fication or as screening test once preventive treatment is available. to determine whether adipophilin is secreted into human breast milk and to associate adipophilin levels in breast milk with the exonic variations of the P09.009 adipophilin gene. Epigenetic alteration of the dopamine transporter gene in alcohol Material and methods: The total of 20 pregnant women with physiological dependent patients is associated with age V. Nieratschker1, M. Großhans1, J. Frank1, J. Strohmaier1, C. von der Goltz1, O. El Maarri2, pregnancy, originating from the Caucasian Central-European population, S. H. Witt1, S. Cichon2,3, M. M. Nöthen2,4, F. Kiefer1, M. Rietschel1; were enrolled into the study and serum-milk sample duos were collected at 1CIMH, Mannheim, Germany, 2University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Research Centre the time of birth and at the days 1-3, 12-14, 28-30, 88-90 and 178-180 post- Jülich, Jülich, Germany, 4German Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders (DZNE), Bonn, partum and investigated using ELISA-based methodology. The exons 3-7 of the PLIN2 gene were directly sequenced. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org220 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Germany. Committee, Education Development Centerand Talented Students Office, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Chronic alcohol abuse and dependence are associated with dysfunctional dopaminergic neurotransmission in mesocorticolimbic circuits. Genetic and Late-Onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD) is the most common form of AD that environmental factors have been shown to modulate susceptibility to alco- affecting people over 65 years old. The etiology of LOAD is complex that has hol dependence, and both may act through epigenetic mechanisms that can strong genetic heterogeneity. The studies show that the different regions modulate gene expression, e.g. DNA methylation at CpG sites. Recent studies on chromosome 10(CALHM1) has concordant to LOAD in linkage analysis. have suggested that DNA methylation patterns may change over time. Ho- CALHM1 encodes a transmembrane glycoprotein that controls cytosolic wever, few data are available concerning the rate of these changes in specific Ca2+ concentrations and Aβ levels. The previous studies reported that that genes. A recent study found that hypermethylation of the promoter of the P86L polymorphism in this gene is significantly associated with LOAD. dopamine transporter (DAT) gene was positively correlated with alcohol Our main objective was to determine the relationship between this poly- dependence, and negatively correlated with alcohol craving. The aim of the morphism and the risk of LOAD in 160 AD patients and 163 healthy controls present study was to replicate these findings in a larger sample of alcohol of Azerbaijan population. DNA was extracted of blood specimens that collec- dependent patients and population-based controls matched for age and sex. ted of these groups. The genotype and allele frequencies were determined in No difference in methylation level was observed between patients and con- test and control goups using PCR/RFLP method. trols, and no difference in methylation level was observed before and after Analysis of acquired data with statistical methods of allele and genotype fre- alcohol withdrawal in patients. However, patients with more severe craving quency distribution of P86L genotype showed slight significant difference showed a trend towards lower DAT methylation levels (p=0.07), which is between the two study groups, that we concluded that T allele (mutant) has consistent with previous findings. Furthermore, in our overall sample, DAT a protective role and is nearly significant between two groups (p= 0.026). methylation levels increased with age. Interestingly, a separate analysis of P09.012 patients suggested that this finding was mainly driven by the patient group. Genetic testing of Alzheimer’s Disease associated polymorphisms Although the present data do not clarify whether chronic alcohol abuse is using biochip-based assay responsible for this phenomenon or merely enhances an aging specific pro- I. I. Nizamutdinov1, T. V. Andreeva2,3, A. Y. Goltsov3, S. S. Kunijeva2,3, E. I. Rogaev2,3, A. S. cess, our findings suggest that hypermethylation in alcohol dependent pati- Zasedatelev1, T. V. Nasedkina1; 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Vavilov ents is a consequence, rather than a cause, of the disorder. Institute of General Genetics RAS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Center of P09.010 Mental Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Follow-up study of a genome-wide association scan in alopecia areata: IL13 and KIAA0350 as new susceptibility loci supported with APOE genome-wide significance Late-onset Alzheimer‘s disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia S. Redler1, D. Jagielska2, F. F. Brockschmidt1,3, C. Herold4, S. Pasternack1, N. Garcia in the elderly. The presence of an epsilon4 allele is a well-established Bartels5, S. Hanneken6, S. Eigelshoven6, M. Refke1, K. A. Giehl7, R. Kruse8, G. Lutz9, H. Wolff7, B. Blaumeiser10, M. Böhm11, U. Blume-Peytavi2, T. Becker4,12, M. M. Nöthen1,3, R. C. genetic risk factor for AD, with a higher percentage of epsilon4 allele in Betz1; pCLaUtieTnOtsM wMi4th0 AEDXO cCo3mLp2aGriAnBg2 toA 2gMeneCrRa1l pBoIpNu1lationP. IRCAecLeMnt genome-wide 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Clinical Research association studies also have identified the other loci of interest including Center for Hair and Skin Science, Department for Dermatology, Berlin, Germany, , , , , , , and , as putative ge- 3Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, netic determinants of the late-onset form of AD. The aim of the work was 4German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Bonn, Germany, to develop biochip for simple and rapid genetic tests of allelic variations in 5Clinical Research Center for Hair and Skin Science, Department for Dermatology, these genes in population and AD cohorts. The genotyping assay has been Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Dermatology, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 7Department of Dermatology, University developed employing multiplex PCR and allele-specific hybridization of the of Munich, Munich, Germany, 8Dermatological Practice, Paderborn, Paderborn, Germany, amplicon probes on low-density gel-based biochips. In total, set of 235 case- 9Dermatological Practice Hair & Nail, Wesseling, Wesseling, Germany, 10Department control subjects of Russian origin have been tested to validate the sensitivity of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 11Department of and specificity of the biAocPhOiEp. The genotype data CaLrUe in agreement with de- Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 12Institute for Medical Biometry, scribed associations in both Russian and other European origin populations Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. showing association of epsilon4 allele and C -allele A(rPsO1E1136000) in AD (OR = 2.34, 95%CI= 1.22-4.47, p=0.01 and OR = 1.6, 95% CI=1.06-2.4, p = 0,024, respectively). Additionally, protective effectfor the epsilon2 Alopecia areata is a common genetic complex hair loss disorder which af- allele has been observed (OR = 0.28, 95% CI=0.13-0.63, p = 0,001). fects approximately 1-2% of the general population, including both sexes The work was supported by Ministry of Science and Education of Russian and all age groups. Although the scalp is the most commonly affected site in Federation (State contract # 02.527.11.0006) and EU 7-th Framework Pro- AA, all hair-bearing areas of the skin, including the eyebrows and eyelashes, gramme (Grant Agreement # 242257). may be affected. Recently, the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) P09.013 of alopecia areata (AA) was performed in a North American sample, and this Association study between APOE and TNF- α gene variations and identified eight susceptibility loci surCpTaLsAsi4ngI Lg-2enRoAme-wide significance. sporadic Alzheimer’s disease in Iranian population The aim of the present follow-up association analysis was to determine N. Safavi naini, S. Momeni, K. Kamali, M. Ohadi, M. Karimloo, H. Khorram Khorshid; five of these eight loci (SNPs from the , , and the HLA regions Genetic Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, were not included due to previous own findings) and to test 12 other loci Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. from the GWAS which did not surpass the threshold for genome-wide si- gnificance. Twenty three SNPs from the 17 loci were investigated using a sample of 1,702 Central EuropUeLaBnP 3AAU LpBatPi6enPtsR DanXd5 1IL,7-223I Lc-o2n1trSoTlsX.1 O7f the Introduction: Amyloid ß (Aß) peptide deposits and Neurofibrillary tangles fIiKvZeF l4ocEi RwBiBth3 previously reported genome-wide significance, association have key roles in pathogenesis and progression of the late-onset Alzhimer’s was confirmed for all of these: / , , / , , and disease. Likewise it has been shown that inflammatory reactions play a si- / (P-value <16 0.05). To detect robust evidence for association gnificant role as well. Inflammatory mediators such as complement, che- among the 12 other loci, a meta-analysis of the present association data and mokines and cytokines activators and inhibitors can release from activated the data of the recent GWAS was performed. Genome-wide significant asso- microglia and astrocytes, causing neuronal dysfunction and death. One of ciatioInL -w13as founKdIA fAo0r 3r5s020C5L4E1C (1P6cAomb=7.52*10-10; OR=1.30 [1.23-1.38]) the most important cytokines is tumor nTeNcrFo-s αis factoArP-Oα E(TNF-α). This study and rs998592I L(-P1c3omb=K1I.1A1A*01305-011C1L9E; CO1R6=A1.28 [1.21-1.36]), thus establis- was designed and carried out to determine the association between spora- hing and / as two new susceptibility loci for AA. dic Alzheimer’s disease and the human and gene vTarNiaFt-iαons in Interestingly, and / are susceptibility loci for other Iranian population. autoimmune diseases, supporting the hypothesis of shared pathways of au- Materials and Methods: In this case - controTlN sFt-uαd y, the role of gene toimmune susceptibility. polymorphism was determined in 167 sporadic AD patients and 163 healthy P09.011 controls. Genomic DNA was extracted and -850C/T promoter poly- Association of CALHM1 Gene Polymorphism with Late Onset morphism was genotyped using PCR/RFLP technique. Comparing the ge- Alzheimer Disease notype and allelic frequencies were analyzed using chi-square TanNdF -lαo gistic J. Gharesouran1, M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, M. Rezazadeh1,2,3; regression tests by SPSS 11.5. 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz University of Medical Results: The obtained results indicated that the frequency of -850 Sciences, tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Genetic Research Center, University of Social heterozygoteT NgFe-nαo type (CT) was significantly higher in AD patients com- Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Research Student paring healthy controls (p=0.038). Although no significant difference were observed in -850 homozygote genotype (TT) and T allele between the www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 221 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 TNF-α APOE P09.016 The challenges of molecular genetic testing in Arrhythmogenic Right studied groups. No interaction was shownT bNeFt-wαe en -850 and Ventricular Cardiomyopathy genepolymorphisms as well. J. M. Taylor1, C. Willoughby1, S. Reid1, K. Thomson1, E. Blair2; Conclusion: These data suggests the role of -850 TC genotype as a risk 1Oxford Medical Genetics Laboratory,, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Department of Clinical factor for AD in Iranian population. Although to show the effects of homo- Genetics, Oxford, United Kingdom. zygote genotype (TT) and T allele, a study with a larger sample size maybe indicated. P09.014 Arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia (ARVC/D) is The effect of AVPR1B gene polymorphisms on personality traits in characterised by fibrofatty replacement of the RV myocardium and a marked healthy individuals from Russia predisposition to ventricular arrhythmias; it is clinically and genetically he- Y. Suleymanova1, A. Kazantseva2, S. Malykh3, E. Khusnutdinova1,2; terogeneous. ARVC/D is generally considered to be an autosomal dominant 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and trait. The incomplete penetrance and variable disease expression seen in Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Psychological Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. this condition suggests a complex aetiology. Approximately 50% of patients are reported to have variants in genes encoding components of the cardiac desmosome; with 4-8% of index cases having more than one desmosomal Since the role of arginine vasopressin in modulation of social behaviors was gene variant. The difficulties in interpreting the clinical significance of vari- established, we aimed to define a single genotype and haplotype effect of ants in these genes are highlighted in the literature and the utility of genetic AVPR1B (rs28632197 and rs33911258) gene polymorphisms on personali- diagnosis in this condition the subject of debate. PKP2 ty traits assessed with TCI-125. SDiSnPceD 2S0G028, OxfoDrSdC 2Medical Genetics Laboratory has provided a diagnostic We recruited1018 healthy individuals (68% women) of Caucasian ori- service for the four most commonly associated desmosomal genes: , gin (Russians-357, Tatars-549, Chuvashs-112) from Russia (mean age: , , and . >175 individuals referred with a clinical or probable 19.53±2.24 years) without any history of psychopathologies. Genotyping of clinical diagnosis oPfK APR2V C/D have been analysDeSdP to date. PDroSbGa2ble/possible two polymorphisms was performed using PCR-RFLP. Statistical analysis was dDiSsCe2ase causing variants were identified in ~46%. The majority of variants conducted with SPSS 13.0, PLINK v.1.07, Haploview 4.1. were detected in (27%), followed by (12%), (11%) and ANOVA demonstrated an association of AVPR1B rs33911258 and Coopera- (6%). 12% of index cases who had variants thought highly likely to be tion in males (p=0.003;F=8.77) occurred mainly due to the lower Coope- pathogenic also harboured at least one other desomosomal gene variant. ration in Tatar males bearing G-allele (p=0.028;F=4.90) compared to A/A- The results of genetic testing in our cohort will be compared to the litera- genotype-carriers. Subsequent haplotype analysis revealed an association ture. The challenges in unravelling the molecular aetiology of ARVC/D in of AVPR1B A*G-haplotype (rs28632197 and rs33911258, respectively, a family will be discussed and the utility of genetic testing in this disorder D’=0.87) and higher Self-transcendence (ST) (p=0.008; R2=0.6%) and G*A- examined. haplotype and lower scores on ST (p=0.003; R2=0.7%) in the total group. P09.017 The same effect of G*A-haplotype on ST was observed in Chuvashs (p=0.007; Anti-leukotriene therapy with Montelukast reduce expression of R2=6.6%), mainly caused by haplotype effect in Chuvash females (p=0.002; IL12B genes, which are overexpressed in children with asthma R2=12.1%). P. Perin1,2,3, U. Potočnik1,2; Our findings indicate that AVPR1B gene has larger impact on character- 1University of Maribor, Faculty of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Maribor, than on temperament traits (according to TCI-125). Moreover,ethnicity me- Slovenia, 2University of Maribor, Faculty of Medicine, Maribor, Slovenia, 3University of diated the main and haplotype effect of AVPR1B gene polymorphisms on Maribor, Faculty of Health Science, Maribor, Slovenia. sociability-related character traits. Study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research (#11-04- IL12B IL13 97032-r_povolzhye_a). Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the cytokine gene cluster on P09.015 5q31-33 region, that includes genes and , was associated with Array comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) as a clinical asthma developmeInLt1. 3HoILw1e2vBer, theIL r2o3leR of those SNPs in asthma behavior diagnostic tool in syndromic and nonsyndromic Congenital Heart and response to therapy is poorly characterized. The aim of our study is to Defects analyze the role of , and genes in asthma pathogenesis and A. Syrmou1, M. Tzetis1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, H. Fryssira1, K. Kosma1, V. Oikonomakis1, K. determinate their role in response to diferent therapies. We have included Giannikou1,2, E. Kanavakis1; 288 children with asthma and 186 healthy individuals. Genotyping was per- 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, «Aghia Sophia» Childrens formed by PCR-RFLP tIeLc1h2nBiq ue. Gene expression was measured by TaqMan Hospital,Greece, Athens, Greece, Greece, 2Alexander S. Onassis Public Benefit Foundation, assay using real-time PCR. The data were statistically analyzed. We were Athens, Austria. the first to found that genILe 1is2 Bo verexpressed in asthmatics compared Aim: to the control group (p<I0L.2030R1). After treatment with anti-leukotriene drug montelukast the expression of was reduced (p=0.015I)L. 1M2oBntelukast • Congenital Heart Diseases (CHD) are often associated with other con- affect the expression of gene, which significantly increased after the genital anomalies, peculiar facies and developmental delay and only few ca- therapy. In eQTL analysis, we found that the expression of is signi- ses of chromosomal abnormalities are detected by conventional cytogenetic ficantly higher in carriers of at least one allele of SNP rs6887695 G, which techniques. The microarray Comparative Genomic Hybridization analysis was in preliminary studies identified as a risk factor for chronic immune- (array CGH) allows the identification of submicroscopic genomic rearran- ImLe1d2iBated diseases. In our study, we were the first to found an impact of al- gements. This study describes for the first time in Greece, the application of lele G on airway obstruction in asthma (p=0.006). The finding of a higher arMraayt eCrGiHal,s a-s M ae dtihaogdnos:stic tool for the investigation of patients with conge- expression in asthmatics may in future serve as diagnostic marker nital heart disease. for asthma and the finding that montelukast decrease its expression may • During the last 3 years, a total of 330 patients were become an important fact in choice of therapy. studied, of whom 55 had CHD of unknown aetiology plus at least one ad- P09.018 ditional indication of abnormal chromosomal phenotype but with normal Association of GRIA1 gene polymorphisms with asthma in Bashkirs conRveesnutlitosnal karyotype. High resolution 1x244K Agilent arrays were used from Russia in this study (> 236.000 probes average resolution of 8.9 Kb). Y. Fedorova1, A. Karunas1, B. Yunusbaev1,2, N. Ramazanova3, E. Galimova3, E. Etkina3, S. • Submicroscopic genomic rearrangements (CNVs) ranging in Zagidullin3, E. Khusnutdinova1; size from D0.V0L81 t, oC1H9R.0D1, MDbIS Pw1e,r eE TdSe1te, cKteCdN Ji5n, 3S7C/N535B ,p aWtiNenTt7sB (, 6S7C%O)2. , InE L2N9, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre of RAS, Ufa, Russian GofA TthAe5s, eC O(5L42A.71%, A)D tAhMe TfoSl1lo, AwDinAgM gTeSn5e, sT BaXss1o, DciGatCeRd8 ,w KiCthT Dh1e3a,r Tt BdXi6se, EasMeI LwINer2e, Federation, 2Estonian Biocentre, Tartu, Estonia, 3Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, MidRenCtLi2fi,e MdR:CL3, MYOM1, LPIN2, LAMA1, CIDEA, KCNG2, TOP3B, TOP3B2, HIC2, Russian Federation. CACNA1B, EHMT1, BAG3, NKX1-2, RBFOX1, EDN1, DTNBP1, MYLIP, KCNT1, NOTCH1, MAML1, FLT4, PRKAG3, WNT6, CYP27A1, NEXN, KCNQ1, ADAMTS13, Asthma is a complex disease that is influenced by many genes and envi- CTNNA3, CACNB2, IGLL3, SLC29A. ronmental factors. Genome-wide association studies have identified many Conclusions candidate loci for a number of complex traits, including asthma. For the • In patients with CHD and / at least one additional indication first time, we performed GWAS of asthma in the Volga-Ural region of Rus- of abnormal chromosomal phenotype array CGH analysis is mandatory to sia. The study involved 358 unrelated patients with asthma and 369 con- detect possible submicroscopic chromosomal abnormalities and provide trol subjects of different ethnicity. DNA samples were genotyped using an proper genetic counseling. Illumina Human 610 quad array as a part of the GABRIEL project. After QC filters, 550 915 SNPs genotyped in 330 cases (141 Russians, 120 Tatars, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org222 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 69 Bashkirs) and 348 controls (145 Russians, 111 Tatars, 92 Bashkirs) to whether changes in gene expression are being analyzed in samples from were used for testing the association of SNPs to asthma. Some markers on asthmatic patients before receiving treatment or together with samples ob- chromosome 5q33 showed the most significant association with asthma in tained after anti-asthma treatment. Bashkirs (p<5xl0-7). The maximum association was at the SNP rs9324750 P09.021 (p=4,25x10-7) in the second intron of GRIA1. Eight linked SNPs (rs495703, Association between VEGF polymorphisms and asthma treatment rs480726, rs726877, rs726876, rs1463747, rs17114771, rs9324750, response rs10041179) located within second intron GRIA1 were selected for haplo- M. Balantic1, M. Rijavec1, M. Skerbinjek Kavalar2, S. Suskovic1, M. Silar1, M. Kosnik1, P. type analysis. The haplotype GTGCGGAT was found to be overrepresented in Korosec1; Bashkirs with asthma (p=3,0x10-4). GRIA1 encodes a subunit of the AMPA 1The University Clinic of Pulmonary and Allergic Diseases Golnik, 4204 Golnik, Slovenia, 2University Clinical Centre Maribor, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia. receptor, a tetrameric ligand-gated ion channel that transmits glutamatergic signals in the brain. It has recently been shown that glutamate not only has Background_ a role as a neurotransmitter, but also as an immunomodulator. These results suggest that GRIA1 gene play an important role in susceptibility to asthma Asthma affects around 300 million people worldwide. Vascu- in Bashkirs from the Volga-Ural region of Russia. Supported by a contract lar endothelial growth factor (VEGF), a regulator of angiogenesis, is elevated from the European Commission (018996). in asthma patients. VEGF contributes to airway responsiveness and remo- P09.019 dVeElGliFng. Treatment of asthma patients decreased VEGF levels and inhibiting Immune-response modifying gene polymorphisms and susceptibility VMEeGthF oind sm: ice diminished asthma symptoms. Therefore, polymorphisms in might be associated with asthma treatment response. to asthma and Opisthorchis felineus helminth invasion I. V. Saltikova1, E. Y. Bragina2, L. M. Ogorodova1, V. P. Puzyrev2,1, M. B. Freidin2; This study enrolled 131 children with asthma. They were treated 1Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Research Institute of with inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) fluticasone propionate or leukotriene re- Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. ceptor antagonist (LTRA) montelukast. We analyzed association between improvement of lung function, assessed by measurement of FEV1 − % of IL13 STAT6 predicted, FEV1/VFEVGCF after 6 and 12 months of treatment and asthma con- It has been shown that common genetic variants of cytokiAnsec aarnids cytoSkcihnie- tRreosl ualfttse:r 12 months of treatment, and polVyEmGoFrphisms, rs2146323 and sstigonsoaml tar ansduction genes, especially and , predict risk of asthma rs833058, in the gene. Oanpdis tahlloerrcghyi,s afse wlineellu ass the intensity of helminth invasion by and Polymorphism rs2146323 A>C in was assocpiated with re- species. sponse to ICS. Patients with the AA genotype had a greater improvement in is a common helminth infection in Siberian region of FEV1 − % of predicted compared to the AC or CCp genotype ( = 0.01). Con- Russia. So far, no information on genfeeltiince cuosmponent of susceptibility for this versely, the AA genotype in rs2146323 was associated with uncontrolled infection was published. To investigate whether the same genes are involved asthma in patients regularly receiving LTRA ( = 0.02). Polymorphism in predisposition to asthma and O. invasion, wfee lainneaulyszed 10 single- rs833058 C>T was associated with treatment response to episodically used nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) off eimlinmeuusn e-response modifying genes in LTRA. A subgroupp of patients with the TT genotype had improvement in 107 asthma patients, 103 individuals infected by O. , 100 persons FCEoVn1cl −u s%io onfs p: redicted compared to no improvement in patients with the CT withP cIoAmS3bination of asthma and O. infection, and control group of or CC genotype ( = 0.03). f1e2li6n ehuesa lthy people. Our results shVoEwGeFd that treatmeVnEt GrFesponse to common- The rs12756687:G/GS OgCeSn5o type was associa ted with symptomatIiFcNOG. ly used asthma therapies, ICS or LTRA, is associated with polymorphisms infection (P = 0.02), while the C/C genotype was associated with rs2146323 and rs833058 in , what makes a potent pharmaco- asthma (P = 0.033). The rs6737848:C/C genotype and the genetic marker. rs206970P5I:CA/ST3 genotypes were associated with asthma (P = 0.006 and P09.022 0.032, respectively) alone. O. felineus Genetic polymorphisms of glutathione S-transferases M1, T1 and P1 Thus, the rs12756687 polymorphism demonstrates the iPnIvAeSr3se assoO-. and susceptibility to oxidative stress and atherogenesis cfeialitnieouns between asthma and invasion clinical manifestation. This I. I. Grubisa1, P. Otasevic2, N. Dimkovic3, V. Dedic4, J. Milasin5, N. Vucinic1; suggests that the gene-environmental iSnOteCrSa5ction bIFeNtwGeen the and 1Department of Human Genetics and Prenatal Diagnostics, Zvezdara University Medical Center, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Dedinje Cardiovascular Institute and Faculty of Medicine, modifies the risk of development of asthma in the helminth endemic University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade region. At the same time, the studied and polymorphisms are and Clinical Department of Renal Diseases, Zvezdara University Medical Center, likely independent risk factors of asthma susceptibility. Belgrade, Serbia, 4European Center for Peace and Development Established by United P09.020 Nations University of Peace, Belgrade, Serbia, 5Institute of Human Genetics, School of Evaluation of gene expression normalization strategy for real- Dentistry, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia. time qPCR in leukocytes from asthmatic patients before and after treatment. C. E. P. Kozmus1,2, U. Potočnik1,3; A persistent oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, University of Maribor, various diseases, among others atherosclerosis. Glutathione S-transfGeSrTasMe1s Maribor, Slovenia, 2Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Porto, Porto, (GSTGs)S TpTro1vide protection against oxidative stress by detoxifying the end- Portugal, 3Laboratory for Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Genomics, University of products of lipid peroxidation. Polymorphic deletion variants in the Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. and genes produce either a functional prGoStTeiPn1 (Inleo1n0-d5eVlaeltion alleles or heterozygous deletion) or result in the complete absence of the prote- in (homozygous deletion-null genotype) while functional The aim of this study was to identify the mo1s8tS sruRitNaAbleA CreTfBereBn2cMe gGeAnePsD Hto polymorphism influences protein catalytic activity and stability. We investi- PnoOrLm2AalRizeR PgLen1e3 AexpresRsPioLn3 2data obtained by qPCR from asthmatic patients. gated the association between these polymorphisms and susceptibility to We analyzed 7 candidate reference genes ( , , , , oxidative stress in 60 angiographically documented patients with manifest , and ) previously reported as being the most stable atherosclerotic disease and 100 control individuals from Serbia. Genomic in blood samples, in asthmatic patients before and after anti-asthma treat- DNA was isolated from peripheral blooGdS TcePl1ls and genotyping was performed menOtR, ManDdL 3coPnStrMoDl s3ubGjSeMctDs.3 VaMrAiaPn3cKe2 ofS CLCq2 v2aAlu5esT RwIaMs3 a5nalyzeEdP HanXd2 gene using polymerase GcShTaMin1 reactiGonST foTl1lowed by restriction fragment length po- stability determined with geNorm. TheA iCnTflBueBn2ceM of norGmAaPlDizHation strategy lymorphism (PGCSRT-RMF1LP) analysis for and multiplex-PCR or ReaGl-StTimT1e on , , , , , and gene PCR methods for and gene variants. We observed significant expression was analyzed. Cq values of , and were shown association of null (OR=2.0, 95%CI=1.05-3.86, P=0.03) and to be stable across samples obtained before and after treatment and also the null (OR=2,26, 95%CI=1,06-4,81, P=0.03) genotypes witGhS TaPth1e Vraols1c0le5rosis. top-ranking genes determined byP gOeLNRo2rAm. TheBs2eM produced the most consi- Combined analysis of the two null genoItlyep/eIlse demonstrated significant in- stent results of the target gene exprOeRsMsioDnL.3 When samples obtained before crease in riskI l(eO/VRa=l15, 95%CI=3,09-73,3, P<0.0001), too. alle- treatment wereP aSnMaDly3zeSdL aCl2o2nAe5, MAP3K 2and TRI Mw3h5ere shown to be the le (OR=0,63, 95%CI=0,39-1,03, P=0.06), (OR=0,53, 95%CI=0,27-1,05, best selection. Gene expression of was shown to be significantly P=0.07) and (OR=0,41, 95%CI=0,12-1,43, P=0,G16ST) Mge1n otypGeSsT sTh1owed GinScDreMaBsed, and , , and were decreased in a nonsignificant 1.6, 1.9 and 2,44 fold decrease in the risk of atherosclero- asthmatic patients before and after treatment compared to healthy controls. sis, respectively. Our data provide evidence that both and null was siPgnSMifiDca3ntly dMecArPe3asKe2d only in asthmatic patients after treat- genotypes, alone or in combination, are associatedV awli1t0h5 increased oxidative ment. When comparing samples obtained before and after treatment, gene stress and atherogenesis. A larger study group is needed to establish true expression of and was significantly decreased. In conclu- relationship between potentially protective allele and disease. sion, a different combination of reference genes should be used according www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 223 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.023 P09.025 Toll-like receptor genes variants and atopic dermatitis in Volga-Ural The GABAergic hypothesis in the etiology of attention-deficit/ region of Russia hyperactivity disorder in the Portuguese population: a family-based G. F. Gimalova1, E. Prans2, A. S. Karunas1, Y. Y. Fedorova1, E. R. Gumennaya3, S. V. association study Levashova4, A. R. Biktasheva4, E. I. Etkina4, S. Koks2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; A. Marques1, J. Boavida2, S. Nogueira2, C. Alfaiate2, M. Almeida2, A. M. Ambrósio1,3; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian Academy 1Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit of National Institute of Legal Medicine, Coimbra, of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Physiology, Portugal, 2Child Development Center of Coimbra Children’s Hospital, Coimbra, Portugal, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Dermatovenerologic dispensary of Bashkortostan 3IBILI-Faculty of Medicine of University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. Republic, Ufa, Russian Federation, 4Bashkir Medical State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is one of the most common neuropsychiatric disorders diagnosed during childhood and several studies Atopic dermatitis is the common chronic inflammatory disorder with cuta- demonstrated that ADHD is a highly heritable disorder with a strong genetic neous hyperreactivity to environmental triggers and is often the first step in basis. However the identification of genes that may predispose to ADHD has the atopic march. Recent studies have shown an association between toll- been difficult. Several lines of evidence suggest that changes in genes from like receptor genes variations and allergic diseases development. We have GABAergic system and particularly the GABA A receptors might be invol- screened 4 SNPs in TLR1 (rs4833095, rs5743604, rs5743571, rs2101521) ved in ADHD, but this hypothesis remains unexplored by genetic studies. and 6 SNPs in TLR10 (rs4331786, rs4129009, rs11096957, rs11466617, Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the role of a GABRB2 gene rs10004195, rs4543123) genes, both map closely together on chromosome polymorphism (C1412T) in the etiology of ADHD, in the Portuguese popu- 4. The AD group consisted of 318 AD patients from Volga-Ural region of Rus- lation through a family-based association strategy.After obtaining informed sia (Russians, Tatars, Bashkirs and individuals of mixed origin). The control consent, blood samples were collected from trios, composed by parents and group included 262 non-atopic individuals of the same ethnic origin. Geno- respective offspring, diagnosed with DSM-IV-TR and genomic DNA was iso- mic DNA was isolated by phenol-chloroform extraction. The genotyping of lated from peripheral leukocytes using an enzymatic method. The GABRB2 SNPs was performed by real-time PCR. C1412T polymorphism was investigated with polymerase chain reaction- The AD patients have significantly higher TLR1 gene polymorphisms alleles restriction fragment length polymorphism technique. We performed both rs5743604*A, rs5743571*C and rs2101521*G frequencies when compared haplotype relative risk (HRR) and transmission disequilibrium test (TDT) with control group (p=0.036, p=0.020, p=0.0378 respectively). The frequen- and found no a2s sociation between the GABRB2 C2 1412T polymorphism and cies of the TLR10 gene variants alleles rs10004195*T and rs4543123*A was ADHD (HRR: χ = 0.199, df = 1, P = 0.656; TDT: χ = 0.182, df = 1, P = 0.670). also significantly higher in AD patients than in healthy donors (p=0.0091 The preliminary results obtained with HRR and TDT analyses do not sup- and p=0.0156). The haplotype analysis revealed that the most frequent port the hypothesis that the C1412T polymorphism of GABRB2 gene con- haplotype is TTATAC (rs11466617-rs10004195-rs4543123-rs4833095- tributes with a minor effect to the expression of ADHD in the Portuguese rs5743604-rs5743571), with statistically significant difference between population. However further studies with larger samples are in course in patients and controls (69% and 63% respectively; p=0.05), besides AD pa- order to confirm or refute these results. tients have significantly higher TTACAC (p= 7.0E-4) and lower TAGCGT (p= P09.026 0.0083) haplotype frequencies compared with controls. Identifying phenotypes and exploring genetic aetiology of autism The results of our investigation show that TLR1 and TLR10 genes polymor- spectrum disorders : a 87 patient study. phisms are important risk factors of atopic dermatitis in the Volga-Ural re- E. Landais1, N. Golovkine2, R. Dard1, F. Lempp1, N. Bednarek1, S. Godet2, R. Senezuk2, A. gion of Russia. Lannoy1, P. Jonveaux3, M. Beri3, C. Bonnet3, M. Valduga3, J. Motte1, G. Schmit2, D. Gaillard1, P09.024 M. Doco.Fenzy1; Genetic dissection of atrial septal abnormalities: integrating QTL 1CHU-Reims, Reims, France, 2Centre de Ressource Autisme, Reims, France, 3CHU-Nancy, mapping and genomic technology Nancy, France. M. Moradi Marjaneh1,2, E. P. Kirk2,3, T. B. Doan1, P. C. Thomson4, I. C. A. Martin4, C. Moran4, R. P. Harvey1,5; 1Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Sydney, Australia, 2School of Women and Autism is characterized by limited verbal communication, lack of recipro- Children’s Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, cal social interaction, and stereotypical behaviour affecting preferentially 3Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, Boys. Mental retardation and or seizures coexists in two-thirds of patients. 4ReproGen - Animal Biosciences Group, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 5St. Vincent’s Clinical School, Faculty of Medicine, University of Autistic spectrum disorders are complex multifactorial disorders involving New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. various genes, and many aetiologic diagnosis remain unravelled. We report a collaborative study between our Genetic Department and the Autism Center (CRA). A population of 87 children with autism was selec- The formation of the atrial septum during cardiac development is a com- ted. We identified 5 different phenotypic groups (8-32 children per group), plex process being vulnerable to a wide range of dysmorphogenesis. A ge- using the behaviour and the intellectual efficiency evaluation criteria from netic link and anatomical continuum between secundum atrial septal defect the following tests PER-R, CARST, and ADIR. (ASDII) and patent forame ovale (PFO) have been suggested by murine and Among them 45 patients (6 -14 per group) were negative for FMR1 ampli- human studies. While ASDII and PFO occur commonly and represent a signi- fication and then tested by array-CGH (180K) to search for deleterious chro- ficant burden to health resources, the genetic complexity of such conditions mosomal rearrangements. The Array-CGH analysis showed the presence of is not fully known. PFO incidence in inbred mice, as we reported earlier, is 49 copy number variants (CNV) not referred as polymorphisms in 28 child- strongly correlated with quantitative parameters of atrial septum. We pre- ren with an average of 2 CNV per patient. A deleterious CNV was found in 5 viously mapped quantitative trait loci (QTL) underlying such parameters children from 4 different groups. A parental study was done in 10 families using F2 intercross between QSi5 and 129T2/SvEms, parental strains with for 14 aberrations : 12 rearrangements were inherited and 2 were de novo extremes of septal dysmorphogenesis. Subsequently, breeding of parental with a 6q26 deletion (gene PACRG) and an isochromosome Yp (deletion of strains continued for 12 further generations to establish an advanced inter- NLGN4Y) both considered of uncertain clinical significance (VOUS). Five cross line (AIL). We genotyped 150 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) CNVs were previously reported in autism: 1q21.1,3p26.3q26.2 (CNTN4), markers at an average interval of 2cM in 400 F14 mice. AIL confirmed the 15q13.3 (CHRNA7), 16p11.2 and Xp22.31. Three aberrations in 3p26 (dup) F2 QTL and significantly improved confidence intervals of the QTL. After- and Xp22 (del/dup) seemed more specific to autism as not present in our ward, we performed whole genome sequencing of the parental strains and cohort of 400 patients with intellectual disability. identified variations between the sequences. The genome was partitioned In conclusion, the aetiologic diagnosis was found in 11% of autistic child- into high and low SNP rate intervals and the genes within high SNP rate ren. regions of the QTL confidence intervals were identified. As a confirmatory P09.027 method, we used mouse HapMap imputation genotype resource. The list A 3- year- old patient with autism and microdeletion in the KIAA0442 of candidate genes was prioritized according to sequence and expression (AUTS2)- gene profiles. In conclusion, integrating QTL mapping and genomic technology C. Huebner1, D. Steinemann2, J. Schmidtke1, M. Arslan-Kirchner1; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute form a powerful approach to dissect genetic complexity underpinning atrial for Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. septal abnormalities. A 2 10/12- year- old boy with bilateral cleft lip and cleft palate as well as de- velopmental delay was presented to our genetics clinic. He is the first child of non-consanguineous healthy parents. He shows behavioural patterns of www.eshg.org www.eshg.org224 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 NRXN1, the autism spectrum which include avoiding eye contact, no response to his iNmLpGaNir3m, NeLnGt,N r4igXi,d C NriTtuNaAliPs2ti c int eSHreAsNtsK a3nd stereotypical behaviors. Recent name, playing alone and stereotyped movements when listening to music. genetic studies have shown that some synaptic genes, including His postnatal chromosomal analysis revealed a normal male karyotype and , are associated with ASD. To study 46,XY. these 5 genes in 5 Thai multiplex families with ASD, the target regions of Array-CGH analysis showed a mAiUcrToSd2e-letion of 170 kb: arr (7q11.22) these candidate genes were enriched from total DNA samples using Nimble- (70,077,607-70,247,036)x1 dn. This part of the chromosome contains exons Gen microarrays. The enriched DNA fragments from each index case were 6-15 of the 19 exons spanning the gene. His parents do not carry this sequenced using 454 Genome Sequencer FLX Titanium. Sequences were microdeletion, indicating that it was a de novo event. aligned and compared with reference sequence UCSC hg18 using New bler Autism spectrum disorder (ASD, OMIM 209850) encompasseAs UdTiSff2erent software. Variant annotations were focused on the exoCnNsT NanAdP 2exon-intron forms of autism with a broader phenotype. Two-thirds of all patients with boundaries, then novel variants were validated by Sanger sequencing.One ASD suffer from mental retardation. Among the genes involved, -dis- novel variant, c.2047C>G (p.E683Q) in the exon 13 of , was iden- ruption has been described in 7 patients with ASD and mental retardation. tified in a boy with ASD. The variant was transmitted from his mother but In all of these seven patients translocations with different breakpoints bet- it was not present in his father and younger brother with ASD. This variant ween exon 1 and 7 and different translocation partners were the underlying was not found in the 170 control alleles. Bioinformatic analysis showed that mechanism of the disruption. Additionally other genes were disrupted ac- the glutamic acid (E) in CNTNAP2 protein was highly conserved across dif- cording to the breakpoAiUntT So2f the partner chromosome. Our patient shares ferent species and the glutamine (Q) variant affected on secondary structure the same symptoms as the 7 patients with translocation, indicating that of CNTNAP2 protein.However, furthCeNr TstNuAdPie2s involving a larger set of ASD disturbed function of and not the truncated translocation partner samples (i.e. association studies) are necessary to determine the potential causes the clinical presentation of the patients. disease relevance of the p.E683Q in . Otherwise, functional analy- P09.028 sis of CNTNAP2 protein with p.E638Q isoform can give us the best conclu- Contribution of rare and common variants of the PTCHD1 gene to sion. Autism Spectrum Disorder and Intellectual Disability P09.030 B. Torrico1,2, A. Hervás3, B. Franke4, J. Buitelaar5, C. Freitag6, A. Reif7, M. Maristany8, M. Mirror effects for Autism Spectrum Disorder due to gene dosage at Milà9, C. Toma1,2, B. Cormand1,2; 10q11.22 affecting GPRIN2 gene, a regulator of neurite outgrowth and 1Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Biomedical PPYR1 gene involved in energy homeostasis. Network Research Centre on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain, 3Child and V. Disciglio1, M. Fichera2,3, R. Ciccone4, M. Mucciolo1, E. Ndoni1, A. Fernández-Jaén5, Adolescent Mental Health Unit, Hospital Universitari Mútua de Terrassa, Terrassa, Spain, O. Galesi2, M. Vinci2, P. Failla2, M. A. Mencarelli1, C. Lo Rizzo1, F. Mari1, O. Zuffardi4, C. 4Departments of Human Genetics and Psychiatry, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition Romano2, A. Renieri1; and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 1Medical Genetics Unit, Biotechnology Department, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, 5Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 2Laboratory of Genetics Diagnosis, IRCCS Oasi SS Maria,, Troina, Italy, 3Medical Genetics, Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 4Biologia Generale e Genetica Medica, Universita’ 6Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, degli Studi di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 5Unidad de Neurología Infanto-juvenil Hospital JW Goethe-University Frankfurt am Main, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 7Department of Universitario Quirón Centro CADE., Madrid, Spain. Psychiatry, Psychosomatics, and Psychotherapy, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 8Developmental Disorders Unit (UETD), Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Esplugues de Llobregat,, Barcelona, Spain, 9Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics Department, Biochemical Diagnosis Centre, Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Spain. We recently reported that a small duplication on 10q11.22 including GPRIN2 gene, a regulator of neurite outgrowth, and PPYR1, a gene involved in energy homeostasis is a candidate modifier for Rett syndrome. Specifi- Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder, characterized by impaired cally, duplications were found in the Zappella variant, the Rett variant with verbal communication, limited reciprocal social interaction, restricted inte- recovery of speech, and lacking the typical growth delay, underweighting rests and repetitive behavior, often accompanied by intellectual disability and autistic features. Since PPYR1 knockout mice display underweight and (ID). Although it is one of the most heritable neuropsychiatric PdTisCoHrdDe1rs, the reduced white adipose tissue an overexpression of PPYR1 due to gene du- underlying genetic factors remain largely unknown. plication may be responsible for the higher body weight characterizing Zap- A recent study reported erta arel. mutations in the X-linked gene (pat- pella variant. We concluded that duplication at 10q11.22 may play a role in ched domain-containing prPoTtCeHinD 11)in patients with autism spectrum disor- protecting from both underweighting and autistic features in Rett patients. der (ASD) and ID (Noor 2010), suggesting a possible role of this gene We now report more convincing evidences that dosage balance at GPRIN2 in cognitive developmentP. TCHD1 is highly expressed in brain regions and locus plays a role in autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We observed 6 pati- encodes a transmembrane protein containing a patched-related domain. It ents affected by ASD with an overlapping small deletion including the two has been suggested that plays a role in the hedgehog signaling pa- genes (and extending to MAPK8 in one patient). We then compared a group thway. PTCHD1 of 164 ASD patients with a group of 180 syndromic and non syndromic intel- In this study we aimed to investigate the possible contribution of common lectual deficit (SID/NSID) patients and 160 controls. Seven deletions were variants in to ASD through a case-control association study. The identified in the ASD group. On the contrary, no deletion has were found study sample consisted of 595 Caucasian autistic patients (270 Spanish, 247 in SID/NSID nor in control group (p=0,005 and p=0,008). We are currently Dutch and 78 German) and 680 gender-matched controls (320 Spanish, 269 extending this study to a second cohort including about 100 ASD patients Dutch and 82 German). Twenty-eight tagSNPs were selected on the basis and 135 SID/NSID. Overall, these data suggest that gene dosage at 10q11.22 of linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns. A significant association, that over- affecting GPRIN2 gene may have mirror effects being duplication protective came the Bonferroni correction for multiPpTleC tHeDst1ing and permutations was and deletion prone to ASD. obtained with the marker rs7052177 (p= 6.13e-4). Furthermore, in order P09.031 to evaluate the possible participation of rare variants in ASD and Whole-genome methylation profile in BEN patients ID, we are currently performing a mutation screening in the Spanish ASD R. G. Staneva1, I. Dimova1, P. Dimitrov2, V. Simeonov3, M. Polenakovic4, V. Stefanovic5, R. cohort, and in an additional sample of 200 individuals with ID. The prelimi- Cukuranovic5, V. Djonov6, S. Lalchev1, D. Toncheva1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2National nary results of this study support the involvement of this gene in autism and Center of Public Health Protection, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Vratza District Hospital, Vratza, cognitive impairments. Bulgaria, 4Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav P09.029 Republic of Macedonia, 5Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Nephrology, University of Nis, Targeted next generation sequencing in Thai families with autism Nis, Serbia, 6Institute of Anatomy, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. spectrum disorders identifies a novel variant, p.E683Q, in the CNTNAP2 gene P. Limprasert1, F. Hayeeduereh1, S. Kulawonganunchai2, T. Sripo1, J. Worachotekamjorn1, BACKGROUND: Balkan endemic nephropathy (BEN) represents a chronic T. Somboontham3, T. Hansakunachai4, R. Roongpraiwan3, N. Ruangdaraganon3, A. progressive interstitial nephritis in striking correlation with uroepithelial Assawamakin2, D. Sangsrakru2, S. Tangphatsornruang2, S. Tongsima2; tumors of the upper urinary tract. The disease has endemic distribution in 1Faculty of Medicine, Prince of Songkla University, Songkhla, Thailand, 2Genome the Danube river regions in several Balkan countries. Institute, National Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Pathumthani, Thailand, 3Ramathibodi Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, DNA methylation is a primary epigenetic modification that is involved in Thailand, 4Faculty of Medicine, Thammasat University, Pathumthani, Thailand. major processes such as cancer, genomic imprinting, gene silencing etc. Epi- genetic tests can prove to be the bridge between environmental factors and genetic background in BEN development. Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) is a group of neurodevelopmental disor- MATERIALS AND METHODS: Age matched pools of 45 female BEN patients ders characterized by distinct patterns of social deficits and communication and 45 healthy controls were created. We’ve performed high-resolution www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 225 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genome-wide methylation array analysis. We’ve analyzed the methylation birth prevalence for the complete BEEC spectrum in children of European status of 27 800 CpG islands of both groups to identify significant methyla- descent has been estimated to be 1 in 10 000. In this study, we aimed to tion profile differences. identify copy number variantions (CNVs) that contribute to BEEC. An array- RESULTS: Our experiments show significant disparity of the methylation based molecular karyotyping, utilizing 1,134,514 SNPs (single nucleotide status of several group of genes. Significant hypomethylation in the patient polymorphisms), was performed to screen 75 individuals with BEEC for group was discovered for the following genes: ADRA2A, B3GNT4, BTBD6, causative de novo events. SNP fluorescence intensity was analyzed with C1orf183, GCH1, KCNK12,NEO1, REXO1, SHROOM2, SSPO, TTC9B.The ge- QuantiSNP using an Objective-Bayes Hidden-Markov model for calling puta- nes ADNP, C11orf63, ACTG1, RNF187, C4orf32, MIR153-2, TM6SF1, SSR4, tive CNVs. The SNPs were filtered according to various criteria by use of the HNRNPH1, EVI5L, TAL1, EBF3, C3orf21, IQSEC1, MSL2, FAM123A, RBMY1B, Cartagenia Bench software, by in-silico-analysis, and by comparison with RBMY2EP showed significantly higher level of hypermethylation in pati- 531 healthy controls. A de novo microduplication on chromosome19p13.12 ents. was detected in a patient with isolated bladder exstrophy. The size of the CONCLUSIONS: Data obtained from our experiments suggest that dysregula- duplication is 0.9 Mb and harbors 23 RefSeq genes. Whole-mount in situ tion of cytoskeletal proteins, transcription factors, transmembrane ion chan- hybridization studies of the genes within the region of rearrangement were nels as well as proteins involved in secretion processes, cell adhesion, DNA- performed in order to prioritize genes according to their expression du- splicing and cell proliferation can be key mechanism in BEN pathogenesis. ring E9.5 to E10.5. WISH data of mice embryos showed specific expression These results are in unison with the key pathological alterations in BEN and of CASP14, NOTCH3, WIZ and CYP4F22. According to the function of the- further elucidate the precise mechanism behind BEN development. se genes WIZ becomes the most promising candidate to be systematically Acknowledgements: funded by project IZ73Z0_127949 of SCOPES, SNSF, sequenced in the complete sample to identify high-penetrance mutations Switzerland involving small sequence changes. P09.032 P09.034 De novo copy number variation in bipolar affective disorder The gene encoding Kit ligand associates with Bronchopulmonary E. Rees1, J. Moran2, K. Chambert2, L. Georgieva1, S. Purcell3,4,2, P. Sklar5,6,7, S. McCarroll2, M. dysplasia O’Donovan1, M. J. Owen1, G. Kirov1; J. M. Huusko1, M. Mahlman1, M. K. Karjalainen1, T. Kaukola1, R. Haataja1, M. Rämet2, P. M. 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Stanley Center for Psychiatric Research, Lavoie3, M. Hallman1; Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Psychiatric and Neurodevelopmental 1Department of Pediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Genetics Unit, Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Finland, 2Department of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Center for Human Genetics Research, 3Child & Family Research Institute of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Department of Genetics Background. and Genomic Sciences, Mount Siani school of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 6Department Psychiatric , Mount Siani School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 7Department of Neuroscience, Mount Siani school of Medicine, New York, NY, United Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is one of the most com- States. mon chronic lung diseases associated with very preterm birth. Major risk factors are lung immaturity and inflammatory lung injury. As a result of im- proved treatment methods, increased infant survival has arisen the “new” An increased rate of de novo copy number variants (CNVs) has been found BPD among the most immature infants. Based on twin studies, genetic fac- in several neuropsychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia, autism and Atoimrss p.lay an important role in BPD susceptibility. However, the genetic back- developmental delay. In this study we wanted to identify de novo CNVs in ground is still poorly understood. NR3C1 bipolar affective disorder (BD). We used Illumina OmniExpress microarrays KITL GBecause glucocorticoids are important in the process of lung matu- to genotype 119 BD offspring from 114 complete parent-offspring families ration, the genes encoding glucocorticoid receptor ( ) and Kit ligand passing strict QC criteria. CNVs were called by PennCNV. We excluded CNVs (Materia, lisn avonldv emde itnh ohdesm. atopoiesis and cell migration) were investigated as <10kb, covered by <10 probes, overlapping segmental duplications and candidates for BPD. with a frequency >1%. Total of 259 infants with gestational age <31 wKIeTeLkGs The initial analysis identified 41 putative novo CNVs. Subsequent validation born in NORu3luC 1University Hospital during 1997-2010 were studied. Of these, by a Z-Score calling algorithm, and manual inspection of the logRratios of 6R1es wuletsr.e diagnosed with KBIPTDL.G All infants were of Finnish origin. Eight the trios, reduced this to seven de novos in six probands. This rate of 5% is and 23 tagging SNPs were genotyped. higher than the reported rates in controls (~1-2%), but similar to studies in Six SNPs of (rs11104906, rs10858753, rs17424193, schizophrenia and BD. TDhLeG m2,e dian size of de novo CNVs was 189kb. Two of rs4842477, rs11104948, rs869408) associated with BPD. The frequencies the de novo CNVs did not intersect any genes. We find one de novo deletion of twNo Rh3aCp1lotypes including all the 8 SNPs were significantly different bet- intersecting an exon of and one large duplication intersecting 27 ge- wCoenecnlu isniofann.ts with BPD and those without BPD. There was no association nes at 16p11.2, both regions having been implicated in de novo CNV studies wKIiTthL G SNPs and BPD. of schizophrenia and BD. The remaining three CCHNRVNs Aa1re, also potential novel We are the firsKtI TtoL Gs,h ow evidence that the polymorphisms of de novo CNVP lCocDiH fo1r5 BD: a 448kb deletion at 2q31.1 that intersects 5 genes associate with susceptibility to BPD. This raises the possibility that incluEdLinAgV Lth2e nicotinic acetylcholine receptor a 160kb duplication transcription products of expressed in endothelial cells or lung fi- intersecting at 10q21.1, and a 186kb deletion at 9q21.3 intersec- broblasts, are important in early lung growth. Present results remain to be ting . confirmed. P09.033 P09.035 Array-based genome-wide genotyping in 75 patiens with complex/ Association of leukocyte telomere length and cardio-vascular fitness: multigenic disorders Results of the Austrian Stroke Prevention study. S. S. Mughal1,2, M. Draaken1,2, A. K. Ebert3, W. Roesch3, R. Stein4, E. Barterls1, D. Schmidt1,5, P. Freudenberger1, A. Sen1, M. Schallert2, C. Nagl1, N. Watzinger3, R. Zweiker3, R. T. M. Boemers6, E. Schmiedeke1,7, P. Hoffmann1,2, S. Moebus8, M. M. Noethen1,2, M. Ludwig9, Schmidt2, H. Schmidt4; H. Reutter1,10; 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Centre of Molecular Medicine, 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Medical university, Graz, Austria, 2Clinical Section of Special Neurology, Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Centre, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric Urology, St. Neurology, Graz, Austria, 3Clinical department of cardiology, Medical university, Graz, Hedwig Hospital Barmherzige Brueder, Regensburg, Germany, 4Department of Urology, Austria, 4Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Centre of Molecular Medicine, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Surgery, Campus Centre of Molecular Medicine; Clinical Section of Special Neurology, Department of Virchow Clinic, Charite University Hospital Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Department of Neurology, Graz, Austria. Pediatric Surgery and Pediatric Urology, Childrenâ€™s Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Center for Child and Adolescent Health, Hospital Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany, 8Institute of Medical Informatics Background: Telomeres are short repetitive sequences protecting the ends Biometry and Epidemiology, University Hospital of Essen, Duisburg-Essen, Germany, of the chromosomes. Leukocyte telomere length (LTL) is related to age, in- 9Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, flammation, oxidative stress and life-style factors. Physical activity has been Germany, 10Department of Neonatology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. indicated to exert beneficial effects on LTL. This study investigates the effect of cardio-respiratory fitness (CRF) on LTL. Methods: Relative LTL was measured by quantitative Real Time PCR in 907 The bladder exstrophy-epispadias complex (BEEC) represents an anterior participants of the Austrian Stroke Prevention Study, a community-based midline defect with variable expression of phenotype comprising a spec- cohort study on brain aging. trum of malformations involving the abdominal wall, pelvic floor, urinary CRF was estimated by exercise ECG in 794 subjects. The measured va- tract, genitalia, and occasionally the anus and spine. Most of the BEEC cases riables included diastolic and systolic blood pressure, heart rate during are classified as non-syndromic, and the etiology is still unclear. The overall www.eshg.org www.eshregst.iongr,g peak and recovery phase. VO2max was calculated by the formula 226 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 15*weight[kg]*maximum/resting heart rate. The associations between each herpetiformis (DH) are also common. In spite of several well-known gFeUnTe2- of the CRF variables and LTL were analyzed using multiple linear regression tic risk factors for celiac disease, environmental factors, e.g. microbiota, are by adjusting for age and sex (Model 1) and additionally for hypertension, suggested playing role in development of celiac disease. Interestingly, diabetes, cardiac disease and BMI (Model 2). association with celiac disease was detected by Dickey et al. (1994), but not Results: We observed a significant association between LTL and maximum by Heneghan et al. (1996). Thus, it is possible that host genes could indirect- achieved heart rate (MHR) (Model 1 β=-0.002; p=0.022). Additional adjust- ly via microbiota composition be involved in manifestation of disease. We ment for vascular risk factors did not alter the effect size and the strength studied 1025 celiac disease patients and 2738 controls using Taqman assay of this association (Model 2 β=-0.02;p<0.018). All other CRF variables were for rs601338. We found suggestive associations at level of genotype (Cases not significantly associated with LTL. The association was confined to sub- and controls: f(AA) = 18.0%, 14.7%; f(AG) = 42.4%, 47.6%; f(GG) = 39.5%, jects above the age of 65(Model2β=--0.003;p=0.005), to men (Model2β=- 37.8%; p = 0.006) and recessive model (Cases and controls: f(AA) = 18.0%, 0.002; p=0.043) and to normotensives(Model2β=-0.004; p=0.018). 14.7%; f(AG/GG) = 82.0%, 85.3%; p = 0.011). Conclusion: This is the first study investigating the association between CRF P09.038 and LTL in a healthy elderly population. Our results suggest a protective role Expression of TLR signalling-related miRNAs (mir-21, mir-146a, mir- of MHR on LTL, which is present particularly in elderly, men, and normo- 155) in celiac disease tensives. L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, I. Irastorza3, J. C. Vitoria3,1, J. R. Bilbao1,2; P09.036 1University of the Basque Country, Leioa-Basque Country, Spain, 2BioCruces Research Institute, Barakaldo-Basque Country, Spain, 3Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo- Expression analysis of celiac disease candidate genes in the 6q22 Basque Country, Spain. GWAS peak C. Bondar1, L. Plaza-Izurieta2,3, N. Fernandez-Jimenez2,3, I. Irastorza4, C. E. G. E. C.5, C. Wijmenga6, F. Chirdo1, J. C. Vitoria4,2, J. R. Bilbao2,3; 1University of La Plata, La Plata, Argentina, 2University of the Basque Country, Leioa- BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs have emerged as important regulators of gene Basque Country, Spain, 3BioCruces Research Institute, Barakaldo-Basque Country, Spain, expression by decreasing target mRNA levels. A trio of microRNAs, mir-21, 4Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo-Basque Country, Spain, 5Spanish Consortium for mir-146a and mir-155, have been proven to be of considerable interest in Celiac Disease Genetics, (SEEC), Spain, 6University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, relation to TLR signalling, and their dysregulation may be involved in many Netherlands. inflamatory diseases, including celiac disease (CD) AIM: To evaluate the expression and relationship with disease status of the- se 3 microRNAs in the pathogenesis of celiac disease. Celiac disease (CD) is an immune mediated, multigenic disorder where HLA- PATIENTS AND METHODS: Biopsy specimens from distal duodenum were DQ2/DQ8 contributes about 35% to genetic risk. GWAS have found more obtained from 30 paediatric celiac patients at diagnosis and after 2 years than 26 regions for CD susceptibility, and several potentially functional can- on gluten free diet, and 18 non-celiac controls. miRNA expression was de- didate genes have been located within. Recently, the IMMUNOCHIP geno- termined by RT-PCR, using commercially available mature-microRNA Taq- typing array discovered additional 13 regions of susceptibility. The GWAS Man assays. Experiments were run in triplicate in an ABI-PRISM 7900HT signal in chromosome 6:128.0-128.4 kb pointed to THEMIS and PTPRK as and results were normalized to RNU48 endogenous control. Groups were possible candidate genes, both with immune-related function. The signal compared using parametric and non-parametric tests. was narrowed to the PTPRK region in the subsequent study, but functional RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: mir-21 and mir-146a were upregulated in confirmation is pending. both groups of CD patients (debut and after 2 years on gluten free diet) The aim of this work was to determine the influence of associated SNPs on when compared to controls, while mir-155 was only upregulated in active THEMIS and PTPRK gene expression in the intestinal mucosa of active and CD mucosa. The same tendency has been found in other immune related treated CD patients and controls. diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus, We assessed the correlation between qPCR expression levels and SNP and functional analysis of their target genes and proteins must be done to genotypes of the top SNPs in both studies (rs802734, rs55743914 and assess their role in the disease. rs72975916) and those most strongly associated in our CEGEC population P09.039 (rs10484718 and rs9491896). Exploring the NFkB signalling pathway in celiac disease THEMIS showed higher expression in active CD compared to treated pati- N. Fernandez-Jimenez1,2, A. Castellanos-Rubio1,2, I. Irastorza3, L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, J. C. ents and controls, while PTPRK showed lower expression. Our study confir- Vitoria1,3, J. R. Bilbao1,2; med an association of this region with CD in the local population, although 1University of the Basque Country, Leioa-Basque Country, Spain, 2BioCruces Research only rs802734 genotype showed any influence in THEMIS expression. Inte- Institute, Barakaldo-Basque Country, Spain, 3Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo- restingly we found a significant positive correlation between THEMIS and Basque Country, Spain. PTPRK mRNA levels in CD patients but not in controls. Our results suggest a possible role for both candidate genes in CD pathoge- nesis although further investigation is needed to clarify the impact of the The NFkB transcription factor family regulates a large array of genes invol- associated SNPs on their expression. ved in immunity, inflammation and cell survival. Previous work of our group P09.037 showed constitutive activation of NFkB in the intestinal mucosa of patients Association of FUT2 (rs601338) with celiac disease in Finnish with untreated celiac disease (CD), suggesting a pivotal role in the perpetua- patients tion of the inflammatory process. A. S. Parmar1, N. Alakulppi2, E. Einarsdottir1, K. Kaukinen3, K. Kurppa4, M. Mäki4, K. Using RT-PCR in a custom Taqman Low Density Array, we analyzed the ex- Lindfors4, J. Partanen2, K. Aranko2, J. Mättö2, P. Wacklin2, P. Saavalainen1; pression of 93 NFkB cascade genes in biopsies from 16 active celiac patients, 1Research Program for Molecular Medicine and Department of Medical Genetics, 16 treated celiac patients on gluten-free diet and 16 non-celiac controls lak- Haartman Institute, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Finnish Red Cross Blood king inflammation of the gut at biopsy. Service, Helsinki, Finland, 3Department of Gastroenterology and Alimentary Tract Twenty-two genes were significantly overexpressed in mucosa from both Surgery, Tampere University Hospital and School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere, Finland, 4Pediatric Research Center, University of Tampere and Tampere active and treated celiac patients compared to controls, and only one was University Hospital, Tampere, Finland. downregulated, confirming the overall upregulation of NFkB pathway in CD. Most of those genes have central regulatory functions in the cascade and are clustered in Apoptosis and Toll-like Receptor (TLR) signalling KEGG pa- Intestinal microbiota plays an important role in human health, and its com- thways. In contrast, of the 10 genes upregulated only in mucosa from active position is determined by several factors, such as diet and host genotype. CD patients, most were located in the periphery of the NFkB route, including However, host genes determining theF iUnTte2s, tinal m icrobiota composition are activating ligands and receptors. The expression signature of each patient largely unknown. Recently, we (Wacklin et al. 2011) and Rausch et al. (2011) group, extracted using Correlation-based Feature Selection and Principal have showed that polymorphism in whichdefines theF UeTxp2ression of Component Analysis highlighted several deregulated genes and a substanti- ABH and Lewis histo-blood group antigens in intestinal mucus and other al set of TLR-related genes. These preliminary results point to several speci- secretions, affects intestinal microbiota composition. TheF UT2 gene en- fic response pathways as key activators of NFkB in CD. codes fucosyltransferase 2 enzyme. Non-functional enzyme resulting from P09.040 nonsense mutation (rs601338, NM_000511.5:c.461G>A) in gene leads Effect of SOCS3 SNP rs4969170 in celiac disease to the non-secretor phenotype (AA). Celiac disease is chronic inflammatory L. Plaza-Izurieta1,2, L. M. Medrano3, N. Frnandez-Jimenez1,2, A. Lopez-Larios3, G. Gutierrez2, I. Irastorza4, C. E. G. E. C.5, C. Nuñez3, J. R. Bilbao1,2; enteropathy occurring in genetically predisposed individuals after dietary 1University of the Basque Country, Leioa-Basque Country, Spain, 2BioCruces Research gluten consumption. It is classically manifested in gastrointestinal tract (di- arrhoea, malabsorption), but extra-intestinal symptoms, such as dermatitis www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 227 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Institute, Barakaldo-Basque Country, Spain, 3Hospital Clínico San Carlos-IdISSC, 2Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology, Linköping, Sweden, 3Finnish Red Cross Madrid, Spain, 4Cruces University Hospital, Barakaldo-Basque Country, Spain, 5Spanish Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland, 4TATAA Biocenter AB, Göteborg, Sweden, 5Institucio Consortium for Celiac Disease Genetics, SEEC, Spain. Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain. BACKGROUND: Celiac disease (CD)S OisC dS3efined as a Th1-mediated gluten- Coeliac disease (CD) is a small intestinal inflammation disor1der, triggered by sensitive enteropathy. Recent studies have shown that Th17 cells may also the intake of gluten protein that present in cert2ain cereals . The prevalence contribSuOteC Sto3 disease pathogenesis. is known to be a negative regula- of CD is about 1% in the European population . tor of the Th17 response, and has beSeOnC cSo3nsidered a candidate gene in CD. A CD has been shown to affect only genetically predisposed individuals; strong SNP in (rs4969170) has been recently associated with CD. relation between this disease and Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLA) has AIM: To study the expression of in affected tissue in relation to been proved, with 95% of the CD patie3nts carrying HLA DQ2 heterodimer rs4969170 genotype and to replicate the genetic association. and ca. 5% carrying DQ8 heterodimer . DQ2 and D4Q8 negative individuals PATIENTS AND METHODS: Gene expression was analyzed in 29 CD biopsy have been shown to be very unlikely to develop CD. pairs, taken at diagnosis and after 2 years on gluten free diet, and 12 con- HSeeqrueeinn cwe eS pperceisfiecn Ot liag oconluocrliemoteitdrei cP raosbsaeys, (bSaSOsePd) on enzyme-linked oligonu- trols. SNP rs4969170 was genotyped in 512 celiac patients and 607 controls cleotide assay (ELONA) technology in combination with reverse dot-blot from the CEGEC collection. TaqMan gene expression and genotyping assays approach, for rapid, easy to were employed. use and cost effective HLA typing of CD associated genes. RESULTS:S GOeCnSe3 expression showed statistically significant differences when Multiplex colorimetric assay for medium to high resolution HLA typing of comparing celiac patients before and after treatment, and also with healthy the DQ2 and DQ8 genes is demonstrated. Probes with high specificity for the controls. is downregulated in active disease, compatible with an in- cd associated alleles (DQA1*02:01, DQA1*03:01, DQA1*05:01/DQA1*05:05, creased Th17 response. No effect of the rs4969170 genotype on gene ex- DQB1*02:01/DQB1*02:02 and DQB1*03:02) were designed and tested by pression was detected, nor was the genetic association for this SNP replica- ELONA and surface plasmon resonance techniques (SPR). Replication set (CEGEC) ted in our sample. Assay condition studies, performed by SPR and ELONA, revealed that de- CD Controls tection can be performed in 25 minutes if operation temperature was set to 37 ºC. FinCalilnlyi,c athl ea npde rAfpoprmlieadn Icmesm oufn tohleo gdye Rveelvoiepweds typing3 platform were validated (N=512) (N=607) byG tuhte analys5is2 of a series of real patient samples. GG 221 (43.2) 236 (38.9) 1. Clinical and Applied Immunology Reviews, 2002, 2, 61-71. AG 229 (44.7) 283 (46.6) 2. Hum, 2a0n0 I3m, mu,n 9o6lo0g-y965. 64 AA 62 (12.1) 88 (14.5) 3. , 2002, , 293-305. 4. , 2003, , 469-477. AA genotype; p = 0.266 P09.043 CONCLUSION: Although SOCS3 could be a functional player in celiac disease, Searching for a causative mutation in a four-generation family with changes in expression are observed only in active mucosa, and seem to be a celiac disease using next-generation sequencing consequence of the inflammatory response rather than a primary effect of I. Ricaño-Ponce, A. Szperl, C. C. van Diemen, C. Wijmenga; the associated variant. Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands. P09.041 Association of the matrix metalloproteinases, disintegrin and metalloprotease 33 and the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases Celiac disease (CeD) is a common food intolerance, caused by a dysregulated genes polymorphic markers with chronic obstructive pulmonary immune respone to dietary gluten. It is strongly associated to the HLA-DQ2/ disease DQ8 genes, which explain 35% of the heritability. Genome-wide association G. Korytina1, O. Tselousova1, L. Akhmadishina1, E. Viktorova2, T. Victorova1,3; 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center, Ufa, Russian Federation, studies for CeD identified a further 39 non-HLA loci that explain another 2George-August University of Goettingen, Goettingen,, Germany, 3Bashkortostan State 5%. To identify more risk genes, we performed whole-genome linkage in a Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation. four-generation Dutch family segregating for CeD. We mapped a dominant- ly inherited linkage region at chromosome 9p21-13 and another region at 6q25 using a model-free approach. The contribution of the polymorphic markers of the matrix metalloproteina- We hypothesize that these regions may contain causal mutations for CeD ses MMP1 (-1607 G>GG, rs1799750; -519 A>G, rs494379), MMP2 (-735C>T, and applied whole-exome sequencing to two affected individuals from the rs2285053), MMP3(-1171 5A>6A, rs35068180), MMP9 (-1562C>T, family to look for mutations. As CeD segregates in the dominant-like matter, rs3918242; 2660A>G, rs17576), MMP12 (-82 A>G, rs2276109), the disinte- we looked for heterozygous changes present in both individuals. We selec- grin and metalloprotease 33 ADAM33 (12418A>G, rs2280091; 13491 C>G, ted all non-synonymous, nonsense and splice-site changes of unknown or rs2787094), the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases TIMP2 (-418G>C, low frequency (MAF<5%) using datasets from 1000 Genomes, an NHLBI rs8179090), TIMP3 (-1296T>C, rs9619311) genes to chronic obstructive exome-sequencing project, and a set of 500 Dutch controls. pulmonary disease has been assessed. For this purpose, PCR-RFLP analysis Two missense variants, on chromosomes 9p21-13 and 6q25, were further of the gene polymorphisms in case (N=391) and control (N=514) groups investigated and were both predicted to be damaging. However, the 6q25 has been performed. The 6A6A genotype of the MMP3 -1171 5A>6A poly- variant was also present in one spouse and the family grandmother, both of morphism was associated with significantly high risk of chronic obstructive whom did not carry the risk haplotype. The 9p21-13 variant showed perfect pulmonary disease (OR=2.490, Padj=0.003979 adjusted for age, sex, smoke co-segregation in the family and is in a gene of largely unknown function, pack-years, ethnos). Analysis showed an association of the G-G haplotype although it is highly expressed in epithelial tissue. This opens up the exci- of 13491 C>G and 12418A>G ADAM33 gene polymorphisms (OR=0.39, ting possibility that it might be involved in barrier function. Further studies Padj=0.0012) with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We found a should investigate the gene function and its involvement in CeD pathoge- significant interaction of the smoking status and ADAM33 12418A>G nesis. (Pinteraction=0.026) and TIMP3 -1296T>C (Pinteraction=0.044). The rela- P09.044 tionship between the GG genotype of the ADAM33 13491 C>G and emphy- SNP association of CNTN4, CNTN5, CNTN6, CHL1 and GRIN2B sema risk was found (OR=1.74, Padj=0.013, Pcor=0.117). Severity of chronic corroborates and extends copy number variation data in autism obstructive pulmonary disease was modified by MMP9 -1562C>T in additi- M. Poot, C. G. de Kovel; ve model (OR=1.883, Padj=0.028). The MMP3, MMP9, ADAM33, TIMP3 ge- Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands. nes polymorphism may be an important risk factor for the development and progression of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, important gene and environmental interactions were determined. Research into the genetics of neurobehavioral disorders such as autism P09.042 spectrum disorder (ASD) is caught within the dichotomy of rare variants Colorimetric Assay For Medium-High Resolution HLA-DQ2/DQ8 with a high phenotypic impact, such as copy number variations (CNVs), vs. Typing For Coeliac Disease Predisposition Analysis common variants with a low effect size. To overcome this (false) dichoto- H. Joda1, V. Beni2, I. Katakis1, N. Alakulppi3, J. Partanen3, K. Lind4, L. Strömbom4, C. K. my and to find missed heritability we performed an association study on O´Sullivan1,5; candidate genes, which we had previously identified by SNP array-based 1Departament d’Enginyeria Quimica, Universitat Rovira i Virgili, Tarragona, Spain, CNV analyses in ASD patients (Neurogenetics (2011) 12, 315). Within these CNVs, genes with clear expression in the brain were selected. In total we www.eshg.org www.eshexga.moirnged 2,042 SNPs, spanning 16 Mb of genomic DNA, which were located 228 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.047 Systematic identification of genetic factors influencing the thickness within or immediately bordering these genes. We compared a cohort of 74 of the cerebral cortex ASD patients without relevant CNVs with a population-based cohort of 132 T. W. Mühleisen1,2, C. Herold3, F. B. Siedek1,2, S. Caspers4, C. Roski4, S. Lux4, D. Drichel3, healthy individuals that CwNeTreN 4not related to the ASD families. After Bonfer- S. Herms1,2, P. Hoffmann1,2, M. M. Nöthen1,2,3, T. Becker3,5, K. Zilles4,6,7, K. Amunts4,6,8, S. roni CcNorTrNec5t ion for multiple testing we found significant association foCr HoLn1e Cichon1,2,4; SNP within intron 11 of (rs142002C1N), TtwN6o SNPs within intron 7 and 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3German Center 9 of (rs659G04R7IN32 aBnd rs11222599), one SNP within intron 1 of for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Neuroscience (rs17329247), one SNP within intron 1 of (rs9878022), and 5 SNPs and Medicine (INM-1, INM-2), Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany, 5Institute of flanking exon 4 of . Our data corroborate involvement of contactins Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, in ASD as indicated by our previous CNV study and indicate that certain 6JARA-BRAIN, Juelich-Aachen Research Alliance, Juelich, Germany, 7C. and O. Vogt genes may harbour variants with both high penetrance and with a smaller Institute for Brain Research, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, degree of effect for the same phenotype. 8Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy, and Psychosomatics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. P09.045 An association between JAK3, STAT3 and CCL2 gene variants and myocardial infarction Y. R. Timasheva, V. A. Matveeva, T. R. Nasibullin, O. E. Mustafina; The human cortex is structurally and functionally segregated. It varies more Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Science Centre Russian Academy of Science, than any other part of the brain between subjects. The identification of gene Ufa, Russian Federation. variants contributing to this inter-subject variability will help to elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying brain functions. In the present study, we focused on cortical thickness which is a heritable Systemic inflammation is considered to be an important factor in the de- quantitative trait. Moreover, it is undergoing changes in many neuropsych- velopment of coronary artery disease. The aim of the current study was to iatric disorders. We analyzed 98 healthy volunteers using a 3T magnetic investigaJtAeK c1a nJAdKid3a tSeT gAeTn3e s in tChCeL 2in fammatory molecular pathways invol- resonance imaging scanner, obtained T1-weighted images, and performed ved in the progression of atherosclerosis. To achieve this goal, we replicated genome-wide genotyping (HumanOmniExpress/HumanOmni1S). Thick- SNPs in , , and genes in the study group consisting of ness data were extracted using the FreeSurfer software. To determine those patients with MI and control subjects. JAK3*T/*C data which explain most of the thickness variability, we applied a principal The group of MI patients of Russian ethnic origin (N=277), when compared component analysis (PCA) on the pooled data from all cortical regions. We tJAo Kh3e* Cc/oCntrol group (N=145), has demostrated increased geno- selected the first 15 principal components which together explained 80% of type frequency (44.23S%TA Tvs3.* C3/2*.2C% resCpCeLc2t*ivGe/l*yG, P=0.032) and decreased the total variance and performed genome-wide association studies (GWAS) genotype frequency (50% vs. 63.56% respectively, P=0.015). In- on each component. Across PCA GWAS, SNP P-values were combined using creased prevalence of and genotypes was observed a meta-analysis approach. Overall, 31 SNPs showed P-values of less than in MI patients of Tatar ethnicity (N=220) (16.59% vs. 8.82%J,A PK=30.031, and 1E-04. The most significant finding was a SNP on chromosome 16q23.2 5.12% vs. 6.8S8T%AT, P3= 0.014 respective ClyC)L.2 JAK3* (P=9.48E-06). Results of the individual GWAS of the first principal compo- In our study, we have detected an association between MI and rs310216 nent, which explains 43% of the observed variability in thickness, will also JiAn KR3ussians, rs2293152 and rs3917887 in Tatars. T/*C be presented. wSTaAsT a3ssociated wCitChL 2increased risk of MI (OR= 1.67, CI: 1.06 - 2.64), while Several common genetic variants with suggestive evidence for association *C/*C was found to be protective (OR= 0.57, CI: 0.34 - 0.90). In Tatars, with cortical thickness were identified. We are currently analyzing the genes *C/*C and *G/*G carriers demonsrated higher risk of MI (OR= and available knowledge of their function and we have initiated a replication 2.05, CI: 1.08 - 3.92, and OR= 2.43, CI: 1.21 - 4.90, respectively). Further in- study in two independent samples to follow-up our results. vestigations are needed to confirm these results and to understand the me- P09.048 chanisms underlying the associations. Role for the assemblage of centrosome-derived structures in the P09.046 pathogenesis of non-syndromic craniosynostosis New genes and coronary artery disease C. Bernardini1, M. Geloso1, M. Barba1, M. Puglisi1, L. Massimi2, G. Tamburrini2, F. Michetti1, M. Ghassibe-Sabbagh1, J. Cazier2, S. Saade1, D. Gauguier2,3, D. E. Platt4, P. A. Zalloua1,5; C. Di Rocco2, W. Lattanzi1; 1Lebanese American University, School of Medicine, Beirut 1102 2801, Lebanon, 2The 1Insitute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, Rome, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Italy, 2Pediatric Neurosurgery, Università Cattolica S. Cuore, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy. Headington, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom, 3INSERM UMRS872, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, 75006 Paris, France, 4IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Hgts, NY, United States, 5Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States. This study attempted to clarify the molecular and cellular mechanisms un- derlying the premature ossification of calvarial sutures in non syndromic craniosynostoses (NS-CRS), highly prevalent craniofacial malformations Genome wide association studies and their replications that have associated with an unclear etio-pathogenesis. Calvarial specimens of patent and fused DNA variants with myocardial infarction (MI) and/or coronary artery disea- sutures were collected from 8 patients during surgery. Total RNA and cal- se (CAD) are predominantly based on populations of European or Eastern varial cells were isolated from tissues. RNAs from matched samples of each Asian descent. Replication of the most significantly associated polymorphis- patient was used for comparative microarray analysis using exon arrays ms in populations with distinctive genetic backgrounds and lifestyles is cru- enabling both gene- and exon-level analyses. Gene-level analysis allowed cial to the understanding of the pathophysiology of a multifactorial disease identifying 114 significantly modulated genes, mainly involved in cell adhe- like CAD. sion, cell-matrix interaction, matrix mineralization, osteogenesis, and tissue We have used our Lebanese cohort to perform a replication study of nine development. Exon-level analysis produced a list of over 150 genes with si- previously identified CAD/MI susceptibility loci (LTA, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, gnificant differentiallly expressed exons suggesting tissue-specific alternati- CELSR2-PSRC1-SORT1, CXCL12, MTHFD1L, WDR12, PCSK9, SH2B3, and ve splicing events occurring at the dysmorphic site. These showed selected SLC22A3), and 88 genes in related phenotypes. The study was conducted splice variants of the ciliopaties-associated genes that were differentially on 2,002 patients with detailed demographic, clinical characteristics, and expressed in fused-versus-unfused suture calvarial tissues. Interesting the cardiac catheterization results. One marker, rs6922269, in MTHFD1L was list included IFT88 and BBS9 genes which are associated with ciliopathic protective against MI (OR=0.68, p=0.0035), while the variant rs4977574 in conditions in craniofacial disorders. CDKN2ACDKN2B was associated with MI (OR=1.33, p=0.0086). Associati- Calvarial cells isolated in primary culture from the suture specimens were ons were detected after adjustment for family history of CAD, gender, hy- analyzed morphologically using confocal microscopy. Fused suture-derived pertension, hyperlipidemia, diabetes, and smoking. The parallel study of 88 cells displayed a constitutive tendency towards the osteogenic commitment, previously published genes encompassed 20,225 markers, three quarters of increased growth kinetics, reduced primary cilia and abnormally orientated which with imputed genotypes. The study was based on our genome-wide mitotic spindles. These resembled tumor-like features, confirmed in vitro genotype data set, with imputation across the whole genome to HapMap by demonstrating a higher clonogenicity and a higher invasiveness in vitro II using HapMap CEU population as a reference. Analysis was conducted of fused suture-derived cells. These suggest that a somatic alteration of cen- on the genotyped and imputed variants in the 88 regions covering selec- trosome-derived structures in the osteo-progenitor cells, could underlie the ted genes. This approach replicated HNRNPA3P1-CXCL12 association with overworking osteogenic process at the site of calvarial suture fusion. CAD and identified new significant associations of CDKAL1, ST6GAL1, and PTPRD with CAD. Our study provides evidence for the importance of the multifactorial aspect of CAD/MI and describes genes predisposing to their etiology. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 229 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.049 Association analysis of OXTR and AVPR1B genes gene in criminal violence The existence of individual differences in response to painful stimuli sug- A. R. Valiullina1, R. F. Kanzapharova1, A. G. Zainullina2, E. K. Khusnutdinova1,2; gests that genetic factors can be involved in its modulation. The aim of our 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and study was to investigate the genetic variation of 16 genes involved either in Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. nervous system pathways or in drug metabolism, in patients from Salaman- ca (Spain), diagnosed CRPS. Methods: Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by standard Human aggression and violence are, unfortunately, ubiquitous phenomena techniques. We selected 16 non-synonymus SNPs. Studies were performed with substantial costs to society. Aggression - defined as hostile, injurious, or using TaqMan probes (Applied biosystems) for the analysis of the polymor- destructive behavior. It is known, that both oxytocin (OXT) and vasopressin phisms in the following genes: TRPV, GSTP1, CYP2D6, COMT, PTGS2, HTR2A, (AVP) systems dysfunction is associated with social behavior. The physiolo- SLLC6A4, OPRD, OPRM, OPRK, CNR1, DRD2, GABRA1, GABRA6, PPARG, gic effects of OXT and AVP are mediated through its specific receptors (OXTR EDN1. Statistical analysis was performed comparing the different allelic va- and AVPR). The aim of the present study was to investigate the association riants of the genes in subgroups of patients: patients with a VAS below and OXTR and AVPR1B genes with criminal violence in Russian population. 177 over 50. violent offenders (convicted of murder or rape) were included in the stu- Results and conclusion: Preliminary analysis has shown significant diffe- dy. The control group consisted of 301 voluntaries. Two SNPs (rs53576 and rences in genotyping distribution (p<0.05) comparing both groups of pa- rs2254298) of the OXTR gene and two SNPs (rs33911258 and rs28632197) tients in the EDN1 and PTGS2 genes. When we split groups according sex, of the AVPR1B gene were genotyped using PCR/RFLP methods. For pairwise we find significant differences in EDN1 and IL1B for men, and in PTGS2, linkage disequilibrium and haplotype analysis, the Haploview 4.1 program GABRA1, TRPV and GSTP1 for women. was used. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confident intervals (CI) were calcu- That support the hypothesis that genetic variants could be associated with lated. The only association we observed was an allele association between increased susceptibility to suffer pain. OXTR rs2254298 and criminal violence: G was significantly overrepresen- P09.052 ted in violent offenders group as compared to controls (p=0.001; OR=2.93, Study of the effect of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the 95%CI: 1.43-4.03). There were no allele or genotype associations between mannose-binding lectin gene (MBL2) on phenotype in Slovak cystic the AVPR1B SNPs or the OXTR rs53576 and criminal violence. There was an fibrosis patients evidence of the strong pairwise linkage disequilibrium (D‘ values between E. Tothova Tarova1, H. Polakova2, H. Kayserova3, P. Celec4,5, M. Zuzulova6, E. Nescakova7, 0.89 to 0.99) between markers within the investigated genes. However, ana- L. Kadasi1,8; lysis of distribution of the estimated haplotype frequencies revealed no si- 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University in gnificant differences between violent offenders and control. Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy od Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Cystic Fibrosis Center, University Hospital This work was supported by grant of the Russian Foundation for Humanities with Policlinic in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Institute of Pathophysiology, Faculty (11-06-00554a). of Medicine of Comenius University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 5Department P09.050 of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Scientes, Comenius University in Bratislava, Higher post surgical opioid requirement in Crohn’s disease - Bratislava, Slovakia, 6Institute of Laboratory Medicine, St. Elisabeth Cancer Institute, expression profiling of small intestine biopsies Bratislava, Slovakia, 7Department of Anthropology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, K. Hühne1, T. Münster2, T. Rau3, T. Foertsch4, R. Croner4, A. Ekici1, B. Rautenstrauss5,6, A. Comenius University in Bratislava, Bratislava, Slovakia, 8Institute of Molecular Winterpacht1; Physiology and Genetics, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 2Department of Anaesthesiology, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 3Department of Patholgy, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 4Department of Cystic fibrosis (CF) is the most common lethal autosomal recessive disease Surgery, University Hospital Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 5Medical Genetics Center, Munich, Germany, Erlangen, Germany, 6Friedrich-Baur-Institut, München, Germany. with .prevalence of 1:2500 newborns. The cause of death in 90% is respi- ratory insufficiency due to chronic inflammation caused by bacterial infec- tions MBL2 Mannose-binding lectin (MBL) protein is an important mediator component Crohn’s disease (CD) is a painful inflammatory bowl disease with complex of the innate immune defense system. It has been shown that vari- polygenic inheritance. It has been shown that a number of CD patients re- ant alleles causing low MBL serum levels are associated with an increased quire significantly higher post operative opioid doses than patients under- risk of infections. In exon 1, thrMeeB sLi2ngle nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) going comparable abdominal surgery. We recently demonstrated that this is and one in promoter region cause independently low MBL serum levels. We not due to the most common variants in components of opioid metabolism. therefore investigated whether gene variants are associated with pul- CD, therefore, may be a suitable model for the identification of novel pain monary function or susceptibility to infection in Slovak CF patients. susceptibility genes. In order to further investigate the molecular and ge- DNA polymorphisms were typed by single base primer extension assay netic basis of this difference in pain perception within CD patients, we fo- (SNaPshot) in 91 patients and 100 controls. The concentrations of protein cused our attention on the affected tissue. RNA was extracted from sections were determined in 34 patients by a sandwich enzyme-linked immunosor- of inflamed and non-inflamed small intestine tissue of 3 CD patients with bent assay, also spirometric ManBdL 2microbiological data were collected from high and 3 patients with low postsurgical opioid requirement. Expression medical records. profiling of all 12 tissues was performed using Affymetrix U133 Plus2.0 mi- In this study we found that MB gLe2notypes were associated neither with croarrays. Expression profiles were compared between inflamed and non- earlier acquisition of bacterial infection nor with reduced pulmonary func- inflamed tissue of CD patients with high and low postoperative opioid con- tion among patients. Although genotypes were associated with the sumption. We identified 18 transcripts (fold change of >2; p-value <0.05) MBL2 protein sMerBuLm2 level, results were statistically significant only for po- which showed a significantly altered expression in tissue from high versus lymorphisms in exon 1, with p=0.0008. low consumers independent of the inflammation status. This includes genes The role of the gene in lung disease severity in CF patients represents already known to be involved in pain perception and/or inflammation as a very complex phenomenon where both genetic and environmental fac- well as genes with yet unknown function. This is the first study investigating tors play an important role. Understanding this complexity requires further intestine tissue from CD patients with respect to their post surgical opioid studies based on a broader scale of genetic factors involving both a whole- requirement. Further investigation of the identified genes, their expression genome approach and a larger patient cohort. in normal and affected tissue, as well as their role in opioid metabolism and/ P09.053 or pain perception is currently in progress. Analysis of TCF7L2 gene polymorphism in CF Russian patients with P09.051 and without diabetes. Study of allelic variants in patients with CRPS from Samalanca (Spain) T. A. Vasilyeva1, V. A. Samoylenko2, G. J. Babadjanova2, N. V. Petrova1; M. López Bartolomé1,2, D. Fernández García1, S. Lobato1, C. Muriel Villoria2,3, R. González 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Sarmiento1; Russian Federation, 2Research Center of Pulmonology Healthcare Ministry of Russian 1Unit of Molecular Medicine. Department of Medicine. University of Salamanca, Federation, Moscow, Russian Federation. Salamanca, Spain, 2Cátedra Extraordinaria del Dolor. Grünenthal Foundation, Salamanca, Spain, 3Unit of Pain. Anesthesia Service. Hospital Clínico de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. Diabetes is aCnF TimRportant complication of cystic fibrosis (CF), a multisystem genetic disease caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis conductance regu- Background: Complex regional pain syndrome (CRPS) is a chronic pain con- lTaCtoFr7 Lg2ene ( ). Diabetes risk increases with age and is associated with dition that is believed to be the result of dysfunction in the central or peri- a significantly worse CF prognosis. Recent studies indicate that variants in pheral nervous systems. gene, transcription factor 7 like 2, or the type 2 diabetes suscepti- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org230 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 TCF7L2 Stch-App bility gene, modifies risk of diabetes in CF. Analysis of three polymorphisms not only of a central nervous system defect, but also have a peripheral origin in gene (rs7903146, rs12255372, rs11196205) was carried out in ant that the region contributes to those. Candidate genes for this two groups of adult Russian CF patients: 47 patients with diabetes (mean new phenotype are currently under investigation. age 22,6 years; 25 males : 22 females); 55 patients wiTthCFo7uLt 2diabetes (mean P09.057 age 22, 8 years; 28 males : 27 females). The difference of the allele and ge- Aging alters DNA methylation level in the genes involved in common notype distribution at rs11196205 polymorphism in gene between diseases two analyzed groups of CF patients was revealed. The frequency of C allele H. Kitajima1,2, K. Ohnaka3, R. Takayanagi2, K. Yamamoto1; at rs11196205 is significantly lower in CF patients with diabetes than in 1Division of Genome Analysis, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, CF patients without diabetes (0,394 versus 0,558; p=0,02). Allele C is as- Fukuoka, Japan, 2Department of Medicine and Bio-Regulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan, 3Department of Geriatric sociated with decreasing risk of diabetes in CF patients (OR=0,51 (95%CI Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. 0,29-0,91); p=0,02). P09.054 Changes in methylation of promoters of immune response genes Aging affects various physiological processes and increases susceptibility to during hemodialysisin patients with diabetic nephropathy detected at diseases. Whether aging alters DNA methylation level and how the aging- the level of cell-free DNA inplasma related epigenetic change influences disease traits are of great interest. To M. Korabecna1,2, E. Pazourkova1,2, A. Horinek1,2, M. Mokrejsova3, V. Tesar1; 1First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Faculty settle this matter, we performed epigenome-wide association study by ana- of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic, 3Third Faculty lyzing approximate 450K DNA methylation sites using the blood sample of of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. total 288 subjects in Japanese general population. We conducted multistage association analysis between DNA methylation level and age by adjusting with sex and body mass index using general linear model for 96 subjects in Background: Of patients with diabetes mellitus (DM), 20%-40% develop each step. We identified 15 methylation sites of 11 genes associated with diabetes nephropathy (DN) which belongs to one of the most frequent cau- age whic-2h9 showed P--9value < 0.001 in every three sets and showed P-value ses of hemodialysis therapy. The process of hemodialysis (HD) itself is not 1.0 x 10 ~ 1.0 x 10 in combined set. The functional information of these without the influence on patient´s immune system, additionally impaired genes are as follows; 3 sites in one of the susceptibility loci of Diabetes Mel- immune functions are documented in DM patients. Elevations of cell-free litus, 2 sites related to fatty acid metabolism, 2 sites in the coactivator of the DNA (cfDNA) concentrations during HD sessions were reported in nu- androgen receptor, 1 site in proapoptotic pathway, 1 site related to athero- merous studies regardless of an applied therapeutic protocol. In this study, sclerosis development, 1 site affected putative deubiquitinase and 1 site of we focus on methylation status of promoter of immune response genes at plasma membrane sodium and calcium exchanger. Our results suggest that the level of plasma cfDNA and their changes iniciated by the process of he- aging may alter epigentic status in the genes involved in common diseases modialysis in DN patients. such as diabetes, dyslipidemia, cardiovascular disorder and cancer. Methods: We isolated plasma cfDNA from 20 patients with DN before and af- ter a HD session. The extent of promoter methylation of 24 genes involved in P09.058 immune response was examined using the Methyl Profiler DNA Methylation Investigation of variants of diverse hormone receptor genes and the PCR Array System and cluster analysis (SABiosciences, Qiagen). male pattern baldness major genetic susceptibility loci AR/EDA2R Results: We discovered significant changes in methylation profiles that were and 20p11 in women with female pattern hair loss promoted in consequence of patient´s blood contact with artificial surfaces S. Redler1, R. Tazi-Ahnini2, M. Birch3, K. Dobson3, D. Drichel4, F. F. Brockschmidt1, K. A. of dialyzer. According to the character of methylation profiles it seems that Giehl5, N. Kluck1,6, R. Kruse7, G. Lutz8, H. Wolff5, T. Becker4,9, M. Böhm10, M. M. Nöthen1,6, A. Th17 cells related immunity may play role in the response of DN patients G. Messenger11, R. C. Betz1; to HD. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 22Department of Infection and Immunity, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 33Department of Dermatology, Conclusion: The method provides the new tool for evaluation of immune Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 4German Center system activity in HD patients and its results can be further correlated with for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of clinical data to bring new insights in the complex pathogenesis. Dermatology, University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 6Department of Genomics, Life & Supported by grants no. I/328 of Ministry of Industry and Trade and no. Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Dermatological Practice, Paderborn, MSM0021620806 of Ministry of Education of the Czech Republic Paderborn, Germany, 8Dermatological Practice, Hair & Nail, Wesseling, Wesseling, P09.056 Germany, 9Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Department of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Locomotor dysfunction and hypotonia in Down syndrome mouse Germany, 11Department of Dermatology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, Sheffield, models for the Stch-App region as a consequence of dosage sensitive United Kingdom. genes controlling muscular metabolism and mitochondrial function V. Brault1, S. Pothion2, M. Karout1, I. Sahun3, J. Bizot4, C. Borel5, F. Trovero6, D. Dembele1, S. E. Antonarakis5, M. Dierssen7, Y. Herault1,8,9; 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2CNRS UPS44 TAAM, Illkirch, France, 3Center for Genomic Androgenetic alopecia is a common hair loss disorder which occurs in both Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, 4Key-Obs, Orleans, France, 5University of Geneva Medical sexes. The disorder is termed male-pattern baldness (AGA) in men, and fe- School, Geneva, Switzerland, 6Key Obs, Orleans, France, 7Center for Genomic regulation, male pattern hair loss (FPHL) in women. Although the precise etiopatho- Barcelona, Spain, 8CNRS UPS44 TAAM, Orleans, France, 9ICS, Illkirch, France. genesis of FPHL remains unknown, one likely hypothesis is that sex steroid hormones are crucial for the development of FPHL. However, we could not demonstrate significant association for any of the 32 genotyped variants Aneuploidies of human chromosome 21 (Down syndrome and monosomy of the hormone receptor genes aromatase-gene (CYP19A1), progesterone 21) lead to variable physiological abnormalities, with constant mental re- receptor (PGR), steroid-5-alpha-reductase alpha polypeptide 1 and 2 (SR- tardation and delayed locomotor skills. Delayed motor performance, weak D5A1, SRD5A2) and estrogen receptors 1 and 2 (ESR1, ESR2). Another likely muscle strength and exercise limitation observed in individuals with Down hypothesis is that FPHL and AGA share common disease-causing mechanis- syndrome are not yet understood and remain a challenging issue. They have ms and a common genetic background. The two major susceptibility loci for been attributed to impaired coordinated input due to cerebellaSrt dchys-Afupnpction, AGA are the X-chromosomal locus AR/EDA2R; and a locus on chromosome but might have a more complex origin. Phenotypic investigation of mouse 20p11. We performed a fine mapping study of AR/EDA2R and genotyped models of trisomy (Ts2Yah) and monosomy (Ms3Yah) for the regi- five SNPs from the chromosome 20p11 region that reached genome-wide si- on revealed the existence in this region of genes sensitive to dosage that are gnificance in a recent GWAS of AGA. No significant association was obtained controlling muscle strength, motor function and endurance. A transcripto- for any of the 20p11 variants, assuming that this locus do not influence sus- me analysis of skeletal muscle in Ms3Yah mice revealed up-regulation of ge- ceptibility to FPHL. At AR/EDA2R, seven markers showed significant asso- nes implicated in mitochondrial function and in the oxidative phosphoryla- ciation in the subgroup of early affected UK patients, suggesting that the AR/ tion pathway, a finding that was confirmed by the visualization of increased EDA2R locus may be specifically involved in the pathogenesis of early-onset number of oxidative fibers. The opposite down regulation was observed in FPHL. Enlargement of the collective of 230 patients (145 UK; 85 German) Ts2Yah mice, although with less effect. In addition, myopathy-likeS tmchu-Ascplpe and 329 controls (179 UK; 150 German) as well as a genome-wide associa- fiber and mitochondria damage was observed in the Ms3Yah model. Our tion study might help to understand the role of AR/EDA2R and to identify findings demonstrate that one or more gene(s) present within the further genes contributing to the development of FPHL. region are implicated in the regulation of muscle energy metabolism and integrity, and point at a defect in the mitochondrial respiratory chain. We propose that locomotor deficits observed in Down syndrome are the results, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 231 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.059 P09.061 Multi-ethnic fine-mapping reveals potential causal variants for a The FTO gene polymorphisms are associated with obesity in the complex disease Chinese postmenopausal women R. C. Almeida1,2, I. Ricaño-Ponce1, A. Szperl1, G. Trynka1, J. Gutierrez-Achury1, J. M. Lin1,2, C. Hwu3, L. Chen1, L. Hsiao3, H. Wu4, J. Fuh5, L. Ho3; Romanos1, L. Franke3, H. Westra1, J. Bilbao4, D. Barisani5, L. Greco6, M. Mazilli7, A. Sood8, 1Institute of Public Health, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department B. Cukrowska9, K. Hunt10, E. Urcelay11, D. van Heel10, C. Wijmenga1; of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, 3Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Taipei Veterans Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Brasilia School of Health Sciences, Brasília, General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Radiology, Taipei Veterans General Brazil, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen and University of Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 5Department of Neurology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 43 Immunogenetics Research Laboratory, Hospital Taipei, Taiwan. de Cruces, Bizkaia, Spain, 54 Department of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Milano-Bicocca, Monza, Italy, 6European Laboratory for Food-Induced Disease, University of Naples Federico II, Napoles, Italy, 7Department of Molecular Obesity is an important risk factor for type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 8Dayanand Medical College and Hospital,Ludhiana, Punjab, India, 9Department of Pathology, Children‘s Memorial Health diseases. The fat mass and obesity-associated gene (FTO) was recently Institute, Warsaw, Poland, 10Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and identified as a susceptibility locus for both obesity and type 2 diabetes by The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, London, United Kingdom, 11Depatment genome-wide association studies in several European populations. To in- of Immunology, H. Clínico S. Carlos, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria San Carlos vestigate the association between FTO gene polymorphisms and obesity in (IdISSC), Madrid, Spain. the Chinese postmenopausal women, we genotyped three single nucleoti- de polymorphisms (SNP) of the FTO gene (rs1421085, rs9939609, and rs9930506) in 424 postmenopausal women recruited from a health survey Genome-wide association studies have identified 26 non-HLA risk loci for at the clinics of General Medicine and Metabolism in a university teaching celiac disease (CD), a common autoimmune disorder. The SNPs in most of hospital. Among these women, 56 of them were obese (BMI>=27), 108 these loci are in very high linkage disequilibrium, which makes fine-mapping with overweight (24=<BMI<27) and 260 with normal weight (BMI<24). difficult. To refine the association signals we used Immunochip, a custom- We found the rs9930506 SNP was significantly associated with obesity in made array that includes common and rare variants with a dense coverage our postmenopausal cohort (p = 0.041). The women carrying with the GG of known immune-related loci. We were able to fine-map more than 50% of op r GA genotypes of the rs9930506 was associated with increased risk of CD loci and identified 13 new risk loci. The most significant signal mapped obesity as compared with those with the AA genotype (42.9% v.s. 26.9%, to an intronic region of 70 kb in the LPP gene (rs2030519, p-value 3x10-49). = 0.014). After adjustment for age and physical inactivity, the association Upon conditional analysis on this SNP, the association within this locus dis- between rs9930506 and obesity remains statistically significant (OR=2.02, appeared, indicating association to a single common haplotype. 95%C.I.:1.13-3.62, p-value=0.019). In conclusion, our results suggest the Our aim was to refine the associated region in the LPP locus by comparing polymorphisms of the FTO gene are significantly associated with obesity in the risk haplotype across four independent populations of European origin, postmenopausal women. We replicated previous finding of the association using the Cross test, a haplotype association algorithm. We have shown that between FTO gene polymorphisms and obesity in our Chinese postmeno- risk haplotypes in the four populations are derived from the same common pausal women population. ancestor and thus might carry the same causal variant in all four populati- P09.062 ons. By comparing risk haplotypes to non-risk haplotypes, we were able to Opisthorchis felineus liver fluke modifies genetic risk of bronchial narrow down the region from 70 kb to 18 kb. asthma and serum IgE levels To investigate functional regulatory elements at this region, we used EN- M. B. Freidin1, I. V. Saltikova1, E. Y. Bragina1, L. M. Ogorodova2, V. P. Puzyrev1,2; CODE annotation to indicate the most likely candidate variants. We suggest 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State that deregulation of transcription factor binding properties might be a cau- Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. sal mechanism underlying the association of the LPP region to celiac disea- se. These variants should be studied further by functional means. P09.060 Gene-environmental interactions (GxE) are in focus of contemporary stu- FTO levels affect RNA modification and the transcriptome dies of alleOrgpiics tdhoisrecahsies sf ealinnde utsr aits. Helminth invasion is recognised as an T. Berulava1, M. Ziehe2, L. Klein-Hitpaß3, E. Mladenov4, J. Thomale3, U. Rüther5, B. important factor influencing atopic disease risk. Earlier, we revealed that Horsthemke1; liver fluke Parasitol iRnevsa.s 2io0n0 7h;a1s0 1a (s4i)g:n1i1f6ic5a-n8t impact on epide- 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Analytical and miological portrait of allergic diseases and immunological status in atopy in Environmental Chemistry, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Institut für Siberian populations ( ). We now set out Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 4Institut to investigate if the helminth invasion is an environmental factor modifying für medizinische Strahlenbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 5Institut genetic risk of allergy. für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere (EMT) Heinrich-Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany. Twenty one single nucleotide polymOo. rfpehliinsemuss (SNP) of immune-response genes were analysed in 222 healthy people and 207 bronOc. hfeialiln aesutshma (BA) patients with established status of invasion. Linear regression FTO A block of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within intron 1 ofF TthOe models were built using the interaction of the SNPs and invasion (fat mass and obesity associated) gene is associated with variation aIsF aN pGredictor of BA and total IgES lTeAvTel2s. SOCS5 in body weight. Previous works suggest that increased expression of , Three significant GxE models were found for BA, including rs2069705 which encodes a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent nucleic acid demethylase, leads ( ; Pint = 0.010), rs2066807 ( ; Pint = 0.015), and rs673848 ( ; to increased body weight, although the underlying mechanism has remained Pint = 0.004) SNPs. Odds ratios for the significant GxE terms indicated ap- unclear. TFoT Oelucidate the function of FTO we examined the consequences of proximately I2F-NtiGmes higher or lower risk of BAST iAnT 6corresponding groups. altered FTO levels in cultured cells and mFuTrOine brain. We show that a knock- Two significant GxE models were obtained for total serum IgE, and included down of in HEK293 cells affects the transcripts levels of autophagy re- rs2069705 ( ; Pint = 0.046) and rs167769 ( , Pint = 0.032). In both lated genes, whereas overexpression of affects the transcript levels of models, the presence of the helminth invasion associated with lower IgE le- genes involved in RNA processing and metabolism. Subcellular localization vels. The results lacOk. efedl itnheeu ssignificance after correction for multiple testing, of FTO further strengthens the latter notion. Using immunocytochemistry likely, due to small sample size. However, the data is the first indication of and confocal laser scanning microscopy, we detected FTO in nuclear speck- the importance of invasion as an environmental factor modifying les and - to a lesser and varying extent - in the nucleoplasm and nucleoli genetic risk of BA and atopy. of HEK293, HeLa and MCF-7 cells. Moreover, RNA modification analyses re- P09.063 vealed that loss of FTO affects the 3-methyluridine/uridine and pseudouri- Suicide and glutamatergic system: NMDAR1 gene dine/uridine ratios in total brain RNA, which mostly consists of rRNAs. We M. Alves1, B. Silva2, C. Cordeiro2, C. Marques2, J. Fonte Santa2, D. N. Vieira2,3, A. M. Ambrósio1,4; conclude that altered levels of FTO have multiple and diverse consequences 1Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit of NILM, Coimbra, Portugal, 2National Institute on RNA modifications and the transcriptome and that the links between of Legal Medicine, Coimbra, Portugal, 3Faculty of Medicine of University of Coimbra, autophagy, RNA modifications and obesity need to be further explored. At Coimbra, Portugal, 4IBILI-Faculty of Medicine of University of Coimbra, Coimbra, present, we are trying to identify the RNA(s) that is(are) modified by FTO. Portugal. Suicide is one of the leading causes of mortality in many countries and is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors. Alterations in glutamate neurotransmission and particularly the ionotropic glutamate receptors have long been suggested to play a crucial role in the etiology of www.eshg.org www.eshg.org232 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 role in proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Our findings might enhance to unravel molecular mechanisms suicide. However, no genetic studies have been performed with NMDAR1 underlying these hematological traits. gene in order to explore the hypothesis of glutamatergic system in suicide susceptibility. The aim of this study was to test the potential involvement of single nucleotide polymorphism G1970A of NMDAR1 gene in the etiology P09.066 of suicide in the Portugese population. Peripheral blood was collected from The estimation of Heritability analyses for BMI of Genome-wide suicide victims and controls in the National Institute of Legal Medicine, Por- Association studies based on Korean cohort tugal and using a standard method, genomic DNA was extracted. The poly- j. Lee, Y. Kim, Y. Kim, N. Kim, J. Oh, B. Han, J. Lee; morphism G1970A in the coding region of NMDAR1 gene was investigated NIH, Korea, chungwon, Korea, Republic of. by RFLP-PCR. The PCR product was digested with MspI enzyme at 37ºC and after digestion, the fragments were separated by electrophoresis on a 3% agarose gel. Many Single nucleotide polymorphisms were significant for various risk fac- For the G1970A polymorphism of NMDAR1 gene, there was no significant tors, but these SNPs account for small fraction. We estimated heritability differences either in allele frequency or genotype frequency between two from the number of risk alleles related on BMI and analyzed linear model. groups (p> 0,05). In this study no evidence of association was found bet- For population and twin-family based on cohort in Korea, we predicted and ween the G1970A polymorphism of NMDAR1 gene and suicide in our samp- compared the heritability for BMI using various methods. The aim of this le and these results suggest that this polymorphism does not play a major study was to estimate variation and their heritability for BMI including ge- role in the susceptibility to suicide. notype information. We have constructed community and twin-family based P09.064 on cohort, which is an ongoing prospective studies and surveyed samples Genetic predisposition to tuberculosis in native and immigrant were drawn from the Korean Genome and Epidemiology Study and Korea Siberian populations Genome Analysis Project in Korea. From Twin-Family cohort, we selected A. Rudko1, M. Freidin1, E. Bragina1, N. Babushkina1, A. An2, A. Garaeva1, V. Puzyrev1,2; 2,473 subjects in twin-family cohort and surveyed their zygosity using the 1Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian Medical self-report questionnaires about 2,000 items and genotyped using Affy 6.0. University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. From community-based cohort(KARE; Korea Association REsource), we selected 8,842 subjects and surveyed their self-report questionnaires about 1,400 items and genotyped using Affy 5.0. We estimated heritability for BMI There is a difference in prevalence of tuberculosis (TB) among ethnically using SOLAR, GCTA, GENABEL. These were estimated and optimized Quan- divergent Siberian populations with highest rates of disease among abori- titative genetic analysis adjust age and sex. The estimation value of heri- ginal Asian populations. Given the similar environment, differential gene- tability for BMI based on twin-family cohort, was 0.67(p=5.21E-86) using tic background can be responsible for distinguished TB liability in native SOLAR(including only epidemiological data) and was 0.44(p<0.000) using and immigrant Siberian populations. We addressed this issue in a study of GCTA and was 0.44(p<0.000) using GENABEL(including epidemiological common polymorphisms of twelve immune-response modifying genes in and genotype data) . The estimation value of heritability for BMI based on Siberian populations of Russians (304 patients, 265 controls), Tuvinians KARE, was 0.15(p=1.13E-04) using GCTA and was 0.18(p<0.000) using GE- (238 patients, 263 controlss )P, aIAnSd3 Yakuts (150 p aPtiIeAnStYs, 1 35 contro lsS)T. ABTo6th NABEL. The estimation difference of heritability between Twin-Family and ethnic spec ifMicC aPn1d common associ aItFioNnG between the genes and TB were KARE cohort, it depends on sampling error and related/unrelated structu- identified. The rs12756687( ), rs3 76S0T9AT043( ),rs16 77P6I9AS(Y ), re. rs102461 1(STAT6), and rs2069705( ) polymorphisms were associated P09.067 wSiTtAhT 5TBB in Russians. TPhIAeS Yrs7572482 ( IF)N, GrRs32760903 ( M), CaPn1d Estimated heritability of the metabolic syndrome components in the rs167769 ( ) were linked to diseaPsIeA SiYn Tuvinians. The rs16967593 Tehranian families: Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study (TLGS) ( ), rs3760903 ( ), rs17880053 ( ), rs1024611 ( ) M. Zarkesh1, M. Daneshpour1, B. Fam1, M. Fallah2, N. Hosseinzadeh1, K. Guity1, F. were associated with TB in Yakuts. The gene was associated with TB Hosseinpanah1, A. Momenan3, F. Azizi3; in all studied populations suggesting it as a cosmopolitan TB gene. Howe- 1Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for endocrine sciences Shaheed Beheshti ver, while in Russians the common allele was protecStiTvAeT a6gainst the disease University of Me, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kowsar Research Center of Human Genetic, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Endocrine Research Center, Research Institute (OR=0.67, P = 1E-6), in Tuvinians and Yakuts it increased the risk of TB (OR for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. = 1M.4C1P, 1P = 0.032; OR = 1.67, P = 0.035, respectively). gene common al- lele was protective in Russians and predisposing in Tuvinians; while in case Introduction: of gene, common allele was predisposing in Russians and protective in Growing evidence suggests that the metabolic syndrome has Yakuts. This finding suggests specificity in allelic effects predisposing to TB both genetic and environmental bases. To evaluate the possibility of further in Asians and Russians of Siberia. Molecular mechanisms of these inverse genetic analysis, this study estimated the heritability of the metabolic syn- effects are to be investigated. dMreotmheo d(Ms:e tS) components in the families with metabolic syndrome among P09.065 from Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study. Genome-wide association study identifies sequence variants We investigated904 nuclear families with two biological parents associated with hematological traits in Asian population and at least one offspring (1565 parents and 2448 children), aged 3-90 J. OH, Y. Kim, Y. Kim, Y. Cho; years of Tehran Lipid and Glucose Study, whom metabolic syndrome infor- Korea National Institute of Health, Chungcheongbuk-do, Korea, Republic of. mation was available and had at least two members of family with metabolic To identify genetic loci influencing hematological traits, we conducted syndrome. MetS was defined in adults according to the Joint Interim State- a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 8,842 subjects recruited ment (JIS) criteria and for offspring as Cooks guide lines. Variance compo- from population-based cohorts in Korea. Replication from indepen- nReenstu mltse:t hods were used to estimate age and sex adjusted heritability of the dent population (N=7,861) to validate GWAS results revealed SNPs re- metabolic syndrome component using SOLAR software. aching genome-wide significance for selected hematological traits. We The heritability of waist circumference (WC), HDL-C, triglyceride identified significant associations between platelet count and genetic (TG), fasting blood sugar (FBS), systolic blood pressure, and diastolic blood variants in four regions on chromosome 4p16.1 (P = 1.46 × 10-10, combined pressure as continuous traits after adjusting for age and gender, were 27, in KIAA0232), 4q25 (P = 6.68 × 10-12, in or near EGF), 12q24.12 combined 46, 36, 29, 25, and 26%, respectively. When the metabolic syndrome com- (P = 1.11 × 10-15, in SH2B3) and 6p21 (P = 1.69 × 10-7, in combined combined ponents were analyzed as discrete traits, the estimates of age and gender BAK1). GWAS for WBC showed strong evidence of genetic association adjusted heritability for abdominal obesity, low HDL-C, high TG, high FBS, on 17q21.1a (P = 1.1 × 10-16) which contains CSF3 gene. Blood he- combined aCnodn chliugshi obnlo: od pressure varied to 22, 40, 34, 38, and 23%, respectively (p moglobin concentration was significantly associated with one region <0.05). on 22q12.3d (P = 2.2 × 10-8) localizing to TMPRSS6 that is required combined We clearly demonstrated a significant heritability of MetS to sense iron deficiency. Two SNPs were detected for their association components among TLGS families. The results strongly encourage efforts to with RBC from GWAS (RBC data not available in replication subjects). identify the underlying susceptibility genes. One (P = 8.6 × 10-9) is located on 6p21.1f in MED20 encoding a com- P09.068 ponent of the mediator complex. The other (P = 3.3 × 10-12) localizes Association of HIF1A gene Pro582Ser polymorphism with strength to 4q12 surrounded with several genes (CHIC2/GSX2/PDGFRA/KIT). athlete status and strength performance in children Interestingly, One locus located on 6q23.3a near MYB showed strong R. T. Gabbasov1, A. A. Arkhipova1, A. V. Borisova1, A. M. Hakimullina2, D. N. Gavrilov2, A. V. association with WBC (Pcombined = 5.7 × 10-7), RBC (P = 3.8 × 10-25) and he- Kuznetsova1, A. G. Williams3, S. H. Day3, I. I. Ahmetov1,2; matocrit (P = 5.1 × 10-9). This locus is known to play an important 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research combined www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 233 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Utsumi2, M. Nakamura1, M. Hosoyamada10, Y. Sakurai6, N. Shinomiya2, T. Hosoya11, H. Performance Research, Manchester Metropolitan University, Crewe, United Kingdom. Suzuki43; 1Department of Pathophysiology, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan, 2Department of Integrative Physiology and Bio-Nano Medicine, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan, 3Department of Pharmacy, the University of Tokyo Hypoxia-inducible factor 1-α (HIF-1α; encoded by HIF1A gene) controls a Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 4Third Division, number of genes that are implicated in various cellular functions including Aeromedical Laboratory, Japan Air Self-Defense Force, Sayama, Japan, 5Midorigaoka glycolysis, cell proliferation and differentiation. The 582Ser allele of the Hospital, Takatsuki, Japan, 6Department of Preventive Medicine and Public Health, Pro582Ser (rs11549465 C/T) polymorphism in the HIF1A gene increases National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan, 7Laboratory for Mathematics, protein stability and transcriptional activity, and therefore, improves glu- Premedical Course, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan, 8Laboratory cose metabolism. The aim of our study was to investigate the association for Statistical Analysis, Center for Genomic Medicine, Institute of Physical and Chemical between the HIF1A Pro582Ser polymorphism, elite strength athlete status Research (RIKEN), Tokyo, Japan, 9Laboratory for Biofunctions, the Central Research Institute, National Defense Medical College, Tokorozawa, Japan, 10Laboratory of and strength related phenotypes in 225 middle school-age children (116 Physiological Chemistry, Teikyo University School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tokyo, boys and 109 girls; aged 11±0.4). A total of 208 Russian strength athletes Japan, 11Division of Kidney and Hypertension, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, (122 weightlifters and 86 wrestlers) of regional or national competitive Japan. standard and 1,413 controls were genotyped using PCR-RFLP method. We found that the frequency of the HIF1A 582Ser allele was significantly high- er in weightlifters (13.1%, P = 0.0031), as well as in wrestlers (15.7%, P = Hyperuricemia has been generally classified into uric acid (urate) “overpro- 0.0002) compared to controls (7.5%). Additionally, the highest (21.1%; P = duction type,” “underexcretion type,” and “combined type” based on only 0.0052) frequency of the 582Ser allele was found in a group of elite strength renal urate excretion, without considering an extra-renal pathway such athletes. Furthermore, the carriers of the HIF1A 582Ser allele among boys as gut excretion. We recently showed that ABCG2/BCRP is a high-capacity demonstrated the best results of handgrip strength testing than Pro/Pro urate exporter and that its dysfunction is a major cause of hyperuricemia homozygotes (Pro/Pro - 13.4 (3.1) kg, Pro/Ser - 16.5 (2.5) kg; P = 0.049). and gout. Here we evaluated how ABCG2 dysfunction affects urate excretion Thus, our study provides evidence for the association between the HIF1A pathways. gene Pro582Ser polymorphism, elite strength athlete status and strength Clinical parameters for urate handling including urinary urate excretion performance in children. Although more replication studies are needed, the were examineAdB CinG 2644 male outpatients with hyperuricemia. Severity of preliminary data suggest an opportunity to use the analysis of HIF1A poly- ABCG2 dysfunction in them was estimated by genotype combination of morphism along with other gene variations in athletic talent identification. two common variants, nonfunctional Q126X (rs72552713) and half- P09.069 functional Replication of functional serotonin receptor type 3A and B variants in Q141K (rs2231142). We investigated the relationship between ABCG2 bipolar affective disorder: a European multicenter study dysfunction and urinary urate excretion, and evaluated urate excretion pa- C. Hammer1, S. Cichon2,3,4, T. W. Mühleisen2,4, B. Haenisch2,4, F. Degenhardt2,4, M. thways between Abcg2-deficient and wild-type mice treated with uricase Mattheisen2,4,5, R. Breuer6, S. H. Witt6, J. Strohmaier6, L. Oruc7, F. Rivas8, G. Babadjanova9, inhibitor, oxonate. M. Grigoroiu-Serbanescu10, J. Hauser11, R. Röth1,12, G. Rappold1, M. Rietschel6, M. Unexpectedly, urinary urate excretion was inversely associated with ABCG2 Nöthen2,4,13, B. Niesler1,12; 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, excretion function. Mild, moderate and severe ABCG2 dysfunctions signi- Germany, 2Life &Brain Center, Department of Genomics, University of Bonn, Bonn, ficantly raised the risk of overproduction hyperuricemia (overproduction Germany, 3Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Juelich, type and combined type). In abcg2-deficient mice, serum urate levels and Jülich, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, renal urate excretion were increased, while intestinal urate excretion was 55Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United decreased, compared to those of wild-type mice. States, 6Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Together with high extra-renal ABCG2 expression, these results suggested Psychiatry, University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany, 7Psychiatric Clinic, Clinical that a decrease in extra-renal urate excretion, especially in intestinal excre- Center of the University of Sarajevo, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 8Civil Hospital Carlos Haya, Malaga, Spain, 9Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian tion, by dysfunctional ABCG2 is a common mechanism of hyperuricemia, of- Federation, 10Alexandru Obregia Clinical Psychiatric Hospital, Biometric Psychiatric ten misunderstood as urate “overproduction.” Thus, “overproduction” hype- Genetics Research Unit, Bucharest, Romania, 11Laboratory of Psychiatric Genetics, ruricemia in the current classification should be renamed “renal overload” Department of Psychiatry, Poznan, Poland, 12nCounter Core Facility, Institute of hyperuricemia, which is caused by two mechanisms, “extra-renal urate un- Human Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 13German Center for derexcretion” and genuine “urate overproduction.” Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany. P09.072 Contribution of Genetic Profiles to the Risk for Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients in Slovenian Population Serotonin type 3 receptors (5-HT3) are involved in learning, cognition, and U. Potočnik, K. Repnik; emotion, and have been implicated in various psychiatric phenotypes. Ho- Medical faculty, Maribor, Slovenia. wever, their contribution to pathomechanisms remains elusive. Three SNPs in the HTR3A and HTR3B genes have been associated with bipolar affective disorder (BPAD) in pilot studies, and all of them are of functional relevance. More than 40 genome wide association studies (GWAs) and subsequent We performed a European multicenter study to confirm previous results meta-analysis in Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients revealed more and provide further evidence for the relevance of these SNPs for neuro- than 150 IBD associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). The sin- psychiatric disorders. This involved analysis of the distribution of the three gle SNP has a limited contribution to disease risk as most of the reported SNPs among 1804 BPAD cases and 2407 healthy controls. A meta-analysis odds ratio (OR) values do not exceed 1.5. This study tested if genetic profiles revealed a pooled odds ratio of 0.881 (P = 0.009, 95% CI = 0.802 - 0.968) for composed of different numbers of most significant SNPs included in genetic the non-synonymous functional SNP HTR3B p.Y129S (rs1176744), there- profiles could better describe contribution to disease risk. by confirming previous findings. In line with this, the three GWAS samples We have genotyped 650 Slovenian IBD patients and 400 healthy controls for BOMA-BD, WTCCC-BD and GAIN-BD, including more than 3500 patients and 34 SNPs previously reported in GWA studies to be most significantly asso- 5200 controls in total, showed an over-representation of p.Y129 in patients. ciated with IBD. We confirmed 21 SNPs associated with at least one disease Remarkably, meta-analysis revealed a P-value of 0.048 (OR = 0.934, fixed sub-phenotype in our patients, including 5 SNPs associated exclusively with model). refractory Crohn disease and 4 with ulcerative colits. The highest calculated Expression analyses to gain further insights into the distribution of HTR3A OR for the genetic profiles reached values between 10-12 for the profiles and HTR3B mRNA in the human brain detected HTR3A and HTR3B in all composed from 10-20 SNPs with more than 90% of disease aleles in tested investigated brain tissues with the exception of the cerebellum, and large SNPs included in profiles. The predictive models using combination of 10-12 differences in the A:B subunit ratio were observed. Interestingly, expression associated SNPs with highest OR showed above 95% specificity in patients of the B subunit was most prominent in the brain stem, amygdalae, and fron- with 90% disease alleles however only a few patients would have 90% di- tal cortex, regions of relevance to psychiatric disorders. sease alleles resulting in low sensitivity usually below 20% of such genetic In conclusion, the present study provides further evidence for the presence test. On the other hand, most of the patients would have between 50%-60% of impaired 5-HT3 receptor function in BPAD. of disease alleles however the specificity of genetic test in this case would be P09.071 less than 15%. These results suggest more complex predictive models need Novel common mechanism of hyperuricemia by decreased extra-renal to be developed for better risk prediction in IBD. urate excretion K. Ichida1, H. Matsuo2, T. Takada3, A. Nakayama2,4, K. Murakami3, T. Shimizu5, Y. Yamanashi3, H. Kasuga3, H. Nakashima6, T. Nakamura7,8, Y. Takada9, Y. Kawamura2, Y. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org234 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.073 Association of IRF6 gene polymorphisms with nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate We included 30 patients with PAH and 50 controls. The DNA extraction was I. Kempa1,2, I. Akota2, B. Barkane2, A. Krumina1, J. Klovins1, B. Lace1; performed with the Qiagen DNA kit FlexiGene. The KCNA5 gene was ampli- 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Riga Stradins University, fied by PCR and sequenced. Riga, Latvia. A total of 10 sequence changes were identified in 11 of the 30 patients with PAH, and none were detected in a panel of 100 chromosomes from normal individuals. From all the mutations and polymorphisms found in this analy- Background: Cleft lip and palate is most common congenital malformation sis, eight of them had not been previously described. Five of the mutations with prevalence of approximately 1 in 700 live birIRthFs6 worldwide, the fre- are missense (p.L42H, p.P46T, p.P169R, p.R184P, p.R577K). Also found a quency also differs by laterality - there is a 2:1 ratio of left to riIgRhFt6 sided nonsense mutation (p.E208X) and one synonymous change (p.L159L). We clefts among unilateral cleft lip cases. Mutations in gene cause Van der found three different mutations in the KCNA5 gene 3´UTR region, which do Woude syndrome and it has been reported that polymoIrRpFh6isms in gene not produce changes in the structure of the protein (c.2093T>G, c.2123T>G, are associated with nonsyndromic CL/P. c.2579A>T). The aim of the study was to evaluate the relevance of gene in etiology In conclusion, the mutations in KCNA5 gene indicated that this gene is the of nonsyndromic clefts. second most important gene implicated in the development and worsening Materials and methods: Seven SNPs were analyzed for allelic association of PAH familiar, idiopathic and secondary. with nonsyndromic clefts. The data set consisted of 116 nonsyndromic cleft P09.076 lip/palate samples and 148 control samples. Out of all cleft cases, 28 had CP Circulating phospholipids are associated with telomere length in a and 88 had cleft lip with palate or cleft lip only (CLP). Dutch family-based study Results: CP p-a7tient group showed the stongest association with rs658860 A. Demirkan1, L. Broer1, V. Codd2, P. Ugocsai3, G. Liebisch3, G. Schmitz3, B. A. Oostra1, N. J. (p=0.873x10 , OR=0.093, 95% CI=0.033-0.264). In patient group with CLP Samani2, A. Isaacs1, C. M. van Duijn1; two SNPs showed significant association (rs-5642961, p=0.011, OR=1.844, 1Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Departments of Epidemiology and Clinical Genetics, 95% CI=1.148-2.962; rs658860, p=0.24x10 , OR=0.376, 95% CI=0.249- Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, University of Leicester, Glenfield Hospital, Leicester, United Kingdom, 3Institute 0,568). Similar results we found according to cleft lip side: patient group for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital Regensburg, with CL on left side (n=45) showed strong association with rs658860 Regensburg, Germany. (p=0.485x10-4, OR=0.332, 95% CI=0.192-0.574) and patients group with CL on right side (n=18) - with rs642961 (p=0.014, OIRR=F26.589, 95% CI=1.187- 5.644). Telomeres are necessary for both successful DNA replication and mainte- ConclusiIoRnF:6 The results of this study suggest that gene contributes to nance of chromosomal integrity. Telomere length (TL) declines with age etiology of nonsyndromic clefts. Our data provide evidence that some varia- and, these decreases are associated with increases in coronary artery disea- tions in gene showed decreased risk to nonsyndromic clefts and futher se, obesity and insulin resistance. Both TL and various lipid particles have studies have to be made to clear it. been associated with longevity. Here, we study the relationship between TL P09.074 in white blood cells, measured by quantitative PCR, and plasma levels of 24 The genes in irritable bowel syndrome research network Europe sphingomyelins (SPM), 9 ceramides, 57 phosphatidylcholines (PC), 20 ly- (GENIEUR) sophosphatidylcholines (LPC), 27 phosphatidyletanolamines (PE) and 16 B. Niesler; PE-based plasmalogens, assessed using mass spectrometry. A total of 784 Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany. persons were included from the Erasmus Rucphen Family Study and ana- lysed using variance component analyses (SOLAR version 4.3.1), adjusting for age, sex and batch effects. After Bonferroni correction, TL was strongly Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a highly prevalent functional gastrointe- associated with 11 PC species (smallest P-value = 2.31 x 10-09, with PC stinal (GI) disorder with a major impact not only on the healthcare system 40:3), SPM 23:0, SPM 23:1 (P-value = 1.16 x 10-04 and 2.39 x 10-04), LPC but also on the patient’s quality of life. Genetic factors contributing to the 22:0 (P-value = 3.16 x 10-09) and PE 42:7 (P-value = 1.81 x 10-04). Results pathogenesis of IBS have not further been specified and knowledge is still remained significant after adjusting for plasma HDL-C and LDL-C. Backward poor. The search for genetic factors in IBS is mainly hampered by the fact regression analyses showed that four of the initial fifteen lipid species (LPC that only a few groups worldwide have just recently started to perform ge- 22:0, PC 38:1, PC O 42:6, PE 42:7) were independently associated with TL. netic analyses in small cohorts. Our findings suggest a link between TL and phospholipid metabolism that Consequently, contradictory results have been reported due to low stati- may help to explain the role of fatty acids and lipids in longevity as showed stical power. The GENIEUR network will foster the establishment of a pan- in animal and family-based studies. European, interdisciplinary network with the major goal being the creation P09.077 of guidelines for patient / control recruitment as well as phenotypic cha- A comprehensive phenotypic and genetic analysis of centenarians racterization by defining quantitative traits as intermediate phenotypes for from 13 Villages located in the Sardinian region of Barbagia- the following identification of genetic factors in the pathogenesis of IBS. Mandrolisai The network will not only focus on genetics but also epigenetics and micro- S. A. M. Urru1, L. Ferreli2, G. Zedda2, N. Curreli2, M. Piras2, M. Lobina2, M. Marongiu2, M. biomics. In line with this, a biobank will be established in which we collect Floris1, S. Sanna2, V. Orrù2, E. Fiorillo2, R. Galanello3, A. Atzeni4, A. Pani4, F. Cucca2; patient material (blood, saliver, colon biopsies, stool samples) for detailed 1CRS4, Pula (Cagliari), Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica (IRGB) CNR, analyses. This represents a solid basis for novel diagnostic and herapeutic Cagliari, Italy, 3Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie ASL8, Cagliari, Italy, 4Nefrologia e approaches and will significantly improve the insight into IBS pathophysio- Dialisi, Azienda Ospedaliera G. Brotzu, Cagliari, Italy. logy, and, hence, help identify new targets for treatment with the ultimate goal of increasing quality of life of affected patients. P09.075 About 30% of longevity is genetically endowed, and there have been repea- Molecular characterization of the KCNA5 gene in Pulmonary Arterial ted observations that long life clusters in families. Presently, it is still unclear Hypertension Spanish patients whether long life results G. Pousada1, A. Baloira2, C. Vilariño3, D. Valverde1; 1) from the absence in some individuals of genetic variants that would pre- 1Dpto. De Bioquímica, Genética e Inmunología, Facultad de Biología, Universidad de dispose to a range of diseases; Vigo, Campus As Lagoas Marcosende s/n, 36310, Vigo, Spain, 2Servicio de Neumología 2) or in addition or instead, from a set of alleles that positively and specifi- del Complejo Hospitalario de Pontevedra, Pontevedra, Spain, 3Servicio de Neumología cally promote healthy old age. del Complejo Hospitalario de Vigo, Vigo, Spain. Genetic studies in cosmopolitan populations have been at best inconclusi- ve in addressing these questions: perhaps the major reason is that “cente- narians” are rare, and it is reasonable to suppose that alleles involved in Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH; OMIM 178600) is a rare and pro- conferring longevity are rare as well. These analyses would be simplified gressive vascular disorder characterized by pulmonary vascular resistance by focusing on isolated founder populations, having a high prevalence of increase, vascular remodelling and right heart failure. Approximately 75% centenarians and hence most likely enriched in powerful pro-longevity and of patients with the familial form of PAH have a mutation in the gene enco- “anti-frailty” alleles. ding bone morphogenetic protein receptor type II (BMPR2). However, some At the geographic centre of Sardinia is located a mountainous, hilly isolated other candidate genes have been advocated, including the KCNA5 gene that region named Barbagia-Mandrolisai, where many centenarians live and con- codifies for a potassium voltage-gated channel. This gene is located on chro- tinue to be active. We focused our attention on about 250 healthy 90-year- mosome 12p13, with a single exon of 2865 bp and 613 aminoacidic resi- olds, from a cluster of 13 villages. Presently, we have been collecting their dues. www.eshbglo.oodr sgamples and measuring over 300 quantitative traits (endophenotypes www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 235 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 GABRA3 GABRE or quantitative risk-related genetic or environmental factors). Traits of spe- multiple tesGtAinBgR cEorrection, two allelic associations remained significant cial interest include cardiovascular risk factors, anthropometric measure- ( and ) and one genotypic association resisted to Bonferroni ments, blood test values, facets of personality and a comprehensive panel correction ( ), all in the females grouGpA.BRA3 GABRE of immunological traits. With this cohort, genetic studies with batteries of No significant results were found in the haplotypic analyses but an additive hundred thousand of single-nucleotide markers - and in selected cases with effect was observed between two SNPs of and two of . direct sequencing of complete genomes - will be conducted. With this study we show, for the first time, a possible involvement of po- P09.078 lymorphisms in GABA receptors in migraine susceptibility and in gender- Susceptibility variants on chromosome 7p21.1 suggest HDAC9 as a specific liability. new candidate gene for male-pattern baldness P09.081 S. Heilmann1,2, F. F. Brockschmidt1,2, J. A. Ellis3,4, S. Eigelshoven5, S. Hanneken5, C. Herold6, The role of genes involved in neurogenic inflammation as S. Moebus7, M. A. Alblas1,2, B. Lippke1,2, N. Kluck1,2, L. Priebe1,2, F. A. Degenhardt1,2, R. Abou susceptibility factors for migraine Jamra8, C. Meesters9, K. H. Jöckel7, R. Erbel10, S. Harrap3, J. Schumacher2, H. Fröhlich11, R. S. Vaz-Osório1, J. L. Neto1, J. Pereira-Monteiro1,2,3, J. Barros2,3, J. Sequeiros1,2, A. Sousa1,2, I. Kruse12, A. M. Hillmer13, T. Becker6, T. Becker6,9, M. M. Nöthen1,9,2; Alonso1,2, C. Lemos1,2; 1Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 1UnIGENe - IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of 3Serviço de Neurologia, Centro Hospitalar do Porto- Hospital de Santo António, Porto, Physiology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4Murdoch Children’s Portugal. Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 5Department of Dermatology, University of Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics, and Epidemiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7Institute for Medical Informatics, Biometry, and Epidemiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 8Institute Migraine is one of the commonest neurological and complex disorders, af- of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany, 9German Center for fecting 11% of the world’s adult population. In the pathogenesis of migraine Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 10Department of Cardiology, several mechanisms are involved such as neurogenic inflammation, with the West German Heart Center Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, release of neuropetides (like substance P, neurokinin A or CGRP). 11Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT, Algorithmic Bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany, Our aim was to unravel the role of three candidate genes related to neuro- 12Private dermatology practice, Paderborn, Germany, 13Genome Technology & Biology, genic inflammation processes - F2RL1, TAC1 and CALCRL- in migraine sus- Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. ceptibility. CALCRL encodes the CALCRL receptor of CGRP and F2RL1 gene encodes PAR2; PAR2 agonists increase SP and CGRP release. Additionally we have also selected TAC1 which encodes protachykinin-1 that can normally Male-pattern baldness (androgenetic alopecia, AGA) is tahned mroogsetn c roemcemptoonr undergo alternative splicing to generate both SP and NKA. foArRm eocf tohdayirs plloasssin a Am2o rnegc ehputomranEsD. AN2uRmerous studiesp haairveed ubnoxe q1uiPvAocXa1lly A case-control association study was designed and performed, using a fidoreknhteifaiedd b towxo A m2ajFoOrX gAe2netic risk loci: the X-chromosomal sample of 188 unrelated migraineurs and 287 healthy controls, age- and ( )/ ( ) locus and the ( )/ gender-matched with cases. ( ) locus on chromosome 20. Although these loci ex- SNPs on candidate genes were selected based on a data dump from The plain a significant fraction of the overall genetic risk for AGA, additional ge- International HapMap Project. From the three candidate genes 14 tagging netic risk factors still await identification. Here, we performed a GWAS using SNPs were obtained and genotyped by the SNaPshot technique. a German sampl he iostfo 5n8e1 d seeavceerteyllya saef f9e ctHeDdA cCa9ses and 617 partially unaffected Allelic, genotypic, and haplotypic frequencies were compared between ca- controls. The best association signal was obtained for rs756853, located in- ses and controls and multiple testing corrections were applied. Also, gene- tronically in the ( ) gene on chromosome 7p21.1. gene interactions were assessed using multifactor dimensionality reduction A fine mapping analysis within the case-control sample and a family-based (MDR) method. analysis revealed rs756853 and rs2P249817, respectively, as primary asso- Four SNPs in the CALCRL gene showed nominal significant genotypic asso- ciated SNPs. The association finding for rs2249817 was confirmed within ciations and one significant haplotype association. Importantly, a significant an independent Australian sample ( =0.026). A combined analysis of seve- interaction was found between three SNPs of TAC1 gene. rely affected German and Australian cases (N=639) and unaffected coHnDtrAoCl9s The results obtained reinforce the importance of neurogenic inflammation (N=384) for rs2249817 revealed a strong association signal of P=9.09x10-8, in migraine susceptibility. Deepening these genetic susceptibilities will be odds ratio 1.63 [1.36-1.95]. Tissue expression studies demonstrated crucial, contributing to public health research and to develop more effective expression in various tissues, including AGA relevant tissues. Genotype- therapeutic strategies. specific expression as well as splicHeD sAtuCd9ies revealed no strong genotypic P09.082 effects, although smAalRler effects cannot be excluded. Pathway analyses ho- Mitochondrial Uncoupling protein 2 gene variations (exon 8 wever support the hypothHesDisA Cth9at plays a functional role in AGA via insertion/deletion and -866 A/G) are associated with childhood interaction with the gene. The genetic data of the present study thus pro- obesity vide strong evidence that is the third AGA susceptibility gene. S. Oguzkan Balci1, N. Col-Araz2, M. Nacak3, M. Araz4, A. Balat5, S. Pehlivan1; P09.080 1University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Migraine susceptibility factors: the role of GABA genes in females’ Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of liability Pediatrics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department M. Quintas1, J. L. Neto1, J. Pereira-Monteiro1,2,3, J. Barros2,3, J. Sequeiros1,2, A. Sousa1,2, I. of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Alonso1,2, C. Lemos1,2; Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Gaziantep, Turkey, 5University of 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Universidade do Porto, Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Gaziantep, Turkey. Porto, Portugal, 3Neurology Department - CHP, Porto, Portugal. Objectives: Uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2) belong to a family of mitochondri- Migraine is a chronic disorder characterized by episodes of headache and al carrier proteins which plays important role in thermogenesis and energy autonomic and neurological symptoms. Several studies showed that migrai- metabolism. UCP2 is releated to pathogenesis of several disease including ne is influenced by genetic and environmental factors. The female-to-male human cancers, neurodegeneration, cardiovascular disease, metabolic dis- ratio of migraine prevalence is 3- to 4-fold higher among women than men. oMredtehros dasn:d obesity. Our aim was to investigate whether childhood obesity The role of common variants of GABA genes in the X-chromosome in migrai- may be associated with variations of UCP2 gene ne susceptibility was assessed, aiming to explain the differences in disease In this study, 80 obese children and 100 age-and sex-matched frequency between males and females. healthy controls were tested for two variations which were exon 8 (45 bp An association study with 188 unrelated cases and 287 migraine-free con- iRnesseurtlitosn: /deletion) and promoter (-866 A/G) variations in UCP2 gene. Ge- trols age- and ethnic matched was performed. The case-control ratio was notyping were performed by PCR and/or RFLP. 1:1.5. Exon 8 variation in UCP2 gene was showed an association with CGaAnBdRidEa,t GeA gBeRnAe3s wer eG AseBlReQcted based on their possible role in pathophy- obese patients. The distribution of DD, DI and II genotypes for the gene was siology of migraine. Twenty-one tagging SNPs were selected in three genes 47.5 %, 25 % and 27.5 % in obese compared with 65 %, 30 % and 5 % in ( and ) and genotyping was performed by SNaPshot. the controls. II genotype was found lower in patients (p < 0.0001), while DD Allelic, genotypic and haplotypic frequencies were compared between cases genotype was higher in controls (p=0.0092). The distribution of UCP2 gene and controls and multiple testing corrections were performed. Also, gene- promoter variation GG, GA and AA genotypes was 17.5 %, 46.2 %, 36.3 % gene interactions were analyzed. iCno onbcelusesi coonm: pared with 16 %, 63 %, 21 % in the controls. Statistically, AA The results for allelic associations revealed GfiAveB RnEominaGl AsiBgRnAif3ic ant associa- genotype was found to be increased in patients (p=0.0116). tions and three trends for association. In what concerns genotypic frequen- The present study showed that UCP2 gene variations were as- www.eshg.org cies, four noteworthy results were found in and genwes.w Afwte.re shsogc.iaoterdg with childhood obesity. Insertion genotype (II) of exon 8 and AA 236 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genotype of promoter variations may influence the susceptibility to obesity. in ARNTL gene and multiple sclerosis. Further studies will be required to Identification of genetic backround in obesity may provide clues about etio- substantiate the significance of these genetic variations. logy and therapeutic targets. P09.085 P09.083 Multiple Sclerosis Risk Variant HLA-DRB1*1501 Associates with High The MTHFR gene C677T polymorphism is associated with athlete Expression of DRB1 Gene in Different Human Populations status and muscle fiber hypertrophy M. Fedetz1, A. Alcina1, M. Abad-Grau2, G. Izquierdo3, M. Lucas4, O. Fernández5, D. I. I. Ahmetov1,2,3, N. V. Makarova2, E. A. Khismatullina4, E. V. Lyubaeva3, A. A. Arkhipova1, Ndagire1, A. Catalá-Rabasa1, C. Delgado6, C. Arnal7, F. Matesanz1; A. S. Glotov5, E. V. Vorobyeva4, V. Y. Gorbunova4, N. D. Golberg2, O. L. Vinogradova3; 1Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina ‘López Neyra’, Granada, Spain, 2Universidad 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research de Granada, Granada, Spain, 3Unidad de Esclerosis Múltiple, Hospital Virgen Macarena, Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Institute for Biomedical Sevilla, Spain, 4Servicio de Biología Molecular, Hospital Virgen Macarena, Sevilla, Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Bashkir Spain, 5Instituto de Neurociencias Clínicas Hospital Carlos Haya, Málaga, Spain, 6Centro State Pedagogy University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 5St Petersburg State University, St Regional de Transfusión Sanguínea Granada-Almería, Granada, Spain, 7Servicio de Petersburg, Russian Federation. Neurología, Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain. Recent findings by Terruzzi et al. (2011) suggest that DNA hypomethylation The human leukocyte antigen (HLA) exerts the largest genetic contribution induces the activation of factors determining proliferation and differentiati- to MS susceptibility ) and HLA DRB1*1501 has been consistently associated on of myoblasts promoting muscle growth and increase of muscle mass. The with multiple sclerosis (MS) in nearly all populations tested, but exactly how C677T polymorphism of the MTHFR gene (involved in DNA methylation) it alters the risk of developing MS is not fully understood. The identification was shown to be associated with reduced 5,10-Methylenetetrahydrofolate of expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) for genes in the HLA locus raises reductase activity. We therefore hypothesized that carriers of the MTHFR T the question of the role of gene expression in MS susceptibility. We analyzed allele may have DNA methylation deficiency, and as a consequence, increased the eQTLs in the HLA region with respect to MS-associated HLA-variants skeletal muscle mass and predisposition for high level athletic performance. obtained from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). We found that To test this hypothesis, we examined the MTHFR gene C677T polymorphism the Tag of DRB1*1501, rs3135388 A allele, correlated with high expression in 1,819 Russian athletes and 1,041 controls. We also investigated the as- of DRB1, DRB5 and DQB1 genes in a Caucasian population. In quantitative sociation between the MTHFR polymorphism and muscle fiber characteri- terms, the MS-risk AA genotype carriers of rs3135388 were associated with stics in 47 physically active healthy men. Genotyping for the C677T variant 15.7-, 5.2- and 8.3-fold higher expression of DQB1, DRB5 and DRB1, respec- was performed by PCR-RFLP. Muscle fiber characteristics of m. vastus late- tively, than the non-risk GG carriers. The haplotype analysis of expression- ralis was determined by immunohistochemistry. The MTHFR TT genotype associated variants in a Spanish MS cohort revealed that high expression (9.5 vs. 6.6%; P=0.0088) and T allele (30.3 vs. 26.3%; P=0.0015) frequen- of DRB1 and DQB1 alone did not contribute to the disease. However, in cies were significantly higher in athletes compared with control subjects. Caucasian, Asian and African American populations, the DRB1*1501 allele Furthermore, the highest frequencies of the MTHFR TT genotype (13.9%: was always highly expressed. In other immune related diseases such as type P=0.0003) and T allele (34.1%; P=0.0009) were found in a group of highly 1 diabetes, inflammatory bowel disease, ulcerative colitis, asthma and IgA elite athletes (n=223). The carriers of the MTHFR T allele (n=25) had signi- deficiency, the best GWAS-associated HLA SNPs were also eQTLs for diffe- ficantly higher cross-sectional area of slow-twitch fibers (5545+/-242 vs. rent HLA Class II genes. Our data suggest that the DR/DQ expression levels, 4900+/-169 square microns; P=0.0175) than CC homozygotes (n=22). Thus, together with specific structural properties of alleles, seem to be the causal the MTHFR gene C677T polymorphism is associated with athlete status and effect in MS and in other immunopathologies rather than specific antigen muscle fiber hypertrophy. Collectively, our data support the hypothesis that presentation alone. the presence of MTHFR T allele has a beneficial effect on athletic perfor- P09.086 mance. Genetic burden analysis of common associated variants in large P09.084 Finnish MS families and isolate population of Southern Ostrobothnia Circadian rhythm genes and multiple sclerosis (MS) V. M. Leppä1,2,3, E. Jakkula4,1, S. Ripatti1,5,2, P. Gourraud6, K. Koivisto7, P. J. Tienari8, J. P. Lavtar1, G. Rudolf1, A. Maver1, L. Lovrecic1, S. Ristic2, N. Starcevic Cizmarevic2, M. Kaprio1,9,10, J. G. Eriksson2,11,12, T. Lehtimäki13, S. Koskinen14, A. Palotie1,5,15, J. Saarela1,2; Kapovic2, J. Sepcic3, A. Stankovic4, M. Zivkovic4, E. Dincic5, R. Raicevic5, S. Sega Jazbec6, Z. 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department Klemenc Ketis7,8, B. Peterlin1; of Chronic Disease Prevention, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Biology and Finland, 3Helsinki Biomedical Graduate School, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 3Postgraduate 4Department of Medical Genetics, Helsinki University Hospital, Hospital District of Study, School of Medicine, University of Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia, 4Laboratory of Helsinki and Uusimaa, Helsinki, Finland, 5Human Genetics, Wellcome Trust Sanger Radiobiology and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Nuclear Sciences “Vinca”, Belgrade, Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 6Department of Neurology, University of Serbia, 5Department of Neurology, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade, Serbia, California San Francisco School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, United States, 7Central 6Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, Hospital of Seinäjoki, Seinäjoki, Finland, 8Department of Neurology, University of 7Department of Family Medicine, Medical School, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Helsinki, Neuroscience Programme, Biomedicum, Helsinki, Finland, 9Department of Slovenia, 8Department of Family Medicine, Medical School, University of Maribor, Public Health, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 10Department of Mental Health Maribor, Slovenia. and Substance Abuse Services, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 11Unit of General Practice and Hospital for Children and Adolescents, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 12Folkhälsan Research Centre, Helsinki, Finland, 13Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Tamplere Medical School and Background : Evidence from epidemiological studies indicates, that, preva- Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 14Department of Health, Functional lence of MS varies with geographic latitude, increasing with distance from Capacity and Welfare, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 15The the equator on both hemispheres. We hypothesized that explanation for Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, United States. the latitude effect might be related to sun exposure which has been shown to impact internal circadian rhythm. This rhytm is controlled by circadian rhythm genes and that could therefore affect MS susceptibility. Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a complex autoimmune disease of the central ner- Methods: A total of 826 Caucasian patients and 888 healthy unrelated vous system. Recent GWAS have discovered over 50 common variants asso- ethnically matched controls without family history of MS, were included ciated with MS. An isolated population in Southern Ostrobothnia in western in the study. In patients, the diagnosis of MS was established according to Finland has two-fold prevalence and familial clustering of MS. Our aim was McDonald’s criteria. Altogether, 8 SNP were included in our study, 4 in CLO- to study whether the accumulation of common predisposing variants in the CK gene: rs6811520, rs6850524, rs11932595 and rs13124436; and 4 in isolate and multiplex families contributes to the increased prevalence. We ARNTχL gene: 3789327, rs1481892, rs4757144 and rs12363415. The signi- used a weighted log-additive model to calculate a genetic burden score in ficance of association for individual SNPs was analyzed using the Chi-Square all samples based on previously identified 51 SNPs. We evaluated the diffe- test ( 2). Odds ratios (OR) and their respective 95% confidence intervals rences in the genetic score distribution between the sample groups by using (CI) was also calculated to compare the allelic frequency and genotype dis- a non-parametric Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. As in previous reports, the ge- tribution in patients and control subjects. netic burden score was increased in MS patients: mean 6.73 in the sporadic Results: Significant difference in distribution of ARNTL rs3789327 polymor- (n=522) and 6.78 in the familial cases (n=64) compared to IBS-matched po- phism genotypes was found in patients with MS in comparison to controls, pulation controls (n=1198) mean 6.23 (p <0.0001). When we divided the with P-value of 4.6e-07 and odds ratio equal to 0.56 (95% CI: 0.45-0.71). MS cases according to region of origin, both the isolate (n=111, mean 6.64) Other SNPs in ARNTL and CLOCK genes did not display significant associa- and the general Finnish cases (n=497, mean 6.77) had significantly higher tion with MS susceptibility. score compared to the population controls (p<0.0001). However, we could Conclusion: We provide evidence for association between genetic variation not detect significant differences in the genetic score distribution between www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 237 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 familial and sporadic cases (p=0.16) or between isolate cases and cases The OPG/RANKL has identified role in immune system via T-cell-activating from elsewhere in Finland (p=0.26). Since the common variants do not seem cytokines. Considering that immune mechanisms play a key role in the pa- to explain the increased familial prevalence in these multiplex families or in thogenesis of MS, OPG/RANKL might be imFopkoIr tance in the underlying me- the isolate, we hypothesize that there are specific variants that contribute chanism of the disease.The aim of this study is to measure plasma levels of to MS predisposition in familial cases and in the Southern Ostrobothnian OPG and RANKL as well as to analyze VDR polymorphism (rs2228570) region. in MS patients and healthy individuals to detect any potential correlation. P09.087 We included a total of 397 participants, 105 of them suffering from two dif- Investigation of relationship Between ATP5β gene expression and ferent types of MS, namely relapsing and remitting and secondary progres- multiple sclerosis disease sive multiple sclerosis. J. Motaei, M. Sanati, a. mirmiran; The results showed differences in the plasma levels of OPG and RANKL 1. Department of Medical Genetics, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and between patients and the healthy control group that were statistically si- Biotechnology (NIGE, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. gnificant. We found higher plasma levels of OPG and lower RANKL concen- trations in RRMS patients in comparison with PPMS and SPMS types of the disease. We detected higher plasma levels of OPG and lower levels of RANKL Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory, demyelinating, neurodegenera- in subjects with F allele compared to those with f allele in healthy subjects. tive disorder of the central nervous system (CNS) with unclear exact cause; However, contradicting results were observed when patients with MS were However studies confirmed the role of environmental and genetic factors in analyzed. We detected loweFr opklIasma levels of OPG and higher RANKL con- MS etiology. Disease onset usually occurs in young adults and it is more com- centrations in patients with F allele in comparison with those with f allele. mon in women. A number of studies have reported mitochondrial defects in This might define a role for polymorphism and OPG/RANKL system in MS and implied a pathogenic role for mitochondria in axonal degeneration. the pathogenesis and progression of multiple sclerosis with further practi- Mitochondria respiratory chain are the most efficient produces of ATP and cal applications. defects in ATP synthesis may be an important factor in neurodegenerative P09.090 disease such as Parkinon, Alzhimers and MS. Analysis of the mitochondrial Association of MMP-8 promoter gene polymorphisms with myocardial proteomin experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) mous mo- infarction: A hospital based study del of MS reveal decrease expression in 5 protein mitochondrial respiratory S. Dayakar1,2, T. Parvathi Kumara Reddy3, B. Shyamala Sesikeran2, M. Sadhnani1; chain (COX5b, COX5a, ATP5b, NDUFS8, NDUFV2) . One of these proteins was 1Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Institute of Genetics & Hospital for Genetic β subunit of complex V with ATP synthase activity. ATP5β encodes a subunit Diseases,Osmania University, Hyderabad-500016, India, 2Apollo Hospitals Educational of mitochondrial ATP synthase. In this study, we tested the altered expres- And Research Foundation, Hyderabad-500033, India, 3Instituto de Genetica,Dpto.de sion of ATP5β in LCLs derived from 30 patients with MS and 31 controls. A Biología Molecular Y Genomica, Centro Universitario de, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. significant reduction of ATP5β mRNA expression was seen in MS patients (P> 0.05). According to our results, we suggest that ATP5β can be used as a biomarker for early diagnosis of MS. However, more researches are neces- Matrix mettalloproteinases (MMPs) are the family of peptidase enzymes sary to reach this goal. responsible for the degradation of extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Keywords: Multiple Sclerosis, Mitochondria respitoray chain, EAE model, MMP-8 cleaves collagen.otype I three times more potently than two other in- ATP5β, Real Time PCR terstitial collagenases, MMP-1 and -13. Therefore, MMP-8 plays a important role in atherosclerosis The aim of the study was to investigate the associa- P09.088 tion of two MMP-8 polymorphisms, rs11225395 (-799C/T) and rs1320632 Does miR-634 play a role in multiple sclerosis predisposition? E. M. Paraboschi, V. Rimoldi, T. Tabaglio, G. Soldà, S. Duga, R. Asselta; (-381A/G). 319 patients were studied out of whom 152 individuals were Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Studi di documented angiographically for coronary atherosclerosis without any Milano, Milano, Italy. evidence of previous MI. 167 patients with normal coronary arteriograms were included as healthy controls. PCR- based restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP-PCR) method was applied. MMP-8-799C/T gene po- Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a neurological disorder characterized by chronic lymorphism was observed with CC 93/152 (61.1%), CT among 34/152 inflammation, demyelination, and axonal damage, probably caused by an al- (22.3%) and TT in 25/152 (16.4%) among the patients with MI; while in tered immune response. control group, 151/167(90.4%) had CC genotype, 13//167 (7.7%) CT and The protein kinase C alpha gene (PRKCA, encoding a protein critical for 3/167 (1.7%) carried TT. The prevalence of TT was 9.0 times higher among T-lymphocyte activation) was the first non-HLA gene demonstrated to be the case patients than the controls (16.4% vs. 1.7%, p = < 0.0001). MMP-8- involved in MS both by linkage and association studies, and subsequently 381 A/G gene polymorphism was observed with AA 89/152 (58.5%), AG replicated in 4 populations. This gene produces at least 2 alternative tran- among 36/152 (23.6%) and GG in 27/152 (17.7%) patients with MI; while scripts with different 3’UTRs, and hosts a microRNA, miR-634, in its intron in control group, 144/167 (86.2%) had AA genotype, 21//167 (12.5%) AG 15. Since several miRNAs have recently been implicated in MS pathogenesis, and 2/167 (1.1%) carried GG. The prevalence of GG was 15.0 times higher and our preliminary results suggested that both PRKCA and miR-634 are among the case patients than controls (17% vs. 1.1%, p = < 0.0001).Our pre- differentially expressed in MS patients vs healthy controls, we decided to liminary data indicate that MMP-8-381A/G ,-799C/T gene polymorphisms better characterize miR-634 expression and function. could be a risk factor for MI.Further studies may explore more to confirm The PRKCA and miR-634 discordant expression profiles in different human the role of these polymorphisms tissues suggested the presence of an independent miRNA promoter and/ P09.091 or the possible miR-634-mediated silencing of PRKCA. Transfection experi- Long-term outcome of anti-VEGF treatment in patients with ments followed by both luciferase-based and RT-PCR assays demonstrated neovascular age-related macular degeneration is influenced by the the existence of a miRNA-specific promoter. Co-transfection of a vector ex- initial response and the genotype of complement factor H (CFH) pressing the wild-type pre-miR-634 hairpin into HeLa cells, together with a B. Kloeckener-Gruissem1,2, M. Menghini3, J. Fleischhauer3, M. Kurz-Levin3, F. Sutter3, D. construct containing the luciferase cDNA coupled to each of the two PRKCA Barthelmes3,4, W. Berger1,5; 3‘UTRs, showed that miR-634 does target the PRKCA shorter 3’UTR. The 1University of Zurich, Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 2ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 3University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich, specificity of this interaction was confirmed by site-directed mutagenesis of Switzerland, 4University of Sydney, Save Sight Institute, Sydney, Australia, 5Center for the miR-634 target site. Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), Zurich, Switzerland. In conclusion, we demonstrated that miR-634 expression is driven by an in- dependent promoter and we suggest that this miRNA, by modulating PRKCA expression, may be involved in MS pathogenesis. The outcome of anti-VEGF treatment in patients with neovascular age-rela- P09.089 ted macular degeneration (AMD) is influenced by several factors. The aim Modulatory influence of vitamin D receptor genotype on OPG/RANKL of this study was to assess the impact of three parameters: (i) loading pha- System and Pathogenesis and Clinical Manifestations in Multiple se, (ii) initial response for the long-term outcome and (iii) the effect of the Sclerosis complement factor H (CFH) polymorphism (p.His402Tyr). Patients treated S. Ahmadi1, K. Mirzaei1,2, A. Hossein-nezhad1, F. Mokhtari1, A. Tootee1, A. Najmafshar1; with ranibizumab for neovascular AMD were analyzed over a period of 24 1Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Institute, Tehran University of Medical months. Visual acuity (VA) was recorded at each visit, effects of loading pha- Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Nutrition and Biochemistry, school of Public Health and institute of public health research, Tehran se and initial response were analyzed, and the genotype of CFH rs1061170 University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. (c.1204C>T, p.His402Tyr) was determined. The study included 204 eyes. A change of +5.0 [-1;+11] and +1.5 [-5.5;+9.5] letters was observed with a www.eshg.org www.eshg.org238 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 median of 4 [3;7] and 10 [7;14] ranibizumab injections during 12 and 24 Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPFT)E RisT a hlaTtRe-oSFnTsePtC, cSoFmTpPlAe2x genetic disease months, respectively. Loading phase was no significant predictor for treat- characterized by inflammation/scarring of the lung parenchyma. To date, ment as VA outcome in eyes with and without loading phase was similar heterozygous causal variations in , , , that accoMunUtC f5oBr (p=0.846 and p=0.729) at 12 and 24 months. In contrast, initial response 2-20% of IPF in various populations have been documented. Recently, Sei- was a significant predictor for improving vision of 5 or more letters at 12 bold et al identified a promoter variant (rs35705950) upstream of (p=0.001; OR=6.75) and 24 months (p=0.01; OR=4.66). Furthermore, the CT that is associated with IPF in US populations. genotype at CFH rs1061170 was identified as a significant predictor for a fa- A TaqMan SNP Genotyping assay and a 7900HT Real-time PCR analyzer vorable VA outcome at 12 and 24 months (OR= 6.75, p=0.001 and OR=4.66, were used to genotype rs35705950 in our cohort. A case-control analysis p=0.01). Our data suggest that an initial response as well as the genotype was carried out using 110 affected individuals and 277 healthy controls of SNP rs1061170 at CFH present critical criteria that influence treatment from the Newfoundland population. Our results showed that there was si- outcome. Clinicians may include these when designing a treatment regimen gnificant association between rs35705950 genotypes and IPF. The odds ra- using ranibizumab injections. tio for individuals affected with IPF who were heterozygous for the variant P09.092 allele of this promoter polymorphism was 5.4 (95% confidence interval, 3.3 Nuclearcytoplasmic Shuttling of Disease Protein in Autosomal to 9.6, P < .001). The odds ratio for individuals affected with IPF who were Dominant Machado-Joseph Disease homozygous for the variant allele was 12.2 (95% confidence interval, 3.3 to A. S. Sowa, M. Opitz, M. Mutter, Z. Wang, J. Weber, A. Kaiser, P. Antony, O. Rieß, T. Schmidt; 44.7, P < .001). Furthermore, some of our cases displayed familial segregati- University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. on of the variant allele with the phenotype. MUC5B This study supports the suggestion that the minor T allele of rs35705950 is a contributor to the pathogenesis of IPF. The gene encodes for Neurodegenerative disorders are a large category of conditions all caused a major gel-forming mucin macromolecule in respiratory secretions and is by a loss of structure or function of neurons, often resulting in progressive upregulated in some other lung diseases. Further evidence of association is neuronal death. Of these conditions, Machado-Joseph Disease, or Spinoce- provided by tissue expression studies done through previous research. rAetbaexilnla-r3 Ataxia Type 3 (SCA3) is an autosomal dominant, late onset neuro- P09.096 muscular disease associated with a coding expansion of a CAG repeat in the Common variants in HFE and TMPRSS6 are strongly associated with gene. The expanded unstable CAG repeat encodes for an abnor- iron parameters but not with serum hepcidin, regulator of systemic mally expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) track which in turn causes protein iron homeostasis misfolding and aggregation. The most recent research in polyQ disorders T. E. Galesloot, S. H. Vermeulen, D. W. Swinkels; has focused on protein transport mechanisms responsible for the traffik- Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. king of disease proteins. The ability of proteins to be shuttled between the cytoplasm and the nucleus confers on them the capability to affect cellular HFE TMPRSS6 transcription in the nucleus and avoid the cellular clearance machinery of Introduction: Genome-wide association studies have convincingly shown the cytoplasm. For disease proteins such as expanded Ataxin-3, localizati- that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in and are as- on of protein aggregates to the nucleus has been shown to worsen disease sociated with iron traits. However, the role of hepcidin, central regulatHoFrEy phenotype and increase symptoms in SCA3 animals. In this work we use moleTcMulPeR oSfS 6systemic iron homeostasis, in these associations is not clear. microscopy, cell viability studies and the filter trap assay to analyze the pos- Here, we investigated the associations between common variants in sible partners of Ataxin-3 which affect the localization, aggregation, patho- and with hepcidin and iHroFnE traitsT, MinPcRluSdSi6ng interaction and ha- genicity, and protein trafficking of this protein. With further understanding plotype analysis. of the pathways involved in the progress of SCA3, it will be possible to de- Methods: A total of 103 SNPs in and were extracted from termine potential targets of therapy to mitigate the course of the disease in genome-wide SNP data of 1832 individuals from the general population patients. (Nijmegen Biomedical Study). Associations with serum iron parameters and P09.093 hepcidin (sHep) were studied using linear regressHioFnE analyses, adjustedT fMor- The relationship of the COMT gene polymorphism rs4680 with PagReS,S g6ender and time of blood sampling. the components of nicotine dependence in a central Romanian Results: The associations between rs1800562 in and rs855791 in population with iron and transferrin saturation (TS) were confirmed (p<1E-10) K. Csep, C. Banescu, N. Argyo, A. Todoran Butila, G. Dudutz; and were independent of sHep. sHep was not statistically significantly as- University of Medicine and Pharmacy Tg Mures, Tg Mures, Romania. sociated with any of the SNPs, but sHep/ferritin and sHep/TS ratio were (p between 1E-7 and 1E-3). Our data suggested the prHesFeEnce of an interac- tion between rs1800562 and rs855791 in relation to sHep and a haploty- Through dopamine release nicotine activates the mesocorticolimbic reward pe effect of rs17999H45FE, rs198T8M5P3R aSnSd6 rs1800562 in , independent of pathway which mediates reinforcement of continued use. Thus, in the mul- rs1800562. tifactorially determined addiction, enzymes responsible for dopamine me- Conclusion: SNPs in and influence iron parameters indepen- tabolism and polymorphisms of their genes may be involved. The rs4680 dent of sHep and affect sHep/iron parameter ratios. This unexpected finding functional polymorphism of COMT (catechol-O-methyl-transferase) due to a suggests that there might be other, yet unknown, hepcidin-independent me- Val→Met substitution results a high (H, G1497) and a low activity allele (L, chanismHs FwEhich TpMlayP RaS rSo6le in these associations. Larger sample sizes are A1497). It has been suggested that carriers of the H allele might present an needed to draw definite conclusions about the additional effect of combina- increased risk to develop dependence, however, results have been contra- tions of and SNPs on sHep and iron traits. dictory, and no study in this respect has been carried out in our population. P09.097 In a case-control study of 113 smokers and 84 non-smokers, we assessed ni- Association of the FTO variant with obesity in two ethnic groups in cotine dependence by NDSS, HSI and FNDS adapted for the local population, Slovakia and genotyped for rs4680 by PCR-RFLP using NlaIII. S. Macekova, J. Bernasovska, J. Carnogurska, I. Boronova, A. Bozikova, D. Gabrikova; Allele frequency in the smoker and non-smoker study group was 53.1 and Department of Biology, Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, University of 46.9 versus 44.4 and 55.6, respectively. Though genotype associated risk Presov, Presov, Slovakia. for smoking was not statistically significant (GG vs AA: OR = 1.96, CI95%: 0.5-8.2, p = 0.16; GG vs GA+AA:1.54, CI95%: 0.57-4.34, p = 0.2), the overall scores of dependence and its certain components, namely drive and priority, Obesity is a global epidemic, arising from the interaction between environ- showed significant differences across the genotypes (p<0.05). mental factors and genetic variants. Recently, common genetic variants in In conclusion, COMT might be a risk modifier involved in nicotine depen- the FTO gene have been found to be associated with obesity phenotype in dence rather than a susceptibility gene. Studying the various traits of depen- multiple ethnic groups. The aim of this study was to test the association of dence on a higher number of subjects would be meaningful and could have the rs9939609 polymorphism with obesity indices in two ethnic groups in direct practical implications in cessation management. Slovakia. Genotyping was performed in 294 Roma and 560 Slovak ethnic P09.095 subjects, using the TaqMan assay. The minor allele A frequency at rs9939609 Association between a promoter SNP in MUC5B and idiopathic polymorphism in the FTO gene was 0.46 in Roma and 0.44 in Slovak ethnic pulmonary fibrosis in the Newfoundland population group. The genotypes distributions in Roma (AA 21.1%; AT 50.7%; TT 28.2%) A. Pirzada, M. Woods, B. Fernandez, K. Mahoney, G. Zhai; and Slovak (AA 18.9%; AT 50.4%; TT 30.7%) ethnic groups were compatible Memorial University, St. John‘s, NL, Canada. with the Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. We observed that the mean values of obesity indices in Roma subjects with AA genotype were significantly hig- www.eshhger. othragn in ethnic Slovaks with the same genotype (BMI=28.7±6.6 kg/m² www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 239 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 BMI vs. BMWCI=24.5±4.1 kg/m², P <0.001; WC=99.8±17.8W cHmR vs. WC=86.2±13.9 Results: We identified about 2300 down- and 2700 up-regulated probes cm, P <0.001; WHR=0.94±0.1 vs. WHR=0.85±0.1, P <0.001). On ANOVA between SOA and controls, and about 2600 down- and 2100 up-regulated analysis, we found significant differences in mean values of BMI, waist cir- probes between IOA and controls. None of the probes showed DE between cumference (WC) and waist to hip ratio (WHR) between different genotypes IOA and SOA. We also identified (0.02 threshold) 74 pathways DE between in Roma (P=0.001, P=0.004 and P=0.008, respectively) as well as in ethnic the SOA and controls and 42 IOA vs controls. No DE pathways were found Slovak group (P=0.042, P=0.007 and P=0.017, respectively). In conclusion, between the IOA and SOA. our genotype-phenotype analysis showed significant association of genetic We hope that these observations could suggest an excellent candidates ge- variation in the FTO gene with obesity in Roma and Slovak pertohjneicct poIpTuMlaS- nes and pathways for OA/TOF etiology. tion. P09.100 Supported by research project APVV-0716-10 and Identification of genes involved in the initiation of osteoarthritis 26220120041 (ERDF). M. Lee1, C. Chou1, C. Wu2, Y. Chen1; P09.098 1Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Orthopaedic Surgery Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Analysis of the MC4R in relation to obesity in population of Latvia Taipei, Taiwan. V. Ignatovica1, R. Petrovska1, I. Kalnina1, I. Vaivade1, D. Fridmanis1, L. Tarasova1, R. Peculis1, H. B. Schioth2, J. Klovins1; 1Latvian Biomedical Reseach and Study centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. Objective: The aim of this study is to select small areas from osteoarthritic cartilages and subchondral bone of different severities to represent diffe- rent stages of disease to provide a more complete picture of the molecular Melanocortin 4 receptor (MC4R) regulates feeding behaviour, therefore, ge- alternations in OA pathogenesis as well as to identify genes involved in the netic studies are trying to associate genetic variation in MC4R locus with initiation of OA. obesity related phenotypes. In this study we preformed evaluation in both Methods: Joint tissues were collected from the knee tibia plateau from pri- non-coding and coding part of MC4R in cohort of extremely obese subjects mary OA and non-OA patients undergoing total knee arthroplasty. Severity (n=380) of the population of Latvia. We found no association of common of destruction was estimated based on histopathology assessment (OA- polymorphism rs17782313 in promoter region of MC4R in severely obese RSI grading system). Each tibia plateau was divided into three parts: ou- individuals and matched normal weight controls with obesity or related ter lateral tibia (oLT) regions defined as undamaged stage (OARSI score: phenotypes. Additionally, we explored three SNPs in another obesity rela- OA=5.23±1.95, n=67), inner lateral tibia (iLT) regions defined as intermedi- ted fat mass and obesity-associated protein (FTO) gene locus for association ate stage (OARSI score: OA=5.23±1.95, n=71), and medial tibia (MT) regions with any available phenotype, two of the studied polymorphisms being in defined as damage stage (OARSI score: OA=16.8±2.56, n=52). Expression complete linkage disequilibrium, were associated with obesity in our study profiling analysis was performed using Agilent microarray on these regions group, but the third demonstrated p-value close to the border of significance. and real-time quantitative PCR using a second cohort of patients were per- The sequencing of the MC4R coding region revealed four heterozygous non- formed for replication. synonymous substitutions - V103I, S127L, V166I and I251L. Two subjects Results:Our results revealed that 958 transcripts were significantly up or had double V103I and S127L mutations. Noticeably, V166I is a novel substi- down regulated at least 2-fold between these three stages. These genes were tution that has not been reported before. S127L, V166I and double V103I/ related to the cell matrix interaction, extracellular matrix remodeling, bone S127L mutant receptors had significantly decreased quantity in cell surface development, inflammation, cytokine, cell proliferation, WNT signaling. compared to wt MC4R. Intriguingly, despite the low abundance in plasma Conclusion: This study revealed some novel genes which have not been re- membrane newly discovered V166I variant demonstrated higher cAMP ported in cartilage to play a role in the pathology of OA. These results iden- response upon αMSH activation than wt receptor. The results of this study tify molecular targets that can be further investigated in the search for the- incorporate an influence of the common polymorphisms and rare genetic rapy or as biomarker for OA. variants in relation to obesity and suggest that in the study group of mor- P09.101 bidly obese cases both SNPs and rare mutations could affect the outcome The study of polymorphisms P447L of calcitonin receptor gene phenotype of the individual. (CALCR) and A986S of calcium response receptor gene (CASR) in P09.099 women with postmenopausal osteoporosis from Volga-Ural region of Whole transcript expression microarray profiling in oesophageal Russia tissue of neonates with oesophageal atresia - preliminary results. A. Maltsev1, R. Khusainova2, I. Yanberdin1, E. Khusnutdinova2; R. Smigiel1, A. Lebioda2, D. Patkowski3, M. Blaszczyński4, K. Korecka5, P. Czauderna6, A. 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State University, Institute of Jakubiak1, D. Bednarczyk1, H. Maciejewski7, P. Wizinska8, M. M. Sasiadek1; Biochemistry and Genetics USC RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. 1Genetic Department Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, 2Institute of Molecular Techniques, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland, 3Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Wroclaw Medical University, Poland Osteoporosis characterized by reduced bone mass, and disruption of nd, Wroclaw, Poland, 4Department of Pediatric Surgery, and Urology, Poznan Medical bone architecture, resulting in increased risk of fractures. The aim of University, Poland, Poznan, Poland, 5Department of Surgery of Congenital Defects in this study was to examine any associations of polymorphisms c.1377C>T Children and Traumatology, Silesian Medical University, Zabrze, Poland, Zabrze, Poland, 6Department of Pediatric Surgery and Urology, Gdansk Medical University, Poland, (P447, rs1801197) in calcitonin receptor gene (CALCR) and c.2956G>T Gdansk, Poland, 7Institute of Computer Engineering, Control and Robotics, Wroclaw (rs1801725; A986S) in the Ca+ receptor gene (CASR) with fractures and University of Technology, Wroclaw, Poland, 8Department of Histology and Embryology, BMD level in Russian postmenopausal women. As the object of the research Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, Wroclaw, Poland. were 828 DNA samples (366 with fractures and 462 without fractures). Ac- cording to the literary data *T allele of polymorphism P447L gene CALCR in homozygotic state is associated with fractures. As a result of our research Etiology of oesophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula (OA/TOF) is in women with fractures *T allele frequency was lower (0,669) compared not clearly understood and no single, specific genetic factor for its etiology with the control group (0,687) the difference doesn’t measure up the sta- was confirmed. OA/TOF may occur as isolated (IOA) or syndromic anomaly tistic significancy. With the arrangement according to BMD level in women (SOA). Combination of multigenic factors and epigenetic modification of ge- with osteoporosis *T allele frequency was lower compared with the control nes can play a role in its pathogenesis. group (0.66 and 0,68, respectively). The study of polymorphism A986S of Methods: Total RNA was extracted from 26 esophageal tissue collected du- Ca+ receptor gene (CASR) revealed no certain difference arrangement al- ring thoracoscopic esophageal atresia repair in neonates with isolated and lele frequency and genotypes between women with fractures and women syndromic form. Control tissues were taken during autopsy from aborted without factures. In our research the tendency of rising frequency *T*T ge- fetuses and stillborn neonates without OA/TOF. The study was accepted notype in women with low level of BMD (0,034) was found compared with by the University Ethical Committee. We used Agilent One-Color Microar- the control group (0,005) the difference doesn’t measure up the statistic si- ray standard protocol to determined gene expression profiling in IOA and gnificancy. Our results show no associations of polymorphisms A986S Ca+ SOA vs control. Multiplicative detrending background subtraction method receptor gene (CASR) and polymorphism P447L in calcitonin receptor gene (Agilent software) was performed to quantify the signal. Quality analysis (CALCR) with the fractures and BMD level in postmenopausal women from and scale normalization for results were performed. Analysis of differen- the Volga-Ural region of Russia. tial expression (DE) was done with the R limma package (multiple testing correction and 0.05 threshold for the adjusted p-value). We also performed pathway analysis using the globaltest method (Hochberg multiple testing p-value adjustment). www.eshg.org www.eshg.org240 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.102 Associations of polymorphic variants of OPG gene with male osteoporosis in the Volga-Ural region of Russia in 771 patients without SQSTM1 mutations from the PRISM study (Albagha R. Shakirova, R. Khusainova, E. Khusnutdinova; et al;Nat Gen, 2011). The study population was divided by the number of Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics USC RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation. risk alleles carried (<14, n=254;14-16, n=254;>16, n=259). Total disease se- verity score was significantly increased in patients carrying >16 risk alleles (6.24±0.10vs5.57±0.16, p<0.0001). They had a greater number of affected Osteoprotegerin (OPG), a secreted member of the tumor necrosis factor bones (1.45±0.04vs1.23±0.07, p<0.009); and received previously a greater receptor family, is a potent inhibitor of osteoclast activation and differen- number of treatments for PDB (2.01±0.04vs1.74±0.07 p<0.001). Deafness tiation. due to skull involvement was also increased (10% vs. 5.8%, p=0.037). There We examined the effect of polymorphisms c.1217-15 C>T (rs3102734), was no difference between the groups in quality of life scores. We found that c.6890-8 A>T (rs7844539), c.950 T>C (rs2073617), 163 A>G (rs3102735), the novel risk alleles interacted with SQSTM1 mutations to affect disease se- 245 T>G (rs3134069), 1181 G>C (rs2073618) in the OPG gene with fractu- verity. Patients with SQSTM1 mutations carrying >16 risk alleles had a 44% res and level of BMD in 131 Russian men with osteoporosis, 149 with osteo- increase in disease severity score, compared with SQSTM1 negative patients penia and matched control (n=152). carrying <16 alleles (7.82 ± 0.50 vs. 5.40 ±0.11, p<0.001). We conclude that The study of polymorphic locus c.1217-15 C>T localized in 1 intron of the the novel risk alleles identified recently not only predispose to the deve- OPG gene revealed that frequency *T allele was 0.14 in male patients with lopment of PDB but also significantly influence disease severity both alone osteoporosis, in control group - 0.16, the differences were not significant. and in combination with SQSTM1 mutations. They could identify patients Frequency of allele *C of locus c.6890-8 A>C in men was higher (0.32), com- at high risk of complications and this, in turn, could target therapy more pared with the control group (0.11), the differences did not reach statistical effectively. significance. P09.105 The study of polymorphic loci c.950 T>C (rs2073617) and 163 A>G Genetic pathways for ADHD show association to hyperactive/ (rs3102735) located in the promoter of the osteoprotegerin gene, also re- impulsive behavior vealed no associations with fractures and BMD level in men from Russia. J. Bralten1, I. Waldman2, S. Faraone3, J. Buitelaar4, B. Franke5, A. Arias-Vásquez5; The analysis of polymorphism 1181 G>C (rs2073618) in the first exon re- 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Departments of Human Genetics and vealed highly significantly differences among patients with osteoporosis Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Psychology, Emory University, Atlanta, and controls. It was found heterozygous genotype *GC associated with in- GA, United States, 3Department of Psychiatry and Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY creased risk of osteoporosis (χ2=7,11; p<0,007; OR=1,95(1,19-3,19)), ho- Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, United States, 4Radboud University Nijmegen mozygous genotype *CC was protective for the development of osteoporosis Medical Center, Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders Institute for Brain, (χ2=6,65; p<0,009; OR=0,49 (0,28-0,84)). This locus was not associated Cognition and Behavior & Karakter Child and Adolescent Psychiatry University Center, with fractures. Nijmegen, The Netherlands, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Radboud University Nijmegen Thus, we found association of 1181 G>C (rs2073618) locus of OPG gene Medical Center, Departments of Psychiatry & Human Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. with decreased BMD level in male from Volga-Ural region of Russia. P09.103 Morphogenetic gene Meis1 and bone characteristics in 1975 patients Finding genetic risk factors for Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder N. Schweighofer1, E. Lerchbaum1, A. Fahrleitner-Pammer1, H. Dobnig1, T. R. Pieber1, W. (ADHD) has been challenging. As multiple genes with small effect size are Renner2, B. Obermayer-Pietsch1; assumed to play a role, considering multiple SNPs within the same analysis 1Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Medical might increase the explained phenotypic variance, thereby boosting the po- University, Graz, Austria, 2Clinical Institute of Medical and Chemical Laboratory wer of genetic studies. We investigated whether a pathway-based analysis, Diagnostics, Medical University, Graz, Austria. considering SNPs within the same biological pathway simultaneously, could bring us closer to unraveling the underlying genetic component of ADHD. Biological pathways involved in dopamine, serotonin and noradrenalin neu- Bone mineral density, an important parameter in the diagnosis of osteopo- rotransmission as well as genes involved in neurite outgrowth, were investi- rosis, is determined by heredity in about 50 to 80 percent, dependent on gated for pathway-based association to ADHD using data from the Interna- its measuring site. Many candidate genes are known to be involved in the tional Multicentre ADHD Genetics (IMAGE) study. The DSM-IV inattention inheritance of bone characteristics. We investigated a polymorphic morpho- and hyperactivity/impulsivity scales of the Conners’ Parent Rating Scale genetic gene called Meis1 which belongs to the HOX (homeobox-containing were used to assess ADHD symptom severity in the 931 probands. From the genes) family and is an evolutionarily highly conserved gene. It is involved imputed and pruned genome-wide data 6501 SNPs were selected and used in the regulation of the development of segmental vertebral structures and for the association analysis. a variety of other tissues. Combined analysis of the four pathways showed significant association with We investigated the effect of two SNPs in the MEIS1 gene in 1975 patients the hyperactive/impulsive score (p=0.0049), but no association for inatten- either routinely referred to our outpatient clinic or investigated in nursing tive or combined scores (p>0.05). Post-hoc analyses showed contribution of homes. Life style factors, fracture incidence, routine laboratory and parame- three pathways (p<0.05) to the hyperactive/impulsive score, only the dopa- ters of bone turnover and bone mineral density at 3 sites (DXA Hologic 4000 mine pathway showed less nominal significance (p=0.07). plus) or bone heel ultrasound were compared between genotypes. The current analysis specifically finds association to the hyperactive/im- Genotype frequencies of MEIS1 SNP rs2049019 were 45,5% (wildtype, WT), pulsive component of ADHD, suggesting similar underlying mechanisms for 44,7% (heterozygotes, HE) and 9,9% (homozygotes, HO) and 31,2% (WT), the studied pathways. Other mechanisms may be involved in the inattentive 50,6% (HE) and 18,3% (HO) of rs6716792. We detected a significant asso- component of the disorder. These findings show that pathway-based asso- ciation of SNP rs2049019 with bone mineral density, body size and testoste- ciation analyses may overcome power problems in association testing by rone levels in young males. Old males homozygous for one of the two SNPs, taking into account allelic heterogeneity. showed a significantly higher bone ultrasound values at all sites measured P09.106 compared to WT or HE persons. Genetic variants of interferon-g and periodontitis in patients with The morphogenetic gene Meis1 is known to influence a variety of bone cha- coronary heart disease racteristics during development. We show associations with bone parame- S. Schulz1, A. Schlitt2, T. Seifert1, A. Lutze1, K. Werdan2, B. Hofmann3, C. Gläser4, H. ters in adults, this gene might therefore be of importance for diagnostic and Schaller1, S. Reichert1; therapeutic aspects in osteoporosis. 1Department of Operative Dentistry and Periodontology, Halle, Germany, 2Department P09.104 of Medicine III, Halle, Germany, 3Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Halle, Germany, Identification of novel genetic markers that predict disease severity 4Institute of Human Genetics and Medical Biology, Halle, Germany. and complications in Paget‘s Disease of Bone Background N. Alonso, O. M. E. Albagha, M. Rios-Visconti, S. H. Ralston; Rheumatic Disease Unit-IGMM-Molecular Medicine Centre, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. : Periodontitis and coronary heart disease are inflammatory di- seases. Both are influenced by genetic predisposition. The c.-874T>A poly- mPaotriepnhtiss man odf m theet hgoednse encoding for interferon-γ (IFN-γ) has been associated Paget’s disease of bone (PDB) is a skeletal disorder affecting 2% of the UK with altered cytokine production. population over 55. Some patients show deafness, bone deformity, fractures : A total of 960 consecutive patients with angiographic and osteoarthritis. Mutations of SQSTM1, found in 10% of patients, are si- proven coronary heart disease (no or mild periodontitis: n=493, severe pe- gnificantly associated with disease severity (Rios-Visconti et al;JBMR, 2010). riodontitis: n=447) were prospectively included in the study entitled “Pe- We analysed seven SNPs (rs10494112, rs4294134, rs2458413, rs1561570, riodontitis and Its Microbiological Agents as Prognostic Factors in Patients rs10498635, rs5742915, rs3018362) associated with PDB in a recent GWAS with Coronary Heart Disease” (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier:NCT01045070). www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 241 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.109 Allelic imbalance in retinal expressed disease genes: a common In this subanalysis, the c.-874T>A polymorphism of the gene encoding for phenomenon? IFN-γ was analyzed by CTS-PCR-SSP Tray kit (Heidelberg, Germany). Sub- S. Balendran, B. Wissinger, S. Schimpf-Linzenbold; gRiensguilvtsal bacterial colonization (11 bacteria) was assessed using a polymera- Institute of Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany. se chain reaction (PCR)/DNA probe test (micro-Ident®). : The genotype (p=0.987) and allele frequencies (p=0.860) of the c.-874T>A polymorphism were not risk indicators for the severity of perPi-. In retinal dystrophies, reduced penetrance and variability in disease ex- oindtoernmtiteidsi ain patients with coronary heart disease. EH. ocworervoedre, nAsA -genotype pression with respect to onset, course, and severity is a well-documented and A-allele carriers had a decreased risk for subgingival occurrence of feature. This makes reliable genotype/phenotype correlations as well as (genotype: p=0.006, allele: p=0.01) and (genotype: individual disease prognosis difficult. Although the basis of this variability p=0.034, allele: p=0.013). These associations remained also significant after is largely unknown, it cisis commonly accepted that secondary genetic factors fCoornwclaursdi osntespwise binary logistic regression analyses considering age, gen- (modifier-genes) are key factors for this phenomenon. der, smoking, diabetes, plaque index as well as other potential confoundersP.. We hypothesize that -acting variants governing gene expression levels intermedia: De sEp. ictoer trhoed ecn.-s8 74T>A polymorphism of the gene encoding for play a crucial role in phenotypic variation and diseacsise penetrance in here- IFN-γ could be shown to be associated with subgingival colonization of ditary retinal disorders. and there was no evidence that it is a risk indicator The aim of this project is the identification of such -acting gene variants for severity of periodontitis in coronary patients. and the determination of their impact on disease expression. P09.107 To demonstrate if and how common allelic imbalance (AI) in retinal ex- Genetic polymorphism and mRNA levels of TNFα and TGFβ genes in pressed genes are, exp2e5riments were done in crossbreeds of five different patients with chronic leg ulcers inbred mouse strains as a proof-of-principle experiment. M. Zagozda1, M. Fic1, A. Sarnecka1, W. Olszewski1,2, M. Durlik1,2; Up to now more than different retinal genes were screened for hetero- 1Mossakowski Medical Research Centre Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland, zygous cSNPs applying PCR and sequencing. We applied Pyrosequencing as- 2Central Clinical Hospital, Ministry of Internal Affairs, Warsaw, Poland. says on RT-PCR amplified cDNAs generated from retinal RNA7 to determine allelic expression differences based on the identified cSNPs. Using the Pyrosequencingtechnology, we identified an PAdI ei6nc retinal disea- TNFα and TGFβ mediates a number of biological processes, including lipid se genes. In two of those genes we can see the AI already on genomic level metabolism, coagulation, endothelial functions and also have an essential suggesting a copy number variation. Screening of the gene revealed function in healingT oNfF pαa tholoTgGiFcaβl wounds such as venous leg ulcers.The a 116-bp insertion on cDNA level that results in a premature termination purpose of this study was to investigate frequencies of single nucleotide codon leading, due to the nonsense mediated mRNA decay, to a downregu- polymorphisms in and genes and evaluate expression of mRNA lation of the mutant transcript. For the remaining genes the cause of the AI levels in chronic leg ulcers. The study population conTsNisFtαed of T6G5 Fpβatients has to be verified. with chronic leg ulcers and 95 healthy control subjects. Polymorphisms P09.110 were investigated by PCR-RFLP method. The level of and genes Lack of association between CFH and ARMS in psoriasis and psoriatic expression was performed by Real-Time PCR with GAPDH as internal con- arthritis trol. There were differences in frequency of genotypes TNFα G-308A in both t. lepre1, r. cascella1, s. persico1, a. galluccio2, c. perricone3, A. Mazzotta4, g. novelli5, e. groups. Patients showed higher frequency of AA (43%) and lower of GG giardina1; (15%), GA (42%) genotypes than controls (2%, 22% and 76% respectively). 1Department of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment TGFβ 29T>C heterozygotic genotype was similar in both groups (53% in in Multifactorial and, rome, Italy, 2Dermatology, „S. Cuore di Gesù” Hospital, patients, and 46% in controls). TT genotype was lower (19%), however po- Fatebenefratelli, Benevento, benevento, Italy, 3Rheumatology, University of Rome, La Sapienza, rome, Italy, 4Dermatology, Tor Vergata Hospital, Rome, rome, Italy, 5Agenzia lymorphic CC genotype was more often (28%) represented in patients than di Valutazione del Sistema Universitario e della Ricerca (ANVUR); San Pietro – in controls (44% and 10%, respectively). TTGNFFβα 74G>C GG genotype reached Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome, rome, Italy. 80% whereas GC 20%. The polymorphic CC genotype was not detected both in study and control groups. The level of gene TexNpFrαe ssion was higher than in control group whereas in case of TGFβ the level of expression was Psoriasis (Ps, OMIM 177900) is a chronic hyperproliferative inflammatory similar in both groups. Analyzed polymorphism of gene could be a disease of the skin, scalp, nails, and joints. About 30% of affected develop probable risk factor in patients with leg ulcers and should be taken into ac- psoriatic arthritis (PsA, OMIM 607507). Psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis count during medical treatment. have a multifactorial etiology, involving environmental (infections, drugs, P09.108 stress, smoking and climate) and genetic factors. It’s well known that in- Association of PON1 and APOA1 genes polymorphism with men’s life flammation plays a central role in the development of many multifactorial expectancy in Russian population diseases, as in age-related macular degeneration (AMD, OMIM 603075). As V. Miroshnikova1,2, A. Zaharchuk3, O. Sirotkina1,2, A. Taraskina1,2, S. Pchelina1,2; psoriasis and psoriatic arthritis share with AMD a multifactorial etiology 1Saint-Petersburg Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3Saint- and the inflammation as central process, we analyzed the some replicated Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. genetic variations associated with AMD in our cohorts of Ps and PsA. A num- ber of 400 Ps cases, 510 PsA cases and 400 healthy controls were tested for rs1061170 (Y402H) in the CFH gene and rs10490924 (A69S) in the ARMS2 Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a high-density lipoprotein (HDL)-associated en- gene. Our results suggest that variations in these genes are not associated zyme that prevents oxidation of low-density lipoproteins. Apoprotein A1 with the development of Ps and PsA. (APOA1) is the key protein of HDL. PON1 and APOA1 play important role in The work was supported by ADIPSO, (Italian Association of psoriatic sub- the prevention of atherosclerosis. So PON1 and APOA1 are plausible candi- jects) date genes for human longevity due to its modulation of cardiovascular risk. P09.111 In our previous studies we demonstrated that PON1 192Q/R polymorphism Genome-wide analysis of copy number variants suggests common and is associated with higher risk of premature atherosclerosis and myocardi- rare copy number variants contributing to psoriatic arthritis al infarction and APOA1 83C/T polymorphism is associated with reduced M. Apel1, S. Uebe1, A. B. Ekici1, F. Behrens2, J. Lohmann3, H. Traupe4, R. Mössner5, H. Burkhardt2, A. Reis1, U. Hüffmeier1; risk of atherosclerosis in Russian population. We conjectured that polymor- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, phism of PON1 and APOA1 genes can be associated with longevity in Rus- 2Department of Internal Medicine II, Division of Rheumatology, Johann Wolfgang Goethe sian population. In this study we investigated 192Q/R and (-108)C/T PON1 University, Frankfurt/ Main, Germany, 3Psoriasis Rehabilitation Hospital, Bad Bentheim, and 83C/T and (-75)G/A APOA1 gene variants in the group of elderly men Germany, 4Department of Dermatology, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, which we observed during 8 years (75-104 years old, mean age 84.1±5.7 5Dermatology, University of Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. in the moment of the beginning of investigation, N=144). There was no association of (-108)C/T PON1 and 83C/T and (-75)G/A APOA1 gene va- riants with life expectancy for men. Unexpectedly, the 192R allele was over- Not only single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) but also copy number vari- represented in the group of elderly men when compared with population ants (CNV) contribute to variability of the human genome and can therefore (df=1, p<0.01). Also we analyzed distribution of 192Q/R PON1 genotypes in be inHvüoflvfmede iienr geet nael.t iNc adti sGeeanseet. 2In0 1o0rder to identify CNVs fBoirr dpssuoirteia tic arthri- group of men that lived 85 years or longer (age of death 85-105, mean age tis (PsA), we investigated our previously described SNP-based GWAS data- of death 91.0±4.1, N=114) and found significant differences when compared set ( ) for CNVs using the algorithm with population (df=2, p<0.05). Men heterozygous for 192Q/R PON1 have 2 optimized for the array system used and performed a CNV GWAS. Primarily, times higher chances to live till 85 (p<0.01). we detected significant differences at 33 gene loci at the 5% level, while a www.eshg.org www.eshg.org242 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 in silico first iann sailliycsois revealed “batch effects” at 16 loci - false-positive fin- The current state and limitations of genetic researches on interplay cannabis dings due to erroneous CNV-determination of single batches. Of the remai- and psychosis is discussed. We address how the application of new genetics ning 17 loci, association analysis showe-4d association at 15 loci (n=9: technologies and the harmonization of the data between the studies could MAF>5%, n=6: MAF<5%), 11 loci with p<1x10 . Validation of those 15 CNVs allow to consistently identify genetic risk variants that in conjunction with with an alternative quantitative method (MLPA) confirmed CN-variability exposure to cannabis may explain the occurrence of psychotic symptoms. at 11 loci. For four common CNVs, perfect concordance between array sy- P09.114 stem and MLPA was observed in 136-157 individuals. Genes located in or Matrix metalloproteinase genes on chromosome 11q22 and range of nearby CNVs are reported to be involved in immune regulatory pathways, motion assessments in physically active individuals. maintenance of extracellular matrix or signal transduction and are there- M. C. Burger1, K. O‘Connell1, S. M. Raleigh2, M. Posthumus1, M. Collins1,3; fore plausible candidates. These four validate-d4 common variants fit a do- 1MRC/UCT Research Unit for Exercise Science & Sports Medicine, University of Cape sage-additive model with a p-value of 1.11x10 , suggesting the presence of Town, South Africa, 2Division of Health & Life Sciences, University of Northampton, United Kingdom, 3South African Medical Research Council, Cape Town, South Africa. simple additive effects towards disease susceptibility. Ongoing studies aim to replicate associations in independent case-control studies, if replicated to INTRODUCTION: A recent heritability study demonstrated that human identify the break points and to functionally analyze the CNVs. range of motion (ROM) has a substantial genetic component. The ob- P09.112 jective of this study was to investigate if variants within the MMP10, Too much, but also too little of calreticulin in major psychiatric MMP1, MMP3 and MMP12 genes associate with ROM measurements, in- disorders cluding sit-and-reach (SR), straight leg raise (SLR) and total shoulder S. Farashi1, A. Mirab Zadeh2, M. Ohadi1; rotation (ShTR), in physically active individuals. 1Genetic Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Welfare and Rehabilitation METHODS: Three hundred and thirty-four physically active Cauca- University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. sians were genotyped, using a Taqman assay, for the MMP10 C/T rs486055, MMP1 1G/2G rs1799750, MMP3 A/G rs679620 and MMP12 A/G rs2276109 variants. Genotype effects on SR, SLR and ShTR ROM Evidence on population association studies support the hypothesis that the measurements were determined. Significance was accepted p<0.05. high heritability of major psychiatric disorders is a combination of relatively RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the MMP10 common alleles of modest effect, and rare alleles some with relatively larger (SR, mm: CC 267±114mm, n=222; CT 273±102, n=70; TT 252±125, effects. We have recently reported three mutations in the proximal promo- n=16; p=0.923), MMP1 (SR, mm: 1G1G 267±110, n=79; 1G2G 265±116, ter of the human calreticulin (CALR) gene at positions n=170; 2G2G 282±110, n=64; p=0.507), MMP3 (SR, mm: AA 265±114, -48C, -205T and -220A that co-occur with the spectrum of psychosis, in- n=81; AG 277±102, n=160; GG 257±120, n=88; p=0.078) or MMP12 cluding schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and bipolar disorder type (SR, mm: AA 265±110, n=147; AG 270±110, n=61; GG 331±61, n=7; I. The frequency of those mutations was estimated at <0.0007, and none of p=0.321) genotypes and the SR ROM measures. Furthermore there those mutations have been detected in the control population (p<0.005). were no significant genotype effects on SLR and ShTR. Interestingly, in- Mutations -48C and -220A were found to increase the expression of the dividuals with the minor MMP12 rs2276109 GG genotype were much CALR gene. The third mutation at -205C>T was detected in an isolate case of more flexible for all measurements (SR, mm: GG 331±61, n=7; AA+AG schizoaffective disorder. 266±110, n=308; p=0.135), however, due to sample size, this finding In this paper, the functional implication of mutation -205T was studied in was not significant. the human neuroblastoma cell lines BE(2)-C and LAN-5, and HEK-293 cell CONCLUSION: lines. In contrast with other mutations in the promoter region, which increa- The MMP10, MMP1, MMP3 and MMP12 genes were not associated with se expression of the gene, the -205T mutation significantly decreased gene ROM in this study. Due to the observed trends and rarity of the MMP12 expression in those cell lines in comparison with the wild-type -205C-nu- GG genotype, further analysis with a larger sample size is required. cleotide (p<0.0005, p<0.001, and p<0.017, respectively). Treatment of the cells lines with the anti-psychotic drug, valproic acid, showed synergistic increase in gene expression in the cell lines with the mutant -205T allele P09.115 vs. wild type -205C constructs (p<0.001). We propose that a deviation from Genome-wide association study for refractory celiac disease (RCDII) normalcy in the level of CALR in either direction is associated with major in Europeans psychiatric disorders. B. Hrdlickova1,2, R. L. J. van Wanrooij3, G. Malamut4,5,6, Y. Kamatani7, G. Bouma3, S. Zhernakova1,8, B. Meresse4,5, F. Biagi9, G. R. Corazza9, C. Cellier4,5,6, M. Lathrop7, N. Cerf- P09.113 Bensussan4,5, C. J. Mulder3, V. Kumar1, C. Wijmenga1; Cannabis and psychosis: a systematic review of genetic studies 1Department of Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2University of Groningen, V. Uliana1,2, A. Tomassini2,3, R. Pollice3, M. Gennarelli4,5, F. Forzano1, F. Faravelli1, M. Groningen, Netherlands, 3Department of Gastroenterology, FUMC, Amsterdam, Casacchia2,3, E. Di Maria1,6; Netherlands, 4Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 5Inserm U989, Faculté de 1Division of Medical Genetics, Galliera Hospital, Genova, Italy, 2PhD programme in Médecine Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 6Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Translational Medicine, University of L’Aquila, L‘Aquila, Italy, 3Department of Health Gastroenterology, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, Paris, France, 7Fondation Jean Sciences, Psychiatric Unit, University of L’Aquila, L‘Aquila, Italy, 4Genetic Unit, IRCCS Dausset-Centre d‘Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH), Paris, France, 8Department Centro S. Giovanni di Dio-Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy, 5Department of Biomedical of Rheumatology, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, 9Dona alla Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico Sciences and Biotechnologies, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy, 6Department of Health San Matteo, Pavia, Italy. Sciences, University of Genova, Genova, Italy. Celiac disease (CeD) is a common autoimmune disorder triggered by die- Though the basic pathophysiology of psychosis is largely unknown, the role tary gluten in genetically susceptible individuals. The only treatment is a of synaptic dysfunction and altered neural connectivity that origin early in lifelong, gluten-free diet (GFD). However, about 5% of CeD patients do not neurodevelopment is currently recognised. There is reliable evidence that respond to GFD and some develop refractory celiac disease (RCD), which is genes contribute to the aetiology of psychosis and recent findings provided characterized by persistent symptoms, severe malabsorption, and intestinal consistent clues for an overlap in genetic susceptibility across the traditio- damage despite a strict GFD. RCD patients with clonal T-cells, referred to as nal psychosis categories. ‘RCDII’, have a high mortality and poor prognosis due to the development of Genetic variations can influence disease risk through the interaction with lymphomas. environmental factors (gene-environment interaction). Epidemiologic stu- To discover genetic risk factors associated with RCDII, we performed a ge- dies suggested that chronic use of cannabis is a risk factor for the develop- nome-wide association study (GWAS) in a Dutch cohort (38 patients, 846 ment of psychosis. Recent researches have focused on the identification of controls), validating the top-associated variants in an independent French genetic variants that moderate the effect of cannabis on psychosis risk un- cohort (33 patients, 787 controls). der the gene-environment interaction paradigm. This revealed 21 potential susceptibility variants in 15 independent loci (p We performed a systematic literature search to identify genetic studies that < 1x10-5); we genotyped the top-15 variants. Using the Fisher Exact test, we explored the association between cannabis and psychosis. We included ge- found evidence for association with two variants in our replication cohort: netic studies that reported the direct measures of genetic risk in the associa- SNP4 in the KLF12 gene at chromosome 13 (p = 0.04, OR = 1.703) and SNP7 tion between cannabis and psychosis. in the WWOX gene at chromosome 16 (p = 0.007, OR = 2.139). Out of 184 articles identified in the screening phase, 14 articles met the in- None of the known celiac disease susceptibility variants showed association clusion criteria. We report a structured summary of populations studied, with RCDII, suggesting that the RCDII phenotype is due to different genetic methodology, genetic variations used as predictors, evaluations of cannabis factors. To further validate our findings, we are currently performing repli- use, outcome measures and main results. cations in other European RCDII cohorts. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 243 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.116 Functional Organisation of the Brain, Genomic Imaging, Research Centre Juelich, Juelich, Investigating the association of rs1800801 and rs1800802 single Germany. nucleotide polymorphisms on the promoter of MGP gene with Renal Stone M. Keramatipour1, M. Taghizadeh1, B. Ahadi2, G. Zarrinrad1, A. Tabibi2; Schizophrenia is a severe and debilitating neuropsychiatric disorder with 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, an estimated heritability of 60-80%. Recent studies have shown that rare, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Section of Urology, Dr Labbafinejad Hospital, Shahid Beheshti highly penetrant variants account for a fraction of the overall genetic risk. University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Some of these disease-associated rare variants have been identified several times in sporadic cases as independent de novo mutations and are obviously subject to negative selection. These findings support the hypothesis that the The Matrix Gla Protein (MGP) is an important inhibitor of calcification. Po- recurrent de novo occurrence of risk variants may compensate for risk vari- lymorphisms of MGP have been shown to be associated with stone forma- ants that constantly disappear from the gene pool by negative selection. tion in Kidney. Mainly two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) G-7A It is reasonable to assume that schizophrenia susceptibility genes identi- (rs1800801) & T-138C (rs1800802) on MGP gene have been suggested to fied by de novo mutations in patients might carry additional risk variants, play a role in susceptibility towards calcification which may affect gene ex- such as other rare single nucleotide mutations but also rare copy number pression due to their location in promoter region of the gene. variants (CNVs). We tested this hypothesis by starting from 34 potential This work is investigating the possible association of these two SNPs with schizophrenia susceptibility genes that were reported to carry de novo mu- the formation of renal stone in Iranian population using a family based tations by Xu et al. (2011). Using Illumina BeadArray data of 1,637 patients (Parents-Affected Child Trios) association study. with schizophrenia and 1,627 population-based controls, we investigated So far 100 trios were recruited. After obtaining their written consent, blood whether CNVs at these loci might contribute to the allelic spectrum in schi- samples were taken and DNA was extracted. For genotyping, the target re- zophrenia. Each individual’s SNP-chip information was analyzed with Quan- gion was amplified by PCR and the products were sequenced. Genotypes tiSNP and PennCNV. of both SNPs were confirmed for 40 trios so far. Analysis of the prelimi- In two genes, RB1CC1 and OR4C46, we found CNVs overrepresented in pa- nary data shows over transmission of A allele for rs1800p8-0va1l uaen d≈ T0. 1a)llele tients compared to controls providing further support for an involvement for rs1800802, althoupg-hv atlhuee d≈i f0f.e6r)e nces statistically were not significant. of these genes in the development of schizophrenia. We are currently ex- Transmission Disequilibrium Test (TDT) value was 2.45 ( for tending our analyses to large, independent case-control datasets. From a rs1800802, and 0.25 ( for rs1800801. It is very likely that ad- functional point of view, it is noteworthy that RB1CC1 insufficiency causes ding the genotypes of the remaining trios, reveals a significant over trans- neuronal atrophy. This may provide a link to pathophysiological considera- mission of T allele in rs1800802, confirming the association of this allele tions in schizophrenia. with the disease. P09.119 This work is being continued by genotyping the rest of samples and the full Unraveling the implication of de novo mutations in the genetics of data will be presented at the meeting. schizophrenia P09.117 S. L. Girard1,2, P. A. Dion1, J. Gauthier1, S. Geoffroy2, M. Dubé2, G. A. Rouleau1,3; Functional study of Peptidylarginine deiminase type 4 as genetic risk 1Center of Excellence in Neuromics, Montréal, QC, Canada, 2Beaulieu-Saucier factor for RA Pharmacogenomics Centre of the University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3CHU A. Suzuki1, Y. Kochi1, H. Shoda2, K. Fujio2, E. Kanno1, R. Yamada1,3, K. Yamamoto1,2; Ste-Justine Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada. 1RIKEN, Yokohama, Japan, 2Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 3Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. Recently, a wave of studies has shown that de novo mutations play a very important role in the genetic mechanism of psychiatric disorders. Our group has shown that there is an enrichment of pathogenic de novo mutations in Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is well-known as an autoimmune disease and is a schizophrenia. Other groups have made the same observation in schizophre- chronic inflammatory disorder characterized by the destruction of multiple nia, but also in autism and mental retardation. We are now trying to cha- joints. Many genome wide association studies were performed and multiple racterize this paradigm using two methods. First, we are looking at healthy RA-susceptibility loci and autoimmune-susceptibility loci have been iden- twins to evaluate the rates of germ line and somatic de novo mutations using tified. These studies suggested that multiple ge(nes and its functions were exome capture. This is the first report of an exonic de novo mutation rate related with disease causing and development. that can be used as a direct comparison to the previous studies. We are also Previouly, peptidylariginine deiminase type 4 PADI4) was identified as a doing a follow up of the genes identified in the first study using an enrich- susceptibility gene for RA in a Japanese population by case-control associa- ment solution in order to evaluate the rare variants burden of each gene in a tion study. PADI4 is a member of the PADI gene family and converts arginine schizophrenia cohort. We are resequencing approximately a hundred genes residue (peptidylarginine) to citrulline residue (peptidylcitrulline). PADI4 is that were found to harbour a de novo mutation in previous studies, in a co- highly expressed in bone marrow, macrophages, neutrophils and monocyte. hort of 250 schizophrenia patient and 250 healthy individuals. Peptidylcitrulline is an interesting molecule in RA, because it is an antigen P09.120 of ACPA and only PADs (translated protein from PADI genes) can provide Analysis of copy number variants (CNV) and gene expression in peptidylcitrullines, via modification of protein substrates. To evaluate the monozygotic twins discordant for schizophrenia importance of PADI4 gene in the progression of RA, we generated Padi4 F. B. Basmanav1,2, S. Herms1,2, A. Sharma3, K. Langbein4, A. Hedman5, M. Bohlken5, S. -/- C57BL/6 (B6) mice by speed congenic method. We used Padi4-/- mice Edkins6, E. Bramon7, H. Sauer4, M. Rietschel8, N. van Haren5, I. Nenadic4, R. Ophoff5,9, H. to show that PAD4 is affected to development and progression of collagen Hulshoff Pol5, M. Weisbrod3,10, M. M. Noethen1,2,11, P. Hoffman1,2, S. Cichon1,2,12; induced arthritis (CIA), well known as an RA model animal. Padi4-/- B6 and 1Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, WT mice were immunized with Chicken type II collagen (CII) for CIA. Clini- 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Section for Experimental Psychopathology and Neurophysiology, Department of General cal disease score was reduced and the incidence of WT and Padi4-/-mice Psychiatry, Centre for Psychosocial Medicine, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, were 56% and 44%, respectively. Padi4-/- mice also significantly reduced Germany, 4Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Jena University Hospital, concentrations of serum anti-CII IgM and IgG compared with WT mice. Jena, Germany, 5Department of Psychiatry, Division of Neuroscience, Rudolf Magnus Resulting from these studies, we suggested that Padi4 enhanced collagen- Institute, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 6Wellcome Trust initiated inflammatory responses. Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton Cambridge, United Kingdom, P09.118 7Division of Psychological Medicine, Institute of Psychiatry, King‘s College London, Copy number variants in RB1CC1 and OR4C46 are overrepresented in London, United Kingdom, 8Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 9UCLA Center a German case-control sample of schizophrenia for Neurobehavioral Genetics, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 10Psychiatric Department, F. Degenhardt1,2, L. Priebe1,2, J. Strohmaier3, S. Herms1,2, P. Hoffmann1,2, R. Mössner4, I. SRH Klinikum Karlsbad-Langensteinbach, Karlsbad, Germany, 11German Center for Nenadic5, H. Sauer5, D. Rujescu6, W. Maier4, M. Rietschel3, M. M. Nöthen1,2,7, S. Cichon1,2,8; Neurodegenerative Disorders (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 12Institute of Neuroscience and 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Medicine (INM-1), Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany. Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3Department of Genetic Epidemiology in Psychiatry, Central Institute of Mental Health, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 5Department of Psychiatry, University Hospital Jena, Jena, Germany, Schizophrenia has a lifetime prevalence of 1% and is a severe psychiatric 6Molecular and Clinical Neurobiology, Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilians- disorder characterized by positive symptoms (e.g. hallucinations, delusions), University, Munich, Germany, 7German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), negative symptoms (e.g. apathy, poor social functioning) and cognitive defi- Bonn, Germany, 8Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), Structural and cits (e.g. poor working memory). There is strong evidence that a polygenic component and environmental factors contribute to disease development. www.eshg.org www.eshAg p.oowregrful strategy to identify etiologically relevant genetic, epigenetic and 244 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 gene expression patterns is the investigation of phenotypically discordant Further studies are necessary to confirm the reported associations. monozygotic (MZ) twins. Recent studies have identified differences in copy This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Humanities grant number variation (CNV) between MZ twins with both concordant and dis- 11-06-00554a. cordant phenotype suggesting that somatic mosaicism may not be uncom- P09.123 mon. These findings suggest that CNV analysis in phenotypically discordant Association study of candidate gene polymorphisms with paranoid MZ twins may provide a powerful tool for identifying disease susceptibility schizophrenia susceptibility in Russian population loci. D. Galaktionova1, O. Gra1, A. Gareeva2, E. Khusnutdinova2, T. Nasedkina1; In the present study, we utilized 20 MZ twins discordant for schizophrenia 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, (n=18) or schizoaffective disorder (n=2) collected in 3 medical research Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. centers located in Germany and The Netherlands. All 20 pairs are current- ly being genome-wide genotyped on Illumina HumanOmni1S beadchips to analyze CNV discrepancies. In addition, for 7 of these discordant MZ twin pairs peripheral mRNA is available and will be subjected to whole genome Schizophrenia is a multifactorial disorder (about 1% in the most populati- expression profiling by use of llumina HumanHT-12 Expression BeadChips ons studied) and is characterized by the contribution of multiple suscepti- to determine potentially differentially expressed regions and to enable inte- bility genes that couldH aTctR i2nA c (orns6ju3n1c1t,i rosn6 3w1i3th, r esp6i3g1e4n etic rpsr7o9c9e7ss0e1s2 a),n BdD eNnF- gration of the genetic and expression data. v(risr6o2n6m5e)n,StaLlC f6aAct4o r(rss. 2B8a9s1ed48 o3n2 )p, rDevISioCu1s ( mrso3l7e3c7u5la9r7 g),e ZnNetFi8c 0s4tuAd (iress1 t3h4e4 f7o0ll6o)-, P09.121 wREinLgN p (orlsy7m3o4r1p4h7i5s)m, sC:O MT (rs165599), SLC18A1 (rs2a2n7d0641) PLXNA2 Genetic association of RGS2 gene variants with schizophrenia and rs132717 5 and antipsychotic response A. Gareeva1, D. Zakirov2, E. Khusnutdinova1,2; ( ) have been chosen and analyzed in 198 patients with schizo- 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Academy of phrenia and 192 healthy individuals. The genotyping procedure included Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. multiplex PCR with fluorescres6n3tl1y4 labeled nucleotides and aHlleTlRe2-sApecific hy- bridization of labeled PCR products with a biochip. The statistically signi- ficant arss6so3c1i1ation between (p = 0r.0s61341, O3R = 2.2H6T)R o2fA gene and Schizophrenia is a common and complex psychiatric disorder with a strong risk of paranoid schizophrenia was found. Also it was shown that genetic va- genetic component. As regulators of G protein signaling and regulators of riants (p = 0.011, OR = 2.33) and gene (p = 0.008, OR= G protein signaling-like proteins play a pivotal role in dopamine receptor 2.40) were associated with suicidal behavior in schizophrenic patients. signaling, genetically based, functional variation could contribute to interin- The work was supported by Ministry of Science and Education of Russian dividual variability in therapeutic and adverse effects Federation (State contracts ## 02.740.11.0869 and 02.527.11.0006). The present study is aimed at exploring whether two single nucleotide po- P09.124 lymorphisms (SNPs) rs2746073 and rs2746072 within RGS2 gene could be Association study of class II cytokine genes with psoriasis in three associated with schizophrenia and whether they could predict clinical out- ethnic groups from the Russia comes in 300 patients of two ethnic groups (158 Russians and 142 Tatars) E. Galimova1, V. Akhmetova1, K. Kingo2, R. Rätsep3, T. Traks2, S. Kõks3, E. Khusnutdinova1; from the Volga-Ural region of Russia treated with antipsychotics. Baseline 1Institute of Biochemistry ang Genetics, Ufa Scientific Center of Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Department of Dermatology and Venerology, and final clinical measures, including PANSS and SAS scales were recorded. University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Physiology, University of Tartu, No significant association was found with the diagnosis of schizophrenia. Tartu, Estonia. However analysis of variance revealed that genotype RGS2*T/*T to be a marker of reduction of Negative symptoms (P=0.04) in the overall sample comprised of Russians and Tatars on the 21 day from the baseline. Background: The molecular basis of pathogenesis of psoriasis remains Our findings provide no evidence for an association between SNPs within unclear, but one unifying hypothesis of disease aetiology is the cytokine RGS2 gene under investigation and schizophrenia susceptibility. However, network model. The class II cytokines (CF2) and their receptors (CRF2) are taking into account the several limitations of our study, further research is all involved in the inflammatory processes and single nucleotide polymor- needed to draw more definitive conclusions. phisms (SNPs) in respective genes have been associated with psoriasis in a This work was supported by grant of the Russian Foundation for Humanities previous study of the Estonian population. (11-06-00554a) Objective: We performed a replication study of 47 SNPs in CF2 and CRF2 P09.122 genes in independent cohorts of psoriasis patients of three ethnic groups Influence of GRIN2B gene polymorphic loci on antipsychotic (Russians, Tatars, and Bashkirs) from the Volga-Ural region of Russia. treatment response and susceptibility to schizophrenia Methods: DNA was obtained from 499 psoriasis patients of three ethnic D. Zakirov1, E. Suleimanova1, A. Gareeva2, E. Khusnutdinova2,1; groups from the Russia and 581 ethnically matched controls. 47 SNPs in the 1Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and loci of CF2 and CRF2 genes were selected by SNPbrowser version 3.5. Ge- Genetics of Ufa Scientific Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. notyping was performed using the SNPlex™ (Applied Biosystems) platform. Results: Comparison of allele frequencies between cases and controls using chi square test revealed differences for seven SNPs rs276466, rs30461, One major problem in the schizophrenia (SZ) treatment is finding the right rs3795299, rs1342642, rs10784680, rs4896227, and rs2834117. Only the drug for the right patients. SNP rs30461 in the IL29 gene displayed a statistically significant association We aimed to examine the effect of five polymorphic loci (rs1805502, with psoriasis in the cohort of Russians when adjusted for multiple compa- rs7301328, rs1805247, 5806A/C, rs1805482) of GRIN2B gene on treat- risons (corrected P-value (Pc)=0.008, OR=0.44). ment response to typical antipsychotics (TA) in schizophrenia patients from Conclusion: Our results suggest that polymorphisms rs30461 of the IL29 Russia. gene may contribute to a protection to psoriasis in Russian population. In Study sample comprised of 300 drug naive patients with the first episode addition, there might be a probability that other variations in CF2 and CRF2 of SZ (158 Russians and 142 Tatars) from the Volga-Ural region of Russia. genes influence susceptibility to psoriasis, but further investigations are Clinical response and severity of Extrapyramidal symptoms (ES) were de- needed to provide more conclusive evidence theirs exact contribution. termined by administering the PANSS and SAS scales at base line and at days 21 and 45. Differences between groups were tested by using unpaired t-test P09.125 (two-tailed), analysis of variance (ANOVA), and chi-square test. Additional Patients and an Association Study support a Role of SOX9 Analysis of variance detected genotype GRIN2B *T/*T (rs1805247) to be in CD-ACD-PRS Phenotypic Continuum and in CPO. L. Desmyter1, M. Quentric1, M. Ghassibe1, W. Courtens2, S. Kivirikko3, H. Antoine-Poirel2, a marker of reduction of Negative (P=0.03) and General Psychopathology G. Ameye2, B. Bayet4, G. François4, R. Vanwijck4, O. Boute5, P. Pellerin6, M. Rubini7, M. symptoms (P=0.04) in Tatar patients on the 21 assessment day. Vikkula1,2; ANOVA revealed GRIN2B *T/*T (rs1805502) genotype to be a marker of low 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium, risk of ES development (P=0.003) in Russian patients on the 21 assessment 2Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires St Luc, Université catholique de day. Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Analysis of association educed allele GRIN2B *T (rs1805247) to be a risk Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 4Centre Labiopalatin, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques marker for schizophrenia in Tatars (OR=2,39). A CTC haplotype encompas- universitaires St Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 5Centre de génétique, Centre hospitalier universitaire de Lille, Lille, France, 6Service de chirurgie sing rs180552, rs1805247, rs1805482 of GRIN2B gene was significantly plastique et reconstructive, Centre hospitalier universitaire de Lille, Lille, France, 7Sez. overrepresented among Tatar patients (OR=2,32). Genetica Medica, Dip. Medicina Sperimentale e Diagnostica, Università di Ferrara, Our results are preliminary and suggest that the SNPs in GRIN2B gene may influence the treatment response to TA and susceptibility to schizophrenia. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 245 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Ferrara, Italy. PON1 x PON2 ( type combination A/- GG was higher in the group of IS pati- Sox9 has an essential role in chondrogenesis. Nonsense mutations and de- ents p=0.044, OR=3.4, 95% CI 1.06-10.4) compared to controls and, thus, letion of Sox9 suggested haploinsufficiency to underly campomelic dyspla- was associated with higher risk of stroke. Further the analysis using MDR sia (CD), a rare autosomal dominant disease characterized by campomelia, (Multifactor Dimensionality ReductionF)G aBlgoritxh AmC Ehas bxe eMnT pHeFrRform exd P. ATIh-1e skeletal defects and Pierre Robin sequence (PRS). Translocations in the statistically significant association with stroke for several genotype combi- 350kb region upstream or downstream of SOX9 were reported in less se- nations was revealed, for example for G/- I/- C/- vere CD patients. Some translocations and deletions further upstream have 5G/5G (p=0.018, OR =2.6, 95% CI 1.2-5.6). been identified in patients with acampomelic campomelic dysplasia (ACD) P09.128 and PRS, suggesting that these three syndromes form a continuum of phe- Association analysis of CRH, CRHR1 and CHRM2 genes in suicidal notypes. We report the identification of a translocation 600kb upstream of behavior SOX9 in a patient with classical features of ACD. In parallel, we identified a A. Zainullina1, Z. Khalilova1, A. Valiullina2, K. Kinasheva2, D. Gaysina3, S. Cohen-Woods4, I. Craig4, P. McGuffin4, E. Khusnutdinova1,2; deletion in a PRS family that overlaps a deletion reported in a patient with 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics Ufa Scientific Center of RAS, Ufa, Russian the same phenotype. These data and the literature lead us to test whether Federation, 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3University College or not there is a genetic association between the SOX9 locus and cleft palate London, MRC Unit for Lifelong Health and Ageing, London, United Kingdom, 4Institute (CP) and/or PRS. We used three SNPs in a cohort of case-parent trios ana- of Psychiatry, Medical Research Council Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry lyzed using TDT. While two SNPs, tagging a conserved region upstream of Centre, London, United Kingdom. SOX9, achieved borderline significance (p=0.045 and p=0.052) in the PRS cohort, significant over-transmission of an intragenic SNP was detected in the combined CP+PRS cohort (p=0,026), with a relative risk of 0.43. The Dysregulation in the stress response of the HPA axis, involving the cortico- association has been replicated in an independent Italian CP-cohort. Our trophin-releasing hormone (CRH) and its main receptor (CRHR1), is consi- data are in agreement with the hypothesis that removal or disruption of cis- dered to play a major role in suicidal behavior (SB). Cholinergic mechanisms regulatory elements upstream of SOX9 can lead to phenotypes of gradual are also implicated in stress. severity. We show for the first time an association of SOX9 with CP and PRS. The aim of the present study was to investigate three genes involved in P09.126 stress response, the corticotrophin-releasing hormone gene (CRH), the CRH Investigating copy number variants within a cohort of individuals receptor 1 gene (CRHR1) and the muscarinic cholinergic 2 receptor gene with specific language impairment (CHRM2), for association with suicidal behavior (SB) in Russian populati- N. H. Simpson1, F. Ceroni1, C. Francks2, S. J. L. Knight1, A. P. Monaco1, S. Fisher2, D. on. Newbury1, S. L. I. Consortium1; Cases were 288 suicide attempters hospitalized in the Clinical Republic 1Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Hospital (Ufa, Russia). Controls were 348 individuals without a personal or Kingdom, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. familial (first degree) history of neuropsychiatric disorders and SB. Two SNPs (rs6159, rs1870393) of the CRH gene, five SNPs (rs242941, rs878886, rs242938, rs1876831, rs1876828) of the CRHR1 gene and four Specific language impairment (SLI) is a developmental language disor- SNPs (rs1824024, rs2061174, rs2350786, rs324650) of the CHRM2 gene der that, in the absence of any comorbid neurological deficits, affects an were genotyped. For pairwise linkage disequilibrium and haplotype analy- individual’s spoken and/or receptive language despite adequate intelligen- sis, the Haploview 4.1 program was used. Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confi- ce and accessibility to learning. SLI is a common childhood disorder with dent intervals (CI) were calculated. an estimated prevalence in pre-school children of up to 7%. It is a complex The only association we observed was an allele association between CRHR1 genetic disorder that is closely related to autism, dyslexia and ADHD. SLI has rs878886 and SB: C was significantly overrepresented in patients with SB a high genetic component with twin studies finding a monozygotic concor- as compared to controls (OR=2.65, 95%CI: 1.12-2.02). Haplotype analy- dance rate of up to 70%. Recent studies of neurodevelopmental disorders sis showed a significant overrepresentation of the CHRM2 (rs1824024, have implicated copy number variants (CNVs) in conditions such as autism, rs2061174, rs2350786, rs324650) C-G-G-T haplotype (OR=12.48, 95%CI: intellectual disability and ADHD. Therefore a study of CNVs within families 1.24-2.01) in suicide attempters as compared to controls. These results may containing individuals with SLI is currently being performed. The SLI con- help understand better the pathophysiology of suicidal behavior, its preven- sortium has collected a cohort of samples from across the UK that have been tion and treatment. phenotypically well characterised for language. 176 of these families con- This work was supported by grant of the Russian Foundation for Humanities taining 186 individuals with SLI have been genotyped using the Illumina (11-06-00554a). HumanOmniExpress beadchip that contains more than 700,000 SNPs. The P09.129 SNP data is being used to identify CNVs across the genome using the copy Copy number variations (CNVs) in the androgen receptor gene (AR) in number detection algorithms QuantiSNP and PennCNV. Data will be presen- British patients with systemic sclerosis - a pilot study ted, for example, of the relative burden of CNVs in cases compared to their G. Rittner1, C. Fonseca2, D. Abraham2, O. Bartsch1, U. Zechner1; unaffected siblings and of novel variants. CNVs of interest are to be validated 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg using quantitative PCR. To our knowledge this will be the first genome-wide University Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Centre for Rheumatology, Royal Free and University CNV analysis performed within a cohort of samples with SLI. College Medical School, London, United Kingdom. P09.127 Association study of the functional polymorphisms in candidate genes with ischemic stroke in residents of central Russia Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disorder characterized by ex- M. Avdonina1, T. Nasedkina1, A. Ikonnikova1, E. Bondarenko2, P. Slominsky2, N. cessive fibrosis and vascular abnormalities in various organs. It is the end Shamalov3, I. Shetova3, S. Limborskaya2, A. Zasedatelev1, V. Skvortsova3; result of a complex interaction of genetic factors and unknown environmen- 1Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, tal influences. Three subgroups can be distinguished, morphea, limited and Russian Federation, 2Institute of Molecular Genetics Russian Academy of Sciences, diffuse SSc. SSc is 3 (diffuse SSc) to 9 (limited SSc) times more frequent in Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Research Institute of Cerebrovascular Pathology and Stroke Russian State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. females than in males which has been discussed to be due to elevated ratios of skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in female patients. Previously, we investigated the XCI patterns in a cohort of 205 patients with F12, PON1, PON2, NOS2, PDE4D HIF1a, GPIba, CYP11B2 REN, AGT, AG- limited SSc and 97 patients with diffuse SSc using the human androgen TTRhe1 ,f AreGqTuRe2n, cBieKsR o2f, 3A4D SRNBP2, i AnC cEa,n FdGidBa, tFe2 geFn5esF 7a,s GsoPcIiIaIatedPA wI-i1th, MisTchHeFmR,i cA sPtOroE-, receptor (AR) gene (HUMARA) assay. This analysis identified 34 patients NkeO S(2, NOS3, LTA, ALOX5AP, ADRB3, , (11%) that were homozygous for the CAG polymorphism in the AR gene, , , , . thereof 17 patients belonging to the limited SSc subgroup (17 of 205, 8.3%) TUB ) have been studied in ischemic stroke and 17 patients belonging to the diffuse SSc subgroup (17 of 97, 17.5%). To (IS) patients and healthy controls, the residents of Central Russia Also po- verify if homozygosity of the CAG polymorphism in these patients is due to lymorphism in gene (rs4578424) and rs2881013, rs4459584 in non- a deletion of the AR gene, we determined the gene dosage at the AR locus coding regions revealed in genome-wide association study in Russian popu- in these patients as well as heterozygous female and hemizygous male con- lation were analyzed. The genotyping procedure included the amplification trols using genomic qPCR. Two of the 34 patients belonging to the limited of selected gene sequences following by hybridization of fluorescently la- SSc group displayed copy number changes ; one had a deletion and one a du- beled fragments with SNP-specific DNA probes immobilized on a biochip. plication at the AR gene. These data let us speculate that changes at the AR An analysis of allele and genotype frequencies for each SNP in IS patients gene itself might contribute to the female predisposition for SSc indicated by (n=300) and controls (n=300) did not reveal any significant difference. The elevated ratios of skewed XCI. pair-wise comparison of genes demonstrated that the frequency of geno- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org246 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.130 Istanbul, Turkey, 2Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biostatistics, Association of leukocyte telomere length and plasma antioxidants Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medıcal :Results of the Austrian Stroke Prevention Study(ASPS) Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey. A. Sen1, M. Schallert2, C. Nagl1, K. Petrovic2, P. Freudenberger1, G. Marsche3, R. Schmidt2, Introduction: H. Schmidt1,2; 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Graz, Austria, 2Department of Non- syndromic cleft lip with or without palate (NS-CL/P) Neurology, Graz, Austria, 3Institute of Clinical Experimental and Pharmacology, Graz, affects about 1/700 births and have diverse causes including environmental Austria. factors of either ethnic or socioeconomic origin and genetic factors. Tβhe na- Background ture of the environmental and genetic factors contributing to this malforma- Mtioant eisr isatill-l Munectlheoadr. sIn this study, we aimed to identify the effect of TGF gene : Telomere length plays an important role in the maintenance IVS+104A> G polymorphism on the onset of NS-CL/P in Turkish patients. of DNA and chromosomal stability. Telomeres undergo progressive shorte- : 68 NS-CL/P patients and 114 healthy controls were en- ning in replicating cells that lack active telomerase. Ageing, oxidative stress rolled to the study. Study procedure was in accordance with the principles and inflammation are related to shorter telomere length. The objective of of the Declaration of Helsinki II and all subjects provided written informed tMheet phroedsse:nt study was to explore the association between plasma levels of cRoenssuelntst :prior to the enrollment. DNA isolation was carried out from peri- antioxidants and leukocyte telomere length (LTL). pheral blood and genotyping was assessed by PCR- RFLP methodology. Relative LTL was measured by quantitative Real Time PCR in 907 The respective frequency of the AA, AG and GG genotypes of the participants of the Austrian Stroke Prevention Study, a community-based patients were 24%, 29% and 47 %, whereas they were 54%, 36% and 20% cohort study on brain aging. Levels of plasma antioxidants including as- for the controls. The frequencies of the patient group showed statistically corbate, cryptoxanthin, canthaxanthin, lycopene, α-carotene, β-carotene, difference from that of the controls (p<0,05). When AA genotype was used retinol, γ- & α- tocopherol and zeaxanthin were measured by MHoPdLeCl i1n 614 aDsi sthcue srseifoenre:nce group, G allele frequency was found to be statistically high- subjects. Association between plasma antioxidants and LTL wasM aondaelly 2zed er in patients when compared to controls (p<0,05). uRseisnugl tmsultiple linear regression by adjusting for age and sex ( ) Manod- The risk of NS-CL/P was statistically increased as the number addeld i1tionally for hypertension, diabetes, cardiac disease and BMI ( ). of the G allele of the TGF-β IVS5+104 increased. The results of this study are : There was a significant association between LTL and ascorbate ( in agreement with the previous studies. This gene locus suggested to be an :β=0.003;95%CI:0.002,0.0:05.;p<0.001), lycopene (β=-0.192;95%CI:- informative screening marker for NS-CL/P in Turkish patients. 0.338,-0.045;p=0.01), Mreotdineol l2 (β=-0.045;95%CI:-0.084,-0.005;p=0.029) and P09.134 β-carotene (β=-0.052; 95%CI-0104,0.000;p=0.050). After adjusting for A rare variant on chromosome 11 is associated with total mortality in vCaosncculluasr iroinsk factors ( ) the significance of the associations and the a European case-cohort study effect sizes remained unchanged. A. Joensuu1, K. Kristiansson1, V. Salomaa1, M. Perola1, .. for the MORGAM Project2; : This is the first study investigating the association between 1National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland, 2MORGAM Consortium, plasma antioxidants and LTL in a healthy elderly population. Our results Belfast, United Kingdom. suggest a protective role for ascorbate and an opposite role for lycopene, retinol and β-carotene in maintaining telomere length. The effect of these antioxidants on LTL is not mediated by vascular risk factors. Aims P09.131 The aim of our study was to find genomic regions which associate with to- A variant in the carboxyl-terminus of connexin 40 alters GAP tal mortality and to study the molecular mechanisms behind the detected junctions and increases risk for tetralogy of Fallot associations. V. Guida1, R. Ferese2, M. Rocchetti3, M. Bonetti4, A. Sarkozy1, S. Cecchetti5, V. Gelmetti1, Methods F. Lepri6, M. Copetti7, G. Lamorte1, M. C. Digilio6, B. Marino8, A. Zaza3, J. den Hertog4, B. 6535 individuals from five European countries in the MORGAM prospective Dallapiccola6, A. De Luca1; study were genotyped with Illumina Cardio-MetaboChip capturing nearly 1Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 200,000 common and rare genomic variants. The 2458 individuals who died 2Department of Experimental Medicine, “Sapienza” University, Rome, Italy, 3Biotechnology and Biosciences Department, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy, during the follow-up of 7-18 years were selected as cases. 4Hubrecht Institute, Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, A Cox proportional hazards model was used to estimate the association of 6Medical Genetics, Cytogenetics and Pediatric Cardiology, Bambino Gesù Children the genotyped variants with total mortality. The genomic region within 1Mb Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy, 7Unit of Biostatistics, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza of the top mortality variant was studied further for association to other di- Hospital, IRCCS, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy, 8Pediatric Cardiology, Department of sease end points and to 22 mortality and cardiovascular risk factors in MOR- Pediatrics, “Sapienza” University, Rome, Italy. GAM and in two subcohorts of the FINRISK 2007 Study (n=3950+694). GJA5 Results A rare SNP (MAF=0.0022 in MORGAM) on chromosome 11 was associated gene (MIM# 121013), localized at 1q21.1, encodes for the cardiac gap with total mortality (p=2.93*10-8, HR = 4.6, 95% CI 2.7-7.9). The SNP sho- junction protein connexin 40. In humans, copy number variants of chromo- wed association to mortality also in independently analyzed MORGAM some 1q21.1 have beeGnj aa5ssociated with variable phenotypes comprising subsamples: men, women, two Finnish cohorts and the combined non- congenital heart disease (CHD) including isolated tetralogy of Fallot (TOF). Finnish cohorts. Furthermore, the SNP was associated with CVD, CHD and In mice, the deletion of can cause a variety of cGoJmA5plex CHDs, in particu- cancer mortality (p<10-4) and with CVD and CHD events (p<0.05). None lar of the cardiac outflow tract, corresponding to TOF in many cases. In the of the SNPs studied for association with risk factors survived correction for present study, we screened for mutations in the gene 178 unrelated multiple testing. probands with isolated TOF. A heterozygous nucleotide change in exon 2 of Conclusions the gene leading to a missense variant GatJ At5he carboxyl-terminus of the pro- The genome-wide significant association of a rare variant on chromosome tein was found in two unrelated sporadic patients, one with classic anatomy 11 with mortality is highly interesting as it does not seem to mediate through and one with pulmonary atresia. This missense substitution was not common risk factors. Replication of the association in multiple subcohorts observed in 1,568 ethnically-matched control chromosomes. Immunofluo- and disease end points gives strength to the original finding. rescent staining and confocal microscopy revealed that cells expressing the P09.135 mutant protein form sparse or no visible gap-junction plaques in the region Screening of first degree relatives of type 1 diabetes patients by using of cell-cell contact. Moreover, analysis of the transfer of the gap junction per- HLA genotyping in combination with regular autoantibodies testing meant tracer lucifer yellow showed that cells expressing thGeJ mA5utant protein J. Vcelakova, L. Petruzelkova, K. Stechova, S. Kolouskova; have a reduced rate of dye transfer compared to wild-type cells. Finally, use University Hospital Motol and 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, of a zebrafish model has shown thaGt JmA5icroinjection of the -mutant dis- Prague, Czech Republic. rupts overall morpGhJoAl5ogy of the heart tube in the 37% (22/60) of embryos, compared to the 6% (4/66) of the wild-type-injected embryos. These findings implicate gene as a novel susceptibility gene for TOF. Introduction: The most important genes which are related to type 1 diabetes P09.132 (T1D) are supposed to be genes for HLA class II molecules. First degree rela- Intron5 +104 A/G polymorphism (IVS+104A> G) of TGF-β gene can be tives (FDR) of T1D patients have an increased risk to develop the diseases as considered as a marker for the onset of non-syndromic cleft lip with/ well. In the Czech republic we screen FDR (children under 18 years of age) without palate in Turkish patients of T1D patients and we provide HLA genotyping and annual screening for K. Ulucan1, M. Yetiskin1, T. Cetin1, E. C. Kaspar2, A. I. Guney3; T1D associated autoantibodies (Abs). 1Marmara University, Faculty of Dentistry, Department of Medıcal Biology and Genetics, Methods: In our programme (established in 2001) 724 children were HLA genotyped (by PCR-SSP method), 170/724 children developed at least one autoantibody during their follow-up, in 37/740 tested persons T1D was dia- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 247 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 IL1F10 PAX8 ALDH2 gnosed. We check by using RIA method for antiinsulin (IAA), antiGAD65 (ga- SLNILPRsB w4ith leukocyte transcriptome data, one polymorphism in was maglutamyltransferase) and IA2 (antityrosinphosphatase) autoantibodies sChoonwclnu stoio anc:t as cis-eQTL to and trans- eQTL to in chr 12 and and we successfully attended the last international Diabetes Autoantibody in chr 19. Standardisation Programme (DASP). IL-1Ra has shown a clinical significance and association with a Results: Within carriers of risky DQA1 DQB1 haplotypes (DQA1*03 number of medical conditions. Identifying genetic variants associated with DQB1*0302 resp. DQA1*05 DQB1*02) autoantibody(ies) positivity was IL-1Ra level in circulation provides further information about related patho- observed more frequently (55,9% resp.45,3%) in comparison with carriers physiological pathways and enables the evaluation of its potential effects on of protective haplotype DQA1*01 DQB1*0602 where only 7,1% of children cardiovascular disease and diabetes. were Abs+ at least once during their follow-up. The presence of the most P09.138 risky genotype (DQA1*03/05 DQB1*02/0302) was connected to shorter Genetic characteristics of Lithuanian and Latvian patients with period from the occurrence of positivity of the first autoantibody to the di- ulcerative colitis sease diagnose (p=0,005). J. Sventoraityte-Skieceviciene1, G. Kiudelis2, L. V. Jonaitis2, A. Zvirbliene1, T. Balschun3, G. Conclusion: Screening of FDR of T1D patients allows early disease diagnose Denapiene4, G. Pranculiene2, M. Leja5, S. Schreiber3, A. Franke3, L. Kupcinskas1; which has a protective effect to the resting pancreatic beta cell mass and 1Institute for Digestive Research, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Kaunas, Lithuania, 2Department of Gastroenterology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, also it is useful for designing of future immunointervention strategies (for Kaunas, Lithuania, 3Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts- the selection of their suitable candidates). University, Kiel, Germany, 4Center of Hepatology, Gastroenterology and Dietetics, Vilnius Supported by IGA NT/11407-5 a GACR P302/10/1679. University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 5University of Latvia, Riga, Latvia. www.predia.cz Introduction. P09.136 Association of polymorphisms representing obesity-related loci Genetic susceptibility is known to play a large part in the pre- comprising FTO and TMEM18 with type 2 diabetes and age at disposition to ulcerative colitis (UC). The past years have witnessed remar- diagnosis of the disease in the population of Latvia kable success in the identification of low-penetrance, high-frequency sus- I. Kalnina1, L. Tarasova1, I. Vaivade1, V. Ignatovica1, J. A. Jacobsson2, M. S. Almen2, H. B. ceptibility variants in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). However, a large Schiöth2, V. Pirags3, J. Klovins1; 1Biomedical Research and Study Centre Latvia, Riga, Latvia, 2Departement of pMaertth oof dthse. genetic variance in IBD is still unaccounted for. Thus, we aimed to Neuroscience, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3University of Latvia and investigate the role of the IBD associated genetic variants in a Department of Endocrinology, Pauls Stradins Clinical University Hospital, Riga, Latvia. We performed a replication study in 447 Lithuanian and Latvian UC patients and 1,154 controls. In total, 77 SNPs that showed moderate or strong association in five GWAS were studied. Single marker case-control, GWA studies have revealed a number of common obesity susceptibility va- gReensoutlytsp.e-phenotype association analysis, and SNP-SNP epistasis analysis riants with the strongest signals observed in the loci comprising FTO and were performed. TMEM18. Variants predisposing to obesity have been demonstrated to con- JAK2 After correcting for mul, tRipNleF 1t8e6st ing, we confirmed associat, ions tribute to the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D), although this has been mostly OatR 2M1DqL231 .1 (rs1736135, P = 8.01E-06), 6q21 (rs7746082, P = 6.41E-05), explained by BMI mediated effects. Association between polymorphisms in (rs10758669, P = 8.08E-06) (rs3806308, P = 2.40E-06) and the FTO and T2D has been asserted across different populations, however (rs2872507, P = 1P.T2P4NE-2026). No association Cw1i3thor af3n1y disease sub- impact of the variation downstream TMEM18 on T2D risk remains elusive. phenotype was found. SNP-SNP interaction analyses showIend s isliigconificant epi- Our aim was to investigate relationship between variants in or near FTO and stasis between SNPs in the (rs2476601) and (rs3764147) TMEM18 genes and T2D in the population of Latvia. genes and increased risk for UC (P = 1.64E-06, OR = 2.44). prediction For this study we selected SNP rs7561317 located near TMEM18 and Cofo tnhcel uinstieornasc.t ive network of these genes further validated a possible inter- rs9939609 and rs57103849 along with other two in the FTO. SNPs were aJAcKti2onR.NF186 ORMDL3 genotyped in 1080 controls and 983 cases by performing TaqMan SNP ge- We confirmed the association of five loci (21q21.1, 6q21, notyping assays. , , and ) with PUTCP iNn2 t2he Lithuanian-Latvian population. Three of the SNPs in the FTO and rs7561317 showed positive association SNP-SNMP yincotebraacctteiroinu man alysis showed that Cth1e3 ocrofm31b ination of the SNPs in with BMI and T2D. Furthermore association between the FTO variants and the T-cell processes involved gene (rs2476601) and gene participa- T2D remained significant after adjustment for BMI. We found no correlation ting in infection clearance (rs3764147) increase between rs57103849 genotype and BMI or T2D, however rs57103849 and the risk for UC. rs7561317 were strongly associated with younger age at diagnosis of T2D P09.139 in a BMI independent manner. Association study for HLA Class II genes (HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1 and In the current study we confirm that genetic variation in the loci comprising HLA-DQB1), CIITA gene polymorphisms (-168A/G and +1614G/C) and FTO and TMEM18 contributes to higher risk of obesity and T2D in the po- multiple sclerosis, in a sample from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. pulation of Latvia. Our data support the evidence that obesity susceptibility E. R. Paradela1,2, A. L. S. Figueiredo1,3, L. A. Agostinho1,4, C. F. Rocha1,5, J. Xavier6, C. L. A. Paiva1, S. Alves-Leon1,7; variants may have an impact on T2D risk through the mechanisms unrelated 1Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (UNIRIO), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, to those involved in the BMI regulation. 2DLE- Medicina Laboratorial, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 3Universidade Severino Sombra, P09.137 Vassouras, Brazil, 4FAMINAS, Muriaé, MG, Brazil, 5Escola Superior de Cruzeiro, Cruzeiro, Genetic determinants of IL-1-receptor antagonist in the circulation Brazil, 6Centro Universitário da Cidade, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 7Universidade Federal do M. Nuotio1,2, K. Kristiansson2, M. Perola2,1,3, V. Salomaa2; Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland, 3University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. Introduction: The aim of this study was to evaluate the relationship between HLA Class II HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 loci, CIITA gene polymorphisms and Interleukins play an essential role in human immunity sy- susceptibility to multiple sclerosis (MS). Peripheral blood samples were ta- stem acting as mediIaLt1oRrsN of inflammation and tissue damage. The interleu- ken from 52 MS patients registered with the outpatient clinic of neurology kin-1 superfamily consists of two agonists, two receptors, and a receptor at Clementino Fraga Filho University Hospital (UFRJ, Brazil), as well as from antagonist, IL-1Ra. in chr 2 has been carefully studied, since IL-1Ra 116 healthy control subjects, who were matched for ancestry, sex and age concentration in circulation shows a clinical significance and association for with the 52 MS patients. The patients were classified according to the cri- example with AMI. Systemic elevation in IL-1Ra concentrations has been teria laid out by McDonald et al. (2001). After DNA extraction, the alleles of previously shown to enable the better control of type 2 diabetes. Recombi- HLA-DQA1, HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DQB1 loci were identified by sequencing nant form of IL-1Ra is also commonly used drug in a treatment of rheumato- and PCR-SSP. Sequencing of polymorphisms -168A/G and +1614 G/C at gene id arthritis and gout. We wanted to perform GWAS for IL-1Ra concentrations CIIPA was carried out by PCR, followed by capillary electrophoresis (ABI in circulation in independent Finnish population- and case-control-cohorts. PRISM® 3500 Genetic Analyzer Applied Biosystems). Our results have indi- WMee tahlosod sw: anted to test the association of resulting top SNPs with leukocyte cated that the relative risk (RR) associated with the allele HLA-DRB1*15:01 transcriptome data. was 3.11. For allele HLA-DQB1*06:02, RR was equal to 2.54. For the haplo- Results: We performed GWAS in a sample consisting in total of 7169 type HLA-DRB1*15:01-DQB1*06:02, the RR was 3.35. The polymorphism adults. -168A/G (rs3087456) at CTIIA gene was not associated with susceptibili- As a result, 17 SNPs were associated with IL-1Ra at p < 10-¹²,while ty to MS, but the polymorphism +1614G/C (Rs4774), together with HLA- adjusting with age, sex, BMI -a 8n-1d1 WHR. Furthermore, 29 SNPs were asso- DRB1*15:01+, increased the RR to 4.46. These findings reinforced the mul- ciated with IL-1Ra at p < 10 . While testing the association of the top tifactorial and polygenic trait of the disease, indicating that when both the www.eshg.org www.eshg.org248 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P09.142 Association of single nucleotide polymorphism in TGFB1 and acute polymorphism +1614G/C of the CIITA gene and the HLA-DRB1*15:01+ alle- radiation-induced mucositis in patients with nasopharyngeal le were present, susceptibility to MS was increased. In addition, our results carcinoma suggested that HLA-DRB1*08:01, HLA-DRB1*11:01, HLA-DRB1*11:02 and I. Cheuk1, S. Yip1, D. Kwong2, V. Wu1; HLA-DRB1*13:03 contributed to resistance against MS, with RR of 0.5, 0.7, 1Department of Health Technology and Informatics, The Hong Kong Polytechnic 0.27 and 0.27, respectively. University, Hung Hom, Hong Kong, 2Department of Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. P09.140 Polymorphism in IL12RB1 Contributes to the Risk for Uterine Leiomyomas L. Zemljic1, U. Potočnik1,2; Radiation therapy (RT) is the standard primary treatment of nasopharyn- 1Center for Human Molecular Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, geal carcinoma (NPC), which is particularly common in southern China. University of Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2Laboratory for Biochemistry, Molecular Radiation-induced side effects may affect treatment outcomes and lead to Biology and Genomics, Faculty for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, University of postponement of RT. Studies have shown that genetic variations in genes Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia. that control cellular processes may act as potential markers to detect radia- tion hypersensitivity in normal tissues. Blood samples were collected from local Chinese NPC patients treated with Uterine leiomyoma (ULM), a common female pelvic benign tumour, occurs RT to extract genomic DNA. Patients in control (n=34) and case groups in ~40% of women. The mechanism of ULM development is believed to be (n=34) were matched based on age, sex, staging, treatment regimen, and the result of complex interactions between genes and environment. The aim severity of mucositis. Severity of mucositis was graded by oncologists based of this study was to investigate the role of single nucleotide polymorphis- on radiation morbidTitGyF sBc1oring XcrRiCteCr1ia published by Radiation Therapy On- ms (SNPs) in genes IL12B (rs6887695), IL12RB1 (rs11575934) and IL23R cology Group (RTOG). Eleven tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) (rs7517847) as the potential risk factors for ULM. The association study was weTreG sFeBl1ected from and . performed in 169 women with clinically and surgically diagnosed ULM and Four out of six tag STNGPFsB (1rs12983047, rs11466345, rs4803455, rs2241716) 92 women with verified absence of myomas used as the control group. Wo- in were genotyped. The major allele (A) of rs12983047 at the 3’ men with three or more (multiple) ULM had higher prevalence of positive flanking region of was found to be associated with increased risk of family history (40,0% vs. 19,5%; p=0,029), higher number of miscIaLr1r2iaRgBe1s developing radiation induced mucXoRsCitCis1 with an odd ratio 2.16 (95% con- (60%; p=0,005), higher percentage of smoking (57,4% vs. 21,1%; p=0,001), fidence interval 1.06-4.41, p=0.0328, chi-square test). No significant diffe- higher prevalence of GG genotype with G allele frequency in rXeRnCcCe1 was found in all tag SNPs of (rs25487, rs3213344, rs100T1G5F8B11, rs11575934 polymorphism (p=0,036; OR=0,13 and p=0,029; OR=0,46 re- rs12611088, rs3213282). spectively), lower age at menarche (0,8 years; p=0,015), lower age at first did not show association to radiation-induced mucositis while sexual intercourse -6(17,7 vs. 19 years; p=0,003), lowe-6r number of pregnan- maTyGbFeB a1 p otential marker for exploring individual variation of radiation sen- cies (48%; p=2x10 ) and lower parity (46%; p=1ILx1120R)B c1ompared to healthy sitivity in noTrGmFaBl1 t issues. The remaining tagSNPs (rs1800469, rs1800470) controls. Women with solitary ULM had lower parity (27%; p=0,006) and of will be genotyped for haplotype analysis. Complete analysis of all higher prevalence of AG and GG genotypes in rs11575934 poly- tag SNPs in may provide support for our hypothesis. morphism (p=0,037; OR=2,54) compared to healthy control subjects. Our results clearly show an association of GG genotype and G allele frequency in P10. Evolutionary and population genetics, and rs11575934 with prevalence of multiple ULM and AG + GG genotypes with Genetic epidemiology solitary ULM. The rs11575934 polymorphism, together with epidemiologi- cal factors can contribute to a higher risk for development of ULM. P09.141 P10.01 Allele specific hemizygosity in Velocardiofacial syndrome as a risk Investigation of the effect of polymorphic variants of genes ACE and determinant of schizophrenia BDKRB2 on hemodynamic parameters of power and strength athletes M. GUIPPONI1, X. Bonilla2, F. Santoni2, C. Gehrig1, S. Dahoun1, S. Eliez2, S. Antonarakis2; E. V. Lekontsev, V. P. Pushkarev, V. Y. Vishnev, D. A. Dyatlov, L. M. Kulikov; 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2University of Geneva Medical Ural State University of Physical Culture, Chelybinck, Russian Federation. School, Geneva, Switzerland. In the course of the experiment was to study the functional state of central Velocardiofacial syndrome is caused by a microdeletion in 22q11.2 ranging and peripheral hemodynamics (noninvasive tetrapolar impedancemetry) of between 1.5 and 3 Mb, containing about 60 genes, with an incidence of 1 in power and strenght athletes (n = 119, in the following age groups: 13-16 4,000 live births. One third of VCFS patients develop schizophrenia during years - 56 people., 17-21 years - 30 people., 21 and over - 23 people). During early adulthood. The incidence of schizophrenia in patients with VCFS is a survey of athletes at rest (horizontal position) were recorded 16 indica- thirty times higher than in the general population; thus making the 22q11.2 tors of central and peripheral hemodynamics and oxygen transport for 500 deletion an important risk factor for schizophrenia. kardioitervals. Based on the high incidence of schizophrenia in these individuals, we hypo- Statistical analysis using the Statistica 6.1 software package includes: Z- thesized that some patients with VCFS develop schizophrenia due to allele- transformation (standardization) and T-test for independent variables. specific hemizygosity of one or more critical regions in the 22q11.2 locus. The study has been shown in a group of athletes with genotype ACE * I / I a Paired-end libraries were prepared from 37 VCFS patients, 21 with schizo- statistically significant increase in the rate AfPG (amplitude photoplethys- phrenia, schizoaffective disorder or psychotic symptoms, and 16 without. A mogram) (p = 0,044709), reduction in vivo (stroke volume) (p = 0,031834) custom-made SureSelect target enrichment library was used to capture the and chdREO (respiratory raterheovasography) (p = 0,021320) compared 3Mb non deleted allele on chromosome 22q11.2 plus 200kb of upstream with ACE * I / D. As well as lowering chdREO index (p = 0,046426) and ri- and downstream genomic sequences. The enriched region was then sequen- sing OPS (total pepefericheskoe resistance) (p = 0,039986) compared with ced on an Illumina HiSeq2000. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that 98% of ACE*D/D. the targeted region was covered at least 8x and on average 2500 variants The study can make a preliminary conclusion that the athletes with geno- were detected per sample. types ACE*I/I and BDKRB2*-9/-9 adaptation of the cardiovascular system The complete haplotype of the non deleted 22q11.2 region was created more efficient at high loads and moderate power. And in the types of endu- using approximately 3500 unique variant sites (including on average 16 rance, they will have an advantage and a lower risk of pathological condi- non-synonymous sites per sample). A candidate region that showed allele- tions, compared to athletes with genotypes ACE*D/D and BDKRB2*+9/+9, specific enrichment in VCFS patients with schizophrenia was identified. Va- and the speed and power modes do not realize their „genetic potential“. lidation with an independent sample is ongoing. P10.02 This study suggests that the remaining hemizygous region in microdeletion Differential selection for the 3.7-type and 4.2-type single alpha-globin syndromes could be a further risk determinant for certain variable pheno- gene deletions within the same population types of such syndromes. S. S. Chong1,2,3, Z. Yap4, K. Sun5, C. R. L. Teo1,2, A. S. C. Tan1,2; 1National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 2National University Health System, Singapore, Singapore, 3National University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore, 4University College London, London, United Kingdom, 5Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 249 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 C9orf72 Since the 1950s, the relationship between high carrier rates for α- and Recently, a hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the non-coding region of β-thalassemia mutations and selective survival advantage in tropical and gene has been identified as a major cause of ALS (23-47%) and sub-tropical3 .7“malaria4.l2 belt” regions has been well established. Mechanisti- fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) C(192o-r2f792%), which can often occur together cally, the -α and -α α-globin single gene deletions arise from non-allelic with ALS in the same individual or familial pedigree. recombination between the homologous α1- and α2-ganltoi3b.7in genesa ndtiu4.2ring We assessed the frequency of the repeat expansion in a large cohort meiosis, with concomitant production of reciprocal ααα and ααα tri- of ALS Italian patients, including 35 FALS and 487 SALS cases. The genetic plicated a3ll.7eles, respectively. A characteristic signature of positive selection analysis was performed by a two-step protocol including a standard PCR for the -α deletiona nhti3a.7s been its significantly higher frequency compared with primers external to the expanded region and a fluorescent repeat-pri- to its reciprocal ααα allele frequency within the sam4.2e populatainotin4..2 Much med PCR. In oCu9r ocrofh7o2rt, 20% of FALS (7/35) and 4.1% of SALS (20/487) less is known about the relative frequencies of the -α and ααα cros- patients carried a pathogenic repeat expansion (more than 40 repeats). We sover alleles. Using simple, multiplex PCR strategies, we genotyped 1,285 also observed repeat expansion in 0.2% (1/382) of controls inclu- unselected anonymous cord blood DNAs from the 3 major ethnic groups ded in the study. in Singapore for the3. 7presence of α-globin deletions and triplications. The Survival time was shorterC i9no prfa7ti2e nts carrying the repeat expansion and a freqauneti3n.7cy of the -α deletion was significantly higher than its reciprocal prevalence of bulbar onset was also observed. αα3α.7 triplication, consistent with the hypothesis of positive selection for Our findings suggest that hexanucleotide repeat expansion can be -α in malarial endemic region4s.2. In marked contrasatn,t i4t.h2ere was no signi- considered the most common cause of FALS in Italian population with large ficant difference between the -α and reciprocal ααα allele frequencies impact even on sporadic forms, according to previous studies conducted on in the sam4.2e population groups, suggesting an aabnsti4e.2nce of posanitti3i.v7e selection cohorts of different origin. for the -α allele. Similar frequencies of the ααα and ααα triplicated P10.05 alleles suggest negligible difference in crossover frequencies at the ~1.3kb Molecular characterization of the ancestral centromere of X-homology and ~1.6kb Z-homolog3.y7 boxes. The factor(s) un4d.2erlying prefe- chromosome 2 rential positive selection for the -α allele but not for the -α allele, within G. Chiatante; the same population groups, merits further investigation. University of Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy. P10.03 Ancestry Informative Markers Set in Brazilian Amerindians and Ancestry Estimates in Brazilian Quilombo Remnant Communities Human chromosome 2 is the product of a head-to-head fusion of two acro- C. E. V. Wiezel1, M. R. Luizon1, S. M. B. Santos2, K. Abé-Sandes3, I. R. SOUSA4, Y. C. N. Muniz5, centric ancestral chromosomes, IIp and IIq, which remained separated in C. T. Mendes-Junior6, A. L. Simoes1; chimpanzee and gorilla. The dicentric chromosome originated from the fu- 1Fac.Medicina Ribeirão Preto, Univ. São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto(SP), Brazil, 2State sion reached stability by inactivating one centromere corresponding to the University of Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz(BA), Brazil, 3State University of Bahia, Salvador IIq, through the loss of alphoid DNA, via poorly understood mechanisms. (BA), Brazil, 4Dept Cell Biology, Embryology and Genetic, Federal University of Santa Unlike the fusion point, the ancestral centromere mapping at 2q21.1-2q21.2 Catarina, Florianopolis(SC), Brazil, 5Dept Cell Biology, Embryology and Genetics, Federal University of Santa Catarina, Florianopolis(SC), Brazil, 6Dept Química, Faculdade de has been poorly investigated. Filosofia Ciências e Letras de Ribeirão Preto, Univ. São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto(SP), Brazil. Here we performed comparative in silico and molecular analyses in chim- panzee, gorilla, orangutan and macaque genomes in order to shed light on the genomic organization of the 2.1 Mb region encompassing the ancestral Individual and population ancestry can be estimated by AIMs (ancestry in- centromere. This approach allowed us to track precisely the evolutionary formative markers with high allele frequency differentials between founder history of the ancient centromere and the corresponding pericentromeric populations). Ancestry estimates of Brazilian population depend on the region, whose assembly is still complicated by segmental duplications. In knowledge of the frequencies of genetic markers in the three founder po- particular our data invalidated the hypothesis of the neocentromere forma- pulations (Portuguese, Amerindian and African). The main objective of this tion occurred in macaque lineage and confirmed the pericentric inversion study is to determine the frequencies for 24 AIMs (FY, RB, LPL, AT3, Sb19.3, occurred in the common ancestor of human, chimpanzee and gorilla. In this APO, PV92, CKMM, DRD2, MID93, MID52, MID575, MID154, MID187, TSC, study we provide the patterns of segmentally duplicated regions among DRD2-TAQI, OCA, WI-161857, WI-11153, GC*1F, GC*1S, WI-17163, WI- chromosomes for each analyzed species and propose a two-steps model to 14319, WI-7423) in Amerindias for use in estimates oqf uainlocmesbtor y in three explain the rearrangements occurred in the region flanking the ancestral Brazilian urban population samples (Teresina, Jequié and São Paulo) and centromere, highlighting species-specific deletions and duplications. in four (Mimbo, Sítio Velho, Gaucinha and São Gonçalo) remnants P10.06 (african-derived communities founded by fugitive slaves 150-200 years Using ancestry-informative markers to identify fine structure across ago). The 24-AIMs were sufficient for an adequate discrimination among 15 populations of European origin. the conQsuidileormedb oa ncestral populations. All ancestry estimates were tri- L. M. Huckins1, V. Boraska1,2, C. Franklin1, J. Floyd1, Genetics Consortium of Anorexia Nervosa, Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium, P. Sullivan3, D. Collier4, C. Bulik3, C. hybrid. African estimates ranged from 45.1% (Sítio Velho) to 68.7% (Gau- Tyler-Smith1, E. Zeggini1, I. Tachmazidou1; cinha). remnants of Mimbo, Sítio Velho and Gaucinha showed a 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2University of Split, Split, higher Amerindian contribution in comparison with São Gonçalo (15.5%, Croatia, 3University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 4King‘s College, 33.8%, 14.3% and 3.5%, respectively). A higher European contribution was London, United Kingdom. observed in urban populations from different Brazilian regions (Northeast or Southeast). This finding was expected and had been previouslSyT reported by mtDNA, Y and autosomal AIMs. Population differentiation (F ) showed The Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 3 anorexia nervosa genome- significant differences between all quilombo remnants. Our findings could wide association scan includes 2,907 cases from 15 different populations of reveal the different founding histories of the quilombo remnants studied, European origin genotyped on the Illumina 670K chip (UK, Dutch, Swedish, as well as generate reliable ancestry estimates of urban populations from Finnish, German, Austrian, Polish, Northern Italian, Southern Italian, Greek, different Brazilian regions. USA, Canadian, Czech, French, Norwegian). This offers a unique opportu- Support: FAEPA, CNPq. nity to study genomic variation within and across these populations, and P10.04 establish genomic relationships with other publicly available populations Analysis of C9orf72 repeat expansion in an Italian cohort with of European ancestry. We have examined the allele frequency spectrum of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis common variants, and compared genomic characteristics across these po- C. Tiloca1, D. Calini1, N. Ticozzi1, C. Colombrita1, C. Morelli1, E. Onesto1, F. Verde1, A. pulations and also with populations from the 1000 Genomes Project. It is Ratti1,2, V. Silani1,2; usual to identify population structure in such studies using only common 1Department of Neurology and Laboratory of Neuroscience, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico variants with minor allele frequency (MAF)>5%; we find that this may re- Italiano, Milan, Italy, 2Department of Neurological Sciences, “Dino Ferrari” Center, sult in highly informative SNPs being discarded, and suggest that instead all Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy. SNPs with MAF>1% should be used. We have established informative axes of variation identified via principal component analysis and highlight impor- tant features of the genetic structure of diverse European-descent populati- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is an adult-onset and fatal neurode- ons (Novembre et al. 2008), some studied for the first time at this scale. We generative disease characterized by the selective loss of upper and lower identified ancestry-informative markers using a method novel to the human motor neurons. Although most cases are sporaSdOicD 1(S, AFULSS), appTAroRxDimBPa, tely genetics field, which may correct for sample size bias in smaller population 10% of patients are classified as familial forms (FALS). ALS is a genetically sizes (following the bias-corrected entropy estimator proposed by Panzeri heterogeneous disorder and 12 genes, including and are and Treves, 2007) and which allows for more efficient use of these SNPs. www.eshg.org associated with the disease, accounting for about 30% of FALS casews.ww.eshg.org250 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Finally, we investigated substructure within these 15 populations and iden- loss-of-function mutations were identified in patients with non-syndromic tified SNPs that help capture hidden stratification. This work can inform the intellectual disability. design and association results interpretation of trans-ethnic studies. For PCR amplification of our gene set from human genomic DNA we used P10.07 previously generated primers for a total of 149 amplicons. We then applied Five novel mutations in the GDAP1 associated with Charcot-Marie- these primers also for investigating the non-human primates and were able Tooth disease in Iranian families to amplify and sequence between 79,2% (Pongo pygmaeus) and 90,6% (Pan E. Mohammadi Pargoo1, O. Aryani2, S. Hassan Tonekaboni3, P. Yaghmaei1, M. troglodytes) of the amplicons from their genomic DNA. Alignment of the se- Houshmand2,4; quences to a human reference sequence showed that all di-nucleotides flan- 1Science and research branch of Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of king each exon were conserved and we detected no insertions or deletions. Iran, 2Medical Genetics Department, Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic Of the total of 85 missense changes we found, 21 were located in ZNF41 and of Iran, 3Mofid Hospital, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic 23 in ATRX. A PolyPhen2 analysis of all 85 missense changes showed that Republic of Iran, 4National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 11 had a potentially damaging effect on the gene product. Interestingly, 10 of the latter were located in ZNF41 or in ATRX. This suggests that ZNF41 and ATRX were relatively important in the development of higher cognitive functions. Autosomal-recessive forms of Charcot-Marie-Tooth (ARCMT) are more common in the Mediterranean basin and the Middle East because of more P10.10 widespread consanguinity. CMT disease caused by mutations in the ganglio- Distribution of eleven autosomal markers in middle age population side-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 (GDAP1) gene is a severe from South Romania autosomal recessive neuropathy resulting in either demyelinating CMT4A D. Cimponeriu1, N. Panduru2, S. Spandole1, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, I. Radu1, C. Serafinceanu3, A. Craciun3, A. D. Ion4; neuropathy or axonal neuropathy with vocal cord paresis. Total genomic 1Department of genetics Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Department of DNA was extracted from whole peripheral blood of the patients and their Pathophysiology „, Carol Davila“ UMP, Bucharest, Romania, 3NIDNMD N Paulescu, families by using of standard procedures. PCR- sequencing method were Bucharest, Romania, 4Department of Pathophysiology, Bucharest, Romania. used to analysis the whole coding regions of the GDAP1 gene in all samples. Five novel mutations (c.100_101ins T, c.802_803 del TG, c.254C>T (P85L), c.102G>C (S34S) and IVS5+25C>T) was identified in GDAP1 gene. In order The South part of the Romanian population presents minor cultural and lin- to show that these found novel mutations are pathogenetic 50 normal con- guistic differences but isn‘t well studied at the genetic level. trols were sequenced for all of these genes for whom no such mutations The aim of the present study is to asses the distribution of eleven common were found. We are going to discuss about clinical and molecular aspects di-allelic markers associated with some common human diseases in healthy of our patients. We need further investigation to prove these mutations as population living in South Romania. Materials and methods. Healthy Cau- founder effect in Iranian population. casian subjects (n=648, 18-66 years old, M/W: 1/1) living in Bucharest P10.08 and eight districts from South Romania were selected for this study. PCR Array painting of Gibbon chromosomes enables access to 44 or PCR-RFLP protocols were used for genotyping rs1801133, rs3767140, evolutionary breakpoints compared to the human genome rs2229569, rs1805087, rs5186, rs3842752, rs680, rs2228570, rs4646994, A. Weise1, M. Voigt1, K. Mrasek1, N. Rubtsov2, T. Karamysheva2, V. Trifonov2, N. rs1800469 and eNOS ID polymorphisms. PowerMarkerv3.25 and Arle- Kosyakova1, X. Fan1, T. Liehr1; quin3.11 software were used to calculate summary statistics and to compa- 1Jena University Hospital, Jena, Germany, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics, re genotypes distribution between districts. Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Results. No deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were observed. The polymorphisms were similar represented in booth gender. The obser- ved heterozygosity was found to be in the range of 0,31 (rs2229569) and Gibbon species (Hylobatidae) have accumulated an unusually high number 0,49 (rs2228570). Average PIC was 0,31 and the overall theta was 0,003. of numerical and structural chromosomal changes. Recently we were able The distribution of genotypes, theta, PIC and gene diversity indicated no si- to describe 71 evolutionary conserved changes/ breakpoints compared to gnificant differentiation of analyzed population. the human genome in the white handed gibbon (Hylobates lar, HLA, Mrasek In age grouped subjects the T allele of rs1801133 increases progressive- et al., 2003). Until now there are no molecular breakpoint data available for ly from subjects of 59-66 years to those with 18-26 years (21,7% vs 41%, this species. The aim of this study was a molecular characterization of 44 of p=0,003). these euchromatic breakpoints compared to the human genome. Therefore Conclusions. On the bases of eleven di allelic markers we found no signi- we combined glass needle based microdissection with high resolution ar- ficant differentiation of Caucasian population from South Romania. ray CGH; i.e. HLA chromosomes of interest were painted by specific labelled Acknowledgements. This paper is supported by the Sectoral Operational DNA-probes and FISH-microdissection of the chromosomes or chromoso- Programme Human Resources Development, financed from the European mal regions encompassing breakpoints was done. The obtained DNA-libra- Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number ries were DOP-PCR amplified and used in array CGH. Applying this method POSDRU/89/1.5/S/ 64109. we were able to narrow down the breakpoints to a mean resolution of 26 P10.11 kb; they were analysed in detail and as a result we could show that most Carrier frequency of the splice site mutation IVS1+1G>A in GJB2 gene of the breakpoints are localized in copy number variant and/or segmental in several indigenous populations of Eastern Siberia duplcation regions. Additionally, we were able to identify novel submicro- N. A. Barashkov1,2, L. U. Dzhemileva3, F. M. Teryutin1,2,4, O. L. Posukh5,6, A. V. Soloviev2, E. scopic chromosomal changes that were not described before. Supported in E. Fedotova4, S. A. Fedorova1,2, E. K. Khusnutdinova3; parts by DLR RUS 09/008 and the China Scholarship Council. 1Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch of the Russian P10.09 Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Ammosov North- Sequence variations in non-human primate orthologs suggests role Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Biochemistry and for ZNF41 and ATRX in evolution of higher cognitive functions in man Genetics, Ufa Scientific Centre, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, B. Moser1, L. R. Jensen2, R. Weissmann2, R. Krause1, C. Roos3,4, L. Walter3,4, R. Reinhardt5, 4Republican Hospital #1 - National Medical Centre, Ministry of Public Health of the A. W. Kuss2; Sakha Republic, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 5Institute of Cytology and Genetics, 1Max-Planck-Institut, Berlin, Germany, 2Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, Greifswald, Germany, 3Primate Genetics Laboratory, Göttingen, Germany, 4Leibniz- 6Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. Institute for Primate Research, Göttingen, Germany, 5Max-Planck-Institut für GJB2 Pflantzenzüchtungsforschung, Köln, Germany. Extremely high prevalence of splice site mutation IVS1+1G>A in gene, observed in homozygous state in Yakut deaf patients, allowed us to pro- A comparatively larger relative brain size and the cognitive abilities asso- pose that IVS1+1G>A may also be a common pathogenic mutation among ciated with it are among the most pronounced features that distinguish other North-East Asians. However, Siberian populations are significantly man from non-human primates. To investigate the molecular background distinguished by anthropologic and linguistic affiliations, as well as by their for these differences, particularly focusing on cognitive aspects, we have population genetic history. We studied the IVS1+1G>A carrier frequency sequenced the coding region and splice sites of 16 X-chromosomal ge- in six indigenous populations of Sakha Republic (Eastern Siberia): Turkic- nes (ARX, KDM5C, DLG3, GDI1, PAK3, IL1RAPL1, MECP2, TSPAN7, ACSL4, speaking Yakuts and Dolgans, Tungusic-speaking Evenks and Evens, and PQBP1, ZNF41, NLGN4, FTSJ1, ATRX, PHF8 and PHF6) in five female non- Yukaghirs with uncertain (Paleo-Asiatic or Uralic) linguistic affiliation, and human primates (Pan troglodytes, Pan paniscus, Gorilla gorilla, Pongo pyg- also Slavic-speaking Russians inhabiting the Sakha Republic. Among 423 maeus and Pongo abelii). These genes play a role in human cognition, as individuals with normal hearing, originated from investigated populations, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 251 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 mutation IVS1+1G>A in heterozygous state was found in 20 subjects: Yakuts Tit1 5H1.1 in human, mice and zebrafish showed a striated staining pattern (14), Dolgans (2), Evenks (3), and Evens (1), and this mutation was absent in muscle cel ls and also staining of centrioles, cytoplasm and nuclei in non- in Yukaghirs and Russians. Carrier frequency of IVS1+1G>A is apparent- muscle cells. ly associated with specific linguistic affiliation of studied ethnical groups. Conclusions.The data prove our previous findings that titin has in addition Highest carrier frequency of IVS1+1G>A was revealed in Turkic-speaking to the known roles in muscle cells also an important role in non-muscle cells Yakuts (11.7%) and Dolgans (4.7%). Lower rate of this mutation was found as a centriole associated protein, and this phenomenon is highly conserved in Tungusic-speaking Evenks (3.8%) and Evens (2.0%), and this mutation in the evolution . Acknowledgements. This work was partly supported by was not found at all in Uralic or Paleo-Asiatic-speaking Yukaghirs and Slavic- target financing SF 0188096s08 of the Estonian Ministry of Science. speaking Russians. Patterns of the IVS1+1G>A mutation prevalence among P10.14 the studied populations, in general, correspond to the data from mtDNA and Genetic epidemiology of Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in the Cypriot Y chromosome lineages studies in Sakha Republic populations that provides population an evidence of most reliable distinctions between Yakut’s and Yukaghir’s P. Nicolaou, E. Zamba-Papanicolaou, P. Koutsou, K. Kleopa, A. Georghiou, T. Kyriakides, gene pools. K. Christodoulou; The study was supported by grants of RFBR (11-04-01221-à) and FP The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. (02.740.11.0701, 16.740.11.0190, 16.740.11.0346). P10.12 A bi-directional Mendelian Randomization analysis in 42,024 Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) or hereditary motor and sensory neu- individuals of European ancestry identifies a causal relationship ropathy (HMSN) is one of the most common inherited neuromuscular disor- between obesity and low vitamin D status ders, affecting approximately 1 in 2,500 people. According to electrophysio- K. S. Vimaleswaran1, D. J. Berry1, M. R. Järvelin2,3,4, J. C. Whittaker5, A. D. Hingorani6, E. logical criteria, HMSN is classified into two main subgroups: demyelinating Hyppönen, for the D-CarDia collaboration1; type (HMSN I or CMT1), characterized by decreased motor nerve conduction 1MRC Centre of Epidemiology for Child Health, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, velocities (MNCV), and axonal type (HMSN II or CMT2) that is characterized United Kingdom, 2Institute of Health Sciences and Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, by normal or slightly reduced MNCV(s). Further subdivisions within those Oulu, Finland, 3Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of Public Health, two types are based on the inheritance pattern and the results of molecular MRC-HPA Centre for Environment and Health, Imperial College, Faculty of Medicine, genetic investigations. Inheritance in CMT can be autosomal dominant (AD), London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Children, Young People and Families, National Institute for Health and Welfare, Oulu, Finland, 5Department of Epidemiology and X-linked, or autosomal recessive (AR). CMT is associated with more than 30 Population Health, London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, London, United loci and about 25 causative genes are thus far known. We performed clini- Kingdom, 6Genetic Epidemiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health cal, neurophysiological and molecular genetPiMc Pst2u2dies in thirty six Cypriot and the Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, University College London, London, United families with CMT. The molecular genePtMicP in22vestigation revealed thirteeCnX f3a2- Kingdom. milies with the most frequent mutaMtioPnZ the duplication, six families wMiFtNh 2the S22F point mutation in the gGeDnAe,P f1our families with gene mutations, two families with gene mutations, two families with 25-hydroxyvitamin D [25(OH)D] is associated with body mass index (BMI) gene mutations and one family with a gene mutation. Seven but the direction of causality is uncertain. We explored the causal direction families were excludeMd FfNro2m the common CMT genes and are still pending of the relationship between obesity and vitamin D using genetic markers as molecular genetic diagnosis and one family is under further investigation instrumental variables in bidirectional Mendelian Randomization analysis. for a candidate novel mutation. In conclusion, the PMP22 duplication We tested associations of 12 obesity-related SNPs with BMI (for validation) which is the most frequent CMT mutation worldwide is also the most fre- and with 25(OH)D (for causal association) individually and in combination quent CMT mutation in the Cypriot population. Five out of the eight other as an allelic score in 42,024 individuals based on a meta-analysis from 21 mutations are novel, not reported in other populations. studies. Also, we examined associations of four vitamin D-related SNPs with P10.15 25(OH)D (validation) and with BMI (association) individually and in com- Marriage and population genetic structure in southern Morocco bination using separate allele scores for 2SNPs involved in either synthesis H. Hami, L. Sbii, A. Mokhtari, A. Soulaymani; or metabolism of 2P5(OH)D. Each 1 kg/m higher BMI waPs associated with Laboratory of Genetic and Biometry, Faculty of Sciences, Ibn Tofail University, Kenitra, 1.15% lowPer 25(OH)D. The B-M62I and 25(OH)D scores showed strong-5 7asso- Morocco. ciations with BMIP ( =-1618.30x10 ) and 25(OH)D (synthesis, =8.07x10 ; me- tabolism, =1.07xP10 ), respectively. The BMI score was associated with a lower 25(OH)D ( =0.004), but no associationP was seen between 25(OH)D The choice of spouse has direct consequences on the distribution, structure scores and BMI ( ≥0.08). A 10% increase in genetically instrumented BMI and heterogeneity of a population’s gene heritage. was associated with a 4.2% lower 25(OH)D ( =0.005). PNo association was The aim of this study is to evaluate geographical endogamy rate among the seen for genetically instrumented 25(OH)D with BMI, a finding that was con- population of Souss-Massa-Drâa region in southern Morocco in order to firmed using data from GIANT consortium (n=123,864, ≥0.57 for 25(OH)D estimate the degree of reproductive isolation (or openness) of the popula- scores). Based on a bidirectional genetic approach that limits confounding, tion studied. our study suggests that a higher BMI leads to lower 25(OH)D, while there The study was conducted within a randomly selected sample of Souss-Mas- was no evidence that lower 25(OH)D contributes to elevated BMI. Hence, sa-Drâa population. Various types of endogamous marriage were measured, population level interventions to reduce BMI are expected to decrease the based on the place of birth, place of residence and geographical origin of the prevalence of vitamin D deficiency. spouses and their parents (600 couples). P10.13 The results show a strong tendency towards geographical endogamy of nup- Evolutionary aspects of centriole associated proteins tiality (78%). This tendency is important among couples within parental A. Mikelsaar1,2, A. Sünter1, R. Mikelsaar1, P. Toomik3, I. Mikelsaar2, E. Juronen1; generation. The results of intergenerational comparisons show decrease in 1Institute of General and Molecular Pathology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2LabAs endogamy rates from parental generation to current generation. However, Ltd., Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Food Science and Hygiene, Estonian University of this decrease is not statistically significant (p>0,05). Life Sciences, Tartu, Estonia, Tartu, Estonia. The homogamy index method confirms these results and indicates the im- portance of this marital behavior among the younger generation. P10.16 Introduction. We have reported earlier the centriole staining with the anti- Evolutionary dynamism of the primate LRRC37 gene family titin monoclonal antibody, named MAb Titl 5H1.1 (Mikelsaar et al, 2010). G. Giannuzzi1, P. Siswara2, M. Malig2, C. Bekpen3,4, T. Marques-Bonet5, N. NISC This antibody was developed using the synthetic peptide N-AVNKYGIGEP- Comparative Sequencing Program6, J. C. Mullikin6, M. Ventura1,2, E. E. Eichler2,7; LESDSVVAK-C corresponding to an amino acid sequence in the A-band of 1Department of Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 2Department of Genome Sciences, the titin molecule as immunogen. Now we have further studied the binding University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Department of of the antigen of MAb Tit1 5H1.1 (titin) with centrioles in association with Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research (SIAF), Davos, Switzerland, 5Institut de Biologia Evolutiva, some other relevant proteins and in connection with the evolution of titin Universitat Pompeu Fabra (IBE CSIC-UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 6Genome Technology molecule. Branch and NIH Intramural Sequencing Center (NISC), National Human Genome Results. We have restricted the epitope of MAb Tit1 5H1.1 by subpeptide Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 7Howard Hughes Medical Institute, mapping to a hexapeptide. According to the data in protein databases this University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. amino acid sequence is located in the COOH-terminus of several different Fn3 domains in the A-band of titin molecule both in human and several other organisms. Our immunohisto- and cytochemical studies with MAb Core duplicons in the human genome represent ancestral duplication modu- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org252 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P10.19 Mitochondrial DNA mutations are not a common cause of non- les shared by the majority of intrachromosomal duplication blocks within a syndromic hearing loss in Republic of Macedonia given chromosome. These cores are associated with the emergence of novel E. Sukarova Stefanovska1, M. Davceva Cakar2, I. Filipce2, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska1; gene families in the hominoid lineage but their genomic organization and 1Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Research Center for Genetic Engineering gene characterization among other primates iLs RlaRrCg3e7ly unknown. Here, we and Biotechnology, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2University investigate the expression anLdR pRoCt3e7n tial function of the core duplicon on Clinic of Otorhinolaryngology, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. chromosome 17 that led to the expansion of during primate evo- lution. A comparison of the gene family organization in human, orangutan, macaque, marmoset, and lemur genomes shows the presence Mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are found to contribute to senso- of both orthologous andL sRpReCc3ie7s -specific genes in all primate lineages. Ex- rineural deafness, including both syndromic and non-syndromic forms. Hot pression profiling in mouse, macaLqRuRe,C a3n7d human tissues reveals that the spot regions for deafness mutations are the MTRNR1 gene, encoding the ancestral expression of was restricted exclusively to the testis. In 12S rRNA and the MTTS1 gene, encoding the tRNA for Ser(UCN). Nucleotide the human lineage, the pattern of became increasingly ubiquitous, changes are observed with a variable frequency among different populati- with significantly higher levels of expression in the cerebellum and thymus, ons of deaf persons. Among the known mtDNA mutations, the A1555G is and showed a remarkable diversity of alternative splice forms. Transfection the most common genetic cause of deafness, with variable frequency of 0.4 studies indicate overexpression of the product can induce filipodia forma- up to 5.4%, described both among nonsyndromic sensoryneural hearing tion in HeLa cells. Subcellular localization of FLAG-tagged recombinant loss (SNHL) patients and aminoglycoside induced SNHL. The aim of this LRRC37 protein indicates that the protein product is secreted after cleavage study was to determine the presence and frequency of the most common of a transmembrane precursor. mtDNA mutations among 130 Macedonian patients with nonsyndromic P10.17 hearing loss. A SNapShot analysis for screening of the five mitochondrial Deep analysis of human single nucleotide polymorphisms in the mutations associated with deafness (A827G, 961delT+Cn, T1095C, C1494T Cytochrome P450 superfamily and A1555G) was performGeJdB. 2None of analyzed deafness-associated muta- R. Polimanti1, S. Piacentini1, D. Manfellotto2, M. Fuciarelli1; tions were identified in the studied patients. Additionally MTRNGRJB1 2gene of 1Department of Biology, University of Rome, Rome, Italy, 2Center of Clinical 10 patients with only one mutation was sequenced in order to detect Pathophysiology, “San Giovanni Calibita” Fatebenefratelli Hospital – AFaR, Rome, Italy. other variants that could influence the pathologic effect of the muta- tion. Mutational screening revealed the presence of one potentially patho- gGeJBn2ic substitution T961G in one patient and a G709A polymorphism in two Cytochrome P450 (CYP450) superfamily comprises enzymes involved in the patients. An unpublished variant G1303A was found in a patient with only cytochrome electron transfer chains. Several studies highlighted that single mutation 35delG. In conclusion, our result suggests that mitochondrial nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in human CYP450 genes affect disease DNA mutations do not represent a significant risk factor for sensorineural risk and drug efficacy. Furthermore, CYP450 genes showed a significant va- deafness in Macedonian population. riability in the human populations, suggesting that the investigation of inter- P10.20 ethnic differences in CYP450 genes may be useful to understand individual APCS and RBP4: possible modifiers of age-at-onset in familial amyloid gene specific properties and then to provide personalized and optimal clinic polyneuropathy (FAP ATTRV30M) therapies. This study deeply analyzes SNPs in the fifty-seven CYP450 genes, D. Santos1, T. Coelho2, J. L. Neto1, J. Pinto-Basto1,3, J. Sequeiros1,3, I. Alonso1,3, C. Lemos1,3, investigating the differences in human populations and evaluating the func- A. Sousa1,3; tional aspect of the variants. 1UnIGENe, IBMC - Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade Clínica de Paramiloidose, CHP, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS - Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. Using the HGDP and HapMap databases, we analyzed the genetic differences of 449 SNPs in the fifty-seven CYP450 genes evaluating the data from 62 human populations. The HapMap Linkage Disequilibrium (LD) data were Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP ATTRV30M) is an AD inherited di- used to examine the LD in CYP450 genes: 1,033 SNPs were in perfect LD sease, due to a point mutation in the TTR gene. Remarkable differences in (r2=1) with the previously investigated SNPs. Bioinformatic analyses were mean age-at-onset (AO) have been described in different clusters, including performed to predict the functional impact of the CYP450 SNPs. within Portuguese population. The analyses of SNPs among human populations highlighted that ethnicity Among Portuguese families, FAP shows a wide variation in AO (17-82 yrs) is an influencing factor of CYP450 variability. Considering the functional im- and asymptomatic carriers aged 95 can be found; this variation is also often pact of the variants, we provided an analysis of the functional inter-ethnic observed between generations. variation of CYP450 superfamily. Furthermore, we also considered some A previous study in Portuguese patients (Soares et al., 2005) found a modi- SNPs with a high functional impact in order to explain inter-ethnic diffe- fier effect in AO for APCS and RBP4, when comparing classic and late-onset rences in various health aspects. patients with controls. However, variation between generations was not ta- In conclusion, our study supplies a deep investigation of CYP450 superfa- ken into account. mily highlighting how the population demographic history affects human Our aim was to investigate if these two candidate-genes have a modifier ef- variation of CYP450 genes and how this variation influences human health. fect in AO variation from parent to offspring. P10.18 We collected a sample of 36 FAP families with at least 2 generations. We Population analysis of deafness in Mexico in the last century: effects selected 5 tagging SNPs and also the 5 SNPs previously described. These of the genetic background F. Loeza-Becerra1, M. d. Rivera-Vega2, S. A. Cuevas-Covarrubias3; SNPs were analysed by SNaPshot and RFLP, respectively. Samples’ genoty- 1Facultad de Medicina UMSNH, Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Fac Medicina, ping is currently underway and results are being analyzed with the Gene- UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, Mapper v.4.0 software. 3Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Fac Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. Preliminary results in 5 FAP families showed that although for RBP4 we found different genotype’s frequencies in patients for rs7079946 and rs17484721 from HapMap, no striking differences were found between ge- BACKGROUND: Deafness in Mexico is currently the 2nd leading cause of nerations in the families analyzed for the two genes. disability. Internal migration and Mexican revolution caused population In the total sample, we expect to find or exclude the potential role of these and geographical redistribution of this disability. OBJECTIVE: To deter- candidate-genes as modifiers of FAP ATTRV30M, in order to better under- mine geographical distribution of hearing loss focused to congenital sen- stand the mechanisms involved in AO variability between generations. sorineural hearing impairment. METHODS: Analysis of the Mexican popu- P10.21 lation censuses (1895 to 2010) about deaf people and their geographical Variability in age-at-onset of familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP distribution. RESULTS: The proportional increasing in general population ATTRV30M): an extended haplotype effect? and people with hearing loss between 1900 and 2010 was 730.87% and C. Lemos1,2, T. Coelho3, D. Santos1, J. L. Neto1, M. Alves-Ferreira1, J. Pinto-Basto1,2, J. 5,450.93% respectively. The Mexican Revolution produced a demographic Sequeiros1,2, I. Alonso1,2, A. Sousa1,2; declination that required nearly three decades to return to the previous le- 1UnIGENE, IBMC -Univ.Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2ICBAS, Univ.Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Unidade Clínica de Paramiloidose, CHP, Porto, Portugal. vel. Nevertheless, deafness showed a few changes with persistence in some areas. DISCUSSION: Genetic composition, founder effects and genetic drifts seem to have decisive influence on the persistence of such problems where the inheritance is recognized. More detailed studies are necessary to clarify FAP ATTRV30M is an AD systemic amyloidosis, due to a point mutation in these findings. the transthyretin (TTR) gene. A wider variability in age-at-onset (AO) has been uncovered, including among Portuguese patients [17-82 yrs]. Early (less than 40) and late-onset(greater than 50) cases are not separate enti- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 253 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ties, often coexisting in the same family, with offspring showing anticipati- at-onset in Portuguese series has only been analysed using information on on - a much earlier AO than their affected parent. The ‘protection’ seeming patients. For the first time we use survival analysis methods, including in the to exist in late-onset cases may be lost in just one generation, raising the sample age-at-last-observation of asymptomatic carriers, as censored data. hypothesis of a closely linked modifier. Therefore, our aim is to identify ge- Survival curves of patients and carriers were compared by gender using netic modifiers closely linked to the TTR locus that may in part explain the log-rank test.Our sample consisted of 2424 patients (1283 men) and 433 observed AO variability. (144 men) proven asymptomatic carriers regularly followed up by the same Haplotype analysis is on-going in 100 families, using intragenic SNPs and group of neurologists. flanking STRs for extended haplotypes. Conventional t-test for independent samples showed significant differences Fifteen tagging SNPs were selected based on a data dump from the HapMap in mean age-at-onset between men (33.1) and women (37.5) patients Project and using Haploview v4.1, with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of (p<0.001), whereas in the asymptomatic group no significant age diffe- 0.1% and covering 60 Kb around the TTR locus. SNP genotyping is currently rences were found (37.9 vs. 37.1). underway by SNaPshot, using a multiplex approach. The use of survival analysis showed overall different gender distributions Eight microsatellite markers were also selected, encompassing 11.4 Mb. and also when considering individuals with onset/age<40yrs. However, for STRs genotyping is being performed by PCR, using fluorescent-labelled pri- late-onset cases (onset/age>49 yrs), no differences were found. mer pairs and genotypes is being determined using GeneMapper v4.0 soft- Further studies are necessary to correct for possible confounding factors ware. and better understand if we are in presence of different underlying gender In a preliminary group of five families analysed so far, no differences were distributions. found in the disease extended haplotypes. In the total sample of 100 fami- P10.24 lies, we expect to find some variants or regions that may confer protection How contemporary human reproductive behaviours influence the to some TTR V30M carriers (late-onset patients or aged asymptomatic car- role of fertility-related genes: the example of the P53 gene riers). R. M. Corbo1, G. Gambina2, E. Broggio2, R. Scacchi3; P10.22 1La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy, 2Hospital of Verona, Verona, Italy, 3CNR Institute of Molecular Biology and Pathology, Rome, Italy. The spectrum of Familial Mediterranean Fever (MEFV) Mutations in the North- west of Iran E. Sakhinia1, L. Rostamizadeh2, A. Mohammadi3, A. Ebrahimi4, K. Nejati4, M. Alizadeh Sharafi4, M. Sakhinia5; Recently numerous polymorphic fertility genes have been associated with 1Department of Medical Genetic, Faculty of Medicine, Tabriz university of Medical reproductive system diseases causing infertility/subfertility. Investigations Science,, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetic, Tabriz carried out in populations at natural fertility suggest that some fertility ge- university of Medical Science,, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3department of agronomy nes have acquired clinical relevance only in the last decades due to the inter- and plant breeding, Tabriz university;, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tabriz Genetic action with contemporary reproductive behaviours (birth control, delayed Analysis Centre, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Faculty of Medicine, University of childbearing, and spacing birth order among others). In recent years, a new Liverpool, United Kingdom, Liverpool, United Kingdom. physiological role in human fertility regulation has emerged for the tumor MEFV suppressor p53 gene (P53), and the P53 Arg72Pro polymorphism has been associated with recurrent implantation failure in humans. In order to detect This is the first comprehensive profile of mutations in the North- west a possible interaction between fertility gene P53 and reproductive patterns, of Iran. FMF is an auto-inflammatory autosomal recessive disorder characte- in present investigation we examined the impact of Arg72Pro polymor- rized by recurrent and self-limited attacks of fever, abdominal pain, synovi- phism on fertility in two samples of Italian women collected from popula- tis and pleuritis which are caused by altered pyrin due to a mutated MEFV tions with different (premodern and modern) reproductive behaviours, not gene. The most severe complication is amyloidosis, which can ultimately selected for impaired fertility. Among the women at near-natural fertility lead to renal failure. FMF is predominantly found among the Mediterranean (n=98), the P53 genotypes were not associated with different reproducti- population, as well as Armenians, Turks, Arabs and Jews. The MEFV gene ve efficiency, whereas among those with modern reproductive behaviours majority of mutations found on exons 2, 3, 5 and 10. To date, 180 mutations (n=68), the P53 genotypes were associated with different mean numbers of and polymorphisms have been reported with varying prevalence according children (Pro/Pro <Pro/Arg <Arg/Arg, p=0.056) and a significant negative to the population studied. Our aim was to identify the distribution and the relationship between the number of children and P53 Pro allele frequencies frequency of the MEFV gene mutations in FMF patients in the North- west (p=0.028) was observed. These results are consistent with those of clinical of Iran . studies reporting an association between the P53 Pro allele and recurrent Five hundred unrelated patients with clinical manifestation of FMF were implantation failure. These findings seem to support the hypothesis that screened for MEFV mutations in exons 2, 3, 5 and 10 using direct sequen- some common variants of fertility genes may have become “detrimental” cing. The most frequent mutation, M694V, represented only 26.25% of the following exposure to modern reproductive patterns and might therefore be alleles examined, followed by E148Q in 24.75%, V726A in 11.25% and associated with reduced reproductive success. M680I in 10.75%, respectively. Two novel missense mutations, P313H in 11.47% and P313S in 5.05% were found in heterozygous state in exon 3. P10.25 In conclusion molecular analysis rather than clinical symptoms to diagno- Functional SHMT1, MTR and MTRR gene variants of folate metabolism sis of FMF patient is very trustful therefore to know variations in mutation in Roma and average Hungarian population samples B. I. Melegh, L. Magyari, L. Járomi, B. Duga, I. Janicsek, P. Kisfali, C. Sipeky, B. Melegh; frequency according to regions of Iran lead to early and correct diagnosis of University of Pécs, Clinical Center, Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary. patient and prevention of amyloidosis with commence lifelong prophylactic treatment of affected individuals with colchicine. SHMT1 MTR P10.23 The serine hydroxymethyltransferase 1 ( MT)R, R5-methyltetrahydrofola- The use of survival analysis to estimate age-at-onset of familial te-homocysteine methyltransferase ( ) and 5-methyltetrahydrofolate- amyloid polyneuropathy (FAPATTRV30M) highlights gender homocysteine methyltransferase reductase ( SHM) Tg1enes play esseMntTiaRl differences in early-onset (o.<40) patients but fails to detect it in late- role in the folate mMeTtRaRbolism. The aim of the study was to analyze three onset (o.>50) patients single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs1979277 in , rs1805087 in A. Sousa1,2, T. Coelho3, C. Lemos1,2, D. Mendonça1,4; 1ICBAS - Instituto Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC and rs1801394 in gene) in the Roma population and to compare the -Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Porto, Portugal, 3Centro Hospitalar do Porto results to the average Hungarian Caucasian population samples. We geno- (CHP), Porto, Portugal, 4ISPUP - Instituto de Saúde Pública, Univ. Porto, Porto, Portugal. typed 293 (113 males, 180 females, mean age 41.7 ± 16.2 years) randomly selected, unrelated Roma subjects from different locations. Pooled DNA of a group of 276 carefully selected, clinically healthy subjects (153 males, 123 FAP (ATTRV30M) is an AD systemic amyloidosis due to a point mutation in femSaHlMesT, 1mean age 37.1 ± 12.7 years) were also studied. The genotypes were the transthyretin (TTR) gene. First described in Portugal by Andrade (1952) analyzed using real-time PCR method. The prevalence of the minor allele A as a disease of young adults (o.<40yrs), Portuguese patients have been cha- of rs1979277 was 25.9% in the Roma group, and it was 33.5% in racterized by early onset (35.1), unlike patients from Sweden (56.7) and theM cToRntrols (p<0.05), the frequency of the homozygous AA genotype was Balearic Islands (45.7) who bear the same mutation. However, late-onset 6.10%, while it was 10.5% in the controls. The prevalence of the G allele patients (o.>50) and aged asymptomatic carriers have been increasingly of rs1805087 was 32.1% in the Roma group and 20.5 % in the con- ascertained. tMroTlRsR (p<0.05). The frequency of the homozygous GG genotype was 8.20%, While in Portuguese series women had later onset than men, the same was while it was 2.50% in the controls (p<0.05). The prevalence of the G allele of not found either in Swedish or Balearic samples, what raises interesting rs1801394 was 64.2% in the Roma group and 43.5% in the controls www.eshg.org questions concerning gender and age-at-onset distribution(s). So wfarw, awge.-esh(pg<.0o.0r5g). The frequency of the homozygous GG genotype was 38.2%, while 254 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 it was 19.6% in the controls (p<0.05). All three variants between the Roma pulations. Methodologically, we generated a GRS from 68 SNPs in the nitric and the Hungarian Caucasian population significant difference was found. oxide synthase (NOS1, NOS2A and NOS3) gene regions that contributed to P10.26 the discrimination between affected and non-affected from the Mycardial Gene x Environment interactions and their impact on the stress Infarction Genetics Consortium (MIGen) samples and a Spanish case-control response system as studied in space-flight analogs study. We also tested the correlation of mean GRS values in 8 populations P. De Boever1,2, N. Goswami3, P. Roma4, H. Hinghofer-Szalkay3, S. Schneider5, G. across Europe (North Spain, South France, North France, Central Italy, North Schoeters1,6; Bosnia-Herzegovina, East Germany, Poland and Scotland) with variation in 1Flemish Institute for Technological Research, Mol, Belgium, 2Hasselt University, coronary-event rates in these 8 European populations reported by the WHO Diepenbeek, Belgium, 3Medical University of Gräz, Gräz, Austria, 4Johns Hopkins MONICA Project. As a result, 8 SNPs in NOS1, 3 SNPs in NOS2A and 2 SNPs University, Baltimore, MD, United States, 5German Sport University Cologne, Cologne, in NOS3 contributed to discriminate affected and non-affected people. The Germany, 6University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. AUCs of discrimination in the different case-control samples ranged from 0.538 to 0.584. Mean GRS values of the 8 European populations samples ranged from 3.8 to 4.2, being North Spain and East Germany the samples Environmental and social cues activate the stress response system and sti- with the lowest and the highest score, respectively. Mean GRS values corre- mulate a series of adaptation processes along the hypothalamus-pituitary- lated with mean CHD mortality rate, non-fatal rate and total coronary events adrenal axis (HPA). An overload of the HPA can lead to decreased well-being rate with correlation coefficients from 0.3 to 0.6 without reaching statistical and is associated to functional illnesses. We are studying under well-con- significance. These results point towards the ability of GRS to estimate risks trolled conditions how gene x environment interactions impinge on the to suffer from complex diseases at a population level. stress response system. For this purpose, we are using space flight analogs P10.29 (SFA) to investigate the effect of gravitational unloading, isolation and con- Haplotype diversity and reconstruction of ancestral haplotype finement on healthy individuals. The conditions of SFA are known to induce associated with the c.35delG mutation in the GJB2 (Cx26) gene among stress, which can lead to cardiovascular, muscular, immunological, and beha- the Volgo-Ural populations of Russia vioral problems. SFA are important to identify the health effects astronauts L. U. Dzhemileva1, O. L. Posukh2, N. A. Barashkov3, S. Lobov1, E. K. Khusnutdinova1; can experience during stay in low Earth orbit or during space exploration, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa Research Center, Russian Academy of and results obtained from this research has also direct relevance for a better Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch, understanding of the impact of social isolation, sedentary lifestyle, aging, Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 3Yakut Research Center and osteoporosis. of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Branch, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, We present an overview of the use of these unique SFA for studying gene x Yakutsk, Russian Federation. environment interactions. More specifically, we will focus on our ongoing GJB2 studies in the Antarctic station Concordia. Using an approach of integrated GJB2 physiology we are studying the impact of isolation and confinement on The spectrum and prevalence of the gene mutations are specific to po- health. We apply behavioral assays and questionnaires, physiological analy- pulations of different ethnic origins. For several mutations, their origin ses (blood pressure, and heart rate variability), stress physiology (salivary from appropriate ancestral founder chromosome was shown, approximate cortisol and alpha-amylase), neurohormonal markers of social affiliation estimations of “age” obtained, and presumable regions oGfJ Bth2e ir origin out- and stability (oxytocin and testosterone), and gene expression changes in lined. This work presents the results of the carrier frequencies’ analysis of blood and saliva. Genotypes associated with HPA reactivity (e.g. brain deri- the major (for European countries) mutation c.35delG ( gene) among ved neurotrophic factor, corticotropin-releasing hormone) and human so- 2308 healthy individuals from 18 Eurasian populations of different ethnic cial behavior (e.g. oxytocin) are determined in saliva. origins: Bashkirs, Tatars, Chuvashes, Udmurts, Komi-Permyaks, Mordvins, P10.27 and Russians (the Volga-Ural region of Russia); Byelorussians, Ukrainians The prevalence rates of hereditary disorders in European part of (Eastern Europe); Abkhazians, Avars, Cherkessians, and Ingushes (Cauca- Russia sus); Kazakhs, Uzbeks, Uighurs (Central Asia); and Yakuts, and Altaians (Si- R. A. Zinchenko, E. K. Ginter; beria). The prevalence of the c.35delG mutation in the studied ethnic groups Research Center for Medical Genetics, Моscow, Russian Federation. may act as additional evidence for a prospective role of the founder effect in the origin and diGsJtBri2b ution, of this mutation in various populations worldwi- de. For the analysis of the haplotypes and the estimation age of the mutation Based on a genetic epidemiological study, the prevalence rates of autosomal c.35delG in the GJgBe2n e three high-polymorphic microsatellite -markers dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR) and X-linked hereditarydisorders were used: D13S175, D13S141, and D13S143, flanking the DFNB1 locus, (HDs) in 13 regions of European part of Russia (7 ethnic groups) were esta- which contains the gene. The haplotype analysis of chromosomes with blished: Russian from seven populations, Adygean, Maris, Chuvashes, Ud- the c.35delG mutation in patients with nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing murt, Bashkirs, Tatars. The size of the investigated populations was more loss (N=112) and in population samples (N =358) permitted the reconstruc- than 3 million inhabitants (about 3000 HDs of OMIM could be identified by tion of an ancestral haplotype with this mutation, established the common this research). Genetic differentiation between populations of different hier- origin of the majority of the studied mutant chromosomes, and provided the archical levels by estimated load of HDs was established. On the contrary, estimated time of the c.35delG mutation carriers expansion (11,800 years) the differences between the populations by the load of AD and AR diseases on the territory of the Volga-Ural region. appear statistically significant. First, the load of both AD and AR diseases is P10.30 always 2 times higher in rural populations as compared with that in urban Genotype distribution of GLCCI1 rs37972 in Roma and Hungarian populations. Secondly, the differences are also seen while comparing the Caucasian samples load of the autosomal HDs in various ethnic groups. For example, the load B. Duga, L. Magyari, L. Jaromi, I. Janicsek, P. Kisfali, B. I. Melegh, C. Sipeky, B. Melegh; of AD and AR pathology among the Maris, Chuvashs, Bashkirs, Tatars and Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary. Udmurts is higher than that among the Russians. The load of AD diseases va- ried between populations from 1.01 to 15.66 per 1000 persons. The load of AR diseases varied from 0.85 to 6.33. The differences between the populati- Asthma is a specific respiratory disease which is widespread in most eth- ons in their load of X-linked diseases are no significant. Analys ing the load of nics. The rate of the asthma incidence is 3.3%, which means 235 million HDs in the examined populations of Russia demonstrated that there exists people suffer from this disease in worldwide (WHO data from 2012). Often a clear-cut differentiation between various populations bothwithin each of the first choice of treatment is glucocorticoid derived, however in numerous the 13 regions examined and between them by the index concerned. cases therapy resistance can be observed. We investigated the rs37972 SNP, P10.28 allele distribution in Roma samples of the glucocorticoid induced transcript Genetic risk score of NOS genes variation to understand trends in 1 (GLCCI1) gene. Kelan et al. reported that certain naturally occurring func- coronary-event rates across European populations. tional variants as r1s37972 cause a decrement response to glucocorticoids R. Carreras, M. Via, E. Esteban, P. Moral; in asthma patients. In our study we investigated the distribution of allele Faculty of Biology - University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. and genotype frequencies of rs37972 in average Roma and the Hungarian population. We genotyped 295 Roma (113 males, 182 females, mean age: 41.6±16.1) and 278 control patients (157 males, 121 females, mean age: Reported population distributions of traditional risk factors, such as obesity, 37.9±12.7, with real time PCR method. We found that the frequency of the have been applied to understand variation of the incidence/prevalence of TT genotype is nearly two times higher in the Hungarian Caucasian po- complex diseases. In this work we evaluate the ability of a Genetic Risk Score pulation than in the Romas (31.7% vs. 16.6%; p<0.001). Regarding the T (GRS) to explain the variation in coronary-event rates across European po- allele frequencies a similar association can be found (55.15% vs. 41.86%; www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 255 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1Institute of Genetic Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Healt, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, p<0.002). The data presented here strongly suggest marked difference bet- Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 3Laboratory for Neuroimmunology, wKeeelann t hGe. e cto arlt.i; cNo sEtnegrol iJd M reeds.p 2o0n1s1e; o3n6 5R:o1m17a3 i-n1 1a8v3e.rage Hungarians, that can Section of Experimental Neurology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 5Institute of Human h1ave therapeutic implications. Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany. P10.31 The role of ethnicity in prevalence of glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) polymorphisms in a healthy Tunisian population: The example Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is considered a chronic inflammatory disease of the of GSTM1 *0/*0, GSTT1 *0/*0, GSTP1 Ile105Val, and GSTA1 *A/*B central nervous system of autoimmune origin involving T and B cells. In- H. Kamoun1, G. Ben Salah1, F. Kallabi1, S. Maatoug1, E. R. Mkaour1, A. Fourati2, F. trathecal IgG synthesis is observed in the majority of patients with MS. Whe- Fakhfakh1, H. Ayadi3; 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Research reas the amount of intrathecal IgG synthesis varies largely between patients, Unit, Chemical Tunisian Group, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Centre of Biotechnology, Sfax, Tunisia. intrathecal IgG remains rather constant in the individual patient. Based on this observation it seems reasonable to assume that genetic factors may im- pact on the extent of intrathecal IgG synthesis. Genetic polymorphisms in glutathione S-transferases (GSTs) genes might in- To investigate the genetic determinants of intrathecal IgG synthesis in MS fluence the detoxification activities of the enzymes predisposing individuals patients, we performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) based on to cancer risk. Owing to the presence of these genetic variants, inter-indivi- 526,014 SNPs of the Human660-Quad chip in 233 MS patients. For replicati- dual and ethnic differences in GSTs detoxification capacity have been obser- on, we genotyped 18 SNPs, showing an association with intrathecal IgG syn- ved in various populations. Therefore, the present study was performed to thesis (p<1x10-5), in an independent validation cohort of 279 MS patients determine the prevalence GSTM1*0/*0, GSTT1*0/*0, GSTP1 Ile105Val, and using Sequenom. Five of the 18 SNPs, which could be replicated in the first GSTA1*A/*B polymorphisms in 154 healthy individuals from South Tuni- validation cohort, were additionally analyzed in a second validation cohort sia, and to compare them with those observed in North and Centre Tunisian containing 152 MS patients genotyped on the Illumina Human660-Quad populations and other ethnic groups. GSTM1 and GSTT1 polymorphisms chip. Patients of all three cohorts are of European descent. were analyzed by a Multiplex-PCR approach, whereas GSTP1 and GSTA1 po- All five SNPs showing a significant association with intracthecal IgG syn- lymorphisms were examined by PCR-RFLP. The frequencies of GSTM1*0/*0 thesis in the discovery and replication cohorts (p=2.61x10-7; p=3.38x10-8; and GSTT1*0/*0 genotypes were 53.9% and 27.9%, respectively. The ge- p=1.2x10-2) are clustered in one locus on chromosome 14 and are in linka- notype distribution of GSTP1 was 47.4% (Ile/Ile), 40.9% (Ile/Val), and ge disequilibrium. 11.7% (Val/Val). For GSTA1, the genotype distribution was 24.7% (*A/*A), The results of this study suggest that intrathecal IgG synthesis in MS patients 53.9% (*A/*B), and 21.4% (*B/*B). The combined genotypes distribution is genetically determined by a region located on chromosome 14. Further in- of GSTM1, GSTT1, GSTP1 and GSTA1 polymorphisms showed that thirty vestigation of this region will identify the responsible gene and its role in the one of the 36 possible genotypes were present in our population; eight of regulation of IgG levels in MS patients. them have a frequency greater than 5%. To the best of our knowledge, this P10.34 is the first report of GSTs polymorphisms in South Tunisian population. Our Genetic history of “Yakut” diseases findings demonstrate the impact of ethnicity and reveal a characteristic V. A. Stepanov1, N. Maximova2, V. Kharkov1, K. Kurtanov2, A. Marussin1; 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Yakut Scientific Centre, pattern for Tunisian population. The molecular studies in these enzymes Yakutsk, Russian Federation. provide basis for further epidemiological investigations in the population where these functional polymorphisms alter therapeutic response and act as susceptibility markers for various clinical conditions. The phenomenon of accumulation of rare genetic diseases in isolated po- P10.32 pulations with founder effect is well known. French Canadians, Ashkena- Whole-genome genotyping of saliva-extracted DNA from participants zi Jews, Finns, Afrikaners are among the examples. In Siberian Russia the of an Internet based survey: reliability and success rate Yakut population is characterized by the accumulation of several monogenic K. V. Allebrandt1, M. Zaharieva1, S. Stoyanov1, M. RadivojkovBlagojevic2, P. Lichtner2, T. Meitinger2, T. Roenneberg1; disorders with the prevalence in Yakuts more than ten times higher that 1Institute of Medical Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany, anywhere in the World. Such diseases as spinocerebellar ataxia 1, myotonic 2Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany. dystrophy, inherited methemoglobinemia, oculopharyngeal muscular dys- trophy (OPMD), Yakut short stature syndrome (3M syndrome) and recently described SCOP syndrome belong to the list of “Yakut” diseases. Whole-genome genotyping (WGGT) demands high quality DNA, usually ob- We have investigated the genetic variability in Yakuts using Y-chromosomal, tained with whole blood-extracted DNA. Self-administered collection pro- mtDNA, X-chromosomal markers and genome-wide SNPs, and found redu- tocols can make it feasible to obtain biological material without meeting ced genetic diversity associated with the bottleneck effect. This effect, accor- survey participants. Additionally, noninvasive, painless sources of biological ding to phylogeny of specific Yakut Y-chromosomal lineages, is dated back to samples, such as saliva samples are indicated to improve participation rate. 11th - 12th centuries. With the intent to conduct a genome-wide association study with subjects Haplotype analysis of CUL7 gene in 3M syndrome, NAG gene in SCOP syn- phenotyped within an Internet-based epidemiological survey, we mailed drome and PABPN1 gene in OPMD suggested that the accumulation of the participants self-collecting saliva sample-kits. To test the reliability of the disorders in Yakuts was driven by two major events: a bottleneck about method, we evaluated the concordance rates between a few (N = 10) sa- 1000 years ago, associated with the initial migration of ancestors of modern liva- versus the respective individual blood-extracted DNA samples with a Yakuts from south to north; and population expansion approximately 350 high-density genotyping array (Illumina Human OmniExpress 700K). Ge- years ago when Yakuts extended from the central part into the territory of notypes were consistent across sources of biological material; concordance their modern settlement. rates between genotype calls of saliva- versus blood-extracted DNA samples We suggest that research of Mendelian and common diseases in isolated from the same individuals were > 99.9 ± 3%. Regarding genotyping effici- Siberian populations may provide a new source of understanding of disea- ency, average genotype call rates were also similar for saliva- (97.3 ± 5%) se genetics, as well as improving the quality of health care to indigenous and blood-extracted (99.5 ± 0.2%) DNA. Among the returned self-collected peoples. saliva-kits, 378 high-quality DNA samples were genotyped with an average P10.35 call rate of 99.0 ± 3%. However, approximately 14% of the saliva-extracted Criminality in Klinefelter syndrome and 47,XYY, a Danish registry DNA did not meet quality control criteria (inspection of absorbance scans study and gel electrophoresis) - even after using a re-purification protocol - and A. B. Bojesen1, K. Stochholm2, A. S. Jensen2, S. Juul3, C. H. Gravholt2; could not be used for WGGT. Although blood-extracted DNA provides higher 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Vejle Hospital, Sygehus Lillebaelt, Vejle, Denmark, 2Department of Endocrinology and Internal Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital NBG, quality DNA, saliva-extracted DNA has proven to be a reliable method to ob- Aarhus, Denmark, 33Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Aarhus tain biological material for high-density genotyping arrays. University, Aarhus, Denmark. P10.33 Genetic determinants of IgG synthesis in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with multiple sclerosis Background: Four to five decades ago several reports showed an increased E. Albrecht1, D. Buck2, M. Aslam2, A. Goris3, N. Hauenstein2, A. Jochim2, S. Cepok2, frequency of criminality among men with Klinefelter syndrome (KS) and V. Grummel2, B. Dubois3, A. Berthele2, P. Lichtner4,5, C. Gieger1, J. Winkelmann2,4,5, B. Hemmer2; 47,XYY, but these studies were hampered by an excessive risk of selection bias. We therefore wanted to study criminality in KS and 47,XYY using lin- www.eshg.org www.eshkagg.eo orfg Danish nationwide registries, trying to avoid the selection bias and 256 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 thereby to give a more realistic picture of the criminality. alleles associated with higher total cholesterol were risk factors for a lower Design: Register-based cohort study comparing the incidence of convictions IQ. Lipid levels might be important for brain development in children, thus among men diagnosed with KS (N=934) and 47,XYY (N=161) with an age the role of this pathway on cognitive function deserves further investigati- and calendar time matched sample (1:100) from the general population on. (N=88,979 and 15,356, respectively), in Denmark, from 1978 to 2006. Cri- P10.38 me was classified in eight types (sexual abuse, homicide, burglary, violence, Quick, „Imputation-free“ Meta-Analysis with Proxy-SNPs traffic, drug-related, arson, and “others”). M. Leber1, C. Meesters2,1,3, C. Herold3, M. Angisch1, M. Mattheisen4,5, D. Drichel3, A. Lacour3, Results: In KS, The incidence of convictions was significantly increased of T. Becker3,1; sexual abuse, burglary, arson and “others”, but significantly reduced of traf- 1Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany, 2AESKU. KIPP-Institute, Wendelsheim, Germany, 3German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases fic. Adjusting for socio-economic factors reduced the HR’s, but convictions of (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 4Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, sexual abuse and arson remained significantly increased. Boston, MA, United States, 5IMBIE, Bonn, Germany. In 47,XYY, the incidence of convictions was significantly increased of all ty- pes, except of traffic and drug-related. After adjustment for socio-economic factors, convictions of sexual abuse remained significantly increased. Imputation is the conventional approach for avoiding loss of SNPs in meta- Conclusion: This large study, covering all diagnosed individuals with KS and analysis (MA) of genome-wide association studies (GWASes) with differing 47,XYY in Denmark, demonstrates that KS and 47,XYY are convicted of a SNP panels. Here we present an alternative, fast method to avoid forfeiting number of specific offences more frequently than the background popula- SNPs present in only a subset of studies, without relying on time-consuming tion. The study also demonstrates that unfavorable socio-economic conditi- imputation. This is accomplished by using reference linkage disequilibrium ons are part of the explanation, since adjustment for socio-economic factors (LD) data from 1,000 Genomes/HapMap projects to find proxy-SNPs to- reduced the hazard ratios in both cohorts. gether with in-phase alleles for SNPs missing in at least one study. MA is P10.36 conducted by combining association effect estimates of a SNP and those of Further Development of the Malta Biobank its proxy-SNPs. Our algorithm is implemented in the MA tool YAMAS (Yet J. Vella, A. Fiott, C. Scerri, A. Felice; Another Meta Analysis Software). University of Malta, Msida, Malta. Association results from GWAS analysis applications can be used as input files for MA, tremendously speeding up MA compared to the conventional imputation approach. Furthermore, analysis of sex-chromosomal markers The Malta Biobank forms part of the Laboratory of Molecular Genetics at the with YAMAS is readily available, while it can otherwise pose difficulties be- University of Malta and is a founding member of EuroBioBank (EBB) and cause of lack of universal implementation in imputing tools. Biobanking and Biomolecular Resources Research Infrastructure (BBMRI). We show that our proxy algorithm is well-powered and yields valuable ad It is designated as the BBMRI-Malta node by the Government of Malta. hoc results, possibly providing an incentive for follow-up. In addition, it is “Further Development of the Malta Biobank” is a new biobank project which more robust if the data contains cohort-specific LD patterns. We propose is being setup with the aim of developing a research resource to discover the our method as a standard approach for studies without available reference genetic causes of disease states in the Maltese population thus increasing data matching the ethnicities of study participPants. As a proof of principle, medical knowledge of diseases locally. Based on Hb quantitative epidemio- we analyzed six dbGaP Type II Diabetes GWAS and found that the proxy al- logy it is assumed that 2-3 alleles at 2-3 loci could generate a braod range of gorithm clearly outperforms naïve MA on the -value level. quantitative complexity in phenotypes and account for trans-selective pres- P10.39 sures on the regional shaping of genomes. Analysis of mitochondrial DNA haplotypes of old human populations A new “identifiable” collection of biological samples and associated health from the Bronze and Iron Age from Romania and lifestyle information from approximately 1% of the population, i.e. 4200 A. Rodewald1, G. Cardos2, C. Tesio3; individuals, will be collected. The collection will be representative of the 1University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 2“Personal Genetics” Medical Genetics Maltese population in both age and gender and will be based on Maltese fa- Center, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania. mily structures. One newborn cord blood sample will be collected together with its family of approximately 30 to 40 members. Informed parental con- sent will be obtained from ante-natal classes. Immediate family members Our genetic study was focused on old human populations from the Bronze will be asked to take part in the study and other family members interested and Iron Ages from Romania in order to analysed their genetic variation and to participate in the study will also be sampled with informed consent. Clini- their genetic kinship al mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA)level with today´s Ro- cal analysis will include: anthropometric measurements; a complete blood manian populations and other modern European populations. count (CBC); a haemoglobin profile; a lipid profile; urinary metabolites and The ancient DNA(aDNA)was extracted from skeletal remains of 50 indivi- SNPlotyping. duals from the Bronze and Iron Age by a phenol-chloroform DNA extraction P10.37 method.MtDNA HVR I and HVR II regions were amplified by PCR and se- Genetic variants associated with lipid metabolism and cognitive quenced by the dideoxy chain terminator method.The aDNA data were ana- ability at 8 years of age: a Mendelian randomization analysis from the lysed in comparison with corresponding mtDNA data of modern Romanian Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) people and other 11 European populations.The ancient mtDNA haplotypes C. Bonilla, D. A. Lawlor, D. Gunnell, A. R. Ness, Y. Ben-Shlomo, S. M. Ring, G. Davey Smith, were framed into 12 haplogroups. The most frequent mtDNA haplotype S. J. Lewis; identified in the old individual sample from Romania was the CRS-like, and University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom. the most frequent haplogroup was H. Significant differences in haplogroup frequencies between the old people and modern Romanians were found. Low values of internal standard genetic diversity indices suggested reduced Brain development occurs most rapidly in utero and in young children. Con- genetic variability within old human populations from the Bronze and Iron sequently, it places a high demand on the supply of nutrients from the diet, Age from Romania, in contrast to all modern European populations and also since adequate nutrient concentrations are required for cell growth, syn- modern Romanians, which showed higher mitochondrial haplogroup diver- apse formation and myelination. Nutrient deficiency during this time could sity values. This fact might be the result of social and cultural local organiza- influence a child’s cognitive ability later in life. Because lipids are vital for tion in small tribes, partially reproductively isolated. Concerning the genetic membrane biogenesis during cellular growth, a relationship between lipids relationships at mitochondrial level, old human populations from Romania and cognitive ability has been suggested. It is not possible to infer causality have shown closer genetic relationship to Turks of Thracian origin,while from conventional observational studies as associations between nutrition modern Romanians were closer to modern Bulgarian, Italian, Greek and and cognitive ability are confounded by lifestyle and environmental factors. Spanish populations. To overcome this problem we used Mendelian randomization, a method that P10.40 exploits genetic variation associated with a modifiable exposure to examine Complete mitochondrial DNA diversity in Iranians the causal effects of that exposure on the outcome of interest. A. Bahmanimehr1, M. Derenko2, B. Malyarchuk2, G. Denisova2, M. Perkova2, S. We examined six SNPs, that have been previously associated with plasma Farjadian3, L. Yepiskoposyan1; lipids, in mothers and children from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents 1Institute of Molecular Biology, National Academy of Sciences of Armenia, Yerevan, and Children (ALSPAC). We detected an association of an APOE-linked SNP Armenia, 2Institute of Biological Problems of the North, Russian Academy of Sciences, in the mothers with offspring IQ (mean difference in IQ, GG vs AG/AA: -5.6; Magadan, Russian Federation, 3Immunology Department, Shiraz University of Medical 95%CI -9.8, -1.4). Among children we identified effects of SNPs located in Sciences, Shiraz, Islamic Republic of Iran. APOA5 (mean difference in IQ per minor allele: -1.1; 95%CI -2.3, -0.01) and LIPC (mean difference in IQ per minor allele: -0.9; 95%CI -1.5, -0.3w), wwhwer.ee shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 257 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 The complete sequencing of mitochondrial DNA has contributed a great deal and MoroccanP OJeRwish populations (92 males and 209 females) and in 322 to the understanding of the timing and direction of human dispersals around healthy persons from the Czech population (137 malPeOs Rand 185 females). the world. To elucidate the early stages of human colonization process out- A total of 11 missense single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were side of Africa and to investigate the demographic history of human popu- identified in the Israeli group. Beyond the known variants, we have lations from the Middle East we have completely sequenced the mtDNAs reported also 6 previously undescribed missense SNPs (p.Ser102Pro, of 275 Iranians represented by Persians (N=105), Mazandaranians (N=4), p.Val164Met, p.Val191Met, p.Asp344Asn, p.Glu398Ala, p.Asp648Asn). In Azerbaijanians (N=22), Kurds (N=5), Lurs (N=5), Armenians (N=10), Bakh- the Czech population, we have identified 6 missense genetic variations, tiarians (N=2), Gilakis (N=2), Indians (N=1), Turkmens (N=10), and Qash- four of which are newPOlyR described (p.Thr29Ser, p.Arg371His, p.Pro384Leu, qais (N=109). Overall diversity is very high, with 252 different sequences p.Thr572Met). Globally, a comparison of the two groups revealed a higher falling into 75 major haplogroups within macrohaplogroups L, N and M. The heterogeneity of the genetic variations in the Jewish population. majority of Iranian mtDNAs (90.9%) belongs to Western Eurasian compo- The data collected in this study on missense POR SNPs are interpreted in nent composed of haplogroups N1, N2, X, R2’JT, U, and R0, though the im- light of the recently published crystallographic structure of human POR. pact of African (L2a, L3d, L3f), Southern Asian (R8, M4, M5, M18, M42), and Supported by GACR P301/10/1426 and NIH Grant GM081568. Eastern Eurasian (A4, B4, C4, C5, D4, F1, G2a) lineages is also perceptible P10.43 being found at frequencies of 1.5%, 2.5%, and 5.1%, respectively. Results of Distribution of PON1 and P2RY12 polymorphisms in Roma and molecular dating of Iranian mtDNA lineages show that macrohaplogroup N Hungarian population samples and its haplogroups N1, R, U, R2’JT coalesce to the time of 45-60 kya, mar- I. Janicsek, C. Sipeky, B. Duga, L. Jaromi, L. Magyari, B. I. Melegh, B. Melegh; king the first stages of modern humans movement out of Africa. The ancient University of Pécs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary. ancestry of Iranian gene pool is also confirmed by revealing of the unique N23 lineage survived both in Persians and Qashqais, albeit at low frequen- cies. This study was supported by Russian Foundation for Basic Research Clopidogrel is a widely used thrombocyte aggregation inhibitor, which has (11-04-00620) and by Far-East Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences recently been in the focus of a debate because of its serious side effects. (12-III-A-06-101). There are many factors that affect its efficacy, like SNPs in genes of specific P10.41 receptors and enzymes. The pharmacogenomic investigation of these fac- mtDNA haplogroups in the population of Lithuania tors might also leave clinical benefit. In our study we investigated variants I. Uktverytė1, M. Li2, M. Stoneking2, V. Kučinskas1; of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) and purinergic receptor P2Y, G-protein coupled, 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, 12 (P2RY12) genes and their distribution in average Hungarian and Roma Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for samples. For the PON1 gene we chose rs662 (Q192R) and rs854560 (L55M), Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. for the P2RY12 gene we analysed 3 SNPs, rs2046934, rs6798347 and rs6801273 as the most frequently investigated naturally occuring variants. We genotyped 491 Roma and 477 Hungarian samples with PCR-RFLP me- Two major ethno-linguistic groups exist in Lithuania, Aukštaiciai and thod. For the Q192R variant the frequency of the GG genotype is more than Žemaiciai, that consist of six dialectal subgroups. Individuals from both 2.5 times higher in the Hungarian group compared to the Romas (11.3% groups speak Baltic languages belonging to the Indo-European family. vs 4.3%, p<0.001). In the G allele frequencies similar significant difference Neighbouring Finno-Ugric (Northern and Eastern Europe), Slavonic (Ea- could be detected (24,8% vs 31.7%, p<0.001). For the L55M variant the stern Europe) and Germanic (Northern Europe) populations which are si- frequency of the TT genotype was more than 2.5 times higher in the Roma tuated in the Baltic Sea region may have influenced the historical formation group than in the Hungarian (10.0% vs 3.8%, p<0.001). For the 3 P2RY12 of Lithuanian ethno-linguistic groups, wIhlliuchm winea inGvAeIIstigate here by mtDNA variants we could find significant differencies only in rs2046934: the fre- analysis. quency of the CC genotype is 7 times higher in Hungarians than in Romas We used multiplex sequencing on the platform after in-so- (1.4% vs 0.2%, p<0.05). The data presented here confirm major differencies lution capture enrHicahpmloegnrte pto obtain complete mtDNA genome sequences between the distribution of PON1 and P2RY12 variants in Hungarian and from 276 samples with an average of 352-fold coverage. Haplogroups were Roma patients that might have clinical implications. determined with and in total 116 different haplogroups were P10.44 identified. The most frequent haplogroups are H1 (19.6%), U5 (12.7%), J1 Analysis of polymorphism at eight nuclear genome DNA loci in Tatars and V (5.8% each); less frequent haplogroups are T2, U4, H6, H, W (<5% N. V. Petrova, E. E. Timkovskaya, T. A. Vasilyeva, R. A. Zinchenko; each). AMOVA based on haplogroups frequency distribution showed no Research Center of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. statistically significant differences between the two major ethno-linguistic groups (Aukštaiciai and Žemaiciai). The percentage of variation among groups was -0.34 (p-value=0.897), among populations within groups 0.36 Population genetic survey of the indigenious populations of the Tatarstan (p-value=0.188), and within populations 99.98 (p-value=0.313) based on Republic (Russian Federarion) belonged to the two Tatar ethnographic 10100 permutations. A multidimensional scaling plot based on Fst calcu- groups: Kazan (Arskiy, Atninskiy districts) and Mishari (Buinskiy, Drojja- lated from haplogroups frequencies depicted ethno-linguistic groups in the novskiy dCisCtRri5c t(sd)e,l w32a)s cAaCrEri (edde ol/uint.s D)NDA7 sSa2m3 p(KleMs 1o9f )45N0O iSn3d i(vViNduTaRl)s, from four first dimension according to their East to West geographical position within district Ts HwOeIr (eS eTxRa)m, FiAnBedP 2a (t SeTigRh)t, CpFoTlyRm (oIVrpS6haicG DATNTA) ,l PoAciH o (fV nNuTcRle)ar genome, Lithuania (stress=0.06). diallelic: , , , and poly- This study is a part of LITGEN Project (VP1-3.1-ŠMM-07-K-01-013). allelic: . Allele and P10.42 genotype frequency distributions were obtained for individual samples and New NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase genetic variants in districts as well as for the ethnic group overall. Analysis of allele’s frequen- Czech and Jewish populations. cy of autosomal DNA markers in Tatar subpopAuClaEt i(odnesl/ sinhso)w, Hs considerable P. Martasek1, S. S. Panda2, D. Gurwitz3, O. Seda4, A. Baxova4, A. Puchmajerova1, B. S. genetic differentiation betwee TnH tOhIe m(S.T TRh)e Hhighest level of genobestic diversi- Masters2, M. Tomkova1; ty in diallelic system was established at locuosb s =0,4687, in 1Department of Pediatrics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, Czech multiallelic system - at locus , =0,8089. The index of mean Republic, 2Department of Biochemistry, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, United States, 3Department of Human Molecular Genetics and heterozygosity is 0,4784. The analysis of dendrograms, based on correlati- Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 4Institute ons between the matrix of genetic distances, and multidimentional scaling of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Prague, analysis prompted us to conclude that Arskiy and Atninskiy subpopulations Czech Republic. of Tatar are genetically closer to each other than to Buinskiy and Drojja- novskiy subpopulations. Our findings are consistent with evidences on Tatar ethnogenesis and historical facts. Analysis of genetic distances between po- Human NADPH-cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase (POR) is a membrane- pulations of the Volga-Ural region shows that the population of Tatars joined bound flavoprotein that catalyzes the transfer of electrons to a wide variety the cluster of Chuvash, Udmurt and Mari populations before the population of enzymes. It is a member of a small group of proteins containing two fla- of Bashkirs. vins, FAD (flavin adenine dinucleotide) and FMN (flavin mononucleotide). P10.45 As indicated by its name, the main protein partners of POR are the micro- Population isolates from Greece offer potential for powerful disease somal cytochrome P450 enzymes (CYPs). By interactions with CYPs, POR gene mapping: the HELIC-Pomak and MANOLIS studies participates in xenobiotic and drug metabolism, as well as steroidogenesis. I. Tachmazidou1, A. Farmaki2, L. Southam1, K. Palin1, N. W. Rayner1,3, E. Daoutidou2, I. In order to ePsOtiRmate the differences in POR allele frequencies between two Ntalla2, K. Panoutsopoulou1, G. Dedousis2, E. Zeggini1; ethnic groups, we have analyzed coding sequences and flanking intronic re- www.eshg.org gions of the gene in 301 healthy unrelated individuals from Aswhkwenwaz.ie shg.org258 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Harokopio University, Athens, Greece, 3University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. congenital prosopagnosia. Thereupon we tested the prevalence of congenital prosopagnosia among The study of low-frequency and rare variants can be empowered by focu- members of a high-IQ society comprising individuals with IQ ≥ 130. Our sing on isolated populations, in which rare variants may have increased in methodology consisted of an initial questionnaire-based screening process frequency and linkage disequilibrium tends to be extended. Sequencing is followed by a semi-structured diagnostic interview. efficient in isolates, because variants are shared in extended haplotype con- Among 194 highly gifted participants we diagnosed congenital prosopagno- texts, supporting accurate imputation. Here we assess sample sets collected sia with varying levels of severity in 29 cases (15 %). This prevalence is six from two Greek populations: the Pomak villages are a set of religiously-isola- times higher than that observed in the general population. Among partici- ted mountainous villages in the North (population size 11,000); Anogia is a pants and those affected by prosopagnosia, both sexes were equally repre- mountainous village on Crete, with high levels of longevity (population size sented. 4,000). 747 and 1118 individuals respectively were typed on the Illumina P10.48 OmniExpress platform. We calculated genome-wide IBS statistics to assess Towards a central registry for rare disease patients in Belgium the degree of relatedness and compared it with the general Greek populati- E. Swinnen, V. Van Casteren; on (707 samples with OmniExpress data, TEENAGE study). We additionally Scientific Institute of Public Health (WIV-ISP), Brussels, Belgium. calculated the proportion of individuals with at least one “surrogate parent” as a means for accurate long-range haplotype phasing and imputation, as proposed by Kong et al, Nature Genetics 2008. We find 1-1.4% of individual In 2009 the European Commission asked the Member States to develop pairs with pi-hat>0.05, and ~0.4% with pi-hat>0.1 in the isolates compared a strategy to improve the care of rare disease patients by 2013 (2009/C to 0% in the general Greek population. We also find that ~80%-82% of sub- 151/02). In Belgium, recommendations for measures to fill unmet needs of jects have at least one surrogate parent in the isolates, compared to ~1% in rare disease patients were formulated by the Fund of Rare Diseases and Or- the outbred Greek population. We have established the HELIC-Pomak and phan Drugs at the King Baudouin Foundation. As a result, for 2012-2013, the MANOLIS cohorts as genetic isolates and are currently whole-genome se- government provides a budget to work out the implementation of a central quencing 250 individuals to enable imputation and subsequent association rare disease registry collecting a minimum common dataset. Indeed, regi- testing. This approach has the potential to identify novel robust associations stration of rare diseases would be highly beneficial to patients, caregivers, with disease-related complex traits. authorities, researchers and the general public. Registries can be used e.g. P10.46 for epidemiological research; incidence, prevalence and survival calculati- Population stratification assessment and genomic control in Brazilian ons; quality of patient care, health-care planning and monitoring. Head and Neck Squamous Cell Carcinoma (HNSCC) patients Belgian data on rare disease patients are scarce and fragmented. The pri- L. F. Araujo1,2, M. R. Luizon1, G. A. Molfetta1,2, C. A. Ferreira3, A. A. Marques3, A. K. Ribeiro- mary goal is to bring together already existing data (e.g. by extraction from Santos4, S. E. Santos4, W. A. Silva Jr1,2; established registries), to harmonize the different initiatives and to start up 1Medical School of Ribeirao Preto- USP, Ribeirão Preto/SP, Brazil, 2National Institute of registration of core data for additional rare diseases. The Orphanet nomen- Science and Technology in Stem Cell and Cell Therapy. Regional Blood Center of Ribeirao clature of rare diseases will be used as this will allow mapping to the ICD11 Preto., Ribeirao Preto/SP, Brazil, 3National Institute of Science and Technology in Stem in the future. Cell and Cell Therapy. Regional Blood Center of Ribeirao Preto., Ribeirão Preto/SP, Brazil, 4Federal University of Para, Belem/PA, Brazil. The core dataset will serve epidemiological purposes, including some qua- lity indicators. In the future, also data on orphan drug use will be collected and other administrative or dossier functionalities might be implemented. Finally, and importantly, data from the Belgian registry can be shared at Eu- HNSCC is the sixth leading cancer by incidence in the world. In Europe, about ropean level, to obtain good statistical power. 87.5 thousand people died from HNSCC in 2008. In Brazil, the mortality rate The methodology behind the central registry and its progress will be docu- is estimated in 12 thousand deaths per year. While the genetic basis of sus- mented. ceptibility to HNSCC has not been defined, an increasing number of studies P10.49 report its association to genetic risk factors. However, the polymorphism Rett Networked Database: an integrated clinical and genetic network frequencies often vary between ethnic groups. Population stratification can of Rett syndrome databases cause spurious relations in population-based association studies. For mini- E. Grillo1, L. Villard2,3, A. Clarke4, B. Ben Zeev5, M. Pineda6, N. Bahi-Buisson7,8,9, A. mizing spurious association, studies recommend adjusting for population Hryniewiecka-Jaworska4, T. Bienvenu8,9,10, J. Armstrong6, A. Roche Martinez6, F. Mari1,11, stratification. Ethnic categories are usually based on self-reports or complex E. Veneselli12, S. Russo13, A. Vignoli14, G. Pini15, M. Djuric16, A. M. Bisgaard17, V. Mejaški- phenotypic evaluation, but those are pointed as poor predictors of genomic Bošnjak18, N. Polgár19, F. Cogliati13, K. Ravn17, M. Pintaudi12, B. Melegh19, D. Craiu20, A. ancestry. This study intends to evaluate the presence of stratification in a Djukic21, A. Renieri1,11; population of 28 patients diagnosed with HNSCC and 74 paired healthy con- 1Medical Genetics, Department of Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, trols from Brazil. A twenty Ancestry Informative Markers (AIMs) set based 2INSERM, U910, Marseille cedex 5, France, 3Aix-Marseille Université, Faculté de Médecine de La Timone, Marseille, France, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, on InDel’s markers were selected based on high allele frequency divergence Cardiff University, Cardiff, Wales, United Kingdom, 5Pediatric Neurology Unit and Israeli between different ancestral. The samples were genotyped by High Resoluti- Rett Clinic, Safra Pediatric Hospital, Sheba Med Ctr., Ramat-Gan, Israel, 6Department of on Melting analysis followed by DNA sequencing. Population structure was Pediatric Neurology, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 7Pediatric Neurology, inferred using STRUCTURE software. The 20-AIMs set was able to distin- Necker Enfants Malades Hospital, Universite ́ Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 8Inserm, guish individuals from different parental populations. The population samp- U1016, Paris, France, 9Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), le of cases exhibited a proportion of 0.349, 0.226 and 0.425, for Ameridian, Paris, France, 10Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Cochin, European and African contribution, respectively. As for the control populati- Assistance Publique – Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 11Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 12Istituto Giannina Gaslini, University of on, it was found the proportions of 0.041, 0.822 and 0.137, respectively. The Genova, Genova, Italy, 13Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Laboratorio Genetica Molecolare, ancestral proportions in cases and control population diverged, confirming Milano, Italy, 14Ospedale San Paolo, Milano, Italy, 15Ospedale della Versilia, Viareggio, the importance of population stratification inference in case-control paired Italy, 16Neurologic Department, Mother and Child Health Care Institute of Serbia “Dr association studies. Financial Support: CNPq, INCTC, FundHerp. Vukan Cupic”, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia, 17Centre for Rett Syndrome, P10.47 The Kennedy Center, Glostrup, Denmark, 18Zagreb Children‘s Hospital, Department Very high frequency of hereditary prosopagnosia among individuals of Neuropediatrics, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia, 19Department of Medical with high intellectual ability Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 20Carol Davila University of Medicine, Pediatric Neurology Clinic, Al Obregia Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, 21Tri-State Rett C. Stemper1, T. G. Baudson2, I. Kennerknecht1; Syndrome Center, Montefiore Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New 1Institut für Humangenetik Westfäliche Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, Germany, York City, NY, United States. 2Fachbereich I - Psychologie Universität Trier, Trier, Germany. Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with one principal Prosopagnosia or face-blindness is an impairment in human face recogni- phenotype and several distinct, atypical variants (Zappella, early seizure on- tion. Besides a very rare acquired form which can be triggered by e. g. a set and congenital variants). Mutations in MECP2 are found in most cases of stroke or a brain injury, there is a much more common congenital form of classic RTT but at least two additional genes, CDKL5 and FOXG1, can under- prosopagnosia, affecting 2.5 % of the human population. The congenital lie some (usually variant) cases. There is only limited correlation between prosopagnosia is almost always heritable. We therefore coined the term he- genotype and phenotype. The Rett Networked Database (http://www.rett- reditary prosopagnosia (OMIM 610382). When establishing the prevalence databasenetwork.org/) has been established to share clinical an genetic in- data, we came across a high number of prosopagnosic subjects with a high formation. Through an ‘adaptor’ process of data harmonization, a set of 293 IQ. In an unpublished pilot study 11 % of gifted individuals showed signs of www.eshcglin.oicarlg items and 16 genetic items was generated; 62 clinical and 7 genetic www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 259 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 items constitute the core dataset; 23 clinical items contain longitudinal in- and T521C polymorphisms of the SLCO1B1 gene affect the activity of OAT- formation. The database contains information on 1832 patients from eleven P1B1, which result in muscle myopathy, derangements in hepatic function countries (February 2012), with or without mutations in known genes. The- and psSyLcChOia1tBr1ic adverse drug reactions. To improve the predictability of se numbers can expand indefinitely. Data are entered by a clinician in each inter-ethnic and inter-individual differences we studied the genetic variabi- center who supervises accuracy. This network was constructed to make lity of polymorphisms in Roma and Hungarian populations. Geno- available pooled international data for the study of RTT natural history and types of 470 Roma and 442 Hungarian healthy subjects for the rs2306283 genotype-phenotype correlation and to indicate the proportion of patients (A388G) and rs4149056 (T521C) polymorphisms wereS LdCeOte1rBm1ined by with specific clinical features and mutations. We expect that the network PCR-RFLP assay. Comparing the genotype and allele frequencies of Roma will serve for the recruitment of patients into clinical trials and for develo- and Hungarian populations differences were found in the 388 AA ping quality measures to drive up standards of medical management. (24.5 vs. 45.5%), AG (42.1 vs. 3S6L.C6O%1)B, 1GG (33.4 vs. 17.9%) genotypes and in P10.50 G allele frequency (0.545 vs. 0.362) between the studied groups (p<0.02). Genetic variation of six X chromosomal STR loci in Bayash Roma Futhermore, the frequency of 521 TT (67.0 vs. 65.2%) was higher samples from Croatia in Roma than in Hungarian samples (p=0.05). Similarly to other Caucasian A. Barešić, M. Peričić Salihović; populations, the 388G allele is the minor allele in Hungarians, while in Roma Institute for Anthropological Research, Zagreb, Croatia. the 388A was found to be the minor allele. The 388G allele frequency of Roma is similar to that found in populations of Indian origin, however, the minor allele frequency of T521CS LSCNOP1 iBs1 almost three times higher in RoSmLa- X chromosome STRs are another tool for exploring different populations and tChOa1nB i1n Indians. Furthermore, the Roma population differs from Hungari- their genetic characteristics and have been more and more used in recent ans and Caucasians in common polymorphisms. The results of years to accompany autosomal and uniparental markers data in population polymorphisms found in the Hungarian population were similar to genetics. In the present study, six X chromosomal microsatellite loci (DXS983, that observed in other Caucasian populations. DXS1225, DXS8092, DXS986, DXS1066 and DXS8082) were used to analyze P10.53 79 samples of unrelated male individuals from two Bayash Roma populati- Age-related phenomena in telomere length ons living in Croatia. The number of alleles for the studied loci ranged from L. Broer1, V. Codd2, P. Henneman3, N. Amin1, A. Isaacs1, B. A. Oostra1, K. W. van Dijk3, N. J. 5-8 in Međimurje and 4-9 in Baranja, while the overall gene diversity values Samani2, C. M. van Duijn1; varied from 0.9673 to 0.9926, respectively. The most informative marker 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2University of Leicester, Leicester, United was DXS8092 (0.80628), whereas DXS1066 (0.18103) was the less informa- Kingdom, 3Leiden University Mecial Center, Leiden, Netherlands. tive one. Our results show that there is a statistically significant difference between Baranja and Međimurje samples based on haplotype frequencies, which conforms to our previously obtained data from uniparental markers. Telomere length (TL) is considered a proxy for biological aging. Studies con- The coefficient of genetic differentiation (FST) is 1.6%, which is lower than ducted in the ‘oldest-old’ often find no significant association with longevi- in mitochondrial DNA (6%) or Y chromosome (2%). All of these results in- ty, possibly due to reduced variability in TL with age, leaving these studies dicate that although Baranja and Međimurje Bayash Roma populations are underpowered. The most important age-related association fonr TL is with part of the bigger Vlax Roma group and thus share similar background and cardiovascular disease (CVD). origin, they clearly differ among themselves; however, future investigations We measured TL in the Erasmus Rucphen Family (ERF) study ( = 2,769) to should be undertaken to determine whether this difference is a reflection of study several characteristics of TL: first, we estimated the heritability of TL separation prior to arriving in Croatia or a result of the past two centuries of using POLY, second, we tested for the equality of variances to compare TL va- strong genetic isolation on their current living location. riability in different age cha2tegoriesp, -avnadlu tehird, we investigated the relation- P10.51 ship of TL with known meta bolic risk factors for CVD-6 i1ncluding adipokines. TL was highly heritable ( = 0.65, = 1.45*10 ). Over the entire age Gorilla genome structural variation reveals evolutionary parallelisms with chimpanzee distribution (18 top 8-8va ylueaers), we observed a significant reduction in TL va- M. Ventura1, C. Catacchio1, C. Alkan2, T. Marques-Bonet3, T. A. Graves4, A. Navarro5, J. riance with age, ranging from 0.150 i-6n younger individuals to only 0.053 in Shendure2, R. K. Wilson4, E. E. Eichler3; older individuals ( = 4.23*10 ). Descendants of the ‘oldest-old’ had 1University of Bari, Bari, Italy, 2University of Washington, seattle, WA, United States, above average TL, suggesting that the ‘oldest-old’ themselves had abovpe- 3University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Washington University Genome avavelureage TL when they were young. Of the 18 metabolic traits tested, only Sequencing Center, St. Louis, MO, United States, 5University of Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, adiponectin was-5 associated with TL after correction for multiple testing ( Spain. = 5.94*10 ). In conclusion, we found that TL has a significant and large heritability and that the variability of TL decreases with age, pointing to a survivor effect. Structural variation has played an important role in the evolutionary re- Of all the CVD related traits we tested, only adiponectin was significantly structuring of human and great ape genomes. We generated approximately associated with TL suggesting a relationship between adiponectin and TL in 10-fold genomic sequence coverage from a western lowland gorilla and in- the development of CVD. tegrated these data into a physical and cytogenetic framework to develop P10.54 a comprehensive view of structural variation. We discovered and validated Association of IRGM polymorphisms and susceptibility to tuberculosis over 7,665 structural changes within the gorilla lineage including sequence in zahedan, southeast of Iran resolution of inversions, deletions, duplications and mobile element inserti- M. Taheri, G. Bahari, M. Hashemi, M. Naderi, A. Moazeni Roodi, E. Eskandari Nasab; ons. A comparison with human and other ape genomes shows that the goril- Zahedan University of Medical Sciences, Zahedan, Islamic Republic of Iran. la genome has been subjected to the highest rate of segmental duplication. We show that both the gorilla and chimpanzee genomes have experienced independent yet parallel patterns of structural mutation that have not oc- Tuberculosis (TB) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality throughout curred in humans, including the formation of subtelomeric heterochromatic the world. IRGM1 is an important protein in the innate immune system caps, the hyperexpansion of segmental duplications, and bursts of retroviral against TB. Indeed by regulating autophagy in response to intracellular pa- integrations. We present here a comprehensive overview of inversions, de- thogens it has a critical role in the innate immune system. Polymorphisms letions, segmental duplications and retrotranspositions within the gorilla in the IRGM genes are known to influence expression levels and may be as- genome. Comparisons with humans and other apes reveal that parallel and sociated with outcome of infections. The objective of this study was to deter- independent mutational processes have more dramatically restructured mine whether the presence of IRGM polymorphisms −1208 A /G, −1161 C/T chimpanzee and gorilla genomes. and −947 C/T was associated with tuberculosis disease. P10.52 We investigated the functional polymorphisms of IRGM −1208 A /G Pharmacogenetic variations of the SLCO1B1 gene in Roma and (rs4958842), −1161 C/T (rs4958843) and −947 C/T (rs4958846) in 150 Hungarian population samples patients with pulmonary tuberculosis (PTB) with an average age of 47.5 C. Sipeky, B. I. Melegh, I. Janicsek, B. Duga, G. Tarlos, I. Szabo, L. Jaromi, L. Magyari, K. years (59 male, 91female; minimum 12 years, maximum78 years) and 150 Komlosi, K. Hadzsiev, B. Melegh; healthy subjects with a mean age of 44.13 years (53 male, 97 female; mini- Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. mum 20, maximum 82). Genotype analysis was done using tetra amplificati- SLCO1B1 on refractory mutation system-PCR (T-ARMS-PCR). In the present study there was a significant difference in −1161 C/T and gene encodes for hepatic transporter protein OATP1B1 that is in- −947 C/T IRGM between control and PTB groups, whereas no significant volved in active cellular influx of statins and many other drugs. The A388G difference in IRGM −1208 A /G was observed between control and PTB www.eshg.org www.eshg.org260 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 groups. rent study will be useful for clinical pharmacogenetics investigations and for In conclusion significant association was found between the IRGM −1161 drug dosage recommendations in Bulgarian population. C/T (rs4958843) and −947 C/T (rs4958846) polymorphisms and suscep- P10.57 tibility to PTB in a sample of Iranian population. Our finding suggests that The Homozygosity Index (HI) approach reveals high allele frequency IRGM −1208 A /G (rs4958842) polymorphism may not be a risk factor for for Wilson Disease in the Sardinian population susceptibility to tuberculosis in our sample. A. Gialluisi1,2, S. Incollu3, T. Pippucci1, M. B. Lepori3, A. Zappu3, G. Loudianos4, G. Romeo1; P10.55 1Unità Operativa di Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze Ginecologiche, Ostetriche e Pediatriche, Bologna, Italy, 2Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute Vistafin: Association with Genetic Variability in Vistafin (PBEF) Gene, for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Dipartimento delle Scienze Biomediche Anthropometric Parameters and Dietary Composition in Obese and e Biotecnologie, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 4Ospedale Regionale per le Non-Obese Central-European Population Microcitemie, Cagliari, Italy. J. A. Bienertova Vasku1, J. Stastny1, J. Tomandl2, M. Tomandlova2, M. Forejt3, Z. Splichal1, P. Bienert1, D. Stafova1, A. Vasku1; 1Department of Pathological Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk University, Mutational records make it possible to estimate the allelic frequency (q) Brno, Czech Republic, 3Department of Preventive Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Masaryk of autosomal recessive disorders using a novel approach based on the pro- University, Brno, Czech Republic. portion of homozygotes versus compound heterozygotes born of consan- guineous parents or even of apparently unrelated parents (the rarer the dis- order, the higher the proportion of homozygotes for the same mutation). Visfatin (PBEF/Nampt) is a recently identified adipocytokine which harbors The HI approach, successfully tested for Phenylketonuria and Familial Me- strong insulin-mimetic activity. However, nothing is known about whether diterranean Fever (Gialluisi et al. 2011), has obvious advantages over tradi- visfatin is related to specific nutritional behavior which may result in obesi- tional epidemiological studies. However, the calculation of the coefficient of ty development. This is the first study focusing on genetic variability of the inbreeding (F) becomes problematic when offspring of apparently unrela- visfatin gene and its association with circulating visfatin, anthropometric ted parents is considered. Using inbreeding data from the general Sardinian parameters and dietary composition. population (Moroni et al. 1972), we applied the HI approach to a sample of We analyzed a total of 6 exons and adjacent non-coding regions of the PBEF 183 Sardinians (only 3 of whom born of consanguineous parents) affected gene in 20 extremely obese Czech individuals (mean BMI 52.2 kg/m2 ± 5.0 with Wilson Disease (WD, OMIM #277900) and well characterized for AT- SD) using direct sequencing and a frequency of rs2302559 was established P7B mutations. in the validation cohort of another 605 individuals with completed 7-day The estimate of F in this sample, keeping into acco-4u nt the individuals born food records and complex anthropometric measurements. Plasma levels of to consanguineous parents, was equal to 8.9 x 10 while the HI value was visfatin, leptin and leptin-receptor were measured in all sequenced indivi- equal to 0 .486, which yielded a q of 0.0158 corresponding to a prevalence duals and in part of the validation cohort. of 1:3991. Three common polymorphisms were identified, two in non-coding regions These results confirm that WD prevalence in Sardinia is much higher (rs78411774 A/C, rs71564769 A/C) and one synonymous SNP in exon 7 than previously reported (P=1:10000, Ghiagheddu et al. 1985) and are in (rs2302559 A/G). The rs2302559 showed significant correlation with vis- line with a recent neonatal screening based on ATP7B mutation analysis fatin plasma level throughout the entire study cohort (p < 0.001); there was (q=0.0192, P=1:2707, Zappu et al. 2008). In conclusion the prevalence of a significant tendency towards higher visfatin levels in G allele carriers with WD, largely underdiagnosed in Sardinia, can be estimated correctly by the GG homozygotes having the highest visfatin plasma levels. Furthermore, a HI approach, which is applicable to other autosomal recessive disorders es- negative correlation was observed between visfatin and leptin plasma level pecially in highly inbred populations. (p = 0.01). No association between investigated SNPs and anthropometric P10.58 parameters or native dietary composition was observed. A Y -chromosome portrait of modern Bulgarians as viewed from This is the first study to demonstrate that the rs2302559 polymorphism in different spatiotemporal aspects the PBEF gene is related to circulating levels of visfatin. S. Karachanak1,2, V. Grugni2, D. Nesheva1, N. Al-Zahery2, V. Battaglia2, C. Nici2, V. P10.56 Carossa2, Y. Yordanov3, A. Torroni2, A. S. Galabov4, O. Semino2,5, D. Toncheva1,5; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Allelic and genotypic frequencies of CYP3A5, CYP2C19 and VKORC1 in 2Dipartimento di Genetica e Microbiologia, Università di Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 3Institute Bulgarian population of Experimental Morphology and Anthropology with Museum, Bulgarian Academy of R. Tzveova1,2, S. Bichev3, P. Atanasov4, A. Mitkova1,2, S. Andonov4, R. Kaneva1,2, G. Nachev5, Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4The Stephan Angeloff Institute of Microbiology, Bulgarian V. Mitev1,2; Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5Authors for correspondence, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1Medical university, Sofia, Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Molecular Medicine Center, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3National Genetic Laboratory, University Hospital of Obstetrics, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4National Sports Academy „ Vasil Levski“, Sofia, Bulgaria, 5St. Ekaterina University National Multi-profile Active To address the structure and evolution of the Bulgarian paternal gene pool, Treatment Hospital, Sofia, Bulgaria. we have examined the Y chromosome variation in 809 Bulgarian males. The analysis was performed by high-resolution genotyping of biallelic markers and by analyzing the STR variation within certain haplogroups. The bialle- VKORC1, CYP2C19 and CYP3A5 polymorphisms are frequently studied in lic markers were analyzed by PCR/RFLP and PCR/DHPLC assay. Seventeen pharmacogenetics. VKORC1 is the key enzyme of the vitamin K cycle and fast-evolving Y-STRs were amplified using the multiplex AmpFlSTR Yfiler a molecular target of coumarins, which represent the most commonly PCR Amplification Kit (Applied Biosystems) and were read on ABI 310 ge- prescribed drug for therapy and prevention of thromboembolic conditions. netic analyzer with GeneMapper software. CYP2C19 and CYP3A5 are members of the cytochrome P450 mixed-function We found that the Bulgarian Y chromosome gene pool is primarily contai- oxidase system and they are involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics. ned within haplogroups common in Europe and surrounding areas. Fur- The goal of this study was to determine the allelic and genotypic frequen- thermore, when patrilineal relationships are visualized in a broader context cies of important variants in CYP3A5, CYP2C19 and VKORC1 in Bulgarian by principal component analysis, Bulgarians are located among European population and compare them with the frequencies in other populations. populations. The analysis of molecular variance shows that the genetic va- We examined 134 unrelated healthy subjects for polymorphisms in CYP3A5, riation within the country is structured among Western, Central and Eastern CYP2C19 and VKORC1 by High Resolution Melting on Rotor-Gene Q. Bulgaria, rather than among the Black Sea coast, the Danubian Plane, Thrace The allelic frequencies for CYP3A5*3 and CYP2C19*2 were 88.43% and and the Southwest mountainous region; which indicates that the Balkan 13.81%, respectively, while VKORC1 1173C>T and VKORC1 -1639G>A were Mountains have been permeable to human movements. found in 51.87% and 45.52% of the subjects tested, respectively. Genotypic Y-STR variation ages and median joining networks of haplogroups E-V13, frequencies were as follows: 10.45%AA, 2.24%AG, 87.31%GG (CYP3A5); J-M241, R-M458, R-L23 and I-M423 were calculated together with data from 74.63%GG, 23.13%GA, 2.24%AA (CYP2C19); 26.87%GG, 55.22%GA, other populations. For this purpose, the analyses of STR variation within 17.91%AA (VKORC1 -1639G>A) and 25.37%CC, 45.52%CT, 20.11%TT haplogroups were based on 8 STR loci, with the exception of haplogroup (VKORC1 1173C>T). Overall our results showed that the frequencies of R-M458, for which the STR profiles were further reduced to 7 loci. In gene- allelic and genotypic variants of CYP3A5 and CYP2C19 in Bulgarians were ral, the Y-STR data reveal that different prehistoric and historic events have similar to those reported for several other Caucasian populations. Also, a left detectable traces in the Bulgarian Y chromosome gene pool. high prevalence of VKORC1 1173C>T and VKORC1 1639G>A polymorphis- ms among Bulgarians was found. High-resolution melting analysis provides a simple and accurate method for genotyping of VKORC1, CYP2C19 and CYP3A5. The results ofw thwe cwur.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 261 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P10.59 Ethnogenetic Estimation of Baltic ancestry A. Puzuka1, L. Pliss2, L. Piekuse1, S. A. Limborska3, A. Krumina2; array-based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (array-CGH) with a variety 1Riga Stradins University, Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Riga, Latvia, 2Latvian of platforms applied in diagnostic and research centers. One of the arrays Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 3Institute of Molecular Genetics, that combines high resolution and relatively low complexity of analysis is Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. the Agilent 400K custom array (Agilent Santa Clara, CA), which can reliably Background. identify deletions and duplications as small as 13 kb. Here we exploit the potential of the above platform to enter the little understood area of genetic Y chromosome is widely used as marker in population genetic basis of autism, limiting our sample heterogeneity by focusing on the popu- studies. The aim of this study was to estimate the possible genetic origin of lation of Cyprus. Balts performing Y chromosome haplogroup (Y-Hg) analysis of Russian in- A cohort of 50 patients, their parents and 50 ethnically matched normal con- dMivaitdeuraialsl tahnadt imnheathboitd hsi.storical regions of Baltic tribes and to compare Y-Hg trol samples were tested using aCGH with Agilent 400K custom array, after frequencies with incidence of Y-Hg in Latvian population. chromosomal imbalances and Fragile X syndrome were ruled-out. Microar- A study encompassed 192 men that represent four ray results were confirmed with real-time PCR and Fluorescence in situ Hy- Northern-Western and Central Russian regions and 153 unrelated ethnic bridization (FISH). As a result, 18 patients were found to carry potentially Latvians. DNA samples were hierarchically genotyped (using appropriate causative aberrations, one of which was de novo and 17 were inherited from PCR followed by RFLP or sequencing of corresponding PCR products) by 10 unaffected parents. Four aberrations reside within genes, known to cause YR ecshuroltms.osomal binary markers (M9, SRY-1532, Tat, P21, M170, P37, M253, autism susceptibility and six are associated with schizophrenia and/or de- M172, YAP, M35) to establish their haplogroup. velopmental delay and/or mental retardation. None of the above aberrati- Similar incidence of main Y-Hg’s - N1c, R1a, and I was found in ana- ons is found in copy number variation databases or normal ethnically mat- lysed Russian regions and Latvian population. Significant differences in Y-Hg ched population. Moreover, population comparison revealed an increased distribution in comparison to other regions under study were observed only rate of rare disease-associated variants in normal parents of children with in Mezen (Archangelsk district, Russia). In Mezen the Slavic component re- autism. The above data supports the multifactorial model of autism aetiolo- presenting R1a haplogroup had the lowest frequency (20%) in comparison gy and the sum of genetic and environmental factors that lead to the disease to other Russian (~55%) and Latvian (~40%) subpopulations. On the other are yet to be identified. hand the Fino-Ugric speaking population representing haplogroup N1c was P11.004 tChoen mcloussti oconms:mon in Mezen (51%) in comparison to other Russian (~15%) Explore thefeatures of brain-derived neurotrophic factor in mood and Latvian (~45%) subpopulations. disorders No significant differences in common Y-Hg distribution among F. Yeh1, P. Kuo1,2; analysed Russian and Latvian populations were found. The analysis of Y-Hg 1Department of Public Health and Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, genofund in Mezen indicates possible Fino-Ugric ancestry that could be con- College of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Research Center firmed after Y haplotype (Y-STR) analysis. for Genes, Environment and Human Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. P11. Genomics, Genomic technology including bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene The neurotrophic hypothesis for major affective disorders (MD) has been proposed over a decade. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is one product function and Epigenetics of the most studied, which plays an important role in neuronal survival and differentiation. However, the features and underlying mechanisms of BDNF for MD is yet clear. Previous studies using different designs often reported P11.001 inconsistent results for the relationship between BDNF and MD. This study IonTorrent: 2nd generation sequencing in a diagnostic laboratory aims to explore the features of BDNF for its role in MD, including aspects B. Dworniczak1, S. Fleige-Menzen1, N. Bogdanova-Markov1, P. Pennekamp2; in molecular evolution, literature review of genetic association studies, and 1University Hospital Muenster, Institute of Human Genetics, Muenster, Germany, 2University Children‘s Hospital Muenster, Department of General Pediatrics, Muenster, pathway analysis. Results of sequence alignment among different species Germany. revealed that BDNF is a highly conserved gene, having 75% identity in chor- dates with human and 85.9%-100% in vertebrates. Molecular evolutionary analysis found no signs of recent positive selection. Literature review and Molecular diagnosis of complex human genetic disorders is still challenging meta-analysis exhibited inconsistent association results for rs6265 in MD, since in most cases multiple genes harboring putative deleterious mutations which is the most studied marker that locates in the coding region of pre- have to be investigated. Currently Sanger sequencing is applied, however cursor BDNF (pro-BDNF). Mature BDNF was produced from pro-BDNF and capillary sequencing is excessive time-consuming and expensive for the the two proteins have opposite biological functions. Studies in European screening of multiple genes. In the last years next generation sequencing seabass showed that stress changed the ratio of pro-BDNF and BDNF, impli- technologies have been developed, but because these technologies are espe- cating the necessity to study pro-BDNF for MD. We identified proteins that cially made for large sequencing projects it is not easy to scale them down interact with BDNF and mapped these genes to genome-wide association for screening a set of disease causing genes in a diagnostic setting. In or- datasets of MD. Pathway analyses identified possible biological pathways der to fill this gap IonTorrent recently introduced a sequencing device with that involved with BDNF for MD. We concluded that examining the features mean throughput utilizing sequencing technology based on the detection of of BDNF systematically can provide opportunities to have a better under- hydrogen ions that are released during the polymerization of DNA. standing for the mechanisms underlying mood disorders. Based on our established sequencing approach we tested the performance P11.005 of this technology especially in respect to usability, software requirements Anticipation in Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome: Gradual increase and accuracy. As templates we used exclusively PCR amplicons left over in maternal H19/ICR1 methylation associated with tall-statured from the routine analysis without further normalization. Per sequencing mothers and BWS in their children run (314 chip) we analyzed simultaneously 600-800 fragments using bar- S. Berland1, M. Appelbäck1, O. Bruland1, D. Mackay2, I. Temple2, G. Houge1; 1Center for medical genetics and molecular medicine, Bergen, Norway, 2Wessex Genetics code technology generating ca 40.000.000 bp of sequence. Although results Service, University of Southampton, Southhampton, United Kingdom. might be preliminary and improvements should be expected our data will be crucial for the decision whether this technology can be implemented for diagnostic purposes. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) was diagnosed in two sisters and P11.003 their male cousin. Both sisters had classical BWS features including Wilms Screening of 50 Cypriot patients with autism using 400K custom tumour. Their male cousin (DZ twin) died from medical complications after array-CGH a caesarian section in week 29. Birth weight was 2,1 kg and he had viscero- L. Kousoulidou1, M. Moutafi1, P. Antoniou1, P. Nicolaides2, C. Christophi2, A. Paradisiotou3, V. Anastasiadou4, P. C. Patsalis1; megaly, macroglossia and general subcutaneous oedema. The children’s two 1Department of Cytogeneitcs and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and mothers and their sister were tall statured (178, 185 and 187 cm) and one Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2The Cyprus Paediatric Neurology Institute, Nicosia, Cyprus, had mild BWS features as a child. Their parents had average heights of 173 3Department of child and Adolescent Mental Health, Archbishop Makarios III Hospital, cm (mother) and 180 cm (father). This 2nd generation’s increased stature Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and and 3d generation BWS correlated with increased methylation of the ma- Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. ternal H19-locus, from 0.49 (normal range 0,50±0.20) in the grandmother to on average 0.70 in the next generation and 0.85 in the affected children. This data was reproduced by bisulphite treatment and subclone sequencing A standard method of whole-genome screening for subtle genetic defects is to quantitate the degree of CpG-methylation in a part of the H19 imprinting www.eshg.org www.eshg.org262 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.008 Identification and functional characterization of trans-acting factors control region (ICR1). Long-range PCR did not detect any microdeletions in involved in the post-transcriptional regulation of CDK5R1 ICR1 that could explain the lack of maternal allele demethylation. However, P. Zuccotti1, A. Barbieri1, C. Colombrita2, S. De Palma3, S. Moncini1, C. Gelfi3, A. Ratti2, M. ICR1 sequencing revealed the same maternal point variant g.1979595T>C Venturin1, P. Riva1; that had been described previously as a cause of BWS in three brothers (De- 1Department of Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, mars et al., Hum Mol Genet 19, 803-14, 2010). This point variant was on Italy, 2Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, Milan, Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Sciences and Technologies, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, the paternal allele in the non-affected grandmother. Mutations in this region Milan, Italy. affect OCT binding, and our data suggests that this interferes with gonadal switching from paternal to maternal imprinting and that H19 interallelic in- teraction might play a role in this process. CDK5R1 encodes p35, an activator of CDK5, a proline-directed serine/threo- P11.006 nine kinase that phosphorylates proteins involved in CNS development and Methylation index as a prognostic marker in bladder cancer patients maintenance. CDK5 and p35 were found to show an important role in neu- M. Nemtsova1,2, A. Babayan1,3, O. Karyakin4, D. Zaletaev1,2; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov Moscow ronal migration and differentiation during CNS development and were also Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Tumor Biology, University implicated in some neurodegenerative and cognitive disorders. Both the Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 4Medical Radiology Research CDK5R1 3’-UTR remarkable size and its conservation during the evolution Centre, Obninsk, Russian Federation. are strongly indicative of an important function in post-transcriptional re- gulation. We recently reported that CDK5R1 3’-UTR contains regulatory ele- ments affecting transcript stability. In particular, a 138 bp region, that does Bladder cancer (BC) is a common malignancy worldwide. At the time point not contain known miRNA binding sites, has been identified as the most of diagnosis 70% of BCs present as superficial BC (SBC), which do not pene- destabilizing portion of the 3’-UTR by luciferase assays. UV cross-linking trate the muscle layer of the bladder. The rest 30% of cases present muscle- and site directed mutagenesis experiments allowed us to delimit potential invasive BC (MIBC). SBC has better prognosis, though recurrences happen binding site for RNA binding proteins (RBPs), among which we identified in 30% of cases after the primary tumor removal. MIBC has much worse the nELAVs, showing a stabilizing activity on CDK5R1 transcript after over- prognosis and survival. Therefore it is of a prior importance to reveal pos- expression and silencing experiments. To search for putative destabilizing sible markers of recurrences or progression of SBC into MIBC. It is proposed factors, pull-down experiments have been carried out, allowing us to iden- that methylation pattern might reflect the ability of BC to recur and/or to tify further binding factors, among which hnRNPA2/B1. The validation of progress. hnRNPA2/B1 binding and the study of its silencing/over-expression might We examined 119 tumor samples from 108 SBC patients and 11 MIBC pa- help to disclose the possible role of this protein on CDK5R1 post-transcrip- tients. Recurrence status after 1 year was known for 39 SBC patients: 31 tional regulation. pRaAtSiSeFn1t Ad, eRveAlRobp,e Pd1 r6e, lapp1s4e, sC, D8H d1i d not. Genomic DNA was extracted from This study will help to define the functional role of the gene, addressing stu- fresh tissue. We investigated the status of promoter hypermethylation of dies on the CDK5R1 implication in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative using methyl-sensitive PCR. Methylation and cognitive diseases. index (MI) (or mean frequency of methylation) was defined as the ratio bet- P11.009 ween the numbers of methylated genes to total number of examined genes Fast and cost effective ChIP-Sequencing with PGMTM system reviews in each sample. Statistical significance was evaluated using the Mann Whit- epigenomic landscape change in the MCF-7 cells upon estrogen ney U-test. stimulation SBC had a significantly lower extent of methylation (median MI 0.1) than Z. Chen1, C. Allen2, L. Pickle3, R. Bennett3; MIBC (median MI 0,25) (p 0,017). Recurrent within 1 year SBCs showed me- 1Life Technologies, Calsbad, CA, United States, 2Life Technologies, Paisley, United dian MI 0,0 while non-recurrent tumors had median MI 0,2 (p 0,047). Our Kingdom, 3Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States. results show that MI might be used as a sensitive marker for the assessment of recurrence and progression potential of SBCs. P11.007 ChIP-Seq provides a digital high resolution map of genome-wide protein and Identification of an integrated molecular network for congenital DNA interactions. With continuing evolving of next generation sequencing anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract technologies, more and more sTeMquencing platforms become well suited for K. Y. Renkema1, G. Poelmans2, N. Nicolaou1, L. F. van der Zanden2, I. A. L. M. van Rooij3, N. the ChIP-Seq application. PGM system is a revolutionary semiconductor Roeleveld2, B. Franke2, E. M. H. F. Bongers2, N. V. A. M. Knoers1; based low cost next generation sequencing system, offers long read length 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen and the fastest sequencing turnarouTMnd time. It provides a new tool for ChIP- Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Seq application. We evaluate PGM system performance on ChIP-Seq ap- Nijmegen, Netherlands. plication in comparison with SOLiD system. Human breast adenocarcinoma MCF7 cells were treated with estrogen. Chromatin immunoprecipitatioTnM with RNA pol II and ER-alpha antibodies were performed with MAGnify Congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) form a spec- Chromatin Immunoprecipitation System, which enabled fast enrichment trum of developmental malformations, including multicystic dysplastic kid- of chromatin complexes and efficient DNA recovery from small number ney, renal hypoplasia, and duplex collecting system. CAKUT are the most of cells. The ChIP DNA samples were further constructed into ChIP-Seq li- common cause of end-stage renal disease in children. Based on previous braries with an efficient ChIP-Seq library construction procedure, which disease modelling, it is anticipated that variants in genes expressed during enabled us to construct a library using as low as 1 ng ChIP DNA. Barcoded embryonic kidney development play an important role in CAKUT aetiology. ChIP-Seq libraries were prepared for SOLiD system, whTMile non-barcoded in- To gain insight into protein signalling cascades contributing to CAKUT and dividual ChIP-seq libraries were constructed foTrM PGM system. Both types to visualize these molecular pathways, an analysis of 185 CAKUT candidate of libraries were sequenced on SOLiD and PGM systems, respectively. The genes was conducted using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software. The 185 ChIP-Seq data from both systems showed expected response upon estrogen candidate genes were selected based on experimental evidence implica- treatment in the MCF7 cells. The effect of different sequencing read length, ting them in CAKUT pathogenesis. Extensive literature mining was subse- ranging from 50bp to 200bp, on the ChIP-Seq profiling was investigated. In quently performed to identify the biological mechanisms through which depth analyses of the ChIP-Seq data from both systems will be presented. the CAKUT candidate genes interact during embryonic development. The P11.010 bioinformatics analysis revealed a significant enrichment of molecular pa-- Comparative Analysis of CHO Cell Transcriptional Dynamics under 2t6hways regulating Wnt/beta-catenin signalling (28/185 gene-s2,0 p=9.72*10 Different Cell Culture Conditions using Next Generation RNA ), basal cell carcinoma signalling (18/185- 2g0enes, p=1.31*10 ), and stem Sequencing Technology cell pluripotency (22/185 genes, p=1.62*10 ). In addition and based on the J. J. Schageman1, M. Liu1, F. Raffaldi2, S. Wang3, C. Mueller1, L. Donahue-Hjelle4, S. subsequent and extensive literature search, we built an integrated protein Gorfien4, R. A. Setterquist1; signalling network for CAKUT. Within this network, glial cell line-derived 1Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States, 2Life Technologies, Monza, Italy, 3Life neurotrophic factor (GDNF)-dependent signalling, which is essential for Technologies, Frederick, MD, United States, 4Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, United growth, maintenance and differentiation of epithelial and mesenchymal States. cells during kidney and urinary tract development, plays an important role. Our results provide important clues for improving our understanding of the molecular background of CAKUT, which in turn is essential for identifying Next Generation RNA-Sequencing (RNA-Seq) is a methodology for compre- novel treatment targets for these disorders. hensive measurements of cellular transcription at a scale, accuracy and pre- cision never seen with previous technologies. We conducted a comparative www.eshRgN.Ao-Sregq study of basic cell growth conditions to understand and improve www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 263 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.013 Comparison of different reference genes used for qPCR-based CNV high quality therapeutic protein production in CHO cells. In this study, we quantification examined global changes in gene expression in CHO cells across differing N. Fang, F. Di Pasquale, C. Beckmann, U. Deutsch, A. Missel; cell subtype and media- specific parameters. Eight CHO RNA samples from QIAGEN GmbH, Hilden, Germany. different cultures were sequenced on two full slides of a SOLiDTM System resulting in approximately 760 million, 50 base pair sequence reads. These reads were mapped to multiple reference sequences including CHO ESTs, Copy Number Variant (CNVs), the change of the DNA copy number in the mRNAs and well as mouse chromosomes with annotated genes with cogna- genome, has been recently shown to be a widely-spread phenomenon that te functional data. From this, we report estimates of transcript expression affects about 10-20% of the human genome. The occurrence of the CNVs has levels and use known annotation to infer functional differences that can be been associated with various diseases such as autism, autoimmune disor- associated with changing basic bioproduction growth conditions. These fin- ders, and cancer. dings may uncover novel genetic mechanisms that could be optimized for The most commonly used molecular biology tools for discovery of CNVs are improved bioproduction. This analysis of this data set represents the cha- array and next-generation sequencing (NGS). These two high-throughput racterization of the CHO transcriptome at an unprecedented depth. methods can discover multiple potential CNVs, which normally need to be P11.011 validated with an independent method. Once validated, the confirmed CNVs Chromatin changes in human mesenchimal stem cells during can also be examined in a large number of samples to identify the statisti- cultivation and differentiation cally significant association of the CNV and phenotype. Quantitative PCR A. V. Lavrov, Y. I. Voldgorn; (qPCR), with its ease of use, sensitivity, and scalability, is often the method Research Center of Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. of choice for CNV validation and association studies. Relative quantification principle is used to determine any possible change of gene copy numbers. Since the consistent copy number of the reference gene is essential for the Epigenomics is one of the most exciting branches of modern cell biology. qPCR-based CNV quantification, we evaluated the reliability of commonly- Role of chromosome territories (CT) in cell physiology in norm and disease used single copy reference genes such as Tert. Our results suggest that, com- remains poorly understood though chromatin structure is highly important pared to single copy genes, stable multi-copy regions can serve as a more for epigenetic regulatory mechanisms. Mesenchimal stem cell (MSC) is a sensitive and reliable CNV quantification reference. useful model for studying CT role in stem-cells and during differentiation. P11.014 Our aim is to study CT changes in MSC during cultivation and differentiation Comprehensive cancer gene research panel sequencing using fast, in vitro. efficient and scalable Ion AmpliSeq technology and semiconductor Human MSC derived from adipose tissue and bone marrow were prepared sequencing at early (before 4) and late (after 5) passages, and also after adypogenic S. Chen, A. Li, M. Shannon, B. Kong, I. Casuga, D. Joun, D. Ruff, J. Leamon, R. Bennett, J. and osteogenic differentiation. Over 2000 nuclei were analyzed using FISH Rothberg; with centromeric probes to chromosome 6 and 18. It was found that chro- Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, United States. mosome 6 holds a more distant radial position than chromosome 18 with medians of 0,65 and 0,47 respectively. Homologues of both chromosomes are always placed at different radial distances keeping medium (0,48-0,67) Targeted enrichment of exon regions from genomic DNA has proven useful and outer (0,71-0,87) layers for chromosome 6 and inner (0,35-0,46) and for mapping somatic disorders in cells. Whole exome sequencing has adap- medium layers (0,48-0,67) for chromosome 18. Comparison of cells at early tation barriers associated with the extensive time needed for hybridization- and late passages, adypogenic and osteogenic differentiation revealed signi- based capture methodologies. Exon centric sample preparation methods ficant (p=0,0008 for chromosome 18 and p=0,03 for chromosome 6) distal are especially challenged in applications that require gDNA analysis from displacement of both chromosomes in cells at late passages and after both degraded sources, such as archived FFPE specimens. We have developed a differentiations also. Described particular chromatin pattern in cultivated fast, easy-to-use, highly multiplex PCR-based selection procedure for next MSCs differs from CT structure in both differentiated (i.e. lymphocytes) and generation sequencing. This process merges the specificity and speed of embryonic stem cells. This pattern could be unique characteristics of MSC highly efficient PCR amplification with extremely scalable single-tube am- necessary for epigenetic regulation of their activity; and observed changes plicon multiplex ranging from 12 to 3,000. This technology has been used to may reflect similar processes during differentiation and prolonged cultiva- design primer pools to enrich coding g TDMNA sequence regions from an array tion. of key cancer genes. The Ion AmpliSeq Comprehensive Cancer Panel inter- P11.012 rogates exons in hundreds important cancer genTMes, covered by over 12,000 A next generation sequencing panel based approach in ciliopathy amplicons which can be sequenced on a Ion318 chip. This kit is suited for diagnostics archival (FFPE) samples, requiring only 10 ng of DNA per react iToMn. When th TeM N. Ortiz Brüchle, M. Begemann, A. Venghaus, J. von Bothmer, T. Eggermann, K. Zerres; libraries are processed and sequenced with the Ion OneTouch and PGM RWTH University Hospital Aachen, Aachen, Germany. Sequencer, mutations present at low frequency can be quantified from DNA to results within a day. The typical sequencing per base uniformity exceeds 96% for the amplicon panel. Using bi-directional sequencing protocols, per Many primary ciliopathies are syndromal autosomal recessive diseases cha- base accuracy exceeds 99.5+%. We report cancer gene somatic variant fre- racterized by defects of primary cilia function. Cystic kidneys, brain abnor- quencies from studies using paired normal/tumor samples. This technology malities and liver fibrosis are overlapping findings in the often severe cilio- enables rapid and efficient focused sequencing in a variety of both basic and pathies as Meckel syndrome (MKS) or Joubert syndrome related disorders translational research settings. (JSRD). To identify the underlying gene defect is often challenging because P11.015 of the genetic heterogeneity with 10 and 16 known genes respectively. Delineation of the reliability of in silico copy number variation (CNV) Our aim was to develop a bench top NGS instrument based approach to calls from different Illumina SNP arrays efficiently analyze the most relevant MKS/JSRD genes and concurrently S. Herms1,2, L. Priebe1,2, F. Degenhardt1,2, M. M. Nöthen1,2,3, S. Cichon1,2,4, P. Hoffmann1,2; achieve the wherewithal coverage. The overall detection rate is about 50%. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Genomics, Life & Brain MKS1, MKS3/JBTS6 (TMEM67), MKS4/JBTS5 (CEP290), MKS6/JBTS9 (CC2- Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 3German Center for Neurodegenerative Disorders (DZNE), Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-1), D2A), JBTS3 (AHI1) are the mainly contributing loci. Taking into account Structural and Functional Organization of the Brain, Genomic Imaging, Research Center own data and data from the literature mutation frequencies divide appro- Juelich, Jülich, Germany. ximately as follows: MKS1 (7%), MKS3 (7-16%), MKS4 (10%), MKS6 (10%) for MKS and JBTS3 (8%), JBTS5 (7-20%), JBTS6 (9%), JBTS9 (9-10%) for JBTS respectively. Further known genes play only little role for the overall Illumina SNP arrays are widely used to identify common and rare suscep- detection rate. tibility variants involved in the etiology of multifactorial diseases. Besides We used the GS Junior system (Roche) and chose the amplicon protocol. We SNP-based genome wide association studies, SNP-arrays allow to in silico designed gene specific oligonucleotides for the above named genes inclu- analyze Copy Number Variants (CNV). There has been a comprehensive ding adapter sequences. The corresponding PCR amplicons were pooled discussion in the field to what extent in silico CNV calls are reliable. For in- followed by emulsion PCR and enrichment. The data were analyzed with dividual associated CNVs, validation by quantitative PCR (qPCR) is usually the SeqNext module (Seqpilot/JSI). We analyzed about 20 patients (inclu- performed which is labour-intense and requires large amounts of DNA. Mo- ding controls) and hereby present our experiences regarding this approach: reover, it is almost impossible to qPCR-validate CNVs from in silico burden detection rates (false negative and positive rates), average coverage for the analyses which test the genome-wide frequency of CNVs between patients investigated amplicons, influence of homopolymeres on the data quality and and controls. In order to get an objective overview of the reliability of in www.eshg.org number of fragments to be reanalyzed by Sanger sequencing. www.eshg.org264 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.018 Fine characterization of the recurrent c.1584+18672A>G deep- silico CNV calls and the influence of batch effects, we compared in silico CNV intronic mutation in the CFTR gene calls from a larger number of technical replicates which were genotyped as D. Rusconi1, L. Costantino1, M. Seia1, R. Asselta2, G. Soldà2, V. Paracchini1, L. Porcaro1, C. internal quality controls in different genotyping projects over the last three Colombo3, S. Duga2; years. These data had been acquired on different Illumina arrays such as the 1Laboratorio di Genetica Medica, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Human660W, HumanOmniExpress, HumanOmni1S and HumanOmni1M- Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 3Cystic Fibrosis Center of Milan, Fondazione Quad. IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy. We compared these replicates on basis of genotypes and copy number variants to evaluate technical artifacts arising from batch effects. We will present data on deviances arising from quality parameters (e. g. gentrain Splicing mutations account for ~12% of the 1,890 CFTR mutations descri- score, logR ratio, B -allele frequency, intensity, chemistry batches) and the bed in cystic fibrosis (CF); however, their impact on pre-mRNA processing implications thereof. frequently remains unclear. An interesting opportunity to study CFTR tran- P11.016 scripts in vivo is the use of RNA from nasal brushings. We previously iden- Generation of Customized and Read-To-Use Genetically Engineered tified through this approach a deep-intronic mutation (c.1584+18672A>G), Mice which activates a 104-bp out-of-frame pseudoexon by creating a donor spli- M. BIRLING; ce site. ICS, ILLKIRCH, France. Screening of 481 CF patients identified c.1584+18672A>G in two additional individuals, demonstrating that it is a recurrent, and potentially overlooked, mutation among Italian patients. Haplotype analysis suggests that it origi- The Institut Clinique de la Souris - ICS- is a research infrastructure that pro- nated from at least two independent events. vides extensive services ranging from the development of mouse models to To further characterize the mutation, a genomic region including the acti- comprehensive phenotyping. The Genetic Engineering and Model validation vated pseudoexon and surrounding intronic sequences was cloned into an Department is dedicated to the development and molecular validation of expression vector and transfected into HeLa cells. RT-PCR analysis identified new mouse models. two alternative splicing products, produced by the activation of two different Mouse model can be valuable models to better understand the molecular cryptic acceptor splice sites: one including the 104-bp pseudoexon (78.7% processes of monogenic diseases or to test drugs in vivo. We can generate of transcripts), the other leading to the inclusion of a 65-bp pseudoexon duplications and deletions of defined genomic fragment (CNVs) as observed (21.3% of mRNAs). Allele-specific measurement of wild-type and aberrant in human disease. We always work in strong interaction with the scientists splicings in the probands’ (genotype F508del + c.1584+18672A>G) RNA and make sure to define their needs. Many publications have already arised from nasal brushing demonstrated: i) a low level of pseudoexon inclusion in from mice generated at ICS. the F508del transcript (not containing the splicing mutation); ii) a residu- The department is also driving several internal R&D programs and is invol- al wild-type splicing in the c.1584+18672A>G mRNA; iii) the allele-specific ved in several international consortium (EUCOMM, EUCOMMtools, GENCO- degradation of aberrant transcripts; iv) the relative strength of the different DYS, IMPC, PHENOMIN). cryptic splice sites. Interestingly, the residual wild-type splicing detected in We have generated a CreERT2 zoo (http://www.ics-mci.fr/mousecre/). transcripts bearing the c.1584+18672A>G mutation well correlates with the When bred with conditional knock-out mice these lines allow the generation milder clinical phenotype of patients. of time and cell specific knock-out after injection of Tamoxifen. We will give you an example of a fully characterized mouse line: Insulin1- P11.019 CreERT2. The Cre expression is observed in the β-cells, the translocation Identification of novel Intellectual Disability genes through detection in the nucleus is confirmed in the presence of Tamoxifen as expected for of de novo mutations J. de Ligt, M. H. Willemsen, B. W. M. van Bon, T. Kleefstra, T. Kroes, A. T. Vulto-vanSilfhout, an inducible line. By breeding this line with Rosa26 reporter line, a specific P. de Vries, B. B. A. de Vries, H. G. Brunner, J. A. Veltman, L. E. L. M. Vissers; LacZ staining is observed in the β-islet cells. This line was phenotyped (un- Department of Human Genetics, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences and der chow diet) and no glucose intolerance was observed at the difference of Institute for Genetic, Nijmegen, Netherlands. the Rat Insulin Promoter (RIP)-Cre line. A comparative study (Ins1-CreERT2 De novo versus RIP-Cre) was performed and will be detailed. de novo P11.017 mutations may play an important role in Intellectual Disability Performance of seven mutation pathogenicity prediction methods in (ID). Here we evaluate the frequency and role of mutations in an the classification of missense variants of the CYP1B1 gene unbiased cohort of 100 ID patients using family-based exome sequencing. G. Chavarria-Soley; To identify the recurrence of mutations in certain genes in the population a Universidad de Costa Rica, San Jose, Costa Rica. targeted sequencing experiment was performed ford 1e 7n oIDvo-related genes in 540 additional ID patients. de novo In the 76 trios sequenced thus far 60 unique coding mutations were Nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the coding re- identified and validated in 58 different genes. On average 0.73 (0-4) gions of genes can lead to aminoacid changes and potentially affect protein mutations were observed per patient. 47 of these mutations were non-syn- function and, therefore, susceptibility to disease. Several computational me- onymous, of which 9 introduced a premature stop or frame-shift. Pathoge- thods have been developed for the classification of SNPs according to their nicity analyses were performed for all non-synonymous variants based on predicted effect on protein function and resulting pathogenic potential. In evolutionary conservation (DNA and protein level) and mutatdieo nn oimvopact on this study, we evaluated the performance of seven commonly used pathoge- the protein. nicity prediction methods available on the Internet ( SIFT, nsSNPAnalyzer, CRoAmBb3i9nBed, SwYNithG AtPh1e , tGarRgIeNt2eAd( rne=s2e)q, uPeDnHciAn1g, wLReP i2d,e TnUtifBieAd1 A3,0 T CF4, GR ImN2uBta- Panther, pMut, PolyPhen, PhD-SNP, and SNAP). In order to test them, nonsyn- tions which likely explain the ID phenotype. Nine inDvoElAvFe1d, kYnYo1w, nD IYDN Cge1nHe1s, onymous SNPs in the CYP1B1 gene- which codes for the cytochrome P450 G(ATAD2B ), 1B1 enzyme-were selected. A total of 129 missense variants in CYP1B1 were eight occurred in new, but recurrent, ID genes ( identified in the literature, from which 87 could be classified as pathogenic ) and 13 additional events had a highd ep antohvoogenicity score and were or neutral according to criteria such as segregation with disease phenotype, present in genes with a potential biological link to ID. and effect on function, among others. The algorithms showed significant va- Our findings provide strong support for a paradigm for ID, and riation in the assignment of the variants to three categories (non-neutral, further strengthen the causality of several previously identifdieed n ogveones. This neutral, no prediction), with a low 37% prediction rate for Panther. Pairwise study comprises the largest cohort of non-syndromal ID patients and sug- concordance between methods in the classification of variants as pathoge- gests an expected diagnostic yield of approximately 35% for mutati- nic or neutral varied between 37% and 94%. The accuracy in the prediction on detection through exome sequencing. of the pathogenicity of the variants was higher than 68% with all methods P11.020 except pMut (47%). The highest false positive and false negative rates were Deep-sequencing of TALENs targeted embryonic stem cells to estimate found for SIFT and pMut, respectively. Taking into account the rate of pre- their efficacy in genome editing diction, accuracy of prediction, false positive, and false negative rates, the S. Anvar, C. Breukel, M. H. A. M. Veltrop, J. F. J. Laros, J. T. den Dunnen, A. M. Aartsma-Rus, method with the overall best performance in the present study was nsSNP- S. Verbeek; analyzer, closely followed by SIFT, Polyphen and SNAP. Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. Engineering of biological systems that recapitulate human genetic disor- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 265 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ders relies on efficient manipulation of the genome. Recently, transcription conditions for high throughput DNA methylation testing. activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) have shown promising potential Here we will introduce this procedure and present performance data as well in site-specific genome editing. Their modular structure enables the design as data generated on clinical tumor samples. Classifiers derived from these and simple construction of TALENs that can specifically recognize virtually analyses have already been confirmed by any DNA sequence. Upon delivery into embryonic stem cells (ESCs), TALENs bisulfite deamination based tests (like qMSP, Sequenom’s MALDI assay and initiate a double strand break that is repaired by non-homologous end- pyrosequencing) and obtained very good correlation of results. Nanoliter joining, introducing a large variety of mutations. Since this method lacks a scaled MSRE based HTqPCR outperforms standard qPCRs with respect to selection procedure the applicability depends largely on its efficacy. material costs, data quality and efficiency. Preamplification enables also Here we focused on altering the hDMD transgene, introduced into the geno- paralleled analyses of up to 96 targets starting with 5-10ng DNA with high me of mouse ESCs. So far, editing by homologous recombination of hDMD reliability and is currently under investigation for methylation testing of cell transgene has failed. Thus, we engineered a TALENs-pair targeting intron free DNA in serum. 52 of the hDMD gene. The utility of the assembled TALENs-pair was de- P11.023 termined by measuring the variation within the targeted sequence of the Placental lipoprotein lipase DNA methylation levels are associated hDMD transgene among TALENs-transfected mouse ESCs. The 135bp locus with impaired glucose tolerance and maternal and fetal blood lipid of hDMD was PCR-amplified and sequenced for 100,000 TALENs transfected profiles and non-transfected cells using IonTorrent semiconductor sequencing. The A. A. Houde1,2, M. F. Hivert3, P. Perron2,3, J. St-Pierre4, D. Gaudet2,5, D. Brisson2, L. targeted locus was covered ≥450,000x. In TALENs-transfected ESCs, the rate Bouchard1,2; of editing events, mainly small deletions and insertions, was 4-fold higher 1Department of Biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, 2ECOGENE-21 and Lipid Clinic, Chicoutimi Hospital, Saguenay, QC, Canada, 3Department (~11%) than in non-transfected cells. Furthermore, we assembled a list of of Medicine, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, 4Department of the most frequently occurred structural variations and cleavage sites to faci- Pediatrics, Chicoutimi Hospital, Saguenay, QC, Canada, 5Department of Medicine, litate follow-up functional studies. Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada. Our data endorse the use of TALENs for modifying the hDMD transgene in Background: ESCs. The TALENs efficacy in genome editing can be further estimated using the Pacific Biosciences Single Molecule Real-Time sequencing. According to the fetal programming (or Barker’s) hypothe- P11.021 sis, newborns exposed to a detrimental fetal and perinatal environment Screening of muscular disease genes with the Access ArrayTM System are more susceptible to develop ob(eLsPitLy), type 2 diabetes (T2D) and related of Fluidigm and Roche’s GS Junior chronic disorders but the underlying molecular mechanisms are poorly un- J. E. Bach, A. Gehrig, S. Rost, C. R. Müller; derstood. Lipoprotein lipase gene is an important regulator of lipid Department of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. metabolism and transport and has been associLatPeLd with obesity, T2D and DMD dyslipidemia. The aim of this study was to determine the impact of impaired gMluecthosoed sto/lReerasnucltes :( IGT) exposure on newborn gene DNA methylation Sequencing of large genes like the gene or of a group of genes, e.g. mu- levels and lipid profile. scular disease genes, for many patients in parallel is a major application in Placental tissues and blood samples were obtained our diagnostic laboratory. In addition to Sanger sequencing, we have esta- from 128 women (31 witLhP ILG T) and their offspring. Glucose tolerance was blished next generation sequencing (NGS) with the 454 GS Junior (Roche). assessed using a 75-g oral glucose toleranpce< 0t.e0s5t (OGTT) betweeLnP Lweeks For target enrichment, the Access Array™ System of Fluidigm is used which 24 and 28 of pregnancy. DNA methylation was determined bLyP bLisulfi- allows parallel amplification of 48 target regions for 48 samples in one sin- te pyrosequencing. There were up to 9% ( ) differences in DNA gle PCR setup. By the combination of target-specific primers and individual- methylatiopn= l0e.v0e2l2s )between women with or without IGT. Placental gene specific barcode primers with 454 adaptors, sequencer-ready amplicon lib- DNA methypl<a0ti.0o5n levels were associated with 2h-glucose pospt=-O0.G0T21T levels raries can be produced in a single step. (r=-0.204, and first trimestepr= 0m.0a4te1rnal triglycerides cpo<n0c.0e5ntration TDhMeD Access Array System is being established for the parallel screening of (r>-0.201, ) and total cholesterol/H, Dp<L0 r.a0t5io (r=-0.207, ). Cord multiple candidate genes in patients with muscle diseases. In a first step, the blood (n=L9P3L) cholesterol (r=-0.216, ), HDL (r>-0.208, ) levels gene has been resequenced in a total of 80 patients in whom mutations aCnodn ctolutasli ochno: lesterol/HDL ratio (r>0.248 LP)L were also correlated with and SNPs had already been identified by classical Sanger sequencing. The placental DNA methylation. sequence coverage was satisfying (at least 15-fold by default) and all known These results suggest that fetal DNA methylation levels variations could be retrieved. We are now extending the system to other are dysregulated by maternal glucose tolerance with a possible functional genes for muscular diseases, especially the genetically heterogeneous limb- impact on cord blood lipid profile. They provide insights on the molecular girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMD). mechanisms that may be involved in fetal programming and long-term de- The combination of Access Array System and GS Junior sequencing has pro- velopment of obesity and dyslipidemia. ven reliability and practicability as a time and cost efficient alternative for P11.024 classical PCR and Sanger sequencing. The system seems to be particularly DNA methylation patterns of mitotic and meiotic chromosomes from suitable for diagnostics as it is easy-to-use and requires only small amounts human spermatogenic cells of genomic DNA and PCR reagents in order to obtain a sufficient amount of I. A. Galembo1, A. A. Pendina2, O. A. Efimova2, I. D. Fedorova2, E. M. Shilnikova1,2, A. V. sequence data within three days. Tikhonov1,2, T. V. Kuznetzova2, A. M. Gzgzyan2, V. S. Baranov2; P11.022 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2D.O.Ott‘s High throughput qPCR DNA methylation marker testing and Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. validation A. Weinhaeusel, M. Wielscher, M. Sonntagbauer, W. Pulverer, M. Hofner, A. Kriegner, K. Vierlinger, C. Noehammer; We studied DNA methylation patterns of mitotic and meiotic chromosomes AIT, Vienna, Austria. from human spermatogenic cells. Samples were obtained from 5 patients with fertility problems in IVF clinic by testis biopsy. Chromosomes were fixed on slides with ethanol:acetic acid (3:1) after colchicines treatment Over recent years elucidation of genomewide epigenetic changes has be- in hypotonic solution. Analysis of DNA methylation was performed by im- come a routine application. As with other genomewide approaches confir- munocytochemistry with monoclonal antibodies against 5-methylcytidine. mation of elucidated DNA methylation changes have to be validated using Chromosomes were identified by QFH/AcD staining. Among 119 analyzed alternate methods and also on additional samples. dividing cells several types were detected by their specific morphological In principle several strategies either based on bisulfite DNA conversion or features: mitotic diploid and polyploid spermatogonia and meiotic sperma- methylation sensitive restriction enzyme (MSRE) digestion are suitable for tocytes at the pachytene, diplotene and diakinese stages. confirmation of methylation changes. During our biomarker-research ef- DNA methylation pattern (MeC-pattern) of mitotic chromosomes appeared forts on several cancer entities we have found that quantitative methyla- to be a specific banding pattern, resembling R-banding. It differed by num- tion analyses are inevitably for analyses. Therefore we have set up a cost ber of bands and DNA methylation intensity from that in lymphocytes and efficient MSRE-based qPCR strategy and have qualified 576 methylation human mesenchymal stem cells, described in our previous study. DNA me- markers according MIQE guidelines. For enabling high throughput analyses thylation level of heterochromatic blocks of chromosomes 1,9,16 and Y of 96 samples x 96 different assays performing 9216 qPCRs in a nanoliter demonstrated the most feasible difference: in most mitotic spermatogonia scaled microfluidic qPCR array per run, DNA target concentrations several these regions were hypomethylated. hundreds of copies per 5 nanoliter reaction have to be warranted for proper Pachytene chromosomes showed less obvious MeC-banding pattern, pro- www.eshg.org analyses. Therefore we evaluated preamplification protocols and opwtimwiswed.e shg.org266 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 bably due to the increased length of chromosomes. The most intensive DNA zygotic twins concordant for T21, normal monozygotic twins without T21, methylation was registered at the peritelomeric regions of pachitene chro- and unrelated normal and T21 individuals to use as controls. We applied Re- mosomes. Diplotene and diakinese cells demonstrated high, but fairly ho- duced Representation Bisulfite Sequencing (RRBS) to generate nucleotide mogeneous DNA methylation along chromosomes with increased intensity resolution of DNA methylation based on high throughput sequencing (HiSeq of signal in chiasmas and heterochromatic regions. 2X 100bp) between each pair of twins. Methylation state of 4,278,488 CpGs Thus, chromosomes of spermatogenic cells demonstrate unique DNA me- with at least 8X coverage was obtained for the monozygotic twins discor- thylation patterns, different from these in somatic cells, possibly explained dant for T21. An initial analysis of methylation percentages differences bet- by their crucial role in chromatin stability and faciliating recombination ween these twins identified 1000 differentially methylated regions (DMRs) events. (FDR<0.001 and at least 4 fold change in methylation differences). These Supported by RFBR, Carl Zeiss, State Contract 02.740.11.0698 and Admini- DMRs were correlated with the deregulation of gene expression. The analy- stration of Saint-Petersburg. ses of the control samples are ongoing. The study of methylation differences P11.025 in monozygotic twins discordant for genetic abnormalities is a promising A genomic approach for DNA methylation & hydroxymethylationanalysis approach to understand the molecular mechanisms of aneuploidies. M. Krispin, X. Sun, R. Leavitt, T. Chung, E. Bacon, A. Petterson, M. Van Eden, X. Jia; P11.028 Zymo Research, Irvine, CA, United States. Comprehensive DNA methylation profiling with the SureSelect target enrichment system K. Jeong1, F. Useche1, R. McInnes1, M. Corioni1, D. Roberts1, J. A. Stamatoyannopoulos2, E. DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation are some of the most important LeProust1; epigenetic modifications that can occur in the human genome. For instances, 1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2University of Washington, Seattle, DNA methylation plays a vital role in the regulation of gene expression in WA, United States. normal cell development and aging, but also in the formation and progres- sion of cancer and other diseases. Large scale identification of putative epi- genetic biomarker candidates is achievable with the ability to profile DNA DNA cytosine methylation is a critical epigenetic modification involved in methylation and hydroxymethylation at the genomic level. Once validated, human diseases such as cancer and imprinting disorders. Various cellular specific biomarkers could be applied to clinical and molecular diagnostic processes including gene regulation, embryonic development, X chromo- fields. Due to the availability of Next Gen sequencing technology, a number some inactivation, and chromatin remodeling are strongly associated with of new technologies have been developed for interrogating DNA methylation DNA methylation changes. Next-generation sequencing combined with so- and hydroxymethylation at the genomic scale. Zymo Research has recently dium bisulfite treatment allows identification of methylation changes at sin- perfected sample prep and bioinformatic analysis as part of its new DNA gle base resolution. However, whole genome bisulfite sequencing is prohibi- Methylation and Hydroxymethylation Profiling Services. These epigenetic tively expensive. Additionally, many of the regions in whole genome bisulfite services combine next generation sequencing with Zymo’s well-established sequencing are in repetitive regions, and provide little information. In many epigenetic technologies and innovative bioinformatic algorithms for the cases, the researcher is only interested in profiling a subset of biological- most streamlined, comprehensive genome scale data generation to date. ly relevant regions. To address these needs, we have developed SureSelect With these new services⋯ hundreds of epigenomic biomarker candidates Methyl-Seq, which combines Agilent’s SureSelect Target Enrichment plat- can be discovered simultaneously. form with bisulfite sequencing to detect methylation changes. Our Methyl- Seq design targets human genomic CpG sites within CpG islands/shores, P11.026 promoters, known differentially methylated regions (DMRs) and previously A genome-wide search for novel imprinted genes J. Beygo1, M. Heitmann1, D. Gritzan1, J. Richter2, O. Ammerpohl2, R. Siebert2, B. determined regulatory regions. This comprehensive design covers 84Mb Horsthemke1, K. Buiting1; making it well suited to study cancer- and tissue-specific DMRs. Here we 1Institut fuer Humangenetik, Universitaetsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Institut fuer describe the SureSelect Methyl-Seq workflow and demonstrate efficient tar- Humangenetik, Universitaetsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany. get enrichment and precise methylation level detection. Further, we show NLRP7 high concordance with whole-genome bisulfite sequencing of known model systems and describe the detection of tissue and cancer specific DMRs. is a maternal effect gene as mutations in this gene cause recurrent P11.029 hydatidiform moles, spontaneous abortions NanLdR Ps7tillbirths, whereas live DNA-methylation in Dutch and Texan NTD children births are very rare. We have studied a patient with multiple developmental L. Stolk1,2, M. I. Both3, N. H. van Mil3, M. M. P. J. Verbiest1, P. H. C. Eilers4, L. Suarez5, A. G. defects born to a mother with a heterozygous mutation. By genome- Uitterlinden1,2,6, R. P. M. Steegers-Theunissen3,6,7; wide CpG methylation analysis of blood DNA from the patient, his parents 1Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Netherlands and 18 normal controls on Illumina 27K arrays we found that the patient Consortium of Healthy Aging, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Biostatistics, had methylation changes (delta ß>0.3) at almost all known imprinted loci Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Environmental Epidemiology & Disease as well as at 77 other loci. Using each control as a pseudoproband, we found Registries Section, Deptartment of State Health Services, Austin, TX, United States, methylation changes at only 11-26 (median 17) loci not known to be im- 6Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 7Department of printed. In order to identify novel imprinted genes among the 77 conspi- Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands. cuous loci in the patient, we selected 22 genes (mainly hypomethylated ge- nes) for deep bisulfite sequencing on the ROCHE/454 Genome Sequencer in the patient and at least two additional controls who were heterozygous Neural tube defects (NTDs) are congenital malformations developing du- at the test locus. Apart from FAM50B, which we proved to be imprinted, we ring the first weeks of pregnancy. Interactions between environmental and did not observe allele-specific DNA methylation at these loci. We conclude genetic factors are involved in the pathogenesis and prevention of NTDs. that the patient has methylation defects at almost all imprinted loci as well Maternal folate shortage during the sensitive period of neural tube develop- as an excess of methylation changes at apparently non-imprinted loci. Our ment contributes to the occurrence of NTD. Folate is an important B vitamin data also suggest that the number of genes that are imprinted in blood cells and donor of methyl groups, essential for DNA methylation, a key epigenetic is rather low and that most of them have been discovered. mechanism to explain gene-environment interactions. We hypothesize that P11.027 folate-related NTD are due to derangements in DNA methylation in the child Genome wide DNA methylation profiling of monozygotic twins of (non)imprinted genes implicated in neural tube development. discordant for trisomy 21 Methylation levels of three imprinted genes (IGF2, H19, and KCNQ1OT1), A. Letourneau1, M. R. Sailani1, F. Santoni1, A. Sharp2, P. Makrythanasis1, S. E. and three non-imprinted genes (MTHFR, VANGL1, and LEKR) were measu- Antonarakis1; red using Sequenom MassARRAY EpiTYPER in 34 cases and 78 controls 1University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetics and Genomic from a Texan study and in 48 cases and 62 controls from the Dutch popu- Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States. lation. Linear mixed model analysis was used to calculate the association of DNA-methylation levels with NTD. The Texan samples revealed no significant association of DNA-methylati- DNA methylation is essential in mammalian development and has an effect on levels of any of the genes with NTD. In the Dutch samples we found a in gene expression. We hypothesize that methylation differences induced by borderline significant association of MTHFR methylation levels with NTD trisomy 21(T21) contribute to the phenotypic characteristics and variations (-1.3% methylation in cases, P-value=0.072). In the combined analysis of in T21 patients. In order to determine the methylation differences in T21 the Texan and Dutch samples we observed a borderline significant associa- without the noise of the genomic variation, we studied samples from mo- tion of MTHFR DNA-methylation with NTD (-0.6% methylation in cases, P- nozygotic twins discordant for T21. We also collected samples from mono- www.eshvgal.uoe=r0g.067). www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 267 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 In conclusion, slightly lower MTHFR DNA-methylation levels may be asso- verted microscope. Recently, a new method, intracytoplasmatic morpholo- ciated with NTD. Additional studies are warranted to confirm our results. gically selected sperm injection (IMSI), was introduced. For IMSI only the P11.030 most normally shaped sperms without a vacuole in the nucleus are retrie- Differential expression of microRNAs in peripheral blood ved using a higher definition microscope. Several recent studies have shown mononuclear cells of Down syndrome children that abnormal sperm parameters are associated with aberrant methylati- J. M. Biselli1, B. L. Zampieri1, D. G. Pinheiro2, W. A. Silva2, D. M. Carraro3, E. N. Ferreira3, E. on imprints. To compare the epigenetic quality of different sperms from H. Tajara1, T. Henrique1, E. M. Goloni-Bertollo1, E. C. Pavarino1; the same males, we have used limiting dilution bisulfite pyrosequencing, 1São José do Rio Preto Medical School - FAMERP, Department of Molecular Biology, São which allows one to study the methylhaLtiIoTn1 levelsh oPfE mG3ultiple genes in pools José do Rio Preto, Brazil, 2Sao Paulo University, Department of Genetics, Medical School of Ribeirao Preto, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil, 3International Center of Research and Training of about 10 spermhGsT eLa2ch. First, we have analyzed the methylation patterns of two maternally imprinted genes, and , and one paternally (CIPE), AC Camargo Hospital, São Paulo, Brazil. imprinted gene, , in ICSI versus IMSI sperm samples from 5 males. Secondly, we have compared IMSI sperms versus sperms with a clearly vi- sible vacuole from 10 males. Thirdly, we compared IMSI sperms versus ab- Down syndrome (DS) or Trisomy 21 is the most common human chromoso- normally shaped sperms with a vacuole from 5 males. Overall, we found a mal disorder. DS phenotype includes several dysmorphic features, intellec- low rate (0-4%) of epimutations (abnormal allele methylation) in all groups tual disability, immunological alteration, congenital heart disease, high risk and no between-group differences. Although we cannot exclude epigenetic for specific types of leukemia and neurological alterations. Recent studies differences in genes other than those studied, our results do not support the show that DS results in the over-expression of microRNAs, which could re- hypothesis that IMSI selects better quality sperms, improving fertilization sult in low expression of specific proteins and contribute to DS phenotype. and pregnancy outcome. To identify differentially expressed microRNAs in peripheral blood mono- P11.034 nuclear cells of six DS and six non-DS children and the biological processes Utilizing next generation sequencing for exome analysis relevant to DS pathogenesis associated with their predicted gene targets of K. A. Stangier, F. Ernst, Y. Kumar, T. Paprotka; microRNAs differentially expressed, we investigated the expression pattern GATC Biotech AG, Konstanz, Germany. of 754 mature microRNAs using TaqMan® Low Density Arrays (Applied Biosystems). Of the 490 mature microRNAs expressed in this cell type, 49 are low-expressed in DS group. The microRNAs located in chromosome 21 Next generation sequencing has changed the possibilities for analyzing did not present differential expression between the groups. Target predic- human exomes. Several commercial kits are available allowing exome en- tion was performed using TargetScanHuman v. 5.2. software and informa- richment with subsequent library preparation in a cost efficient way. These tion about gene targets was obtained using the Bioprocess, a database that libraries can be directly analyzed on e.g. an Illumina HiSeq. Enrichment is obtains data from NCBI. Bioinformatics analysis showed that genes involved performed by pull down of coding regions with baits, which differ in overall in relevant biological process to DS, including apoptosis, reactive oxygen design depending on the manufacturer. The depth of analysis can be enhan- species metabolism, mitochondrial metabolism, immune system, cell aging, ced by increasing the number of reads by using higher sequencing coverage cycle and division and control of gene expression, are predicted targets of mapped on the genome or the targeted region. microRNAs differentially expressed in DS children. In conclusion, DS child- We used commercially available exome enrichment kits and designed a ren present low expression of microRNAs not located on chromosome 21 in pipeline for data quality analysis, mapping and especially SNP detection. peripheral blood mononuclear cells and biological processes relevant to DS The mapping of reads was analyzed in detail to determine the efficiency of pathogenesis are associated with predicted gene targets of these microRNAs enrichment for the targeted exons. Variants were filtered according to seve- differentially expressed in DS chidren. ral criteria like base quality, read quality, thresholds for coverage, and the P11.032 overall mapping quality. Epimutations of imprinting genes and early pregnancy loss In order to improve the overall quality of reads for data processing, a quality E. A. Sazhenova, I. N. Lebedev; score which represents the probability of a particular base mismatch in the Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation. reference genome was established. This highly increased the probabilities of validating certain mismatches. In addition, FFPE samples were used for exome enrichment and the map- Genomic imprinting is one of the most significant epigenetic phenomena, ping and SNP detection compared to other starting material. which is involved in reproduction and fetal development. We have perfor- Utilizing exome sequencing in clinical and genetic diagnosis and personali- med DNA methylation analysis of the cytotrophoblast (CT) and extraem- zed disease risk profiling is expected in the near future. Optimizing the sen- bryonic mesoderm (EM) from 5 first-trimester spontaneous abortions sitivity and data analysis pipelines will help to integrate exome analysis into (6.8±1.1 weeks) with normal karyotype and 6 induced abortions (7.5±0.7 a common clinical setup. weeks) as a control group using HumanMethylation27 BeadChip (Illumina, P11.035 USA) comprising 409 CpG sites oriented near promoter region of 60 im- Accurate detection of de novo mutations in rare and common printing genes. Sixteen (26.6%) imprinting genes have revealed abnormal neurodevelopmental disorders methylation in most miscarriages. Most CpG sites of these genes (ATP10A, A. Hoischen1, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, B. W. M. van Bon1, J. M. Beechem2, K. Lao2, J. de Ligt1, H. CDKN1C, DIRAS3, GNAS, GRB10, KCNQ1, MEST, MKRN3, SLC22A3, SNRPN, G. Brunner1, C. Gilissen1, J. A. Veltman1; TP73, WIF1, WT1, ZIM2) were hypomethylated, whereas only in two genes 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Life (INS, OSBPL5) hypermethylation of CpG sites was detected. The presence of Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. several epimutations affected from 1 to 9 imprinting genes in CT and from 1 to 6 ones in EM was observed in each embryo. All epimutations had a postzy- gotic origin since were confined by EM or CT, that indicates forming epimu- Many dominant Mendelian disorders occur sporadically because the seve- tations after differentiation of these tissues. Most imprinted genes with epi- rity and early onset of the disorder preclude transDme inssoivoon to subsequent mutations participate in cell cycle (CDKN1, DIRAS3, INS, TP73, GO:0007049 generations. Exome sequencing represents the first systematic approach to ), in cell differentiation (CDKN1C, GNAS, INS, TP73, WIF1, GO:0030154), in identify many genes that cause sporadic diseases. mutations cau- cell death (INS, TP73, WT1, GO:0008219), cell proliferation (CDKN1C, INS, sing rare syndromici .feo. rms of dominant Mendelian disease, such as Schinzel- WT1, GO:0008283) and growth (GNAS, INS, WT1, GO:0040007). This study Giedion syndrome and Kabuki syndrome were first identified by applying was supported by Federal Program (contracts P303). ovedrel anpo vsotrategies, identifying mutations in the same gene in multiple P11.033 independent affected individuals. Subsequent studies focused on the role Methylation analysis of three imprinted genes in ICSI versus IMSI of mutations in common neurodevelopmental disorders, such as in- sperms by limiting dilution bisulfite pyrosequencing tellectual disability, autism and schizophrenia by applydineg n ao vtorio design, i.e. J. Kuhtz1, T. Hansmann1, N. El Hajj1, E. Schneider1, B. Linek2, T. Hahn3, M. Schorsch3, T. exome sequencing of patient-parent trios. Haaf1; In order to establish a robust approach optimized for analysis, we 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Wuerzburg, Würzburg, Germany, used latest SOLiD 5500XL sequencing technologies in combination with 2Department of Gynecology and Obsteterics, University Medical Center, Mainz, Germany, 3Fertility Center, Wiesbaden, Germany. the recently announced wildfire product (Life Technologies, Foster City, CA). The latter allowed the highest number of analyzed DdNe An omvoolecules (>1 billion raw reads per lane), a fast process, long reads, high throughput and importantly allowed reliable calling of disease causing mutations Optimum selection of sperm cells may increase the success rate of intra- by applying exome sequencing to patient-parent trios. As a proof-of-con- cytoplasmatic sperm injection (ICSI) for human infertility treatment. For cept for this novel technology we studied a patient with Baraitser-Winter www.eshg.org standard ICSI the embryologist selects normal looking sperm undewr wan win.-eshg.org268 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.038 The contribution of histone modifications to fetal programming syndrome, a well-defined disorder characterized by distdien cnto vcoraniofacial of adult disease - studies in offspring of mothers with gestational features, ocular colobomata and a neuronal migraAtCioTnB defect. Using whole- diabetes exome sequencing of a patient-parent trio, we identified a missense A. Fitzner1, M. Wolf1, N. El Hajj2, G. Pliushch2, E. Schneider2, M. Aretz3, H. Lehnen3, T. mutation in the cytoplasmic actin-encoding gene . Haaf2, U. Zechner1; P11.036 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, University Würzburg, Detection of Interstrand and Intrastrand DNA Crosslinks with Two- Würzburg, Germany, 3Städtische Kliniken, Mönchengladbach, Germany. Dimensional Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis B. Gudmundsson1, H. G. Thormar1,2, S. Thongthip3, A. Smogorzewska3, J. J. Jonsson4,1; 1Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2BioCule Inc.,, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Laboratory of Genome Maintenance, Rockefeller Several human epidemiological studies and experimental animal studies University, New York, NY, United States, 4Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, link in utero conditions very early in development with adverse effects on Landspitali, Reykjavik, Iceland. the risk of developing obesity, diabetes and other metabolic diseases later in life. Children born to mothers with obesity and/or diabetes have been shown to have a greater prevalence of metabolic disorders later in child- Two-Dimensional Strandness-Dependent Electrophoresis (2D-SDE) is a no- hood, adolescence and adulthood. Epigenetic modifications of gene expres- vel technique for nucleic acid analysis to assess quality of samples, efficiency sion by DNA methylation and histone modifications are very attractive can- of molecular procedures and DNA damage. In the first dimension nucleic didates for modulating these fetal programming effects. To investigate the acid fragments are separated based on length and strandness i.e. double- impact of maternal overnutrition on the epigenome of the offspring, we aim stranded DNA, single-stranded DNA and RNA•DNA hybrids. The nucleic at analyzing the histone modification profiles of candidate genes in chorio- acids are heat denatured before the second dimension electrophoresis and nic villi of newborns from mothers with insulin-dependent gestational dia- thereafter fragments separate only based on length. After 2D separation, dif- betes (GDM), dietary-treated GDM, and healthy controls (without GDM and ferent arcs can be seen representing different strandness and lengths of the overweight) using Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) real-time PCR. nucleic acids in the original sample. We started our analysis with the maternally imprinted MEST gene since our We tested if 2D-SDE could be used to detect DNA crosslinks. Patients with previous studies detected a significantly decreased DNA methylation at this Fanconi anemia (FA), a group of rare recessive disorders with heterogenic gene in offspring of mothers with GDM. First experiments revealed a marked clinFiAcNalC fAeatureFs,A aNrCe De1xtremely susceptible to DNA crosslinking agents. Hu- increase of the activating histone H3-lysine 4 trimethylation and histone H3- man genomic DNA in solution and fibroblast cell cultures with mutations lysine 9 acetylation marks that is associated with maternal GDM. No signi- in and genes were treated with the different crosslinking ficant changes in the repressive histone H3-lysine 27 trimethylation mark agents diepoxybutane, mitomycin C and cisplatin and analysed with 2D-SDE. were observed. Histone modification analysis of several other candidate ge- Increased amount of DNA migrating behind normal dsDNA was observed as nes is also in progress. These preliminary results support the view that ear- expected for molecules with interstrand crosslinks since they prevent full ly exposure to overnutrition involves not only altered DNA methylation but denaturation of dsDNA. Intrastrand crosslinks causing bending of nucleic also changes in histone modifications that possibly lead to increased MEST acids and ssDNA migrating in front of arc dsDNA were also observed. Lesi- gene expression and effects on fetal programming of adult disease. ons were dosage-dependent and correlated with cytogenetic abnormalities. P11.039 Repair efficiency, as measured with 2D-SDE, was lower in the FA cell types Elucidating the role of FOXP1 in striatal development compared to the wild-type cells. C. Bacon, G. Rappold; 2D-SDE has potential use in research, for Fanconi anemia diagnosis, and in Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, chemosensitivity testing as the cytotoxicity of many cancer medications de- Germany. pends on their DNA crosslinking ability. De novo FOXP1 P11.037 Application of next generation sequencing to identify causative heterozygous gene deletions were recently idFeOnXtiPfi1ed in 3 pa- variant at the BCL11A locus tients with intellectual disability and language impairment. These findings, F. Danjou1, L. Usala2, L. Perseu2, C. Sidore2,3,4, F. Busonero2, R. Berutti3,5, F. Reinier5, together with support from independent studies, show that may play A. Angius2,5, A. Maschio2,4, C. Jones5, F. Anni1, S. Satta1, F. Demartis1, N. Ramaiah6, G. a role in both cognitive as well as language development. This is supported Abecasis4, D. Schlessinger6, R. Galanello1, F. Cucca2,3, S. Sanna2, M. Uda2; by the fact that Foxp1 is strongly expressed in specific brain structures, par- 1Clinica Pediatrica 2a, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie - Università ticularly in the striatum. To date, very little is known about the role of FOXP1 di Cagliari, Ospedale Regionale Microcitemie ASL8, Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca in brain development. Examination of different developing brain structures Genetica e Biomedica (IRGB), Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, Monserrato, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, in the absence of FOXP1 would shed light on the neurodevelopmental pa- Università di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 4Center for Statistical Genetics, Department of thways in which it is playing a role. We have used a knockout mouse model Biostatistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, 5Center for Advanced to investigate the role of Foxp1 in early striatal development. The striatum Studies, Research, and Development in Sardinia (CRS4), AGCT Program, Parco Scientifico is composed mainly of medium spiny neurons (MSNs) which can be divi- e tecnologico della Sardegna, Pula, Italy, 6Intramural Research Program, National ded into patch and matrix MSNs and form axonal connections with other Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, United States. components of the basal ganglia. Analysis of the Foxp1 knockout brain using various immunohistochemical and histological stains, which identify patch and matrix MSNs, have revealed that these specific neuronal populations are In the past few years, genome-wide association studies have improved our seemingly unaffected up to E14.5. We have additionally used axon tracing understanding of the molecular basis of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels, which techniques to trace the striatal projections to the substantia nigra and these is one well known ameliorating factor of both beta-thalassemia and sickle experiments revealed no misprojection of these axons. Taken together our cell anemia disorders. This approach led to the identification of the BCL11A results show that Foxp1, which is strongly expressed in the striatum is not transcription factor as one of the main genetic modifier of the two disease essential for early striatal development and that its function is likely to be phenotypes. rather more central in later developmental stages. Although several studies have shown that BCL11A functions as a develop- P11.040 mental stage-specific repressor of HbF expression controlling globin swit- Role of CTCF protein in regulating FMR1 gene transcription. ching both in human and mouse, the specific contribution of associated vari- M. Goracci1,2, S. Lanni1,2, L. Borrelli1,2, E. Tabolacci1,2, G. Neri1,2; ants in gene action is still unclear. Here we report the integration of data from 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Rome, Italy, 2Catholic University, Rome, Italy. genotyping and targeted and whole-genome sequencing using next generati- on technology to identify causative variants at the BCL11A locus. We performed at two steps imputation using BCL11A targeted sequencing Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is mostly caused by expansion and subsequent of 33 patients with Thalassemia Intermedia (300x coverage, on average) and methylation of the CGG repeat at the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene (full muta- low pass whole-genome sequencing of 347 unrelated individuals from the tion). Rare individuals of normal intelligence, carrying an unmethylated SardiNIA project (4x coverage, on average) to impute the discovered variants full mutation (UFM), have been reported and the epigenetic modifications in 2343 individuals, from the same cohort, genotyped with Affymetrix 500K in their FMR1 gene were previously characterized. CTCF (CCCCTC-binding and 6.0 arrays. Accounting for all known HbF levels modifiers, the associati- factor), a zin-finger protein, is an important regulator of the transcription of on at the BCL11A locus can be explained by two independent variants, map- genes harbouring trinucleotide repeats, acting as chromatin insulator. We ping 304 bp apart. They represent the strongest haplotypic signal within the investigated the role of CTCF in regulating FMR1 gene expression and ob- gene and are likely to be the causative polymorphisms. Experimental assays served that the amount of CTCF bound to FMR1 was higher in the UFM cell are ongoing to assess their specific impact in BCL11A function. lines and in normal controls, compared to FXS cells. Knock-down of CTCF www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 269 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.043 Gene expression analysis using functional genomics techniques with anti-CTCF siRNA resulted in a reduction of FMR1 transcripts (both sen- D. Vlad1, V. Dumitrascu1, C. Gug2, C. Gurban1, R. Popescu3, M. Duma4, C. Vlad5, A. Matusz6; se and antisense) in normal and UFM fibroblasts. After CTCF knock-down, 1Department of Pharmacology and Biochemistry, ``Victor Babes`` University of Medicine the epigenetic analysis of the FMR1 promoter demonstrated a reduction of and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2Department of Genetics, ``Victor Babes`` University H3-K4 methylation and an increase of H3-K9 methylation, while the DNA of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 3Department of Molecular Biology, ``Victor Babes`` University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 4Department methylation of the FMR1 promoter region and of the upstream methylation of Clinical Laboratory, Emergency County Hospital, Timisoara, Romania, 5Dentissimo boundary remained unmodified. CTCF knock-down affected its binding to Dental Care, Timisoara, Romania, 6European General Practice Research Network the 5’ UTR of the FMR1 gene. These results suggest that CTCF is a modulator Romanian National Representative, Timisoara, Romania. of the FMR1 transcription, given that its depletion causes FMR1 transcript Background: reduction and the transition to a heterochromatic configuration. The elu- cidation of the mechanism sparing UFM males from inactivating their full This work presents an overview of evolutionary models and mutation is important for planning therapeutic attempts at converting me- some functional genomics methodologies in the specific context of analy- thylated into unmethylated full mutations, restoring FMR1 gene expression. zing the gene expression. Supported by FRAXA Foundation and Telethon Onlus. Functional genomics techniques are intended to aid in rapidly identifying P11.041 gene function by correlating gene expression with cell or tissue phenotype. The prediction of Pathogenesis of Mitochondrial 12397 A>G Despite many complex studies performed, the clinical utility of genotype- substitution in Friedreich’s ataxia with Bioinformatic Procedures phenotype associations remains unclear. M. Heidari, M. Khatami; Profiling transcriptomes and examining the coordinate expression of genes Department of Biology, Science School, Yazd University, Yazd, Iran, Yazd, Islamic in diverse pathobiologic pathways is now possible with techniques such as Republic of Iran. gene array analysis. Functional genomics techniques compare mRNA transcript pools (transcrip- tomes), they can also be used to compare genomes, and to study the prote- Friedreich’s ataxia (FRDA) is the most common ataxia that has an autosomal ome. We use those methods in which no prior gene sequence is required recessive inheritance. The disorder caused by mitochondrial defects. The (open architecture systems), as well as those in which prior sequence data prediction of pathogenesis of nucleotide changes by bioinformatics is useful are required (closed architecture systems). method for Geneticians. In this study, Mitochondrial NADH dehydrogenase The aim of this work is the most widely used functional genomics metho- IV (ND5) gene was investigated by PCR-SSCP in 25 patients. The samples dology, gene array analysis applied to gynecological fields for diagnose the with shift bands sent for sequencing. Sequencing results were determined 12397 A>G substitution in 2 patients. This substitution causes to change of fKuetyu rwe odrisdesa: ses of the new born and to prevent the surgical complications of Thr to Ala (T21A). The determination of pathogenesis of this mutation were tAhbeb mreavlfioartmioantsiv: e interventions in the first days of life. gene expression, microarray technology, evolutionary models. performed by SIFT database (Sorts Intolerant from Tolerant amino acid sub- mRNA - messenger ribonucleic acid stitutions). The Substitution at position 21 from T to A is predicted to affect P11.044 protein function with a score of 0.00 and median sequence conservation is Systematic Characterization of PRR-activated Monocyte 4.32. Although the prediction of this database is sequence homology-based Transcriptional Program tool, but that is useful method for the determination of effect of mutation S. Kim1,2, J. Becker1, J. Schumacher1, V. Hornung2; on phenotype. 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Bonn, P11.042 Germany. Correlation analysis of clinical parameters with epigenetic modifications in the DUX4 promoter in FSHD J. Balog1, P. E. Thijssen1, J. C. de Greef2, B. Shah3, B. G. M. van Engelen4, K. Yokomori5, S. J. Dynamic cellular processes, such as the response to an invading pathogen, Tapscott6, R. Tawil7, S. M. van der Maarel1; are governed by complex transcriptional regulatory networks. These net- 1Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3University of Rochester works typically involve a large number of transcription factors (TFs) that Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Rochester, NY, United States, 4Department are activated in different combinations and in a certain temporal order to of Neurology, Radboud University, Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, produce a particular cellular response. 5Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, University of California, Irvine, Here, we pursued a gene expression profiling strategy to systematically CA, United States, 6Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, explore regulators of transcription after stimulation with prototypical mi- Seattle, WA, United States, 7Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical crobial ligands. To this effect, we isolated monocytes from four healthy do- Center, Rochester, NY, United States. nors and exposed the cells to pathogenic compounds such as viral nucleic acids. We measured mRNA expression at six time points after stimulation. Clustering differentially expressed genes via smoothing spline clustering Aim of our study was to identify relationships between epigenetic parame- (SSC) method revealed a broad range of activation kinetics. We hypothesize ters correlating with a relaxed chromatin state of the DUX4 promoter regi- that clustered genes are to some extent co-regulated by common TFs. To on and clinical severity as measured by a clinical severity score or muscle find overrepresentation of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) we con- pathologic changes in D4Z4 contraction-dependent (FSHD1) and -indepen- ducted promoter analysis using TFs whose expression was validated in our dent (FSHD2) facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy patients. microarray data set. These results revealed a systematic overview of novel 21 primary fibroblast and 26 primary myoblast cultures originating from transcriptional regulators that may play a role in the response to pathogens. patients with FSHD and controls were analyzed. Histone modification le- Elucidating the transcriptional network and identifying key regulators and vels were determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation. We examined their functions will greatly enhance our understanding of the innate immu- correlations between the chromatin relaxation score (CRS) defined by the ne response and its role in infection. H3K9me3:H3K4me2 ratio and an age corrected clinical severity score (CSS) P11.045 or muscle pathology score (MPS). Possible relationships were investigated Generation and comprehensive phenotyping of mouse models at the using linear regression analysis and significance was tested by Pearson’s ICS product-moment coefficient. H. Meziane; We found a significant difference of the CRS between controls and patients ICS, Illkirch, France. with FSHD1 and between controls and patients with FSHD2. Tissue specific differences in CRS were also observed. We also found a near-significant re- lationship between CRS and the age corrected CSS in fibroblasts but not in The Institut Clinique de la Souris (ICS) is a research infrastructure of ex- myoblasts. Surprisingly, we found a strong correlation between the MPS of cellence for translational research and functional genomics. Founded in the vastus lateralis and the CSS. 2002 by Prof. Pierre Chambon, it provides a comprehensive set of highly Our results confirm the D4Z4 chromatin relaxation previously shown to be specialized mouse services to scientists from academia and industry. The associated with FSHD in a small number of samples. A possible relationship ICS combines the capacity of generating mutant mice on a large scale with between clinical and epigenetic parameters could be established in patient a high-throughput and comprehensive phenotypic analysis of mice, but also fibroblasts, but not in myoblasts. The strong correlation between the MPS customized protocols to better answer the scientist’s needs. The ICS pheno- of the vastus lateralis and the CSS suggests that this muscle can be used to typing platforms are adapted for the study of genetically engineered mouse study for surrogate markers of overall disease severity. models, as well as for pharmacological and toxicological studies, allowing better understanding of human diseases and their underlying physiological and pathological basis. More than 250 assays are available for evaluation www.eshg.org www.eshg.org270 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 of various functions including behavior, cognition, sensory systems, nutri- ted to be associated with disease loci (n = 59) or quantitative trait loci (n = tion, metabolism, clinical chemistry, cardiovascular, respiratory function 20), indicating a possible functional mechanism for these eSNPs. Our data and anatomopathology. Beside its services, the ICS is a member of several demonstrate that eQTLs in whole blood are highly robust and reproducible European programs: EUCOMM (www.eucomm.org) to generate the mutant across studies and highlight the relevance of whole blood eQTL mapping in strains, EMMA (www.emmanet.org) to archive and distribute them, and EU- prioritization of GWAS candidate genes in humans. MODIC (www.eumodic.org) to phenotypically characterize 500 knock-out P11.048 models. The EUMODIC is extended to the 20 000 potential genes identified The novel BTB-kelch Protein, KBTBD8, is ubiquitously expressed but in the mouse genome and continued by the International Mouse Phenoty- specifically localized in the Cis-Golgi-Apparatus ping Consortium (www.mousephenotype.org). ICS is also a partner of the S. Lührig, S. Kolb, J. Adamczyk, N. Mellies, J. Nolte; Fondation Maladies Rares. Up to now, about 80 mouse mutant lines were Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany. phenotyped and around 80% of the analyzed lines show at least one phe- notypic trait. The data are available to the scientific community (www.euro- phenome.org), as well as the mouse models through EMMA. Proteins of the BTB/Kelch family are known to be involved in multiple bio- P11.046 logical processes such as migration, cytoskeletal arrangement, regulation of Integrating genomic technologies in clinical practice: A novel cell morphology, protein ubiquitination and gene expression. Kbtbd8 is a approach new undescribed member of this family. The gene was found to be highly Y. J. Trakadis; expressed in mouse pluripotent stem cells by analyzing their transcriptome McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. and was therefore suggested to be a putative pluripotency regulating gene. Comparative analysis of the gene and protein sequences revealed a high conservation throughout evolution especially in the characteristic domains Medical genetics is shifting from the present “phenotype-first” medical mo- of BTB, BACK and Kelch. del to a “data-first” model which leads to multiple complexities. This abstract Starting with expression analysis on RNA level, Kbtbd8 was found to be ubi- discusses a “phenotype-first” approach, Individualized Mutation-weighed quitously expressed in mouse and human cell lines and tissues. In mice two Phenotype On-line Search (I-MPOS), which could render widespread use transcripts can be detected - one full length and a shorter one lacking a part of Exome Sequencing (ES) and Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) in the of exon 1 - which encode for two isoforms of the protein. Next we performed immediate future practical, ethical and clinically useful. In brief, patients Western Blot and indeed both suggested isoforms were detectable at the have their exome/genome sequenced and their encrypted data stored on predicted size. By immunocytochemistry on mouse and human cell lines we a password-protected platform which remains at the disposal of the indi- found a striking staining pattern next to the nucleus which we later identi- vidual patient. A patient presents to clinic with a specific medical concern. fied as cis- Golgi apparatus by staining with GM130 antibody. Specificity of The physician performs a clinical evaluation and identifies some iemportant the KBTBD8 antibody was confirmed by tagging the KBTBD8 protein with features. After obtaining authorization, the clinician temporarily and anony- an E2 tag. Detection of E2 and endogeneous KBTBD8 in transfected NIH-3T3 mously uploads the patient’s encrypted genomic data to a search ngine (I- cells showed a perfect overlap suggesting the specificity of the antibody. MPOSE) which simultaneously operates on the patient’s encrypted data and In conclusion, Kbtdb8 is a new member of the BTB/Kelch superfamily that is on a regularly updated database containing all well characterized genetic specifically expressed in the cis-Golgi apparatus in mouse and human. diagnoses. I-MPOSE identifies the genetic changes present in the patient’s P11.049 sequenced encrypted genome relative to the reference genome. Using pre- Epigenome-wide association study for HDL-cholesterol levels in set criteria, I-MPOSE automatically assigns a weight score to each variant familial hypercholesterolemia based on the level of certainty for its pathogenicity. The physician performs S. P. Guay1,2, G. Voisin3, D. Brisson2, J. Munger1,2, B. Lamarche4, D. Gaudet2,5, L. Bouchard1,2; a database search using keywords related to the clinically assessed pheno- 1Department of biochemistry, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, type thereby providing an initial ranking of possible genetic diseases. This 2ECOGENE-21 and Lipid Clinic, Chicoutimi Hospital, Saguenay, QC, Canada, 3Genome Québec Innovatioin Centre, Montréal, QC, Canada, 4Institute of Nutraceuticals and initial ranking is then adjusted by I-MPOSE based on the weight scores au- Functional Foods, Univerisité Laval, Québec, QC, Canada, 5Department of Medicine, tomaticaly assigned to the variants identified by ES/WGS. The proposed ap- Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada. proach allows for a more efficient prioritization of the genes to be tested in a clinical lab and an incremental integration of genomic technologies into clinical practice. Background: A low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) level is a P11.047 well-known cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk factor. Although its heritabili- Impact of common regulatory single nucleotide variants on gene ty estimate is high, a few associated genetic variations accounting for a small expression profiles in whole blood percentage of its heritability has been reported. The aim of this study was K. Heim1, D. Mehta1, C. Herder2, M. Carstensen2, G. Eckstein1, C. Schurmann3, G. Homuth3, to assess whether epigenetic changes, a non-traditional heritable mecha- M. Nauck4, U. Völker3, M. Roden2,5, T. Illig6, C. Gieger6, T. Meitinger1,7, H. Prokisch1,7; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany, 2Institute for Clinical nism, may account for HDL C variability. The study was conducted in familial Diabetology, German Diabetes Center, Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research at Heinrich hypercholesterolemia (FH), a recognized human model to study CVD risk Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald, modulators. Interfaculty Institute for Genetics and Functional Genomics, Greifswald, Germany, Methods/Results: A genome-wide DNA methylation analysis (Infinium 4University Medicine Greifswald, Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory HumanMethylation27 BeadChip, Illumina) was performed on blood DNA Medicine, Greifswald, Germany, 5Department of Metabolic Diseases, University Clinics samples obtained from FH men subjects with low (L-HDLC; n=11) or high Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine University, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Institute of Epidemiology, (H-HDLC; n=11) HDL-C concentrations. A total of 619 loci (β-value bet- Helmholtz Center, Munich, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University, ween 0.10 and 0.90; p<0.05) were found differentially methylated between Munich, Germany. groups. Among these loci, 232 were hypomethylated in the L-HDLC group compared to the H-HDLC group, whereas 387 were hypermethylated. Accor- ding to gene ontology analyses (GeneCodis 2.0 software), hypomethylated Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have uncovered susceptibility regions revealed a pathway related to lipid metabolism (p<0.02), whereas loci for a large number of complex traits. Functional interpretation of can- hypermethylated regions were more likely to be associated with inflamm- didate genes identified by GWAS and confident assignment of the causal va- atory (p<0.0003) and oxidative stress pathways (p<0.003). Furthermore, riant still remains a major challenge. Expression quantitative trait (eQTL) the initial association with one of the top differentially methylated locus lo- mapping has facilitated identification of risk loci for quantitative traits and cated in the promoter of Troponin T type 1 gene was replicated in a cohort might allow prioritization of GWAS candidate genes. One major challenge of of 276 FH subjects using bisulfite pyrosequencing. eQTL studies is the need for larger sample numbers and for replication. The Conclusion: These results suggest that epigenome-wide changes contribute aim of this study was to evaluate the robustness and reproducibility of who- to the interindividual variations in plasma HDL-C levels in FH patients. If re- le blood eQTLs in humans and test their value in identification of putative plicated, these findings could influence our understanding of the molecular functional variants involved in the etiology of complex traits. In the current mechanisms involved in the pathophysiological processes of CVD. study, we performed comphrehensive eQTL mapping from whole blood. The discovery sample included 322 Caucasians from a general population samp- P11.050 le (KORA F3). We identified 363 cis eQTLs and 14 trans eQTLs after strin- Massive targeted resequencing for the diagnosis of Hearing gent Bonferroni correction for multiple testing. Of these, 98.6% and 75% Impairment: a 69-gene panel R. Miñambres1, E. Gómez -Rosas2,3, A. Romera1, C. Collado1, R. Rodríguez-De Pablos1, V. of cis and trans eQTLs respectively could be replicated in two independent populations (KORA F4 (n = 740) and SHIP-TREND (n = 653)). Furthermore, we identified evidence of regulatory variation for SNPs previouswly wrepwor.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 271 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Fernández-Pedrosa1, D. Cantalapiedra1, L. Pérez-Cabornero1, M. Lázaro1, P. Fernández1, C. Buades1, J. Rosa-Rosa1, J. Triviño1, S. Zúñiga1, Á. Ballester1, M. Gil-Borja1, I. del Castillo3,2, S. Santillán1; in polypyrimidine tracts, with aim of disrupting long uridine tracts to pre- 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, IRYCIS, vent hnRNP C binding and maintain binding of U2AF65. Cryptic exonization Unidad de Genética Molecular, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Biomédica en under hnRNP C regulation was verified in control and hnRNP C knock-down Red de Enfermedades Raras, Unidad 728, Madrid, Spain. conditions. Introduced mutations lead to constitutive inclusion of ALU ele- ments even in the presence of hnRNP C, what confirmed that hnRNP C regu- lates exonization of ALU elements through competition with U2AF65. Mo- Hearing impairment (HI) is the most frequent sensory disorder, with a big reover, exonization of Alu elements in hnRNP C knock-down conditions was impact in the quality of life of affected individuals. About 1 of 500 children shown to regulate inclusion of neighbouring alternative exons, as well as ef- present with prelingual HI. Genetic causes underlie over 60% of cases. Early fecting normal polyadenylation process. By constructing examples of mini- detection is essential for the success of special education and treatments. genes with naturally occurring sequence polymorphisms, we demonstrated To date, conventional techniques have been insufficient to provide a com- important role of Alu exonization in primate evolution and in disease. prehensive molecular diagnosis, given the high number of genes that are P11.053 implicated in HI. Loss of heat shock protein HSPA4 aggravates pressure overload- We designed an NGS targeted resequencing panel for 69 genes, including: i) induced myocardial damage all genes currently known to be involved in non-syndromic HI (NSHI), with B. A. Mohamed1, A. Z. Barakat1, W. Zimmermann2, R. E. Bittner3, C. Mühlfeld4, M. autosomal dominant, recessive, X-linked and maternal-mitochondrial inhe- Hünlich5, W. Engel1, L. S. Maier5, I. M. Adham1; ritance patterns; ii) genes involved in some syndromic conditions, in which 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, Germany, Göttingen, Germany, HI is the clinical sign that is earliest observed. The panel includes a total of 2Department of Pharmacology/Heart Research Center, University of Göttingen, Germany, 0.49 Mb comprising coding exons, splice sites and 5’ and 3‘ UTR regions of Göttingen, Germany, 3Department of Neuromuscular Research/Center of Anatomy & Cell the 69 genes. These regions were fully sequenced in 12 control patients with Biology, University of Vienna, Austria, Vienna, Australia, 4Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Giessen, Germany, Giessen, Germany, 5Department of Cardiology known mutations and in two HapMap cell lines (NA12144 and NA12892). and Pneumology/Heart Research Center, University of Göttingen, Germany, Göttingen, Enrichment of the exonic regions was carried out using SureSelect Enrich- Germany. ment System (Agilent) and sequencing was performed with a SOLiDv4 Ge- netic Analyzer (Life Technologies). Sequencing reads were mapped and ali- gned against a reference sequence (GRCh37/hg19); variants were identified Failure of molecular chaperones to direct the correct folding of newly syn- and classified. We present the results obtained during the validation of our thesized proteins leads to the accumulation of misfolded proteins in cells. panel, showing a high level of efficiency. Our targeted re-sequencing system HSPA4 is a member of the heat shock protein 110 family (HSP110) that acts offers massive analysis of 69 genes involved in HI, making the comprehensi- as a nucleotide exchange factor of HSP70 chaperones. We found that the ex- ve molecular diagnosis of this disorder feasible. pressionH sopfa H4S PA4 is upregulated in murine hearts subjected to pressure P11.051 overload and in failing hHusmpaa4n hearts. To investigate the cardiac function of Generating complex descriptions of sequence variants using HGVS HSPA4, knockout (KO) mice were generated and exhibited cardiac hy- nomenclature based on sequence comparison. pertrophy and fibrosis. KO hearts were characterized by a significant J. F. J. Laros; LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands. increase in heart weight/body weight ratio, elevated Hesxppar4ession of hyper- trophic and fibrotic gene markers, and concentric hypertrophy with pre- served contractile functions. Cardiac hypertrophy in KO hearts was associated with enhanced activation of gp130-STAT3, CaMKII, and calcineu- Descriptions of sequence variants can be checked and corrected with the Mutalyzer sequence variation nomenclature checker to prevent mistakes rin-NFAT signaling. Further anHaslypsae4s revealed a significant increase in cross sectional area of cardiomyocytes, and in expression levels of hypertrophic and uncertainties which might contribute to undesired errors in clinical markers in cultured neonatal KO cardiomyocytes suggesting that the diagnosis. Construction of variant descriptions accepted by Mutalyzer re- hypertrophy of mutant mice was a result of primary defects in cardiomyo- quires comparison of the reference sequence and the variant sequence and cytes. Gene expression profile in hearts of 3.5-week-old mice revealed a dif- basic knowledge of the Human Genome Varia- tion Society sequence variant ferentially expressed gene sets related to ion channels and stress response. nomenclature recommendations. With the advert of sophisticated variant Taken together, these results reveal that HSPA4 is implicated in protection callers (e.g., Pindel) and the rise of long read sequencers (e.g., PacBio), the against pressure overload-induced heart failure. chance of finding a complex variant increases and so does the need to de- P11.054 scribe these variants. An algorithm performing the sequence comparison Development of a single comprehensive gene screening test for would help users to describe complex variants. The algorithm closely fol- Familial Hypercholesterolaemia using Next Generation Sequencing lows the human approach to describe a variant. It will first find the „area of P. Dean1, L. Yarram1, G. Bayly2, A. Taylor3, A. Day4, K. Haralambos5, S. Whatley5, I. change“, and then finds the largest overlap between the original area and the McDowell5, M. Greenslade1, M. Williams1; area in the observed sequence. This process is repeated until the smallest 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Bristol Royal Infirmary, Bristol, description is found. This algorithm ensures that the same description will United Kingdom, 3Royal United Hospital, Bath, United Kingdom, 4Weston General be generated every time researchers observe this variant. Furthermore, no Hospital, Western-super-Mare, United Kingdom, 5University Hospital of Wales, Cardiff, knowledge of the HGVS nomenclature is required to generate this descripti- United Kingdom. on. This not only helps clinicians to generate the correct description, but its implementation also allows automation of the description process. We have incorporated this algorithm in the Mutalyzer suite under the name Descrip- Bristol Genetics Laboratory provides a comprehensive three level genetic tion Extractor. tLeDsLtiRng service for Familial HyperchoPlCeSstKe9rolaemia (AFPHO)B using; level 1 FH20 P11.052 ARMS for 20 common mutations; level 2 MLPA and Sanger sequencing of Minigene study of cryptic exons inclusion controlled by competition ; level 3 Sanger sequencing of and the exon 26 mutation of hnRNP C with the core splicing machinery hotspot. Over aL DthLrRee year period of service provision a variant was identi- M. Tajnik1, J. König2, K. Zarnack3, D. Glavač1, J. Ule2; fied in 93/232 index cases (40%). The ARMS methodology detected 48% of 1University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, positive cases, sequencing 46% and the MLPA assay 6%.To reduce test Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3The European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust costs,L rDedLRucAe PtuOrBn arouPnCdS Kti9mes and increase tAhPrOouBghput we are developing Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, United Kingdom. a single assay for FH to detect all point mLuDtaLtRioAnPs1 and copy number variati- on in , and . The coverage of has increased to include all coding exons and an additional gene, , which is associated with It was previously shown that heterogenous nuclear ribonucleoprotein C1/ autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia, is included in the panel. The as- C2 (hnRNP C) silences inclusion of alternative exons by binding to long uri- say uses a targeted capture next generation sequencing approach (Haloplex dine tracts at the 3‘ splice sites of pre-mRNAs. With genome-wide approach PCR, Illumina MiSeq) and a bioinformatic analysis pipeline is under deve- using iCLIP and RNAseq methods, we identified its binding to the polypyri- lopment using the Galaxy platform. The assay is currently being validated midine tracts is mediated by direct competition with the core splicing factor using 32 known positive control samples comprising: 25 samples with point U2AF65. Observed binding at deep-intronic sequence positions was shown mutations and indels, and 7 samples with exon duplications/deletions. To to prevent inclusion of cryptic exons, of which majority is represented by explore the benefits of extended screening we are analysing a cohort of pre- ALU elements. Further, we performed more detailed study with use of re- vious test-negative patients with a high scoring clinical/biochemical index porter minigene assays, so far the most effectual choice to study regulation for FH. A comprehensive high throughput assay at reduced cost should fa- of alternative splicing by RNA-binding proteins in vivo. The competition of cilitate extended uptake and commissioning of FH testing in the UK and be hnRNP C and U2AF65 was confirmed with minigenes containing mutations generally applicable to all European populations. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org272 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.055 Genomics and transcriptomics in Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: from the bench to clinics sue. CTAs have been also recognized to be found in some tumor tissues .It S. R. Santos1,2, V. Marques2, M. Pires2, A. C. Nunes2, C. M. Machado3, I. M. Gaspar4, D. has been reported by many researchers that the expression of CTAs could Brito5, I. M. Carreira6, F. M. Couto3, C. Monteiro7, A. T. Freitas8, A. R. Fernandes1,2,9; be served as biomarkers to diagnosis, prognostic and immunotherapy in 1Centro de Química Estrutural, Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, some cancers. Computational approaches have been used for the identifica- 2Universitdade Lusófona, Humanidades e Tecnologias, Lisbon, Portugal, 3LaSIGE, Centro tion CTAs mRNA expression pattern and led to subsequent identification of de Informática, Universidade Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 4Hospital Santa Cruz, CHLO, many novel genes with similar characteristics to known CTAs. Lisbon, Portugal, 5Hospital Lisbon North, Hospital Santa Maria, Lisbon, Portugal, 6Fac. In this work we have used the UniGene database for gene clusters composed Medicina, Universidade de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 7Fac. Farmácia, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal, 8Instituto de Engenharias de Sistemas e Computadores, of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) generated from normal testis and tumor- Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal, 9Departamento de Ciências da Vida, derived cDNA libraries. Using this data base, we analyzed the entire human Faculdade de Ciências e Tecnologia, UNL, Caparica, Portugal. genome in order to identify new CTAs gene by some selective ESTs. These candidate genes subsequently can be assayed with experimental ap- proaches to reconfirm their roles as CTAs genes. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), the most common hereditary cardio- In this presentation we will introduce some of the possible novel CTAs ge- vascular disease, affecting 1:500 individuals in the general population, is ty- nes. pically characterized by genetic and allelic heterogeneity (more than 1000 P11.058 mutations in 30 genes). The understanding of the genetic basis of HCM, Gene-Specific DNA Methylation Analysis in Inflammatory Bowel namely the identification of new pathological biomarkers of heterogenei- Disease ty that could contribute to genotype -phenotype correlations is of extreme L. Merten1, M. Wolf1, M. Götz2, U. Zechner1; importance. In this regard, the correlation between genomic and transcrip- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg tomic profiling and their integration into the clinical data was performed for University Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. 120 Portuguese Caucasian HCM-patients. DNA was extracted from periphe- ral blood samples and genotyping was performed by iPLEX Mass Array and High Resolution Melting to detect known and novel DNA variants in sarco- The two main types of Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) are Crohn’s di- meric/non-sarcomeric genes, respectively. RNA extracted from cardiac and sease (CD) and Ulcerative colitis (UC): CD can affect the whole bowel wall of skeletal biopsies from HCM-patients were used for both sarcomere and non- each part of the gastrointestinal tract, while UC is restricted to the mucosa sarcomere transcript levels and microRNAs profiling. Unsupervised machi- of the colon and the rectum. The etiology of IBD is unknown but thought to ne learning methods were used to distinguish differences between groups involve environmental, immunological, microbiological and genetic factors. of patients, tissues and genes. 85 of the 120 genotyped patients presented A contribution of epigenetic factors to IBD pathogenesis has been assumed genetic alterations, 14 of them are novel ones and not presented in 200 chro- but not been studied in detail up to now. We used using bisulfite pyrose- mossomes from healthy control individuals. All the novel mutations affected quencing to investigate the methylation levels at the promotor regions of highly conserved residues. The most frequently mutated genes were MYH7 nine IBD candidate genes in inflammatory and non-inflammatory terminal and TNNT2. Statistical analysis revealed a strong correlation between MYH7 ileal and colonic mucosal biopsies from IBD patients as well as terminal ileal and TNNI3 expression pattern in cardiac and skeletal muscles. Transcrip- and colonic mucosal biopsies from non-IBD patients (controls). Our analysis tional profile also revealed an upregulation of CSRP3 gene in cardiac tissue. revealed no significant methylation differences between terminal ileal bi- microRNAs expression profile changes observed during HCM remodeling, opsies of CD patients and controls. MUC6 and IL17REL, however, displayed seems very promising to identify novel pathological biomarkers. significantly increased methylation levels in inflammatory colon samples P11.056 of CD patients compared to non-inflammatory patient samples and control Heterodisomy at 20q as a cause of Pseudohypoparathyroidism-Ib samples. Methylation levels of MUC2, MUC6 and IL17REL were even more I. Garin1, R. L. Poole2, L. Suarez3, L. Martorell4, D. Mackay2, G. Perez de Nanclares1; 1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Wessex Regional Genetics significantly increased in non-inflammatory and inflammatory colon samp- Laboratory, Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, United Kingdom, 3Endocrinology les of UC patients compared to controls. MUC15 was the only gene with a Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu,, Barcelona, Spain, 4Molecular Genetics significantly decreased methylation detected in both non-inflammatory Department, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain. and inflammatory colon samples of UC patients. Overall, the detected DNA methylation changes appeared to correlate with the progression of IBD. A comprehensive understanding of the epigenetic mechanisms contributing Introducction: Pseudohypoparathyroidism-Ib results from epigenetic GNAS to IBD will likely enable development of new therapeutic agents and strate- defects. Familial and sporadic forms of PHP-Ib have been reported with di- gies targeting epigenetically dysregulated genes. stinct GNAS imprinting patterns: familial PHP-Ib patients have an exon A/B- P11.059 only imprinting defect whereas sporadic cases have abnormal imprinting of CHERISH - Improving Diagnoses of Mental Retardation in Children in the four differentially methylated regions (DMRs) in GNAS. In addition, they Eastern Europe and Central Asia through Genetic Characterisation present a different underlying genetic alteration. and Bioinformatics/Statistics - a GENOMIC PROJECT Objective: to analyze the methylation pattern at GNAS locus in a patient C. Graziano1, E. Bonora1, J. A. Hettinger2, K. Männik3, P. Magini1, M. Badura-Stronka4, E. diagnosed with Pseudohypoparathyroidism-Ib and to identify underlying Õiglane-Slik3, J. Kasnauskienè5, I. Lebedev6, M. Havlovicova7, D. Babikyan8, L. A. Livshits9, molecular genetic defect(s). T. Sarkisian8, A. Latos-Bieleńska4, V. Kučinskas5, Z. Sedlacek7, P. C. Patsalis2, A. Kurg3, G. Design: We have studied dosage and methylation pattern at GNAS locus in Romeo1; 1U.O. Genetica Medica Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Cytogenetics the patient and her family by MS-MLPA. We also analyzed microsatellite and and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3IMCB SNP markers along chromosome 20 looking for causative molecular altera- Dept. of Biotechnology University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4“Poznań University of tion. Medical Sciences“ Department of Medical Genetics, Poznań, Poland, 5Department of Results: We found that the index case and one of her brothers presented an Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius, Lithuania, 6Institute of Medical Genetics, Russian altered methylation pattern at GNAS locus. It seems that the genetic altera- Academy of Medical Sciences, Tomsk Scientific Centre, Tomsk, Russian Federation, tion causative of this epigenetic defect was a paternal heterodisomy at least 7Charles University Prague 2nd Medical School, Department of Biology and Medical at 20q13.13. Genetics, Prague, Czech Republic, 8Laboratory of Molecular Genetics Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 9National Academy of Sciences of Conclusion: Our work underlines the importance of analyzing apparently Ukraine IMBG, Kiev, Ukraine. healthy family members of affected patients because of the subtle clinical features. Additionally, we emphasize that obtaining parental samples is es- sential to exclude/confirm uniparental disomy (isodisomy or heterodisomy) The CHERISH consortium was funded by EU FP7 under grant agreement as a molecular underlying defect of Pseudohypoparathyroidism-Ib. #223692 and its first aim was the creation of a large collection of patients P11.057 with developmental delay (syndromic and non-syndromic), mainly from In silico approach to Identification of novel cancer/testis-antigen Eastern Europe. General information and updates can be retrieved through genes by Expressed Sequence Tag(EST) http://www.cherishproject.eu/. M. Foroutan1, R. Molania2, F. Mahjoubi2; During the first 2 years of the project, 233 patients underwent analysis 1Shahid Beheshti University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB)., Tehran, through a 44K (135 patients) or 105K (the remaining 98) array platform, to Islamic Republic of Iran. search for cryptic chromosome rearrangements. Of these, 166 patients were carriers of benign CNVs only, while 34 patients had “pathogenic” anomalies and 33 patients were carriers of a total of 39 variants of uncertain pathoge- Cancer testis antigens (CTAs) expressions are restricted to normal testis tis- nicity. Analysis of these last variants is underway. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 273 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 SNP-array analysis was performed on another group of patients (~450). gene. Family studies are in progress to determine segregation of the aberra- Analysis of variants is more complex due to high resolution of this assay tions with the disease and association with the phenotype. In addition, the and is being carried out by each partner. For instance, out of 95 patients performance of this new platform for the detection of CNCs associated with analyzed in the Armenian cohort, 7 had known micro-del/dup syndromes, ID will be assessed. 11 had variants interpreted as pathogenic, while 7 variants are still under P11.062 investigation. Large-scale validation and genotyping of inversions in the human A subset of patients with X-linked intellectual disability underwent analysis genome by inverse PCR through a highly specific array, covering most exons from known X-chro- C. Aguado1, S. Villatoro1, D. Izquierdo1, X. Estivill2, M. Cáceres1,3; mosome genes. Out of 46 cases, 41 turned out normal while 5 cases need 1Institut de Biotecnologia i Biomedicina, Universitat Autonòma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, further investigation. Barcelona, Spain, 2Genes and Disease Program, Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG- UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 3Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Global analysis of the identified variants will be presented. Barcelona, Spain. As a last part of the project, selected familial cases (1 autosomal dominant, 3 X-linked and 8 autosomal recessive), where chromosome rearrangements had been excluded, will undergo exome analysis through next generation In the last years, different types of structural variants (SVs), have been dis- sequencing. covered in the human genome and their importance to human health has P11.060 become increasingly clear. Typically arrays have been used to characterize Seeking for novel genes for autosomal recessive intellectual unbalanced changes. Inversions, however, are more difficult to study and disability in overlapping runs of homozygosity in a large sample of less known. In this study we investigate the general applicability of inverse consanguineous families PCR (iPCR) for the analysis of inversions. We have tested different reagents J. Bauer1, K. Eberlein1, R. Buchert1, S. Uebe1, A. Abboud2, A. Al-Khateeb2, M. Fakher2, S. Hamdan2, A. Ismael2, S. Muhammad2, A. Ekici1, J. Schumacher3,4, M. Nöthen3,4, A. Reis1, R. and conditions to optimize the iPCR method and designed a high-through- Abou Jamra1; put iPCR protocol to genotype inversions in a large number of individuals in 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, just one day and with a small amount of DNA (10 ng for each inversion). As 2Practising Paediatricians, Syria, Syrian Arab Republic, 3Department of Genomics, an example of the potential use of this method, we have analyzed 19 inver- Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, sions predicted in humans with a size between 8 kb to 200 kb and mediated University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. by inverted repeat sequences of 1.5-25 kb. First, we validated 17 of the 19 inversions in a panel of 9 Hapmap individuals (Yoruba, European, and Asi- an). Then, we genotyped these inversions in >60 additional European indi- A significant part of the unsolved cases of intellectual disability is probably viduals and found total frequencies for the inverted allele between 1.5% and of autosomal recessive inheritance pattern and shows an extreme hetero- 62%. For these inversions we also checked the genetic transmission in ~10 geneity. To discover novel genes causing autosomal recessive intellectual mother-father-child european trios. Finally, we have determined the possib- disability (ARID), 93 simplex, consanguineous families of Syrian descent le gene effects of the validated inversions, with around half of them changing with affected members were clinically examined and 316 individuals were the orientation of genes or exchanging the 3´or 5´ regions. In conclusion, the genome-wide genotyped using SNP chips (Illumina 610K and CytoSNP as iPCR is a powerful, simple and fast method for high-throughput validation well as Affymetrix 6.0). We conducted autozygosity mapping and identified and genotyping of a wide range of inversions. 552 runs of homozygosity (ROH). Fourteen families showed one ROH, 44 fa- P11.063 milies showed two, three or four ROHs, and 35 families showed five or more Producing iPS cells: a biobank service for translational genetic ROHs. We considered highly interesting candidate regions, i.e. with five or research more overlapping ROHs, and selected 31 candidate genes based on expres- D. A. Coviello1, M. Castagnetta1, C. Baldo1, S. Viaggi1, F. Fruscione2, F. Zara2, C. Minetti2; sion, function, and results of association studies of neurological phenoitny psielsi-. 1E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genova, Italy, 2IRCCS Istituto G. Gaslini, Genova, Genova, Italy. cWoe Sanger sequenced the genes in all candidMatuet faatmioinliTeass. tSeurbPsoeqlyuPehnetnly, we SidIFenTtified 14 not annotated (dbSNP 132) candidate mutations and analyzed them with help of the programs , , and The goal of this project is to use the expertise of the Laboratory of Human . In 4 cases, the analysis predicted a pathogenic effect of the candidate Genetics and the Galliera Genetic Bank (GGB) to provide researcher with mutations and those were examined by genotyping in a Syrian healthy con- the possibility to obtain induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (iPSCs) from samp- trol sample of 95 individuals. All candidate mutations were excluded becau- les of patients involved in a specific research project. The iPS cell lines are se of relatively high frequencies in controls. Our analysis shows an extreme validated using classical cytogenetic karyotype, immunofluorescence assay heterogeneity of ARID and suggests that massive parallel sequencing is a and RT-PCR, in order to be ready to be used by the researcher requesting better strategy to elucidate its causes. the service. The iPSCs are a powerful tools to perform in vitro functional P11.061 analysis of mutation causing diseases. The application of this tool will be Screening of a cohort of patients with intellectual disabilities from to investigate the effects of mutations causing epilepsy and to assess the Cyprus using a high-resolution 400K microarray effect on neuronal membrane excitability of different neuron subtypes, to J. Hettinger1, P. Evangelidou1, C. Sismani1, V. Anastasiadou2,3, P. C. Patsalis1; shed light into molecular pathways regulating brain functions and biologi- 1Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and cal events leading to epileptic seizures. We have generated iPS cells using Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, The Cyprus Institute of STEMCCA vector, that allows the most efficient generation of iPS cells, com- Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Department of Pediatrics, Arch Makarios III bined with the high availability of the cell lines stored in GGB/TGB Network. Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. STEMCCA vector is a single lentiviral „stem cell cassette“ encoding all four reprogramming factors, OSKM in a single polycistronic vector. By combining all reprogramming transgenes in a single cassette, STEMCCA accomplish re- Intellectual Disabilities (ID) are very heterogeneous conditions with an esti- programming of fibroblasts with high efficiency and allow the derivation of mated prevalence of ~1-3%. While it is estimated that genetic factors con- iPSC containing a single viral integration. It is also available a excisable ver- tribute to ID in ~50% of affected individuals, the identification of autosomal sion of gene cassette vector flanked by loxP sites to achieve highly efficient loci and chromosomal regions associated with ID has been challenging. One reprogramming of normal or diseased fibroblasts to allow the derivation of approach for the identification of copy number changes unique to individu- human iPSC free of exogenous transgenes. als with ID is by array-CGH. The availability of custom-designed high-reso- lution oligonucleotide arrays enables interrogation at an extraordinary re- P11.064 solution and coverage not previously experienced with older platforms. The Assessment of promoter DNA methylation for an entire family of purpose of our study was to screen a cohort of patients from Cyprus using laminin-encoding genes in normal and tumorous breast tissues O. A. Simonova1, E. B. Kuznetsova1,2, V. V. Rudenko1,2, O. V. Babenko1,2, T. V. Kekeeva1,3, D. V. a new whole-genome 400K microarray which we designed, optimized and Zaletaev1,2, V. V. Strelnikov1,2; validated. Our new high-resolution array consists of >400,000 probes, and 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov includes the entire 4X180K ISCA design as well as comprehensive coverage First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 3Hertzen Cancer of >9,000 CNV regions identified by the WTCCC. In addition, ~200,000 pro- Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation. bes were used to generate a high-resolution backbone spanning the entire genome. Here we report the preliminary results obtained from the initial screening of 12 patients and family members from 9 Cypriot families. CNCs Laminins are key components of the extracellular matrix playing important were identified in 7 patients and included 5 duplications and 3 deletions roles in morphogenesis of breast tissues and involved in normal develop- that ranged in size from ~99kb to ~7Mb. All of the duplications and two of ment and pathological processes. We evaluated methylation status for 12 www.eshg.org the deletions harbored several genes while one deletion resided inw a wsinwgle.e shg.org274 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 promoter regions of laminin-encoding genes in 106 samples of breast can- Limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs) are a group of muscular dys- cer, 106 paired adjacent nonmalignant samples, 4 samples of normal mam- trophies characterized by a predominant involvement of the scapula, pelvic mary gland from autopLsAy,M 3A01 s, aLmAMplAes2 ,o Lf ApMerAi3pBhe, LraAlM bAlo4o, dL AaMndB 71 samLpAleMs Co3f girdle and trunk muscles without affecting the facial muscles. Different au- buccal epithelium of healthy donors. tosomal recessive LGMDs (>10) have been identified as distinct entities with Promoters of 6 genes, and a similar phenotype and clear clinical overlap that makes their differential have demonstratedL AaMbnAo3rAm, aLlA mMeBt2h,y LlaAtMioBn 3in 2% t o 42% samples of breast diagnosis difficult. To date, several hundreds different mutations have been cancer and/or adjacent tissues. described with their biological relevance remain unclear. Promoters of the LAMC2 geneswere constitutively me- We have developed genotyping analysis of 96 mutations - insertions/dele- thylated in breast tissues as well as in normal lymphocytes and buccal tions and SNP, within different genes related to LGMDs (SGCA, SGCB, SGCD, sLwAMabAs3, Aa,n LdA MofB t3h e LAMC 2in breast tissues only. Our findings contradict CAPN3, DYSF, several more mutations, and 4 control SNP within X/Y chro- previously reported abnormal methylation of laminin-5-encoding genes mosomes) using Illumina’s VeraCode GoldenGate Genotyping Assay. and in 44%, 4%, and 20% of breast tumors respec- Here we report study analysing a group of 107 unrelated Latvian controls tively against the background of next to never methylated nonmalignant with no sign of neuromuscular diseases matching general Latvian popula- breast tissues, normal lymphocytes and buccal swabs (Sathyanarayana et tion by gender and nationality with our developed assay. 31 mutations had al., 2003). Our results are supported by recently published Reduced-Re- minor allele frequency (MAF) higher that 0.01 (0.014 - 0.294) suggesting no presentation-Bisulfite-Sequencing and our own bisulfite sequencing data. confirmation of their pathological effect. Constitutive methylation of laminin-5-encoding genes abandons its use as a Our data suggest that miscellaneous mutations found in LGMD patients and marker of the pathological process and requires revision of the mechanisms described as pathological need to be studied more intensively in terms of of disregulation of these genes in cancer. general population to clarify their effect. This study is among the first to evaluate promoter methylation for the whole P11.067 family of cancer-related genes. VarioML micro-framework for comprehensive variation data Methylation in representation and exchange Methylation in Methylation breast cancer normal mammar In buccal Methylation M. Byrne; and/or adj. gland from epithelium In peripheral Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, Helsinki, Finland. nonmalignant Blood ( % ) autopsy ( % ) ( % ) samples ( % ) GLAenMeAs3 cAonstitutively mLAeMthBy3l. in breast tissue The VarioML micro-framework is a set of tools and practices improving the LAMB2 100 100 100 100 availability, quality, and comprehensivity of human variant information. It LAMC2 100 100 100 100 enables researchers and clinics to share that information with ease, clari- 100 100 100 100 100 100 0 0 ty, and without ambiguity. Sharing of variation data is a critical need, yet GLAenMeAs1 abnormally attempts to meet this need have come up against difficulties at each level mLAeMthAy2l. in breast cancer of design and implementation. Variant information can be arbitrarily com- LAMA3B 35 0 0 0 plex, making a single standard vocabulary elusive and re-formatting diffi- LAMA4 42 0 0 0 LAMB1 6 0 0 0 cult. Complex standards have proven too time-consuming for clinicians to LAMC3 2 0 0 0 implement. 16 0 0 0 The GEN2PHEN project addressed these difficulties by developing a compre- 8 0 0 0 hensive data model for capturing biomedical observations, Observ-OM, and GLAenMeAs5 unmethyl. iLnA bMrCe1ast cancer building the VarioML micro-framework around it. VarioML pairs a simplified 0 0 0 0 open specification for describing variants, with a toolkit for adapting the 0 0 0 0 specification into one‘s own research or clinical workflow. Straightforward P11.065 variant data can be captured, federated, and exchanged with no overhead; New non-invasive test for Limb Girdle Muscle Dystrophies type 2 more complex data can be described, without loss of compatibility. The open B. Lace1, I. Innaskina1, E. Jankevics1, I. Vasiljeva1, M. Naudina1, J. Strautmanis1, J. specification enables push-button submission to gene variant databases Stavusis1, I. Micule2; (LSDB‘s) e.g., LOVD (http://lovd.org), using the free Cafe Variome data pu- 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Childrens‘ University Clinical Hospital, Riga, Latvia. blishing service (http://cafevariome.org/), while the micro-framework bi- directionally transforms data between semantic and web-application code formats, opening up new possibilities for open source web applications buil- ding on shared data. Semantic vocabularies and translation schemas allow One over 8000 persons worldwide are effected by inherited or acquired variant data to be part of the semantic web. A JAVA implementation toolkit neuromuscular diseases (NMD) presenting with muscle weakness, skeletal makes VarioML easily integrated into biomedical applications. deformities, early loss of functions and mortality. The most common type of VarioML has received funding from the European Community‘s Seventh NMD is muscular dystrophies, which also have the most unfavourable out- Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under the GEN2PHEN project come. Diagnostic pathway requires invasive muscle biopsy, later molecular (grant agreement number 200754). confirmation. Aim of the study was to develop non-invasive DNA based test for the com- P11.068 mon Limb Girdle muscle dystrophies (LGMD) mutations. Genomic organization of macrosatellite repeats M. Schaap1, R. Maassen1, P. J. van der Vliet1, L. F. Hoogerheide2, H. K. van Dijk3, R. J. L. F. Materials and methods. Twenty patients with symptoms of LGMD without Lemmers1, P. de Knijff1, S. M. van der Maarel1; muscle biopsy data were recruited in various NMD centres. Illumina Gold- 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2VU University, Amsterdam, enGate technology was applied for the 82 selected mutations in DYSF (35 Netherlands, 3Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands. sequence variations), CAPN3 (28), SGCA (8), SGCB (4), SGCD (3) and SGCG (4) genes. Results. LGMD diagnosis was confirmed in six persons (30%) with applied Macrosatellite repeats (MSRs) comprise a significant proportion of the DNA diagnostics technique. CAPN3 gene mutation 550delA were identi- human genome, usually spanning hundreds of kilobases of genomic DNA. fied in 59 % of identified mutations, 2184G>A in 6 %, 664G>A in 5%, DYSF Because of their highly polymorphic nature, MSRs represent an extreme ex- 2372C>G in 12 %, 1566C>G in 12 %, 1368C>A in 6%. ample of copy number variation, but their structure and function is largely Conclusions. 550delA mutation in the CAPN3 gene is considered as a Slavic understudied. This study comprises the genetic analysis of autosomal and X founder mutation, and it is frequently met in LGMD2A patients from Eastern chromosomal MSRs of HapMap individuals representing Caucasian, Asian Europe. and African populations. Copy number variation, repeat stability and gene- Non invasive DNA test is advisable for patients with LGMD prior muscle bio- tic heterogeneity of the autosomal macrosatellite repeats RS447 (chromo- psy. some 4p), MSR5p (5p), FLJ40296 (13q), RNU2 (17q) and D4Z4 (4q and 10q) P11.066 and X chromosomal DXZ4 and CT47 were investigated. Repeat array size Limb Girdle muscle dystrophies mutation analysis using Illumina’s distributions show that these MSRs are indeed highly polymorphic with the VeraCode GoldenGate Genotyping Assay highest genetic variation among Africans and the least among Asians. A mi- I. Inashkina1, I. Vasiljeva1, E. Jankevics1, J. Stavusis1, I. Micule2, B. Lace1; totic mutation rate of 0.4-1.5% was observed, exceeding meiotic mutation 1Latvian Biomedical Research and Study Centre, Riga, Latvia, 2Children‘s University rates and explaining the high size variability found for these MSRs. Rather Clinical Hospital, Riga, Latvia. than a uniform size distribution we observed a multimodal size distribution in seven MSRs using a Bayesian approach for the estimation, where for five www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 275 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 of these MSRs the posterior probability was larger than 99.33%. In three of unreported genomic rearrangements in MR and a higher incidence of clini- these five MSRs equidistant intervals between the modes were very likely cally relevant CNVs. as well, suggesting that MSR sizes are restricted and that MSRs are possibly P11.071 organized into higher order chromatin structures. This study represents the Mutation screening of new candidate genes for mental retardation by first comprehensive study of MSRs in world populations identifying novel next generation sequencing commonalities and differences in the organization and function of the hu- S. Boppudi, I. Schanze, I. Wieland, D. Schanze, M. Zenker; man genome. Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität, Magdeburg, Germany. P11.069 Intellectually disabled children with normal molecular karyotypes: Genome-wide screening for altered methylation I. Tangen1, P. Sporns1, S. Bens1, J. Gutwein1, U. Jacobsen1, M. Rydzanicz2,3, U. Stephani4, G. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies generate high throughput Gillessen-Kaesbach5, R. Siebert1, O. Ammerpohl1, A. Caliebe1; sequence data very rapidly at a lower cost by massively parallel sequencing 1Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts-Universitaet zu Kiel and UKSH, of clonally amplified DNA molecules. NGS is anticipated to transition into cli- Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Science, nical-diagnostics use by avoiding massive PCR preparation and sequencing Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, of multiple large regions of interest simultaneously. For the successful tran- University of Adam Mickiewic, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Neuropaediatrics, sition streamlining of processes is required, especially sample preparation, Christian-Albrechts-Universitaet zu Kiel and UKSH, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 5Institut coupled with improvements in technology robustness and characterizati- fuer Humangenetik, Universitaet zu Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany. on of accuracy through validation studies. The purpose of this study was to establish the amplicon-based NGS technology for screening novel mutations in mental retardation (MR) patients. In this pilot project, ‘Universal Tailed’ The aim of this study was to evaluate the impact of epigenetic alteration for Amplicon sequencing method was used. The amplicon library preparation intellectual disability (ID). We evaluated 81 clinically well characterised pa- was optimized by using multiplex PCR. We performed mutation detection tients with ID. Most of them showed in addition muscular hypotonia, short of complete coding regions of two genes (total 32 amplicons) implicated in stature, obesity or epilepsy. In these patients a monogenetic disorder could MR in 40 individuals on a bench-top 454 GS Junior platform (Roche). The clinically not be diagnosed. All showed normal results on ArrayCGH (105K 10-hr run was able to generate approximately 72,000 reads and about 22 or 244K Agilent Array). Epigenetic alterations were analysed using the Illu- million high-quality bases at an average read length of 308 bp. Altogether, mina HumanMethylation450K Bead Chip, covering more than 485.000 CpG 12 sequence variants were found in this study with seven known SNPs and sites. The control group consisted of age and sex matched patients mainly five novel changes. All the variants were confirmed by traditional Sanger affected by recurrent upper airway infections. sequencing providing evidence of NGS accuracy. In conclusion, next-gene- The analysis for differences in methylated loci between the patient and ration amplicon sequencing with enhanced efficiency and accuracy can be control group revealed 266 differentially methylated loci which were enri- used as an efficient tool for high sensitive mutation detection in large pati- ched for HLA, the interferon gamma-pathway, and antigen presentation. As ent cohorts and complex phenotypes. We identified one mutation in these this global comparison of both groups is not suited to detect private DNA two genes that may potentially be involved in MR and need to be studied in methylation aberrations we are currently investigating local enrichment of larger patient samples. DNA methylation changes aiming to identify methylation changes over se- veral consecutive CpGs being typical e.g. for epimutations at imprinted loci. P11.072 This strategy is driven by the observation that we identified one proband in Methylation analysis of breast cancer in Cyprus and Slovenia M. Loizidou1, I. Zouvani2, S. Novakovic3, V. Stegel3, M. Krajc3, K. Kyriacou1, A. the patient group with hypomethylation in MEG3. This finding was corrobo- Hadjisavvas1; rated by bisulfite pyrosequencing. 1Department of EM / Molecular Pathology, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Our results show that imprinting disorders are still underdiagnosed and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Histopathology Department, Nicosia General Hospital, may have a possible impact on ID. This is in agreement with the results of (1) Nicosia, Cyprus, 3Institute of Oncology, Ljubljana, Slovenia. who analysed a comparable cohort of 90 patients for known imprinting dis- orders and found two patients with Silver-Russell- respectively Beckwith- Wiedemann syndrome. The best-studied epigenetic alteration in cancer is DNA methylation. It has (1)Poole et al., Am J Med Genet A. 2010;152A:1990-3. been demonstrated that during tumorigenesis methylation is usually de- P11.070 creased at a genome-wide level, with selective hypermethylation of CpG Molecular and cytogenetic screening of children with idiopathic islands occurring within the promoter regions of a number of tumor-sup- mental retardation in Ukrainian population pressor genes. This leads to transcriptional silencing of these genes and sub- L. A. Livshits1, E. Bonora2, P. Magini2, P. Patsalis3, J. A. Hettinger3, N. Hryshchenko1, O. sequent tumor progression. Analysis of abnormally methylated genes has Soloviov1, A. Kucherenko4,1, C. Graziano5; received a lot of attention lately since it is a feature of most cancers and is 1Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine, 2U.O. Genetica Medica, speculated to play a role in cancer etiology. Within the scope a bilateral pro- University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 3Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Taras Shevchenko Kiev National University, Kiev, Ukraine, 5U.O. ject between Cyprus and Slovenia we investigated quantitative methylation Genetica Medica, University of Bologna, Bologna, Cyprus. changes in twenty four tumor suppressor genes, with the ultimate goal of identifying novel biomarkers applicable to the management of breast cancer patients. Methylation study was performed on 100 matched normal and tu- Mental retardation (MR) is a generalized term, which includes disorders of mor paraffin-embedded breast tissues from Cyprus and Slovenia, using me- adaptive behavior associated with a lack of cognitive development. MR oc- thylation-specific MLPA. The cumulative methylation index (CMI) was calcu- curs in 2-3% of the general population. In the majority of MR individuals a lated as the sum of the percentage methylation for all genes. Mann-Whitney specific cause can not be identified. and Kruskal-Wallis tests were used for comparing medians between groups. We represent the data of 113 patients from 96 Ukrainian families with well The χ2-test was used for comparing proportions. Hierarchical clustering was clinically characterized MR included in the CHERISH project (grant agree- applied using R and SPSS statistical packages. Our results showed promoter ment n°223692). Preliminary analysis (metabolic investigation, karyotype, methylation of in a number of tumor suppressor genes. The prognostic va- molecular tests of known syndromes, MLPA for subtelomeric rearrange- lue of promoter hypermethylation is currently being further evaluated by ments) have been done. We found 1 patient with FRAXE expansion and 2 studying additional samples. patients with Prader-Willi Syndrome. In 57 patients with normal results or P11.073 with complex chromosomal rearrangements search for cryptic chromoso- Rapid and efficient mutation detection in the mitochondrial DNA me rearrangements was carried out through 44K, 105K or 400K array-CGH using a bench-top next-generation DNA sequencer analysis in partner laboratories in Bologna (Italy) and Nicosia (Cyprus). M. Bigler, S. Gallati, A. Schaller; Division of Human Genetics, Bern, Switzerland. Quantitative Real Time PCR were used to confirm the array-CGH findings. In total, copy number variations (CNVs) in patients from 26 Ukrainian MR families were detected (size: from 11Kb to 24378 Kb). CNVs with potential Mitochondria play an important role in essential cellular functions. Each clinical significance were found in 9 cases. These CNVs were characterized eukaryotic cell contains hundreds of mitochondria with hundreds of mito- as pathogenic or probably pathogenic, based on their size, position and ge- chondrial genomes (mtDNA). Human mtDNA is a 16,569-kb circular, double- nes involved in. stranded molecule, which contains 37 genes: 2 rRNA genes, 22 tRNA genes, The obtained results show the strong genetic heterogeneity of hereditary and 13 structural genes encoding subunits of the mitochondrial respiratory forms of MR in our group of patients. These results generally agree with chain, where ATP is generated. Mutant and wild-type mtDNA may co-exist those of previous array-CGH cohort studies, showing, however, previously www.eshg.org www.eshg.org276 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.076 Changes of DNA mismatch repair MLH1 promoter methylation and as heteroplasmy, and cause human disease with diverse and variable clini- expression in DMT2 patients after a dietary intervention cal features and a loose genotype-phenotype relationship. Next-generation O. J. Switzeny1, E. Müller1, K. Wagner1, H. Brath2, A. G. Haslberger1; sequencing (NGS) technologies can be a boon to human mutation detection 1Department of Nutritional Sciences of the University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria, 2WGKK given their high throughput: consequently, many genes and samples may be Gesundheitszentrum Wien Süd, Vienna, Austria. simultaneously studied with high coverage for accurate detection of hetero- plasmy. In circumstances requiring the intensive study of a few genes, parti- cularly in clinical applications, a rapid turn around is another desirable goal. The genotoxic effects caused by reactive oxygen species (ROS) are among To this end, we assessed the performance of the bench-top 454 GS Junior the most common DNA damage causes. Oxidative stress may lead to an platform as an optimized solution for mutation detection by amplicon se- increased level of unrepaired cellular DNA damages, discussed for tumor quencing. The purpose of this protocol is to simultaneously determine mtD- initiation. Mismatch repair (MMR) enzymes act as proofreading complexes NA sequence and quantify the heteroplasmic level. This protocol includes that maintain the genomic integrity. MMR-deficient cells show an increased two independent PCR amplifications of the entire mitochondrial genome. mutation rate. A diet containing a high amount of antioxidants lowers the Resulting PCR products are then mixed at an equimolar ratio. Subsequently, potential harmful effects of ROS. The MutL homolog 1 (MLH1) gene belongs samples of twelve individuals are then barcoded and sequenced with high- to the MMR complex. throughput, next-generation sequencing technology. A 10-hr run was able Objectives: The influence of an antioxidant and vitamin rich diet on the to generate ∼72,000 reads and ∼25 million high-quality bases at an average epigenetic pattern of MLH1 was analyzed in non-insulin depended diabe- read length of 348 bp. This technology is highly sensitive, specific, and accu- tes Mellitus type 2 (NIDDM2), impaired fasting glucose (IFG) patients and a rate in determining mtDNA mutations and the level of heteroplasmy. lean control (LC) group. P11.074 Methods: CpG methylation of the MLH1 and MGMT promoter region was Mitochondrial DNA analysis in the Genome of the Netherlands analyzed by pyrosequencing. Gene expression of MLH1 was measured by M. Vermaat1, M. Li2, J. T. den Dunnen1, P. de Knijff1, M. Stoneking2, J. F. J. Laros1; quantitative RT-RCR cDNA. DNA integrity was evaluated by COMET Assay. 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Results and Discussion: The region on the forward strand of the MLH1 had Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. higher methylation level in both intervention groups (p<0.05) after the in- tervention. The expression of the MLH1 gene decreased (p<0.15) in both groups. IFG and NIDDM2 groups showed makeable differences. The COMET The Genome of the Netherlands (GoNL) is a national collaboration aimed at Assay data suggests that the DNA stability was increased and a correlati- establishing a map of Dutch genetic variation by whole genome sequencing on between the expression of MLH1 and the DNA damage was found in the of 250 trio families consisting of unselected individuals of Caucasian origin. IFG group (p<0.05). The down-regulation of the MLH1 expression correla- The unprecedented trio-based setup of this scale and the abundance of mtD- ting with the observed increased CpG promoter methylation might reflect a NA in each sample give us the unique opportunity to study both population- lower MMR requirement by the higher DNA stability following the dietary wide and intra-human variation on the mitochondrial genome. intervention. We developed a number of techniques in which mtDNA can assist in quality P11.077 control of whole genome sequencing experiments. The high coverage (aver- A DNA resequencing array for genes involved in MODY/Type 2 aging ~1100x) enables us to easily detect Diabetes: a new era in clinical and molecular diagnosis sample contamination with a low percentage of foreign DNA. One such case S. Giglio1, A. Provenzano1, B. Mazzinghi2, R. Artuso2, E. Contini2, L. Giunti2, S. Toni3, M. is present in our data set and its contamination has been confirmed by auto- Salvadori4, O. Zuffardi5, E. Mannucci6; some analysis. By looking for violations of the inheritance pattern we readi- 1Dept. of Clinical Pathophysiology and Medical Genetics Unit- Meyer Children ly identified sample swaps. Indeed, in two of the trios there had been a swap Hospital, Florence, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit- Meyer Children Hospital, Florence, Italy, 3Paediatric Diabetology Unit- Meyer Children Hospital, Florence, Italy, 4Clinical of the parents which was independently confirmed by immunochip data. Biochemistry Unit- Meyer Children Hospital, Florence, Italy, 5Medical Genetics, University One of the goals of our mtDNA study is to refine the Dutch mtDNA phylo- of Pavia, Pavia, Italy, 6Section of Geriatric Cardiology and Medicine, Department of genetic tree. Preliminary results show that the data set contains more than Cardiovascular Medicine, Careggi Hospital, Florence, Italy. 165 different haplogroups, where H and its subclades are most abundant, representing ~40% of individuals. This is in concordance with previous stu- dies on the distribution of haplogroup H in Europe. 127 haplogroups are Genetic testing for MODY has become a routine procedure allowing to set supported by at least 2 individuals, while 68 are supported by at least 4. Our up proper treatment and discriminate from type 2 diabetes (T2D) whose samples disagree on defining polymorphisms for some haplogroups, indica- symptoms are often overlapping. Common variants implicated in risk of dia- ting opportunities for refinement of the phylogenetic tree. betes explain only a minor proportion of the familial clustering observed in P11.075 sporadic cases. We apply targeted resequencing technology to detect both A simplified Sanger sequencing workflow for mitochondrial variant known and novel mutations on a single high-throughput platform. We until detection provides high data quality now resequenced 12 cases with clinical diagnosis of MODY/T2D for 46 genes M. Wenz, P. Ma; involved in this disorder. All the detected variations were confirmed by di- Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States. rect sequencing and potential pathogenicity was assessed by functional pre- dictions and frequency in controls. We identified modest associations with common variants and a trend suggestive of an overrepresentation of rare Variations in the human mitochondrial genome are frequently used in fo- variants in cases compared to controls for several genes, although it is plau- rensic analyses, disease association research and human evolution. Because sible that combinations of rare and/or common variants in genes already of the abundance of variations in mitochondrial DNA, either the complete implicated might explain the genetic basis of the disease. Between detected mitochondrial genome or the critical region is sequenced. We present here variants, we focusP oDnX 111, of which 2 are double heterozygous and plausibly a new PCR/sequencing workflow for mitochondrial DNA that uses capil- pathogenic. In addition, our data show that, at least in the Italian population, lary electrophoresis and that is integrated with data analysis and variant mutations in the are likely the second cause of MODY/T2D, and that detection. This simplified re-sequencing workflow utilizes novel universal many patients resistant to traditional therapies are double heterozygous M13 sequencing primers for improved 5’ sequence resolution, increased for some genes individually associated with diabetes/hyperglycemia.Next- throughput, and reduced hands-on time. TThMi s workflow generates high generation sequencing technologies are becoming the first tier for an im- quality bases from base 1 when using POP-7 polymer comTpMa rable to data mediate understanding of the molecular basis of most diseases. Altogether, typically seen when using the considerably slower POP-6 polymer and these efforts should allow to better understand the disease pathogenesis, standard Sanger sequencing chemistry. In addition to improved 5’ data qua- find new targets for clinical therapy, and allow prediction of disease. lity the new workflow eliminates the need for a separate PCR clean-up step. P11.078 Taken together these improvements reduce the entire workflow from PCR Mosaic Homozygosity Reporter: A tool to detect low levels of revertant to finished sequence data to under 5 hours, compared to approximately 8 mosaicism in SNP array data. hours for the standard workflow. The sequencing output is analyzed with E. T. P. Verwiel1, J. Y. Hehir-Kwa1, E. J. Kamping1, R. Pfundt1, Y. Heijdra2, T. Vulliamy3, I. Variant Reporter® Software that applies quality control metrics, including Dokal3, A. Geurts van Kessel1, N. Hoogerbrugge1, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, M. C. J. Jongmans1, the use of Quality Values for DNA trace values and confidence values for va- R. P. Kuiper1; riant validity. We will present examples to demonstrate this mitochondrial 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, re-sequencing workflow for variant detection. Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Pulmonology, Radboud University Nijmegen Research Use Only Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Centre for Paediatrics, Blizard Institute of Cell www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 277 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 and Molecular Science, Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom. into luciferase expression vector and performed reporter assays. We used electrophoretic mobility shift assay to demonstrate binding of transcription Revertant mosaicism is a phenomenon that occurs when the replacement factors to candidate promoter region. Human sialidase Neu4 gene has TATA- of a pathogenic allele by the wild type allele favors cell-survival. Especially less promoter but contains CCAAT elements. Luciferase reporter assay de- within a tissue with high turnaround time, such as blood, this can lead to monstrated that 187 bp upstream of Neu4 gene is minimal promoter region near complete replacement of the pathogenic allele by the wild type allele. which regulate transcription. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed The presence of two copies of one allele can be detected by genome-wide that 187 bp upstream region recruits several transcription factors such as c- single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays. However, when stretches of myc. Overall, our results show some of cis- and trans- acting factors involved homozygosity are present in a small percentage of cells, like in the early sta- in the human sialidase Neu4 gene regulation. The data we obtained might ge of revertant mosaicism, these are often missed by allelic algorithms. be useful to discover small molecules which control Neu4 gene expression. Here we present Mosaic Homozygosity Reporter, a method that facilitates Selective high expression of sialidase Neu4 gene might be controlled using the detection of low levels of allelic imbalance using the genotyping data drugs or small molecules and the accumulated ganglioside GM2 in lysoso- from SNP arrays. The method detects mosaic stretches of homozygosity mes of Tay-Sachs patients can be reduced. with high sensitivity by comparing the signal distribution of heterozygous P11.081 calls between telomeric regions. Development of a custom designed aCGH chip (Neuromuscular Chip) We have applied this method on Affymetrix SNP6.0 array data from 19 indi- for investigation of Neuromuscular Disorders viduals with an autosomal dominant form of Dyskeratosis Congenita (DC), a V. Oikonomakis, K. Kekkou, N. Vogiatzakis, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli, E. Kanavakis, M. Tzetis; multisystem disorder. The Mosaic Homozygosity Reporter detected mosaic Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece. reversion in blood cells of six patients with high significance (P<7.9•10-25), two of which could not be detected by visual inspection of the array’s B- allele frequency plots. These data show that revertant mosaicism may be a Neuromuscular disorders (NMDs) are a group of genetically determined di- common event in autosomal dominant DC and that Mosaic Homozygosity seases encompassing many conditions that impair muscle function (DMD/ Reporter is able to detect low level mosaic stretches making it a valuable BMD, LGMD2A, Sarcoglycanopathies, etc). Similar phenotypes may be tool for the reanalysis of previously unsolved clinical cases where mosaic caused by mutations in many different genes and consequently molecular homozygosity may play a role. diagnosis can sometimes be inefficient. Array-based comparative genomic P11.079 hybridization (aCGH) is a high-throughput technology for detecting copy- Searching for Multiple sclerosis genomic candidate regions by number variations (CNVs) in the human genome. genome-wide synthesis of heterogeneous data sources In order to address the NMDs diagnostic problem, a custom Agilent a-CGH A. Maver, B. Peterlin; oligonucleotide chipD M(SDurePrint G3, 8x60k platform) was designed using the Institute of Medical Genetics, Ljubljana, Slovenia. e-Array application. The chipL cAoRvGerEs a selection of genes most commonly involved in NMDs: (>25,513 probes, every 90bp for exons and appro- ximately150bSpG CfoAr introns), SGCB CongenitSaGl CmGuscular dSyGsCtrDo phy type Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a debilitating autoimmune condition characterized 1D (MDC1D), (5P9O6M3 Tp1r/o bPeOsM) STa2r/c oPgOlyMcGanNoTp1a/t hFiKeTs N&/ LFiKmRbP Girdle Muscular by demyelination in central nervous system, leading to symptoms of seve- DUTysRtNro, pLMhiNesA: , EMD, (T1R7IqM2312.3, M3)Y, L7,AC T(A41q11), (13q1 C2A),P N3 (5q33.3) re motosensory neurological disturbances. Development of high -through- (4609L GpMroDb2eAs), (2681 probes), put technologies opened the possibility of scrutinizing complete profile of (7089 probes), (1020 pro- molecular alterations in MS. Inherent statistical issues of multiple testing bes), and Caveolinopathies: CAV3 (141 probes). and high false-positive rates have, however, hampered attempts to entirely The neuromuscular aCGH chip was evaluated by a retrospective analysis, elucidate molecular background. using DNA samples from NMD patients with known deletions or duplicati- To propagate discovery and increase detection specificity of these studies, ons. The expected CNVs, in all previously characterized patients, were suc- we performed an integrative synthesis of data originating from heteroge- cessfully confirmed. Additionally, new exonic and intronic CNVs were detec- neous sources of global molecular alterations in MS. Data for inclusion was ted, which possibly contribute/ modify to the patient‘s phenotype. Clinical collected from 39 studies or bioinformatic sources. Altogether, 158.520 di- application of the custom-designed stinct significant signals discovered on 16 different biological levels were for general diagnosis of NMD patients, can therefore, provide significant ad- included. Custom rank product prioritization approach based on genomic ditional information on the molecular pathogenesis for NMDs. We are plan- position of included results was utilized for data synthesis. Nested permuta- ning to add it to our diagnostic investigation for neuromuscular diseases. tional cycling was employed to determine significant accumulation of most P11.083 significant results discovered on most diverse biological levels. Accurate determination of the length of homonucleotide stretches by In total, 381 genomic regions were characterized with significant accumu- highly parallel sequencing lation of results, reaching local permutation p-value minima below 0.001. H. Cuppens, M. Jaspers, S. Lehnert; Follow-up characterization of selected regions revealed them to contain Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. 409 genes of which 87 (21.3%) overlapped with those tracked by HuGENet disease-gene associations database, while a notable proportion have not been investigated in MS. This suggests that there exists a substantial body of The number of nucleotides in long homonucleotidestretches, especially genes, whose involvement in MS is suggested by evidence in a complex body when 7 or more nucleotides long, cannot be accurately determined by high- of data from ‘omic’ studies, but focused studies of their direct role in MS ly parallel sequencing based on pyrosequencing or Ion Semiconductor Se- have yet to be performed and they thus present plausible targets in further quencing. Most genes, however, harbor homonucleotidestretches in this size validation studies. range. This pitfall prohibits implementation of these sequencing formats in P11.080 routine genetic diagnostics. Molecular characterization of human sialidase Neu4 gene promoter We present a method in which the length of a long homonucleotidestretch is region reduced to a series of shorter nucleotide stretches in which each of them can M. Delman, V. Seyrantepe; be accurately determined. The combined accurate analysis of the smaller Izmir Institute of Technology, İzmir, Turkey. homonucleotidestretches then allows accurate determination of the length of the original longer homonucleotidestretch. The reduction in size of the homonucleotidestretch can be achieved by PCR, which we call homonu- Sialidase Neu4 is one the four mammalian sialidases. We characterized pre- cleotide-stretch-reduction-PCR (hnr-PCR). An hnr-primer is used, which is viously that human Neu4 sialidase has activity against sialic acid containing complementary against the region of the homonucleotidestretch, which ex- substrates including ganglioside GM2. Biological role of human sialidase tends in the homonucleotidestretch but not until its end, and which contains Neu4 enzyme has been shown by the transfection of neuroglia cells from at least one non-complementary nucleotide. Since 100% complementary of a Tay-Sachs patient that Neu4 clears accumulated GM2. It has been also a primer is not needed to allow DNA synthesis, as long as its 3’ end is com- shown that sialidase Neu4 enzyme is responsible for degradation of gan- plementary against its target, non-complementary nucleotides can indeed glioside GD1a in brains of Neu4 knock-out mice. To expore human sialida- be incorporated at certain positions of a primer. When a 5’adapter sequence se Neu4 gene regulation, we aimed to determine minimal promoter region is added to the primers used for hnr-PCR, and a different 5’adapter sequence and identify several transcription factors. We used TESS (Transcription is added to the primers used for standard PCR, the combined analysis of the Element Seach System) tool to predict the sequence motifs. We amplified standard amplicon and the hnr-amplicon against a given region then conclu- seven different DNA fragments from human Neu4 promoter region, cloned des the actual sequence. In this way, a ‘one-stop’genetic test is obtained for www.eshg.org www.eshthge.soe sregquencing formats. 278 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.084 Storing and sharing NGS variant data and phenotype information in web-based LOVD3 gene variant databases The City of Hope and GnuBIO will present results that for the first time P. E. M. Taschner, I. F. A. C. Fokkema, I. C. Lugtenburg, J. Hoogenboom, Z. Tatum, G. C. P. demonstrate the detection of unknown mutations in a blinded cohort of Schaafsma, M. Vermaat, J. F. J. Laros, J. T. den Dunnen; clinical patient samples in p53 cancer gene sequenced on the GnuBio plat- Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden, Netherlands. form. The depth of coverage realized from these analyses, combined with the accuracy, turn-around-time, and ease of sample handling, provides the potential framework to make routine clinical diagnostics a reality with the Exome and genome sequencing studies currently flood us with sequence GnuBIO instrument. variants. The free, open-source, platform-independent Leiden Open-source P11.087 Variation Database software (LOVD, http://www.LOVD.nl) was developed Sample Quality Control within various Next Generation Sequencing to build standardized databases for curating and sharing gene variants. To workflows using the new Agilent 2200 TapeStation System cope with the new demands posed by exome/genome studies we have de- D. McDade Walker, A. Lee, J. Ong, E. Lin, M. Gassmann; veloped a new version of the LOVD platform. LOVD3 is compatible with the Agilent Technologies, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. Gen2Phen data model, implemented with additional tables for phenotype, screening and transcript information. Genome-wide sequence variant data can be stored in a single LOVD installation using chromosomal nucleotide This study evaluates the performance of the 2200 TapeStation System in positions as reference. Web services retrieve gene and transcript informati- various Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) workflows. Numerous sample on on the fly. Data from exome/genome studies can be stored and displayed types were checked for quality at different stages of various NGS protocols in several ways: variant-by-variant or all connected to one patient. To pro- including pre- and post-shearing, post adaptor ligation as well as pre-hy- mote early release of exome data, both phenotypes screened but unresolved bridisation and post-hybridisation within the SureSelect target enrichment and variants not-excluded from being causative can be stored (and identi- workflow. The data shows that this new automated electrophoresis system fied) individually. Data can be public and non-public for both with the option provides qualitative information that enables informed decision making to query. This leaves submitters in control of the data, ensuring that they in all downstream steps. By providing a range of ScreenTape consumables will be contacted to obtain essential information. Finally LOVD3 supports with standard and high sensitivities along with a tailored analysis package, a new access level, “collaborator”, allowing collaborating groups to share the system is able to QC gDNA, fragmented DNA, whole genome libraries and otherwise non-public data. Other new features include: display of disease- target enriched libraries, presenting descriptive analyses at each stage for specific phenotype information, storage of temporal phenotype informati- multiple sequencer protocols. The data described here demonstrates that on, improved interface and speed, and queries in and across data columns. the 2200 TapeStation System has the range, sensitivity, precision and accu- Web services will be developed to communicate between LOVD installations racy to meticulously QC samples within the NGS workflow. as well as to allow database queries. Funded by the European Community‘s P11.088 Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement Direct in-flowchip isothermal amplification of sequencing libraries at nº 200754 - the GEN2PHEN project. ultra-high density for next-generation sequencing P11.085 T. Rygus; Quality control of DNA from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded and Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany. fresh-frozen tissues prior to target-enrichment and next generation sequencing in-situ M. Liu1, M. Ramirez2, R. Salowsky3; We have developed a new nucleic-acid template-preparation methodolo- 1Agilent Technologies, Inc., La Jolla, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa gy, called “WildFire”, where sequencing libraries are amplified di- Clara, CA, United States, 3Agilent Technologies R&D and Marketing GmbH & Co. KG, rectly in-the-flowchip; no cycling-steps, no sequencing beads, no material Waldbronn, Germany. exchanges. Sequencing libraries are added directly to the 5500-series Ge- netic Analyzer flowchip, whose surfaces have been coated with a special library-adaptor capture oligonucleiont-isditeu. A DNA polymerase reaction mix is There are over 400 million formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tis- added, and in a single isothermal step lasting ~ 30 minutes, individual nu- sue samples archived in biobanks worldwide. These diseased and normal cleic acid fragments are amplified on the flowchip. The net density of tissue collections are valuable resources for molecular genetic studies. Ho- sequencing-colonies created in this manner far exceeds anything currently wever, the challenges of DNA extraction from FFPE tissues, including form- utilized in next-gine-nseitruation sequencing, reaching ~ 1 million colonies per aldehyde cross-linking, degradation, and mixtures of single-stranded and mm^2 per flowchip surface (~ 2 million colonies / mm^2 optical viewing double-stranded DNA, result in low amounts of usable high quality mate- surface). During amplification, the capture oligonucleotide is “consu- rial for downstream assays. Hence, assessing the quality of samples to be med”, and each individual nucleic-acid fragment “spreads” inside the flow- processed for highly sensitive and costly applications, such as next genera- chip until reaching an adjacent library fragment(s). When the individually- tion sequencing, becomes a critical consideration. On-chip and automated growing fragments “meet”, the amplification step terminates, because all of electrophoretic devices were evaluated for the characterization of FFPE and the surface-bound primer was consumed. These “self-assembled”, spatially fresh-frozen DNA samples prior to and during target-enrichment and next resolved, monoclonal colonies, are then sequenced-by-ligation. The resul- generation sequencing workflows. ting colony-sequencing reads maintain the same high accuracy as our bead- P11.086 based method. Ligase-reactions also appear to be more efficiently completed A new horizon - assessment of the GnuBIO next gen clinical on sequencing colonies (vs. sequencing beads), with the overall chemistry sequencing platform cycle-time decreasing (~ 1.5X) and the read-lengths increasing (towards J. Sram1, H. Gao1, A. Aslam2, J. Boyce2, B. Chin2, J. Emhoff2, A. Esmail2, H. Ghandour2, S. 100 bps). Full genomes (bacterial to human), exomes (human), and tran- Harborth2, J. Healy2, T. Hung2, S. Kiani2, P. Mary2, K. Moulton2, T. Raz2, J. Simoneau2, P. Stokes2, N. Nerkizian3; scriptomes (humina-ns)it huave now been sequenced using WildFire technology (detailed statistics will be presented). WildFire technology greatly improves 1City of Hope, Duarte, CA, United States, 2GnuBIO, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3GnuBIO, Cambridge, CA, United States. NGS workflow ( amp), increases throughput (via ultra-high density colonies), and significantly decreases net cost-per-genome (elimination of costly template preparation steps). Next generation sequencing is poised to revolutionize medicine. Current P11.089 platforms have been optimized for the research market; however, many Similar nucleosome occupancy pattern of NF-Y histone substitute challenges remain that prevent the technology from being widely used in family proteins, in human embryonic stem cells and induced clinical settings. Target enrichment and sample preparation are laborious pluripotent cells and require highly technical personnel. In addition, data analysis is costly M. Shahhoseini1, R. Favaedi1, S. Molla Mohammadi2, H. Baharvand2; 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Center, Royan Institute for and time consuming. These challenges are compounded by high per sample Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of cost, and a need for sample batching to minimize these costs. Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for GnuBIO’s first generation sequencer is a fully integrated platform requi- Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ring only raw genomic DNA as starting material. Enrichment for hundreds Introduction to thousands of PCR targets occurs on board followed by data analysis and variant calling. Run times are short, e.g. a 500 PCR target run is estimated to take 3 hours. This is the first attempt to highly automate the next gen se- Pluripotent ES and iPS cells are indebted their unique properties like their quencing process from gDNA to data analysis with a fast turn-around-time wonderful developmental plasticity to unique structure of their chromatin. while offering high accuracy and long reads in a single product. The dynamics of this structure is regulated by a variety of complex pro- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 279 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 cesses such as use of histone substitutes. Transcription factor NF (Nuclear exome sequencing service” in order to provide an overview of what one can Factor)-Y, is a histone substitute family protein that specifically recognizes actually expect from such deal and how differences on sequencing data qua- the CCAAT box present in the promoter region of many constitutive, indu- lity, exome capture enrichment systems and bioinformatics analyses influ- cible, and cell-cycle-dependent eukaryotic genes and plays a key role during ence on the final results. eukaryotic development. As induced pluripotent cells show many similari- P11.093 ties to embryonic stem (ES) cells also because of their excellent potential to Rapidly profiling thousands of large non-coding RNAs from nanogram study developmental mechanisms and human disease in addition to new amounts of total RNA using a single microarray design hopes to use of them for regenerative medicine, vast and stringent compari- A. Bergstrom Lucas1, V. Kulkarni1, K. Swaminathan1, B. Mullinax2, P. Costa1, A. DeWitte1, son of them to replacement of ESC by iPSC may resolve ethics limitations. M. Srinivasan1, E. LeProust1, S. Fulmer-Smentek1; Material and Methods 1Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States, 2Agilent Technologies, La Jolla, CA, United States. In this experiment total level of NFY-A, B and C of a few human cell lines including ESC and iPSC as pluripotent cells, and differentiated ESC and fibro- blast cells as differentiated lines was evaluated by the method of nucleoso- Large intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs) are emerging as key regula- me ELISA (Nu-ELISA) to compare their epiproteome signature. tors of diverse cellular processes. As researchers face the challenge of in- Results vestigating the function of lincRNAs, there is a need for tools that can ac- Results showed remarkable similarities in nucleosome occupancy pattern curately and rapidly measure the expression of both lincRNAs and mRNAs of NFY-A, B and C in ESC and iPS cells and lower levels in comparison to simultaneously. A catalog of more than 8,000 human lincRNAs was recently differentiated ESC and fibroblast. annotated from more than 4 billion RNA-Seq reads across 24 tissues and cell Conclusion types by scientists at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard. Using this new Current finding implies the dynamic epigenetic role of NF-Y family members catalog of lincRNAs we have updated the content of the Human SurePrint G3 in gene regulation involved in development and differentiation. microarrays to enable systematic profiling and simultaneous detection of P11.090 coding and non-coding gene expression from a single sample. We used low Establishment of a core unit laboratory for ultra deep sequencing nanogram amounts of total RNA from matched tumor and adjacent normal A. B. Ekici, S. Uebe, A. Reis; Institute of Human Genetics, Erlangen, Germany. tissues to detect both large and subtle differences in gene expression profi- les that were consistent with the current literature. GeneSpring GX softwa- re rapidly identified differentially expressed lincRNAs and protein-coding With continued advances in sequencing technologies, next-generation se- RNAs resulting in expression measurements from total RNA in less than two quencing has been successfully used in a variety of targeted and genome- days. Microarray data demonstrated good reproducibility, wide dynamic wide analysis techniques to uncover the genetic basis of a number of Men- ranges and high sensitivity, and the tumor versus normal ratios generated delian diseases. The analysis of the genome-wide coding region (exome) is from the microarrays showed high correlation with ratios generated from now economically feasible and quickly accomplishable. whole transcriptome sequencing of the same matched RNA samples. In this We established a core unit for ultra-deep sequencing equipped with two study we demonstrate that microarrays can provide accurate differential systems, a SOLiD-4 and its descendant SOLiD-5500XL (Life Technologies). expression measurements of both protein coding and non-coding RNA from We are using both with appropriate automation for library and templated very low amounts of total RNA rapidly providing expression data that is bead preparation. The main application is the whole exome sequencing ap- equivalent to whole transcriptome sequencing measurements. proach with single samples as well as index-parents trios using the Agilent- P11.094 SureSelect 50Mb-Kit for the exome enrichment. The data analysis pipeline MicroRNA expression profiling meta-analysis identifies pathways for read mapping and variant calling starts with LifeScope 2.5 (Life Tech- associated with lung cancer development and reveals potential nologies) running on a cluster in the university high performance-compu- therapeutic drug targets ting group (HPC). Subsequently the usage of publicly available annotation U. Võsa1, R. Kolde2, T. Vooder3, J. Vilo2, A. Metspalu1,4, T. Annilo1; 1Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of tools like ANNOVAR are simplified for end user with own scripting soluti- Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, ons. A commercial software NextGENe (Softgenetics) may also be used by 3Clinic of Cardiovascular and Thoracic Surgery of Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, end users for variant calling and annotation. Up to now, we sequenced 135 Estonia, 4Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. whole exomes, (86 SOLiD-4 and 49 SOLiD-5500XL). The transition to the newer system resulted in a significant higher coverage at same sequencing paradmee nteorvso (SOLiD-4 54 - 61, SOLiD-5500XL 111 - 114). In particular the The development of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) involves a strong detection of homozygous variants in single samples with a recessive model enviromental component and alteration of many genes and pathways. Mi- and variants in trios with a dominant model was very successful in croRNAs, short non-coding RNAs are important gene regulators on post- different projects. More than half of the samples of both models recovered transcriptional level and aberrations in their expression are often directly straightaway functionally meaningful candidate variants. linked to tumorigenesis and disease outcome. During recent years, a num- P11.091 ber of studies have reported microRNA expression changes in NSCLC. Se- The $1000 exome dilemma: expectations and facts veral platforms with different number of detectable microRNAs have been S. Zuniga1, J. Trivino2, J. Rosa-Rosa2, O. Rodriguez-Cruz2, M. Cabo-Diez2, C. Collado3, used for these profiling studies, causing the variance in the results due to the R. Rodriguez-de Pablos3, V. Fernandez-Pedrosa3, L. Perez-Carbonero4, A. Romera4, S. differences in methods of detection and data analysis. Santillan1; 1Sistemas Genomicos Foundation, Valencia, Spain, 2Department of Bioinformatics, To identify microRNA drivers in lung cancer, we performed comprehensive Sistemas Genomicos Ltd, Valencia, Spain, 3Department of New Technologies, Sistemas meta-analysis of 16 available miRNA expression profiling studies using a no- Genomicos Ltd, Valencia, Spain, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Sistemas Genomicos vel Robust Rank Aggregation method. As a result, we identified a signature Ltd, Valencia, Spain. of four significantly over- and seven under-expressed microRNAs. To assess the biological function of identified miRNAs, we used several target predic- tion algorithms and gene enrichment tests to identify possibly perturbed The rapid evolution of Next-Generation Sequencing platforms is transfor- biological processes and pathways. ming today’s medical research and diagnostics. Currently, the combination In conclusion, we have shown that our approach is suitable and effective of exome capture enrichment systems and high-throughput sequencing for meta-analysis of gene expression studies in case when different techno- techniques is the method of choice for genomic research in Mendelian dis- logical platforms have been used or raw data is unavailable. Our pathway orders and is becoming more popular for genetic diagnostics purposes as analysis further confirms the link between aberrant regulation of miRNA the cost per base decreases. expression and lung cancer. At present, many institutions, both public and private, offer exome analysis P11.095 services at a very attractive price which can vary in price tremendously from The importance of alignments in evaluating missense variants one site to another. Frequently, users with not much expertise in either NGS S. Williams, A. Devereau; sample preparation issues or bioinformatics analysis approaches use price NGRL Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. as the key selection criteria overlooking other important issues that are cri- tical for the achievement of reliable results. Here we report the results of the exome sequencing and analysis of a Human Many missense sequence variants have been implicated in human disease controlled cell line, previously sequenced by the HapMap project, that was phenotypes. However, in the absence of functional assays, the related patho- sent to three different anonymous sequencing sites that offered the “$1000 genicity of many variants remains unclassified. A number of in silico tools www.eshg.org www.eshg.org280 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 have been developed to predict the effect of missense variants. In combina- cDNA Synthesis, which erases RNA strand information. Synthesis of a ran- tion with other evidence, these tools are used routinely by diagnostic labs domly primed double-stranded cDNA followed by addition of adaptors for to advise clinicians of disease likelihood. However, errors may arise through next-generation sequencing leads to the loss of information about which uninformed choice of tools and use of inappropriate parameters which may strand was present in the original mRNA template. The polarity of the tran- compromise their accuracy. script is important for correct annotation of novel genes, identification of We have benchmarked the predictions from a range of algorithms on a set antisense transcripts with potential regulatory roles, and for correct deter- of genes with well characterised missense variants. We find that predic- mination of gene expression levels in the presence of antisense transcripts. tion success is highly gene-specific and that different algorithms perform This work investigates the performance of different strategies for directio- optimally with different genes. Prediction algorithms based on multiple se- nal RNA-Seq using multiple next generation sequencing platforms. Here, we quence alignments (MSAs) can be sensitive to the quality of the alignments examine the effect of different RNA fragmentation methods (divalent cati- used. In order to satisfy statistical considerations, certain levels of sequence ons plus heat versus enzymatic fragmentation). We provide a comparative divergence are required and carefully curated alignment use is recommen- analysis (library complexity, continuity of gene coverage, strand specificity ded. In this respect, we also assessed the impact of alignment quality on the- and 3’and 5’-end bias analysis) of strand-specific RNA methods. se algorithms and find that the majority of possible orthologue alignments P11.099 do not affect prediction success greatly when assessing a set of variants. GeneTalk: an expert exchange platform for assessing rare sequence However, when assessing individual variants, prediction success can vary variants in personal genomes with alignment quality and diversity in MSAs is an important consideration P. M. Krawitz1, T. Kamphans2; to ensure optimum algorithm performance. 1Charite, Berlin, Germany, 2GeneTalk, Berlin, Germany. We suggest that provision of benchmark data for different algorithms, and of standard MSAs, will allow the optimal use of missense prediction tools. P11.096 Next-generation sequencing (NGS) has become a powerful tool in persona- RNA analysis, a diagnostic tool lized medicine. Exomes or even whole genomes of patients suffering from M. Kulseth, H. Johnsen, O. Rødningen; rare diseases are screened for sequence variants. After filtering out com- Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo, Norway. mon polymorphisms, the assessment and interpretation of detected per- sonal variants in the clinical context is an often time consuming effort. We have developed GeneTalk, a web-based platform that serves as an expert DNA sequence variants of uncertain significance (VUSs) is a common chal- exchange network for the assessment of personal and potentially disease lenge in all types of genetic testing. Sequence variantsd elo ncoavteod all over the relevant sequence variants. GeneTalk enables a locus centered knowledge exons and introns have the potential to disrupt proper splicing of mRNA, management for genetic variants and may assist a clinical geneticist who either by disrupting a normal splice site, by creating a splice site or is searching for information about specific mutations: Our platform gets a by disturbing the interaction of splice regulatory factors. geneticist directly connected to other users with expertise for the sequence In order to reveal the effect of VUSs identified by DNA sequencing, we have variant of interest. GeneTalk is available at www.gene-talk.de. offered RNA analysis for genes expressed in blood and with identified se- P11.100 quence variants which might cause aberradnet nsopvloicing. These are sequence The sensitivity of detecting heterozygous variants in next-generation variants located within the normal splice sites, synonymous variants and in- sequencing data is increased by applying an allele frequency tron variants which are predicted to create splice sites. In the poster distribution derived from a stochastic branching process we will present the method of choice and some examples of results. V. Heinrich1, J. Stange2, T. Dickhaus1, P. Imkeller1, U. Krüger1, S. Bauer1, S. Mundlos1, P. N. RNA analysis is a simple and straightforward tool to increase the knowledge Robinson1, J. Hecht3, P. M. Krawitz1; about the effect of sequence variants identified by DNA sequencing. 1Charite, Berlin, Germany, 2Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany, 3Berlin Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies, Berlin, Germany. P11.097 Enabling next-generation knowledge integration for human genetics B. Vroling, T. van den Bergh, R. Kuipers, H. Joosten; Bio-Prodict, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology allows us to detect genetic variants on a genome-wide scale. A deeper knowledge about the allele dis- tribution at heterozygous loci is essential for sensitive variant detection. It is widely accepted that information overload, in terms both of the growing We describe the pivotal steps of the library preparation before sequencing volumes of biomedical data and of the associated literature, is making it in- as a stochastic branching process and derive a mathematical framework creasingly difficult for researchers to keep pace. We present 3DM, a suite for the expected distribution of alleles at heterozygous loci in a short read providing information systems for protein families, relieving many of the alignment. Based on technical replicates of human exomes we demonstrate burdens that researchers face in dealing with the growing amounts and that the variance of allele frequencies is higher than expected from a simple complexity of biomedical data. For each protein family a large amount of binomial distribution. As a consequence algorithms for mutation detection information that is extracted from protein structures, alignments and scien- that apply this wrong prior distribution are less sensitive for variants that tific literature, among others, is available. All this information is integrated, deviate strongly from the expected mean frequency. Due to the stochasticity validated, and can be analysed and interacted via a number of methods. As inherent to the sample preparation we show that there is an upper bound for a response to the amount of scientific literature outgrowing researchers’ heterozygous variant detection even with increasing sequencing depth. Our ability to keep pace, we have developed software that can place this inte- results therefore indicate that technical replicates are an effective means in grated data and information from 3DM systems in the context of full-text the reduction of error rates. PDF articles. Users are able to jump seamlessly from a particular paper both P11.101 to its underlying data and to other related information and literature at the Assessing the quality and the population background of high- click of a button, thereby allowing readers to extract more knowledge more dimensional human variant data sets from next-generation swiftly from the literature. sequencing platforms using similarity metrics Having many heterogeneous data types readily available in an integrated P. M. Krawitz1, S. Bauer1, V. Heinrich1, J. Stange2, T. Dickhaus2, P. N. Robinson1; 1Charite, Berlin, Germany, 2Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany. and validated fashion can greatly speed up research, and a wide variety of questions can be answered when such protein-related data from many diffe- rent origins can be flexibly combined. As an example of particular interest to the human genetics community, by intelligently combining all this heteroge- In reference based resequencing projects a list of all detected genetic va- neous information the system is able to provide state-of-the-art predictions riants represents an important intermediate step in bioinformatics data about the effects of genetic variations. processing. Although scores are used to estimate the error probability of single variant calls, the heterogeneity of analysis pipelines as well as the P11.098 high dimensionality of the data make it difficult to compare the quality of Comparative Analysis of Strand-Specific RNA Sequencing Approaches D. Munafo1, P. Liu1, C. Sumner1, B. Textor2, L. Apone1, B. Langhorst1, F. Stewart1, E. T. entire data sets. Here we describe a similarity metric that allows a distance- Dimalanta1, T. Davis1; based quality assessment of human variant data on a genome wide scale 1New England Biolabs Inc., Ipswich, MA, United States, 2New England Biolabs GmbH, irrespective of the platform it was generated on. Using the individuals of the Frankfurt, Germany. 1000 genomes project as a high-quality reference set we are able to robust- ly identify the population background, answer questions about relatedness and estimate error rates in a data set. Our distance-based scoring system Standard RNA-sequencing approaches generally require double-stranded is accessible at www.gene-talk.de and may be applied in high-throughput www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 281 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 sequencing laboratories for an easy means of quality control and routine Background: Genome-wide association studies have identified a large num- consistency checks in sample workflow. ber of common variants associated with common diseases. Most variants, P11.102 however, explain only a small proportion of the estimated heritability, Molecular diagnosis and genotype-phenotype studies in patients with suggesting that less common and rare variants might contribute to a lar- osteogenesis imperfecta by next generation sequencing ger extent to common diseases than assumed to date. Here we use next- C. C. Hung1,2, C. N. Lee3, S. Y. Lin4,5, Y. N. Su1,2,5; generation sequencing to test whether such variants also contribute to the 1Graduate Institute of Clinical Genomics, National Taiwan University College of risk for anxiety disorders by re-sequencing 40 kb including all exons of the Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Department of Medical Genetics, National Taiwan University TMEM132D locus which we have previously shown to be associated with Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 3Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Taiwan panic disorder and anxiety severity measures. University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 4Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Methods: DNA from 300 patients suffering from anxiety disorders, most- Taiwan University Hospital, Hsin Chu Branch, Hsin Chu, Taiwan, 5Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. ly panic disorder (84.7 %), and 300 healthy controls was screened for the presence of genetic polymorphisms using the SOLiD 3+ next-generation se- Background: quencing platform (Life Technologies) in a pooled approach. Results were Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder of boCnOe- verified by individual re-genotyping. Lfo1rAm1ationC, OwLh1icAh2 is characterized by bone fragility and low bone mass. As Results: We identified a total 371 variants of which 247 had not been repor- repCoRrTtAedP,, LaEuPtoRsEo1m al dPoPmIBinant OI is associated with the mutations in ted before, including 15 novel non-synonymous SNPs. The majority, 76 % of Meth oadnsd: genes and autosomal recessive OI is cauCseOdL 1bAy1 m, CuOtaLt1ioAn2s, these variants had a minor allele frequency less than 5 %. While we did not iCnR TAP, LEPRE1 anPdP IB genes. identify additional common variants in TMEM132D associated with panic In this study, exon-wide mutation analyses of disorders, we observed an overrepresentation of rare functional variants in and genes were performed by PCR and next-generation healthy controls as compared to cases. sequencing (NGS). One hundred unrelated patients and their family mem- Conclusions: Our data suggest that not only common but also rare variants bReerssu ldtisa:gnosed with OI clinically fromC OTLa1iwAa1n population werCeO eLn1rAo2lled in within TMEM132D might contribute to the risk to develop anxiety disor- this study. COL1A1 COL1A2 ders. In addition, the overrepresentation of rare functional variants in con- 46 patients had mutation in gene, and 25 in PPIB gene. trols supports previous results associating an increased function of this The mutation deCteRcTtAioPn ratLeE PoRf E1 and genes was 71%. Fur- gene with anxiety measures. thermore, one patient was identified heterozygous mutations in gene. P11.105 NCoon mcluutsaiotino:n in or gene was found. In total, there was an Isolation and characterization of the RNA content of exosomes overall mutation identification rate of 72%. derived from blood and cell culture media using the Ion Torrent To gain moCrOeL i1nAsi1g,h CtO iLn1toA 2th, Ce RmTuAtPa, tLiEoPnRalE s1pectrPuPmIB in Taiwanese Personal Genome Machine (PGM™) patients with OI, we conducted this study to perform extensive exon-wide R. Setterquist1, N. Kefer2, T. Barta1, A. Vlassov1, M. Li1, R. Conrad1, J. Schageman1; 1Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States, 2Life Technologies, Darmstadt, Germany. mutational analysis of COL1A1 COL1A2 and genes based on the high- throughput mutation scanning system with NGS. There are se- veral hot mutation regions in and gene had been proposed. Exosomes are small (30 - 120 nm) vesicles containing nucleic acid and pro- PCR followed by NGS is an alternative strategy for molecular diagnosis. tein cargo secreted by all cell types in culture. They are found in abundance P11.103 in body fluids including blood, saliva, urine, breast milk. There is an expo- A fish-specific transposable element shapes the repertoire of p53 nentially growing interest to studying the function exosomes and utilizing target genes in zebrafish them for diagnostics development. At the moment, the mechanism of exo- M. Loviglio1, L. Micale2, M. Manzoni3, C. Fusco2, B. Augello2, E. Migliavacca1, G. Cotugno2, E. Monti3, G. Borsani3, A. Reymond1, G. Merla2; some formation, the make up of the “cargo”, biological pathways and resul- 1Center for Integrative Genomics - University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, ting functions are poorly understood. There is an urgent need to further our 2Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS „Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza“, San Giovanni Rotondo, understanding of microvesicles, and critical to this, is the development of Italy, 3Department of Biomedical Science and Biotechnology - University of Brescia, reagents and tools for their isolation, characterization and manipulation. We Brescia, Italy. will present data on (1) isolation of exosomes from blood and cell cultures, using modified ultracentrifugation and other protocols; (2) initial characte- rization of the RNA content from these exosome fractions using next gene- Transposable elements, as major components of most eukaryotic organisms’ ration sequencing. genomes, define their structural organization and are known to establish new cellular functions during evolution. Recent discoveries support the hy- P11.106 pothesis that TEs can directly mediate gene regulatory novelties at the net- Enabling Whole Transcriptome RNA-Seq on the Ion Torrent PGM work level by contributing to transcriptional and post-transcriptional mo- Sequencer dulation of nearby genes. For instance, TEs participate to the origin of new B. Sanderson1, X. Cristina2, N. Supunpong-Hernandez1, C. Burnett1, D. Williams1, K. functional elements, as promoter sequences, transcription factors binding Bramlett1; sites and enhancer, silencer and insulator elements. For example, binding 1Life Technologies, Austin, TX, United States, 2Life Technologies, Paisley, United Kingdom. sites of the pleiotropic master transcription factor p53 reside in LINE1, Alu and LTR repeats in the human genome. Similarly, here we describe the first case of a mobile element shaping the repertoire of the p53 target genes in As processes for the PGM continually improve, library construction has quik- zebrafish (Danio rerio). Through their embedded p53 responsive elements, kly become one of the most apparent bottlenecks for the RNA-Seq pipeline. the multiple copies of the non-autonomous DNA transposon EnSpmN6_DR Addressing this obstacle is extremely important to enable the developing drive in several instances p53-dependent transcriptional modulation of the clinical sequencing market by improving speed of sample to sequence. Also, adjacent genes, whose human orthologs were often previously annotated as with the already vast number of stored FFPE samples in tissue banks and a p53 targets. These transposons define a set of target genes that contribute growing impetus to study samples that may be rare or precious, a library to axonogenesis, synaptic transmission and the regulation of programmed method that can start with total, limited, and/or sheared RNA is necessary. cell death. Consistent with these biological functions, the EnSpmN6_DR-co- Historically, RNA-seq libraries have started with microgram quantities of to- lonized loci are enriched for genes expressed in both adult and fetal brain. tal RNA in order to perform a polyA selection or ribo minus depletion and Our data corroborate the recent findings concerning the role of p53 in the make the sample useful for downstream applications. These processes remo- regulation of neural stem cell development and pinpoint a remarkable ex- ve up to 95% of the sample, the majority of which being unwanted rRNA and ample of convergent evolution: the exaptation of lineage-specific transpo- mtRNA. At Ambion, we have developed a library preparation method that can sons to establish networks of p53-regulated genes crucially involved in neu- begin with a minimal amount of total RNA and selectively enrich for mRNA ronal morphogenesis in both a hominid and a teleost fish. using a not-so-random (NSR) priming approach. We will detail the NSR pri- P11.104 ming strategies to build an RNA library kit for sequencing whole transcrip- Rare variants in TMEM132D contribute to the risk for panic disorder tomes using the Ion Torrent PGM. We will show results from experiments in a German sample optimizing hybridization parameters and workflows for library using less C. Quast, A. Altmann, P. Weber, J. Arloth, D. Bader, A. Heck, H. Pfister, B. Müller-Myhsok, than 100ng total RNA, significantly reduce the representation of rRNA and A. Erhardt, E. B. Binder; mtRNA, and be performed in less than 4 hours. This will permit a clinicitahn to Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. build a library in less than half the time, at a reduced cost, using 1/100 the amount of starting RNA as compared to a ligation-based approach. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org282 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.107 Expert system PharmakoGen intended to increase efficacy of drug therapy Platelets are essential to hemostasis and thrombosis. Having a complete un- I. V. Ugarov1, M. M. Litvinova2, A. V. Zaborovskiy1; derstanding of the platelet transcriptome will give insight into the genetic 1Moscow State Medical Stomatological University, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I basis of these disease traits ultimately leading to new methods for treat- Moscow State I.M. Sechenov Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. ment. Genome-wide RNA expression studies using microarrays has pro- vided novel insights to the platelet transcriptome. However, limitations of microarrays including the use of probes only to known transcripts and a Nowadays pharmacogenetics is a very rapidly developing field of know- limited dynamic range for quantifying very low and high levels of transcripts ledge which allows to predict therapeutical effect of different drugs and has not yet revealed the complete picture of the platelets transcriptome. To occurrence of pathologic medical reactions depending on genotype of the capture the complexity of all the transcripts in human platelets, we per- patient. formed RNA sequencing (RNAseq) in leukocyte-depleted platelets derived Every day more and more scientific articles are being published worldwide from four healthy donors. The platelet whole transcriptomes for long and regarding this matter. So extensive data which include information on diffe- short RNA from total and ribosomal RNA-depleted samples were analyzed rent genes, mutations, polymorphisms and drug-to-drug interactions can- on the AB SOLiD platform. We estimate that there are ~9500 protein-co- not be stored in one’s mind and that is why cannot be used by the doctors ding genes expressed in platelets, 85 of which were validated by qRT-PCR. without applying for special literature and databases. Many classes of non-coding RNAs were identified, including a larger num- Our aim was to develop expert system for increasing efficacy of drug thera- ber of miRNAs than previously appreciated, as well as pseudogenes and py depending on genotype of the patient. As a result of the project expert retroelements. Comparison of microarray results to the RNAseq revealed system PharmakoGen was created. a significant correlation of well-expressed mRNAs, but RNAseq identified Expert system PharmakoGen is developed on the platform xGen IDS, suc- many more transcripts of lower abundance and permitted the discovery of cessfully used for creation of diagnostic systems on hereditary neuromus- novel transcripts. The RNAseq performed here revealed the complexity of cular diseases, eye illnesses, and chromosomal syndromes. the platelet transcriptome that may permit a better understanding of the Our expert system includes following elements: the module of input of pa- molecular mechanisms that regulate platelet physiology and contribute to tient information, the knowledge base module, the module of results expla- disorders of thrombosis and hemostasis. nation, and finally the module of expert conclusion with special individual P11.110 recommendations. Guidelines for splicing analysis in molecular diagnosis derived from The system can be used by doctors of various specialities and will help to a set of 327 combined in silico/in vitro studies on BRCA1 and BRCA2 prescribe correct dosage of medicine and to prevent undesirable drug ef- variants fects while treating patients. C. Houdayer1,2, V. Moncoutier1, S. Krieger3, M. Barrois4, F. Bonnet5, V. Bourdon6, M. Our system also can be helpful in forming the list of genes and polymor- Bronner7, M. Buisson8, F. Coulet9, P. Gaildrat10, C. Lefol1, M. Leone11, S. Mazoyer8, D. phisms which should be tested in patient before beginning of specific treat- Muller12, A. Remenieras6, F. Revillion13, E. Rouleau1, J. Sokolowska7, J. Vert14, R. Lidereau1, ment. F. Soubrier15, H. Sobol6, N. Sevenet5, B. Bressac de Paillerets4, A. Hardouin16, M. Tosi17, O. Sinilnikova18, D. Stoppa Lyonnet1,2; Thus developed software will be interesting to the practicing doctors and 1Institut Curie, Paris, France, 2université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3centre F will allow to optimize treatment of diseases depending on specific genetic Baclesse, Caen, France, 4Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 5Institut Bergonie, features of the patient. Bordeaux, France, 6Institut Paoli Calmettes, Marseille, France, 7CHU, Nancy, France, P11.108 8Inserm U1052, Lyon, France, 9APHP pitié Salpétrière, Paris, France, 10Inserm U614, The distribution of risk alleles for clopidogrel response (CYP2, PON1, Rouen, France, 11CHU, Lyon, France, 12centre P Strauss, Strasbourg, France, 13centre O ABCB1): pilot study in Czech patients with coronary stenting Lambret, Lille, France, 14Ecole des Mines, Paris, France, 15APHP Pitie Salpétrière, Paris, P. Schneiderova1,2, E. Kriegova1,2, J. Petrkova3, M. Petrek1,2; France, 16cetre F Baclesse, Nancy, France, 17inserm U614, Rouen, France, 18centre L 1Lab. of Immunogenomics and Immunoproteomics, Palacky University, Olomouc, Czech Berard, Lyon, France. Republic, 2Lab. of Cardiogenomics, University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic, 3Internal Medicine – Cardiology, University Hospital, Olomouc, Czech Republic. in sAislisceossing the impact of variants of unknown significance (VUS) on splicing is a key issue in molecular diagnosiBsR. CTAh1is impBacRtC cAa2n be predicted by Clopidogrel - an inhibitor of platelet activation - is widely used in the pre- tools, but proper evaluation and user guidBelRinCeAs are lacking. To fill this vention of atherothrombotic events in patients undergoing percutaneous gap, we embarked upon the largest and splice study to date coronary interventions (PCI) with stent implantation. Genetic variations in by testing 272 VUSs (327 analyses) within the splice network of Uni- genes involved in the absorption (P-glycoprotein/ABCB1) and metabolism cancer. All these VUSs were analyzed by using six tools (Splice Site Predic- (CYP2C19, CYP2C9, PON1) of clopidogrel are thought to influence the re- tion by Neural Network, Splice Site Finder, MaxEntScan, ESE Finder, Relative sponse to the drug. The purpose of our study, therefore, was to characterize Enhancer and Silencer Classification by Unanimous Enrichment, Human the distribution of alleles which are associated with altered response to clo- Splicing Finder) and the predictions obtained were compared to transcript pidogrel in Czech patients after PCI. analysis results. Combining MaxEntScan and Splice Site Finder gave a 96% A spectrum of risk genetic variants in genes CYP2C19, CYP2C9, PON1, AB- sensitivity and a 83% specificity for VUSs occurring in the vicinity of con- CB1 were assessed in a cohort of 294 patients after PCI employing multiplex sensus splice sites, i.e. the surrounding 11 and 14 bases for the 5’ and 3’ PCR analysis by MassArray technology (Sequenom). sites, respectively. This study was also an opportunity to define guidelines Carriage of loss-of-function alleles, which may cause reduced conversion for transcript analysis along with a tentative classification of splice variants. to active metabolite of clopidogrel was as follows: CYP2C19*2 27.9 % (2.4 The guidelines drawn from this large series should be useful for the who- % homozygotes), CYP2C9*3 16.0 % (0.7 %), PON1 192R 46.9 % (4.4 %). le community, particularly in the context of growing sequencing capacities Carriage of CYP2C19*17 - the allele associated with ultra-rapid metabolism that require robust pipelines for variant interpretation. - was 42.5 % (4.5 %). Genetic variation of P-glycoprotein influencing drug P11.111 absorption - ABCB1 3435TT genotype and ABCB1*2 allele (haplotype AB- Targeting human KIAA0649P into mouse Rb1: Pseudogene integration CB1 1236TT-2677TT-3435TT) - was found in 33.3 % and 21.8 % patients, is causative for genomic imprinting of RB1 respectively. L. Steenpass, D. Kanber, M. Hiber, K. Buiting, D. Lohmann; In conclusion, more than 40% of our PCI patients possessed alleles and/ Institute of Human Genetics, Essen, Germany. or their combinations, which have been reported to be associated with im- RB1, paired efficacy of antiplatelet treatment and/or increased risk of cardiova- scular complications. The evaluation of risk allele(s) genotyping on the rate The human retinoblastoma gene, is imprinted. Gene expresKsIiAonA 0is6 4sk9eP- of subsequent cardiovascular events in our PCI patients is under progress. wed in favour of the maternal allele. This is due to parent-of-oRrBig1i n specific (Grant support: IGA_PU_LF_2012_07, CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0030) DNA methylation on the truncated and inverted pseudogene . P11.109 This pseudogene eRvBo1lved after integration into intron 2 of the and in its The human platelet transcriptome: RNA-seq reveals a greater present form harbors a new CpG island, CpG85, which serves as promoter complexity of protein-coding and non-coding transcripts than for an alternative transcript, transcript 2B. CpG85 is methylated on the previously appreciated maternal allele only and, as expectedR, Bex1pression of transcript 2B is restric- E. Londin, I. Rigoutsos, S. E. McKenzie, L. Edelstein, P. Loher, H. Chen, S. Nagalla, K. ted to thReb 1paternal allele. TranKsIcArAip0t6i4o9nP of the paternal transcript 2B interfe- Delgrosso, A. Ertel, P. F. Bray, P. Fortina; reKs IwAiAth06 t4ra9nPscription of the regular transcript on the saRmb1e allele. Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA, United States. Mouse does not contaKiInA A0649P and is not imprinted. TRob d1etermine if is sufficient to result in skewed expression of we genera- ted a knock-in of human in intron 2 of the murine gene. To www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 283 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Rb1 P11.114 Long term investigation of gene expression variations in venous blood be able to distinguisRhb 1expression of the two alleles, mouse embryonic from healthy individuals stem (ES) cells were first modified such that they harbor a single nucleotide S. Lehnert, H. Cuppens; variant in exon 3 of . Rb1 Center for Human Genetics, Leuven, Belgium. In the generated ES cell lines we could sRhbo1w that integration of a second active promoter leads to transcriptional suppression of the targeted al- lele. In addition, we determined that the promoter and CpG85 are free Gene-expression profiles from human venous blood have been applied in of DNA methylation. Currently we determine if an alternative transcript 2B diagnostic tests and laboratory settings. A new method to obtain these pro- is expressed of CpG85. files is RNA-Seq, a high-throughput sequencing technique. This method out- At the present stage our analyses of genetically modified mouse ES cells performs hybridization-based array technologies in sensitivity and dynamic provides evidence that the integration of a pseudogene can suppress gene range and provides a digital readout of transcript levels. Thus, it creates a expression. high resolution snapshot of the transcriptome. While reproducibility of re- P11.112 plicates and technical biases of high-throughput sequencing has been exten- Amplicon based targeted resequencing analysis of PDE6A and PDE6B sively studied, within individual variability has not. By applying RNA-Seq, in a cohort of patients with a clinical diagnosis of Retinitis Pigmentosa we will categorize intra-individual variations over a time span of 2 years using the Fluidigm 48.48 Access Array™ system and the Roche 454 GS and analyze the impact on diagnostics. We would like to confirm that sample FLX Next Generation Sequencing technology extraction on a “bad-day” does not sicken a patient. N. Weisschuh1, S. Link1, S. Kotschote2, S. Kohl1, B. Wissinger1; Human venous blood samples will be collected from 3 healthy volunteers on 1Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany, 2IMGM Laboratories, Munich, a day to day, week to week and month to month basis over 2 years. Multi- Germany. plexed samples will be analyzed on the Illumina HiSeq system and prepared by 3 approaches. The first is designed to analyze only polyadenylated RNAs, the second to investigate rRNA depleted RNA and the third focuses on small The genetic heterogeneity of Retinitis Pigmentosa hampers the identifica- non-coding RNAs. The sequence reads will be mapped with Tophat and ana- tion of the underlying mutation in many cases. Current genetic diagnostics lyzed at the (gene) transcript isoform level with tools as Cufflinks, edgeR frequently takes several months or even years and, due to the need for inve- and(or) DESeq. stigation of many large genes, is very expensive. Moreover, there is a lack of Defining these limitations is a crucial step in applying RNA-Seq in diagno- data about mutations in low-prevalence disease genes due to the technolo- stics. Characterizing intra-individual transcriptome variations will enable gical limits that PhDavEe6 AhampePreDdE c6oBmprehensive studies. diagnostics to determine the limitations of RNA-Seq’s predictive power. This We aimed to find all possible disease-associated variants in coding se- study will provide practical recommendations that will significantly impro- quences of the and genes in a large cohort of patients dia- ve the accuracy of RNA-Seq studies. gnosed with autosomal recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa (arRP) using a time- P11.115 and cost-efficiePnDtE n6eAxt genePrDaEti6oBn sequencing (NGS) approach. A simple method for improving the limit of detection for capillary Ninety-six patients with a clinical diagnosis of arRP were screened for mu- electrophoresis DNA sequencing - a comparison of methodologies for tations in the and genes using an amplicon based targeted KRAS variant detection resequencing approach. Target enrichment was performed using the Flui- C. J. Davidson1, K. J. Champion2, M. Gauthier1, F. Wang1, J. Boonyaratanakornkit3, J. R. digm 48.48 Access Array™. NGS was performed using the Roche 454 GS Jones2, E. Schreiber1; FLX technology. Identified variants were confirmPDedE 6oAr rejected by Sanger 1Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, United States, 2Greenwood Genetic Center, PseDqEu6eBn,c ing. Greenwood, SC, United States, 3AcroMetrix, Benicia, CA, United States. We verified a total of 16 sequence variants in and 14 variants in respectively. Five of these were clearly pathogenic because they ful- filled the criterion of homozygosity or compound heterozygosity and, mo- Fluorescent dye terminator Sanger sequencing (FTSS), with detection by au- reover, have been previously described. The pathogenicity of the remaining tomated capillary electrophoresis (CE), has long been regarded as the gold variants remains unclear since they were only found in heterozygous state. standard for variant detection. However, software analysis and base-calling Due to the heterogeneity of Retinitis Pigmentosa, genetic diagnostics based algorithms used to detect mutations were largely optimized for resequen- on traditional Sanger sequencing is laborious and expensive. We found that cing applications in which different alleles were expected at heterozygous the NGS approach is a time- and cost-efficient tool for screening low-preva- mixtures of 50%. Increasingly, the requirements for variant detection are an lence disease genes in large cohorts. analytic sensitivity for minor alleles of <20%, in particular, when assessing P11.113 the mutational status of heterogeneous tumor samples. Here we describe Time course RNA-seq: A potential avenue with somewhat different a simple modification to the FTSS workflow that improves the limit of de- approach in tandem of differential analysis tection of cell-line gDNA mixtures from 50-20% to 5% for G>A transitions S. Oh1, H. Zhao2, J. P. Noonan2; and from 50-5% to 5% for G>C and G>T transversions. In addition, we use 1Cincinnati Children‘s Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States, 2Yale two different sample types to compare the limit of detection of sequence School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, United States. variants in codons 12 and 13 of the KRAS gene between Sanger sequencing and other methodologies including shifted termination assay (STA) detec- tion, single-base extension (SBE), pyrosequencing (PS), high resolution melt RNA-seq is exponentially becoming the de facto standard approach to compel (HRM), and real-time PCR (qPCR). considerable advantages over conventional technologies such as microarray P11.116 by directly sequencing transcripts in gene expression profile. Thanks to the Investigating levels of precision in gene expression measurement by reduced cost to sequencing, studies to dynamic change of gene expression digital PCR in a given biological system over time have shown steady growth over the R. Sanders1,2, C. A. Foy1, D. Mason2, J. F. Huggett1; past few years as microarray, however, statistical approaches to characteri- 1LGC, Teddington, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. ze dynamic temporal complexities are currently elusive. In differential gene expression analysis, as somehow limited but intuitive solutions, static diffe- rential expression methods without respect to time can be applied, which Gene expression studies profiling mRNA are central to biomolecular re- do not take into account the inherent dependencies in time series explicitly search offering considerable potential for research, diagnostics ainnd v pitrroogno- that the expression patterns at later stages are dependent on patterns at isnti cvsiv. oGene expression measured by reverse transcriptase (RT) linked PCR, earlier stages. We present a statistical framework to define dynamic gene is commonly used to interpret the effects of specific signals both and expression patterns over time using empirical trajectory index and Hidden , often on low copy transcripts extracted from tissues. The RT step, Markov Model (HMM) approach in time series RNA-seq data, and our me- necessary to convert mRNA to cDNA, is widely accepted as both inefficient thods are validated through Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) simulation and imprecise, with studies reporting variabilities up to 17-fold. This stu- study in time dependent data. The utility of the proposed dynamic methods dy tested RT measurement variability of synthetic RNA transcripts (ERCC for temporal RNA-seq is demonstrated by application to the analyses of gene developed targets; European RNA Control Consortium) using RT digital (d) expression patterns in RNA-seq real data sets and MCMC simulation study PCR evaluated through one-step reactions; where RT-dPCR is performed in in details. a one-step (one reaction vessel) process rather than the standard two-step approach (independent reactions in different tubes for the RT and then PCR stages). dPCR applies single molecule amplification achieved by sample par- tition for absolute quantification. The measurement capability and repro- ducibility of RT to aid quantification of targets spiked into human cell-line www.eshg.org www.eshg.org284 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.119 QCTool: an efficient toolkit to automatically generate quality metrics derived total RNA was assessed. Furthermore, to compare measurement of next-generation sequencing data accuracy of RT-dPCR with more established DNA dPCR, six well-characte- R. Berutti1,2, F. Reinier1, R. Atzeni1, A. Angius1,3, R. Cusano3, M. Marcelli1, M. Oppo1, R. rised ERCC targets of known concentration were evaluated, enabling assay Pilu3, M. F. Urru1, M. Valentini1, I. Zara1, S. Sanna3, F. Cucca3,2, C. Jones1; bias assessment. Our results demonstrate RT reaction sensitivity is assay 1CRS4 - Centre for Research Development and Advanced Studies in Sardinia, Pula, dependent, with different quantification determined for each target despite Cagliari, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università degli Studi di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 3Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica - Consiglio Nazionale delle evaluation of equal copy numbers. This study is one of the first to demon- Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy. strate application of RT-dPCR for absolute quantification of low copy RNA targets. This approach allows RT precision, sensitivity and linearity to be monitored alongside reaction efficiency, facilitating accurate interpretation With the wide use of next-generation sequencing platforms and the increa- of gene expression data. se in sample throughput, it is necessary to automate the determination of P11.117 data quality metrics, not only for sanity check purposes but also to monitor Excess of novel nonsense mutations identified in putative the complex workflow of the sequencing process to locate, and eventually susceptibility genes for schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders correct, possible errors. To facilitate this process in a large ongoing effort to S. Furlong, E. M. Kenny, P. Cormican, C. Fahey, R. Anney, G. Donohoe, A. P. Corvin, L. study the whole genomes, exome and transcriptome of about 1500 Sardini- Gallagher, M. Gill, D. W. Morris; Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland. ans, we have developed „QCTool“. The software takes as input SAM/BAM files and produces, in addition to standard statistics as base and mapping qualities, reads-to-reference mis- Schizophrenia (SZ) and autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are complex ge- match rate, and genome coverage, also several parameters useful for wet-lab netic neurodevelopmental disorders that share certain phenotypes (e.g. quality validation such as PCR duplicates count, nucleotide relative content, cognitive deficits), and may share an underlying pathology due to shared and insert size distribution statistics. It is enriched with contig/chromo- genetic risk variants (e.g. already-identified NRXN1). This study involves some specific breakdowns as well as per-cycle quality plots. Furthermore next-generation sequencing of the exonic regions of 215 putative suscep- for exome sequencing, a simple command line option allows the parsing of tibility genes in an Irish sample of 151 cases of ASD, 274 cases of SZ and targeted regions and the determination of quality statistics limited to such 287 controls, to identify rare mutations contributing to one or both disor- regions. ders. A multiplex target enrichment method combined DNA samples using The package produces both PDF reports and an easily parsable file that can indexes/barcodes followed by enrichment of exonic regions using Agilent be integrated into LIMS systems or analysis tracking tools. For a direct use SureSelect and paired-end sequencing on an Illumina GAII. Selected genes on presentations or papers, all plots are also generated in JPG format. The were categorised as: 1) NRXN1 and interactors, 2) Postsynaptic Glutamate toolkit can be run stand-alone, just supplying the input file on a single core Receptor Complexes (NMDA, mGluR5 and AMPA), 3) Neural cell adhesion machine, or in a multicore fashion. Around 8Gb of memory are required for molecules, 4) DISC1 and interactors, and 5) Functional and Positional Can- the complete analysis of a human genome aligned file, but deactivating some didates. Analysis of 2,170 rare variants revealed an excess of nonsense mu- analysis options enables execution on desktop machines using only a few tations in cases (n=12) compared to controls (n=1; p=0.019). All nonsense kilobytes of memory. mutations were novel and 3 were in DST (2xSZ, 1xControl). The other SZ P11.120 mutations were in DLG5, FAT1, FYN, INADL, MACF1 and MYO16. Five of 7 SZ Frequency of altered DNA methylation at imprinted loci in children nonsense genes have NRXN1-related function. ASD mutations were in CNT- born SGA NAP1, GRIP1, GRIN2B and NRG1. Rare ASD mutations have previously been S. Bens1, A. Haake1, J. Richter1, J. Leohold1, J. Kolarova1, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach2, K. Buiting3, F. G. Riepe4, A. Caliebe1, R. Siebert1; reported for GRIP1 and GRIN2B. Analysis of all rare variants in the 11 non- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Christians-Albrechts-University Kiel& University Hospital sense genes identified an excess of cases carrying one or more mutations Schleswig-Hol, Kiel, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität zu Lübeck, compared to controls (p=0.019). These results supply new supportive data Lübeck, Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Duisburg-Essen, for known ASD risk genes and identify putative new susceptibility genes for Essen, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, Christians-Albrechts-University Kiel & both disorders. University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. P11.118 Determination of methylation profile in patients with schizophrenia B. B. Rukova1, S. Hadjidekova1, R. Staneva1, I. Dimova1, Z. Hammoudeh1, V. Milanova2, G. Patients with imprinting disorders show a broad range of phenotypic varia- Kirov3, D. Toncheva1; bility. This leads to the hypothesis that imprinting defects might frequent- 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Department ly be undetected in patients that share some, but not all typical symptoms of Psychiatry, Medical University, Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Department of Psychological being present in imprinting disorders, e.g. children born small for gestatio- Medicine, Cardiff University, UK, Cardiff, United Kingdom. nal age (SGA). Furthermore recent studies propose hypermethylation in IG- F2R DMR2 to be enriched among patients with growth restriction. Within the BMBF funded German Network “Imprinting Disorders” we here perfor- Schizophrenia is a severe chronic mental disorder that affects most of the med quantitative DNA methylation analysis of 10 imprinted loci (PLAGL1, higher brain functions. Its prevalence is estimated on about 1% worldwide. H19DMR, IGF2, GRB10, NDN, SNRPN, NESP, NESPAS, MEG3, IGF2R DMR2) The classical symptoms occur in several other psychiatric disorders, which by bisulfite pyrosequencing of 97 patients born SGA and 50 controls. For makes difficult the exact diagnosis. Schizophrenia is a serious social and IGF2R DMR2 we additionally screened 95 parents of patients born SGA (47 economic healthcare problem. Currently, there is no etiological treatment. parent pairs and one single mother). We established in one child the diagno- DNA methylation is a major epigenetic modification. It is a biochemical pro- sis of Temple syndrome most likely due to an epimutation. Furthermore five cess that is important for normal organismal development and cellular dif- patients and six individuals from the SGA parent cohort displayed IGF2R ferentiation. DNA methylation stably alters the gene expression pattern in DMR2 hypermethylation. Of these in two families IGF2R DMR2 hyperme- cells. This modification can be inherited through cell division. thylation was detected in the child and one parent. Five individuals in the Materials and methods: We analyzed age matched pools of 110 female control cohort displayed IGF2R DMR2 hypermethylation. We conclude that schizophrenia patients and 110 female healthy controls. We’ve performed imprinting disorders may still be underdiagnosed and are a relevant diffe- high-resolution genome-wide methylation array analysis (Agilent 1x244K). rential diagnosis in children born SGA. Hypermethylation in IGF2R DMR2 is We’ve analyzed the methylation status of 27 800 CpG islands of both groups not enriched in our patient cohort. Lack of genotype-phenotype correlation to identify methylation profile differences. in our and previous studies leads to the assumption that IGF2R DMR2 hy- Results: Our experiments show significant difference in the methylation permethylation most likely represents an epigenetic polymorphism, howe- profile between patients and controls. In patients we observed significantly ver a Mendelian inheritance cannot be excluded from our observations. higher number of hypermethylated genes compared to healthy controls. In P11.121 controls we established that hypomethylated genes predominate in compa- Determining the role of SIRT6 as an epigenetic regulator of gene rison to schizophrenia patients. expression in hepatocytes Conclusions: Our data suggest that there is a major differences is methylati- M. Linke1, K. Fischer2, U. Zechner1, S. Strand2; on profile between patients and controls. This dysregulation can play a cri- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg tical role in schizophrenia pathogenesis. University Mainz, Mainz, Germany, 2Department of Internal Medicine I, University Acknowledgements: funded by projects DO 02-12/2009 and DMY 03- Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. 36/2011, Ministry of Education and Science The mamalian sirtuin family consists of seven members (SIRT1-7) that tar- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 285 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 get a wide range of cellular proteins in nucleus, cytoplasm, and mitochon- (PRS) is a craniofSaOcXia9l disorder that is typically a component of the CD phe- dria for post-translational modification by deacetylation or ADP-ribosylati- notype, and we have previously reported a locus for isolated PRS at ~1.1-1.4 on. SIRT6 is located in the nucleus and promotes a number of important key Mb upstream ofS OX9. We now report two novel deletions in PRS patients; functions like DNA repair, genome stabilization and telomere maintenance. one partly overlapping the previously identified locus, and the other falling In accordance with these functions, Sirt6 knock-out mice show several dra- much closer to . In parallel, we performed ChIP-Seq analysis to iden- matic symptoms of premature ageing and die within four weeks. tifyS OgXen9ome-wide binding sites for p300, a marker of active enhancers, in We performed microarray gene expression profiling of hepatocytes from mouse craniofacial tissue. Several binding sites were identified upstream Sirt6-deficient and wildtype mice. This analysis detected a significant upre- of , and were validated as craniofacial enhancers in transgenic mouse gulation of the imprinted H19, Igf2 and Peg3 genes which was subsequently reporter assays. Notably, some of the p300 binding sites fall within the no- confirmed by quantitative PCR. Bisulphite pyrosequencing of the imprin- vel PRS deletions, and sequencing of these regions in a large cohort of PRS ting control regions of these three and other imprinted genes did not reveal patients reveaSlOeXd9 several rare variants. These studies add a further level of significant methylation differences between Sirt6-deficient and wildtype complexity to our knowledge of the mechanisms governing transcriptional hepatocytes. Similarly, DNA methylation analysis of these cells at subtelo- regulation of . meric regions known to exhibit DNA methylation changes associated with increased telomeric recombination in DNA methyltransferase-deficient P11.124 cells gave normal results. However, using quantification of global DNA me- Sex determining region Y (SRY) contributes to normal development thylation with a specific antibody in an ELISA-like reaction, we observed by regulation of genes involved in pluripotency and differentiation significantly decreased levels of 5-methylcytosine in Sirt6-deficient cells. S. Ashrafi Kakhki1,2, R. Favaedi1, G. H. Salekdeh3, M. Shahhoseini1; Bisulphite pyrosequencing excluded that repetitive elements as frequently 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Center, Royan Institute for used indicators of global DNA methylation changes are affected by this de- Reproductive Biomedicin, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biology, methylation process. Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Our results provide further evidence that the epigenetic regulatory role of 3Department of Molecular Systems Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. SIRT6 is more likely associated with higher order chromatin structures and specific histone modifications. Nevertheless, there is an obvious decline in global DNA methylation in Sirt6-deficient cells that needs to be studied in Introduction: Members of the SOX (SRY box) family proteins play critical more depth. roles in multiple aspects of development.SRY, as a founder member of SOX P11.122 family, has long been believed to be involved in development of sexual go- Detecting SNP interactions associated with HDL using GPUs E. M. van Leeuwen1, F. A. S. Smouter1, T. Kam-Thong2, N. Karbalai2, K. M. Borgwardt3, C. nads by triggering signaling cascades that lead to formation of testis or ova- M. van Duijn1, L. C. Karssen1, B. Muller-Myhsok2; ry from bipotential gonads. However, less is known about whether SRY has 1Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, role in other developmental procedures. In order to gain further insight into Munich, Germany, 3Max Planck Institutes, Tübingen, Germany. the possible roles of SRY during development, we looked into possible SRY- regulated genes and their levels of expression in a human embryonic OcaCrTc4i- nNoAmNOa Gcell linSeO, nXa2med NTera2, before and after inductioNnE oSTf dINifferenPtiAaXti6on. In recent years many genome-wide association (GWA) studies have been Material and methods: For this respect two groups of genes including , performed. Many of these have been successful in identifying loci associated and as pluripotency marker genes, and and as with complex diseases. Until now, these results failed to fully explain the differentiation marker genes were evaluated.Chromatin Immunopercipita- heritability of many of the diseases. tion (ChIP) was performed using SRY antibody on chromatin extracted from Searching for interactions between Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms NTera2 cells before and after neural differentiation and SRY incorporati- (SNPs) is one of the many possible explanations to the missing heritabili- on on the regulatory regions of the aforementioned genes were evaluated ty. However, the computational time needed for testing all pairs of SNPs is quantitatively, using real time-PCR technique. proportional to the square of the number of SNPs, translating into months Results and conclusion: Our results shOoCwTe4d StOhXa2t incoNrpAoNrOatGion of SRY in of CPU time. We therefore evaluated GLIDE [1] which makes use of the com- both groups ofP AmXa6rker gNenEeSsT IwNas increased after induction of differentiati- putational power of consumer-grade graphics cards (GPUs) to detect inter- on. Besides, the low expression level of , and and the high actions via linear regression. expression of and in the differentiated cells suggest that SRY We present our first experiments with GLIDE for which we analysed the HDL may act as a transcription repressor for pluripotency-associated genes and levels in 3,000 individuals of the Rotterdam Study. The first results show as a transcription activator for differentiation -related genes. that GPUs can indeed be used for fast genome-wide analysis of SNP-SNP P11.125 interactions. We found multiple regions showing genome-wide significant Targeted sequencing experiments for rare disease alleles: interactions which are currently being investigated. However, occasionally implications in clinical practice and diagnosis of steroid-resistant problems occur using imputed data hampering meta-analysis and replicati- nephrotic syndrome on. Further developments are currently ongoing to overcome this issue and A. Provenzano1, B. Mazzinghi2, B. Tesi2, M. Materassi3, P. Romagnani4, S. Giglio1; will also be presented. 1Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, Medical Genetics Unit-Meyer Children‘s This work is supported by the NVIDIA Academic Partnership Program. University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 2Medical Genetics Unit-Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, Italy, 3Nephrology Unit-Meyer Children‘s University Hospital, Firenze, [1] Kam-Thong et al, submitted Italy, 4Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, Nephrology Unit-Meyer Children‘s P11.123 University Hospital, Firenze, Italy. Genetic and functional investigation of the SOX9 regulatory region in development and disease C. T. Gordon1, C. Attanasio2, D. Kleinjan3, S. Benko1, L. Melin1, M. Ansari3, V. Abadie4, K. During recent years, several podocyte genes have been implicated in severe Temple5, A. Goldenberg6, L. Pennachio2, A. Munnich1, D. FitzPatrick3, J. Amiel1, A. Visel2, S. Lyonnet1; forms of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRNS) progressing to renal 1Université Paris Descartes, INSERM U-781, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, failure. To date, at least 15 genes highly expressed in the podocyte have been France, 2Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, United States, 3MRC associated with the syndrome and different mutations in these genes have Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Centre de been identified; it is now known that the phenotypes associated with muta- Référence Pierre Robin, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5University of tions in these genes display significant variability, rendering genetic testing Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 6Hôpital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France. and counselling a more complex task. Traditional methods for sequencing SOX9 genes are often laborious and not easily available and a screening techni- que that enables the rapid detection of the pathogenetic variants would be Mutations in the coding sequenceS oOf X9 cause campomelic dysplasia (CD), very helpful in the clinical practicNeP. THhSe2 scopWe oTf1 our work is to apply next- a disorder of skeletal development, in association with 46,XY sex reversal, generation sequencing (NGS) technology to study patients affected by SRNS, reflecting the essential roles of in choSnOdXro9genesis and testis deve- in which the previous analysis of and genes had not shown any lopment. Non-coding genomic lesions, including translocations and dele- mutations. We perform in 8 affected subjects a targeted resequencing of 46 tions, within a ~1.4 Mb region upstream of can recapitulate the CD genes including those already known as causative of the disorder and seve- phenotype fully or partially, suggesting the existence of an unusually large ral other genes highly expressed in the podocyte. PLCE1, ACTN4, cis-regulatory control region. Indeed, studies in transgenic mice have de- WMYeO f1oEu,n PdO DneXwL) heterozygous missense mutationsZ iHnX d2i fferent genes that monstrated that this interSvOalX c9o ntains several highly conserved non-coding occasionally are associated with the disease in childhood ( elements that can function as enhancers of tissue-specific transcription, . We also detected a variation in the gene, to date never www.eshg.org partly recapitulating the expression pattern. Pierre Robin sweqwuenwce.e shg.org286 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 WT1 associated with SRNS. This gene encode for a transcriptional factor which sequencing costs by several orders of magnitude and enabled numerous regulates the expression of several genes in the podocyte, including . whole-genome analyses. Nevertheless, the expense and operational capa- This results and further clinical investigations provides an exciting oppor- city necessary for large scale whole genome studies is still prohibitive for tunity to reveal more insight into the pathogenic mechanisms that underlie many laboratories. Since large portions of the genome consist of repeat ele- this debilitating disorder. ments and regions of unknown phenotypic value, targeted exome capture P11.126 combined with massively parallel sequencing has become one of the most A systems biology approach to linking genotype to phenotype, using viable options to gain novel insights into the genetic causes of inherited celiac disease as an example disorders. By focusing on the protein-coding regions of the human genome, V. Kumar, H. Westra, J. Gutierrez, B. Hrdlickova, R. Almeida, J. Karjalainen, L. Franke, C. scientists are now able to more efficiently identify both common and rare Wijmenga, S. Withoff; polymorphisms that are more likely to result in cellular dysfunction and Department of Genetics, UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands. exhibit significant penetrance in disease association studies. This includes Mendelian disorders and complex diseases like cancer or neurological pa- thologies. Herein we describe our latest SureSelect Human All Exon designs, Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been successful in iden- which incorporate updated exome coordinates from the major databases. tifying genes involved in complex diseases. However, the critical challenge Performance and workflow improvements including automation and multi- is to translate GWAS hits into a biological hypothesis. We have previously plexed samples are demonstrated with respect to capture efficiency, unifor- identified 57 independent, non-HLA loci to be strongly associated with ce- mity, reproducibility of enrichment, and ability to detect SNPs and indels on liac disease (CeD). Many of these loci harbor multiple genes and for many multiple sequencing platforms. The specificity and accuracy of the human of these it is difficult to link genotype to phenotype. We therefore under- All Exon design ensures coverage of biologically relevant coding regions for took a systems biology approach to fill this gap, integrating results from small and large scale sequencing operations. eQTL analysis, network/pathway-based analyses, imputation results, and P11.129 SNP function annotation. The eQTL mapping, using whole genome gene- Multiplex enrichment of genomic regions using HaloPlex PCR expression data and genotyping data from 1,240 samples and replication in H. Johansson, M. Isaksson, F. Roos, E. Agné, F. Dahl; an independent set of 229 blood samples, suggested significant eQTLs at 16 Agilent Technologies, Uppsala, Sweden. CeD SNPs (FDR P < 1.12*10-7 to 1.51*10-137). Pathway analyses using seed genes identified by GWAS and eQTL analysis suggested causative genes at 55 out of 57 CeD loci. Surprisingly, along with enrichment for T-cell, B-cell and Targeted sequencing methods, in combination with bench top sequencers, neutrophil genes, co-expression network analysis also suggested that 11% enable studies of select regions of large genomes in multiple samples with of CeD genes are highly expressed in epithelial tissues and are involved in sufficient coverage. epithelial cell-cell adhesion. We imputed CeD-associated regions using 1000 For a target sequencing to be useful for genetic research as well as for clini- Genome project and annotated the function of all the susceptibility variants. cal applications it is important that the regions of interest are enriched with SNPs with strong eQTLs lay within binding sites of either microRNAs (e.g. high specificity and uniformity to maximize the amount of useful data retrie- for IL18RAP, UBE2L3) or transcription factors (e.g. for MMEL1, CSK). Thus, ved from each run. Furthermore it is also important that the protocol is fast our study provides a biological hypothesis for almost every CeD susceptibi- to make use of the short turnaround times on bench top sequencers. lity locus to connect the genotype and CeD phenotype and it implicates the The HaloPlex PCR method combines target enrichment and library prepa- involvement of a novel pathway in CeD pathogenesis. ration in a single protocol without the requirement of any dedicated instru- P11.127 ments. The protocol associates all targeted fragments with common primer Analisys of MMP-3 gene promoter methylation status in epithelial motifs which can then be used to run multiplex PCR using only one primer cells from oral mucosa and gingival tissue cells and genetic expression pair. To make use of the capacity in the sequencing run, up to 96 samples can in smokers and nonsmokers subjects with chronic periodontitis be enriched, barcoded and pooled on the same flowcell. G. R. Damm1,2, N. F. Oliveira1,3, A. P. Souza1; We have developed a faster version of the protocol that can be completed in 1FOP - Unicamp, Piracicaba, Brazil, 2Hospital AC Camargo, São Paulo, Brazil, six hours and with improved enrichment uniformity. The key improvements 3Universidade Federal da Paraiba, João Pessoa, Brazil. are shortened restriction digestion and hybridization times and consolidati- on of several of the reaction steps. The performance of the new protocol was demonstrated by the enrichment The objective was to investigate the methylation status of CpG site at position of a 400 kb region in ten samples that were subsequently pooled and sequen- -686 of MMP-3 gene promoter and the levels of mRNA expression of MMP-3. ced on one MiSeq flowcell. All samples were enriched with >95% specificity Subjects were divided into: nonsmokers healthy, non-smokers and smokers and 90% of the targeted bases were covered at >10% of average depth. with chronic periodontitis. DNA was purified from buccal epithelial cells, P11.130 that were obtained after oral rinse and DNA and RNA were purifieHd pfraoImI bi- Development of a gene panel for targeted next generation sequencing opsies gingival cells. The methylation status at -686 of MMP-3 gene promoter of twelve thoracic aortic aneurysmal genes was investigated by restriction enzyme sensitive to methylation , the D. Proost1, C. Vrints2, B. Paelinck2, J. Saenen2, B. Loeys1, L. Van Laer1; PCR and electrophoresis. Methylated samples showed positive bands after 1Center of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of PCR and non-methylated samples showed no bands. The statistical analysis Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, Edegem, Belgium, between the me2t hylation status found in this samples in each groups was 2Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of performed by X test at 5% level. The relative expression of MMP-3 was ex- Antwerp and Antwerp University Hospital, Antwerp, Belgium, Edegem, Belgium. amined by real time PCR and statistical analysis was performed by Kruskal- Wallis test at 5 % level. There was not difference in the methylation status found in each group. The frequency of the unmethylated status found in the Dissection/rupture of aortic aneurysms represent important causes of death epithelial oral cells was 18,3% in healthy non-smokers, 12,5% in chronic pe- in the Western world. The genetic contribution to thoracic aortic aneurysm riodontitis smokers and 9,7% non-smokers. And the unmethylated status of (TAA) is significant and a dozen causative genes are known. The molecular gingival cells was higher in all groups: 28% in healthy non-smokers, 38% in confirmation of the clinical diagnosis is important as the identification of the smokers with chronic periodontitis and 27% in non-smokers with chronic underlying mutation has implications for further patient management and periodontitis. Also, there was not difference in genetic expression of MMP-3 therapy. Because of overlapping phenotypes, the high allelic/locus hetero- among these groups. We conclude that there is not association between the geneity and large size of the involved genes, the molecular diagnosis for TAA methylation status observed at position -686 of MMP3 gene promoter and is not always straightforward. Moreover, the consecutive molecular scree- chronic periodontitis in smokers and non-smokers. ning of genes using conventional mutation screening methods is expensive P11.128 and labor intensive. Next generation sequencing (NGS) after hybridization Agilent Technologies SureSelect™ Human All Exon Designs: or amplification based enrichment offers an attractive alternative. High Performance Target Enrichment System for Human Exome Here, we propose a cost- and time-efficient method for simultaneous scree- Sequencing ning of twelve TAA genes (ACTA2, COL3A1, FBLN4, FBN1, FLNA, MYH11, D. N. Roberts, E. Lin, A. Lee, A. Giuffre, C. Pabón-Peña, H. Ravi, B. Novak, M. Visitacion, F. MYLK, NOTCH1, TGFBR1, TGFBR2 and SLC2A10) based on the Haloplex Useche, J. Ong, M. Guadalupe, G. Amparo, S. Happe, E. Leproust; technology. The latter is an innovative, simple method for specific en- Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, United States. richment of target regions. The protocol simultaneously incorporates the sample identification barcodes (up to 96 different) and the primers for the subsequent NGS run and does not require the acquisition of expensive de- Next generation sequencing technologies have reduced high-throughput dicated equipment. It requires 2 x 150 bp paired-end runs, which we have www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 287 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. performed on a Miseq (Illumina). We have obtained an overall coverage “by design” of 99.7% and a “real-life” sequencing coverage of 96.6% of the tar- Tyrosinase is a copper- containing enzyme that has been isolated and studied geted regions. We are currently optimizing the assay, which includes design from a wide variety of plant, animal and fungal species.Tyrosinases found in improvements and validation in large sample groups. different sources such as prokaryotic or eukaryotic microorganism, mam- P11.131 mals and plant, differ from each other with respect to the primary structure, Sample preparation of animal and plant tissues prior to automated size, glycosylation pattern and activation characteristics, but, all tyrosinases, nucleic acid purification with Thermo Scientific KingFisher Duo and have in common within their active site. In tyrosinase active site, two copper KingFisher Kits atoms are each coordinated with three histidine residues. Histidine residues M. Suomalainen, S. Suomalainen, K. Bertula, V. Puro, A. Lamberg; are located in two regions named cuA and cuB. A loop containing three re- Thermo Fisher Scientific, Vantaa, Finland. sidues including M374 connects two copper atoms centers. Therefore this loop is essential for stability and activity of enzyme. M374 is conserved in the phenol oxidase superfamily. A set of mutants were generated previous- Efficient homogenization of animal and plant tissues is an essential step to ly by replacement of this residue with glycine. In this study, M374 was re- ensure good DNA and RNA yield and quality. Certain sample types, e.g. har- placed with asp, Lys, arg, and thr. To carry out mutational characterization of der tissue samples, require strong, either chemical or mechanical treatment human tyrosinase, an expression plasmid, pHis-tyrosinases, which contain for destroying tissue and cell structures before nucleic acid purification pro- the entire coding sequence of tyrosinase with site directed mutations that cess. mentioned above, were constructed and expressed in p.lysis. The expressed Magnetic particle technology enables fast and effective purification of high enzymes were purified by an affinity chromatography. Oxidative activity and quality nucleic acids. Thermo Scientific KingFisher Duo uses magnetic par- km values for native and recombinants enzymes were detected respectively. ticle technology based on the use of magnetic rods with specially designed These newly recombinant tyrosinases may have therapeutic potential due plastic consumables, BindIt software for protocol development and optimi- to their activity and stability. zed KingFisher Kits for nucleic acid purification. KingFisher Duo enables pu- P11.134 rification of 12 samples during one run in working volumes of 30-1000 µl. GenomeNL variant database; towards a deep genetic encyclopedia of Running two protocols sequentially without interruption raises throughput Dutch variation up to 24 samples per load. In addition, the instrument gives an option to P. B. T. Neerincx1, F. van Dijk1, T. Rengaw1, L. C. Francioli2, P. I. W. de Bakker2,3,4, C. choose working volumes up to 5 ml. Wijmenga1, M. A. Swertz1; We tested several different mechanical homogenization methods in addition 1Genomics Coordination Center & Department of Genetics, University Medical to chemical lysis to optimize sample preparation before nucleic acid puri- Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Departments of Medical Genetics and fication in the KingFisher Duo. We analysed performance of homogenization Epidemiology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, MA, United States, 4Division of Genetics, Brigham and and purification using several different sample materials, including tobacco Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States. leaves as well as animal liver and heart samples. The purification process in the KingFisher Duo was performed using three different KingFisher Kits, suitable for cell and tissue DNA or RNA purification. The results indicate Background high sensitivity of the purification process. The Dutch biobank collaboration BBMRI-NL has initiated the „Genome of The KingFisher Duo in combination with the KingFisher Kits and new Bin- the Netherlands“ (GoNL) project to produce ~12x whole DNA genetic pro- dIt software 3.2 constitute an exceptional purification system for obtaining files of 769 Dutch people: 231 trios of a child with its parents, 11 quatros of excellent yield and purity of nucleic acids. monozygotic twins and 8 quatros of dizygotic twins. This deep genetic re- P11.132 source will offer unique opportunities for science, which is currently being Different Next Generation Sequencing approaches detect mosaic expedited by an international team of researchers on optimal variant disco- mutations and deep intronic mutations in tuberous sclerosis complex very, population genetics and evolution. K. Mayer1, C. Wagner2, M. Scholz1, S. Datter1, I. Vogl1, I. Rost1; 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany, 2IMGM Results Laboratories GmbH, Martinsried, Germany. Here we present the GoNL variant database, an online encyclopedia of Dutch variation. At submission of this abstract, researchers can already query the GoNL variant database to verify whether variants in their own sample are Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is caused by TSC1 or TSC2 mutations. unique against 25 million SNPs observed in the panel of 500 parents. By Current molecular genetic testing combining Sanger sequencing of all 62 April we expect a high quality SNP set based on the full panel and a coll- and MLPA of 58 coding exons, respectively, identifies a mutation in approxi- ection of structural variations using the unique trio structure to filter false mately 80% of the individuals with a definite clinical diagnosis. Possible re- positives. We will enrich the database with reference annotations on each asons for this detection gap are mosaicism for a mutation underrepresented variant to disclose a wealth of new information and possible applications in lymphocyte DNA or mutations in regulatory regions. the diagnostics. We reanalyzed patients with the definite clinical diagnosis TSC by resequen- Methods cing the entire genomic regions of TSC1 and TSC2 applying two Next Gene- The SNP data was produced using Illumina sequencing, BWA alignment, ration Sequencing approaches. Firstly, target enrichment with the Agilent Immunochip for QC, and GATK SNP calling. The data is represented in the SureSelect technology was combined with the Life Technologies SOLiD4 database using the Observ-OM standard, developed in collaboration with sequencing system. Probe design for 63.885 bp TSC1 and 44.255 bp TSC2 EU-GEN2PHEN. The software is implemented using the open source MOL- resulted in 43 and 27 genomic regions, respectively. Secondly, 108.140 bp GENIS biosoftware toolkit and is freely available for groups to setup their genomic region was amplified by 20 overlapping long-range PCR fragments own repositories. The database is accessible via http://www.nlgenome.nl of 5.000-5.400 bp and subjected to the 454 pyrosequencing technology P11.135 using the GS FLX Titanium system. Adhesion Protein VSIG1 Is Required for the Proper Differentiation of The SureSelect/SOLiD4 technology revealed a bias with an average of Glandular Gastric Epithelia 46.68% reads (coverage 612-1332) mapped to TSC1 but only 5.8% (co- G. Nyamsuren, O. Oidovsambuu, S. Liu, W. Göring, A. Khamit, W. Engel, I. M. Adham; Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany. verage 170-390) to TSC2. Coverage gaps in 17 of the 27 TSC2 regions are obviously due to its high GC content. The long-range PCR/454 GS FLX Tita- nium approach achieved a more uniform coverage ranging from 697-1719 for TSC1 and 687-3905 for TSC2. VSIG1, a cell adhesion protein of the immunoglobulin superfamily, is prefe- Preliminary results following the two approaches for 10 TSC patient samp- rentially expressed in stomach, testis, and certain gastric, esophageal and les uncovered four mosaic mutations composed of two missense and two ovarian cancers. Here, we describe the expression patterns of three alterna- splice site mutations as well as one true heterozygous deep intronic mutati- tively spliced isoforms of mouse Vsig1 during pre- and postnatal develop- on leading to aberrant splicing. ment of stomach and potential function of Vsig1 in differentiation of gastric epithelia. We show that isoforms Vsig1A and Vsig1B, which differ in the 3’ P11.133 untranslated region, are expressed in the early stages of stomach develop- Expression, Purification and Molecular Evolution Studies of Human ment. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that VSIG1 is restricted to the Tyrosinase R. Behzadi1, M. Sadeghizadeh1, A. Mousavi Movahedi2; adherens junction of the glandular epithelium. The shorter transcript Vsig1C 1Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University, is restricted to the testis, encodes an N-terminal truncated protein and is presumably regulated by an internal promoter, which is located upstream of exon 1b. To determine the role of VSIG1 during the development of stomach www.eshg.org www.eshg.org288 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 epithelia, an X-linked Vsig1 was inactivated in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). tool for the detection of mutations underlying rare human genetic disorders. Although Vsig12/Y ESCs were only able to generate low coat color chimeric We performed WES in nine patients and in all cases the same genes consi- mice, no male chimeras transmitted the targeted allele to their progeny sug- stently caught our attention, because they were overrepresented by hetero- gesting that the high contribution of Vsig12/Y cells leads to the lethality of zygous single nucleotide variants (SNV). One of our patients carried a large chimeric embryos. Analysis of chimeric stomachs revealed the differentiati- number of heterozygous base substitutions in CDC27, even though one allel on of VSIG1-null cells into squamous epithelia inside the glandular region. of this gene was known to be partially deleted. We found three listed pseu- These results sVusgigg1est that VSIG1 is required for the establishment of glan- dogenes of CDC27 which could be responsible for wrong mutation calls by dular versus squamous epithelia in the stomach. To perform more functio- misalignment of short sequence reads. Via selective primer design we were nal analysis of , generation of conditional knockout mice is underway. able to specifically resequence the functional gene by Sanger technique. As P11.136 expected, all variants were identified as false positive calls due to overlap Genotyping Fanconi Anemia Patients by Whole Exome Sequencing with the pseudogenes. In consequence of this finding, we became more alert K. Knies1, B. Schuster1, T. Bettecken2, R. Friedl1, B. Gottwald1, D. Schindler1; concerning alignment artifacts due to paralogous sequences in the other 1University of Wurzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Max- projects as well. But contrary to the general expectation that these misalign- Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, CAGT Center for Applied Genotyping, Munich, Germany. ments should be detectable because of their increased SNV counts, we also found several isolated SNVs which should have mapped to a related pseudo- gene. Analysis of the same data with different bioinformatic tools could only The rare genomic instability disorder Fanconi Anemia (FA) is characterized partially decrease the error rate. We therefore conclude that pseudogenes by bone marrow failure, variable malformations and increased predisposi- cause an enormous amount of false positive SNVs and require careful atten- tion to leukemia and solid tumors. Biallelic mutations in at least 15 genes tion because they cannot be withdrawn as easily as sequencing errors. Mu- involved in the FA/BRCA network of DNA interstrand crosslink repair (ICL), tation validation by Sanger sequencing still seems to be indispensable and are known to be disease causing. FA can be diagnosed in different ways: At the possibility of false negative mutation calls should be regarded as well. cellular level functional assessments like chromosomal breakage analysis P11.139 or cell cycle testing are state of the art. However, at the molecular level it Functional characterization of Williams-Beuren syndrome becomes more difficult, time consuming and expensive to detect mutations chromosome region 22 protein the more FA genes are identified. Therefore we performed whole exome se- K. Õunap1,2, A. Kurg1, R. Kurg2; quencing (WES) in four FA patients with previously unknown mutations in 1Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of order to evaluate the benefit of this method for moleNcuimlabrl edGiaegnnosis and FA Technology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. genotyping. To find the best coIlmlubmininaation between enrichment and sequen- cing technologies we SteusrteeSde ltewcto different pairings: SOLiD enrichment fArpopmli eRdo Bchioes yasltoenmgs with the Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) is a multisystem disorder associated with platform and Agilent enrichment with the platform from the hemizygous deletion of 26-28 genes on chromosome 7q11.23. Typical . Irrespective of the enrichment method or sequencing features of WBS comprise a recognizable pattern of facial dysmorphism, su- platform we were able to dFeAtNecCtJ ,a -nDd1 ,c o-Dn2fi rm th-eP pathogenic mutations in pravalvular aortic stenosis, connective tissue abnormalities, hypercalcemia each of our four patients. We found homozygous and heterozygous single and distinctive neurobehavioral phenotype. Hemizygosity of elastin gene is base pair substitutions in and but also an insertion of associated with supravalvular aortic stenosis; however it is unknown how two base pairs and a splice site mutation. Therefore WES is proposed as the deletion of other genes in 7q11.23 contribute to the phenotype. Altered a valuable tool for molecular diagnosis of FA which may replace classical expression level of dosage-sensitive genes within aneuploid segments is the genotyping approaches. main cause of WBS. P11.137 WBSCR22 (protein expressed from Williams-Beuren chromosomal region Alternative Splicing Governs miRNA Biogenesis 22) is a nuclear protein which has a predicted S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) Z. Melamed1, A. Levy1,2,3, G. Lev-Maor1, G. Ast1; binding motif and it is assumed that WBSCR22 has methyltransferase ac- 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of tivity. SAM-dependent MTases represent a diverse class of enzymes which Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, act on protein, small molecule, lipid or nucleic acid methylation and there- Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel, 3Rosetta Genomics Ltd., Rehovot, Israel. fore mediate numerous cellular processes. The yeast homolog of WBSCR22, Bud23, sharing 47% similarity on amino acid level, is a ribosomal 18S rRNA methyltransferase required for ribosome biogenesis. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs of 22 nucleotides that induce In our laboratory, we investigate the cellular function of WBSCR22. In sucro- post-transcriptional gene silencing through base-pairing with their target se gradient ultracentrifugation WBSCR22 cosediments with free ribosome mRNAs. miRNA primary transcripts contain a local hairpin structure that is small subunit (40S). WBSCR22 knock-down reduces the level of free 40S cleaved by the Microprocessor complex, consisting of RNAse III Drosha and and alters 40S/60S ratio. WBSCR22 is involved in processing of 18S rRNA DGCR8. The processing reaction releases the hairpin-shaped intermediates since WBSCR22 knock-down causes the accumulation of 18S-E pre-rRNA in (pre-miRNAs). The majority of mammalian miRNAs are located in introns. cell nucleus. Our data suggest that WBSCR22 protein is involved in ribosome Splicing of the introns in which such miRNAs reside was recently suggested biogenesis. to derive independently from the miRNA processing. We have uncovered a P11.140 novel regulatory mechanism in which splicing determines the processing of Screening of a European cohort of 150 male XLID patients using a pre-miRNAs. Based on a bioinformatic analysis of predicted transcription custom-designed chromosome X exon-specific microarray units of all miRNAs genes in 18 species, we identified a group of 52 miRNA A. Alexandrou1, J. Hettinger1, C. Sismani1, M. Badura-Stronka2, J. Kasnauskienė3, V. precursors that share an intriguing genomic location - positioned on exon- Kučinskas3, C. Graziano4, G. Romeo4, A. Kurg5, T. Sarkisian6, Z. Sedlacek7, L. Livshits8, P. C. intron junctions, these miRNAs are exposed to a regulatory mechanism in Patsalis1; which splicing or alternative splicing might determine their biogenesis. 1Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and We experimentally demonstrated that in these cases the splicing machin- Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Dept of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of Medical ery and the Microprocessor complex compete for processing of the same Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 3Dept Human and Medical Genetics, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, 4Unit of Medical Genetics, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 5Institute of region on the RNA transcript and therefore, either the spliced mRNA or Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 6Dept of Genetics and the pre-miRNA can be produced separately from the shared transcript. We Cytology, Center of Medical Genetics and Primary Health Care, Yerevan, Armenia, 7Dept also showed that tissue-specific and embryonic-specific alternative splicing of Biology and Medical Genetics, Charles University Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, negatively regulates the levels of mature miRNA produced from splice-site 8Dept of Human Genomics, Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Kiev, Ukraine. overlapping miRNA precursor, and reciprocally, that Drosha and DGCR8 mo- dulate inclusion of alternatively spliced exon that overlaps with the miRNA stem-loop. Our data reveal a potential role for alternative splicing in the re- X-linked Intellectual Disability (XLID) is a common cause of intellectual im- gulation of miRNA biogenesis. pairment in males with an estimated prevalence of ~1:1000. Many studies P11.138 have been performed for the identification of genes associated with XLID. Pseudogenes: an unsolvable problem in Whole Exome Sequencing? One approach for the identification of regions that may harbour novel XLID B. Schuster, K. Knies, D. Schindler; genes is through the detection of copy number changes (CNCs) by array- University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. CGH. The purpose of our study was to screen a European cohort of male XLID patients using a high-resolution oligonucleotide 105K microarray spe- cific for the X chromosome. This custom-designed chromosome X exon-spe- Over the past years Whole Exome Sequencing (WES) became an established cific microarray provides full coverage not only of the X chromosome itself www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 289 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P11.143 but complete exome coverage with at least 6 probes for each exon thereby ensuring a robust screen for the identification of CNCs down to the indivi- HG.e Dnroamisem-wa1i,2d,3,e R a. Pssooolc1i,4a, Gti.o Wni lilne m1s1e9n81,2 ,D J.u Htocthte inngdai1v,2i, dDu. Ia. lBso foomr s1m6a31, 2s,4;e rum dual exon level. To date, we have screened 153 patients and found CNCs in 1mDeeptaabrtomlietnets of Biological Psychology, VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 11 patients (7.2%). These aberrations consisted of seven deletions and six Netherlands, 2The EMGO+ Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, duplications that ranged in size from 165bp to 7.26Mb. All of the deletions Netherlands, 3ENGAGE: European Network of Genomic And Genetic Epidemiology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4BBMRI-NL: Infrastructure for the Application of and two of the duplications resided in single genes while the remaining du- Metabolomics Technology in Epidemiology (RP4), Amsterdam, Netherlands. plications spanned regions that harbored several genes. Follow-up studies including confirmation and segregation analysis with family members are in progress. In addition, the clinical significance of these aberrations and the Metabolites, or the small molecules involved in cellular metabolism, are pre- possible role of these genes as novel XLID loci will be assessed. sumed to be directly linked to (patho)physiology. Hence, it is important to P11.141 gain a deeper understanding of the genetic and environmental contributions Expanding and enhancing access to the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) to interindividual variation in metabolite levels. As part of our ongoing con- through a complementary new web-based mirror tributions to the European Network of Genomic and Genetic Epidemiology C. Smith, B. Ganter, E. Worley, B. Xia, A. Sundquist; (ENGAGE) consortium, we carried out a genome-wide association (GWA) DNAnexus Inc., Mountain View, CA, United States. study for serum metabolite levels in 1198 unrelated individuals who parti- cipated in the Netherlands Twin Register Biobank project. From 2004 until 2008, blood samples were obtained from these individuals (67.2% male, Public institutions such as the National Center for Biotechnology Informati- 32.8% female; mean age 52 years [SD, 13]) after overnight fasting. Meta- on (NCBI) have made tremendous investments in generating and archiving bolomics analysis was performed on the serum fractions of these samples, a wide array of valuable genomic data for use by the research community. using the Biocrates AbsoluteIDQ p150 kit and electrospray ionization-MS/ Expanding access to these valuable public data and streamlining the ability MS enabling detection of 163 metabolites belonging to five different clas- to integrate them into data management tools and powerful analyses, will ses: acylcarnitines (N=41), amino acids (AA, N=14), glycerophospholipids further expedite their use and value in medical research, discovery and ap- (N=92), sphingolipids (N=15), and a compound measure for hexoses (N=1). plications. Genotyping was performed using various GWA chips. Imputation against Teaming up with Google, DNAnexus has developed a complementary hosted HapMap 2 Build 36 Release 24 resulted in data for 3.8M unfiltered single mirror of the NCBI’s Sequence Read Archive (SRA) that provides researchers nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for each participant. SNPtest v2.2.0 was an additional way to access these important datasets. This freely accessib- le resource provides a new web-based user interface built using the latest used for association analysis,p i ncluding age, sex and principal component scores for population stratification as covariates. Genome-wide (conser- “cloud” technologies and genomic data standards. As the most comprehen- vative Bonferroni-corrected <3.1E-10) significant hits were observed sive archive of publicly available next-generation sequencing data, the SRA for several metabolites. The associations for 22 glycerophospholipids with is an important resource to researchers around the world. The SRA remains SNPs in the fatty acid desaturase (FADS) gene cluster were among the most the single best source of useful sequence data from research initiatives such prominent. In conclusion, we found several clusters of genome-wide signi- as the 1,000 Genomes Project and institutions like the Broad Institute, Was- ficantly associated SNPs for metabolites detected by MS in human serum. hington University, and the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute. Future meta-analyses will combine these data with the results of six ENGA- Here we discuss our work with the NCBI and Google to create a comple- GE partners, to determine whether the results found in our Dutch sample mentary mirror of the SRA available at sra.dnanexus.com. Through a typical are replicated in other cohorts. user scenario, we will discuss the underlying data processing pipeline, key features of the new web-based interface that enables researchers to quickly P12. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders identify and browse datasets of interest, link-outs to PubMed references, and integration of those data into an analysis workflow for hypothesis ge- neration. P12.001 P11.142 Mutational analysis of RPE65, ABCA4 and RHO genes on Greek A nonsense mutation in ATR-X gene responsible for nonsyndromic patients with Retinitis Pigmentosa, Leber congenital amaurosis and XLID in MRX77 family Stargardt’s disease C. Sismani1, M. Syrrou2, A. Alexandrou1, F. Abidi3, C. Skinner3, M. Friez3, S. McGee3, L. M. Tsipi1, M. Tzetis1, S. Kitsiou1, M. M. Moschos2, E. Kanavakis1; Holloway3, C. E. Schwartz3, P. C. Patsalis1; 1University of Athens, Department of Medical Genetics, Athens, Greece, 2University of 1Department of Cytogenetics and Genomics, The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Athens, Department of Ophthalmology, Athens, Greece. Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Cytogenetics Unit, Laboratory of General Biology, Medical school, Ioannina, Greece, 3Greenwood Genetic Center,Center for Molecular Studies, JC Self research Institute, Greenwood, SC, United States. Retinal dystrophies are a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders which affect more than two million people worldwide. This he- terogeneity raises difficulties on genetic testing and counseling for the af- In 2003 we reported a linkage analysis performed on a 3-generation Greek fected families. Although our knowledge about genetic factors underlying family (MRX77) with seven affected males. Clinical evaluation showed ap- these diseases has recently increased dramatically, a lot of disease causing parently nonsyndromic X-Linked Intellectual Disability (XLID). The affected mutations still remain unknown. Our study deals with identifying the disea- males have moderate to severe intellectual disability, severe speech pro- se-associated variants in Greek families with Stargardt disease, Cone-Rod blems and aggressive behavior. Two point linkage analysis using 26 poly- dystrophy , Retinitis Pigmentosa and Leber Congenital Amaurosis. morphic markers spanning the X chromosome had localized the disease We focused our research on the possible role of three genes (ABCA4, RHO gene to a large interval Xq12- Xq21.33 (flanking markers DXS983 in Xq12 and RPE65) in the pathogenesis of hereditary retinal dystrophies in Greek and DXS6799 in Xq21.33) with a maximum lod score of 2.36. In 2010, the patients. All exons of ABCA4 were sequenced in families with Stargardt Di- affected MRX77 patients were screened using the new full coverage chro- sease, Cone-Rod Dystrophy and Retinitis Pigmentosa. RHO was sequenced mosome X exon-specific array designed by our group which showed no copy in families with Retinitis Pigmentosa and RPE65 in families with Leber Con- number changes. In 2011, a proband was screened for mutations in 92 XLID genital Amaurosis and Retinitis Pigmentosa. genes using neAxTtR g-eXneration sequencing pArTiRo-rX to undertaking a whole X exo- A great number of genetic variants in coding and non-coding regions were me sequencing. A nonsense mutation, p.R37X (c,109C>T), was identified in found in this study. Most of them were known variations and include disea- exon 2 of the gene. Although, the gene had been sequenced in se-causing mutations and known polymorphic variants. Mutations in AB- 2003, this mutation was not detected since this exon was not annotated at CA4 were found in patients with Stargardt Disease, autosomal recessive Re- that time. Segregation and the skewed X-inactivation pattern in carrier fe- tinitis Pigmentosa and Cone-Rod Dystrophy. Mutation c.272G>A (p.R91Q) in males were consistent with the clinical phenotype of the MRX77 family. This RPE65 was found in a patient with Retinitis Pigmentosa and in his healthy nonsense mutation had previously been observed in the Chudley-Lowry mother. This mutation has been associated with autosomal recessive Reti- syndrome and another XLID family, both of which had a phenotype less se- nitis Pigmentosa. We also found novel variants in non- coding sequences vere than ATRX syndrome. Since our family has nonsyndromic XLID, the fin- which may affect the splicing process. These variants were analyzed with ding further confirms that the variability of the phenotype associated with the use of bioinformatic tools. We also attempted possible phenotype/ge- this mutation is likely due to the presence of alternative transcripts which notype correlations. do not contain exon 2. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org290 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.002 Two ABCB4 mutations involving two strategic NBD-motifs do not prevent the targeting to the plasma membrana but promote MDR3 Clinical and genetic information dysfunction Patient 1 Patient 2 Patient 3 D. Degiorgio1,2, P. A. Corsetto3, A. M. Rizzo3, C. Colombo4, M. Seia1, L. Costantino1, G. Sex F M M Montorfano3, L. Castellano5, A. Ragozzino6, G. Castaldo7,8, M. P. Rastaldi9,10, D. A. Coviello11; Age 3yr4m 12yr6m 8yr 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Milan, Italy, 2Laboratory Height (cm) 91.3 (-1.6SD) 138.6 (-2.1SD) 113.4 (-2.8SD) of Molecular Genetics, International Association of Medical Genetics MAGI-onlus, BMI (kg/m2) 17.4 (+0.9SD) 22.3 (+0.5SD) 16.4 (-0.4SD) Rovereto (TN), Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Molecolari Applicate ai Biosistemi, PRKAR1A mutation p.Q285R p.R368X p.R368X Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy, 4Department of Pediatrics, Fondazione At birth: IRCCS Ca‘ Granda, Milan, Italy, 5Gastroenterologia, ASL Napoli 1, distretto 33, Naples, - Gestational age 40w 39w 38w Italy, 6Radiologia, Ospedale S.M. delle Grazie, Pozzuoli (Na), Italy, 7Dipartimento di - Weight 2400g (-2.4SD) 2840g (-1.2SD) 2270g (-1.9SD) - Length 49cm (0SD) 47cm (-1.6SD) 45cm (-2.2SD) Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, 8CEINGE Biotecnologie avanzate, scarl, Naples, Italy, 9Renal Research Laboratory, Alterations: Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 10Fondazione Bone: D‘Amico per la Ricerca sulle Malattie Renali, Milan, Italy, 11Laboratory of Human - Peripheral dysostosis Yes Yes Yes Genetics, E.O. Ospedali Galliera, Genoa, Italy. - Generalized brachydactyly Yes Yes Yes - Nasal hypoplasia Yes Yes Yes Biochemical and hormonal - PTH Increased Increased Increased MDR3 protein translocates phosphatidylcoline (PC) from the inner to the - Serum calcium Normal Normal Normal outer leaflet of the hepatocanalicular membrane; its deficiency, related to - Serum phosphate Normal Normal Normal ABCB4 mutations, favours the formation of “toxic bile”. A continuum of he- - TSH Increased Increased Increased patobiliary diseases have been associated with ABCB4 mutations but, for - Serum T4 Normal Normal Decreased most of them, the detrimental effect on the protein is speculative only. The functional relevance of two strategic mutations within the N-terminal Nu- P12.004 cleotide-Binding-Domain was examined with stably transfected HUH28-cell- A new form of autosomal recessive syndromal acroosteolysis with lines expressing wild type and mutant MDR3 proteins by western-blotting, recurrent infections, sensory neuropathy and mental retardation. P. Chiurazzi1, F. Pirozzi1, S. Swagemakers2, B. van der Eerden3, G. Neri1, J. P. T. M. van immunocytochemistry and chromatographic quantification of lipids, coll- Leeuwen3, P. J. van der Spek2; ected from culture medium after sodium-taurocholate (NaTC) stimulation. 1Istituto di Genetica Medica, Rome, Italy, 2Department of Bioinformatics, Erasmus MC, As suggested by our three-dimensional model of MDR3 (Degiorgio D et al., Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, 2007), the p.Y403H mutation involves the A-loop while the p.L481R muta- Netherlands. tion is contained into the Q-loop. Our results show that both MDR3-mutant proteins were expressed in a comparable way to the MDR3-wild-type prote- in: a molecular mass of 160KDa associated with a green fluorescent signal, We describe a syndromic form of acroosteolysis characterized by mental intenser and sharper in the plasma membranes, was constantly identified. retardation, sensory neuropathy and recurrent infections with autosomal However, compared to the stably transfected HUH28-cell-line expressing recessive inheritance. SNP haplotyping mapped the disease locus to the wild-type-MDR3 protein in the presence of NaTC 3mM, the lipid dosage into short arm of chromosome 11. Whole-genome sequencing using unchained culture medium has shown (with five indipendent experiments) that base reads on self-assembling DNA nanoarrays allowed identification of a i) the efflux of PC is reduced (p<0.01) from cell lines expressing p.Y403H homozygous missense mutation in a gene localized in 11p15 that encodes a and p.L481R mutant proteins; SNARE-associated Golgi protein. We show that the gene’s mRNA is markedly ii) the efflux of cholesterol is increased (p<0.01) from cell line expressing upregulated in osteoclast cell cultures and patients’ osteoclasts (induced by the p.Y403H mutant protein. blood mononuclear cells) exhibit a significantly enhanced bone resorption In conclusion, these mutations could promote in vivo formation of toxic bile activity. Mutations in the NOTCH2 gene (associated to Hajdu-Cheney syn- with reduced amounts of PC (p.L481R) or with reduced amounts of PC and drome), mapping in 1p12-p11.2, and in the WNK1 gene (associated to here- increased level of cholesterol (p.Y403H). ditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy type IIA), mapping in 12p13.33, P12.003 have been excluded by both haplotype analysis and whole-genome sequen- New clues on the differential diagnosis between acrodysostosis and cing. pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia P12.005 A. Pereda1, O. Rubio-Cabezas2,3,4, S. Berrade5, M. Muñoz-Calvo2,3,4, J. Argente2,3,4, G. Perez Autosomal Dominant Polycystic Kidney Disease: A comprehensive de Nanclares1; mutation analysis of the PKD1 and PKD2 genes in Spanish patients 1Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain, 2Endocrinology Service, J. Garcia-Planells1, M. Garcia-Hoyos1, C. Ruiz1, M. Bermejo1, L. Rausell1, M. Molero1, M. Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, IIS La Princesa, Madrid, Spain, 3Department Ballesta2, A. Benavides3, M. Martínez-Atienza4, M. Lopez-Ariztegui5, M. Garcia-Barcina6, of Pediatrics, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 4CIBEROBN, Instituto de M. Perez-Alonso1; Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain, 5Service of Pediatrics, Complejo Hospitalario de Navarra, 1Instituto de Medicina Genomica (IMEGEN), Paterna (Valencia), Spain, 2Unidad de Pamplona, Spain. Genética Médica. Hospital Virgen de la Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3Unidad de Genetica. Hospital Central de Asturias, Oviedo, Spain, 4Servicio de Genética. Hospital Virgen de las Nieves, Granada, Spain, 5Unidad de Genética. Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo (Bilbao), Acrodysostosis is a skeletal dysplasia characterized by short stature, nasal Spain, 6Servicio de Genética. Hospital de Basurto, Bilbao, Spain. hypoplasia and brachydactyly. When multihormonal resistance is also pre- sent (mainly, PTH and TSH), the disorder might be clinically misdiagnosed as pseudohypoparathyroidism type Ia (PHP-Ia). Acrodysostosis with multi- Autosomal DominantP PKoDly1cystic KidneyP DKDis2e ase (ADPKD) is one of the most hormonal resistance is caused by mutations in PRKAR1A, which participa- prevalent inherited disorders, with an incidence of 1:1000. ADPKD is caused tes in the Gsα protein signaling pathway. by mutations in the (85%) and genes (15%). The gPeKnDet1ic dia- Patients and methods: PRKAR1A was sequenced in five PHP-Ia patients with gnosis of this disease has so far been a very complex task because of the negative genetic and epigenetic analysis in GNAS locus. presence of 5 pseudogenes witPh KaD h1igh identity (98%) with the gene. Results: A heterozygous mutation in PRKAR1A was identified in three of the We have developed a PCR+sequencing based technology that allows a speci- five patients. Parental testing showed that the mutation arose de novo in the fic and accurate analysis of the sequences, excluding the pseudogenes three cases. A detailed analysis of clinical and radiological data revealed the ones. characteristic bone abnormalities of acrodysostosis. In this work we have used this methodology to obtain a genetic diagnosis in a cohort of ADPKD from different Spanish hospitals. Results do not show the Conclusion: Acrodysostosis is an infradiagnosed disorder that might be con- presence of prevalent mutations in the Spanish population. We have iden- founded with PHP-Ia. An exhaustive radiologic study of patients presenting tified a high percentage of non-previionu ssillyic moutations making difficult their with short stature and PTH resistance could help clinical diagnosis and ge- clinical interpretation. In these cases, familial analyses have been performed netic testing. and results have been supported by analyses. The identification of the disease-causing mutations in several Spanish families has allowed to provide a genetic counselling and an accurate genetic diagnosis to the pati- ents and opened the possibility to offer familial testing and prenatal genetic diagnosis. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 291 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.006 L4A3/COL4A4 Recurrent agnathia caused by DNA replication slippage in PRRX1 gene screening is accomplished by genomic PCR and SURVEYOR M. J. Dasouki1, D. Kamnasaran2, B. Andrews1, P. Parimi1; endonuclease, followed by targeted DNA re-sequencing. PCR-RFLP is used 1University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, United States, 2Laval University, for detecting more mutation carriers in the AS families.We have DNA samp- Québec, QC, Canada. les from all Greek-Cypriot AS families (totally nine) refered to Cyprus’ hos- pitals. Two were studied and published by a French laboratory in 2001 (one homozygous for the COL4A3-c.3533delC mutation and one with the de-novo Agnathia-otocephaly is a rare craniofacial malformation which was recently COL4A5-G618R mutation). In two of them, we found a novel mild mutation, found to be caused by de novo dominant as well as recessive mutations in COL4A5-P628L. Two others were found to be compound heterozygous ca- the PRRX1 gene in two unrelated babies. We studied the PRRX1 gene in a ses [COL4A3-G1334E with COL4A3-G871C (novel); COL4A3-c.2621-2622- non-consanguineous Indonesian family with a 4 month old daughter who delGAinsT with COL4A3-G1077D (novel)]. The remaining three were not was diagnosed prenatally with severe micrognathia (bilateral Pruzansky studied yet, but the inheritance pattern is obvious (two ARAS, one XLAS). III). Her older affected brother died shortly after birth and clinically had Totally: four XLAS families (45%) with ten living patients (71% of all cases) agnathia-otocephaly. A frame shift mutation in a poly lysine (poly A) tract and five ARAS families (55%) with four living patients (29% of all cases). in the PRRX1 gene was identified in the proband while her father just had Although we found more XLAS families than ARAS, the total percentage of an insertion of one lysine residue . Expression of both mutations in COS7 XLAS and ARAS cases resembles that in other countries. cells showed loss of function of the frame shift mutation only. SNP analysis P12.009 coupled with the recurrence of this mutation in this family are consistent The p.Gly624Aspmutation in the COL4A5 gene is the prevalent with paternally derived germline mosaicism rather than autosomal reces- mutation in the Czech families with X-linked Alport syndrome sive inheritance. Also, severe micrognathia (bilateral Pruzansky III) and P. Plevova1,2, A. Baxov a3, M. Kubala4, J. Soukalova5, J. Zastera6, E. Silhanova7,2; agnathia-otocephaly represent a spectrum of craniofacial malformations in 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 2Medical this family. Faculty of the Ostravian University, Ostrava, Czech Republic, 3Department of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty of the Charles University and General University P12.007 Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic, 4Faculty of Natural Sciences, Palacký University, COL4A5 mutational analysis of 51 unrelated Portuguese patients with Olomouc, Czech Republic, 5Department of Medical Genetics, University Hospital, Brno, Alport syndrome - preliminary report Czech Republic, 6Genomac International s.r.o., Prague, Czech Republic, 7Department of M. J. N. Sá1,2, S. Alves1, F. Carvalho1, J. P. Oliveira1,2; Medical Genetics, Faculty Hospital, Ostrava, Czech Republic. 1Departamento de Genética - Faculdade de Medicina/Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade de Investigação e Desenvolvimento em Nefrologia - Faculdade de Aim of the study: Medicina/Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. Alport syndrome is characterized by progressive heredi- Introduction: tCaOrLy4 nAe5phritis, hearing loss, and ocular anomalies may also beC pOrLe4seAn5t. The disease is genetically heterogenous, 85% of cases being X-linked caused by CollaCgOenL 4tAy5pe IV glomerulopathies include Alport syndro- me (AS) and thin basement membrane CnOepLh4rAo3pathy (TCBOMLN4)A. 4X-linked AS Patients g aennde mmuettahtoiodns:s . The aim of the study was to detect gene (XLAS) is caused by mutations and the autosomal recessive and do- mutations in patients with herCeOdLit4aAry5 nephritis or hematuria. Molecular genetic analysis of the whole coding se- Amiimna:nt forms of AS and TBMN are due to and/or mutations. quence, i.e. exons 1-51 of the gene was performed in 61 unrelated APaptpireonxtism aantedly m 8e0t%h oodf sA:S is X-linked. patients. Denaturating gradient gel electrophoresis, high resolution melting Describe the molecular pathology of XLAS in Portuguese families. In the setting of an ongoing nationaCl OmLu4lAti5center analysis, direct sequencingC, OaLn4dA t5h e MLPA method were used. Besides that, 48 family members of the patients with disclosed mutation were tested for study, 51 unrelated patients with the clinical diagnosis of AS referred by ne- phrologists have already been studied. Mutational analysis CoOf L4A3 geCnOe- cRaersruieltrss:hip of the familial mutation. Computer modelling was per- Lw4aAs4 performed by direct PCR sequencing and mCOulLt4ipAl5ex ligation-dependent formed to simulate the impact of some mutations a t the protein level. A pathogenic mutation has been found in twenty-nine of 61 pati- Rpreosbuel tasm: pCliOfiLc4aAti5on (MLPA). Direct PCR sequencing of the and ents (i.e. in 47%). The c.1871G to A / p.Gly624Aspmutation in exon 25 was genes will be subsequently performed in -negative cases. the prevalent one being found in 12 families (i.e. 41% of pathogenic muta- direct sequencing identified 5 missense mutati- tions). This is the only mutation that has been published in the HGMD and ons [c.4342G>C (p.Gly1448Arg); c.715G>A (p.Gly239Arg); c.1009G>A (p.Gly337Ser); c.1844G>A (p.Gly615Glu); c.2633G>T (p.Gly878Val)], ACoRnUcPlu dsaiotanb:ases. All the other mutations are novelC. OTLh4irAt5y-eight of the 48 4 splice site mutations [c.1339+6C>G; c.4297+1G>A; c.4803+1G>A; tested family members were fou nd to carry the familial mutation. In nearly half of the Czech families with gene mutations c.891+83_84insACTT], 3 deletions [c.2423del (p.Gly808fsX818); c.590del the c.1871G to A / p.Gly624Aspwas found suggesting common ancestry. (p.Gln197fsX202); c.2510_2554del(45bp)], 2 nonsense mutations P12.011 [c.4444C>T (p.Gln1482X); c.2815G>T (p.Glu939X)] and one previously re- Determination of the exact GGGGCC-hexanucleotide repeat length of ported mutation of unknown significance [c.1992G>T (p.Lys664Asn)]. Four C9ORF72 in German and Swedish families with amyotrophic lateral lDairsgceu dseslieotnio:nCsO Lw4eAr5e detected by MLPA [del ex.1_13 + (del ex.1_2 COL4A6); sclerosis and frontotemporal dementia del ex.2_29; del ex.2_51; del ex.43_45]. A. Volk1, W. Just1, J. Weishaupt2, C. Akimoto3, A. Birve3, N. Marroquin1, C. Kubisch1, A. mutational analysis confirmed the diagnosis of XLAS in Ludolph2, P. M. Andersen2,3; only 19 families (≈37%), allowing the identification of 15 novel mutations, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Department of Neurology, Ulm, Germany, comprising ≈90% of all genetically confirmed AS cases. Two index patients 3Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå, Sweden. carried the same missense mutation with a similar microsatellite haploty- pe, suggesting that they may share a common ancestor. The clinical criteria used by nephrologists appear to overestimate the diagnosis of AS. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive, adult-onset neurodege- P12.008 nerative disorder affecting the upper and lower motor neurons. Mutations Alport syndrome epidemiology in Greek-Cypriots in 15 genes have been identified in familial cases and mutations in SOD1 L. Papazachariou1, P. Demosthenous1, K. Voskarides1, M. Arsali2, M. Hadjigavriel3, C. have been reported to account for 12-23%% of familial cases. Recently, an Stavrou4, A. Pierides5, C. Deltas1; intronic GGGGCC-hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 was found 1Molecular Medicine Research Center, University of Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Department to be associated not only with ALS but also with frontotemporal dementia of Nephrology, Limassol General Hospital, Limassol, Cyprus, 3Department of Nephrology, Larnaca General Hopsital, Larnaca, Cyprus, 4Department of Nephrology, Evangelismos (FTD) and an overlapping phenotype combining ALS and FTD. Indeed, a re- Hospital, Pafos, Cyprus, 5Hippocrateon Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. peat expansion in C9ORF72 was identified in up to 30% of familial and even 5% of sporadic ALS cases making C9ORF72 the most commonly mutated ALS gene. In most of the studies published so far, molecular testing solely Alport syndrome (AS) is a hereditaCrOy Lh4eAm5a turic nephritis, associated with relies on an indirect PCR-based methodology for repeat detection without sensorineural deafness, eye defects and pCroOgLr4eAs3si/oCnO Lto4 Ae4n d stage kidney determining the exact repeat size. Therefore, little is known about the ex- disease (ESKD) around 20-25 yo. gene on chromosome Xq22-23 act size and size range of causative C9ORF72 alleles. Here, we report on a accounts for ∼80C%O Lo4f Aa3ll/ ACSO Lca4sAe4s/ (CXOLLA4SA)5. genes on chro- Southern-blot based analysis of the exact repeat length in a cohort of Ger- mosome 2q36-q37 account for the remaining cases (ARAS). man and Swedish ALS families as well as on possible repeat expansions in We areC sOtLu4dAyi5ng COL4A3/COL4A4 genes (in AS and in familial he- seemingly healthy controls. Our study thus broadens the knowledge about maturiaC) OfoLr4 Ath5e last 9 years. Depending on inheritance pattern, we screCeOn- the size range of normal and pathological C9ORF72 alleles, which is impor- either or either or all three genes (totally ~150 tant e.g. for the identification of genotype-phenotype correlations as well as exons). is analyzed by genomic PCRs and direct re-sequencing. for improved individualized risk predictions and genetic counseling. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org292 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.012 The world largest ALS-FTD pedigree is linked to a massive GGGGCC- repeat expansion in the C9ORF72 on 9p21: The Mörtsell Disease. 1 missense, 2 nonsense and 1 small deletion. In 15 families both causative A. Birve1, A. Volk2, W. Just2, C. Akimoto1, J. Bergh3, C. Kubisch2, K. Forsberg3, S. L. mutations could be identified, in one patient one mutation was found while Marklund3, T. Brännström3, A. Ludolph4, P. M. Andersen1,4; no genetic alteration could be detected in two patients. Mutation detec- 1Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå, Sweden, 2Institute of Human Genetics, tion rate was 86%. Five mutations, namely c.107C>T (p.T36M), c.3407A>G Ulm, Germany, 3Department of Medical Biosciences, Umeå, Sweden, 4Department of (p.Y1136C), c.5513 A>G (p.Y1838C), c.6992T>A (p.I2331K) and c.7916C>A Neurology, Ulm, Germany. (p.S2639X) were detected in more than one patient and are responsible for 58% of PKHD1 disease-causing alleles among Hungarian patients. One of them, c.7916C>A, was found to be surprisingly frequent, being responsible We present a 2200-individual pedigree in 6 countries where individuals for 22% of all PKHD1 null alleles. either with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) or frontotemporal dementia P12.016 (FTD) in 1999 was found to be linked to 9p21. We now demonstrate that the Islet1 is a direct transcriptional target of the homeodomain patients with ALS or FTD share a massive GGGGCC-hexanucleotide expansi- transcription factor Shox2 in the sinoatrial node of the developing on in C9ORF72 as a cause of neurodegeneration. The patients have variable heart degrees of expansion in leucocytes from peripheral blood. Autopsies perfor- S. Puskaric1, I. M. Berger2, A. Glaser1, C. Bacon1, L. Li3, K. U. Schneider1, N. Gretz3, H. med on 6 patients (4 ALS, 2 FTD) show very similar morphological cellular Steinbeisser1, W. Rottbauer2, S. Just2, G. Rappold1; findings but in different cell populations depending on the phenotype of the 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Department of Internal Medicine II, individual. Remarkably, while no mutations could be detected in the SOD1 Ulm, Germany, 3Medical Research Center, Mannheim, Germany. in any of the patients, all FTD and ALS patients showed neuronal inclusions that stained positive for highly specific antibodies for misfolded wild-type SOD1. While the disease penetrance for either ALS or FTD is complete in The heart’s rhythm is initiated and regulated by a group of specialized cells some parts of this huge family, in other parts it is incomplete. Whether this in the sinoatrial node (SAN), the primary pacemaker of the heart. Abnor- is due to variable size of the hexanucleotide expansion in different cell po- malities in the development of the SAN can result in irregular heart rates pulations or have other causes is being studied. (arrhythmias). Although several of the critical genes important for SAN for- P12.013 mation have been identified, our understanding of the transcriptional net- PAX6 mutations in 93 aniridia Italian cases work controlling SAN development remains at a relatively early stage. The A. Franzoni1, A. D‘Elia1, E. Bregant1, N. Passon1, M. Patrosso2, L. Mauri2, S. Penco2, G. LIM homeodomain transcription factor Islet1 (Isl1) represents a prominent Damante1; marker for cardiac progenitor cells of the second heart field and has been 1Istituto di Genetica medica, A.O.U.-SMM di Udine, Udine, Italy, 2S.O.S. di Genetica medica, proposed, very similar to Shox2, to play an essential early role in the speci- Ospedale Niguarda Ca‘Granda, Milano, Italy. fSihcoatxi2o-n/- and patterning of the SAN. Isl1 Here, we compared gene expression levels in the rIisgl1ht atria of wildtySpheo xa2n-d/- hearts using microarray experiments and identified as one of Aniridia is a rare human congenital malformation of the eye characterized its putative targeitn g seintues. The downregulation of expression in by almost complete absence of the iris aPnAdX 6o ther eye malformations. This hearts was confirmed and the affected region narrowed down to the SAN disease is a dominantly inherited condition and sequence analysis had esta- by wholeI SmL1ount hybridization. Using luciferase reportIesrl1 assays and blished that causative mutations involvPeA X6 gene located in chromosomal EMSA studies, we identified two specific SHOXS2h boxin2ding sites within intron region 11p13. 2 of the locIussl1. We also provide functional evidence for as a tran- We have investigated the presence of mutations in 93 cases of aniri- scriptional target of Shox2 by rescuing the -mediated brSahdoyxc2ardia dia come from different Italian regions. We have used molecular techniques pIshl1enotype with using zebrafish as a model system. such as sequence analysis and MLPA for every case. Our findings demonstrate a novel epistatic relationship between and Among the 93 cases, 44 are familiar (47%). The causative mutation was in the heart with important developmental consequences for SAN for- identified in 50 subjects (54%). In 19 cases (38%PA)X, 6the muWtaTtions was a mation and heart beat. deletion not identified through MLPA, in 31 reEmLaPi4ning cases (62%) by se- P12.017 quence analysis. PInA Xt6wo cases with deletion, both and 1 genes are Genetic screening of plakophillin-2 (PKP2) gene in Russian patients involved. In 10 cases, the deletion regard only gene (located about 35 with arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia Kb downstream 3’ region), suggesting that the disease is caused by a A. Shestak1, O. Blagova2, V. Rumiantseva1, Y. Frolova1, S. Dzemeshkevich1, E. mutation that affect element controlling gene expression. Zaklyazminskaya1; Among the identified mutations by sequence analysis, 21 consist in non- 1Russian Research Center of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Sechenov sense mutations, 5 in missense mutations, and 5 in site splicing mutations. Moscow Medical University, Moscow, Russian Federation. Several of these mutations are novel, not present in the PAX6 mutation dPAatXa6- base (http://www.hgu.mrc.ac.uk/Softdata/PAX6/). These data provide important indications: i) Mutational screening of Background: Arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD) is an inhe- gene must include techniques such as MLPA, which is able to identified rited cardiomyopathy characterized by progressive fibro-fatty replacement mutations not observed by analysis sequence. ii) In a relevant fraction of of the myocardium, specific ECG-pattern, and high risk of life-threatening patients with aniridia (about 10%), the alteration consist in a deletion of ventricular arrhythmias. Disease mainly element that play a role in the transcriptional control. affects the right ventricle, but left ventricle, atriums and septum might be P12.015 involved. Mutations in the desmosome armadillo repeat protein plakophi- PKHD1 mutations in autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease in lin-2 are common in patients with ARVD. Methods: A group of 12 unrelated Hungary Russian ARVD patients were examined. Clinical and instrumental exami- I. Balogh1, T. Szabó1, K. Tory2, C. Bereczki3, E. Marián4, É. Gombos1, I. Máttyus2, É. Ajzner4, nation included collecting of personal and family history, physical exami- J. Kappelmayer1; nation, standard and 24 h-ECG, Echo-CG and cardiac MRI. Genetic analysis 1University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary, 2Semmelweis University, Budapest, of the PKP2 gene was performed by direct Sanger sequencing. Results: Ge- Hungary, 3University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary, 4Jósa András County Hospital, netic screening of mutations in PKP2 gene in DNA samples of 12 Russian Nyíregyháza, Hungary. ARVD patients was performed. Two mutations p.S140F and P.W538X were found in two unrelated families. Female patient (35 y.o.) carried heterozy- gous p.S140F variant had thinning of anterior wall infarction of the right Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is a severe inheri- ventricle and the presence of epicardial fat. Male patient (71 y.o.) carried ted monogenic disease, which is characterized by enlarged polycystic kid- heterozygous nonsense PW538X had sustained ventricular tachycardia sin- neys and congenital hepatic fibrosis. Prognosis of the disease is very poor, ce 41 y.o., ventricular fibrillation, AVB(I) and hypertrophy and dilation of 30% of the affected children die within the first year of life. Incidence of RV. ICD was implanted, patient had repeated appropriate shocks. Those two ARPKD is 1 in 10.000-40.000. ARPKD is caused by mutations in polycystic variants were previously described as disease-causing mutations. Three ad- kidney and hepatic disease gene 1 (PKHD1) that encodes a large protein ditional variants without apparent clinical significance were detected in 3 called fibrocystin/polyductin. PKHD1 gene consists of 67 exons. patients. Conclusion: We identified two mutations in PKP2 gene in 2 of 12 The goal of our study was to establish the mutational spectrum of ARPKD Russian unrelated ARVD patients (16%). This prevalence matches with the families in Hungary. All exons of the longest open reading frame of PKHD1 prevalence of ARVD9 (MIM*609040). Genetic analysis of family members gene and their intronic boundaries were amplified in 77 amplicons and se- and genotype-phenotype correlation is in progress now. quenced. We have analyzed 18 families with ARPKD. Of the 15 different de- tected mutations, 8 missense mutations, 5 nonsense mutations and 2 small deletions could be identified. Four novel mutations were found, wof wwhwic.he shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 293 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.018 Asphyxiating Thoracic Dysplasia: clinical and molecular review of 42 families the development of papular lesions of keratin-filled cysts over extensive G. Baujat1, C. Huber1, R. Caumes1, C. Do Ngoc Thanh2, A. Coeslier-Dieux3, A. David4, B. areas of the body. Hair loss in APL is irreversible and the histology is consi- Estournet2, C. Francannet5, H. Kayirangwa1, S. Sigaudy6, M. Le Merrer1, K. Le Quan Sang1, stent with an absence of mature haHirR foPl2liRcYle5s. LIInP Hthis stuDdSyG w4e ascertained A. Munnich1, V. Cormier-Daire1; a family AP7 from northern part of Pakistan. We used candidate gene ap- 1Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 2Hôpital Poincaré, Garches, France, proach by selecting four genes like , , , and HR. Linkage ana- 3Hôpital Jeanne de Flandres, Lille, France, 4CHU, Nantes, France, 5CHU Hotel Dieu, Paris, lysis and direct sequencing of the PCR products carried out. A recurrent mis- France, 6Hôpital d‘Enfants La Timone, Marseille, France. sense mutation (c.1859G>A) in exon 6 of the hairless gene ( ) is identified. This mutation has already been reported in a large family of Irish Travellers. Phenotypic appearance of affected individuals in this family was marked Asphyxiating Thoracic Dysplasia (ATD) belongs to the short rib polydactyly by complete absence of hair on the eyebrows, eyelashes and scalp. Cystic group and is characterized by a long and narrow thorax, short long bones lesions were present on the elbows of affected individuals with no other and trident acetabular roof. Other features have been reported including abnormalities. This mutation found in the Pakistani population that segre- polydactyly, retinal, renal and liver involvement. Today, mutations in IFT80, gates with APL in homozygous form in affected individuals. Phenotypes of DYNC2H1, TCC21B and WDR19 genes have been reported in ATD. The clini- the affected members of family AP7 are different from the alrHeRady reported cal and molecular heterogeneity lead to difficulties in the evaluation of the phenotypic descriptions. Hypotrichosis and nail dysplasia are observed in long term prognosis. this family which is not reported before with this mutation in gene. Papu- Through a national grant (PHRC AOM 06031), we investigated 55 ATD cases lar lesions are present in affected individuals. This research will help in the from 42 families, and including 29 fetuses. They benefited from a combined establishment of carrier screening test for prevention of above disease and approach of deep phenotyping, and IFT80 and DYNC2H1 molecular scree- to understand the molecular basis involved in the gene function. ning. The series included 26 postnatal cases, ranging in age from 6 months P12.021 to 36 years. Significant pulmonary insufficiency was noted in 46% of cases, Inherited and de novo SHANK2 variants associated with autism with tracheotomy requirement in 4 cases. Renal and liver diseases occurred spectrum disorder impair neuronal morphogenesis and physiology in 16% of cases; whereas retinal alteration was present in 40 % cases aged S. Berkel1, W. Tang2, M. Trevino2, M. Vogt3, H. A. Obenhaus2, P. Gass3, S. W. Scherer4, R. more than 2 years (6/15). The molecular screening allowed the identifica- Sprengel2, G. Schratt5, G. A. Rappold1; tion of DYNC2H1 mutations in 63% and IFT80 mutations in 6%. In 6 cases, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Heidelberg, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Medical only one heterozygote mutation in either IFT80 or DYNC2H1 was identified. Research, Heidelberg, Germany, 3Central Institute of Mental Health, Mannheim, Finally, the two genes were excluded in 31% cases. Germany, 4University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 5Institute of physiological These results emphasize that DYNC2H1 is the major gene responsible for chemistry, Marburg, Germany. ATD. The presence of only one mutation in 38% of mutated cases may sug- SHANK2 gest a digenic diallelic inheritance. The pulmonary prognosis is probably less pejorative and retinal involvement more frequent than previously thought. Mutations in the postsynaptic scaffolding gene have recently been Follow up guidelines are proposed. identified in individuals with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and intellec- P12.019 tual disability (ID). However, the cellular and ph ydsei onloovgoicSaHl AcoNnKs2equences of Novel G2 micronucleus test allows detection of defects in homologous these mutations in neurons remain unknown. We have analyzed the func- recombination and G2/M cell cycle control in a patient with adult tional impact caused by two inherited and one mutations ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) and parents from ASD individuals (L1008_P1009dup, T1127M, R462X). Although all K. B. M. Claes1, P. Schietecatte1, J. Depuydt2, A. Baert2, B. Poppe1, V. Vandersickel2, M. three variants affect spine volume and have smaller SHANK2 cluster sizes, D‘Hooghe3, K. De Leeneer1, A. Vral2; T1127M additionally fails to rescue spine volume in Shank2 knock-down 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, 2Department of neurons. R462X is not able to rescue spine volume and dendritic branching Basic Medical Sciences, Ghent University, Gent, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology, AZ and lacks postsynaptic clustering, indicating the most severe dysfunction. Sint-Jan, Brugge, Belgium. To demonstrate that R462X when expressed in mouse can be linked to phy- siological effects, we analyzed synaptic transmission and behavior. Princi- pal neurons of mice expressing rAAV transduced SHANK2-R462X present We report here a patient (aged 23 years) with dystonic dyskinetic cerebral a specific, long lasting reduction in miniature postsynaptic AMPA receptor palsy and elevated serum alpha fetoprotein levels. The clinical diagnosis currents. This dominant negative effect translates into dose-dependent alte- of adult A-T was confirmed by the identification of two heterozygous ATM red cognitive behavior of SHANK2-R462X expressing mice, with an impact mutations. The patient inherited a previously reported missense mutation, on the penetrance of ASD. c.8122G>A (p.Asp2708Asn), from her father and a novel splice site mutati- P12.022 on, c.8851-1G>T, from her mother. Evaluation of adRP microarray (Asper Biotech) for the diagnosis of AT patients are known to display enhanced chromosomal radiosensitivity. autosomal dominant macular dystrophies With the G0 micronucleus test, whereby the cells are irradiated in G0 phase P. F. San Jose1, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, M. Corton1,2, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, A. Giménez1, A. Avila- of the cell cycle, 3-5X enhanced radiosensitivity is observed in typical AT Fernandez1,2, I. Hernan3, M. Carballo3, C. Ayuso1,2; patients compared to control persons. However, in this adult A-T patient, we 1Department of Genetics, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centre for only found a 1.7X increased radiosensitivity and no enhanced radiosensiti- Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCII, Madrid, Spain, vity in the parents. As ATM is involved in homologous recombination and 3Department of Genetics, Hospital de Terrasa, Barcelona, Spain. G2/M cell cycle checkpoint, we developed a novel test, evaluating the num- ber of micronuclei in lymphocytes irradiated in G2 phase of the cell cycle. This test showed about 3.5X enhanced radiosensitivity for the A-T patient Purpose: autosomal dominant macular dystrophies (adMD) are a group of compared to controls. For the heterozygous parents values were lower than diseases clinically and genetically heterogeneous. Currently there is no spe- for the proband, but significantly higher than for controls. cific tool for genetic diagnosis. AdRP Microarray (Asper Biotech), which in- This novel G2 micronucleus test showed the potential to distinguish bi-alle- cludes genes responsible for adMD, has recently demonstrated to be a cost- lic and mono-allelic ATM mutation carriers from controls. We will evaluate efficient tool for autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa diagnosis (1). We if this test allows determination of radiosensitivity in carriers of germline aim to test the AdRP Microarray for its potential use in adMD diagnosis. mutations in other genes involved in G2/M checkpoint and associated with Methods: 54 unrelated Spanish adMD patients affected were tested with an increased risk for breast cancer (BRCA1&2, Chek2, etc.). This could be an adRP microarray. All mutations found were confirmed by sequencing. Peri- interesting approach to identify patients who would benefit from mutation pherin 2(PRPH2), the most frequently mutated gene responsible for adMD, testing of these genes. was sequenced in all negative samples for the microarray. The rate of false P12.020 negatives (real mutations in PRPH2 gene represented but not detected by Atrichia with papular lesions: a recurrent missense mutation with the array) and false positives (microarray results not confirmed by sequen- novel phenotype cing) were established. A. Azhar1, M. Tariq1, T. Naeem1,2, J. Klar2, N. Dahl2, S. Baig1; Results: adRP microarray detected the mutation in 10 of the studied pati- 1Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, National Institute for Biotechnology and ents (diagnostic accuracy: 18.5%). Nine patients presented a mutation in Genetic Engineering (NIBGE), Faisalabad, Pakistan, 2Department of Immunology, PRPH2 gene, one in RHO gene. All mutations were confirmed by sequencing. Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. Sequencing of PRPH2 of non-characterized families allowed the identifica- tion of one false negative. These results show a high level of analytical both sensitivity (91%) and specificity (100%). Atrichia with papular lesions (APL) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder, Conclusions: adRP microarray shows high levels of analytical specificity and www.eshg.org characterized clinically by occurrence of universal congenital alopweciwa awnd.e shg.org294 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 sensitivity but sequencing of PRPH2 gene seems to be a more cost-efficient (70%), of which autosomal recessive inheritance predominates (80%). He- tool for adMD diagnostic than the adRP microarray. reditary hearing loss is very heterogeneous, so that nearly 95 loci and 40 (1) Blanco-Kelly et al, 2012. genes have been identified as the causes of autosomal recessive non-syndro- P12.023 mic hearing loss (ARNSHL) to date. Identification of genetic defects in Iranian GJB2-heterozygous deaf DFNB59 is one of the contributing loci in ARNSHL. Several studies showed individuals mutations in PJVK as the cause of deafness in this locus. PJVK is considered A. Kashef1,2,3, N. Nikzat1, N. Bazzazadegan1, S. Arzhangi1, Z. Fattahi1, F. Sabagh2, F. as the first human gene implicated in non-syndromic deafness due to a neu- Pourfatemi3, H. Najmabadi1, K. Kahrizi1; ronal defect. To date, several mutations have been reported in Iranian fami- 1GRC (Genetic Research Center) , University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, lies from different studies and also some reports in Moroccan and Turkish Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kerman Welfare Organization, Kerman, Islamic populations as well. Republic of Iran, 3Mazandaran Welfare Organization, Mazandaran, Islamic Republic of In order to have more comprehensive look into PJVK gene in Iranian po- Iran. pulation, 144 ARNSHL families with two or more affected individuals from different Iranian ethnic groups were selected for this study. Homozygosity mapping with flanking STR markers following conventional Hereditary hearing loss (HHL) is one of the most common sensorineural sequencing of the gene, revealed 2 mutations in 2 families, in which one problems, affecting approximately one in 500 children. Although significant of them is a novel nonsense mutation(c.274C > T or p.Arg92X) in exon 3. genetic heterogeneity exists as the cause of sensorineural HL, one locus, DF- This data shows a prevalence of less than 2% in Iranian population for PJVK NB1, comprising the GJB2 and GJB6 genes, is responsible for up to 20-50% mutations. Although, mutations in this gene had been reported in different of cases with congenital non-syndromic HL in many populations. Homozy- studies in Iranian deaf families but our data shows that this gene is not as gous or compound heterozygous mutations in GJB2 are detected in most prevalent as it seems. cases with DFNB1-relatedHL. Interestingly, in some studies10-42% of deaf P12.026 subjects showed recessive pattern of inheritance and withGJB2 mutations, Molecular approach in Spanish families affected by Bardet-Biedl carried only one mutant allele. Syndrome In this study, using direct sequencing; second mutant allele of GJB2 which T. Piñeiro-Gallego, D. Valverde; leads to deaf phenotype was screened for possible mutations. One hundred Departamento de Bioquímica, Xenética e Inmunoloxía. Facultade de Bioloxía. patients with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss(ARNSHL) Universidade de Vigo, Vigo, Spain. through Iranian population bearing first mutation in their coding exon (exon-2) of GJB2, were assessed for any other mutations in non-coding exon of GJB2 (exon-1)as well as promoter region of the gene. Bardet-Biedl Syndrome (BBS, OMIM 209900) is a rare autosomal recessive We have identified the second mutant allele in splice site of exon-1 of GJB2 ciliopathy BaBssSo1c-iBaBteSd1 6w)ith several features including obesity, retinopathy, which known as -3170G to A in 14 probands (14%). No mutation in promo- polydactyly, mental retardation, hypogonadism, and renal defects. Until now ter region of GJB2 was found. Furthermore, Real-time PCR has been set up in 16 genes ( have been iBnBvSolved in ~70% of the families. order to check four known deletions which encompass both GJB2 and GJB6, We selected 36 individuals from 30 families from a Spanish population pre- for remainder probands. viously BscBrSe1e0ned for mutations on gene using a genotyping microarray P12.024 (Asper Biotech Ltd) and with negative results. We performed direct sequen- A novel ILDR1 gene mutation in two Iranian families with autosomal cing of gene in these 36 patBieBnSt1s. This genBeB aSc1c0ounts for morBe BthS1an0 recessive non-syndromic hearing loss 20% of the mutational load in our population. Without taking into consi- E. Sohrabi, M. Babanejad, N. Bazazzadegan, K. Jalalvand, S. Arzhangi, K. Kahrizi, H. deration the recBuBrrSe1n0t mutations ( -M390R, -C91LfsX95), Najmabadi; gen carried the largest mutational load in our population. Genetic Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Sequencing of gene revealed compound heterozygous mutations p.L533fsX554/ p.V331A (novel mutation) in one affected individual and a single heterozygous novel mutation p.Y197del in anBoBthSe1r0 patient. Our work led to the identification of mutations in two families (B4B.2S%10)/3 alleles. BBS In conclusion, two novel heterozygous mutations in gene were found. Hearing loss (HL) is the most common sensory deficit in human. It affects Our study shows the important of testing preferably gene when approximately 10 percent of the world population. Genetic causes of HL are estimated to account about 68% of newborns and 55% of cases by the age of genotyping microarray is negative in the diagnoBsBisS 1of Bardet-Biedl syndro- me. Since we could not detect any mutations in 28 families, sequencing of four. Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss (ARNSHL) is the most next gene carrying the largest mutational load ( ) is convenient. common type of inherited hearing impairment. Due to the wealthy gene pool, Iran is a valuable source to identify the genes involved in different con- P12.027 ditions.To date, several genes have been studied in Iranian deaf population. Mutations in RIPK4 that encodes Receptor-Interacting Serine/ DFNB42, one of the related loci in ARNSHL, was first identifIiLeDd Rin1 a Pakista- Threonine Kinase Protein 4 cause the Autosomal Recessive Form of ni family. Another study on more Pakistani and Iranian families, led to the Popliteal Pterygium syndrome identification of 10 different mutations in the related gene, . E. Kalay1, O. Sezgin2, V. Chellappa3, M. Mutlu4, H. Morsy5, H. Kayserili6, E. Kreiger7, A. Cansu8, B. Toraman1, E. Abdalla5, Y. Aslan4, S. Pillai3, N. A. Akarsu9; To estimate the contribution of this gene in Iranian deaf population, we have 1Department of Medical Biology, Karadeniz Technical University Faculty of Medicine, set out to perform homozygosity mapping with flanking STR markers on Trabzon, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Biology, Karadeniz Technical University 140 Iranian deaf families. Institute of Health Sciences, Trabzon, Turkey, 3Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Mutation detection, using conventional sequencing, for three out of 140 fa- Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Department of Pediatrics, milies showing linkagILe DtoR 1DFNB42 locus, led to identification of one splice Karadeniz Technical University Faculty of Medicine, Trabzon, Turkey, 5Department of site mutation (c.379+1G>A) in two of the families. Human Genetics, Alexandria University Medical Research Institute, Alexandria, Egypt, Our data shows that gene has the prevalence of about 2.14% in Ira- 6Medical Genetics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University nKieaynw doeradf spopulation, that comparing to other loci seems to h aIvLeD aR 1small Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8Department of Radiology, Karadeniz proportion of the ARNSHL causes in Iran. Technical University Faculty of Medicine, Trabzon, Turkey, 9Gene Mapping Laboratory, :Autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss, , se- Department of Medical Genetics, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, Ankara, quencing, Iran. Turkey. P12.025 A novel PJVK gene mutation in Iranian family with autosomal recessive non-syndromic hearing loss The autosomal recessive form of popliteal pterygium syndrome, also known Z. Fattahi1, M. Babanejad1, N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Nikzat1, S. Arzhangi1, K. Jalalvand1, K. as Bartsocas-Papas syndrome (BPS), is a rare, but frequently lethal disorder Kahrizi1, H. Najmabadi1,2; characterized by marked popliteal pterygium associated with multiple con- 1Genetics Research Centre, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, genital malformations. Using a genome-wide SNP homozygosity mapping Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Kariminejad Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. strategy for this malformation syndrome in a Turkish family we identiRfiIePdK 4a homozygous segment co-segregating withR IdPiKse4ase on chromosomal region 21q22.3. Since the phenotype of the deficiency of mRoIuPsKe4 ortholog of consistent with anomalies seen in BPS, was selected as candidate Hearing impairment is one of the common sensory disorders in world and gene from the critical interval. Sequencing of the showed a homo- affects about 1 of every 1000 newborns. In developed countries at least 50% zygous missense mutation p.Ile121Asn (c.362T>A) in the kinase domain of of the cases are due to genetic defects resulting in non-syndromic deafness www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 295 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 the protein. Screening of additional two BPSfs families showed a homozygous globin gene 3’ UTR mutations are associated with mild phenotype of beta missense mutation p.Thr184Ile (c.551C>T) and a homozygous one base- thalassemia. pair insertion c.777_778insA (p.Arg260Thr X14) within the kinase domain P12.030 of the protein. Molecular modeling and Luciferase reporter assays showed Novel indel mutation in CDMP1 gene is associated with brachydactyly that both Ile121 and Thr184 positions are critical for the stability and cata- type C in a four generation Turkish family lytic activity of RIPK4. RIPK4 mediates activation of the nuclear factor-kB O. Z. UYGUNER1, M. Kocaoglu2, G. Toksoy1, S. Basaran1, H. Kayserili1; (NF-kB) signaling pathway that is required for keratinocyte differentiation 1Department of Medical Genetics, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, and craniofacial and limb development. The abnormalities observed in pre- Turkey, 2Orthopedics Department, Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. sented individuals were similar, but less severe than those seen in Cocoon syndrome as aR rIePsKu4lt of CHUK (IKKα) deficiency which is another c omponent of NF-ĸB signaling pathway. In conclusion, our results showed that recessive mutations in cause autosomal recessive form of multiplepterygium The cartilage derived morphogenetic protein-1 (CDMP1), also referred as syndrome and RIPK4 and CHUK may function in closely related pathways to the growth/differentiation factor 5 (GDF5) gene, has been shown to be a promote keratinocyte differentiation and epithelial growth. key regulator in the bone morphogenic protein pathway (BMP) during skeletal and joint development. Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations P12.028 reported to cause hypoplasia/aplasia of certain skeletal elements (brachy- An identical PRRT2 mutation underlies benign familial infantile dactyly), heterozygous gain-of-function mutations, occurring either on the epilepsy with and without paroxysmal dyskinesia A. K. Anttonen1,2,3, E. Liukkonen4, E. Gaily4, A. Sirén5,6, K. Mattila7,3, A. Polvi7,3, A. E. gene itself or through the loss of its inhibitor noggin, result in joint fusion Lehesjoki7,3; (symphalangism). Furthermore, homozygous mutations, predominantly 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department affecting the limbs have been described; Grebe type dysplasia, Du Pan Syn- of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 3Folkhälsan drome, Acromesomelic Dysplasia-Hunter Thompson type. Also reported is Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 4Epilepsy Unit, Pediatric Neurology, Helsinki homozygous missense mutation presenting with brachydactyly, formulating University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland, 5Unit of Pediatric Neurology, Department phenotype-genotype correlations by type and domain inconceivable, likely of Pediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 6Outpatient Clinic for due to the influence of other factors impacting the developmental pathway. Persons with Intellectual Disabilities, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland, 7Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. Presently, 34 mutations dispersed throughout propeptide and chain do- mains of CDMP1, associated with eight different OMIM entries, have been described. We ascertain here two affecteds, one female and one male, with brachdacty- Benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE) and paroxysmal dyskinesias are ly type C (MIM# 113100) presenting with disproportionate shortness of the clinically and genetically heterogeneous paroxysmal neurological disorders. 2nd and 3rd fingers and hypersegmentation of the proximal and middle 2nd The ICCA syndrome is a phenotype combining both BFIE and paroxysmal and 3rd phalanges. These cases are from a family that reports an additional kinesigenic dyskinesia (PKDP)R. BRFTI2E, PKD, and the ICCA syndrome have been 8 affected members spanning across four generations. CDMP1 analysis re- linked to the pericentromeric region of chPrRoRmTo2some 16. Recently, hete- vealed a novel heterozygous in frame indel mutation (c.803_827del25ins25) rozygous mutations in the gene on 16p11.2 were described as the in the propeptide domain (p.cys268_ser276delCPSGRQPASinsLLSALLDVN). cause of BFIE and paroxysmal dyskinesias. encodes the proline-rich This is the second indel mutation ascribed to the CDMP1. The previously transmembrane protein 2 implicated to have a role in synaptic function. In published indel mutation was of the out-of-frame type in homozygous state, this study we clinically and genetically characterized patients in three large in the chain motif, associated with Du Pan Syndrome. Our novel mutation Finnish families, which presented with either BFIE alone or in combination further emphasizes the allelic heterogeneity of CDMP1. with a movement disorder with different types of triggers. Linkage analy- sis in twDo1 l6aSrg3e0 2IC2CA families showed evidence for linkage to chromosome P12.031 16p12-p11.2 and a significant two-point LOD score of 5.55 was obtained at Altered Genomic DNA Binding Profile of a HOXD13 Mutant in a Novel marker (θ = 0.000). In the third fPaRmRiTly2 sharing a haplotype over Type of Brachydactyly D. Ibrahim1,2, P. Hansen1, A. Stiege2, S. Dölken1, M. Schmidt-von Kegler1, F. Wagner3, B. the region on 16p12-p11.2 the clinical presentation was BFIE. After sequen- Timmermann2, P. Krawitz1, D. Horn1, P. Seemann1, P. Robinson1, S. Mundlos1,2, J. Hecht1,2; cing several positional candidate genes, the PRRT g2ene was sequenced. Pa- 1Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck Institut für tients in all three families were heterozygoPuRsR fTo2r the c.649dupC duplication molekulare Genetik, Berlin, Germany, 3Atlas Biolabs GmbH, Berlin, Germany. mutation, the most frequently encountered mutation. These data give further support for the association of mutations to both epilepsy and movement disorders of both kinesigenic and non-kinesigenic type. The Mutations in HOXD13 have previously been associated with synpolydact- association of a single mutation with a variety of phenotypes highlights the lyly. Here we describe a patient with brachydactyly and a novel mutation contribution of modifying genetic and/or environmental factors to the cli- (Q317K) in the DNA binding homeodomain of HOXD13. Anomalies of hands nical presentation. and feet are characterized by shortness of fingers and toes, oligodactyly, and P12.029 aplasia of some terminal phalanges. Functional analysis was performed by Two novel putative beta-globin gene mutations leading beta retroviral overexpression of FLAG-tagged HOXD13 wt and mutant in chicken thalassemia intermedia phenotype micromass cultures, a well established model of chondrocyte differentiati- T. Bilgen1, O. Altiok Clark2, Z. Ozturk3, M. A. Yesilipek3, I. Keser1; on. Targets of HOXD13 were identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation 1Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, followed by next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq). Bioinformatic analysis Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 3Akdeniz University, School of Medicine, Department of of precipitated sequences showed an altereQd31 D7KNA binding motif of the mu- Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Antalya, Turkey. tant protein. The inferred motif of HOXD13 showed similarity to that of PITX1. The mutant lysine at position 317 corresponds also to a conserved lysine at the analogous position of bicoid type homeodomaiwnt proteins sQu31c7Kh There have been described approximately 800 different genomic alterations as PITX1. Thus we compared the binding pattern of HOQX31D7K13 , HOXD13 , in the beta globin gene reported in the HbVar database and novel mutati- and PITX1 using ChIP-seq and found a shift of HOXD13 towards Qa3 1P7IKTX1- ons are still rarely being reported. In this study, we aimed to identify two like binding pattern. Furthermore the expression profile in HOXD13 ove- novel putative mutations in 3’ un-translated region (3’-UTR) of the beta glo- rexpressing micromass cultures Qa3l1s7oK shifted towards a PITX1 overexpressi- bin gene and to describe their clinical reflections. Four patients from two on profile. Injection of HOXD13 into developing wing buds of chicken unrelated families referred with diverse set of hematological and clinical embryos showed a PITX1-like phenotype as well. Our results demonstrate findings associated to beta thalassemia were included in this study. Mole- how ChIP-seq can be used to characterize genome-wide binding profiles of cular diagnosis of the beta globin gene mutations was performed by direct mutant transcription factors. The mutation results in a partial conversion of sequencing of the beta globin gene. A novel mutation HBB:c.*+108 A>G was HOXD13 into PITX1 and thus ectopic activation of PITX1 targets. found in combination with IVS-I-110 G>A mutation caused intermedia phe- P12.032 notype in two brothers and one sister with mild splenomegaly and occasio- New genes involved in metabolic disorders: Diseased states due to nal transfusion history in the first family. The second novel mutation named errors in the enzymatic regulation of the mammalian branched-chain as HBB:c.*+132 C>T was found in combination with IVS-I-1 G>A in a 7 years α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex old male diagnosed as beta thalassemia intermedia with irregular transfu- A. Oyarzabal1, B. Merinero1, P. Sanz1, R. Navarrete1, M. Ecay1, C. Robles2, M. Martínez- Pardo3, M. Ugarte1, P. Rodríguez-Pombo1; sion history in family 2. Based on beta thalassemia intermedia phenotypes 1CEDEM, CBMSO, CIBERER, IDIPAZ, Univ. Autonoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 2Servicio despite of clinical diversity observed in our patients and taking into account the accompanying mutations, it would be concluded that these novel beta www.eshg.org www.eshg.org296 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 de Pediatría, Hospital San Cecilio, Granada, Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, Madrid, Spain. appropriate shocks after ICD implantation. Quinidine was ineffective in de- creasing VT frequency. This genetic variant had not been found in a control Mammalian branched-chain α-keto acid dehydrogenase complex (BCKDc) group. is a mitochondrial macromolecular multienzymatic complex consisting of New rare genetic variant in SNT1A gene had been found in Russian SCN5A- three catalytic components that catalyzes the rate-limiting step in the oxida- negative BrS patient. Syntrophin 1A is a protein interacting with Nav1.5 tion of branched-chain α-keto acids. BCKDc deficiency leads to the autoso- channel and can be considered as a candidate gene for BrS. It might influ- mal inborn error of metabolism -maple syrup urine disease (MSUD)-. Acti- ence on cardiomyocyte repolarization via altering sodium channel function. vity of the complex is regulated by a specific kinase (BCKDK) which causes To elucidate possible causative role of c.R106Q in SNTA1 gene further func- inactivation, and the protein phosphatase 2Cm (PP2Cm) which causes ac- tional investigations are required. tivation. Up to now, the 150 described MSUD-causing mutations have been P12.035 only found on the genes encoding for the E1α, E1β and E2 catalytic subunits, Reliable and sensitive SCN5A high resolution melting curve analysis but not much is known regarding diseased states that could arise due to as a primary gene scanning assay for genetic diagnosis of Brugada errors in the enzymatic regulation of BCKDc. We present here the first two syndrome patients with a defective regulation of BCKDc. The first one corresponds to S. J. Van Dooren1, L. Peirsman1, I. Timmermans1, U. Ullmann1, M. Biervliet1, P. Brugada2, a MSUD patient with a mild variant phenotype. The second one is a patient M. Bonduelle1; 1Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, VUB, Brussels, Belgium, 2Heart Rhythm with neurological abnormalities, showing a decreased amount of branched- Management Institute, UZBrussel, VUB, Brussels, Belgium. chain amino acids levels in physiological fluidsP.P TMh1eK Sanger sequencing of BCKD related genes in both patients evidenced: a homozygous null mutati- on change c.417_418delTA (p.His139fs) in the gene, which encodes Brugada syndrome (BrS) is an autosomal dominant inherited primary car- fPoPrM P1PK2Cm for the MSUD patient, and that was proved to be pathogenic by diac arrhythmia in a structurally normal heart, with a propensity to sudden genetic complemBeCnKtaDtKion in patient’s fibroblasts using the pT-REX-DEST30/ cardiac death. Genetic defects have mainly been attributed to mutations in wt vector, and a homozygous c.1166T>C (p.Leu389Pro) nucleotide the alpha-subunit of the sodium channel gene (SCN5A), which account for variation in the gene, undetected in 300 control alleles, for the se- approximately 20% of cases. The clinical diagnosis is based on an anamne- cond one. The disease phenotype of these two patients demonstrates the sis of the patient and a baseline and/or infusion electrocardiogram, which importance of tight regulation of oxidative disposal of BCAA for normal should be confirmed genetically by the mutation analysis of the SCN5A gene. growth and neurological functions. To allow a convenient and cost-effective diagnostic genetic testing for BrS P12.033 a primary indirect gene scanning assay by high resolution melting curve Application of RNA analyis for evaluation of unclassified variants in analysis (HRMCA) of the SCN5A gene was developed.To assess the sensi- routine genetic diagnosis of breast cancer and neurofibromatosis 1 tivity and specificity of the HRMCA assay over 100 clinically diagnosed BrS S. Preisler-Adams, J. Horvath, P. Wieacker; University Clinics Muenster, Muenster, Germany. patients were analyzed in parallel by bidirectional cycle sequencing of the 28 SCN5A exons and by HRMCA analysis of 24 exons. Sensitivity of the HRM- CA could be increased by using spike-DNA completely homozygous in the amplified regions and by discriminatory analysis of melting patterns with A frequent problem in molecular genetic diagnosis is the assessment of un- dual melting domains. All of the Sanger sequencing confirmed mutations classiinfi esidli cvoariants (UCVs). Exonic missense or silent variants and intronic and SNPs could be detected through HRMCA, with the exception of a deep variants outside the invariably exon-flanking dinucleotides are ambiguous intronic mutation lying 8 nucleotides downstream of the 3‘end of the for- and analysis has its limits in being theoretical. Expression analysis ward primer. Specificity of the assay met expectations. This study demon- via RNA from blood lymphocytes can help to discriminate between variants strates that SCN5A HRMCA analysis can be implemented as a cost-effective, that influence correct splicing and those that don`t. A precondition for this high-throughput, user-friendly primary gene scanning method within the approach is the expression of the corresponding gene in blood cells as is framework of the molecular diagnosis of BrS. the case for e.g. BRCA1, BRCA2, RAD51C and NF1. Using reverse transcripti- on, RT-PCR and sequence analysis of the resulting product(s) we were able P12.036 to show a splice effect for the BRCA1 variants p.G1366S, IVS19-12A>G, the The imprinted C15orf2 gene in the Prader-Willi syndrome region RAD51C variant p.C135F and the NF1-variants IVS16del-6_3, IVS3+6T>G encodes a nuclear pore complex associated protein L. Neumann1, Y. Markaki2, E. Mladenov1, D. Hoffmann3, K. Buiting1, B. Horsthemke1; and p.L1569V. Conversely, a splice effect could be excluded for the BRCA1 1Universitaetsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany, 2Ludwig-Maximilians-Universitaet variants p.D120N, p.T1548T and p.Q1604Q, the BRCA2 variants IVS9-11T>C München, Martinsried, Germany, 3Universitaet Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. and IVS22-7_4del, the RAD51C variant p.G3R and the NF1 variants p.K724K, L549Q, p.F1289F, p.R1375H and p.L1957L. Preparing RNA from blood and performing cDNA analysis is usually not part The Prader-Willi syndrSoNmOeR (DP1W16S) region in 15q11q13 harbours a cluster of the routine molecular diagnosis. In our laboratory practice - if a possib- of imprinted genes expressed from the paternal chromosome only. Whereas le splice mutation was identified - we recommend to take a second blood loss of fuCn1c5toiorfn2 of the genes appears to be responsible for the sample in the context of the subsequent genetic counselling in order to per- major features of PWS, the role of the other genes is less clear. One of these form RNA analysis. In view of the potential benefit by solving the question of gCe1n5eosr fi2s , which has no orthologs in rodents but appears to be under pathogenicity, this turns out to be a feasible effort. strong positive selection in primates. P12.034 encodes an 1156 aa protein with six nuclear localisation sequences. New mutation in SNTA1 gene in Russian Brugada Syndrome patient - a To find out more about the function of C15orf2, we used the Phyre softwa- new causative gene? re for sequence threading against a structural database and InterProScan E. Zaklyazminskaya, M. Polyak, M. Noskova, S. Dzemeshkevich; for a pattern and profile search. We found a highly significant similarity of Petrovsky Russian Research Centre of Surgery, Moscow, Russian Federation. the C-terminal part of C15orf2 to the nuclear pore complex (NPC) protein Pom121. Using the Invitrogen Flp-In system we generated a stable cell line that expresses flag-tagged C15orf2 upon doxycycline induction. By immu- Brugada syndrome (BrS) is inherited cardiac arrhythmic disorder characte- nocytochemistry in expression-induced cells we found C15orf2 located at rized by ST-segment elevation in right precordial leads, pseudo right bundle the nuclear periphery, where it co-localized with NPC and nuclear lamina branch block, T-wave inversion and high risk of cardiac sudden death due to proteins. Extending these observations to three-dimensional structured il- polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (PVT). The SCN5A gene was identified lumination fluorescence microscopy (3D-SIM), which achieves an eight-fold as causative in 1998 and has been only one known for BrS for many years. improved volumetric resolution over conventional imaging and can resolve Mutations in this gene account 15%-30% of all cases. Starting from 2007 the single NPCs, we saw that C15orf2 is located at the inner nuclear membrane list of genetic variants was increased up to eight. But all those genes seem to where it strongly associates with the NPC. Additionally, in nuclear envelope be much less prevalent and does not explain vast majority of BrS cases. isolation and fractionation experiments C15orf2 co-purified with NPC and Clinical, instrumental and familial data, informed consent and blood samp- nuclear lamina proteins. les were obtained from 20 unrelated SCN5A-negative Russian BrS patients. These experiments for the first time demonstrate that C15orf2 is part of the The PCR-based Senger sequencing of full coding and adjacent intronic areas NPC or its associated molecular networks. of SCN5A, and few additional known and new candidate genes including SN- T1A gene was performed. We did find a new rare missense variant c.R106Q in SNT1A gene in patient with spontaneous BrS1-type ECG, registered episodes of PVT, and numerous www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 297 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.037 RMRP Whole CYP21A2 gene analysis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia patients due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency malignancy. CHH is caused by mutations in the gene, which encodes D. Kirac1, K. Ulucan2, D. Ergec2, T. Guran3, T. Akcay3, G. Koc2, E. C. Kaspar4, A. Bereket3, T. the RNA component of the RNase MRP complex. RNase MRP is involved in Isbir1, A. I. Guney2; the endoribRoMnRuPcleolytic processing of specific RNA substrates (viperin and 1Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Istanbul, cyclin B2), RNA primers for mitochondrial DNA replication, and pre-5.8S Turkey, 2Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, rRNA. The RNA Ralmsorp forms complexes with TERT, Rthmer tpelomerase pro- Istanbul, Turkey, 3Marmara University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric tein component. Endocrinology, Istanbul, Turkey, 4Yeditepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department When reanalyzing the expression in heterozygous 70A>G knock- of Biostatistics, Istanbul, Turkey. in mice, we exclusively detected the wildtype allele in all tested tissues. We Introduction: hypoRtMhResPized that the instability of the mutated transcript had increased Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) is an autosomal re- RafMteRrP neo-cassette removal and decided to analyse the expression of muta- ted transcripts in CHH patients. Our qPCR data show clearly reduced cessive disorder, caused by mainly 21-hydroxylase deficiency. Females with transcript levels in all patients and mild reductions in parents car- severe 21 hydroxylase deficiency are exposed to excess androgens prenatal- rying one mutated allele. Then we compared the transcript ratios of both ly and are born with ambiguous genitalia. Also most patients can not syn- alleles by sequencing. Confirming our mouse data, the mutated transcript tMheetshizoed ssu:fficient aldosterone to maintain sodium balance and may develop potentially fatal “salt wasting” crises if not treated. was nearly absent in heteRrMozRyPg ous parents. Interestingly, wReM aRlsPo observed shifted transcript ratios in compound heterozygous CHH patients. Whole CYP21A2 gene were analyzed in 100 patients and 80 con- trols. Distinctive primers were selected for the amplification of the functio- Our results indicate that mutations lead toR MreRdPuced transcript nal gene (CYP21A2) as there is a pseudogene (CYP21A1P) with 98% homo- levels, probably due to instability of mutated tRraMnRsPcripts. Furthermore, the transcript instability depends on the individual mutation. The diffe- logy. After the isolation of DNA from peripheric blood, functional gene was rent stabilities and resulting variable residual transcript levels might aRmespulilftise:d by PCR. Mutations were detected with direct sequencing. Results explain the diverse clinical presentation of CHH patients, as, e.g., the degree were evaluated statistically. of telomerase dysfunction observed in CHH patients may be dosage-depen- Totally 66 different mutations/polymorphisms were found in dent. which 20 of them cause amino acid changes and 24 of them are novel. Also P12.040 12 of them were found statistically significant in patients when compared to Identification of novel CAV3 gene alterations controls. Additionally G→A mutation at position 711 (13 %) (novel mutati- M. Svingou1, K. Kekou1, H. Fryssira1, P. Manta2, D. Petychakis1, E. Kanavakis1; on), A/C→G mutation at position 777 (38 %) and C→G mutation at position 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, „Aghia Sophia Children‘s 1C7o0n9cl (u2s0io %n:) were only detected in the patient group and were found stati- Hospital“, Athens, Greece, 2Department of Neurology, University of Athens, Eginition stically significant when compared to controls. Hospital, Athens, Greece. Prenatal diagnosis of CAH has been utilized for over 20 years especially by screening 9 known mutations. In case of obtaining the similar results of G→A mutation at position 711 in different populations, it may be The human CAV3 gene, mapping to chromosome 3p25, encodes for caveo- used as a marker for prenatal diagnosis. Therefore, genital ambiguity and lin-3 muscle-specific protein, which is the principal integral membrane com- salt wasting can be reduced in CAH patients by using prenatal approaches. ponent of caveolae. Caveolin-3 is localized to the muscle cell plasma mem- P12.038 brane, where it forms a complex with dystrophin and associated-proteins. Targeted next-generation sequencing for the molecular genetic This suggests that the small vesicular invaginations of the plasma membrane diagnostics of arrhythmogenic cardiac disorders in sudden cardiac (caveolae), involved in cell signaling and trafficking, might play an important death role in muscle membrane physiology. In vitro and in vivo experimental mo- C. Marschall, C. Heberle, I. Vogl, H. Klein; dels indicate that the maintenance of normal levels of caveolin-3 is essential Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine, Martinsried, Germany. for normal skeletal muscle development and postnatal function. Mutations in the coding sequence of CAV3 cause dominant limb-girdle muscular dys- trophy (LGMD-1C). In this survey 121 Greek individuals, comprised of 119 Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is the most common cause of death in the normal controls and 2 patients presenting with increased serum creatine young. Ion channel disorders (channelopathies) such as the long QT syndro- kinase (CK) levels, muscle weakness and a compatible with caveolinopathy me (LQTS), catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT) muscle biopsy were screened for mutations along CAV3 gene. Two causative and Brugada syndrome (BrS) may account for more than 30% of unclear mutations in exons 1 and 2, respectively where disclosed in the 2 patients. SCD cases lacking cardiac structural abnormalities. Other frequent causes Twenty three heterozygous polymorphic alterations were identified in the of SCD are hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) affecting 1 of 500 people control group, including 3 missense mutations- one of which is novel, and and arrhythmogenic right ventricular dysplasia (ARVD). As HCM and ARVD two previously reported - a novel a microdeletion in 3’UTR and 19 silence may present with only little structural symptoms, the differential diagnosis mutations. As different alterations were detected between the control group of these arrhythmogenic disorders may be difficult. Stepwise analysis of va- and the patients, interpretation of gene defects will help towards the under- rious genes with traditional Sanger sequencing is elaborate, time-consuming standing of LGMD-1C pathogenesis. and expensive. Although clearly superior to Sanger sequencing, NGS has litt- P12.041 le impact on clinical testing to date. Sequence capture target enrichment fol- Genotype-phenotype correlations in cerebral cavernous lowed by re-sequencing on the Roche Genome Sequencer FLX (GS FLX) sy- malformations stem could be useful for novel mutation detection. A Roche-NimbleGen and S. Spiegler1, W. Schröder1, J. Najm1, S. Pflug1, A. Barthelmie2, C. Fauth3, A. Ferbert4, Y. an Agilent SureSelect in solution target enrichment assay was designed for Hellenbroich5, C. Korenke6, E. Kunstmann7, M. Mair8, S. Munk-Schulenburg9, S. Pauli10, S. the capture of coding regions including splice sites of 40 SCD genes known Rudnik-Schöneborn11, I. Stefanova5, I. Stoller12, U. Sure13, B. Zoll10, U. Felbor1; to be associated with SCD. Both enrichment assays were validated with 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medicine Greifswald and Interfaculty Institute two samples with known mutations in duplicates. Additional clinical SCD of Genetics and Functional Genomics, University of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany, samples with unknown genotype were analyzed with a minimum coverage 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Genetic counceling Services, Med. University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 4Klinikum Kassel of 30-fold. Data analysis was performed with the CLC Genomic Workbench GmbH, Clinic for Neurology, Kassel, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University software. Potentially disease causing variants and regions with an insuffici- of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 6MVZ am Klinikum Oldenburg GmbH, Oldenburg, Germany, ent coverage were re-analyzed with Sanger sequencing. 7Praxis für Humangenetik, Würzburg, Germany, 8Institute of Human Genetics, University P12.039 of Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, University of The mutation makes the difference - Analysis of RMRP transcript Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 10Institute of Human Genetics, University of Göttingen, levels in Cartilage-hair hypoplasia Göttingen, Germany, 11Institute of Human Genetics, University of Aachen, Aachen, K. Reicherter1, E. Lausch1, P. Hermanns2, R. Keppler1, C. Steinwender1, T. J. M. Welting3, Germany, 12Institute of Medical Genetics, Universitätsspital Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland, B. Zabel1; 13Department of Neurosurgery, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. 1University of Freiburg, Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Freiburg, Germany, 2Medical Centre of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Centre for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Mainz, Germany, 3Maastricht University Medical Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM) are prevalent cerebrovascuClCaMr l3e/- Center, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Maastricht, Netherlands. sPiDoCnDs 1p0redisposing to chronic headaches, epilepsy, and hemorrhagic stroke. Individuals carrying an autosomal doCmCiMna1n/KtlyR IiTn1heriteCdC mMu2t/aOtiSoMn in have been reported to have a higher risk for cerebral hemorrhage Cartilage-hair hypoplasia (CHH) is an autosomal recessive disorder cha- during childhood when compared to and mutation racterized by short stature and metaphyseal dysplasia. Variable extraskel- carriers. Most recently, it has also been suggested that CCM3 function may www.eshg.org etal features include sparse hair, immunodeficiency, and predispowsitwionw to.e shg.org298 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 NIPBL be distinct from CCM1 and CCM2 and that CCM3 acts in different molecular Our results, at least for gene analysis, suggest that the use of several pathways. different techniques is essential for attaining a high mutation detection rate. Genomic DNA sequencinCgC aMn1d MLPAC CanMa2lyses allCoCwMed3 us to identify 38 ad- CdLS cases with somatic mosaicism are probably underestimated in the lite- ditional CCM probands harbourinCgC aM lo3ss-of-function mutation in one of the rature and may explain some degree of phenotypical variability. three CCM genes (21 in , 5 in , 12 in ) over the past three P12.045 years. Notably, the proportion oCfC M3 mutation carriers (32%) was signi- CHD7 is involved in a multi-protein complex together with CHD8 and ficantly higher than previously reported. TChCeM m1ean age at referral was 17 FAM124B years for index patientsC wCMith2 a mutation (ranging from 1 to 51) while T. Batsukh1, Y. Schulz1, H. Urlaub2, T. Oellerich2, S. Pauli1; the mean age at referral was 36 years for probands (ranging from 6 1Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Biophysical to 79) and 43 years for probands (ranging from 17 to 72). We are cur- Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany. rently inquiring for morCeC dMe3tails about disease manifestations and disease CHD7 processes. However, our data already suggest a tendency towards earlier disease presentation in mutation carriers. Mutations in the gene are in approximately 2/3 of cases the under- P12.042 lying cause of CHARGE syndrome. To identify candidate genes involved in The atypical Rett-syndrome protein CDKL5 promotes excitatory the pathogenesis of this disease, we searched for CHD7 interacting partners. synapse formation by strengthening the interaction between NGL-1 We could previously demonstrate that a part of CHD7 interacts with a part and the postsynaptic scaffold protein PSD95 of CHD8. Because CHD8 is a known component of the WDR5-ASH2L-RBBP5 M. Hambrock1, S. Ricciardi2, F. Ungaro2, N. Rademacher1, G. Stefanelli2, U. Fischer1, A. (WAR) complex, wes askingi the qulestion if CHDa7 is also a memcber of this Grimme1, D. Brambilla3, A. Sessa2, C. Magagnotti2, A. Bachi2, C. Kilstrup-Nielsen4, V. M. complex. Additionally, we search for new CHD7-CHD8 interacting partners Kalscheuer1, V. Broccoli2; by using the SILAC ( table sotope abelling with mino acids in ell culture) 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2San Raffaele Scientific method in combination with mass spectrometry. Institute, Milan, Italy, 3University of Milan Medical School, Milan, Italy, 4University of We identified FAM124B as a potential interacting partner of CHD7 and Insubria, Busto Arsizio VA, Italy. CHD8. We confirmed the result by co-immunoprecipitation. Furthermore, we studied the direct interaction between the CHD7 part, the CHD8 part and FAM124B by using the method of direct yeast two hybrid. We could de- Mutations in the X-linked gene cyclin-dependent kinase like 5 (CDKL5) cause monstrate that the CHD8 part directly interacts with FAM124B, while the a severe neurodevelopmental disorder with clinical features that are closely CHD7 part is not interacting. This result leads to the suggestion that CHD7 related to Rett syndrome (RTT), including intellectual disability, early on- is together with CHD8 and FAM124B a component of the same complex, set intractable epilepsy and autism. However, very little is currently known with direct contact to CHD8 and no direct interaction with FAM124B. Using about the biological role of CDKL5. We here show that Cdkl5 localizes at the Duolink Pla II method we could demonstrate that CHD7 is also in near excitatory synapses and contributes to correct spine morphology and syn- proximity with the WAR-complex members, leading to the suggestion that aptic activity. Since we previously found that a balanced chromosome trans- CHD7 is also involved in this complex. location in the Netrin-G1 gene (NTNG1) also caused atypical RTT with early The characterisation of CHD7 containing complexes and the identification onset seizures, we hypothesized that the two genes play a role in common of interaction partners will help to understand the pathogenesis of CHARGE pathogenetic processes. Immunofluorescence and immunoprecipitation ex- syndrome. periments revealed that Cdkl5 interacts with the Netrin G1 ligand NGL-1, P12.046 a postsynaptic neuronal adhesion protein. In addition, we could show that Targeted High-Throughput Sequencing for Diagnosis of Genetically NGL-1 is phosphorylated and that this phosphorylation is mediated by CD- Heterogeneous Diseases: Fast and Efficient Mutation Detection KL5, in vitro. Using fibroblasts from a patient who carried a truncation of in Bardet-Biedl Syndrome, Alström Syndrome, and in clinically the CDKL5 gene, we obtained further evidence that CDKL5 phosphorylates overlapping ciliopathies NGL-1. Moreover, we have found that this phosphorylation is necessary for C. Redin1, S. Le Gras1, O. Mhamdi2, V. Geoffroy1, C. Stoetzel3, M. Vincent4, B. Jost1, H. B. promoting a stable association between NGL-1 and PSD95, a scaffold protein Chaabouni2, H. Dollfus3,5, J. Mandel1,4,6, J. Muller1,4; of the post-synaptic density. Accordingly, phospho-mutant NGL-1 lacked the 1IGBMC, Illkirch Graffenstaden, France, 2Laboratory of Human Genetics, University of ability to induce synaptic contacts, while its phospho-mimetic form bound Medicine of Tunis, Tunis, Tunisia, 3Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale EA3949, Faculté PSD95 more efficiently and partially rescued the CDKL5-specific spine de- de Médecine/Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 4Laboratoire de Diagnostic fects. In conclusion, we provide novel mechanistic insights into how CDKL5 Génétique, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 5Service de Génétique Médicale, CARGO, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, mutations can impact on neuronal function in atypical RTT. 6Chaire de Génétique Humaine, Collège de France, Illkirch, France. P12.043 Further contributions towards the molecular analysis of NIPBL and SMC1A genes in a cohort of patients with Cornelia de Lange Syndrome Bardet-Biedl syndrome (BBS) is a pleiotropic recessive disorder that be- E. Pinto da Costa1, J. Oliveira1, J. Silva2, R. Santos1; 1Unidade de Investigação e desenvolvimento, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto longs to the rapidly growing family of ciliopathies. It shares phenotypic Magalhães - INSA, Porto, Portugal, 2Unidade de Consulta, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. traits with other ciliopathies such as Alström syndrome (ALMS), nephrono- Jacinto Magalhães - INSA, Porto, Porto, Portugal. phthisis (NPHP) or Joubert syndromes. BBS mutations have been detected in 16 genes and no clear genotype-to-phenotype correlation could be ob- served. This extensive genetic heterogeneity is a major problem for mole- Cornelia de Lange Syndrome [CdLS (MIM#122470)] is a rare multisystemic cular diagnosis and genetic counseling. While various strategies have been disorder, characterized by a typical phenotype that includes distinctive facial proposed in order to optimize mutation detection they either fail to detect dysmorphism, hirsutism, growth and psychomotor developmental delay, mutations in a majority of patients or are time-consuming and costly. We abnormNaIPliBtiLes of tShMe Cu1pAper extremities, and relatively frequent gastrointe- tested a targeted exon-capture strategy coupled with multiplexing and high- stinal and congenital heart defects. CdLS is essentiallyP cDaSu5sAedP bDyS 5mButSaMtioCn3s throughput sequencing on a total of 52 patients: 14 with known mutations in the and genes (~50% and 5% of cases, respectively), but as proof-of-principle, 38 with no previously detected mutations. Thirty ge- mutations have been also described in other genes ( , , ) nes were targeted in total, including the 16 BBS genes, the 12 known NPHP (http://www.lovd.nl/CDLS). This genetic heterogeneity in CdLS can howe- genes and the single ALMS gene. This strategy allowed the reliable detection ver be explained by a close functional relationship at the cellular level, since of causative mutations (including homozygous/ heterozygous exon deleti- all these proteins are involved in chromateitd aclohesion. ons) in 68% of BBS patients with no previous molecular diagnosis and in all The molecular and clinical charactNeIrPizBaLtion of 42 Portuguese CdLS patients proof-of-principle samples. Three probands were found to carry truncating has been previously described (Oliveira ., 2010). In this work we con- mutations in ALMS1 confirming the phenotypic overlap between both disor- ducted the molecular analysis of gene and more recently expNanIPdBedL ders. The overall efficiency of detecting mutations in patients was positively this study to other 20 patients. SuSbMseCq1uAently, all the molecularly unresol- correlated with their compliance to classical BBS phenotype suggesting that ved patients were screened for large deletions and duplications in only a few true BBS genes remain to be identified. We will illustrate some by MLPA, and point mutations in by high resolution melting curve interpretation problems one may encounter in diagnostic settings due to the analysis and sequencing. multiplicity of variants detected. Targeted capture strategy appears highly Preliminary results allowed us to identify 4 previouslyN IkPnBoLwn mutations efficient and cost-effective for genetically heterogeneous diseases. (including a casSeM wCi1thA somatic mosaicism), 3 novel mutations (c.3316C>T, c.6983C>G and c.7307C>T) and 2 large deletions in the gene. Mutati- on screening in is still ongoing. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 299 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.047 Whole exome sequencing in prenatal and postnatal investigations identifies the causative mutations associated with complex The patient harbouring the sequence variant c.946C>T (p.Arg316Cys) was phenotypes referred at age 6 with clinical symptoms of muscular dystrophy. Investigati- C. Pangalos, B. Hagnefelt, S. Sevastidou, K. Pispili, C. Konialis; on including FSHD genetic testing and muscle biopsy was inconclusive. On InterGenetics-Diagnostic Genetic Center, Athens, Greece. re-evaluation at age 13, electromyography, clinical and radiological investi- gations raised suspicion of scapuloperoneal SMA. Further genetic testing was negative regarding SMA and CMT2. He has a younger brother that also By combining Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) with human whole exome reports some overlapping clinical syTmRpPtVo4ms. A clinical re-examination and capture, it is now feasible to identify, in a single step, inherited or somatic segregation analysis of the family will be presented and compared with pa- pathological mutations residing in coding regions of all known human genes. tients previously reported with this mutation. We applied whole exome capture and NGS in 2 complex clinical cases, invol- P12.050 ving: (1) an 18yr old male patient, exhibiting multiple abnormalities of the Cockayne Syndrome testing at BGL- a new service and case study kidneys coupled to progressive visual impairment, and (2) a chorionic vil- M. Greenslade1, L. Yarram1, P. Lunt2, A. Lehmann3, H. Fawcett3, M. Williams1; lus sample following termination of pregnancy, of a male fetus with skeletal 1Bristol Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 2St. Michael‘s Hospital, Bristol, and genital anomalies. Exome enrichment was achieved using Roche Nim- United Kingdom, 3Genome Damage and Stability Centre, Brighton, United Kingdom. bleGen v2 capture, followed by NGS on an Illumina GAIIx at >50x coverage. Sequence data was analyzed and variants were filtered, identified and evalu- ated utilizing NextGENe v2.1 sequence analysis software (SoftGenetics) and Cockayne Syndrome (CS) is a recessive multisystem disorder characterised various publicly available tools and databases. In the first case, a known or by early onset microcephaly, mental retardation, cachectic growth failure, novel pathological heterozygous mutation was identified in each of 4 diffe- photosensitivity and progressive neuroEloRgCiCc6a l deterioration usually leEaRdCiCn8g rent genes (NPHP4, RPGRIP1L, CC2D2A, AVIL), consistent with a diagnosis to death in childhood or early adulthood. ERCC6 ERCC8 of multi-allelic cilliopathy with retinal degeneration. In the second case, a CS is associated withE RmCCu6tationsE RiCnC 8 (OMIM:609413) and predicted pathological hemizygous mutation c.194A>G (p.N65S) within the (OMIM:216400). 75% of CS mutations are in and 25% in . The NSDHL gene on Xq28 was identified, and its presence was confirmed in the proteins encoded by and both play important roles in tran- carrier mother. The presence of this novel mutation in the male fetus is most scription-coupled nucleotide excision repair. likely associated with malformation syndromes caused by dysfunction in We present an urgent prenatal case of a mother presenting at 10+ weeks, cholesterol biosynthesis, in agreement with the clinical findings. In both ca- her 17 month old son having a definite clinical diagnosis of CS but no mole- ses, our findings provide new and important insights into the genetic causes cular or cellular confirmation. Time pressures precluded obtaining a mole- of complex phenotypes and highlight the value of this new technology when cular test result in European sEerRvCiCce6/reseEarRcChC l8aboratories, and cellular UV applied in a clinical setting. sensitivity studies requiring cultured skin biopsy typically taking 6-8 weeks. P12.048 SEaRnCgCe6r sequencing assays for and were designed and valida- ted in ten working days and the proband identified as homozygous for an Exhaustive molecular analysis and accurate estimation of type V pathogenic variant c.3052dupA. This facilitated prenatal testing by collagen mutations in classic EDS D. Syx, S. Symoens, F. Malfait, P. Coucke, A. De Paepe; sequence analysis with results available in three days, confirmed by UV-test Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent, Belgium. 5-6 weeks later. Rapid reporting of sequencing assays recommends DNA testing as the first line approach in suspected CS cases meeting clinical criteria, complemented Classic EhlersC-ODLa5nAlo1s syndCrOoLm5eA 2(EDS) is characterized by hyperextensible by the cellular UV sensitivity studies when variants of unknown significance skin, atrophic scarring, easy bruising and generalised jointhypermobility. (VUS) are detected. DNA testing avoids an invasive skin biopsy, and may re- Mutations in and , encoding type V collagen, have been re- duce the number of additional tests undertaken upstream e.g. microarray ported, but the proportion of classic EDS that result from defects in these CGH. genes remains unresolved. We studied 126 patients with a clinically esta- An accredited diagnostic genetics service for CS is now available for the UK blished or suspected diagnosis of classic EDS. Of these, 102 patients fulfilled and Europe, we present an audit of referrals to date. all major diagnostic criteria for classic EDS (Villefranche nosology) (group P12.051 1). We also included 24 patients in whom the diagnosis of classic EDS could Mutations in Swi/SNF chromatin remodeling complex gene ARID1B not unequivocally be established, as they presented jointhypermobility and cause Coffin-Siris syndrome soft, mildly hyperextensible skin but no typical dystrophic scarring (group G. W. E. Santen1, E. Aten1, Y. Sun1, R. Almomani1, C. Gilissen2, M. Nielsen1, S. G. Kant1, 2). Inclusion of this cohort allowed evaluating the most indicative clinical Y. Hilhorst-Hofstee1, N. S. den Hollander1, M. W. Wessels3, M. van Belzen1, C. A. L. Ruivenkamp1, G. B. van Ommen1, M. H. Breuning1, J. T. den Dunnen1, A. van Haeringen1, features for the presence of a type V collagen defect. In total, a typCeO LV5 cAo1l-- M. Kriek1; lagen defect was identified in 93/102 patients in group 1, amongC OwLh5iAch1 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Nijmegen 49 CnOoLv5eAl 2mutations. Approximately half of these defects caused Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, haploinsufficiency, whereas one-third were structural mutations in Netherlands. or . In 9/102 patients no typeC OVL c5oAll1agCeOnL d5eAf2ect was detected. No obvious genotype-phenotype correlation was observed. In contrast, none of the patients of group 2 harboured a / mutation. Our data Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS) is characterized by intellectual disability, speech show that >90% of patients fulfilling all classic EDS Villefranche criteria impairment, coarse facial features, hypoplasia of the fifth digits and/or fin- harbour a type V collagen deTfeNcXt.B Biochemical and molecular analysis in the gernails and callosal agenesis. Since several sibships with CSS have been de- mutation-negative patients from group 1 and 2 excluded the involvement of scribed autosomal recessive inheritance was considered a likely possibility. other fibrillar collagens and , which implies that type V collagen is the We selected three unrelated patients with CSS and the parents of one patient major, if not the only, protein involved in classic EDS. for exome sequencing. Filtering using public databases rendered recessive P12.049 inheritance unlikely, as there was no gene with two heterozygous or one TRPV4 mutations in a selected CMT2 Norwegian patient cohort homozygous variant in all three patients. Focusing on autosomal dominant T. Fagerheim, R. Glad, K. Abeler, J. Tajsic, N. Kuklina, C. Wahl; inheritancAeR inIDs1teBad, only one gene with a variant in all three patients remadie- University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsoe, Norway. nnoevdo a fter filtering inherited and homozygous variants. Three truncating mu- tations in were identified which were confirmeAd RaInDd1 sBhown to be by Sanger sequencing. Array-based CNV analysis in 2000 patients with Mutations in the ankyrin domain of the TRPV4 (Transient receptor potential intellectual disability revealed deletions encompassing in three pati- vanilloid) protein have been shown TinR PpVat4ients with congenital distal spinal ents with partially overlapping phenotypes. They share facial features, intel- muscular atrophy (SMA), scapuloperoneal SMA and Charcot-Marie-Tooth lectual disability and severe speech delay with the CASSR IpDa1tiBe nts. Interestingly, (CMT) 2C. We aimed at identifying mutations by sequencing exon 5 they lack the typical CSS abnormalities and CSS was considered in only one if and 6 of the gene in a cohort of Norwegian patients with clinical and eleGcJtBro1- these patients as a diagnosis. Several patients with haploinsufficien- pMhFyNs2icaMl PfiZndGinDgAsP s1uspicNioEuFsL of CMT type 2. We identified twenty two pati- cy have been dAeRscIDri1bBed in literature with a very similar phenotype and often ents who were previously tested normal for the commToRnP CVM4T2 genes ( , with agenesis of the corpus callosum. Therefore we conclude that haploin- , T, RPV4 and ), and identified two patients heterozygous for sufficiency of , which encodes a (epigenetic) modifier of chromatin the mutations p.Arg315Trp and p.Arg316Cys in the TRPV4 gene. This sug- structure, emerges as an AimRIpDo1rBtant cause of CSS and a potential common gests that mutations might represent a relatively common cause of cause of intellectual disability and speech impairment. By screening additio- CMT2 in the Norwegian population and testing of the gene should be nal groups of patients for we have identified several new mutations. www.eshg.org considered where genetic testing of the common genes is inconcluswivew. w.eshg.org300 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.052 Genetic abnormalities in Coffin-Siris syndrome N. Matsumoto; This findings further extend the role of collagen genes family in the patho- Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan. genesis of the disease. P12.055 Consanguinity as a means to identify pathogenic recessive mutations Coffin-Siris syndrome (CSS; MIM 135900) is a rare congenital anomaly syn- P. Makrythanasis1, M. Nelis1, M. Guipponi2, A. Vannier1, F. A. Santoni1, F. Sloan-Béna2, S. drome characterized by growth deficiency, intellectual disability, microce- Gimelli2, E. Stathaki2, G. Duriaux-Sail2, S. Temtamy3, A. Megarbane4, M. Aglan3, M. S. Zaki3, phaly, coarse facial features and hypoplastic nail of the fifth finger and/or S. Fokstuen2, L. Gwanmesia2, A. Bottani2, K. Aliferis2, A. Masri5, S. Psoni6, S. Kitsiou6, H. Fryssira6, E. Kanavakis6, N. Al-Allawi7, A. Sefiani8, S. Al-Hait9, S. Elalaoui8, N. Jalkh4, L. Al- toe. The majority of patients are sporadic, being compatible with autosomal Gazali10,11, F. Al-Jasmi10,11, H. Chaabouni-Bouhamed12, H. Hamamy1, S. E. Antonarakis1,2; dominant inheritance. The genetic cause has not been elucidated. 1Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, To reveal the genetic basis of CSS, we performed whole exome sequencing Switzerland, 2Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, of five typical subjects. Based on our scheme assuming that an abnormality Switzerland, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, of a particular gene would be shared in two or more patients, 51 variants 4Medical Genetics Unit, Saint Joseph University, Beirut, Lebanon, 5Pediatric Department, remained as candidates. All the variants were checked by Sanger sequen- Jordan University Hospital, Amman, Jordan, 6Department of Medical Genetics, University cing of PCR products amplified usingd eg ennoovmoic DNA from the five patients of Athens, Athens, Greece, 7Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, University of Dohuk, Dohuk, Iraq, 8Département de génétique médicale, Institut National and their parents. Nine were false-positives (errors), 40 were inherited from d‘Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 9Genetic Clinic, Al Amal Maternity Hospital, Amman, Jordan, either the father or mother, and two heterozygous mutations were 10Department of Paediatrics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab found in two patients. Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 11Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Using this information, we carefully analyzed 23 CSS patients and found that Hospital, United Arab Emirates University, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 12Department at least 20 of them are genetically explained. Detailed information will be of Human Genetics, University Tunis El Manar, Faculty of Medicine, Tunis, Tunisia. presented. The following doctors are highly appreciated: Tsurusaki Y, Okamoto N, Ohashi H, Kosho T, Imai Y, Hibi-Ko Y, Kaname T, Naritomi K, Kawame H, Wa- Consanguinity and inbreeding increase the sharing of alleles among indi- kui K, Fukushima Y, Homma T, Kato M, Hiraki Y, Yamagata T, Yano S, Mizuno viduals. We have initiated a project to collect samples from families with S, Sakazume S, Ishii T, Nagai T, Shiina M, Ogata T, Ohta T, Niikawa N, Miyatake recessive phenotypes in consanguineous families, in order to identify the S, Okada I, Mizuguchi T, Doi H, Saitsu H, Miyake N. functional genomic variation responsible for the disease. Any phenotype P12.053 and family history compatible with autosomal recessive inheritance (and A novel COL1A1 mutation in a family with infantile cortical unknown molecular defect) is candidate for participation in the study. Forty hyperostosis (ICH, Caffey disease, OMIM#114000) two families of different ethnic background have already been collected. A. Baumer1, H. Auricchio2, D. Bartholdi1, A. Rauch1; From each family, blood DNA from the patient(s), all unaffected siblings, and 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, 2Ospedale Civico, Lugano, the parents is extracted. Samples from one or more of the affected indivi- Switzerland. duals per family are first analyzed by array-CGH 400K for the detection of homozygous deletions. Then the samples of all family members are geno- typed with a dense SNP array in order to identify Runs of Homozygosity Infantile cortical hyperostosis is a rare autosomal dominant disorder cha- (ROH), allowing the definition of chromosomal regions likely to contain the racterized by subperiosteal hyperosteogenesis manifesting in the prenatal responsible genes. Finally exome sequencing is performed in one affected period or in early infancy. It often affects the mandible, the clavicles, the ribs individual per family. Variants are called using publically available tools and and the long bones. Typical clinical symptoms include painful swelling of the filtered according to polymorphic SNVs deposited in public databases and bones and fever. ICH is a self limiting disease which usually resolves sponta- predicted pathogenicity. We have so far analyzed twelve families using this neously by 2 years of age. approach. Causative variations of known disease genes have been identified A single mutation in the COL1A1 gene has been reported to date in ICH pati- in two families (VLDLR gene, causing disequilibrium syndrome and FKTN ents of different ethnic origins, namely the missense mutation p.Arg836Cys. gene causing Fukuyama muscular dystrophy). In 5 additional families candi- The mutation was shown to lead to abnormal disulfide bonds and abnormal date genes have been identified. Consanguineous families provide an oppor- structures of the alpha 1 chain dimers.(1) tunity to identify pathogenic variants in known genes as well as candidate COL1A1 gene mutations, detected throughout the gene, are responsible for genes responsible for recessive phenotypes and rapidly fill in the space of further connective tissue disorders such as: osteogenesis imperfecta and genotype phenotype links. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome type III. Typical for these disorders is fragility of P12.056 the bones and laxity of the skin/connective tissue, respectively. Molecular analysis of TSC2/PKD1 contiguous gene deletion syndrome We report here on the molecular findings obtained for a young girl with ty- J. Nevado1,2, R. Peces3, M. Palomares1,2, E. Vallespin1,2, C. Peces4, E. Cuesta-Lopez3, P. pical clinical manifestation of ICH. After having excluded the presence of the Gonzalez3, M. Picazo3, C. Vega-Cabrera3, R. Selgas3, P. Lapunzina1,2; COL1A1 mutation p.Arg836Cys we sequenced all coding exons of the gene. 1INGEMM- IDIPAZ (HULP), Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3IDIPAZ (HULP), The sequencing analysis revealed a heterozygous mutation, p.Arg918Cys, in Madrid, Spain, 4Area de Tecnologia de la Informacion (SESCAM), Toledo, Spain. the patient and her father, who also had typical features of the disorder. The TSC2/PKD1 mutation was not present in the patient‘s mother and 200 control alleles. TSC2 PKD1 We suggest that ICH may not only be caused by the recurrent p.Arg836Cys The contiguous gene syndrome (PKDTS, MIM#600273) results mutation, but also by the novel p.Arg918Cys mutation. in disruption of both the and genes. PKDTS is characterized by Reference: severe juvenile polycystic disease, combined with variable phenotypic ex- 1.Gensure R.C. et. al (2005) J. Clin. Invest. 115:1250-1257 pression of tuberous sclerosis (TSC2). This extensive renal damage by cysts P12.054 usually results in end-stage renal disease (ESRD), often before the second A Loss of Function Mutation in the COL9A3 Gene Cause Autosomal decade of life. Currently, the mechanism for PKDTS is nearly unknown. Recessive Stickler Syndrome Previous findings suggest that PKDTS damage is associated exclusively with F. Faletra1, I. Bruno1, A. P. D‘Adamo2, E. Athanasakis1, S. Biskup3, L. Esposito4, P. the severity of kidney symptoms, and not with the severity of other ones, Gasparini2; such as TSC, liver cysts, and intracranial aneurysms. To our best knowledge, 1Institute for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo”, Trieste, Italy, 2Institute no whole studies including; clinical, renal imaging stuTdSiCe2s/, nPoKrD h1istopatholo- for Maternal and Child Health - IRCCS “Burlo Garofolo” – Trieste, University of Trieste, gical and neither molecular biological analysis with new technologies (such Italy, Trieste, Italy, 3CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 4CBM S.c.r.l. Area Science Park - as MLPA and aCGH), have been performed on the contiguous Basovizza, Trieste, Italy. gene syndrome patients. The main aim of this work is to examine the genotype-phenotype correla- tions in this dTisSeCa2s/eP KinDc1luding previously reported patients with clarified Stickler syndrome is a clinically variable and genetically heterogeneous syn- breakpoints of the large deletions. To end this, we report herein 7 new pati- drome characterized by ophthalmic, articular, orofacial, and auditory mani- ents with the contiguous gTeSnCe2 syndPrKomD1e deletions in different festations. Until now, it has been described with both autosomal dominant extent, by means of MLPA and a custom design aCGH within 16p13.3 locus. and recessive inheritance. The dominant form is caused by mutations in CO- The extent of the deletion concerning and genes, and the nature L2A1 (STL 1, MIM 108300) , COLA11A1 (STL 2, MIM 604841), and COL11A2 of the deleterious event are determined and discussed concerning clinical (STL 3, MIM 184840) genes, while recessive forms have been associated consequences and pathogenic molecular mechanisms. with mutations of COL9A1 (MIM 120210) and COL9A2 (MIM 120260) ge- nes. Here, we describe the first autosomal recessive Stickler family due to loss of function mutations (c.1176_1198del, p.P392fsX25) of COL9A3 gene. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 301 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.057 Counseling Service, Department of Pediatrics, Regional Hospital of Bolzano, Bolzano, Familial recurrence and modifier genes in CDLS families with NIPBL Italy, 6Queensland Health Pathology, Royal Brisbane Hospital, Herston, Australia, mutations. 7Erciyes University, Medical Faculty, Department of Pediatrics, Kayseri, Turkey, 8Sami S. Russo1, M. Masciadri1, C. Piccinelli1, A. Ficcadenti2, P. Finelli1,3, L. Larizza1,3; Ulus Maternity and Children Training Hospital, Ankara, Turkey, 9Al Hada Military 1Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy, 2Clinica Pediatrica dell‘Ospedale Salesi, Hospital, Taif, Saudi Arabia, 10INGEMM, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, Ancona, Italy, 3University of Milano, Milano, Italy. 11Department of General Pediatrics, Münster University Children‘s Hospital, Münster, Germany. Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS; OMIM #122470) is a rare multisystem Crisponi syndrome (CS) and cold-induced sweating syndrome type 1 (CISS1) disease characterized by mental and growth retardation, typical facies, and represent manifestations of the same autosomal recessive disorder with limb reduction. Mutations in three genes encoding a regulator (NIPBL) and different degrees of severity, caused by mutations in CRLF1. The two syn- two structural subunits of the multifunctional cohesin complex (SMC1A and dromes share clinical characteristics, such as dysmorphic features, muscle SMC3) , account for up to 60% of CdLS cases, with >50% due to NIPBL. Alt- contractions, scoliosis and cold-induced sweating, with CS patients showing hough germinal mosaicism has been reported, inherited NIPBL mutation a severe clinical course in infancy involving hyperthermia, associated with have been rarely described. death in most cases in the first years of life. We suggested recently to rename We report on two familial cases out of a cohort of 90 NIPBL-mutated pati- the two genetic entities with the broader term of Sohar-Crisponi syndro- ents. In the first family, a mother with a very mild facial phenotype and her me. We expanded the mutational spectrum of CRLF1 in the syndrome and two CdLS sibs were carriers of c.5329-15A/G splicing mutation, leading to carried out a meta-analysis of the literature for all the mutations described c.5328[TGTTTGCTTGGCAG]5329ins transcript that predicts the truncated so far. In conclusion we found 9 new mutations in addition to the 29 alrea- p.Ile1777Cys fs22X protein. In the second family the p.Leu1238Phe change dy described. The higher prevalence is registered in Sardinia, Turkey and was transmitted by the mother, with a psychiatric phenotype, to the CdLS Spain. In Sardinia, where the syndrome seems to be more common than in proband and to her brother affected with learning disability. The variant has the rest of Italy, due to 2 founder mutations, we performed a pilot screening not been found in either 800 control chromosomes or LOVD . Array-CGH to evaluate the carrier frequency. In details we found 16 carriers on 1,100 has been performed to investigate whether CNVs actingd aes n movoodifier factors Sardinian control individuals from 4 different provinces, with an estimated could modulate the intrafamilial phenotypic variability. prevalence of 1:20,000. A more detailed analysis (detection of heterozygous A duplication containing the entire PIAS3 gene and a duplication CRLF1 deletions by Quantitative Real Time PCR, CLCF1 and CNTFRα testing, exiting in the whole duplication of RPAI1 gene were detected in the two sibs exome sequencing) is ongoing to find the genetic cause in those patients of the first family and the CdLS proband of the second family both involved with a clinical phenotype suggestive of Sohar-Crisponi syndrome, but with in genomic stability. no evident mutations in CRLF1. This will help in better understanding the Quantitative real-time-PCR is in progress These data, suggest a putative con- pathogenesis of the disease and the molecular pathways involved in the phe- current effect of rare CNVs and NIPBL mutation in the CdLS expression of notype. clinical signs. P12.061 P12.058 Further molecular characterization of PYCR1-related cutis laxa Differential allelic expression of SMC1A gene in Cornelia de Lange B. Fischer1, T. Gardeitchik2, A. Dimopoulou1, D. Kouwenberg2, S. Sprenger1, C. Schlack1, B. female patients Fauler3, S. Mundlos1,3, L. Nijtmans2, H. Kayserili4, B. Wollnik5, E. Morava2, U. Kornak1; C. Gervasini1, I. Parenti1, J. Azzollini1, C. Picinelli2, M. Masciadri3, A. Cereda4, P. Finelli5,2, S. 1Institut fuer Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Berlin, Germany, 2Radboud Sirchia1, L. Garavelli6, S. Russo2, A. Selicorni4, L. Larizza1; University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Max Planck Institute for 1Medical Genetics University of Milan, Milano, Italy, 2Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Cusano Milanino, Milano, Italy, 3Istituo Auxologico Italiano, Cusano Milanino, Milano, Istanbul, Turkey, 5University Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. Italy, 4MBBM Foundation, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy, 5Biology and Genetics for Medical Sciences, Milano, Italy, 6Clinical Genetics, Santa Maria Nuova Hospital, Reggio Emilia, Italy. Autosomal recessive cutis laxa (ARCL) sydromes are a group of overlapping disorders with progeroid features, but without lung and vascular involve- ment (ARCL type 2). In a cohort of patients initially as characterised as wrin- Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS OMIM #122470, #300590, #610759) is kly skin syndrome, gerodermia osteodysplastica or De Barsy syndrome we a rare multisystem disorder characterized by facial dysmorphisms, upper identified mutations in the PYCR1 gene encoding pyrroline-5-carboxylate limb abnormalities, growth and cognitive retardation. Mutations of NIPBL reductase 1. PYCR1-related ARCL (ARCL2B; OMIM #612940) is the second (5p13.2) and SMC1A (Xp11.22) genes, encoding a regulator and a structu- most frequent form of ARCL. We give an update on the clinical variability ral subunit of the cohesin complex, account for about 60% and 6% of CdLS and report novel disease-causing mutations. cases. The SMC1A gene escapes X chromosome inactivation, although un- The PYCR1 protein is part of the proline-cycle, a conserved pathway descri- completely, with a variable expression of the allele located on the inactive bed to generate NAD(P)+ in the cytoplasm via synthesis of proline. PYCR1- X. This finding may contribute to the clinical variability of SMC1A-mutated deficient fibroblasts from ARCL2B patients show decreased mitochondrial female patients. membrane potential, a disrupted mitochondrial network, and an increased Four female patients carriers of different mutations of SMC1A gene and 8 apoptosis rate upon different kinds of stress. A detailed analysis of the sub- controls have been tested by Pyrosequencing to assess the reciprocal level cellular distribution revealed an exclusive mitochondrial localization of of allelic expression, discriminated by the heterozygous mutation in the pa- PYCR1. After RNAi-induced loss of PYCR1 in HeLa cells we reproduced the tients and heterozygous coding SNP rs1264011 in the controls. fragmentation of the mitochondrial network and a decreased membrane po- The analysis of the two alleles showed a 53/47 ratio in the controls group tential. In addition, alterations of ATP and lactate levels imply mitochondrial and a 67/33 ratio favouring the wild type allele in the patients. In particular dysfunction. the patient with the highest wild type expression (73/27=wt/mut) presents Thus, we conclude a role of PYCR1 in the regulation of the mitochondrial a borderline phenotype with mild dysmorphisms and cognitive deficits, at redox state, which influences mitochondrial fusion and possibly also me- difference of the other patients (65/35=wt/mut) showing a moderate to se- tabolic activity. This combination of defects is likely to be a key event in the vere clinical phenotype. pathogenesis of ARCL2B and qualifies ARCL2B as a mitochondrial disorder. According to the proposed dominant negative mechanism of mutated SM- C1A protein in females CdLS patients, the preferential, but variable expres- P12.063 sion of the wild type allele may influence the clinical phenotype. The overall Clinical Genetic Analysis of Cystic Fibrosis in Republic of Moldova findings, expanded to further cases and corroborated by quantitative ex- N. I. Barbova, V. V. Egorov; State Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of pression data, enhance our understanding of the variable clinical spectrum Moldova. of X-linked CdLS and highlight the occurrence of overlooked cases. P12.060 Expanding the mutational spectrum of CRLF1 in Crisponi Syndrome. Determining the frequency of CFTR mutations which are specific for indivi- R. Piras1,2, F. Chiappe1, M. Pitzalis1,3, G. Crisponi4, F. Benedicenti5, B. Kamien6, M. Ali dual population having a scientific interest. Akin7, F. Tuba Eminoglu8, N. Uzunalic8, O. Assy9, P. Lapunzina10, F. Cucca1,3, F. Rutsch11, L. Crisponi1; During the period from 1992 to present we investigated 147 Moldavian 1Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cagliari, patients with CF aged from 1 month to 24 years (70 male and 77 female). Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Università degli Studi We carried out comparison of phenotypic features in CF with type of CFTR di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università degli mutation. The national distribution of patients was following: Moldavians - studi di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 4Casa di Cura Sant’Anna, Cagliari, Italy, 5Genetic 66,2%, Russians - 14,6%, Ukrainians - 7 %, Gagauz - 6,2 %, Bulgarians - 2,3 %, and another nationalities - 3,7%. www.eshg.org www.eshTog .doertegrmine 9 mutations (F508del, G542X, N1303K, W1282X, R117H, 302 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.067 Novel GJB2 mutations in Greek patients with sensorineural, non- G551S, R347P, R334W, R553X) in CFTR gene we are used the method of syndromic deafness PCR, in 15 patients was administered DNA diagnosis for 35 - 36 mutations H. Kokotas1, M. Grigoriadou1, M. Koutroumpe2, J. Economides3, M. B. Petersen1; jointly with professionals from Center of Cystic Fibrosis, Bordeaux, France, 1Department of Genetics, Institute of Child Health, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s Hospital, and Department of Genetics of University Clinic in Hannover, Germany. Athens, Greece, 2Department of Pediatrics, ‘Aglaia Kyriakou’ Children’s Hospital, Athens, CFTR-mutations were identified in 69,72 % investigated chromosomes, were Greece, 3Department of Audiology-Neurootology, ‘Aghia Sophia’ Children’s Hospital, Athens, Greece. determined 17 mutations. The mutation which have clinical importance in Moldova (> 1%) were: F508del- 58,84%, 2789+5G>A - 1,70 %, G542X - 1,36 % , N1303K- 1,36 %, 2184insA- 1,36 %. All of them are „severe“ and are associated with pancreatic insufficiency. The frequencies of other mutations Non-syndromic hearing loss is one of the most common hereditary diseases were < 1%. 16 mutations (excluding F508del) were determined in 10,88% in human, and the disease is a genetically heterogeneous disorder. Conne- studied chromosomes. For patients with non-identified mutations (30,28%) xins (Cxs) are membrane-spanning proteins that co-assemble into intercel- is characteristic high level of pulmonary pathologies (70,0%). lular gap junction channels. Gap junction channels mediate electrical and Therefore, the present study discovered fact what in Moldavian patients biochemical communication between adjacent cells and play vital roles as prevailed rare mutations, and severity of CF correlates with type of muta- mediators of intercellular molecular signaling. Cx-linked deafness highlights tions in CFTR gene. the key role of gap junctions in the physiological processes of hearing. Co- localization of Cxs with the gap junction system in the inner ear suggests P12.064 a role in cochlear electrolyte homeostasis. During auditory transduction, Whole-exome sequencing identifies a novel nonsense mutation in the they are proposed to maintain membrane potentials by regulating the flow TTN gene in a large Dutch family with DCM R. J. Sinke1, J. Zhang2, R. Almomani1, A. Pósafalvi1, K. Y. van Spaendonck-Zwarts1, M. P. of potassium ions between the sensory epithelia of the inner ear. Mutations van den Berg3, B. Sikkema-Raddatz1, P. van Tintelen1, J. Wang2,4, J. D. Jongbloed1; in the GJB2 gene, encoding connexin 26 (Cx26), are a major cause of non- 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, syndromic recessive hearing impairment in many countries and are largely Groningen, Netherlands, 2BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 3Department of Cardiology, dependent on ethnic groups. Here we describe the clinical and molecular University Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, genetic findings in two Greek families presenting with bilateral, sensori- 4Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. neural, non-syndromic deafness. In the first family with hearing parents we detected compound heterozygosity of the c.35delG and the novel c.292C>T (p.R98W) GJB2 mutations in a proband with postlingual hearing loss while Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is an etiologically highly heterogeneous in the second family where both parents and the proband suffered from pre- disorder, characterized by left ventricular dilation and dysfunction, lea- lingual deafness, we observed homozygosity of the c.35delG GJB2 mutation ding to heart failure and sudden death. Approximately 20-50% of dilated in the mother and compound heterozygosity of the c.35delG and the novel cardiomyopathy cases are familial with significant genetic and phenotypic c.247-249delTTC (p.delF83) GJB2 mutations in the father and the proband. heterogeneity. In a multigenerational Dutch family with autosomal domi- P12.068 nant transmission, we employed whole-exome sequencing in three affected Mutations in the prostaglandin transporter SLCO2A1 cause primary family members. Using the GATK pipeline for whole exome data analysis, hypertrophic osteoarthropathy with digital clubbing we identified between 1431 and1557 novel exonic/splice site variants per J. Busch1, V. Frank1, N. Bachmann1, A. Otsuka2, V. Oji3, D. Metze4, K. Shah5, S. Danda5, K. individual. Subsequent filtering steps, included filtering for dominant in- Kabashima2, H. Traupe3, H. J. Bolz1,6, C. Bergmann1,7; heritance (heterozygous variants) and for coding regions, revealed a novel 1Bioscientia Center for Human Genetics, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Department of shared nonsense variant in the Titin gene (TTN) in all three affected pa- Dermatology, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan, 3Department of Dermatology, University tients. The respective substitution c.59845C>T predicts a premature stop Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Department of Pathology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, 5Clinical Genetics Unit, Christian Medical College, Vellore, codon (p.Arg19949X) at the protein level, leading to a truncated titin pro- India, 6University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 7RWTH University, Aachen, Germany. tein. The mutation was confirmed by Sanger sequencing and was shown to co-segregate with disease in all DCM patients in this family. Our results show that mutations in the gene encoding giant muscle filament titin (TTN) can Digital clubbing with enlargement of the distal phalanges and overcurvature cause DCM and may account for a significant portion of the genetic etiology in familial DCM in the Dutch population. of the nails frequently occur seconHdPaGriDly as a feature of chronic hypoxia or neoplastic processes. We and others reported mutations in the 15-hydro- P12.066 xyprostaglandin dehydrogenase ( ) gene encoding the major prosta- Etiological study of hearing loss: clinical practice guidelines in glandin PGE2 catabolizing enzyme in patients with digital clubbing and pri- Brazilian patients mary hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (PHO). In this study, we hypothesized E. L. Sartorato, P. Z. Ramos, V. C. S. de Moraes, M. C. Svidnicki, A. M. Castilho; that PHO can also be caused by mutations in other components of prosta- Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas - SP, Brazil. glandin signalling. Extracellular prostaglandins are taken up by a carrier- mediated process across the plasma membrane. For many prostanoids (e. g. Deafness is considered the most prevalent sensory disorder in humans. In PGE2) this transport is medSiLaCteOd2 Ab1y SLCO2A1, a type IV transmembrane pro- Brazil, there are no official data regarding the prevalence and etiology of tein that belongs to the solute caHrPrGieDr organic anion transporter family. We performed sequencing of in seven PHO patients previously found hearing impairment, but it is known that environmental factors are among to be negative for mutations in and identified pathogenic mutations the major causes. Although a simultaneous testing approach, including clini- cal exams, audiological, laboratorial, imaging and genetic expands the etio- in all but one individualS. ALCllO p2aAti1ents were of normal intelligence and height and did not suffer from pulmonary disease or any other interfering disease. logical diagnostic, overloads the healthcare system due to high costs. Thus, All of our mutations in represent truncating alleles or affect resi- the goal of the present study is to evaluate the effectiveness of imaging and dues that are indispensable for prostaglandin transporter activity. To corro- genetics tests and their impact on public health, aiming to increase effici- ency and reduce costs of the etiological diagnostic of hearing loss. It was borate our data, we constructed molecSuLlCaOr2 mAo1d els and Ramachandran plots of wild-type and mutated SLCO2A1 proteins to visualize changes of protein conducted an analysis of 100 patients with sensorineural hearing loss. A de- tailed investigation was performed in patients, including imaging and gene- folding and structure. We show that is a frequHePnGtD c ause SfLoCr Oa2uAto1- somal recessive PHO confirming the data recently published by Zhang et al. tics analysis. The number of individuals with unknown cause was reduced (2012). Although most patients harbour mutations in and , from 72 to 42 (42% of reduction). Radiologic abnormalities were identified further genetic heterogeneity is likely and candidate approaches targeting in 29 of the patients, while molecular alterations were found in 31 indivi- other prostaglandin signalling components seem promising. duals. The etiology remained unknown in 42% of the patients, was due to environmental factors in 25%, genetics in 19% and inner ear malformations P12.069 or other defects in 14% of the cases. It was concluded that both imaging The frequency of short pathogenic repeat expansions in DM2 W. Kress1, G. Meng1, B. Schoser2; and genetic analysis were important to identify the etiology of hearing loss, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 2Friedrich-Baur-Institut, LMU however, molecular tests contributed mainly for diagnosis of patients with München, München, Germany. congenital deafness, while radiologic exams had greater contribution for diagnosis of cases with progressive or abrupt hearing loss. The sequential protocol enables an optimization of the etiological diagnosis and cost re- Myotonic Dystrophy type 2 (DM2), in Germany as frequent as DM1, is nor- duction. mally caused by huge CCTG repeat expansions in intron 1 of the zinc finger protein (ZNF9, CNBP) gene on chromosome 3q21. During the last few years we found some symptomatic patients with small CCTG expansions between www.eshthge. onorrgmal upper limit of about 26 CCTGs in the population and a putative www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 303 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.072 An unusual form of autosomal recessive early onset nephropathy: old lower limit for pathogenic repeat expansions of 75 CCTGs during our mapping to chromosome 4. routine diagnostic screening process for DM2. Pictures of a Southern blot Y. Perez; and TP-PCR (repeat primed PCR) are given. There is good evidence that The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, Soroka these ,,mini expansions“ are pathogenic: there were ribonucleic foci in the Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel. patients’ muscle biopsies and alternative splicing events in muscle specific genes. From 2004 till now we detected 19 DM2-patients with such a short pathogenic repeat. This is a portion of roughly 2% of all patients with a long Early onset nephropathy (age of onset less than one year) with features of expansion (n=960) in this period; the distribution between male and female tubulo-interstitial nephritis, hypertension and tendency for hyperkalemia patients is nearly equal. The short pathogenic repeat expansions may arrise was diagnosed in 4 individuals of an Israeli Bedouin kindred. None of the in most cases from a pool of long normal alleles (as suggested in DM1) by a affected individuals had rapid deterioration of renal function. Neurological slippage or unequal crosssing over mechanism; on the other side we could manifestations commensurate with Cogan-type oculomotor apraxia were find at least one repeat contraction from an effected mother to an affected evident. Molar tooth sign was not seen on neuro-imaging. Association with daughter (full expansion contracting to a mini expansion). The latter case any of the previously known 12 loci for nephronophthsis was ruled out. Ge- supports the observation of ,,pathogenic mini expansions“. nome wide linkage analysis identified a disease-associated locus on chro- P12.070 mosome 4 between 37143147 and 57096602. No mutations were found Clinical, pathological and genetic characterization of manifesting in the coding sequence of WDR19 (NPHP13). Whole exome sequencing is DMD carriers: the role of X-chromosome inactivation underway. J. Juan-Mateu1, L. Gonzalez-Quereda1, M. Rodriguez2, E. Verdura2, L. Alias2, J. Salazar2, M. P12.073 Baiget2, P. Gallano2; Identification of novel causal genes for early-onset Alzheimer disease 1Hospital Sant Pau-Ciberer, Barcelona, Spain, 2HOSPITAL SANT PAU-CIBERER, through whole genome sequencing technology BARCELONA, Spain. R. Cacace1,2, K. Bettens1,2, C. Van Cauwenberghe1,2, C. M. van Duijn3, K. Sleegers1,2, C. Van DMD Broeckhoven1,2; 1Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, Mutations in gene lead to Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), milder Antwerp, Belgium, 2Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, University Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) and rare X-linked dilated cardiomyopa- of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, thy (XL-DCM). Female carriers are mainly asymptomatic, however between Netherlands. 7,8% and 22% manifests some degree of the diDseMaDse. Several mechanisms have been implicated to cause sympDtMomDs among manifesting carriers. These include X-autosomal translocations disrupting , compound heterozy- Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common form of late-onset neurodege- gous mutations, co-occurrence of mutations together with other ge- netic abnormalities (X-chromosome monosomy, X-chromosome uniparental nerative dementia, that also occurs at young age in 10% of AD patientAs.P IPn disomy and male pseudohermaphroditism) and skewed X-chromosome in- aP SsEmNa1ll percPeSnEtNag2e of early-onset AD patients the disease is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Mutations in the 3 known causal genes ( , activation. Clinical presentation among manifesting carriers are heterogenic and ) are not explaining all early-onset AD patients. and ranges from myalgia to disabling DMD-like forms. A previous genome-wide linkage study on a well-documented early-onset We identified 22 manifesting caDrMriDers, ten of them with no family history of AD family has implicated a novel genetic locus of 5.44 Mb at 7q36. Traditio- D/BMD affected males. We report findings concerning clinical presentation, nal Sanger sequencing of all coding exons of the genes present in the candi- muscle dystrophin expression, n mutation spectrum and X-chromosome date region and array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) for inactivation (XCI) panttern in blood and muscle. Clinical pictures includedn: 1) CNV analysis both failed to reveal evident disease-linked mutations. Yet, the isolated dilated cardiomyopahty ( =2, 9%), 2)n isolated mental retardation role of non-coding variations remains to be explored. To continue searching or behavior issuens ( =3, 14%), 3) myalgia and/or nexercise intolerance ( =4, for the underlying genetic defect whole genome sequencing (WGS) was per- 1n8%) and, 4) mild to severe muscle weakness ( =13, 59%) that ranged from formed on 4 distantly related patients from the pedigree. The GenomeComb mild BMD-like ( =6, 2D7M%D) to severe BMD-like ( =4, 18%) and DMD-like software tool has been used for filtering on quality and frequency and for ( =3, 14%). variations prioritization. After this procedure, we obtained 93 variations of Twenty-one different mutations were identified in heterozygous sta- which 35 were segregating with the disease. These have been tested in the te including: 12 exonic deletions (57%), 3 exonic duplications (14%) and 6 extended control cohort of Flanders-Belgian origin to exclude (common) point mutations (29%). The aim of this study was to explore the potential polymorphisms. Leaving eventually 4 variations shared by the family pati- correlation between the severity of the disease and X-chromosome inactiva- ents and absent in controls. The screening of these variations in a larger AD tion. We have compared XCI ratios between manifesting carriers, non mani- population is ongoing to estimate the contribution of the newly identified festing carriers and normal female controls. variations to AD pathogenesis. Next, we will functionally characterize the P12.071 newly identified variations to better understand their contribution to AD The LGMD2A prevalence among patients diagnosed as DMD in Russia. pathology. O. P. Ryzhkova, N. Komarova, A. Polyakov; Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. P12.074 A RP1 common founder mutation is a major cause of Early-onset Autosomal Recessive Retinitis Pigmentosa in Spanish population A. Avila-Fernandez*1, M. Corton*1, K. M. Nishiguchi2, N. Muñoz-Sanz3, F. Blanco-Kelly1, R. Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is the commonest and best-known of Riveiro-Alvarez1, P. F. San Jose1, B. Garcia-Sandoval3, C. Rivolta2, C. Ayuso1; the muscular dystrophies, but other types of muscular dystrophy (MD) like 1Genetics Department, IIS- Fundación Jiménez Díaz- CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, limb-girdle muscular dystDroMpDhy type 2A (LGMD2A) may have a similar clini- 2Department of Medical Genetics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, cal presentation. LGMD2A is the most frequent autosomal recessive MD. 3Ophthalmology Department, IIS- Fundación Jiménez Díaz- CIBERER, Madrid, Spain. The molecCuAlaPrN d3efect in gene, accounting for approximately 60% of cases of DMD is deletion of one or more exons. The most common molecular Background. defects in gene in Russia are two missens mutations c.550delA and * Both authors have contributed equally to this work c.598_612del. Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is a clinically and genetically hete- More than thouDsaMnDd DNA samples (1339) of patients diagnosed as DMD rogeneous group of retinal degeneration disorders being one of the major have been analyzed foDr MdeDletions of exons 3, 4, 6, 8, 13, 17, 19, 32, 42-45, 47, causes of genetic blindness. While the RP1 gene is a major genReP r1esponsible 48, 50-53, 60 in gene and in 539 of them (40.25%D)M hDave been revealed for autosomal dominant RP (adRP), it also seems to be a rare cause for the different deletions in gene. 800 patients haCvAeP nNo3 these deletions. aMuetothsoomdsal recessive RP (arRP). However, very few studies for have been DNA samples of 698 patients without deletions in gene have been performed in patients affected with arRP so far. screened for the most frequent mutations in gene and these mu- . Homozygosity mapping or exome sequencing analysis were per- tations were revealed in 34 of them (4.87%). Genotypes was: c.550delA/ formed in three families segregating arRP. A mutational screening was per- c.550delA - 14 patients, c.550delA/N - 15 patients, c.550delA/c.598_612del formed in 241 additional unrelated families for the p.Ser452Stop mutation. - 2 patients, c.598_612del/N - 3 patients. Haplotype analysis was also conducted. Individuals who were homozygous, From Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium summary the allelic frequency of this dRoeusubllets h.eterozygotes or carriers of mutations in RP1, underwent an oph- twoD MmDutations comprised 64%. Using this data we calculated that there thalmic evaluation to establish a genotype-phenotype correlation. have to be 45 patients with LGMD2A among 800 patients without deletions Four novel mutations in RP1 were identified. The new mutati- in gene. So we found that the frequency of LGMD2A among patients on p.Ser542Stop was present in 11/244 (4.5%) of the studied families. www.eshg.org diagnosed as DMD comprise 3.36%. www.eshAgll .cohrrogmosomes harboring this mutation shared the same haplotype. All 304 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 SCN1A patients presented a common phenotype with an early age of onset and a the aim of this study was to search for mutations in in patients with pCroonmclputs mioancsular degeneration while the heterozygote carriers did not show Dravet and Doose syndromes, thus establishing genotype-phenotype cor- any signs of RP. relations using SpCrNed1iActive algorithms to determine potentially deleterious . p.Ser542Stop is a single founder mutation and the most pre- mutations. valent described mutation in the Spanish population. It causes early-onset We performed mutation screening in 15 patients with Dravet syn- RP and is responsible for 4.5% of all cases. Our data suggest that the impli- drome and 13 with Doose syndrome. Eight algorithSmCNs 1wAere used to analyze cation of RP1 in arRP could be underestimated. the possible impact of the mutations in protein function. In addition, MLPA P12.075 was used to detect copy number variations within . Molecular screening of KRT14 common mutations in Iranian patients Twelve mutations were identified in patients with Dravet syndrome. All affected with Epidermolysis bullosa missense mutations were predicted to be deleterious and are mostly loca- M. Mahdavi1, A. Kakavand hamidi1, H. Dehghan1, M. Moghaddam1, N. Hatamnejadian2, ted in the pore region or the C-terminal of the protein. Patients with Doose B. Sedaghati khayyat1, M. Yousefi3, P. Tousi4, A. Ebrahimi1; syndrome showed no mSCuNta1tAions. Moreover, no copy number variants were 1Parseh Medical Genetic Counseling Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Shahid identified. Beheshty University Skin Research Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Shahid beheshti university skin research center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Shahid The high frequency of mutations fouSnCdN i1nA patients with Dravet syn- drome (80%) suggests that molecular testing is particularly useful for in- Beheshti University Skin Research Center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dividuals with this phenotype. In contrast, testing does not seem to be clinically relevant in Doose syndrome. Our strategy for predicting dele- terious effect of mutations using multiple prediction algorithms provided Epidermolysis bullosa (EB) is a heterogenic skin disorder with three classic valuable information, helping clinicians with decision making. Furthermore, clinical forms includes Simplex, dystrophic and Junctional which characte- our results indicate that missense mutations can cause severe phenotypes rized by blisters that follows minor physical trauma .The Simplex form is depending on its location and the type of amino-acid substitution. more common variation which has four subtypes, caused by mutation in P12.079 KRT5 or KRT14.Although the Skin Biopsy is the first step in EB Testing stra- Mutations in PRRT2 cause familial and sporadic cases of Benign tegy, it is needed to confirm and localize the mutation by direct molecular Infantile Epilepsy methods.We aimed to evaluate the KRT14 hot spot exons as a rapid, nonin- L. M. Dibbens; vasive and cost benefit panel test for first step screening of common muta- University of South Australia, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Adelaide, tions in EB affected patients.Methods: About 80 affected patients clinically Australia. diagnosed as EB, were collected and classified clinically so all DNA samples Objective: evaluated blind for selected exons of KRT14 by direct Sequencing method. Result: Molecular screening for KRT14 hot spots revealed that about 25% Benign familial infantile epilepsy (BFIE) is an autosomal do- of affected probands show mutation in selected exons. It is confirmed that minant seizure disorder that occurs in infancy. Seizures begin around 6 these exons beside the other selected hot spots include KRT5, COL7A1 as a months of age and cease by 2 years. In some cases a movement disorder, screening panel could exclude about 40% of EB types.Key words: EB, KRT14, paroxysmal kinesigenic choreoathetosis (PKC), follows in childhood or Sequencing, KRT5, COL7A1 adolescence: this combined disorder is known as infantile convulsions and P12.076 pPRarRoTx2ysmal choreoathetosis (ICCAd) es ynnodvrooPmReR. TW2e have recently shown that Identification of novel mutations in the amiloride-sensitive epithelial the familial disorders BFIE, PKC and ICCA are allelic, caused by mutatiPoRnRsT in2 sodium channel in African patients with cystic fibrosis-like disease . We sought to determine if mutations cause sporadic L. Mutesa1,2, C. Verhaeghe2, J. Vanbellinghen2, D. Veronique2, D. Veronique2, V. Bours2; 1National University of Rwanda, Butare, Rwanda, 2University of Liege, Liege, Belgium. Mbeentihgond isn:f antile epilepsy and whether the phenotypic spectrum of was b roader than initially recognized. 4P4R pRrTo2b ands with infantile-onset seizures, infantile convulsions withmild gastroenteritis and benign neonatal seizures underwent pheno- The defect in chloride and sodium transport in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients tRyepsiunlgt sa:n d sequPeRnRcTin2g . The segregation of mutations identified in is a consequence of CFTR loss of function and/or an abnormal interaction probands was studied. between cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and The recurrent mutation c.649-650insC (p.R217fsX224) was amiloride sensitive epithelial sodium channel (ENaC). Apart from the defec- identifiedd ei nn o1v1o pPrRoRbTa2n ds. Nine probands had a family history consistent tive chloride secretion, loss of functional CFTR results in increased sodium with BFIE or ICCA. Two probands without aP RfaRmT2il y history of seizures or absorption through the ENaC channel in CF patients. PCoKnC chlauds ions: mu tPaRtiRoTn2s. Febrile seizures with or without afebrile We investigated whether mutations in the genes that code for the different seizures were observed in two families with de novmouPtRatRioTn2s . subunits of ENaC gene might result in CF-like disease in patients in whom Mutations in are an important cause of seizures seen only one CFTR gene is mutated, or that carry no mutations at all in the CFTR in infancy. Mutations can be either familial or . mutations are coding region and its exon/intron junctions. We extensively performed ENaC present in >80% of BFIE and >90% ICCA families, but are not a common genes sequencing in these CF-like patients and established the frequency of cause of other forms of infantile epilepsy. Seizures with fever may occur in identified ENaC mutations in a cohort control. BFIE such that it may be difficult to distinguish BFIE from febrile seizures In total, 66 sequence variants in ENaC genes were found in in 60 CF-like in small families. patients. P12.080 Several novel ENaC gene mutations were identified and some of them were NGS in molecular diagnostics of epilepsies. located in highly conserved domains and consistent with a pathophysiolo- L. Minichová1, E. Decker2, M. Hikkelová1, H. Gabriel2, M. Genčík2; gical role. Only three novel mutations including p.V348M and p.W423R in 1MedGene, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2diagenos, Osnabrück, Germany. SCNN1B subunit and p.R180W in SCNN1G were observed once in our pati- ents, but not in controls. The preliminary functional studies using expressi- on in Xenopus laevi oocytes showed that the p.V348M is a gain of function The molecular genetic diagnosis of epilepsy particularly in children is es- mutation with a high amounts (2-30%) functional ENaC activity. sential for precise diagnosis, prognosis and has significant implications for Our data suggest that CF-like syndrome in Africa could be associated with the therapeutic strategy. Until now mutation screening was performed by ENaC mutations. The combination of ENaC and CFTR mutations may play a DGGE, Sanger sequencing and MLPA technique. hitherto unrecognized role in lung diseases. Here we report on a new mutation screening protocol for Dravet syndro- P12.078 me & GEFS+ assoSciCaNte1dA ,g SeCnNes1 Bb,a GseAdB RoGn2 N, GexAtB-GReDneratiPoCnD SHe1q9uencing (NGS) Improving molecular diagnosis of epilepsy by applying multiple using the Roche 454J platform. Our current testing panel includes mutation prediction algorithms analysis of genes SCN1A and . GABRD M. C. Gonsales, P. Preto, M. Montenegro, M. M. Guerreiro, I. Lopes-Cendes; So far, 22% of the patients suspected for Dravet syndrome / GEFS+ harbou- University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. red a mutation in the gene, one patient had a mutation in the SCN1A gene. The spectrum of identified mutations incSluCdNe1dA small deletions, inser- tions, indel mutations, truncatingS CaNnd1 Amissense mutations, mostly located Mutations in the voltage-gated sodium channel α1-subunit gene ( ) in the pore and voltage sensitive region of the protein. We have also have been associated with the spectrum of generalized epilepsy with febrile detected a deletion of the whole gene as well as a large duplication seizures plus, which includes severe phenotypes such as Dravet and Doose by MLPA. Interestingly, in two patients with a severe clinical manifestation syndromes. However, the prognostic value of these mutations and a possible a homozygous and two compound heterozygous mutations were identified, correlation with the different clinical subtypes remain unclear. Therefore, www.eshrges.poerctgively. www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 305 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.083 Mutation spectrum in the CACNA1A gene in 49 patients with episodic Genetic diagnostics based on the NGS platform enables the analysis of mul- ataxia type 2 tiple disease-related genes in parallel, to reduce TAT and the cost of the test C. Sintas1,2,3, O. Carreño1,2,3, R. Corominas1,3,4, C. Toma1,2,3, M. Vila4, N. Fernández- as well and therefore outperforms the conventional Sanger sequencing. Castillo1,2,3, E. Cuenca4, A. Macaya4, B. Cormand1,2,3; P12.081 1Department of Genetics, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut de Biomedicina de la Universitat de Barcelona (IBUB), Barcelona, Spain, 3Center for Mutations of the PCDH19 Gene in 26 Female Patients with Epilepsy Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER)-Institute of Health Carlos M. Gagliardi1,2, M. Sesta3, P. Tarantino1, F. Cavalcanti1, G. Tortorella4, A. Labate5, T. III, Barcelona, Spain, 4Pediatric Neurology Research Group, Vall d’Hebron Research Mirante1, A. Bagala1, A. Quattrone5, A. Gambardella1, G. Annesi1; Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. 1Institute of Neurological Sciences,National Research Council, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiolog Department of Neurology, Pediatric Hospital, Bari, Italy, 4Departement of Neurosciences, Psychiatry and Anaesthesiology University of Messina, Episodic ataxia is an autosomal dominant ion channel disorder characte- Messina, Italy, 5Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro and rized by episodes of imbalance and incoordination. Episodic ataxia type 2 Neuroimaging Research Unit, National Research Council, Germaneto (CZ), Italy. (EA2) features recurrent episodes of vertigo and cerebellar ataxia, lasting from minutes to a few days, with often interictal nystagmus. Many EA2 patients harbor mutations in the CACNA1A gene, encoding the Dravet syndrome (DS), or severe myoclonic epilepsy of infancy (SMEI) is α1A subunit of the P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channel Cav2.1. The a genetically determined encephalopathy mainly caused by de novo muta- vast majority of them are loss-of-function missense or nonsense mutations tions in the SCN1A gene. Recently, Depienne et al identified mutations in leading to decreased channel currents. Recently, CACNA1A exonic deletions the gene encoding protocadherin-19 (PCDH19) in 11 females with epileptic were reported in EA2 using quantitative approaches, such as multiplex liga- encephalophathy of infancy who were negative for mutations in the SCN1A tion dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and quantitative multiplex PCR gene. The PCDH19 gene links to Xq22.1 and this gene contains 6 exons, of of short fluorescent fragments (QMPSF). which the first is unusually large. We performed a mutational screening of the CACNA1A gene, including the We studied 26 female patients from southern Italy with SMEI that were ne- promoter and 3’-UTR regions, in 49 unrelated patients diagnosed with EA2. gative for mutations in SCN1A to investigate the frequency of PCDH19 mu- When point or small indel mutations were not found, we performed MLPA tations in our population. and QMPSF assays to screen for large duplications or deletions. Overall, a The clinical features of patients are seizures onset before 12 months of age, mutational screening by PCR amplification and sequencing allowed iden- mild to severe mental retardation with poor language development ,and ata- tification of 9 point mutations (4 nonsense and 5 missense changes) and a xia. Genomic DNA from the patients was analysed by direct sequencing of 2-bp deletion (predicting a truncated protein), covering 20% of the patients. the PCDH19 gene on an ABI 3130XL Avant automated sequencer. Subsequently, quantitative analysis identified a deletion of exon 35 as a re- In this study, we identified three different heterozygous novel mutations sult of a homologous recombination event between flanking Alu sequences. of PCDH19 gene in 26 patients with SMEI (11,5%). The c.1522_1528del/p. Our data suggest that these variations are disease-causing, although functio- Ile508ProfsX59 novel mutation was identified in an isolated female patient. nal studies are warranted. The second novel mutation identified is c.1649G>C/ p.Arg550Pro; the third P12.084 novel mutation identified is c. 2568C>T/p.Ser856Cys. Does C-terminal deletion in the ALAS2 gene cause x-linked dominant The results of this study indicate that PCDH19 mutatinon is a relatively fre- or recessive protoporphyria? quent cause of epilepsy in Southern Italy. This frequency (11,5%) is compa- V. Brancaleoni, E. Di Pierro, F. Granata, M. D. Cappellini; rable to that reported in previous studies. Dipartimento di Medicina Interna-Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda-Università degli Studi In conclusion molecular testing of PCDH19 should be considered in females di Milano, Milano, Italy. with early-onset FS and/or epilepsy with or without cognitive impairment and family history. P12.082 Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) is an inherited disorder caused by Targeted Next Generation Sequencing as Diagnostic Tool in Epileptic over-proFdEuCctHio n of protoporphyrin IX in the final step of heme synthesis. Disorders Most patients have autosomal-dominant EPP, which requires coinheritance J. Lemke1, E. Riesch2, T. Dorn3, Y. Weber4, H. Lerche4, D. Böhm2, S. Biskup2; of a nuAllL AS2 mutation trans to a hypomorphic allele. Recently a new form 1Division of Human Genetics, University Children’s Hospital, Inselspital, Bern, of X-linked dominant protoporphyria associated FtEoC gHain of function deleti- Switzerland, 2CeGaT GmbH, Tübingen, Germany, 3Swiss Epilepsy Center, Zürich, ons in has been described. ALAS2 Switzerland, 4Department of Neurology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. In this study we re-examined 7 Italian unrelated -negative families for a total of 2A3L sAuSb2jects by sequencing of exon 11 of . In 4 families, 4 males and 5 females carried the deletion c.1706-1709 delAGTG, confirming The epilepsies are a very heterogeneous group of common neurological dis- the role of in protoporphyria phenotype. DiffereAnLtAlyS 2from what was orders comprising many individually rare diseases. Thus, genetic diagnosis previously described (Whatley et al., 2008) we found hieterogeneity of phe- oft remains difficult. With our approach we aim to reveal the genetic basis of notypes beZtwMeYeMn3 f emales: out of five females with the deletion, only epileptic disorders in so far unresolved cases. two showed photosensiitivity. Thus X-inactivation (X) were evaluated by We enriched a panel of 323 epilepsy-associated genes using a custom de- analysis of gene and HUMARA Assay. The symptomatic females sho- signed Agilent SureSelect in solution kit and sequenced on a SOLiD 4 plat- wed extreme skewed X pattern of the wild type allele (95% vs 5%), while form. the other three showed a balanced or a slightly skewed inactivation of thei We screened >50 unknown cases with a broad spectrum of epilepsy pheno- mutated allele. Our results demonstrate that the disease is transmitted as types. We detected causative aberrations in commonly mutated ion channel an X-linked recessive trait and the phenotype depends on the degree of X. genes (e.g. SCN1A, SCN2A) as well as in rarely affected genes (e.g. STXBP1, In one family only the proband carried the deletion indicating a possible the MFSD8). Surprisingly, we detected many mutations in extremely uncommon novo onset of the mFuEtCaHtion that was confirmed by segregation of microsa- genes (e.g. KCTD7, ARHGEF9, KCNJ10, SMS). We also revealed SCN1A mu- tellites. tations in three patients where conventional testing (Sanger sequencing / The mutations in 3 -negative EPP families remain unknown, indicating HRM) failed to detect the mutations. that new gene targets can offer new opportunities for diagnosis. We have successfully established a fast and cost efficient genetic screening P12.085 method for patients with seizure disorders. We were able to uncover the ge- Whole-exome sequencing in patients with clinical diagnosis of netic basis of many so far unresolved cases with epilepsy. We detected mu- Familial Hypercholesterolaemia tations in patients with both clear and unspecific epilepsy phenotypes. We A. C. Alves1,2, M. Bourbon1,2; revealed false negatives in conventional genetic testing methods. Many mu- 1Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal, 2Center for Biodiversity, tations were detected in genes that only in very rare instances have been as- Functional & Integrative Genomics (BioFIG), Lisboa, Portugal. sociated with epileptic disorders. Thus, many rare epilepsy disorders might perhaps be more common but simply underdiagnosed due to unspecific and diffuse phenotypes. Therefore, our approach may contribute in collecting Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) is a monogenic condition caused, in information on both well-known and unacquainted epilepsy disorders and most cases, by mutations in LDLR, APOB and PCSK9. From our previous stu- in revealing their true phenotypic spectrum. dies only 40% of patients have an identifiable mutation so, other mutations in these genes or other gene defects must exist to explain the cause of hyper- cholesterolemia in the remaining families. The main aim of this project was the whole-exome sequencing of 5 index www.eshg.org www.eshg.org306 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 patients with clinical diagnosis of FH (4 without a detectable mutation and OmniExpress) have identified six homozygous region shared by the two af- one patient (P1) with a mutation in LDLR but the genotype did not justified fected members. Among them, a 17Mb region on chromosome 3p24.3p21.3 the phenotype), in order to identify the genetic cause of the hypercholeste- was identified. The two affected cases as well as the mother were sent for rolemia in these patients. exome sequencing at Perkin Elmer service lab. The Agilent SureSelect 50Mb Multiple variants were identified for each patient, more than 15000 per kit was used for exons capture and the sequencing was performed on an sample. The present analysis only refers to variants occurring only in one Illumina HiSeq. A list of candidate genes with rare variants shared by the sample. A total of 6139 were nonsynonymous single-nucleotide substituti- two cases in a homozygous state and heterozygous in the mother was pro- ons, 11740 were synonymous, 283 were frameshift alterations and 73 were duced. The uncovering of the genetic bases of muscular dystrophies serve as stopgain or stoploss alterations. A total of 1566 of the nonsynonymous sub- the essential original building blocks on which successful new therapeutic stitutions were not present in dbSNP. The 639 novel nonsynonymous substi- approaches can be designed. tutions were distributed among 501 genes. P3 has a nonsynonymous altera- P12.088 tion described before in LDLR gene, that was missed before due to technical Next-generation sequencing in genome-wide investigations reveals problem. P1 has a frameshift alteration and P4 has an insertion, both not novel candidates in genetic eye disease described before, that are possible causes of hypercholesterolaemia. Fami- R. V. Jamieson1,2, W. Ng1,2, S. Yousoof1,2, K. Hana Utami3, E. Chew3, F. Collins4, M. Flaherty4, ly studies are being prepared but functional studies are required to prove J. Grigg1,5, E. Liu3, Y. Ruan3, A. Hillmer3, G. Peters4, S. Davila3, V. Cacheux3; pathogenicity. 1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Eye & Developmental Genetics Research, Children‘s Hospital at Westmead & Children‘s Medical Research Institute, Sydney, Exome sequence produces a vast amount of data that needs careful analysis Australia, 3Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 4The Children‘s but it can lead to the discovery of new genes for FH. Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 5Save Sight Institute, Sydney, Australia. P12.086 Evaluation of exome sequencing in genes associated with aortic diseases Many ocular disease including developmental eye conditions such as an- J. Meienberg1,2, A. Patrignani3, M. Okoniewski3, C. Henggeler1,2, E. Arnold1,2, R. Perez1,2, N. terior segment dysgenesis and diseases affecting the retina show marked Mahlberg1,2, N. Amstutz1,2, H. Burri2, F. Dutly4, T. Carrel5, B. Steinmann6, G. Matyas1,2; 1Center for Cardiovascular Genetics and Gene Diagnostics, Schlieren (Zurich), genetic heterogeneity. The underlying genetic causes are unknown in many Switzerland, 2Institute of Medical Molecular Genetics, Schwerzenbach, Switzerland, cases. An understanding of genotype-phenotype correlations is required to 3Functional Genomics Center Zurich, ETH and University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, facilitate improved treatment strategies in these conditions. Next-generati- 4Institute for Medical & Molecular Diagnostics Ltd., IMD, Zurich, Switzerland, 5Clinic on sequencing is a key strategy for assessing structural and sequencing va- for Cardiovascular Surgery, University Hospital, Berne, Switzerland, 6Division of rdiea nntosv oon a genome-wide scale in personalized medicine. We identified two Metabolism, University Children’s Hospital, Zurich, Switzerland. families with balanced chromosomal rearrangements and eye disease, one and one segregating with the disease, indicating pointers to the un- derlying disease genes. For rapid breakpoint identification, we used a mate- Exome sequencing is a combination of next generation sequencing (NGS) and pairdeed -neonvdo-tag sequencing approach. Identification of discordant read pairs the enrichment of all known human protein-coding exons and flanking spli- spanning the breakpoints showed the genomic rearrangements precisely. In ce sites. In addition to qualitative analyses, which can detect point mutations the case with retinitis pigmentosa, a strong novel candidate disea- and small insertions/deletions, exome sequencing data can also be used for se gene with a role in presynaptic neurotransmitter release was transected quantitative sequence analysis in order to detect large insertions/deletions. by the breakpoint. In the familial case with anterior segment dysgenesis, In this study, we have evaluated the qualitative and quantitative properties several candidates were in proximity to the breakpoint and expression re- (i.e. mutation detection rate) of exome seq(uFeBnNci1n)g for different mutation sults from the patient cells and mouse eye tissues have identified a strong (tyTpGeFsB aRn1d, TgGenFBesR. 2T)hese genes are associated with syndromic form(CsO oLf3 rAa1r)e, candidate in eye anterior segment development. Exome target enrichment aortic diseases, such as Marfan syndrome , Loeys-Dietz syndrome sequencing is being carried out for these and other candidates to screen for (ACTA2, M YH11 MY, LaKn)d Ehlers-Danlos syndrome vascular type mutations in other patients with similar eye phenotypes. Our work empha- or with non-syndromic forms such as familial thoracic aortic aneurysms sises the utility of combined genome-wide structural and exomic analyses in , . For this evaluation, DNA samples with known point disease gene identification in genetically heterogenous eye disorders. mutations and small deletions/duplications detected by Sanger sequencing P12.089 as well as large deletions/duplications detected by MLPA were used as tem- Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis developed in visceral plate in exome sequencing. In a first step, we applied Agilent’s in solution leishmaniasis may have genetic etiology sequence capturing of all coding exons and flanking intronic sequences and G. Balta1, F. M. Azik2, A. Gurgey1; performed NGS using a SOLiD4 platform. Exome sequencing data visualized 1Hacettepe University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Division of by the Integrative Genomics Viewer revealed that the mutation detection Pediatric Hematology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Ankara Children‘s Hematology Oncology rate of the used exome sequencing method was lower than that of Sanger Hospital, Department of Pediatric Hematology Diskapi, Ankara, Turkey. sequencing and MLPA, varying between mutation types and genes. Whereas point mutations were successfully detected in enriched exons with suffici- ent read-coverage depth, the used exome sequencing protocol needs to be Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is an immune dysfunction dis- improved for the detection of small deletions and duplications/insertions as order with various etiologies. Familial HLH (FHL) has genetic basis, while well as for the more balanced capturing of exons. acquired HLH develops secondary to infections, malignancies etc. BMT is P12.087 the only curative therapy in FHL whereas HLH symptoms in secondary HLH Exome sequencing of a consanguineous family affected by a subside by the treatment of main cause. HLH may rarely develop secondary congenital muscular dystrophy with hyperlaxity (CMDH). to visceral leishmaniasis (VL). This first study demonstrates that HLH deve- M. Tetreault1,2, M. Vanasse3, B. Brais1,2; loped in VL may actually have genetic etiology. One-year-old only child of a 1Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Ins titute, McGill consanguineous family had abdominal distention and high fever. Leishmania University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Laboratoire de neurogénétique de la motricité, amastigots in BMA led to diagnosis of VL. Liposomal-amphotericin-B thera- Centre d’Excellence en Neuromique de l’Université de Montréal, CRCHUM, Montreal, QC, py resolved symptoms which reappeared subsequently. No amastigots but Canada, 3Clinique des maladies neuromusculaires, Centre de réadaptation Marie-Enfant, hemophagocytosis detected in second BMA. She received continuous HLH- Hôpital Sainte-Justine Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada. 2004 protocol therapy since remissions followed by HLH reactivations and/ or five CNS relapses until she died at age four. HLA matched donor was una- vailable. Haplotype analysis of the family for Perforin, UNC13D, Syntaxin 11 Over the past two decades, there have been major advances in defining the and STXBP2 genes of FHL revealed homozygosity for UNC13D gene. Sequen- genetic bases of congenital muscular dystrophies (CMD). Genetic research cing identified homozygous 627delT frameshift mutation (Thr209fsX40) in has allowed the identification of more than 14 genes responsible for various exon 8, resulting in premature termination of translation 40 amino acids forms of CMDs. Despite the great progress in this field, there are still a signi- downstream. Parents were heterozygous for this pathologic mutation. In ficant percentage of cases for which the mutated gene is unknown. This is conclusion, HLH in this patient did not develop secondary to VL, but FHL, particularly the case for milder forms. Novel genomic techniques like Next- triggered by leishmania infection, most probably emerged at an earlier time. Generation DNA Sequencing (NGS) open new avenues in the elucidation of Clinicians must be aware that HLH developed in VL may have genetic etiolo- genetic defects causing monogenic disorders such as CMD. We recruited a gy and leismaniasis may mask the diagnosis of primary disease, which may consanguineous French-Canadian family from Southwestern Quebec affec- eventually lead to loss of the patient due to tardiness in proper therapy and ted by CMDH. A previous microsatellite genome wide-scan (GWS) has linked BMT. Supported by TUBITAK (Project No:105S386-SBAG3193). this family to 32cM region on chromosome 3p23-21. Most obvious candi- date genes have been rule out in this region. A SNPs genome scan (Illumina www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 307 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.090 Molecular analysis of MEFV gene mutations in Iranian patients with FMR1 Familial Mediterranean Fever High-Resolution Melt analysis can be used in a laboratory developed (LD) R. Najafi1, M. Azad1, M. Rostami1, H. Imanian1, H. Najmabadi1,2; protocol to determine the overall methylation status of the promoter. 1Kariminejad-Najmabadi Pathology & Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, One possible High-Resolution Melt protocol was evaluated in experiments 2Research Center, University of Social Welfare & Rehabilitation Sciences, Tehran, Islamic testing the methylation status of 20 clinical samples (4 premutation males, Republic of Iran. 5 premutation females, 4 full mutation males, and 7 full mutation females) for which the results were compared to methylation values estimated from Southern blot results. Additional clinical and Coriell DNA samples were te- Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal recessive disorder cha- sted that included normal, premutation and full mutation allFeMleRs 1from both rMacEteFrVized by recurrent attacks of fever and painful inflammatory manifesta- genders. Our results showed qualitative methylation values were in line with tions in the abdomen, chest or joints. The marenostrin/pyrin-encoding gene those observed by other methods. A PCR-based LD assay for methyla- ( ), mapped to 16p13.3, has been proposed as a candidate gene for FMF tion would complement other PCR-based expansion sizing and screening LD on the basis of the identification of mutations clustered in M10E FexVo ns. tests to allow both expansion and methylation status of patient samples to In this study we used reverse-hybridization (FMF StripAssay, ViennaLab be rapidly determined. Diagnostics, Vienna, Austria) to analyze the following 12 mutations: P12.094 E148Q, P369S, F479L, M680I (G/C), M680I (G/A), I692del, M694V, M694I, Examination of FMR1 allele size in women with primary ovarian K695R, V726AM, EAF7V4 4S and R761H in 331 Iranian patients, who were refer- insufficiency from the Basque Country red to us based on clinical criteria indicating FMF. M. Barasoain1, G. Barrenetxea2, I. Huerta1, M. Télez1, A. Carrillo2, C. Pérez2, E. Ortiz- We identified mutations in 33.8% of our patients. Out of these, 66.5% Lastra3, J. González3, B. Criado4, I. Arrieta1; were located in exon 10, while the remaining 33.5% were found in other 1Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology. Faculty of exons. The most common mutations were p.M694V (20%), followed by Science and Technology. University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain, 2Center for p.E148Q (18%), p.V726A (9%), and p.M680I (c.2040G>C) (3%), which Reproductive Medicine and Infertility Quirón Bilbao, Bilbao, Spain, 3Department of Medical-surgical Specialities. Faculty of Medicine. University of the Basque Country, suggests a heterozygote advantage of these first three mutations in Iran. Bilbao, Spain, 4Department of Genetics. Cooperativa de Ensino Superior Politecnico e IMnE 4F5V.9% of patients we could not identify any mutation that could explain Universitario (CESPU), Porto, Portugal. their clinical status; therefore, we plan the comprehensive sequencing of gene to elucidate the cause of their disease. Among thesMe pEaFtVie nts, for the first time we report on a novel disease causing compound heterozygote FMR1 premutation alleles (55-199 CGG repeats) have been associated with mutation (R202Q) in exon 2 and (c.1588-69 G>A) in IVS-5 of gene in primary ovarian insufficiency (POI). More recently some studies have shown one family which is followed by early onset FMF. As disease-causing mutati- that alleles in the intermediate range (45-54 CGG repeats) and in the high ons these two mutations should be further investigated in more patients in end of the normal range (≥35 CGG repeats) are also related with the deve- different populations. lopment of this condition. A group of 31 women with POI from the Basque P12.091 Country has been analyzed to study the prevalence of alleles in the premuta- Homologous recombination - a pool for FA candidate genes tion, intermediate and the high end of the normal range. Considering the 35- K. Helsper, B. Schuster, K. Knies, D. Schindler; 54 CGG repeat range, the number of women carrying at least one allele with University of Wuerzburg, Department of Human Genetics, Wuerzburg, Germany. >35 CGG repeats was statistically higher in patients (16.3% vs. 6.67%). To make a more accurate analysis the patient group was classified into two ca- tegories, women with overt POI (19.36%) that presented with amenorrhea Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare autosomal or X-linked recessive genetic dis- for at least four months and FSH levels >10 IU/L and women with occult order, characterized by typical physical abnormalities, bone marrow failure POI (80.64%) that presented with decreased fecundity and regular menses. and an increased risk for malignancies. Because of a DNA repair defect FA When comparing alleles with >35 CGG repeats, the prevalence of these al- cells show elevated spontaneous and in particular MMC inducible chromo- leles was statistically higher among women with overt POI, but not among somal instability. To date, fifteen FA genes have been reported. The corre- women with occult POI. The data of this study suggests that carrying more sponding proteins are known to be members of the FA/BRCA network that than 35 CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene might be related with the develop- promotes DNA interstrand crosslink repair by homologous recombination ment of overt POI, but not with occult POI. (HR). P12.095 A small subset of FA patients still cannot be assigned to established com- Mosaicism for a normal allele, a full mutation and a deletion involving plementation groups. Therefore, we screened cell lines from those patients the whole CGG repeat in the FMR1 gene for defects in candidate genes involved in HR. These potential FA genes in- R. C. Niessen1, K. A. Kooi1, K. L. I. van Gassen2, R. J. Sinke1, R. Hordijk1; cluded MUS81, SFPQ and MMS22L. MUS81 is the structure-specific endonu- 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, clease of the MUS81/EME1 heterodimer that interacts directly with the FA Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen protein SLX4 (FANCP). The splicing factor related protein SFPQ cooperates Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. with RAD51D, a paralog of RAD51C (FANCO), and might play a role in ho- mologous recombination. The third candidate gene is MMS22L. In complex with TONSL, it accumulates at stalled replication forks and is required for We report on a 29-year-old female who wants to start a family. She was re- efficient formation of RAD51 foci after DNA damage. ferred for D NFMA Ran1alysis to see what risk she carries for having offspring with The screening methods included Sanger sequencing and Western blotting fragile X syndrome, because her mother carried a premutation of 80 CGG and so far revealed no pathogenic mutations. More unassigned FA cell lines units in the gene. and additional FA candidate genes will be included in our screen, since can- DNA was isolated from lymphocytes. PCR and length analysis on an automa- didate gene approaches have been successful in the past for the identificati- tFeMdR s1equencer identified only a normal CGG repeat of 29 CGG units. Further on of the FA genes BRCA2/FANCD1, PALB2/FANCN and SLX4/FANCP. Southern analysis revealed a mosaic pattern, that indicated presence of an P12.093 allele with a deletion next to a normal allele and alleles with a full mu- Evaluation of a Laboratory Developed High Resolution Melt Assay tation. Sequence analysis indeed confirmed presence of a 2475 bp deletion Design for Determination of Methylation Status of the FMR1 Promoter that covered the whole CGG repeat and transcription initiation site until 45 A. Hamilton, C. L. Sigua, D. A. Bost; bFMp Rpr1o ximal of the translation start cod on. Celera, Alameda, CA, United States. Similar deletions have been reported and these result in inactivation of the gene and absence of the FMR1protein. Our patient therefore has a FMR1 50% risk of transmitting eitherF Ma Rfu1ll mutation allele or the deletion allele, Fragile X Syndrome (FXS), a common cause of intellectual disability, is in- either of whichF McoRu1l d cause fragile X syndrome in her offspring. hFMerRit1ed via expansion of the trinucleotide (CGG) repeat in the gene. It is important to note that the deletion allele was not detectable with FXS is associated with methylation of the expansion and the neighboring the Amplidex PCR kit (Asuragen, Austin, USA). Since recently, we use promoter, preventing transcription. Fragile X diagnostic testing incor- this new method as an alternative to Southern analysis in DNA testing for porating Southern analysis can detect expansion of the repeat region and fragile X syndrome. We are now comparing various techniques to decide evaluate methylation using a methylation-sensitive restriction digest, but upon an optimal method that can be offered for prenatal testing. the process is time-consuming and only queries a small number of CpG si- tes flanking the expansion. We rFeMceRn1tly developed and tested a PCR primer pair capable of amplifying both methylated and unmethylated bisulfite-con- verted DNA, for a region of the promoter incorporating 22 CpG sites. PCR amplification of bisulfite converted DNA with an intercalating dye and www.eshg.org www.eshg.org308 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.096 Fraser syndrome: Implementation and first results of FRAS1 molecular analysis at the University Hospital of Clermont-Ferrand, neuromuscular disorder. It is associated with a contraction of D4Z4 macro- France satellite repeats on chromosome 4q35. The copy number variation of the C. Nachury1, D. Bozon2, P. Dechelotte3, C. Francannet4, I. Creveaux1,5; D4Z4 repeat varies between 11-100 copies in the normal population and 1CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Molecular Biology Laboratory, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 1-10 in FSHD patients. 2CHU Lyon, Centre de Biologie Est, Lyon, France, 3CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Pathology Chromosome 10q26 contains a highly homologous repeat array. On both Laboratory, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 4CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Medical Genetics, chromosomes, the array can be embedded in two major haplotypes - A and Clermont-Ferrand, France, 5Université d‘Auvergne, GenHotel-Auvergne, Clermont- B, but only repeat contractions on the 4qA haplotype are associated with Ferrand, France. the disease. GenomicVi- Tsihoen standard method for FSHD diagnostics is Southern blotting, but in about 20% of patients thine sFitSuHD genotype remains unclear. Therefore, Fraser syndrome is a rare disease, with autosomal recessive inheritance. It has designed a diagnostic test for FSHD based on Molecular Combing is a malformative syndrome, which most frequent signs are cryptophtalmos and fluorescence hybridisation. and syndactyly. They are associated with other anomalies like craniofacial, Molecular Combing is a single-molecule analysis that enables direct vi- genital, urinary or lung malformations. The expression is variable. Clinical sualization of multiple whole genomes and the detection of large genome diagnosis criteria have been defined by Van Haelst in 2007. Currently, prena- rearrangements. Long DNA molecules are combed onto a solid surface in tal diagnosis uses ultrasonography during the second quarter of pregnancy parallel alignment with uniform stretching allowing direct sizing of fluo- and is difficult without family history orientation. Two genes, FRAS1 and rescence signals. Probes have been developed to visualize the FSHD-locus FREM2, have been identified as responsible for Fraser syndrome. Only 2 dif- as a three-coloured bar code in order to differentiate the repeats and the ferent mutations have been described in FREM2 and 23 in FRAS1. four haplotypes. In this work, our initial goal was to identify, by PCR-sequencing, causative In our diagnostic lab this new technique has been ß-tested for diagnostic mutations of Fraser syndrome patients from eight families who were dia- purposes. DNA of 30 suspected FSHD patients has been analysed by Mole- gnosed on clinical criteria. We analyzed FRAS1 in priority. cular Combing, results have been compared to the corresponding Southern We found in those patients 4 nonsense mutations, 2 intronic mutations af- blots and show very good accordance. fecting splicing, one 1-bp duplication and finally 4 new sequence variations Molecular Combing provides all molecular data required for the diagnosis of (intronic and exonic) of unknown significance. We specified the value of FSHD in a single experiment. these 4 sequence variations using bioinformatic algorithms and functional P12.099 tests based on transfection of minigene constructs in HeLa cells. Using these Analysis of the Glucocerebrosidase Gene Mutations in 32 Turkish tools, a missense mutation was shown to induce exon skipping. Gaucher Patients Analysis of FRAS1 gene provides the clinician a molecular confirmation of E. Karaca, S. Kalkan, H. Onay, A. Aykut, M. Coker, O. Cogulu, F. Ozkinay; Fraser syndrome diagnosis in about 40% of cases. This further allows the Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey. possibility to offer the parents an early antenatal molecular diagnosis for a future pregnancy. We are now considering the development of the analysis of coding exons of FREM2 gene to increase the coverage rate. Gaucher disease (GD) is the most frequent autosomal recessive lysosomal P12.097 glycolipid storage disease and is caused by acid b-glucosidase (E.C.3.2.1.45) Study of FRAXE-MR in intellectually disabled individuals referred for enzyme deficiency. Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA; MIM# Fragile-X Syndrome testing in Portugal 606463; GenBank accession no. J03059.1) cause Gaucher‘s disease. The GBA P. Jorge1, I. Marques1, R. L. Gonçalves2, M. Gonçalves-Rocha3, R. Santos1; (7.5 kb) gene contains 11 exons and 10 introns and is located at chromoso- 1UI&D, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto de Magalhães – Porto, Instituto Nacional me 1q21 locus which consist of several genes. A highly homologous GBA de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, INSA I.P., Porto, Portugal, 2Genética Médica, Hospital de Dona Etefânia-CHLC, EPE, Lisboa, Portugal, 3UME, Centro de Genética Médica Dr. Jacinto pseudogene is 16 kb downstream from the functional gene. More than 200 de Magalhães – Porto, Instituto Nacional de Saúde Dr. Ricardo Jorge, INSA I.P., Porto, mutations such as subtitutions, splicing alterations, partial and total deleti- Portugal. ons insertions, including complex mutations due to genetic rearrangements between the functional gene and pseudogene have been defined in the FMR1 , AFF2 ( GBA gene (2). In this study we report the molecular characterization of 32 Among the genetic causes involvAeRdX in X-linked intellectual disability ( XLID), unrelated Turkish GD patients having different types of GD. The allelic fre- pathogenic variations in FMR1 (FragAiFleF 2Mental Retardatiopno l1ym)orphic AreFp4e/- quencies of GBA gene mutations in Turkish patients are reported. The most tFiMtivRe2 r efagmioinlys member 2) and (Aristaless Related Homeobox) genes prevalent mutations are N370S and L444P accounting for 50 % and 35.48 emerge as main causes. and genes contain ( % in our GD patient groups respectively. We identified one novel genetic ) a repeat polymorphism whic h is susceptible to suffer dyna- alteration which was a missense change L385R that are associated with the mic mutation, a proceAssF Ft2h at may induce pathogenic expansions. FRAXE- severe phenotype of type II GD. Molecular genetic analysis of the GBA gene associated mental retardation (FRAXE-MR)is mainly a non-syndromic form in GD is important for genotype phenotype correlation and also will provide of XLID and is due to gene silencing as a consequence of 5’UTR-CCG reliable genetic counseling in families at high risk for GD. expansion or gene mutations. A CCG triplet number up to 30 repeats is con- P12.100 sAiFdFe2r normal, while full expansion (>200 repeats) and hypermethylation of Prevalence of 35delG of the GJB2 gene in hereditary, prelingual, CCG cluster results in FRAXE-MR. nonsyndromic hearing loss in Mexican population. variants are not frequently sought. An implementation of a cost-effec- R. Rivera-Vega1, L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta1, H. Urueta-Cuellar1, R. Hernandez-Viquez1, A. tive strategy (co-amplification with other ID genes)A rFeFp2resents an improve- Totomoch1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias2; ment in molecular diagnosis with consequent gains in clinical genetic dia- 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. gnosis and counseling. Herein we present results of molecular analysis in a subpopulation of 5000 intellectually-disabled individuals with primary referral for FRAXA screening, by a novel multiplex-PCR strategy. This ap- Hearing impairment is the most common sensory disorder. About 1/1000 proach accurately detected normal to pre-mutated alleles. A pre-mutated children is affected by pre-lingual deafness. Several gene mutations have allele with 68 CCG was identified and further characterized by Southern blot been associated with recessive hearing impairment. The GJB2 gene muta- analysis in order to exclude methylation and/or repeatA nFuFm2 ber mosaics, as tions are the most frequent cause of hereditary, prelingual, non syndromic well as PCR failure. Possible phenotype-genotype correlations based on the hearing loss; they present an autosomal recessive inheritance. More than 90 clinical daAtaF Fo2f one previously diagnosed family with full expansion, GJB2 mutations affecting Cx26 expression have been reported and linked the newly characterized pre-mutation carrier and one case with a new vari- to hearing loss. Up to 85% of abnormal Cx26 expression may be attributed ant of the gene will be investigated and presented. to the 35delG mutation. This type of mutation showed a high prevalence P12.098 among Caucasian populations. Prevalence of GJB2 mutations in the Chinese Molecular Combing for the Diagnosis of FSHD population seems to be different, it appears that 35delC is the most frequent M. Larsen1, G. Emmert1, C. Chaix2, N. Frankenbach3, P. Walrafen3, C. R. Müller1, S. Rost1; 1Department of Human Genetics, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany, cause of recessive hearing impairment among this population; similarly, 2Département de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital d’Enfants de la Timone, AP-HM, and Japanese families with bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, also present INSERM UMR_S 910, Université de la Méditerranée, Marseille, France, 3Genomic Vision, the 235delC defect, which seems to be the most prevalent mutation affec- Paris, France. ting Cx26 expression among this population. Previous investigations show ethnic association to other specific GJB2 mutations, per example R143W mutations among African populations or 167delT among Ashkenazi Jews. Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is the third most common Objective: To identify the prevalence of 35delC GJB2 mutation in a sample of www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 309 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.103 Mild haemophilia A in a female patient with an Xq27.3-q28 deletion Mexican patients. Methods The study included 96 patients from 37 non-re- and a missense mutation in the F8 gene lated families with hereditary, prelingual-nonsyndromic-hearing-loss, all of M. Zimmermann1, I. Nanda1, V. Aumann2, J. Oldenburg3, C. R. Müller1, S. Rost1; them were analyzed through PCR and DNA sequencing from genomic DNA. 1Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany, 2Magdeburg University Children‘s Results and Discussion: We found in 7 families the presence of 35delC both Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Institute of Experimental Haematology and Transfusion in heterozygous and homozygous state. We discuss the prevalence of this Medicine, Bonn, Germany. mutations in the Mexican sample and compare it with the data previously reported in other populations. Haemophilia A is an X-linked recessive bleeding disorder which is rarely re- ported in females. The main reason for the manifestation of haemophilia A P12.101 in females is due to heterozygous mutations in the F8 gene combined with Identification of a de novo splice-site mutation in SLC2A1 gene causing non-random inactivation of the X chromosome. Glut1 deficiency syndrome in a Turkish patient Here, we present a 7-year-old girl with mild haemophilia A (FVIII:c 20%) I. Karacan1, S. Uğur İşeri1, H. Maraş2, Ö. Özdemir1, F. N. Tuncer1, E. Yücesan1, B. Kara2, U. Özbek1; whose brother shows a hemizygous missense mutation (p.Met2164Val) in 1Department of Genetics, Institute for Experimental Medicine, Istanbul University, exon 23 of the F8 gene and suffers also from a mild haemophilia A (FVIII:c Istanbul, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, 18%). Kocaeli, Turkey. Direct sequencing of exon 23 in the young girl revealed the same missense mutation as detected in her brother but strikingly it was present in homo- zygous form. Turner syndrome could be excluded by analyses of polymor- Glucose transporter-1 deficiency syndrome (Glut1-DS) is a metabolic disor- phic markers on Xq13, Xq22 and Xq28. Multiplex ligation-dependent pro- dSLeCr 2cAha1raGcLteUrTiz1ed by early onset infantile seizures, movement disorders and be amplification (MLPA) revealed a large heterozygous deletion involving a wide range of neurologic abnormalities. Heterozygous mutations in gene the whole F8 gene and adjacent control regions. In order to determine the ( SL)C 2hAav1e been implicated in Glut1-DS, which encodes Glut1-a extension of the deletion an analysis for copy number variation was per- major glucose transporter in the mammalian blood-brain barrier. formed on a 300 K Illumina Cyto SNP-12 array. Thereby, a large deletion of Weanalyzed in a Turkish patient with early onset infantile seizu- approx. 8.9 Mb comprising about 200 genes on Xq27.3-q28 was detected res, microcephaly, intellectual disability, ataxia, dyskinetic cerebral mo- in this girl. Additionally, almost complete inactivation of the X chromosome vement disorder and hypoglycorrhachia (cerebrospinal fluid (CSSFL)C g2lAu1- containing the large deletion could be demonstrated by fragment analysis cose concentration:31mg/dl; normal:>40mg/dl and CSF/blood glucose after methylation sensitive digestion. ratio:0.36; normal:>0.45). All exons and exon-intron boundaries of Except for the manifestation of haemophilia A the contiguous deletion is were PCR amplified in ten fragments from genomic DNA and screened for supposed to have no or only mild phenotypic consequences for the girl her- mutations by direct DNA sequencing. We detected a novel heterozygous spli- self in contrast to her potential male offspring: a male fetus carrying this ce site mutation (NM_006516.2:c.680-1G>T) adt eth neo lvaost nucleotide of intron deletion may not be viable. 5. Neither the parents nor the 5 healthy sisters of the patient carried this P12.104 mutation indicating that mutation has arisen . This novel mutation Genetic screening of MYH7 and MYBPC3 genes in Russian HCM analyzed using high resolution melting assay iwna ssi lnicoot detected in a control patients group of 92 samples selected from the general population. The theoretical N. A. Ogorodnikova, L. Rizun, U. Frolova, S. Dzemeshkevich, E. Zaklyazminskaya; consequences of mutation predicted with an splice site prediction Russian Research Centre of Surgery named by Petrovski, Moscow, Russian Federation. tool; Human Splicing Finder (HSF). HSF analysis resulted with broken ac- ceptor splice site with 33.57% loss of scoring where scoring decrease >10% was considered pSrLeCd2iAct1i ve of splicing alterations. Background: Primary hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is inherited We report a novel mutation that possibly creates an altered splice-site. Ana- cardiac disorder characterized by clinical and genetic heterogeneity. Muta- lysis of relative transcript levels by real-time quantitative RT-PCR tions in MYBPC3 and MYH7 genes, encoding myosin-binding protein C and shows a decreased level in the patient suggesting a pathogenic effect of this myosin heavy chain beta, respectively, account of 40% of HCM cases. Some mutation on the transcript level, which will further be analyzed. MYBPC3 and MYH7 mutation carriers have a high risk of sudden cardiac P12.102 death (SCD). Investigating the functional role of GPM6A as a possible intellectual Methods: By now panel of 30 patients with primary HCM have been formed. disability gene We have screened coding and adjacent intronic areas of MYBPC3and MYH7 A. Gregor1, J. M. Kramer2, I. Schanze1,3, A. Reis1, A. Schenck2, C. Zweier1; by direct sequencing in 15 patients. Medical examination: personal and fa- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, milial history collection, physical examination, standard ECG, 24-h HM and 2Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Echo-CG. Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Results:We have found 3 mutations (S217G, Q1233ter, V896) in 3 probands Magdeburg, Germany. inMYBPC3 gene (20% of cohort screened), and 2 HCM-associated polymor- phisms (S236G, R326Q). Two mutations (R403W, R249Q) in 2 probands (13,3%) were found in MYH7 gene. In a patient with mild cognitive impairment/leGaPrMni6nAg disabilities and beha- Patient carried heterozygous MYBPC3 variants R326Q and Q1233ter had vioral anomalies, molecular karyotyping with an Affymetrix 6.0 SNPG PaMrr6aAy early manifestation, fast progression and positive SCD familial history. Pa- revealed a de novo copy number gain of the gene. Subsequent ex- tient with mild form of HCM had heterozygous S217G mutation in MYBPC3 pression analysis in patient’s blood lymphocytes showed increased gene shown previously as leading to dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) or HCM expression in the patient compared to healthy controls. Glycoprotein M6a (with SCD) both. Carrier of heterozygous variants S236G in gene MYBPC3 (GPM6A) is a transmembrane protein of the PLP/DM20 protein family and R249Q in gene MYH7, 4 y.o., male, had a hypertrophy of left ventricular whose expression is restricted to neurons. In rats GPM6A has already been and interventricular septum. His sister with HCM died suddenly at age of 14 implicated in neurite outgrowth, neuronal differentiation and synapse for- y.o. Mutation carrier R249Q has a high risk of SCD. mation. M6a has also been implicated in stress response in different animal Conclusion: Screening of mutations in MYBPC3 and MYH7 genes patients is models. reasonable and cost-effective in HCM patients. We employed Drosophila melanogaster as a model organism to further elu- P12.105 cidate its role in stress response, synapse formation and behavior. Using the High throughput technologies aimed at the identification of new UAS-Gal4 system we analyzed the function of the Drosophila homologue m6 candidate genes in Italian and Qatari population after tissue specific knockdown and overexpression with different m6 RNAi g. girotto1, M. Alkowari2, K. Abdulhadi3, F. Faletra1, D. Vozzi1, D. Licastro4, R. Siam2, N. and m6 overexpressing lines. We found elevated expression levels of m6 in Najjar2, R. Badii2, P. Gasparini1; fly brains of L3 larvae and adult flies after heat shock stress treatment, which 1Dep.Rep.Sciences,Dev.Pub.Health;IRCCS-Burlo Garofolo-Children Hospital-University further increased with heat shock elongation. These findings indicate that of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Hamad Medical Corporation, m6 expression is also stress responsive in flies. Effects of different m6 levels Doha, Qatar, Doha, Qatar, 3ENT Division, Hamad Medical Corporation, Doha, Qatar, on survival time upon starvation and oxidative stress are also being studied. Doha, Qatar, 4CBM scrl., Basovizza, Trieste, Italy, Trieste, Italy. Additionally we are currently investigating the role of m6 in synapse forma- tion by dissecting L3 larvae to analyze various parameters of the synapses of neuromuscular junctions and a possible role in complex learning and me- Hereditary Hearing loss (HLL) is a common disorder accounting for at least mory processes by performing the Courtship conditioning assay. 60% of prelingual deafness. Most cases (70%) are non-syndromic (NSHHL) with mutations in GJB2 and GJB6 genes playing a major role worldwide, and www.eshg.org www.eshg.org310 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 GJB2 almost no other common genes have been identified. Regarding the Qata- D13S1854)were identified in any of the investigated Cypriot non-syndromic ri population, a molecular screening for these common genes/mutations hearing loss patients. This work confirms that the 35delG mutation is clearly demonstrates that they accounts for a minor proportion of NSHHL an important pathogenic mutation for hearing loss in the Cypriot population cases in this population. Thus, these findings strongly suggest that many ge- and that the underlying molecular basis of autosomal recessive non-syndro- nes for NSHHL await identification. To increase our knowledge on the mole- mic deafness in Cyprus is genetically relatively homogeneous . This finding cular bases of HHL in these populations, an extensive use of high throughput will be used towards the effective diagnosis of non-syndromic hearing loss, technologies such as High Density arrays (i.e for linkage data) and Next Ge- improve genetic counseling and used as a potential therapeutic platform in neration Sequencing has been planned. the future for the affected patients in Cyprus. Six Italian families (dominant inheritance) and 5 Qatari families (recessive P12.108 inheritance), all negative for the presence of mutations in the most common Nonsense Mutations In SMPX, Encoding A Protein Responsive To hearing genes, have been selected. High density SNPs arrays have been uti- Physical Force, Result In X-Chromosomal Hearing Loss lized to define a minimum number of candidate loci, to be applied in the fil- A. K. Huebner1, M. Gandia2, P. Frommolt3, A. Maak1, E. M. Wicklein4, H. Thiele3, J. tering phase of NGS data. Whole exome sequencing data have been obtained Altmüller3, F. Wagner5, A. Vinuela2, L. A. Aguirre2, F. Moreno2, H. Maier6, I. Rau7, S. and confirmed by Sanger sequencing. After filtering (dbSNP and in-house Gießelmann1, G. Nürnberg3, A. Gal7, P. Nürnberg3, C. A. Hübner1, I. del Castillo2, I. Kurth8,7; 1University Hospital Jena, Institute of Human Genetics, Jena, Germany, 2Unidad database), 2 new candidate genes have been identified in the Qatari popu- de Genetica Molecular, Hospital Universitario Ramon y Cajal, Madrid, Spain, lation, while data on the Italian samples are still under the validation step. 3Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, These results will definitely increase our knowledge of new deafness genes, 4Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Klinik für Neurologie, Hamburg, Germany, and further confirm the importance of such new technologies for disease 5ATLAS-Biolabs, Berlin, Germany, 6Medical University Hannover, Department of gene identification. Otolaryngology, Hannover, Germany, 7Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, P12.106 Institut für Humangenetik, Hamburg, Germany, 8University Hospital Jena, Institute of Human Genetics, Functional Genetics, Jena, Germany. Different contribution of DFNB loci in Hearing Impaired pedigrees in Iranian population N. Jalilian1, M. A. Tabatabaiefar2, A. Ahmadi3, M. R. Noori-Daloii1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Hereditary hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder in humans Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, School of and is characterized by an extraordinary allelic and nonallelic genetic he- Medicine, Ahvaz Jundishapur University of Medical Sciences,, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of terogeneity. X-chromosomal hearing impairment represents only a minor Iran, 3Center for Genetic Counseling,Welfare and Rehabilitation Organization,, Birjand, fraction of all cases. In a study of a Spanish family the locus for one of the Islamic Republic of Iran. X-chromosomal forms was assigned to Xp22 (DFNX4). We mapped the di- sease locus in the same chromosomal region in a large German pedigree with X-chromosomal nonsyndromic hearing impairment by using genome- Hearing loss is the most common sensory disorder. The autosomal recessive wide linkage analysis. Males presented with postlingual hearing loss and non-syndromic form (ARNSHL) accounts for 72% of monogenic HL. DFNB1 onset at ages 3-7, whereas onset in female carriers was in the second to is the most common cause of ARNSHL in many populations (50%) including third decades. Targeted DNA capture with next-generation sequencing de- Iran (20%). The fact that many loci are involved together with the hetero- tected a nonsense mutation in the small muscle protein, X-linked (SMPX) of geneity of the status, necessitate studying further loci in various IraGnJBia2n affected individuals. We identified another nonsense mutation in SMPX in ethnic groups. Fifteen largGeJ Bd6eaf pedigrees originating from the Southern patients from the Spanish family who were previously analyzed to map DF- Khorasan province of Iran were selected. The families analyzed for , NX4. SMPX encodes an 88 amino acid, cytoskeleton-associated protein that exon I & II, mutations and large deletions (D13S1830, D13S1854). Pe- is responsive to mechanical stress. The presence of Smpx in hair cells and digrees negative for GJB2 mutations were then subject to linkage analysis supporting cells of the murine cochlea indicates its role in the inner ear. The for loci DFNB2, DFNB3, DFNB4, DFNB7/11, DFNB9, DFNB21 & DFNB59. nonsense mutations detected in the two families suggest a loss-of-function Individuals were genotyped for STR markers using touch-dowGnJ PBC2R-PAGE. mechanism underlying this form of hearing impairment. Results obtained DFNB4, DFNB3, DFNB21 & DFNB59 have been analyzed and the project is after heterologous overexpression of SMPX proteins were compatible with proceeding for other loci. Three out of the 15 families showed mutati- this assumption. Because responsivity to physical force is a characteristic ons. One family carried homozygous c.35delG mutation. The other pedigree feature of the protein, we propose that long-term maintenance of mechani- carried two different mutations; One patient was heterozygous for c.231G>A cally stressed inner-ear cells critically depends on SMPX function. while another carried a heterrodzygous c.380 G>A mutation. The second alle- P12.109 les were not detected. The 3 pedigree showed heterozygote mutation of Transthyretin-related familial amyloid polyneuropathy in Bulgaria p.V27I+E114G/wt . GJB6 deletions were not detected. One family showed A. Todorova1,2, S. Sarafov3, A. Kirov1,2, T. Todorov1,2, M. Gospodinova4, V. Guergelcheva3, V. linkage to DFNB3 and the remaining did not show linkage to the studied loci. Mitev1, I. Tournev3; Our results once again emphasize the heterogeneity of HL among different 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Iranian ethnic groups .These results could provide further insight into the Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of etiology of HL and may lead to better genetic diagnostics & counseling. This Neurology, Alexandrovska Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic of study proceeds with more loci and more families. Cardiology, Alexandrovska Hospital, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. P12.107 The genetic basis of non-syndromic hearing loss in Cyprus C. Costi1, C. Shammas1, V. Anastasiadou1, G. Tanteles1, E. Spanou1, Y. Kyamides2, V. Transthyretin-related Familial Amyloid Polyneuropathy (TTR-FAP) is a he- Neocleous1, L. A. Phylactou1; reditary amyloidosis, caused by amyloid formation and destabilization of 1The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Nicosia General the transthyretin tetramer. Hospital, Nicosia, Cyprus. The disease is autosomal dominant, caused by mutations in the TTR gene. GJB2 The majority of the described cases concern small kindred or sporadic pa- tients. The TTR mutation p.Val30Met is the most common one and only this Mutations in the (Connexin 26) gene are responGsiJbBl2e for mGoJBre6 than half mutation has been reported in large family cases, so far. of all cases of pre-lingual recessive inherited non-syndromic deafness in Eu- We report on 45 TTR-FAP patients from 26 Bulgarian families. The restricti- rope. This study presents a mutation analysis of the and genes in ve cardiomyopathy and the progressive polyneuropathy are the most typical 104 Cypriot patients with sensorineural non-syndromic heariGnJgB 2loss com- clinical findings. patible with recessive inheritance. Samples from patients were screened We found endemic region in the south-western part of the country, where for the IVS1+1G splice mutation and the cGoJdBi2ng exon 2 of the gene in- 80.7% of the patients carry the mutation c.325G>C; p.Glu89Gln, while the cluding also the deletions del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6-D13S1854). worldwide most common mutation p.Val30Met was detected only once. In- Twenty seven patients were verified with mutations in both alleles and terestingly, one patient from this region was compound heterozygous for with 35delG as the most dominating one, accounting for 76.3% (45 out of the mutations p.Val30Met and p.Glu89Gln. The clinical symptoms are typi- 59 mutated alleles), followed by p.R184P (6.9%), p.V37I (1.7%), p.E47stop cal, although the age of first symptoms is five years earlier in comparison to (1.7%), p.L90P (1.7%), delE120 (1.7%), 167delT (1.7%) and p.V178A the average age. On the other hand, one patient was a 62 years old carrier of (1.7%). Additionally, five patients with severe sensorineural hearing loss the mutation p.Glu89Gln without any clinical history. were detected only in the heterozygote state. Three of these patients were In summary, FAP encompasses complex phenotype with marked variability heterozygoGuJsB f6or p.V153I, a fourth was hete(rGoJzBy6g-oDu1s3 fSo1r8 p3.V0)37I and lastly a within a single family. The screening for mutations in the TTR gene should fifth for the spice site IVS1+1G>A. not be restricted to common mutations, as a second mutation might exist. Finally, no mutations or the known del and del(GJB6- The detected mutations in pre-symptomatic cases, even well-known ones, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 311 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 have to be interpreted with caution in respect to their pathological income. Hereditary hemorrhagic telangiectasia type 1 (HHT 1) or Osler-Weber- Acknowledgements: The study was supported by the grant No 43/2011, So- Rendu disease (OMIM 187300) is an autosomal dominant disorder. HHT 1 fia Medical University, Bulgaria characterized by recurrent epistaxis, telangiectasia, multi-systemic vascu- P12.110 lar dysplasia and clinical presentation of wide variation. Molecular-genetic Mutational analysis of SERPING1 gene in Slovenian patients with analyses of HHT 1 have identified gene ENG on chromosome 9. This gene hereditary angioedema: four novel mutations encoded protein endoglin, which is expressed predominantly on endothelial M. Rijavec, M. Šilar, P. Korošec, M. Zidarn, M. Košnik; cells as a heavily glycosylated disulfide-linked dimer that binds TGF-β1 and University Clinic of Respiratory and Allergic Diseases, Golnik, Slovenia. TGF -β3. Here, we report genetic analyses of one Russian family with HHT 1 dia- gnosed by clinical criteria. The proband is a boy 2,5 year old. He was dia- Hereditary angioedema (HAE) is a rare autosomal dominant disease charac- gnosed as HHT 1 with recurrent epistaxis and arteriovenous malformation terised by the swellings of the face, lips, tongue, larynSxE, gRePnINitaGl1ia or extremi- (AVM) in the left lung. The history of HHT 1 was found also in his relatives: ties, with abdominal pain caused by intra-abdominal edema. HAE is caused recurrent epistaxis, arteriovenous malformation in spleen, migraine heada- by mutations affecting C1 inhibitor gene, also called , resulting in che in mother and spontaneous, recurrent epistaxis, telangiectases in ma- low levels of C1 inhibitor (Type I HAE) or by normal levels of ineffective C1 ternal grandmother. inhibitor (Type II HAE). Amplicons of 1, 3, 7, 9, 12 exons and introns of ENG gene were directly se- We recruited 16 individuals with HAE from 7 unrelated Slovenian families. quenced. We found a heterozygous single nucleotide (G) deletion in the spli- The diagnosis of HAE was established in the presence clinical and laborato- ce donor site of intron 7 (c.991+1delG or IVS 7+1 del G) that converted the ry criteria (low C1 inhibitor aSnEtiRgPeInNicG 1levels and/or function), followed up 5‘ end of intron 7 from GT to TG. This deletion would lead to frame shift and with positive family history. Genetic studies were carried out by PCR and se- produce unstable mRNA. Found mutation is a novel. Genetic testing of this quencing for the detection of mutations, in promoter, noncoding family confirmed clinical diagnosis in individuals and provided for early de- exon 1 and in the 7 coding exons and exon-intron boundaries. tection of AVMs and helps us to prevent the complications of HHT 1 disease In all patients with HAE a mutation responsible for the disease has been in our proband. identified. Four mutations were reported for the first time. In HAE type I P12.113 families one already reported substitution (Gln67Stop, c.265C>T), together The mutational spectrum of GDAP 1 gene in hereditary motor and with four novel mutations have been identified. The new mutations inclu- sensory neuropathy patients from Bashkortostan Republic (Russia) ded two missense substitutions, Ser128Phe (c.449C>T) and Glu429Lys I. Skachkova1, I. Khidiyatova1, E. Saifullina2, D. Baizigitov3, R. Magzhanov2, E. (c.1351G>A), together with two frameshift mutations, indel (c.49G>TT; Khusnutdinova1; c.49delGinsTT) and deletion (c.593_594delCT). Both families with HAE type 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian II harboured the two well-known substitutions affecting the arginyl resi- Federation, 2Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 3Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. due at the reactive centre in exon 8, Arg444Cys, c.1396C>T and Arg444His, c.1397G>A, respectively. SERPING1 Our study identified four novel mutations in the Slovenian HAE population, Hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy (HMSN) comprises a group of highlighting the heterogeneity of mutations in the gene causing clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorders of the peripheral ner- C1 inhibitor deficiency and HAE. vous system. We examined HMSN patients from Bashkortostan Republic P12.111 (BR) and detected spectrum of specific mutations in the GDAP1 gene using The added value of targeted next generation sequencing in patients direct sequencing of its coding regions. The GDAP1 gene (8q21.11) codes with cardiomyopathies. Substituting Sanger sequencing as a ganglioside-induced differentiation-associated protein 1 - an important diagnostic test. factor in the fission of mitochondria. The GDAP1 gene mutations cause B. Sikkema-Raddatz, L. F. Johansson, E. N. de Boer, L. G. Boven, K. Y. van Spaendonck- Zwarts, J. P. van Tintelen, J. D. H. Jongbloed, R. J. Sinke; autosomal - recessive disease type 4A. Molecular-genetic investigation of Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, HMSN in 165 unrelated families showed 6 different nucleotide changes in Groningen, Netherlands. the GDAP1 gene. Two of them haven’t been described previously: c.685G>A (p.Glu229Lys), c.934G>A (p.Ala312Thr), and were not detected among healthy family members and controls (n=100), and one previously repor- Whole exome sequencing (ES) of a significant number of samples from a ted mutation c.715C>T (p. Leu239Phe) wide spread among patients with wide variety of diseases has become common practice for identifying puta- HMSN 4A type. Its nucleotide changes are supposed to be disease causing tive disease linked variants. The advantage of this approach is the possibility mutations. Three revealed nucleotide changes appeared to be gene poly- of analyzing a large amount of genes in parallel. However, substituting San- morphic variants: c.102G>A, c.507T>G and c.933G>A. All mutations were ger sequencing with ES for mutation detection in daily diagnostics is yet not heterozygous and revealed in different patients. Taking into consideration applicable due to dramatic differences in coverage within ES experiments, an autosomal-recessive type of HMSN, confirmed by genealogical analysis, resulting in missing clinically relevant mutations. Targeted enrichment will every patient should carry a second undefined mutation. Perhaps, mutati- circumvent this shortcoming by selecting only those genes involvedTM in a ons, which we haven’t found, may be located in the GDAP1 promoter region. particular disease. We developed two kits, based on Illumina‘s TruSeq Cu- Thus, it is established that HMSN are caused by the GDAP1 mutations in 2% stom Enrichment and Agilent Sure Select Target Enrichment, for mutation cases in BR. The received data will contribute to optimization of medical and detection in 48 genes that were proven to be involved in hereditary cardio- genetic consulting of HMSN families in our region. myopathies. Eighteen patients were analysed applying both kits and San- P12.114 ger sequencing for up to six genes. An additional 18 patients were screened Candidate gene responsible for a new clinical form of hereditary using the Agilent Target Enrichment kit only. Sample preparations were per- recurrent neuropathy formed according to manufacturers protocols. Samples were multiplexed to E. L. Calpena1, D. Martínez-Rubio1, V. Lupo2, D. Montaner3, E. Serna4, C. Rivolta5, J. an amount still permitting a theoretical coverage of 100 reads per targeted Dopazo3, F. Palau1, T. Sevilla6, J. J. Vílchez6, C. Espinós2; sequence/per patient. All samples were sequenced using 151bp-paired end 1Instituto de Biomedicina de Valencia (IBV), CSIC and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 2CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) and IIS La reads on a Illumina MiSeq sequencer and analysed using the MiSeq Repor- Fe, Valencia, Spain, 3Centro de Investigación Príncipe Felipe (CIPF) and CIBER de ter pipeline. All (pathogenic) mutations previously detected with Sanger Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 4Fundación Investigación Hospital sequencing were identIifni esdil.i cIon addition, 103 novel putative pathogenic mu- Clínico Valencia (INCLIVA) and Universitat de València, Valencia, Valencia, Spain, tations (19 synonymous, 10 splice site and 74 missense) were found, on ave- 5University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Hospital U. i P. La Fe and CIBER de rage three per patient. analyses, confirmation by Sanger sequencing Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Valencia, Spain. and co-segregation analyses are currently performed to identify the causal mutation in each patient/family. P12.112 Inherited peripheral neuropathies that are recurrent and from which af- Novel mutation in the ENG gene in Russian patients with Hereditary fected individuals make full or partial degrees of recovery are unusual. The Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia. most prominent dPisMoPrd2e2rs that fall into this category are: (i) hereditary neu- N. S. Averiyanova, V. Y. Kornienco, N. V. Jourkova, O. B. Kondakova, T. A. Prudnicova, Y. V. ropathy with liability to pressure palsieSsE (PHTN9PP; MIM 162500) caused by Kirgizov, A. U. Asanov, V. G. Pinelis; mutations in the gene; (ii) hereditary neuralgic amSyCoNtr9oAphy (HNA; Scientific center for children’s Health, RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. MIM 162100) due to mutations in the gene; and (iii) primary ery- thromelalgia (MIM 133020) caused by mutations in the gene. We recruited a large three generation family with eight affected members and www.eshg.org www.eshg.org312 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 the inferred diagnosis of recurrent neuropathy with an autosomal dominant tChoen nceluesdi ofonrs S: PG4 screening of this HSP group. No mutations were found in pattern of inheritance. The main clinical manifestations are recurrent epi- Turkish patients. sodes of nerve paresis, lumbo-sacral plexopathy, erythromelalgia and mi- Our findings contribute to a better understanding the mole- gPraMtoPr2y2 sSeEnPsoTr9y neurSoCpNa9thAy. In order to characterize the molecular bases cular basis of HSP and have implications for diagnostic testing and genetic which underlie this neuropathy, we first analyzed the candidate genes/loci counseling in Bulgarian population. ( , and ) by Sanger sequencing and/or by segregation P12.117 analysis. Our findings showed that none of these three genes are involved in Studying the molecular basis of hereditary spastic paraplegia in the disease. By combining exome sequencing with previous genome-wide Gypsy/Roma patients from Bulgaria linkage analysis, a novel heterozygous mutation was detected in a gene loca- D. Kancheva1, K. Mihova1, A. Andreeva2, N. Ivanova1, V. Mitev1, I. Tarnev2, A. Jordanova1,3; ted on chromosome 17, which has not been associated with any neuropathy 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry,Molecular Medicine Center, Medical yet. This mutation co-segregates with the disease and was not observed in University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, University Hospital „Alexandrovska“, Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3VIB Department of 1T3hi2s uwnoarfkf ewctaesd s uinpdpiovritdeuda blsy othf em Iantscthiteudto g deeo gSraalpuhdi Ccaalr laonsc IeIIs t(rGyr. aWnets anruem cbuerr- Molecular Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium. rCePn0t8ly/ 0in00ve5s3t iagnadti PnSg0 t9h/e0 0p0at9h5o)g ceon-fiucintdye odf wthitihs FmEuDtEaRti ofunn bdys. cellular studies. Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a group of rare heterogeneous P12.115 neurodegenerative disorders, characterized by progressive spasticity and Molecular testing for hereditary spastic paraplegia type 4 (SPG4) in a weakness of lower limbs. All modes of inheritance have been described in group of Polish patients - preliminary results HSP - autosomal dominant (AD), autosomal recessive (AR) and X-linked re- E. Elert-Dobkowska, W. Krysa, M. Rajkiewicz, I. Stepniak, E. Zdzienicka, A. Sulek, J. cessive. In order to better tackle the genetic heterogeneity of HSP, we are Zaremba; Department of Genetics, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, Warsaw, Poland. studying Bulgarian Gypsy/Roma families with this disorder. Gypsies share unique features as an isolated population, like high degree of inbreeding, decreased genetic heterogeneity and higher incidence of rare recessive dis- BACKGROUND: Mutations in the SPAST gene are responsible for spastic orders. So far we have collected 44 Gypsy patients belonging to 24 families paraplegia type 4 (SPG4), the most common among heterogeneous group (4 AD, 14 AR and 6 sporadic). termed hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP). The dominant and sporadic families were screened for mutations in the spa- MATERIAL AND METHODS: A group of 160 patients clinically diagnosed stin (SPG4) gene, the most common cause of AD-HSP. We identified a novel as HSP (90 familial, 70 sporadic cases) were screened for mutations in the splice site mutation in one patient. The most frequent AR-HSP gene, para- SPAST gene. Molecular analysis was performed using multiplex ligation-de- plegin (SPG7), was screened for the recessive families. In only one of all the pendent probe amplification (MLPA) and direct sequencing analysis. tested patients was detected a nonsense mutation. RESULTS: Screening of 160 patients for mutations in the SPAST gene Two consanguineous recessive families were subjected to genome-wide by MLPA enabled us identification of microrearrangements in 12 sub- SNP genotyping followed by homozygosity mapping. In the first pedigree jects (7.5%). Among those 11 deletions (9 multiexonic and 2 single exon with four affected sibs we identified 4 autozygous regions which contain deletion) and 1 duplication of two exons were found. Sequencing of the two known HSP genes, AP4E1 and spartin (SPG20), and their sequencing SPAST gene, which contains 17 exons, performed so far for 13 exons in is ongoing. The homozygosity mapping in the other family with three affec- 104 patients, revealed 11 different mutations in 12 individuals. Frames- ted sibs identified only four large homozygous regions that do not contain hift mutations (c.1215_1219delTATAA, c.1246_1247insG, c.1317delT, any known HSP gene, suggesting a novel genetic entity. Exome sequencing is c.1418_1431delAGTCTGCTGGAGAT, c.1435_1436delAG, c.1779_1780insA), currently underway to indentify the underlying genetic defect. splice site change (c.1729-2A>G) and missense mutations (c.1079T>C, P12.118 c.1100T>C, c1378C>T, c.1849T>G) were identified. Out of 11 point mutati- Seven novel genetic mutations within the 5’utr and the housekeeping ons 10 are localized in the AAA domain of spastin and one missense muta- promoter of HMBS gene responsible for the non-erythroid form of tion in the last TAA STOP codon switched to coding for glutamic acid. Fur- acute intermittent porphyria. thermore 5 intronic substitutions and 1 known synonymous variant in exon F. Granata, V. Brancaleoni, D. Tavazzi, M. D. Cappellini, E. Di Pierro; Dipartimento di Medicina Interna-Fondazione IRCCS Ca‘ Granda-Università degli Studi 6 were detected. di Milano, Milano, Italy. CONCLUSIONS: So far molecular analysis in 160 patients revealed 24 cases of SPG4 (15%). The study results confirm that the majority of point mutati- ons as well as microrearrangements in the SPAST gene are localized in the HMBS Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is an autosomal dominant disorder AAA domain of the spastin protein (19/24 cases). caused by molecular abnormalities in the gene. This gene is transcri- P12.116 bed from two promoters to produce ubiquitous and erythroid specific iso- Mutation analysis of SPG4 gene in Bulgarian patients with hereditary forms of porphobilinogen deaminase (PBGD). In the classical form of AIP, spastic paraplegia both isoforms are deficient, but about 5% of families have the non-erythroid K. Mihova1, D. Kancheva1, A. Andreeva2, V. Mitev1, I. Tarnev2, A. Jordanova1,3; 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Molecular Medicine Center, variant in which only the ubiquitous isoform is affected. Only one mutation Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinic of Neurology, University sited in the housekeeping promoter have been previously reported as causa- Hospital „Alexandrovska“, Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, tivHe MfoBr Sth is form of AIP. In this study we identified one small deletion and six Sofia, Bulgaria, 3VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, nucleotide substitutions within the 5’UTR and the housekeeping promoter Belgium, Antwerp, Belgium. of gene: c.1-440_-427del14bp; c.1-421G>A; c.1-331C>T; c.1-270G>A; Background: c.1-122T>A; c.1-103C>T; c.1-28A>C. Using luciferase reporter assays and quantitative PCR experiments we cha- Hereditary spastic paraplegias (HSP) are a group of clinical- racterized the functional role of these seven novel genetic variants demon- ly and genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders which main strating that all mutations cause a significant loss of transcriptional activity. features are progressive spasticity and weakness of lower limbs. HSPs are Our investigations suggest that these nucleotide substitutions may alter characterized by degeneration of the longest axons in the central nervous critical binding sites for transcriptional factors and they confirm that these system. Prevalence in European population is 3-10 cases per 100 000. All ty- regions represent an important molecular target for pathogenesis of non- pes of inheritance are described in this disorder - autosomal dominant (AD), erythroid form of Acute Intermittent Porphyria. autosomal recessive (AR) and X-linked. HSP is classified in two big clinical P12.120 groups - pure and complicated. In about 35% of AD cases with pure form Abnormal Responses to Visual Cortex Activation in Early Stage aMrae tdeertieaclste adn md umtaettihonosd isn: SPG4 (spastin) gene, but can be found in sporadic Huntington Disease Patients using 31P-Nuclear Magnetic Resonance cases as a result of de novo mutation. Spectroscopy We performed a genetic screening for SPG4 muta- F. Mochel1, T. Nguyen1, D. Deelchand2, D. Rinaldi1, R. Valabregue3, C. Wary4, P. G. Carlier4, tRioensus lbtys dainredc td sisecquusesnicoinn:g in a cohort of 50 AD and sporadic HSP cases from A. Durr1, P. Henry2; three different ethnic groups (Bulgarian, Gypsy/Roma and Turkish). 1INSERM UMR S975, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France, 2University of In this study we identified 9 mutations in SPG4 Minnesota, Center for Magnetic Resonance Research, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 3CEntre de NeuroImagerie de Recherche, Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, gene, 4 novel (1 splice site mutation, 2 missence and 1 deletion) and 5 al- France, 4Institut de Myologie, Laboratoire de RMN, Paris, France. ready reported (3 missence, 1 nonsense and 1 deletion). In 6 cases the mu- tations are found in patients with AD type of inheritance. A novel finding for Bulgarian population are mutations in four sporadic cases confirming www.eshOgb.jeocrtigve: To test the hypothesis that brain energy metabolism is abnormal www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 313 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 in patients at an early stage of Huntington disease (HD). lytic component of the multi-synthetase complex, catalyzing the ligation of Background: Energy metabolism has been a major focus of HD research for amino acids to their cognate tRNAs. The deletion causes a frameshift muta- many years due to several observations in both patients and models of the tion resulting in a premature stop codon amputating the 312aa protein after disease. However, there are currently no in vivo biomarkers of brain energy 127 aa, abrogating AIMP1/P43‘s main catalytic domain .The mutation was metabolism in HD. not found in 200 control chromosomes. Methods: We coupled noninvasive 31P-NMR spectroscopy with activation of P12.123 the occipital cortex in order to measure the levels of ATP, phosphocreatine Identification of an Alu-mediated 12.2 kb deletion of the complete (PCr) and inorganic phosphate (Pi) before, during and after a visual stimu- LPAR6 (P2RY5) gene in a Turkish family with hypotrichosis and lus. We studied 15 HD patients at an early stage of the disease (mean motor woolly hair UHDRS= 18 ±9) and 15 age- and sex-matched controls. H. Mahmoudi1, E. Tug2, A. H. Parlak3, H. I. Atasoy4, M. Ludwig5, M. Polat3, S. M. Results: In controls, we observed an 11% increase in Pi/PCr ratio (p=0.024) Pasternack1, R. C. Betz1; and a 13% increase in Pi/ATP ratio (p=0.016) during brain activation, re- 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Gazi University, Ankara, Turkey, 3Department of Dermatology, Abant flecting increased ATP synthesis and ADP levels. Subsequently, controls had Izzet Baysal University, Bolu, Turkey, 4Department of Pediatrics, Abant Izzet Baysal a return to baseline levels during recovery (p=0.012 et 0.022 respectively). University, Bolu, Turkey, 5Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, In HD patients, both Pi/PCr and Pi/ATP ratios were unchanged during and University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. after visual stimulation, reflecting altered mitochondrial bioenergetics. In addition, in HD patients the ratio of Pi/ATP correlated with the UHDRS score during the activation (p=0.014) and recovery periods (p=0.009), while Pi/ Hypotrichosis is a rare form of progressive hair loss characterized by sparse PCr ratio correlated with the UHDRS score during recovery (p=0.016), re- and occasionally woolly hair that is curly and breaks easily. Disease causing flecting a correlation between brain energy metabolism and disease seve- mutations in LIPH, LPAR6 and KRT74 have recently been identified. We de- rity in HD. scribe a four generation pedigree from Turkey following an autosomal re- Conclusions: 31Phosphorus nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy cessive pattern, in which the four affected members had hypotrichosis and could provide functional biomarkers of brain energy deficit to monitor the- woolly hair. By sequencing LPAR6 and the use of SNP-arrays we revealed a rapeutic efficacy in Huntington disease. homozygous loss of the entire LPAR6 gene in the affecteds. We hypothesize P12.121 that the 12 kb deletion resulted from illegitimate recombination secondary Translation of HTT mRNA with pathogenic CAG repeats is regulated to slip-replication. The orientation of three Alu repeats around LPAR6 may by the ubiquitin ligase MID1 and the translation modulators PP2A have provoked the formation of a ‘triple barrel’ structure during replicati- and mTOR on, thereby allowing strand slipping. This first report of complete LPAR6 S. Krauss1, N. Griesche1, E. Jastrzebska2, C. Chen3, D. Rutschow3, C. Achmüller4, S. Dorn1, S. loss expands the spectrum of known LPAR6 mutations, and suggests a novel Boesch5, M. Lalowski6, E. Wanker6, R. Schneider4, S. Schweiger3; mechanism for this gene and for the formation of DNA rearrangements in 1DZNE, Bonn, Germany, 2MPI, Berlin, Germany, 3Ninewells Hospital, Dundee, United Kingdom, 4CMBI, Innsbruck, Austria, 5Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, general. 6MDC, Berlin, Germany. P12.124 A single amino acid residue deletion, p.Leu3230del, in the brain- specific isoform Dp71 of dystrophin results in intellectual disability Expansion of CAG repeats is a common feature of neurodegenerative dis- without muscular dystrophy orders like Huntington’s disease. We show here that expanded CAG repeats A. P. M. de Brouwer1, S. B. Nabuurs2, A. R. Oudakker1,3, R. Hordijk4, H. G. Yntema1, J. M. Hordijk-Hos4, K. Voesenek1, B. B. A. de Vries1, T. van Essen4, H. Hu5, H. Ropers5, J. Chelly6, V. bind to a translation regulatory protein complex that contains MID1, PP2A, Kalscheuer5, B. C. J. Hamel1, H. van Bokhoven1,3, T. Kleefstra1; and the translation factor S6K. Binding of the MID1-PP2A protein complex 1Department of Human Genetics, Raboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, increases with repeat size and leads to a stimulation of the translation of Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud the CAG repeat expansion containing mRNA in a MID1, PP2A and mTOR de- University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition pendent manner. Our data indicate that pathological CAG-repeat expansions and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of upregulate translation leading to an overproduction of aberrant protein and Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 5Max Planck suggest the MID1-complex as a promising therapeutic target for CAG repeat Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department Human Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 6Institut Cochin, INSERM Unité 1016, Paris, France. expansion disorders. P12.122 Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-like disease caused by a homozygous mutation We have identified a single amino acid residue deletion, p.Leu3230del, in in AIMP1/P43 M. Feinstein1, B. Marcus1, I. Noyman2, H. Flusser3, H. Shalev3, I. Shelef4, Z. Shorer5, S. the brain-specific isoform Dp71 of dystrophin in a family with nonspecific Sivan1, O. S. Birk6; X-linked intellectual disability by sequencing of all exons of the X chromoso- 1Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute of Biotechnology me. Linkage analysis supported causality as the mutation was present in the in the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 2Division of Pediatrics at Soroka Medical Center, Ben- 7.6 cM linkage interval on Xp22.11-Xp21.1 with a maximum positive LOD Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-sheva, Israel, 3Division of Padiatrics at Soroka score of 2.41. Molecular modeling predicts that the p.Leu3230del deletion Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, Beer-sheva, results in the destabilization of the C-terminal domain of dystrophin and Israel, 4Diagnostic Imaging Institute at Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University hence reduces the ability to interact with β-dystroglycan. Subsequent de- of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, Beer-sheva, Israel, 5Division of Pediatrics at Soroka termination of the creatine kinase levels in blood of the index patient inde- Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, Beer-sheva, Israel, 6Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics at the National Institute of ed showed a mild but significanDt MeleDvation in serum creatine kinase, which Biotechnology in the Negev, Genetics Institute at Soroka Medical Center, Ben-Gurion points to impaired dystrophin function. Taken together, these data indicate University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, Beer-sheva, Israel. that we have identified the first mutation in Dp71 that results in intel- lectual disability without muscular dystrophy. P12.125 Pelizaeus-Merzbacher-Like disease (PMLD) is a hypomyelinating leukodys- Unravelling the genetic causes of syndromic Intellectual Disability in trophy, a disorder involving aberrant myelin formation presenting with ro- the era of exome sequencing. tatory nystagmus, progressive spastic paraplegia, severe motor impairment I. Zara1, M. Oppo1, F. Chiappe2, F. Reinier1, R. Berutti1,3, R. Atzeni1, C. Jones1, V. Dessì4, C. and neurological deterioration within the first months of life. The known Perria4, V. Pes4, G. Serra4, M. Valentini1, A. Angius1,2, S. Sanna2, F. Cucca2,3, L. Crisponi2; forms of the disease are caused by homozygous mutations in GJA12 and 1CRS4 - Centre for Research, Development and Advanced Studies in Sardinia, Pula, Cagliari, Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle HSPD1. Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università degli studi di Two remotely related Bedouin kindred in southern Israel presented with an Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 4Istituto di Neuropsichiatria Infantile, Università degli studi di autosomal recessive phenotype of PMLD. Homozygosity at the two known Sassari, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, Sassari, Italy. loci was ruled out in affected individuals. DNA samples of 5 affected indivi- duals and 7 non-affected obligatory carrier first-degree relatives were ana- lyzed using 250k SNP Affymetrix arrays, and fine mapping was done using Intellectual Disability (ID) represents a large and heterogeneous group of microsatellite markers. The phenotype-associated locus was mapped to a disorders with variable phenotypes and severity, and impaired intellectual 8.94 Mb region on chromosome 4q24 (maximum multipoint LOD score of abilities as a common feature. Although the number of ID causing genes is 4.25). Sequence analysis of 14 candidate genes of the 39 genes in the region increasing rapidly, at present the genetic aetiology remains unexplained for unraveled a two-nucleotide (CA) deletion mutation in AIMP1/P43 encoding 60% of the ID forms, thus no molecular diagnosis can be made for the ma- ARS-Interacting Multifunctional Protein 1. AIMP1 functions as a non-cata- jority of the patients. With the aim to identify new genetic causes of ID, we www.eshg.org www.eshg.org314 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 used the exome sequencing approach and focused on syndromic autosomal patients. recessive forms. So far we selected 4 families of Sardinian origin with at least 11 patients with clinical features of Herlitz-JEB (3 cases) or non-Herlitz JEB 2 patients affected by Multiple Congenital Anomalies and Intellectual Disa- (7 patients), and a couple with history of 3 children demised of Herlitz-JEB bility (MCA/ID) associated into a clinically undefined syndrome, and 1 fami- were enrolled to the study. DNA analysis was performed using direct se- ly with 1 patient affected by Filippi syndrome with unknown genetic aetio- quencing. LAMB3 logy. Up to date, 6 samples from 2 families were sequenced with the TruSeq We established full genotype in 6 cases. The other patients are still under Exome Enrichment Kit (Illumina). On average, 140,000 variants (SNVs and analysis. In 5/6 cases we detected mutations in gene. 40% of muta- indels) were identified, of which 7% were novel (not yet included in dbSNP ted alleles accounted for R635X, in 30% of them we found c.1439_1443del 132). Among the novel variants, on average 980 fall in exons and 1,452 in and in 20% novel c.965_966+8del. Our preliminary results indicate that UTR regions, and we are currently searching the potential causative variants R635X is the commonest mutation in Polish JEB patients, as it is in general related to the diseases by applying a standard step-wise filtering approach. population, and that at least 2 other mutations - uncommon in other Euro- Our study will contribute to the molecular diagnosis of a larger number of pean countries- are recurrent in Poland. This finding has a practical impact subjects by improving the existing map and networks of ID causative genes, while preparing an algorithm of molecular analysis for Polish JEB patients. and likely to the detection of new syndromes through the so-called “reverse P12.128 dysmorphology”, ie, using an approach from genotype to phenotype. Incomplete penetrance of a novel KCNQ1 mutation in a large family P12.126 with long QT syndrome Pitfalls of whole exome-sequencing: hidden DYNC2H1 mutations in Z. Shinwari, N. Dzimiri, M. Al-Fayyadh, Z. Al-Hassnan; patients with Jeune Asphyxiating Thoracic Dystrophy King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. H. H. Arts1, M. Schmidts2, E. M. H. F. Bongers1, M. M. Oud1, L. Duijkers1, Z. Yap2, J. Stalker3, J. L. Yntema4, A. Hoischen1, C. Gilissen1, J. A. Veltman1, A. Kutkowska5, E. Kamsteeg1, P. Scambler2, P. L. Beales2, -. UK10K Consortium3, N. V. A. M. Knoers6, R. Roepman1, H. M. Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) KisC NaQn 1in KhCeNriHte2d SpCoNte5nAtially fatal ar- Mitchison2; rhythmogenic disorder that is characterized by prolonged corrected QT 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, (QTc) interval. Mutations in 3 genes ( , , ) account for Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Molecular Genetics Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Genome the majority of the cases. However, 10 otherK gCeNnQe1s aKrCe NnHo2w SkCnNo5wAn to be Center, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 4Department of Paediatrics, Radboud University implicated in LQTS. In this work, we describe the clinical and molecular ana- Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Department of Medical Genetics, lysis in a large family with LQTS. Screening , , KCgNenQe1s Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 6Department of Medical Genetics, in the proband, who presented with episodes of syncope led to the identi- University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. fication of a novel heterozygous mutation (c.773 A> C; p.H258P) in . An extended clinical and genetic screening of the family identified 11 other members who were carriers for this mutation. All identified carriers had In recent years whole-exome sequencing has been developed, a technique prolonged QTc intervals, yet, only two of them were clinically symptoma- by which all exons of the genome (all the protein-coding DNA) can be se- tic. Nevertheless, the eKleCcNtrQo1cardiographic and molecular analysis stratified quencDedY NatC o2nHc1e. Here we show that whole-exome sequencing, using either seven carriers at high-risk of a cardiac event as they had a QTc of ≥ 500 ms 35 or 50 Mb Agilent kits for exome capture, was insufficient to detect patho- and were carriers of a mutation. Our work illustrates the importance genic variants in patients with Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy of extended family screening in LQTS to identify silent carriers and hence (ATD; Jeune syndrome). Jeune syndrome is a rare inherited ciliopathy in- adopt the most appropriate therapeutic and preventive intervention. volving chondrodysplasia characterized by shortened ribs and long bones, P12.130 and polydDaYcNtyCl2y,H p1r ogressive kidney and liver disease as well as retinitis Inherited cystic kidney disease: a molecular screening in Italian pigmentosa. Reduced thoracic capacity causes approximately 60% early patients lethality. encodes a subunit of the dynein 1B motor that drives A. Aquilano1,2, C. Graziano3, O. Baraldi2, E. Sestigiani4, E. Marasco1, A. Prossomariti1, M. tip-to-base ciliary intraflagellar transport, and mutations have previously Seri3, A. Santoro4, G. La Manna2, S. Stefoni2, V. Mantovani1,3; beenD YaNssCo2cHia1t ed both with embryonically lethal short rib-polydactyly and 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, the milder, but overlapping Jeune aspyxiating thoracic dystrophy. Although Italy, 2Department of Internal Medicine, Aging and Kidney Diseases, Bologna University, Bologna, Italy, 3Unit of Medical Genetics, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy, the gene was targeted in our whole-exome experiments many se- 4Unit of Nephrology, Dialysis and Hypertension, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, quence reads were not properly aligned, resulting inD 3Y0N-C720H%1 of the gene Italy. not being covered. Only a combination of whole-exomDeY NseCq2uHe1ncing and a candidate gene approach (i.e. analysis of noDnY-cNoCv2eHre1d exons using Sanger sequencing) enabled us to detect the missing mutations. Inherited kidney diseases are a heterogeneous cause of renal failure with Whole-exome data analysis of the 90 exon gene is therefore com- great clinical variability. Once ultrasound and urinalysis have excluded poly- parable to playing ‘hide and seek’, whereby certain mutations are easier to cystic kidney and glomerulonephritis, family history can help to distinguish find than others according to their relative coverage. In conclusion, although nephronophthisis (recessive) from dominant nephropathies. Clinical fea- whole-exome sequencing has revolutionized the field of human genetics, tures can also help to define the specific diagnosis, but this is still a deman- our findings emphasize that next-generation sequencing also presents si- ding task due to phenotypic overlap. gnificant challenges for gene identification and for implementation of this Purpose of this study was to perform a molecular screening of someN PgeHnPe1s technique in DNA diagnostics. aNsPsHocPi5ateUdM wOiDthR tEhNese disHoNrdFe1rBs, in order to validate a diagnostic algorithm P12.127 related to clinical phenotypes, useful to drive the genetic screening. , Molecular analysis of Polish patients with junctional epidermolysis , , and genes were selected for the analysisN. DPHNPA1s bullosa from 12 ItalianH pNaFt1ieBnts with inherited nephropathies were submitted to di- J. Sota1, K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, C. Kowalewski2, K. Woźniak1, A. Kutkowska- rect sequencing. Furthermore, deletion analysis by multiplex PCR for Kaźmierczak1, A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska1, J. Bal1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, and MLPA RfoErN were performed. 2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. Three causative mutations were detected: 1) a novel heterozygous p.E48K variant in found in a patient with cystic nephropathy, hyperuricemia, hyperkalemia and anemia. The mutation lieNs PinH Pa5 conserved position, co- Junctional epidermolysis bullosa (JEB) is a rare, autosomal recessive geno- segregated with affected family members and was absent in 50 chromoso- dermatosis characterized by spontaneous or mechanically induced blisters mes; 2) a homozygous p.R489X mutation in gene was detected in a formation at the level of lamina lucida of the epidermis-dermis junction. Cli- patient with retinitis pigmentosa and recurrent cholangitis, conHfiNrmF1inBg the nical outcome of the disease varies fromLA gMenBe3r, aLliAzMedC,2 l,e tLhAaMl HA3e rlitz subtype, diagnosis of Senior-Locken Syndrome. This mutation was previously repor- to milder, someCtiOmLe1s7 lAo1calized- non Herlitz JEB. ted in a Pakistani family; 3) a heterozygous pR295C variant in was JEB is mostly caused by mutations in encoding la- identified in a patient with renal failure and diabetes mellitus. This mutation minin332 and encoding collagen type 17 - extrcellular proteins is known to alter the DNA binding domain and was not previously reported linking hemidesmosomes to extracellular LmAaMtrBix3 in epidermis-dermis junc- in Italy. These preliminary results are promising for defining a diagnostic tion. algorithm. According to literature data, mutations in are most frequently found worldwide in JEB patients and some recurrent mutations were identified in this gene in different populations. The aim of the study was to investigate the mutation spectrum in Polish JEB www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 315 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.131 A mutation detected by exome sequencing and phenotypic variability in a family with Lenz microphthalmia syndrome morphological abnormalities in nuclear envelope structure. Within the fra- T. KANAME1, K. Yanagi1, Y. Muramatsu2, T. Tohma1, Y. Itagaki3, H. Taniai4, K. Kurosawa5, mework of our ongoing effort to integrate technologies (and their results) S. Mizuno2, K. Yoshiura6, K. Naritomi1; used to gain the information about genomic mutations (classical or next-gen 1University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara-cho, Japan, 2Central Hospital, Aichi Human Service sequencing, scanning or unlabelled-probe HRMA), gene expression (qPCR, Center, Nagoya, Japan, 3Suita Municipal Hospital, Osaka, Japan, 4Nagoya Child Welfare microarray analysis, next-gen sequencing) and its regulation (ChIP-chip, Center, Nagoya, Japan, 5Kanagawa Child Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan, 6Nagasaki ChIP-qPCR, ChIP-seq) in HGPS patients which could be further used to im- University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. prove diagnosis, prognosis, treatment and the overall quality of life of the HGPS patients we conducted a pilot experiment on gene expression in fibro- blast cell lines from four HGPS patients and four age-matched controls. Our Lenz microphthalmia syndrome was first described as a type of X-linked reliminary data on this small group of target and control samples showed microphthalmia in 1955. It is known to exhibit genetic heterogeneity and that the most affected biological processes are transcription, signal trans- two loci, Xq27-q28 and Xp11.4, have been mapped to be associated with duction, development and signal transduction. This work was supported by the syndrome. the grant FR-TI3-588 from The Ministry of Industry and Trade of the Czech We met a large family with syndromic microphthalmia. Bilateral but asym- Republic. metric microphthalmos and mental retardation were observed in all the pa- P12.135 tients and cardiovascular malformations or renal abnormalities were obser- Genome-wide SNP analysis to identify genetic modifiers for long QT ved in some patients, showing phenotypic variability. All patients were male syndrome in a consanguineous population and the pedigree indicated X-linked recessive inheritance. According to their Z. N. Al-Hassnan, S. Tulbah, M. Al-Fayyadh; clinical findings and the form of inheritance, patients were diagnosed with King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Lenz microphthalmia syndrome. Whole exome sequencing was performed by using a next-generation sequen- cer and TruSeq Exome Enrichment system (illumina) to identify a mutation Congenital long QT syndrome (LQTS) is an inKhCeNrQit1edK pCoNtEen1tially fNaOtaSlA a1rP- in the family. Pooled DNA with four affected males in the family was used for rhythmogenic disorder that is characterized by variable expressivity and one exome analysis to enrich hemizygous variations in the patients. incomplete penetrance. Common variants in , , and Of 552 called SNPs or indels on X chromosome, 51 were novel (not regi- genes have been recently implicated in modifying the risk of life-threatening stered in the SNP131). Four hemizygous (not detected as heterozygous) arrhythmias in LQTS. In our highly consanguineous population, we conduc- variations were found in exons. After comparison of exome data between ted genome-wide SNP analysis in 15 families with LQTS to identify regions affected and unaffected males, one substitution, c.C254T, was identified and of homozygosKiCtyN (QR1OH) that harbor loci known to be associaAtKeAd Pw9ith either was confirmed by direct Sanger sequencing in all the patients. In addition, LQTSS NoTr Ari1s k of sudden cardiac death. In two families with previously known we confirmed heterozygous mutation in all female carriers as well. hAoDmRBo2zy gous (LQT1) mutations, ROH encompassing (LQT11) We concluded that the mutation was responsible for the patients. and (LQT12) that were detected. In a third family, a ROH that harbors P12.132 gene, known to be associated with SCD without LQTS, was identified. Three novel mutations in Leptin and Leptin Receptor genes among 3 In the context of consanguinity, our work illustrates the value of homozy- Egyptian families gosity analysis for detecting genetic modifiers in LQTS. In addition, our ap- M. A. El-Gammal1, K. Amr1, M. Abdel-Hamid1, S. Farooqi2, I. Mazen1; proach could also be adopted to detect the presence of digenic inheritance 1National Research Centre, Cairo, Egypt, 2Cambridge University, Cambridge, United in consanguineous families with LQTS. Kingdom. P12.136 Background: Towards a better prediction of the age at onset in Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 Congenital leptin deficiency and congenital leptin receptor T. Schmidt1, L. Dengler1, J. Schroeder1, T. Tsoleridis1, J. J. Weber1, T. Karsunke1, H. deficiency are a rare recessive genetic disorder resulting in severe hyper- Pétursson1,2, P. Bauer1, O. Riess1; phagia and early onset obesity. It is caused by mutations in the LEP gene 1University of Tuebingen, Medical Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Statistics Iceland, eOnbcjoedcitnivge l:e ptin and mutations in the congenital leptin receptor gene re- Reykjavík, Iceland. spectively. Method: We report 6 patients from 3 Egyptian families presenting with severe hyperphagia and early onset obesity. Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCAM3JD) o1r g Menaechado-Joseph disease (MJD) is an Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leukocytes of autosomal-dominantly inherited, neurodegenerative disorder caused by the all patients and their family members using a standard method. Direct se- expansion of a CAG repeat in the . quencing of the whole coding region of the leptin gene was carried out in the Statistically, a correlation between the number of CAG repeats and the age two families with undetectable serum leptin levels while sequence analysis at onset of SCA3 patients exists and patients with more CAG repeats have an oRfe tshuel tLsE: PR gene was performed in the third family with high serum leptin earlier onset of symptoms. However, this statistical correlation is not perfect levels. and the number of CAG repeats contributes only about 55 % to the aMgeJD a1t We detect one novel missense mutation in the leptin LEP gene ogennsee t. Therefore, the remaining 45 % are influenced by other factors, which (N103K) and another novel nonsense mutation in the leptin LEP gene we aim to identify in this study. Aside from the CAG repeat itself, the (CWon1c2l1uXs)io ans: well as a missense mutation in the Leptin receptor gene LEPR contains several polymorphisms within the coding region which lead (P316T). to amino acid changes or even a premature stop in the encoded ataxin-3 Although genetic causes of obesity are rare autosomal recessi- protein. ve disorders, high consanguinity rate in our society will lead to the discove- Here, we assume that the amino acid changes within ataxin-3 resulting from ry of a high number of monogenic obesity. these polymorphisms influence the function of normal and expanded ata- P12.134 xin-3 and/or its interaction with other proteins and therefore modify the Transcriptional dysregulation in Hutchinson-Gilford progeria age at onset, the pathogenesis and disease progression of SCA3 patients. We, syndrome patients compared to age-matched controls therefore, genotyped more than 500 samples of SCA3 patients for these po- R. Blatny1, Z. Zubacova1, I. Novakova2, L. Jarolimova2, V. Philimonenko2, Z. Halbhuber1, P. lymorphisms and generated haplotypes comprising the CAG repeat length Hozak2, V. Krivjansky1, M. Krivjanska1; and the polymorphisms located downstream. Two haplotypes turned out 1KRD s.r.o, Prague, Czech Republic, 2IMG, Prague, Czech Republic. to be most common among SCA3 patients and additional haplotypes have a possible impact on the age at onset in SCA3. We hope that our results will improve the prediction of clinical symptoms and contribute to the under- Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS) is a rare genetic condition standing of pathogenic processes in SCA3. with symptoms of premature aging manifested at a very early age. Patients P12.137 born with progeria typically live to their mid teens or early twenties and Applying Next Generation Sequencing to Molecular Diagnosis of the most frequent cause of death is myocardial infarction or stroke. HGPS is Marfan and Loeys-Dietz Syndromes usually caused by dominant mutations in the lamin A (LMNA) gene. There E. Weis, M. Willam, S. Lechno, C. Poarangan, D. Galetzka, O. Bartsch, U. Zechner; are 22 known LMNA mutations associated with the development of HGPS Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg that have been published in the literature to date. These mutations can be University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. detected by the classical or next generation sequencing, high resolution melting analysis (HRMA) and denaturing high-performance liquid chroma- tography. At the subcellular microscopic level, the disease is manifested by The Marfan syndrome (MFS) and the phenotypically related Loeys-Dietz www.eshg.org www.eshg.org316 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 syndrome (LDS) are caused by mutations in the genes coding for Fibrillin-1 the most common sensory impairment in humans. Approximately 50% of (FBN1), Transforming Growth Factor Beta Receptor 1 and 2 (TGFBR1 and all cases are caused by genetic factors. Among all types of monogenic, Men- TGFBR2) and Sma- and Mad-related Protein 3 (SMAD3). Molecular diagno- delian traits, autosomal recessive form stands for nearly 80% of all NSHL stics of thes two syndromes by PCR sequencing using the Sanger method cases. The group of hearing disorders is characterized by tremendously high is time-consuming and expensive, especially for the FBN1 gene with its 65 locuGs JaBn2d, GaJlBle6l,e M hYeOte7rAo,g MenYeOit1y5 Aw, itShL Co2v6eAr 4h, undr eTdM gPeRnSeSs3 associated to the- exons. se disorders. Most frequently analyzed genes in NSHL patients worldwide As an alternative, we started sequence analysis of these genes using a mul- are and . In respect to the tiplex PCR approach followed by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) on the patient’s population origin, mutations in otherwise scarce genes may occur Roche GS Junior System. Plexes were designed in silico considering ampli- in higher frequencies in some specific populations. Demographic history con length and avoiding potential primer dimer formations using the online and population structure of Roma in Europe resulted in occurrence of such tool http://biocompute.bmi.ac.cn/MPprimer/primer_dimer.html. Ampli- population specific mutations which are otherwise very rare or unseen in cons that comprise the up to now not extensively studied regulatory regions autochthonous popMuAlaRtVioEnLsD i2n Europe. Studying a large Hungarian family of in the promoter and 5’-UTR areas of the four genes were also included. To Roma origin with multiple NSHL patients we identified a founder mutation, distinguish and resolve correct amplification of all multiplex PCR products IVS4+2T>C of the gene, previously identified in Pakistani pati- before NGS analysis, we performed PCR with Cy5-tagged M13 primers and ents. To test the prevalence of the identified mutation analyzed 167 Hun- subsequent detection by fragment analysis in a capillary sequencer. garian and 300 Slovak NSHL patients regardless the ethnic origin. Random Up to now, we studied genomic DNA samples from 11 patients with pre- population sample biobanked from unrelated healthy 502 Hungarian and viously identified mutations and/or polymorphisms in FBN1, TGFBR1, 300 Slovak Roma individuals were also tested. Heterozygous presence of TGFBR2 and SMAD3 and all known variants were correctly identified. Ana- IVS4+2T-C mutation among healthy, control Roma individuals proved the lyses of samples of 30 patients suspected of having MFS/LDS that have not population specific character of this mutation in Hungary and Slovakia. The yet been investigated for mutations in TGFBR1, TGFBR2 and SMAD3 are in common orMigAinR oVfE tLhDe2 surveyed mutation identified in Hungarian and Slovak progress. Mutation screening using this combined multiplex PCR-NGS ap- Gypsy patients was further analyzed using set of SNP markers located adja- proach is suitable to make diagnostics faster and less expensive. cent to the gene locus. P12.138 P12.140 A recurrent ALU repeat-mediated deletion within the NFIX gene Screening of a large cohort with UMOD associated kidney disease accounts for a missing part in Marshall-Smith syndrome (UAKD) for mutations in UMOD, HNF1beta and Renin D. Schanze1, D. Neubauer1, V. Cormier-Daire2, R. C. M. Hennekam3, M. Delrue4, D. de A. Pannes1, M. T. F. Wolf2, B. B. Beck1; Silva5, T. Hasegawa6, R. Koenig7, G. Krueger8, F. Petit9, I. Schanze1, E. Seemanova10, T. M. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 2Pediatric Strom11,12, P. Meinecke13, A. Reis14, M. Zenker1; Nephrology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, United States. 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Département de Génétique, Université Paris Descartes, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Department of Pediatrics H7-236, Academic Medical Center, University A spectrum of slowly progressive autosomal dominant kidney disease cha- of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Medical Genetics, Pellegrin Hospital, Bordeaux, France, 5Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University racterized by hyperurecaemia, reduced Uromodulin excretion, renal cysts, of Kelaniya, Ragama, Sri Lanka, 6Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School and endstage renal failure between the third and seventh decade is subsu- of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Johann Wolfgang Goethe mized under the term UMOD associated kidney disease (UAKD). University Hospital, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, 8Medical Genetics Unit, Department The UMOD gene encoding for Uromodulin was the first MCKD gene identi- of Pediatrics, University Hospital Rostock, Rostock, Germany, 9Department of Medical fied. Mutations often affect a cysteine residue and result in endoplasmatic Genetics, Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Lille, France, 10Institute of Biology & Medical reticulum retention and subsequent reduced urinary excretion. However Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, Praha, Czech Republic, 11Institute of Human the precise pathopyhsiology of tubulointerstitial damage is ill understood. Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 12Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany, 13Clinical Genetics Unit, Next to UMOD, mutations in HNF1beta can result in a similar clinical pre- Children‘s Hospital Altona, Hamburg, Germany, 14Institute of Human Genetics, University sentation. of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. Recently, dominant Renin mutations were shown to result in a UAKD pheno- type. Initially recessive mutations in Renin were identified as one cause of renal tubular dysgenesis. Marshall-Smith syndrome (MSS) is a recognizable entity characterized by Here we report the results of a stepwise mutational analysis in 71 families moderate to severe developmental delay, skeletal abnormalities, upper air- compatible with a diagnosis of UAKD. way obstruction, and distinctive facial features. Mutations in the gene NFIX UMOD mutations were identified in 25, while HNF1beta mutations could be were recently discovered as the cause of MSS (Malan et al. AJHG 2010). In identified in 7 families. On the remaining 39 families complete Renin analy- six patients exhibiting the typical phenotype, we identified four novel NFIX sis identified one kindred with a mutation in the signal sequence (p.W10R) frameshift and splice-site mutations by direct sequencing, while two indivi- affecting four generations. We report the youngest patient showing renal duals turned out normal. For further evaluation, we set up an MLPA-based impairment as early as 11 months of age and provide further functional screening for exon deletions or duplications. Both patients were found to data on signal sequence mutations. Only 4 heterozygous REN mutations all carry a heterozygous deletion of exons 6 and 7 of the NFIX gene. The same within the signal peptide have been published. For the three previously de- deletion was found in three additional cases of a cohort of 15 MSS patients, scribed mutations, a damaged targeting and cotranslational translocation of of which 9 were previously found to have NFIX point mutations. Breakpoint preprorenin into the endoplasmatic reticulum had been shown. sequencing revealed the deletion to be mediated by a recombination event This study illustrates that the genetic of cause still remains to be identified between ALU-Y repeats located in introns 5 and 7. Further studies on the in the majority of patients suffering from UAKD. mRNA level indicated that the transcript lacking exons 6 and 7 escapes P12.141 nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, thus suggesting that the deletion leads to Cellular localization of MCPH1 isoforms and effects of MCPH1 the expression of a mutant protein rather than haploinsufficiency of NFIX. mutations on G2/M checkpoint release We conclude that the recurrent NFIX deletion is specific for MSS, because I. Rost, T. Staab, D. Schindler; it mimics the effects of other MSS-associated mutations that are thought to Department of Human Genetics, Würzburg, Germany. generate mdueta nnot vporoteins able to exert a dominant-negative effect over the wild-type allele. Intronic ALU repeats create predetermined breaking points facilitating occurrence of this deletion, a mechanism that accounts Biallelic mutations in the human MCPH1 gene are the cause of primary mi- for about one quarter of MSS cases in our joint cohort. crocephaly associated with a unique cellular phenotype marked by prema- P12.139 ture chromosome condensation (PCC syndrome) in G2 phase and delayed Accumulation of nonsyndromic hearing loss associated with Marveld2 decondensation post mitosis. MCPH1 encodes a multifunctional protein that gene mutation in Slovak and Hungarian Roma patients was reported to be involved in brain development, DNA damage response A. Soltysova1, A. Ficek1, I. Posta-Janicsek2, K. Komlosi2, C. Sipeky2, B. Melegh2, L. Kadasi1,3; and regulation of chromosome condensation. 1Comenius University, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Dpt. of molecular biology, Bratislava, In previous work of our group, Gavvovidis et al. found that MCPH1 encodes Slovakia, 2University of Pecs, Department of Medical Genetics, Pecs, Hungary, 3Slovak two major transcripts, full-length MCPH1 (MCPH1-FL) and another tran- Academy of Sciences, Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, script lacking the six 3’ exons (MCPH1Δ9-14). In addition, a splice variant Slovakia. lacking exon 8 (MCPH1Δ8) was detected. Here we re-examined the cellular localization of those isoforms after centrosomal localization of full-length MCPH1 had been reported by several groups. By transfection of human cell The wide group of nonsyndromic hearing loss disorders (NSHL) wis wonew o.fe shligne.os (rUg2OS, HeLa) with FLAG-tagged constructs, we were unable to satisf- www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 317 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.144 SHANK3 Microdeletion in a patient suspected to Rubinstein-taybi actorily show any of the MCPH1 isoforms colocalizing with centrosomes. We syndrome conclude that such localization must be a temporary or cell type-specific j. Malbin1, R. Tagi Aliyev2, Z. Sharifi3, N. Khazaeii4, H. Bagerian4, M. Masodifar4, M. Falah4, phenomenon. S. Zeinali5; Furthermore, experiments using knockdown of MCPH1 by RNAi or MCPH1- 11. ANAS Genetic Resources Institute ,Baku, Azerbaijan, 3. Genetic Counselling Center, deficient MEFs had previously shown severe effects on the cellular response State Welfare Organization, Urmia, Iran, uromieh, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2anas, baku, Azerbaijan, 32. Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), Tehran, Iran, tehran, to DNA damage after irradiation. Here we compared the effect of patient- Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Kawsar Human Genetics Research Center (KHGRC), Tehran, derived MCPH1 mutations on G2/M checkpoint control. We determined the Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5epartment of Molecular Medicine, Biotech mitotic index by phospho-histone-H3 flow cytometry after irradiation of Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Iran, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cells with 1 Gy. There was no difference in terms of G2/M checkpoint control compared to normal control cells. However, delayed checkpoint release was observed in all of the analyzed MCPH1-deficient cell lines, featuring the way Mental retardation (MR) is a heterogeneous disorder with genetic and non- in which DNA damage response to IR is defective. genetic etiology affecting 1 to 3% of the general population. Here we descri- P12.142 be a copy number variation in a patient with MR and multiple congenital Phenotypical consequences of mild Mecp2 overexpression in the anomalies (MCA). mouse as an experimental approach to estimate gene-dose effects A 24 years old man with a history of infantile hypotonia and childhood deve- C. Bodda1,2, M. Tantra3, J. P. Arunachalam1, K. Can1, H. Ehrenreich3,2, A. U. Mannan1,2; lopmental delay was referred to our clinic. His dysmorphic feature includes 1Instiute of Human Genetics,University Medical Center Goettingen, Göttingen, Germany, short stature, heavy eyebrows, ptosis, speech difficulty and high arched pa- 2DFG-Research Center Molecular Physiology of the Brain, Göttingen, Germany, 3Division late. He had convulsion episode due to epilepsy from 5 years old. of Clinical Neuroscience, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany. Conventional cytogenetic study revealed no abnormal finding. Further in- vestigation was performed using Multiplex Ligation Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique with P245 kit, P070 and P036 kits (SALSA, MLPA Kit, Overexpression of MeCP2 as found in the MECP2 duplication syndrome has MRC, Holland) to screen microdeletion syndromes and subtelomeric rear- a detrimental effect in both human and mouse. Thus, any future therapies rangements. MLPA results were analyzed by Genemaker V1.95. directed at increasing the levels of MeCP2 in the patient must be considered Micro-deletion was detected in CREBBP gene (16p13.3) and SHANK gene carefully to avoid further neurological impairments. To estimate gene dose (22q13.33) in P245-kit. A subtelomeric micro-deletion was detected in DE- effects and predict the level at which potential non-tolerable side effects CR2 gene in P070 kit. might occur, mouse models with mild overexpression are instrumental. We Patient’s phenotype could be explained by this genetic finding as CREBBP generated Mecp2_WT_EGFP transgenic mouse, in which the total amount gene is a known cause of Rubinstein-Taybi Syndrome (RTS) in most of ca- of MeCP2 (endogenous plus transgenic) is mildly overexpressed (~1.5X). ses. Nearly 3% of RTS are related to the deletion in EP300 gene (22q113.2) When Mecp2_WT_EGFP mice were crossed with Mecp2 knockout (KO) mice, which was not investigated here. However we detected SHANK3 gene de- our preliminary analysis suggest that major phenotypes of the KO mice were letion that is characterized by severe expressive-language delay and mild rescued, however further investigation will be necessary to exclude any late mental retardation. stage symptoms. To characterize Mecp2_WT_EGFP mouse model, we perfor- This is the first report of deletion in SHANK3 gene in Rubinstein-Taybi Syn- med an extensive test battery which, apart from increased aggressiveness drome that could be confirmed and further characterized by other methods and seizure propensity, revealed essentially unaltered behavior. Evaluation like FISH, array CGH or confirmatory MLPA kit. of neuronal parameters both ex vivo and in vivo revealed no major abnor- P12.145 malities. Also, expression analysis of differentially regulated Mecp2 target Primary microcephaly (MCPH): Expanding the phenotype genes, such as Bdnf, Ddc, Gdf11, Gpr26, Lrp1b, Pygm and Robo1 by quanti- K. Müller1, K. Seufert1, C. Korenke2, G. Uyanik3, U. Grasshoff4, B. Albrecht5, A. Kuechler5, S. Liu1, A. Hotz1, H. Rosenkötter6, M. Buob6, M. Nikolaidou7, E. Rudd8, A. Kutkowska- tative RT-PCR analysis in Mecp2_WT_EGFP mice revealed only minor altera- Kazmierczak9, E. Obersztyn9, D. Bartholdi10, S. Azzarello-Burri10, B. Hartmann1, C. tion in the expression of Mecp2 target genes. In contrast, a transgenic mice Zeschnigk1, D. J. Morris-Rosendahl1; overexpressing 2X Mecp2 has been reported earlier to have considerable 1Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 2Zentrum für Kinder- und effects on target gene expression. We conclude that quantitative RT-PCR Jugendmedizin, Klinikum Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany, 3Institut für Humangenetik, analysis of Mecp2 target genes may be a suitable approach to evaluate in Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany, 4Medizinische Genetik, Universitätsklinikum Tübingen, future the success of MeCP2 supplementary therapy. Tübingen, Germany, 5Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Essen, Germany, 6Sozialpädiatrisches Zentrum, Ludwigsburg, Germany, 7Department of Neuropediatrics, P12.143 Astrid Lindgrens Childrens Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 8Clinical Genetics, Karolinska MEFV mutations in patients with Familial Mediterranean Fever from University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 9Department of Medical Genetics, Institute Antalya province, Turkey of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 10Institut für Medizinische Genetik, Universität I. Keser1, T. Bilgen1, O. Altiok-Clark2, R. Artan3, G. Süleymanlar4, E. Coban5; Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. 1Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty, Antalya, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Medical Faculty, Antalya, Turkey, 3Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Medical Faculty, Antalya, Turkey, 4Department of Nephrology and Organ Transplantation, Medical Faculty, Antalya, Turkey, 5Department Primary MCPH (MCPH) defines congenital microcephaly with an occipito- of Internal Medicine, Medical Faculty, Antalya, Turkey. frontal circumference (OFC) two standard deviations (SD) or more below the age- and sex-related mean. It is genetically heterogeneous with at least seven known loci and genes (MCPH1 to 7), for which autosomal recessive Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is mainly autosomal recessive and the inheritance of mutations has been shown in families. Primary MCPH was most frequent hereditary inflammatory disease characterized by fever, ar- initially defined as excluding gross structural brain malformations or severe thritis, serosal inflammation and amyloidosis. FMF affects different ethnic neurological deficits, however additional malformations of cortical develop- groups and countries including Turkey, connected with the MEFV gene mu- ment (MCD) are increasingly being recognised. Few patients with primary tations. In this study, we reviewed the data of 2283 FMF suspected patients microcephaly and mutations in the MCPH genes other than ASPM have been (1281 female and 1002 male) from May 2003 to December 2011. Automated described. We have performed mutation analysis in the MCPH1, WDR62, DNA sequencing was used to identify the mutations in exon 2 and exon 10 CDK5RAP2, CEP152, ASPM, CENPJ, STIL and PNKP genes using haplotype of MEFV gene. Of 2283 suspected patients, 1065 (46.64%) had MEFV gene analysis and direct sequencing in 14 families and 10 sporadic patients. Mu- mutation and 52,84% of them were female. Seventeen different mutations tations were found in the ASPM (5 families, 8 patients), WDR62 (5 families, (M694V: 67%, E148Q: %14.8, V726A: 11.4, M680I: 9.27%, R761H: 2.19%, 5 patients), CDK5RAP2 (1 family, 2 patients), STIL (1 family, 1 patient) and K695R: 1.91%, A744S: 1.41%, M694I: %1.2, K695M: 0.14%, E230K: 0.63%, PNKP (1 family, 1 patient) genes. Twelve of the 16 different mutations found E167D: 0.42%, T267I: 0.014%, and E225D, E251K, L110P, V653I, M680V have not been previously described. All patients had severe developmental with 0.07% frequency) were found. Of these mutations, 16 different hetero- delay, with speech development being most severely affected. All patients zygote and 10 different homozygote genotype were detected. The most five showed a MCD in addition to severe microcephaly. The mildest brain pheno- common mutations were M694V, E148Q, V726A, M680I, and R761H in or- type was associated with ASPM mutation and a characteristic combination der. Although the allelic frequency of V726A (9.21%) was found lower than of polymicrogyria and pachygyria was associated with WDR62 mutation. E148Q (14.8%), the frequency of M694V/V726A compound heterozygote Patients with CDK5RAP2 and PNKP mutation had agenesis of the corpus was found as higher than M694V/E148Q. callosum in addition to simplified gyration. The recognition of specific pat- In conclusion, we first time report the mutations of MEFV gene from Antalya terns associated with mutation of each of the MCPH genes will aid targeted province in Southern of Turkey, and found different mutation types and fre- diagnosis in the future. quencies than previous reported studies in Turkey. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org318 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.146 A novel locus for autosomal dominant microcephaly R. Kadir, T. Harel, S. Shalev, J. Zlotogora, O. S. Birk; the importance of dosage analysis as an adjunct to sequencing in determi- The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics and the Genetics Institute, Soroka ning the molecular cause of CS. Medical Center, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel. P12.150 Autosomal dominant microcephaly with mild to moderate mental re- Parallel approach in molecular diagnostics of progressive muscular tardation with no dysmorphism or other anomalies was diagnosed in dystrophies. eleven individuals of an Arab Israeli family. Craniosynostosis and envi- Z. Vlckova1, P. Stöbe2, M. Gencik1,2; ronmental factors were ruled out per history as possible contributors 1Praxis fuer Humangenetik Wien, Wien, Austria, 2Diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany. to the disease, thus verifying the diagnosis of primary microcephaly. Brain CT scan of affected individuals showed no architectural anoma- lies. Nine living affected individuals were available for clinical and ge- There are two major disease groups to account for the phenotype of a pro- netic evaluation. Association with all known microcephaly-associated gressive muscular dystrophy: X-linked dystrophinopathies (Duchenne, Bek- loci were ruled out using polymorphic markers and genome wide lin- ker) and limb-girdle muscular dystrophies (autosomal dominant/recessive kage analysis data. Genome-wide linkage analysis revealed association LGMD). Their common features are progressive muscle weakness and atro- of the disease to a region on chromosome 4 with a maximal LOD score phy spreading form proximal to distal muscle areas. The particular type of of Z = 3.44, at marker D4S1534 (θ=0). Whole exome sequencing is un- the disease is clinically difficult to distinguish. Pedigree analysis, muscle bio- derway. psy and molecular-genetic analysis are used as main diagnostic tools. In our laboratory, deletion/duplication analysis of the dystrophin gene and direct sequencing of relevant genes constitute the standard testing procedu- P12.147 re. Until now our strategy involved a stepwise sequencing analysis starting Megalencephalic Leukoencephalopathy with subcortical Cysts type 1 with genes most frequently harbouring disease causing mutations.The step- (MLC1) due to a homozygous deep intronic splicing mutation (c.895- wise strategy was selected due to 226T>G) abrogated by AMO treatment. a) the large size of involved genes C. Mancini1, G. Vaula2, L. Scalzitti1, S. Cavalieri1,3, E. Bertini4, C. Aiello4, C. Lucchini5, R. A. b) high genetic heterogeneity of LGMD and Gatti6, A. Brussino1, A. Brusco1,3; c) low throughput and high cost of Sanger sequencing method. 1Department of Genetics, Biology and Biochemistry, University of Torino, Torino, All these factors contributed to significantly prolonged testing time per pa- Italy, 2Department Neuroscience, AOU. San Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, Torino, tient. In many cases, the testing was stopped prematurely due to high cost/ Italy, 3S.C.D.U. Medical Genetics, AOU. San Giovanni Battista, Torino, Italy, Torino, long duration. Italy, 4Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ospedale Pediatrico Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, Rome, Italy, 5UO Complessa di Neurologia, Ospedale di Ivrea, Italy, Ivrea, Italy, Therefore, we have implemented a high-throughput sequencing platform 6Departments of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California, David (GS Junior, Roche), which has enabled us to switch from consecutive to par- Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, 90095-1732, CA, United States. allel testing strategy. Our muscular dystrophy panel currently contains 14 genes (DMD, MYOT, LMNA, CAV3, CAPN3, DYSF, SGCG, SGCA, SGCB, SGCD, FKRP, POMT1, ANO5, POMT2) and further genes will be added as necessary. Megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cysts is an autoso- We aim to decrease the testing time and cost, increase the mutation detec- mal recessive disease characterized by early-onset macrocephaly, develop- tion rate and avoid muscle biopsy where possible. mental delaMy, LmC1otor disability in the form of progHreEsPsAivCeA sMp asticity and ata- P12.152 xia, seizures , cognitive decline and characteristic MRI findings. Mutations in Molecular genetic diagnostics of myotonia congenita and structural two genes, (22q13.33; 75% of patients) or (11q24; 5M-1L0C%1 analysis of mutations in the CLCN1 gene of patients)are associated with the disease. L. Fajkusová1, D. Páclová2, J. Sedláčková2, J. Marek1; We describe an adult MLC patient with moderate clinical symptoms. 1Central European Institute of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic, 2Centre of Molecular cDNA analysis from lymphoblasts showed a strong transcript reduction, and Biology and Gene Therapy, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. identified a 246-bp pseudoexon containing a premature stop codon bet- ween exons 10 and 11, due to a homozygous c.895-226T>G deep-intronic CLCN1 SCN4A CLCN1 mutation. The role of this mutation on splicing was confirmiend v uitsriong a mini- Non-dystrophic myotonias are skeletal muscle disorders associated with gene assay, and an antisense morpholinated oligonucleotide (AMO) targeted mutations in the and SCN4 Agenes. Mutations of result in auto- to the aberrant splice site partially abrogated the mutation . somal dominant (Thomsen) and/or autosomal recessive (Becker) myotonia The mutation c.895-226T>G has a leaky effect on splicing leaving part of the congenita (MC). Mutations in are typically inherited as an autosomal full length transcript and may explain the milder phenotype in our patient. dominant trait. The ClC1 protein is a homodimer with a separate ion pore This category of mutations is often overlooked, being outside of canonically within each subunit. The varied inheritance pattern of myotonias appears sequenced genomic regions, and is particularly important because it can be to result from differential effects of a mutation on the channel dimer. Mu- corrected by antisense oligonucleotides therapy. tations causing recessive myotonia most likely affect properties of mutant monomer leaving the wild type monomer unaffected in the heterodimer. On P12.148 the other hand, mutations causing dominant myotonia affect properties of New deletion in Currarino syndrome I. Holm1, T. Monclair2, T. E. Prescott1, K. L. Eiklid1; bothC LsCuNbunits iSnC Nth4eA wild type/mutant heterodimer. Our study addresses 1Deparment of medical genetics, Oslo, Norway, 2Deparment of pediatric surgery, Oslo, two points: 1) molecular genetic diagnostics of MC by tandem analysis of Norway. the 1 and genes, and 2) homologyC mLCoNd1elling of theS dCiNm4eAric ClC1 channel. In the first part, mutations associated with the disease were identi- fied in 57 probands - 39 carried mutations in and 18 in . In the Currarino syndrome (CS, OMIM#176450) is an autosomally dominant inhe- second part, we performed homology modelling of the dimeric ClC1 channel rited developmental disorder due to incomplete rostral separation of endo- on the basis of known crystallographic structures. From this model, we pre-- and ectoderm. The conMdNitXio1n is characterized by three mHaLiXnB f9indings; a sac- dicted aminoacids (AA) forming the dimer interface and AA forming the Cl ral bony abnormality, anal stenosis and a presacral mass. CS is associated ion pathway. Further, we perfo-rmed search for mutations of AA forming the with mutations in the gene (previously known aMsN X1 ). Penetrance dimer interface or/and the Cl ion pathway in our model which have been is reduced and expression is variable within families. Molecular testing can found in patients with MC to assess the correlation between the localisation facilitate diagnosis anMdN aXc1curate genetic counseling. mutations were of a mutation and the type of MC. identified by direct Sanger sequencing of the coding regions and intron/ P12.153 exon boundaries oMf NX1 and by multiplex ligation probe amplification FZD6 encoding the Wnt receptor frizzled 6 is mutated in autosomal- (MLPA kit P277-B1 Human Telomere-10) and a specially designed kit with recessive nail dysplasia probes within the gene. A total of 23 individuals with CS from nine S. M. Pasternack1, G. Naz2, C. Perrin3, M. Mattheisen1,4,5, M. Refke1, S. Khan2, A. Gul2, M. different families were tested. We found mutations in only three families. Simons6, W. Ahmad2, R. C. Betz1; In one family four affected individuals had a deletion of a cytosine in exon 1 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2Department of Biochemistry, Islamabad, Pakistan, 3Hôpital L Pasteur, Laboratoire Central d’Anatomie Pathologique, Nice, (c.340delC, p.His114ProfsX111), previously described by Ross et al. (1998) France, 4Institute for Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, Bonn, Germany, and referred to as DelC, nt 414-17. In the second family, the two affected 5Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, Bonn, Germany, 6Center for Biological individuals, harboured a duplication of a guanine in exon 1 (c.336dupG, Systems Analysis (ZBSA), Freiburg, Germany. p.Pro113ArgfsX11M0N),X p1r eviously described by Köchling et al. (2001) and referred to as 413delG. In the third family, four affected individuals had a microdeletion of detected by MLPA only. The extent of the deletion, Isolated nail dysplasia is rare and has only been reported in a small number which has not been reported previously, is defined. This case undwerwscowre.se shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 319 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 TRPC6 WT1 of families. In this report, we describe two Pakistani families with an autoso- , ) using the Roche 454 technology. In 18/31 patients mutations mal-recessive inherited nail dysplasia. Thickening and hyperpigmentation were known, 13 patients did not show mutations in the already examined of all finger and toe nails were present at birth, and the nails subsequent- genes (Sanger detection rate 58%). ly became claw-like around puberty. By genomewide linkage analysis, we In 16/18 genetically diagnosed patients mutations were confirmed using mapped this genodermatosis to chromosome 8q22.3, and identified a ho- NGS. Two mutations localized within hCoDm2AoPp olymer regioInNsF h2ad not been mozygous nonsense mutation c.1750G>T (p.E584X) in the frizzled 6 (FZD6) identNifPieHdS. 1In 4/13 (31%) without mutations so far, mutations in one of the gene in all affecteds. Expression analyses in nail sections from healthy indi- following genes have been identified: (1 patient), (1 patient), viduals revealed strong expression of FZD6 in the ventral nail matrix and and (2 patients). These genes were not sequenced using Sanger a less pronounced expression of FZD6 in the nail bed. FZD6 belongs to a sequencing because they were excluded by the mutation algorithm. Alto- family of proteins that serve as receptors in Wnt signaling pathways, and has gether, in 20/31 patients causative mutations have been identified (NGS been shown to act as a negative regulator of the canonical Wnt/β-catenin si- detection rate 65%). gnaling cascade and a positive regulator of the non-canonical Wnt or planar NGS in the diagnostics of NS seems to be a good option for a rapid and reliab- cell polarity (PCP) pathway. The present results therefore suggest that FZD6 le genetic analysis. However, mutations within homopolymer regions can be plays a pivotal role in the growth and guidance of the nail plate in humans missed by the Roche 454 technology. These regions should still be analyzed by acting as a molecular switch between different Wnt pathways. Previous by Sanger sequencing. studies have identified mutations in the RSPO4 and LMX1B components of P12.156 the Wnt pathway in patients with the hypoplastic nail disorders anonychia Mutational analysis of the PLCE1 gene in Greek children with clinical and nail-patella syndrome, respectively. Only recently, FZD6 mutations were presentation of nephrotic syndrome (NS) and diffuse mesangial identified in isolated nail dysplasia. The present results emphasize the im- sclerosis (DMS) or focal segmental glomerulosclerosis(FSGS) portant role of the Wnt pathways in nail development and increase under- E. Fylaktou1, C. J. Stefanidis2, V. Askiti2, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, M. Bitsori3, A. Mitsioni2, E. standing of Wnt-mediated developmental events in general. Kanavakis1, J. Traeger Synodinos1; 1Medical Genetics, Athens University, „Aghia Sophia“ Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Greece, P12.154 2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, „P. and A. Kyriakou“ Children‘s Hospital, Athens, Identification and characterization of a rare gene variant in Greece, 3Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital of Heraklion, Heraklion, Greece. congenital interstitial lung fibrosis and nephrotic syndrome N. Nicolaou1, S. Kevelam1, M. Lilien2, M. Oosterveld3, R. Goldschmeding4, A. van Eerde1, R. PLCE1 Pfundt5, A. Sonnenberg6, P. Terhal1, N. Knoers1, K. Renkema1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Utrecht, Mutations in encoding phospholipase C epsilon 1(PLCe1) have re- Netherlands, 2Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Medical Center Utrecht, cently been described in patients with early onset nephrotic syndrome (NS), Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Amsterdam Medical Centre, diffuse mesangial sclerosis (DMPSL) CaEn1d focal segmental glomeruloscerosis Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Department of Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, (FSGS). In 40 NS patients (35 sNpPoHraSd1i,c N, 5P HfaSm2ilial) WwTit1h histological findings Utrecht, Netherlands, 5Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen of DMS or FSGS, 27/31 exons of were analysed by direct sPeLqCuEe1ncing. Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Pathological mutations in the and genes had been pre- Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. viously excluded in all patients. Sequencing analysis revealed mu- tations in 4/35 patients. Three, homozygous for the previously described p.R1246X, had similar clinical findings (FSGS, age diagnosis 3.7, 2.5 and 3.5 We saw a patient who presented with severe congenital interstitial lung fi- years, respectively; age first dialysis 3.9, 2.6 and 4.5 years, respectively). brosis and nephrotic syndrome, characterized by kidney hypoplasia, hydro- AdditionalIlny ,s 1il iccaose was found homozygous for a novel mutation, p.A945P. nephrosis, glomerulosclerosis, pulmonary hypoplasia, and alveolar glycoge- The patient (male) presented at 3months with DMD, initiating dialysis at nosis, leading to death 7 months after birth due to respiratory insufficiency. 9months. analysis (SIFT, Polyphen, Pmut and MutationTaster) were The purpose of this study was to describe the clinicopathologic findings and applied to evaluate causality of the p.A945P mutation. Pmut and SIFT found unravel the underlying genetic cause. Known nephrotic syndrome genes the nucleotide change “possibly damaging”, while Polyphen and MutationTa- were screened and 250K SNP array analysis was performed. No novel vari- ster indicated p.A945P to be benign. Resequencing analysis in members of ants were identified in the known nephrotic syndrome genes. A homozygous the patients’ family (over 3 generations, all unaffected wPitLhC eN1S) found only region of 20 Mb was identified in the patient’s DNA. Sequencing of the stron- heterozygotes for p.A945P (according to expePcLtCeed1 phase). Further studies gest candidate gene revealed a novel homozygous missense variant that was are required to conclude the pathogenicity of this novel mutation, in inherited from the heterozygous unaffected parents and not found in 384 the light of observations that pathogenPicLiCtye 1of gene mutations may be control chromosomes. Striking similarities were seen between the gene ambiguous (Boyer et al, J Med Genet, 2010). Overall our findings are consi- knockout mouse and the patient’s phenotype. Further in vitro characteriza- stent with previous conclusions that mutations are not uncommon tion studies demonstrated the effect of the variant on the protein function. in childhood NS patients in whom mutations in other NS-gene have been Here, we report a novel human gene variant, causing congenital interstitial excluded. lung fibrosis and nephrotic syndrome for the first time. The variant leads to P12.157 an amino acid substitution in a gene essential for basement membrane de- Analysis of VANGL2 in 164 patients with neural tube defects reveals velopment, in a domain interacting with extracellular matrix components. no mutations This is the first clinical phenotype associated with a mutation in this gene in I. Kirmes, U. Zechner, O. Bartsch; humans. Our findings have major implications for our understanding how Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg basement membrane morphogenesis is regulated and facilitates the design University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. of genetic screening tests for early diagnosis and genetic counselling for pa- tients and their relatives. P12.155 Van Gogh-like (Vangl2) is a protein of the non-canonical Wnt signalling Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) in the diagnostics of Nephrotic pathway regulating polarized cell movements during embryonic develop- Syndrome ment such as neurulation. Mutations of the Vangl2 gene have been shown J. Hoefele1, A. Büscher2, C. Heberle1, M. Konrad3, S. Weber2, H. Klein1; to cause neural tube defects (NTDs) in loop-tail (Lp) mice and have become 1Center for Human Genetics and Laboratory Medicine Dr. Klein & Dr. Rost, Martinsried, strong candidates for causing NTDs in humans. Mutations in the VANGL1 Germany, 2University Children‘s Hospital, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Essen, Germany, 3University Children‘s Hospital, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, gene, which is homologous to VANGL2, were described to be associated with Muenster, Germany. NTDs in 1-2% of cases. To examine the contribution of VANGL2 sequence variants to human NTDs, we studied lymphocyte DNA from peripheral blood of 164 patients with clinically relevant NTDs for VANGL2 gene mutations About 10% of children with idiopathic Nephrotic syndrome (NS) are stero- using PCR sequencing. id-resistant (SRNS), and develop end-stage renal disease. In the last couple We identified no mutations, but 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of years, mutations in a number of genes highly expressed in podocytes have in the VANGL2 gene. Of these, seven were silent SNPs within the coding DNA been identified causing SRNS. (exons 3, 4, 6 and 7) and seven were intronic SNPs. Nine SNPs were already The focus of this study was to establish a NGS approach for developing a reported by the 1000 Genomes Project with similar frequencies, and five fast and extensive method leading to increased genetic diagnostics of SRNS SNPs were novel and appeared with low frequencies. In silico testing of the patients. As positive control 31 patients were analyzed, who had already five novels SNPs predicted no deleterious effects (no alteration of splice been sequencedA uCsTinNg4 thCeD 2SAanPgCerO Qse6quINenFc2inLgA mMeBt2hoNdP fHoSll1owNiPnHg St2heP mLCuEta1- sites), but further studies remain to be done before final conclusions can tional algorithm. These patients were examined in all thitherto known SRNS be drawn. Furthermore, we performed a methylation analysis by bisulfite relevant genes ( , , , , , , , , pyrosequencing of the potential VANGL2 promoter region to search for pos- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org320 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 sible epimutations causing NTD and identified no methylation differences bromas, and Lisch nodules. The disorder is caused by defects in the tumor- between patients with NTDs and controls. Other studies reported VANGL2 suppressor gene NF1. Mutation detection is complex and expensive due to mutations in about 2% of NTD cases, suggesting that VANGL2 gene mutati- the large size of the NF1 gene, the presence of pseudogenes, the lack of mu- ons are associated with NTDs in a small subset of cases. tation hotspots as well as a large variety of minor and major deletions. P12.158 We have established a Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS)-based mutation Neurofibromin (NF1) is required for skeletal muscle development detection method as a tool for routine analysis of the entire NF1 gene in pati- S. Stricker1, N. Kossler1, J. Kim2, J. Kühnisch3, D. A. Stevenson4, T. Braun2, S. Mundlos1,3, M. ents with excluded deletion. So far, we have tested >45 patients with suspec- Kolanczyk1,3; ted NF1. 7% of the patients harbored a NF1 gene deletion, the remaining 1Max Planck Institute for molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 2Max-Planck-Institute for patients were subsequently examined using NGS: all protein-coding exons Heart and Lung Research, Bad Nauheim, Germany, 3Institute for Medical and Human including the flanking splice consensus sites were amplified by PCR and af- Genetics, Charité, Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 4Division of Medical terwards sequenced using the Roche 454J platform. In >70% of the patients Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States. we have detected exonic and splice site mutations. All mutations identified by NGS were successfully validated by Sanger sequencing. NF1 NF1 No causative mutation was found in over 20% of the patients, which might Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a multi-system disease caused by mu- be explained either by the presence of deep intronic mutations or the fact tations in the gene. encodes a RAS-GAP protein, Neurofibromin, that not all patients in our cohort met diagnostic criteria for NF1. To further which negatively regulates RAS signaling. Besides neuroectodermal malfor- increase the mutation detection rate we have recently included NGS-based mations and tumours, the skeletal system is often affected in NF1 patients, testing of the SPRED1 gene, mutated in the clinically similar Legius syndro- scoliosis and long bone dysplasias being a main cause of considerable mor- me. bidity. Interestingly, a reduction of muscle strength and size has been re- We conclude that the use of NGS-based diagnostic procedures offers an af- ported in NF1 patients. However it remained unclear whether the observed fordable and highly sensitive alternative for NF1 diagnostic. muscle weakness was a consequence of the skeletal ramifications develo- P12.161 ping during puberty and early adulthood or if there was a muscular phe- Mutation analysis of NF1 and SPRED1 genes in Slovak patients notype before the onset of a bone phenotype. Nf1 geneP rixn1activation in the M. Nemethova1, A. Rybarova2, D. Ilencikova2, L. Kadasi3,1, A. Zatkova1,3; early mouse limb bud mesenchyme using Prx1-cre (Nf1 ) resulted in mu- 1Laboratory of Genetics, Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, Bratislava, scle dystrophy characterised by fibrosis, reduced number of muscle fibres, Slovakia, 22nd Department of Pediatrics, Comenius University Medical School University and reduced muscle force. This was caused by an early defect in myogenesis and Children´s Hospital, Bratislava, Slovakia, 3Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty affecting the terminal differentiation of myoblasts between embryonic days of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. (E)12.5 and E14.5. In parallel, the muscle connective tissue cells exhibited increased proliferation at E14.5 and an increase in the amount of connecti- ve tissue as early as E16.5. These changes were accompanPirex1d by excessive Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of the most common autosomal do- MAPK pathway activation. Satellite cells isolated from Nf1 mice showed minant disorders with incidence of 1:3500. The main clinical features are normal self-renewal, but their differentiation was impaired as indicated by “café au lait” macules, freckling, optical glioma, Lisch noduls, any types of diminished myotube formation. Our results demonstrate a requirement of neurofibromas, and dysplasia of bones. The disease is caused by inacti- Neurofibromin for muscle formation and maintenance. This previously un- vating mutations within the NF1 gene that maps to 17q11.2 and consists of recognized function of Neurofibromin may contribute to the musculoskele- 60 exons. Protein product of NF1 is a tumor suppressor neurofibromin that tal problems in NF1 patients. functions as a negative regulator of Ras proto onkogen. P12.159 Legius syndrome called NF1- like syndrome is disorder with similar clinical Mutation screening by Next generation sequencing technology in features like NF1. It is caused by mutation in the next negative regulator of analysis of Neurofibromatosis type 1- our first experience. MAPK signal pathway - SPRED1 (Sprouty-related EVH1 domain - containing J. Kadlecová1,2, S. Dudová1,2, M. Vaňásková1, I. Valášková1,2, R. Gaillyová1,2; protein 1). SPRED1 gene is localized on 15q13.2 chromosome and consist 1University Hospital Brno, Medical Genetics Dept., Brno, Czech Republic, 2Fakulty of of 8 exons. Medicine, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic. We identified 55 mutations in NF1 gene. 31 of them are new and 24 are recurrent. Using protocol base on sequencing of entire NF1 coding region NF1 developed by Messiaen and Wimmer (2008), we identified 25/55 (45%) Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is autosomal dominant disordeNrFs 1a nd is frameshift, 8/55 (15%) splicing, 7/55 (13%) missense, 5/55 (9%) non- caused by mutations in the gene. Current approaches of NF1 analyses sence mutations and 1/55 (2%) small frame deletion. In all cases where are complicated molecular diagnostics due to the large size of the gene, no mutation was identified by sequencing we performed MLPA analysis we the presence of pseudogenes, the great variety of possible lesions and high identified 5/55 (9%) deletions of entire gene type 1, 4/55 (7%) larger intra- mutation detection rate. genic deletions of one or more exons. We report our first experience of NF1 gene analysis using the next-generati- If patients fulfil the main diagnostic criteria but they have no germinal mu- on sequencing (NGS) (Roche GS Junior). 20 patients with clinical symptoms tation in NF1 gene we analysed SPRED1 gene. Analysis of SPRED1 gene was of the disease were included to DNA mutational screening .The PCR of all finished in 18 patients. No pathogenic mutation was found. exons of NF1 gene were performed by the use of primers composed by a P12.162 gene-specific part and a universal tail. Each primer was labeled by MID tails Loss of neurofibromin increases micro- and macroporosity in cortical (Multiplex Identifier Adaptors), which serve to identify specific patient´s bone resulting in diminished mechanical resistance DNA sample. Prepared amplicons of NF1gene were analysed using of two J. Kühnisch1, C. Lange2, J. Seto2, J. Grohmann3, S. Tinschert4, K. Raum5, T. el Khassawna5, runs in the GS JUNIOR system. The generated NGS data were processed with F. Elefteriou6, U. Kornak1, P. Fratzl2, M. Kolanczyk1, S. Mundlos1; Roche software Amplicon Variant Analyzer version 2.5p1 and acquired se- 1Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité, Universitätsmedizin quences were compared to reference genome. Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Biomaterials, Max Planck Institute for Colloids We have detected point mutations within the coding region: deletion, non- and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, FG sens, missense, splicing and frameshift mutations. All of these sequence Development & Disease, Berlin, Germany, 4Institut für Klinische Genetik, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany, variants were confirmed by conventional analysis method (Sanger sequen- 5Julius Wolff Institute & Brandenburg School of Regenerative Therapies, Charité - cing). Since the data acquired within our first experiment by the Roche Ju- Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 6Center of Bone Biology, Vanderbilt nior system are in full accordance with results obtained by traditional ap- University - Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United States. proach and the process is both time and cost effective , we are involving NGS to our strategy of molecular genetics testing of NF1 patietns in combination with conventional analysis methods as MLPA, Sanger Sequencing of DNA Skeletal manifestations such as osteoporosis, dystrophic scoliosis or tibial and cDNA dysplasia are commonly in patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). To P12.160 further explore the origin of NF1 bone dysplasia we now performed detailed Next-Generation Sequencing in Neurofibromatosis 1 analysis of the cortical bone porosities in Nf1Prx1 mice and in NF1 pati- E. Decker1, L. Behalova2, M. Hikkelova2, H. Gabriel1, M. Gencik1, A. Gencik1; ents employing high-resolution imaging techniques. One of our aims was 1diagenos, Osnabrück, Germany, 2MedGene, Bratislava, Slovakia. to explore how NF1 loss of function affects osteocytes, the mechanosenso- ry cells of the bone. The overall morphology of the humerus from Nf1Prx1 mice appeared severely disordered. Especially at the muscle to bone inserti- Neurofibromatosis 1 is an autosomal-dominant disease characterized by on sites we observed large amounts of fibrocartilaginous tissue. Within the multiple café-au-lait spots, axillary and inguinal freckling, multiple neurofi- diaphysis we detected large non-mineralized regions of bone tissue that are www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 321 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1Department of Medical Genetics, Izmir, Turkey, 2Department of Pediatrics, Izmir, Turkey. associated with blood vessels. Thus, the macroporosity was 5-fold increased in Nf1Prx1 mice as compared to controls. Microporosity, which is mainly determined by the size of osteocyte lacunae, was increased. While Nf1Prx1 Niemann-Pick disease Types A and B (NPD) are autosomal recessive sphin- cortical bone contained a normal number of osteocyte lacunae, the average golipidoses caused by mutations in the sphingomyelin phosphodiesterase 1 lacuna volume was increased, yielding higher relative osteocyte volume per (SMPD1) gene. These two types of the disease were described as early onset bone volume (3.4 % in the mutants vs. 2.0 % in controls). The osteocyte phe- Type A disease and the milder Type B according to the presence (type A) or notype is likely cell autonomous as increased osteocyte lacuna volume was absence (type B) of neurological symptoms. also detected in the Nf1Col1 mice. Similarly, a quantitative volumetric ana- The 5 kb gene encoding the human SMPD1 gene (MIM# 607608,GenBank# lysis of cortical bone samples from NF1 patients demonstrated increased M81780.1) is composed of six exons and is located at chromosome 11p15.1- osteocyte lacuna size. These findings suggest that neurofibromin is required 11p15.4. Several mutations causing NPD have been described. We present for normal osteocyte function, and facilitates bone homeostasis. Thus, our a molecular analysis of six unrelated Turkish NPD patients in which mutant collective data reveal a significant impact of neurofibromin on cortical poro- SMPD1 alleles were identified. One of the patients had type A and 5 had sity establishing a further aspect of NF1 bone dysplasia. type B NPD. These mutations included two missense mutations: c.409T>C P12.163 (p.L137P) and c.1262 A>G (p.H421R); the common frameshift mutation at In search of genetic defects in unrelated frontotemporal lobar codon 189, identified in 2 patient is caused by the deletion of the 567T intro- degeneration patients using whole genome sequencing ducing a stop codon 65 aminoacids downstream (p.P189fsX65) and a novel S. Philtjens1,2, I. Gijselinck1,2, T. Van Langenhove1,2, J. van der Zee1,2, S. Engelborghs2,3, R. frameshift mutation c. 1755delC (p.P585PfsX24) which was not previosly Vandenberghe4, P. Santens5, P. De Deyn2,3, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2, M. Cruts1,2; reported. The known c.409T>C (p.L137P) and c.567delT (p.P189fsX65) 1VIB Department Molecular Genetics, Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge, were the most frequent mutations accounting for 50% and 25% the alle- University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 3Department of Neurology and Memory les, respectively. In this study genotype-phenotype correlations were esta- Clinic, Hospital Network Antwerp Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven and University of Leuven, blished for the mutations. Leuven, Belgium, 5Department of Neurology, University Hospital Ghent and University of P12.166 Ghent, Ghent, Belgium. Frequent CLCN1 gene mutations in patients from Russian Federation (RF) with non-distrophic Thomsen and Becker myotonias E. Ivanova1, V. Fedotov2, S. Kurbatov2, E. Dadali1, G. Rudenskaya1, A. Polyakov1, A. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) has a positive family history Polyakov1; 1Russian Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Center of in up to 50% of patients and approximately 40% can be explained by cau- Genetic Consultation, Russia, Voronez, Russian Federation. sal mutations in one of the known genes. In spite of this, identifying and sampling informative families for genetic linkage studies becomes incre- asingly difficult due to a variable disease onset and penetrance, amongst Non-dystrophic Thomsen and Becker myotonias are muscle channelopa- other reasons. We use whole genome sequencing (WGS) as an alternative to thies caused by mutations in CLCN1 (7q35). The study group consisted identify Mendelian FTLD genes. We obtained the whole genome sequences of 79 unrelated patients with revealed myotonia by clinical examination. of three affected sib pairs and ten unrelated at an average coverage of 70- Patient’s DNA samples were analyzed by direct sequensing of all 23 exons fold capturing both alleles of 96.5% of the genome. Analysis of the genome of the CLCN1 gene and 40 different mutations were detected in 118 chro- sequences resulted in about four million variants per genome. Subsequent mosomes in 21 family cases (9-AD and 12-AR) and 45 sporadic cases (84% variant filtering procedures were based on sequence quality, genomic lo- altogether). Eighteen mutations haven’t been described earlier. There were cation, allele frequency, zygosity, predicted functional consequences and detected several frequent mutations: p.Gly190Ser (5,9%), c.1437-1450del occurrence in sequenced patients. The number of variants was reduced to (9,3%), p.Ala493Glu (5,1%), p.Thr550Met (3,4%), p.Tyr686Stop (5,1%) and a manageable number of candidate variants, with 380 missense or splice va- p.Arg894Stop (30,5%) composed 59,3% all mutant chromosomes. The most riants segregating in each sib pair and 350 shared by at least three unrelated frequent p.Arg894Stop was revealed in homozygous and compound-hetero- patients. We are now validating the selected variants and determining their zygous cases and allelic frequency of p.Arg894Stop among the control popu- frequency in neurologically healthy control individuals and extended pati- lation is 1,2% (12/488). As the founder effect was expected to cause the high ents cohorts. The identification of novel FLTD genes will provide valuable frequency of the p.Arg894Stop we analyze haplotypes of mutant chromoso- insights into the pathogenesis of the disease and will eventually lead to the mes in 28 patients and 17 relatives using microsatellite markers D7S1824, development of e.g. disease models. D7S2513, D7S3068, D7S661 and D7S2511. Despite most linked markers P12.164 flanking CLCN1 gene was in 1,7 Mb(D7S2513) and 0,6 Mb(D7S3068) away Characterization of the delC.2970-2972 AAT mutation in exon 17 of from the gene it wasn’t any common haplotype in mutant chromosomes. the NF1 gene in Mexican patients with neurofibromatosis type 1 with Possibly the distance between markers and the mutation wasn’t enough no cutaneous neurofibromas close. So we analyzed haplotype using introgenic SNP markers (rs940864, P. Hernandez-Alcantara1, L. Plaza-Benhumea1, J. Cazarin-Barrientos2, M. R. Rivera- Vega1, L. M. Gonzalez-Huerta1, H. Urueta-Cuellar1, S. Cuevas-Covarrubias1; rs2272251 upstream and rs4489232, rs6464546 downstream the mutati- 1Genetica, Hospital General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico, 2Dermatologia, Hospital on Arg894Stop). Founder haplotype was detected in 13 out of 17 mutant General de Mexico, Mexico, D.F., Mexico. chromosomes (rs940864-rs2272251-rs4489232-rs6464546: A-T-T-A) and it is statistically significant comparably with control group (p=0,05). Resu- me this data widespread occurrence of mutation p.Arg894Stop in Russia is Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is one of most common genodermatosis result of founder effect. inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with complete penetrance and va- P12.167 riable expressivity. With an incidence of 1:3000, it is caused by mutations Clinical spectrum of intragenic CAMTA1 rearrangements: From non- in the NF1 gene, which encodes the protein neurofibromin. Recent reports progressive congenital ataxia to intellectual disability identified a three nucleotide deletion in exon 17 of neurofibromin gene as- J. THEVENON1,2, E. Lopez2, B. Keren3,4, D. Héron5, C. Mignot6, C. Altuzarra7, L. Gallagher8, sociated with absence of neurofibromas and benign course. The aim of the M. Béri-Dexheimer9, C. Bonnet9, E. Magnin10, L. Burglen5,11, D. Minot1, J. Vigneron12, S. Morle7, M. Anheim5, P. Charles5, A. Brice3,4, J. Amiel13, E. Haffen14, C. Mach3, C. Depienne3,4, study is the molecular analysis of the gene NF1 in Mexican patients with D. Doummar5, M. Bonnet15, L. Duplomb2, V. Carmignac2, P. Callier16, A. Mosca-Boidron16, NF1 and no neurofibroms. Methods: 10 patients were screened through PCR N. Marle16, V. Roze17, B. Aral18, F. Razavi19, P. Jonveaux9, L. Faivre1,2, C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2; and DNA sequencing from genomic DNA. Results: 10 patients (all >20 years 1Centre de référence maladies rares, Dijon, France, 2Equipe Génétique et Anomalies old) with a mild NF1 phenotype and no neurofibroms were screened for du Développement, Université de Bourgogne, Faculté de Médecine, Dijon, France, deletion in exon17 (c.2970-2972 AAT) of the NF1 gene. All patients included 3INSERM, U975 and CNRS 7225, CRICM, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 4AP-HP, in the study were negative for the deletion reported in other populations. Département de Génétique et de Cytogénétique, Centre de Génétique Moléculaire et Conclusions: In this study we found no association between the absence of Chromosomique, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence „Déficiences intellectuelles de causes rares“, Groupe Hospitalier neurofibromas and delc.2970-2972 AAT in exon 17 in patients with NF1.. Pitié-Salpêtrière et CRICM, INSERM UMRS975, La Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris, France, We consider that other genes or environment factors could be associated 6Département de Génétique et Centre de Référence „Déficiences intellectuelles de causes with the absence of neurofibromas in neurofibromatosis type 1. rares“, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière et CRICM, INSERM UMRS975, La Pitié P12.165 Salpêtrière, Dijon, France, 7Service de Neuropédiatrie, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, Identification and characterization of SMPD1 mutations causing France, 8Department of Psychiatry, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 9Laboratoire Niemann-Pick types A and B in Turkish Patients de Génétique et EA 4368, CHU de Nancy, Nancy, France, 10Neurologie, CHU de Besançon, A. Aykut1, E. Karaca1, H. Onay1, S. Kalkan2, M. Coker2, O. Cogulu1, F. Ozkinay1; Besançon, France, 11Centre de référence des malformations et maladies congénitales du www.eshg.org www.eshg.org322 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 cervelet et Service de Génétique Médicale, APHP, Hôpital Trousseau, et INSERM U676, Hôpital Robert Debré, Paris, France, 12U.F. de Génétique Clinique, Maternité Régionale, Nancy, France, 13Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker Enfant Malade, AP-HP et An Italian family with two siblings affected by nonsyndromic sensorineural Université René Descartes, Paris, France, 14Psychiatrie, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, hearing loss (NSHL) and showing a recessive pattern of transmission was France, 15Centre de Référence des Troubles du Langage et des apprentissages, Pédiatrie, selected for whole-exome next-generation sequencing (PNRGPSS)1. Genomic cap- CHU Dijon, Dijon, France, 16Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, Plateau Technique de ture and NGS on a HiSeq 2000 sequencer (Illumina) of the proband lead to Biologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 17Laboratoire de Cytogénétique, CHU de Besançon, Besançon, France, 18Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Plateau Technique de the identification of a novel missense mutation within . Mutations in Biologie, CHU de Dijon, Dijon, France, 19Service d’Histologie-Embryologie-Cytogénétique, this gene, which codes for the phosphoribosylpyrophosphate synthetase 1 Hôp (PRS-I) enzyme, were previously demonstrated to cause X-linked syndro- mic condloitciuosns associated with hearing impairment (e.g. Arts syndrome and Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease-5), and, most recently, NSHL in 4 families Non-progressive congenital ataxias (NPCA) with or without intellectual (PDRFPNS1X 1 ). The identified mutation segregates with prelingual, bilateral, disability (ID) are clinically and genetically heterogeneous conditions. As a profound NSHL in the proband’s family. A subsequent screening of the entire consequence, the identification of the genes responsible for these pheno- gene by Sanger sequencing in 13 additional unrelated probands from types remained limited. Using high resolution microarrays, we identified NSHL families showing a likely X-linked inheritance pattern led to the dis- intragenic copy number variations in the CG-1 domain of the Calmodulin- covery of a second missense mutation segregating with pre-lingual hearing binding Transcription Activator 1 (CAMTA1) gene, segregating with au- impairment. The two novel variants were absent in a cohort of 126 Italian tosomal dominant ID with NPCA in two unrelated families, and a de novo audiologically-tPeRstPeSd1, normal-hearing controls. Both amino-acid substituti- deletion located in the same domain in a child presenting with NPCA. In the ons are predicted to cause a destabilization of the enzyme structure. The ID patients, the deletion led to a frameshift, producing a truncated protein, impact of both mutations on the function of PRS-I is currently under while this was not the case for the patient with isolated childhood ataxia. analysis by measuring the enzyme activity in the patients’ emolysates com- Brain MRI of the patients revealed a pattern of progressive atrophy of cere- pared to contrPoRlsP. SIn1 conclusion, we provide evidence of the usefulness of bellum medium lobes and superior vermis, parietal lobes and hippocampi. wlohcuosle-exome NGS for the genetic diagnosis of NSHL and we highlight the Although DNA sequencing of the CG-1 domain in 197 patients with sporadic recurrence of mutations, suggesting that it may represent a major or familial non-syndromic intellectual deficiency, extended to full DNA se- for X-linked NSHL to be prioritised in genetic screenings. quencing in 50 patients with ID and 47 additional patients with childhood P12.170 ataxia, identified no pathogenic mutation, there is considerable evidence A custom multiplexing mutation panel for Noonan, Costello, LEOPARD that CAMTA1 rearrangements are being disease causing. Indeed, CAMTA1 and Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndromes is a brain specific calcium responsive transcription factor expressed in the P. Tavares, A. Lopes, L. Lameiras, L. Dias, J. Sá, P. Rendeiro, A. Palmeiro; brain and cerebellum during development and later implicated in memory CGC Genetics (www.cgcgenetics.com), Porto, Portugal. processes; intragenic rearrangements are concentrated in a highly conser- Introduction: ved functional domain with transcription regulation ability and nuclear traf- ficking functions; CAMTA1 transcriptional studies have shown upregulation Noonan syndrome is a congenital genetic disease that affects of genes already implicated in intellectual disability and autism spectrum both males and females equally. Often this syndrome is not diagnosed, but disorder. Altogether, we show that CAMTA1 loss-of-function is responsible it is related to many complex problems such as coagulation defects and for NPCA with or without ID. lymphatic dysplasias. Differential diagnosis includes major diseases in the P12.168 same metabolic pathway - Costello, CardiofaciocutManeethoousd :and LEOPARD The prevalence of OTOF mutations in Iranian deaf population Syndrome. Noonan Syndrome is often present in prenatal cases with in- N. Bazazzadegan1, N. Meyer2, K. Kahrizi1, M. Babanejad1, K. Jalalvand1, N. Nikzat1, S. creased nuchal translucency and normal karyotype. We developed Arzhangi1, R. J. H. Smith2, H. Najmabadi1; a custom multiplex mutation panel (CGC Mutation Panel - Pat. Pending) that 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences,, contains a total of 81 point mutations on genes PTPN11, RAF1, SOS1 and Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Molecular Otolaryngology Research Laboratories, KRAS, HRAS, BRAF, MAP2K1 and MAP2K2 inRveosluvletds in Noonan, LEOPARD, Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, University of Iowa, IA, IA, United Costello and Cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes. With this panel we analysed States. 85 samples (35 prenatal and 50 postnatal). : From the 85 samples tested (35 prenatal and 50 postnatal), in 2 prenatal sample we detected mu- tations on PTPN11 gene allowing the diagnosis of Noonan and in 3 oCf othne- Hearing impairment is the most common genetic sensory defect in humans pclousstinoanta:l samples we found mutations on SOS1, BRAF and PTPN11 gene al- worldwide. One in every 1,000 neonates is born with profound congenital lowing the diagnosis of Noonan and Cardiofaciocutaneous syndromes. deafness. About 70% of hereditary sensoryneural hearing loss (SNHL) is This approach is a valuable prenatal and postnatal diagnostics tool, non-syndromic (DFN) and at least 80% of these cases have autosomal reces- since it detects the most common mutations associated with Noonan Syn- sOiTvOe F(DFNB) inheritance. To date, genetic studies have shown that mutations drome and syndromes of the same metabolic pathway in a single test. This in more OthTaOnF 90 loci and 40 genes are associated with DFNB. Mutations in panel reduces time and costs to achieve a diagnosis improves its capability, gene are cause of neurosensory non-syndromic recessive deafness, independently of the sample type, allowing an earlier decision-making pro- DFNB9. gene contains 48 exons which encode a transmembrane pro- cess in patient management, and is useful especially in prenatal diagnosis tein, otoferlin. Several mutations in this gene have been found in Lebanese, situations with increased nuchal translucency and normal karyotype. Pakistani, Turkish, Colombian and Spanish families. OTOF P12.171 Recently, we observed an Iranian family with autosomal recessive non-syn- Novel mutations in PTPN11 gene in two girls with Noonan syndrome dromic hearing loss(ARNSHL),which showed linkage to gene. Muta- phenotype tion detection of this gene revealed a missense mutation. So we decided to E. Yilmaz Gulec1, S. Candan1, E. Ataman1, C. Yarar2; screen our population for this gene. 1Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research Hospital, Medical Genetics One hundred and forty four ARNSHL families with two or more affected in- Department, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul Kanuni Sultan Suleyman Training and Research dividuals originated fromO TdOifFferent ethnic groups of Iran were selected for Hospital, Pediatric Neurology Department, Istanbul, Turkey. this study. All the families were subjected to homozygosity mapping using flanking STR markers of gene. After screening all the families, one fa- mily showed linkageto this gene. Further analysis using direct seOqTuOenFcing of Noonan syndrome is an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by this gene revealed a splice site mutation (IVS28+2 T>C). So, in comparison postnatally reduced growth, distinctive facial dysmorphic features, hyper- with other countries such as our neighboring country, Pakistan, muta- trophic cardiomyopathy and/ or pulmonary valve stenosis , skeletal and tions are very rare in Iran. hematological anomalies, and webbing of the neck. To date, mutations of P12.169 nine different genes were identified as the molecular cause of this disorder. Exome sequencing identifies PRPS1 as a major locus for X-linked While mutations of these genes are responsible for the 75% of all the cases, nonsyndromic hearing loss in the Italian population mutations in PTPN11 is responsible for approximately 50% alone. M. Robusto1, J. Zhang2, R. Asselta1, J. Liang2, X. Liu2, P. Primignani3, P. Castorina4, S. Here, we report two novel mutations c.A1690G and c.C155T in two girls Caccia5, U. Ambrosetti4, Y. Yin2, J. Wang2, S. Duga1, G. Soldà1; with Noonan Syndrome phenotype, both with short stature, one with mild 1Dipartimento di Biologia e Genetica per le Scienze Mediche, Università degli Studi di neuromotor developmental delay and the other with dysplastic pulmonary Milano, Milano, Italy, 2BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 3S.O. Genetica Medica, Ospedale valve and pulmonary valve stenosis. We try to correlate genotype-pheno- Niguarda Ca‘ Granda, Milano, Italy, 4UO Audiologia, Fondazione IRCCS, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Mangiagalli e Regina Elena, Milano, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Scienze type relation. e Tecnologie Biomediche, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 323 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.172 A spectrum of mutations in PTPN11, SOS1 and RAF1 genes in patients with Noonan syndrome clinical suspicion. The syndrome consists of failure to thrive, a natural killer cell deficiency, A. Abramowicz1, M. Gos1, J. Klapecki1, R. Frazao2, J. Majewski2, A. Szpecht-Potocka1, A. an atypical Fanconi‘s type DNA breakage disorder and features of familial Kutkowska-Kazmierczak1, K. Szczałuba1, P. Lepage2, E. Obersztyn1, J. Bal1, E. Bocian1; glucocorticoid deficiency. In addition the children had delayed bone age, 1Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2McGill University and Genome Quebec clinodactyly and some presented with hypoglycaemia. Using SNP homozy- Innovation Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada. gosity mappiMngC,M w4e/ PidReKnDtiCfied a locus for this syndrome on 8p11.21-q11.22. Targeted resequencing of the candidate region revealed a hoMmCoMzy4g ous mPRuKtaDtCion in in all ten patients that segregated with the phe- Noonan syndrome (NS) is a relatively common developmental syndrome notype. Consistent with the observed DNA breakage diPsoRrKdDeCr, and belonging to the group of RASopathies, that are characterized by increased are both involved in the ATM/ATR DNA repair pathway which is de- activity of the Ras/mitogen activated protein kinase (RAS/MAPK) signaling fective in patients with Fanconi’s anaMemCMia4. DPeRfiKcDieCncy of in mice has pathway. NS is known to be a disorder with variable phenotypic expressi- been shown to result in an abnormal NK cell physiology similar to that ob- on including symptoms like short stature, dysmorphic features, congenital served in the patients. Mutations in / represent a novel cause heart defects and many other. of DNA breakage and NK cell deficiency. Our findings suggest that clinicians Noonan syndrome is caused by a germline mutatPioTnP iNn1 o1n, eS OoSf 1th, eR AgFen1e, Bs RthAaFt, should consider this disorder in patients with failure to thrive who develop eKnRcAoSd, eN RprAoSt,e SiHnsO Cin2v, oMlvEeKd1 i n RACSB/LM APK s.ignaling pathway. In NS patients, pigmentation or who have recurrent infections. heterozygous mutations have been identified in P12.175 and genes Oncogenic NRAS G12S discovered as a germline mutation in a patient Three hundPreTdP Nel1e1v,e SnO Sin1dividRuaAlFs1 ( 237 patients with clinical suspicion of with Noonan/CFC syndrome NS and 74 relatives) were referred to our laboratory for molecular exami- S. Jakubiczka1, S. Spranger2, A. Pekrun3, C. Titgemeyer3, C. Lißewski1, M. Zenker1; nation. The and genes were examined in 237, 70 and 28 1Institute of Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany, 2Praxis for Human Genetics, patients, respectively. The analysis of coding sequence was performed using Bremen, Germany, 3Hospital Bremen-Mitte, Bremen, Germany. direct sequencing mePtThPoNd1.1 SOS1 RAF1 The known NS causing missense mutations were found in 89 (37.5%) cases: 67 had mutation in , 10 in de naonvdo 12 in . All the identified Noonan syndrome (MIM 163950) and cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome mutations, according to the litPeTrPatNu1r1e, werSeO gSa1in-oRfA-fFu1nction type. Although (CFC syndrome; MIM 115150) are clinically overlapping syndromes caused most of the probands with NS have a mutation, we have identified by mutations in various genes encoding components of the RAS/MAPK si- 17 (50%) familial cases (14 - , 2 - , 1- ). The low frequency gnalling pathway. Here, we report on a 1-year-old girl with facial anomalies, of identified mutations among patients included in the study might suggest heart defect, and developmental delay leading to the differential diagnosis that more stringent criteria should be used for patients’ qualification for of Noonan or NCFRCA Ssyndrome. She has not had any signs of a myeloprolife- molecular testing. rative disease or other malignancy, so far. Mutation analysis revealed the Supported from NCN research project no. DEC-2011/01/D/NZ5/01347. heterozygous mutation c.34G>A (p.G12S) in dleeu nkoovcoyte DNA. The pre- P12.173 sence of the mutation was also confirmed in the patient’s NbuRcAcSa l cells and Interpretation of atypical NOTCH3 mutations: lessons from patients could be ruled out in the parents, thus indicating a mutational event with novel large NOTCH3 alterations but no CADASIL in the germline. G12S is one of the most frequent sNoRmAaSt ic mutations J. W. Rutten1, E. M. Boon1, H. G. Dauwerse1, P. Lakeman2, M. K. Liem1, E. J. Vollebregt1, A. and predominantly observed in cancers of haematopoietic and lymphoid de Kort3, M. H. Breuning1, S. G. van Duinen1, G. M. Terwindt1, S. A. J. Lesnik Oberstein1; tissues, thyroid, and skin. Only very few germline mutations sparing 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2VU medical center, Amsterdam, the classical oncogenic mutation hotspots have been identified to date in Netherlands, 3St. Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, Netherlands. patients with Noonan syndrome. It has been hypothesized that oncoNgeRnAiSc mutations when occurring in the germline might lead to embryonic lethali- ty. Two anectdotal reports, however, described the known oncogenic Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and mutation G13D being apparently present in the germline of patients with lNeOuTkoCeHn3cephalopathy (CADASIL) is characterized by early onset stroke a hematologic phenotype but no obvious signs of NNoRoAnSan syndrome. Our and vascular dementia. It is caused by stereotyped missense mutations in observation documents a clear RASopathy phenotype and absence of mye- , which invariably lead to an uneven numNbOeTrC oHf3 cysteines in one of loproliferative disorder in a patient with oncogenic G12S as a consti- the 34 EGFL domains that constitute the NOTCH3 ectodomain. In addition tutional mutation. to missense mutations, a few small pathogenic deletions and in- P12.176 sertions have been described. All changed the number, or the spacing, of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome diagnostics in times of NGS cysteine residues. A frame shift mutatiNoOnT leCaHd3ing to a stop was reported as P. Stöbe, T. Schopen, H. Gabriel, M. Gencik, A. Gencik; pathogenic, but molecular and clinical testing was incomplete. diagenos, Osnabrück, Germany. We describe three patients with large alterations, of which the pa- thogenicity was initially unclear. We combined extensive laboratory analysis (MLPA, DNA and RNA analysis, Western Blotting) with thorough clinical eva- Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CDLS) is a rare autosomal dominant disease luation. The first patient has a deletion of exon 3-16, leading to a premature with an incidence of 1 in 10.000 to 60.000 newborns. It leads to severe de- stop, the second patient has an exon 3 stop mutation. Clinically, they did velopmental anomalies. This disorder is characterized by skeletal, craniofa- not have a CADASIL phenotype. Molecularly, the mutations are predicted to cial deformities, gastrointestinal and cardiac malformations. The physical as result in small NOTCH3 fragments that lack transmembrane and intracel- well as intellectual development of a child is affected. Clinical diagnosis is lular domains and are highly unlikely to be expressed at the cell surface. based on the phenotype. The pathogenicity of the mutation in the third patient, a splice site mutation This disorder is mainly caused by mutations in the Cohesin complex genes causing exon 7 skiip)ping, remains uncertain but does not give classical CA- NIPBL, SMC1A, and SMC3. Mutations in the NIBL gene are responsible for DASIL NOTCH3 about 50% of the cases. The two latter genes cause a slightly milder form of We conciil)udNeO tThCaHt 3 clinical and molecular investigation by an experienced CDLS. In addition, patients with mutations in the UBE2A gene show a CDLS team is indispensable for the cNoOrTreCcHt 3in terpretation of atypical mu- like phenotype. So far, molecular validation of CDLS has been done by San- tations stop mutations do not cause CADASIL, arguing against ger sequencing or MLPA with focus on NIPBL gene analysis. All coding exons the theory that hypomorphic alleles also cause CADASIL. and their corresponding splice sites were analyzed. P12.174 Recently, the high throughput pyrosequencing technique using the Roche Recessive mutations in MCM4/PRKDC cause a novel syndrome 454J platform was implemented in our laboratory and an open and flexibly characterised by a primary immunodeficiency and impairments in upgradeable diagnostic panel for CDLS including the genes NIPBL, SMC1A, DNA repair SMC3 and UBE2A was established. J. P. Casey1,2, M. Nobbs3, P. McGettigan4, S. Lynch5, S. Ennis2,5; Here, we report on our analyses of CDLS patients applying NGS technology 1National Children‘s Research Centre, Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin, into routine diagnostics and compare its performance with standard mu- Ireland, 2Health Sciences Centre, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 3Bristol tation detection. The preliminary data show that our diagnostic panel is a Genetics Laboratory, Bristol, United Kingdom, 4College of Life Sciences, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 5National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady‘s real alternative to classical sequencing in respect to sensitivity, TAT and cost. Children‘s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland. In addition, our approach is optimal for molecular analysis of genetically heterogeneous diseases with distinct clinical manifestation and caused by mutations in a limited number of genes. We present a study on ten children from three families with a novel syn- www.eshg.org drome born to consanguineous parents from the Irish Traveller popwulwatiwon..e shg.org324 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.177 New insights in non-syndromic albinism M. Martínez-García1,2, R. Riveiro-Álvarez1,2, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, M. Á. Lopez-Martínez1,2, A. therefore be sequenced in JSRD males with mosliatru sto iontvhe rssiugsn,, in association Giménez1,2, C. Vélez1,2, L. Montoliu2,3, C. Ayuso1,2, M. J. Trujillo-Tiebas1,2; with other suggestive features such as retinopathy, polydactyly, macroce- 1Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de phaly but also hyOpFoDth1alamic hamartoma and and recurrent Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 3Centro Nacional de Biotecnología (CNB-CSIC), bronchitis. Abnormal NO measurement might help orienting the molecular Madrid, Spain. analysis towards . Background: P12.179 A compound heterozygous missense mutation and a large deletion in Albinism is a complex group of genetic disorders characte- the KCTD7 gene presenting as an opsoclonus-myoclonus ataxia-like rized by reduced or complete absence of melanin pigment in the skin, hair, syndrome and eyes associated with decreased visual acuity, nystagmus, and photopho- D. Lev1,2, L. Blumkin1, S. Kivity1, R. Shomrat3, T. Lerman-Sagie1,2, E. Leshinsky-Silver1,2; bia. Oculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is classified into several types based on 1Wolfson Medical Center, Holon, Israel, 2Sackler school of Medicine, Tel Aviv, Israel, clinical and molecular categories. The prevalence of all forms of albinism 3Pronto diagnostics, Tel Aviv, Israel. vPaartiieesn tcso nasnidd eMraebtlhyo wdso:rldwide and has been estimated at approximately 1/17,000. After informed consent was obtained, blood samp- Purpose: To describe a new presentation of KCTD7 mutations: an opsoclo- les were collected from patients wiTthY Rclinical signs of OCAT. YWReL screened 13 nus-myoclonus ataxia like syndrome with subsequent development of gene- families (7/13 Spanish, 1/13 RusOiaCnA 2and the 2/13 Africans) for sequence va- ralized continuous epileptic activity. riations in the coding region of the gene avoidTinYgR the OCA 2pseudogene Methods: We recorded the clinical course of the disease, the evaluation and aRneds uthltes :6, 7 and 13 exons of the gene. Also MLPApT3Y2R5 wasO pCeAr2formed the response to steroid therapy. After excluding possible genetic causes, in order to detect deletions or duplicacions in the and genes. whole genome exome sequencing was performed in order to identify the At least one single mutation in either or both and genes causative gene. Sequence variants were filtered according to the phenotype. has been identified in 12 out of 13 families. Most of the identified mutations Sanger sequencing was performed to confirm the point mutation and MLPA wDiesrceu dsestieocnt:ed in a heterozygous pattern, but with the exception of the mu- was used for screening for a possible deletion in the second allele. tation p.Pro81Leu and the 2,7kb including exon 7. Key finding: Two pathological variants were found in the KCTD7 gene: R84W The entire coding regions of 4 genes associated with non-syn- and a large deletion of exons 3 and 4. The father is heterozygous for the dromic OCA have been analysed in many cases, however one single mutation R84W mutation and the mother is heterozygous for the exon 3+4 deletion. have been identified in many of the cases analysed what suggests that other Significance: KCTD7 mutations were described in a single family with pro- genes yet unidentified probably exist. Epistasic phenomenon also has been gressive myoclonus epilepsy. Our patient presented with non epileptic myo- described in mice assays. The new technologies such as Next Generation Se- clonus, ataxia and opsoclonus responsive to corticosteroid treatment and quencing would provide us new insights in this disease. only two years later developed an epileptic EEG witout overt seizures. The P12.178 different phenotype broadens the spectrum of KCTD7 related diseases. Novel OFD1 mutations in males extend the phenotypic spectrum to P12.180 vermis hypoplasia, polydactyly, hypothalamic hamartoma and situs Lack of mutations in COL1A2 gene in osteogenesis imperfecta inversus, and basal bodies docking impairment patients from Russia C. Thauvin-Robinet1,2, S. Thomas3,4, M. Sinico5, B. Aral2,6, L. Burglen7, N. Gigot2,6, H. D. Nadyrshina1,2, R. Khusainova1, E. Khusnutdinova1,2; Dollfus8, S. Rossignol9, M. Raynaud10, C. Philippe11, N. Badens12, R. Touraine13, C. Gomes3, 1Institute of Biochemistry and Genetict RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Bashkir State B. Franco14,15, E. Lopez2, N. Elkhartoufi16, L. Faivre1,2, A. Munnich3,4,16, N. Boddaert4,17, L. University, Ufa, Russian Federation. Van Maldergem18, F. Encha-Razavi4,16, S. Lyonnet3,4,16, M. Vekemans3,4,16, E. Escudier19, T. Attié-Bitach3,4,16; 1centre de génétique, Dijon, France, 2Equipe émergente GAD, IFR Santé STIC, Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 3Unité INSERM U781, Hôpital Necker – Enfants Malades, Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is a heritable disorder of connective tissue Paris, France, 4Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 5Service d’Anatomopathologie, mainly caused by dominant mutations in type I collagen genes COL1A1 and Centre hospitalier intercommunal de Créteil, Créteil, France, 6Laboratoire de Génétique COL1A2. Moléculaire, Plateau Technique de Biologie, CHU, Dijon, France, 7Département de The aim of our study was to identify mutations in COL1A1 and COL1A2 ge- Génétique, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, Paris, France, 8Département de Génétique, CHRU, nes in Russian OI patients. Strasbourg, France, 9Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Trousseau, APHP, We examined 54 patients with OI from 43 families and 50 healthy controls Paris, France, 10Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, CHU, Tours, France, 11Laboratoire corresponding by age, gender, ethnicity and place of residence. All 51 coding de Génétique Moléculaire, Hôpital Brabois, CHU, Nancy, France, 12Département de exons in COL1A1 gene and 52 exons and flanking intronic regions in COL1A2 génétique médicale, CHU de Marseille - Hôpital de la Timone, Marseille, France, 13Département de Génétique, CHU, Saint Etienne, France, 14Laboratorio di Ricerca, gene were analyzed by SSCP-analysis and direct sequencing. Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Napoli, Italy, 15Medical Genetic One frameshift mutation (c.579delT (p.Gly194ValfsX71), three non- Services, Department of Pediatrics, Federico II University of Naples, Napoli, Italy, sense mutations (c.967G>T (p.Gly323X), c.1081C>T (p.Arg361X), 16Département de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Assistance Publique c.2869C>T (p.Gln957X)) and one splice mutation (c.4005+1G>T) were –Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France, 17Service de Radiologie Pédiatrique, Hôpital identified in patients with autosomal dominant inheritance of OI type I. Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP, Paris, France, 18Service de Génétique, CHU, Besançon, Two mutations (c.2444delG (p.Gly815AlafsX293) and c.3540_3541insC France, 19Service d‘Histologie - Embryologie Hôpital Armand Trousseau, APHP, Paris, (p.Gly1181AlafsX38)) occurred in sporadic cases of OI type I, whereas France. c.1243C>T (p.Arg415X) mutation - of OI type 3. OFD1 In conclusion, the present study revealed eight mutations in COL1A1 gene (two of them observed de novo: c.967G>T (p.Gly323X) and c.3540_3541insC is classically responsible for dominant X-linked OFD I syndromewith (p.Gly1181AlafsX38)) and no mutations in COL1A2 gene in Russian pati- male lethality,butmutations were recently reported in males, oOnFe Ds1y ndro- ents with OI. However, no predominant mutations were detected. Despite mic mental retardation (MR) families (SGBS2, MIM300209) and two Joubert the previous studies indicating the vast majority (70%) of COL1A1/CO- syndrome (JBS10, MIM300804) . We therefore sequenced the gene L1A2 mutations causing OI being glycine substitutions to amino acid with in a cohort of 92 males, including 32 JBS patients, 20 fetuses with Joubert/ a bulky side chain, we detected no missense ones. Interestingly, all detected Meckel syndrome or ciliopathy spectrum, as well as 40 additional males mutations were unique for each family except for the frameshift mutation with syndromic MR based on the association of at least 2/5 of the following c.579delT (p.Gly194ValfsX71) observed in two unrelated families. Future criteriae: macrocephaly, obesity, OpFoDly1d actyly, recurrent respiratory infec- research should focus on other genes responsible for OI development in tions, andd ere ntoinvoopathy. Russian patients. We identified 2 novel truncating mutationssi,t ubso itnhv elorcsuatsed in exon 21. The first mutatioOnF wDa1s found in a fetus with polydactyly, vermis hy- P12.181 poplasia, but also hypothalamic hamartoma and extending the LEPRE-1 gene in Osteogenesis Impefecta: study of mutations in phenotypic spectrum of mutations. The second maternally inherited Brazilian patients F. Paula1, C. Barbirato1, M. G. Almeida1, V. Sipolatti2, M. R. G. O. Rebouças2, V. Nunes2, A. N. mutation was found in a 10 year-old JBS male with polydactyly, obesity, re- Akel Junior2, I. D. Louro1; current bronchitis and abnormal nasal NO measurOeFmDe1nt. Electronic micro- 1Department of Biology, Federal University of Espírito Santo, Vitória, Brazil, 2Hospital scopy of airways epithelia in both cases showed cilia abnormalities and an Infantil Nossa Senhora da Glória, Vitória, Brazil. abnormal centrosomal docking atO tFhDe1 cell surface. expression analysis during early human development correlates with its phenOoFtDyp1ic spectrum. Our study further confirms that mutations in the C-terminal domain Osteogenesis Imperfecta (OI) is a heterogeneous genetic disease charac- lead to syndromic recessive X-linked JBS in males. The gene should terized by bone fragility, recurrent fractures and clinical variability. The www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 325 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 LEPRE1 majority of OI cases has autosomal dominant inheritance and is caused by zygous mutation (c.31269C>A); 2/15 carried one mutation and a variant, mutations in genes that codify type I collagen proteLinE.P TRhEe1 gene is probably pathogenic (c.[2401G>T;2402A>T];[2464C>T] and c.[2401G>T one of the most frequent mutated gene described in OI patients with reces- ;2402A>T;c.4936C>T];[3608A>G]). These last two propositus originated sive pattern. In order to characterize mutations in gene a total of from unrelated pedigrees from Congo and Burundi. 1 patient was carrier of 33 unrelated Brazilian OI patients were studied using SSCP screening and 2 undetermined variants (c.[2123G>A];[206+9G>A]); 1 patient of 2 variants sequencing analyses. This study was approved by the Research Ethics Com- (Cco.[n3c7lu5s1ioTn>:C (;)5063C>T]) and mittee and all patients agree in participate of the work. The previously de- 6 patients had one variant only. scribed African mutation (c.1080+1C>T) was found in homozygous state in The present1 screening confirms substitutions considered as pa- one isolated case with severe OI. Two mutations were identified in heterozy- thogen ic reported once and present in different genetic background popu- gosis: the c.1087A>G/p.Lys363Glu missense mutation detected in a spora- lation.Identified compound heterozygous (one mutation and one variant, dic case with severe form and the c.2024G>T/p.Trp675Leu change detected this last reported so faGr JaBs2 ‘probaGbJlBy6 pathogenic’) maOyT OacFcount for a less in a moderated case with recessive inheritance. In these patients the other severe phenotype. Precise genetic counseling remains delicate. Molecular changes were not found probably because of the technique limitations. The sRterfaetreegnyc ee: nRcoommapnaoss Je. sJ Hum G aenndet 2009 ;5ge4n:3e8s2 b-3e8fo5re ORF sequence c.1720+52C>T mutation and c.1812C>T silence change were found in one screening i1n AN. patient with mild OI and dominant heritance, but absent in hiLsE aPffReEc-t1ed mo- ther, suggesting that these were no-pathogenic changes. Our results showed P12.186 that almost 10% of Brazilian OI patients carry mutations in LEPRE-1 gene. Novel mutation in Cathepsin C Gene (CTSC) and the Modeling of Moreover most of the carry patients have severe phenotype and are spora- Mutated Protein in Three Iranian Families with Papillon Lefèvre dic cases. These dates showed the importance of the study of gene Syndrome in OI and corroborate dates observed in other populations. Supported by E. Dadkhah1, M. Moghaddasian1, H. Arab2, H. Bustani Farkoush2, M. Kazemi Noughabi1, Brazilian Institutions: CAPES, FAPES, FACITEC, CNPQ, Arcelor-Mittal, Brazil. M. R. Abbaszadegan1; 1Human Genetics Division, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, P12.183 Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, An overview of clinical, biochemical and molecular findings in series 2Department of Periodontology, School of Dentistry and Dental Research Center, of 36 COL1A1/COL1A2 mutation-negative osteogenesis imperfecta Mashhad University of Medical Sciences (MUMS), Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. patients F. Malfait, S. Symoens, P. Coucke, A. De Paepe; Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. Papillon-Lefèvre syndrome (PLS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by hyperkeratosis followed later by periodontitis, destruction of alveolar bone and loss of primary and permanent teeth. Mutation of the Autosomal recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) is associated with mutati- lysosomal protease Cathepsin C (CTSC) gene is the genetic cause of PLS. The ons in an expanding list of genes, encoding collagen-modifying enzymes and CTSC Gene was analyzed in three Iranian families with affected PLS showing chaperones (CRTAP, LEPRE1, PPIB, FKBP10, SERPINH1 and PLOD2), and premature tooth loss and palm plantar hyperkeratosis. Direct automated se- more recently SP7 and SERPINF1. quencing of genomic DNA was performed following amplification of exonic We studied the presence of mutations in these genes in a carefully selected regions and associated splice intron site junctions of the CTSC gene. Mu- cohort of 36 COL1A1 /COL1A2 mutation-negative patients with a clinical tation screening and sequence analysis of the CTSC gene revealed a novel diagnosis of OI type II, III or IV, or with Bruck syndrome (BS), a related phe- mutation (P. 35delL) in exon 1 of one patient, and two previously reported notype characterized by bone fragility and congenital contractures. mutations in other probands. The known mutations were a missense muta- Homozygous/compound heterozygous mutations were found in 19/36 pro- tion in exon 4 which converts Arginine to Proline (CGT→ CCT, CM993131, bands. The majority of mutations were present in LEPRE1 (n=6) and FKBP10 codon 210) and a nonsense mutation in exon 6 that causes a stop codon (n=5) and, to a lesser degree, in CRTAP (n=3), SERPINF1 (n=2), PPIB (n=1), (CGA→TGA, CM993134, codon 272) in the other two patients. RFLP for 100 SERPINH1(n=1) and PLOD2 (n=1). In agreement with previous reports, normal alleles confirmed the new mutation. Protein modeling of the dedu- LEPRE1, CRTAP and PPIB defects cause a severe to lethal osteochondro- ced novel mutation was performed by online server Swiss-Prot automated dysplasia that overlaps with but is distinctive from OI type II/III, whereas modeling and analyzed by special bioinformatic softwares including ZMM, FKBP10 and PLOD2 mutations are associated with Bruck syndrome. Two ICM-browser and SPDB-viewer to better understand the structural defects. probands with progressive OI harboured homozygous SERPINF1 mutations, The structural defect caused by the mutation P. 35delL admits the polarity and a homozygous p.Arg222Ser was found in SERPINH1 in a patient with nature of the molecule. As this mutation occurred in the conserved domain OI type III. Biochemical collagen studies provide a valuable contribution to of the CTSC, the structural analysis might reveal inconsistency of the special the diagnostic work-up for recessive OI as important overmodification of binding sites in the CTSC molecule which could be very important in the the collagen type I α- chains is seen in the presence of CRTAP and LEPRE1 functionality of the protein. mutations. An abnormal electrophoretic pattern for type I collagen was also P12.187 observed for the SERPINH1 mutation, but not for mutations in the other The guanine nucleotide exchange factor kalirin-7 is a novel genes. Our findings also indicate that still other gene(s) are involved in the synphilin-1 interacting protein and modifies synphilin-1 aggregate pathogenesis of OI. transport and formation P12.184 Y. Tsai, O. Riess, H. Nguyen, A. S. Soehn; Identification of nucleotide substitutions and mutations in Department of Medical Genetics, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. the Otoferlin (OTOF) gene in a cohort of patients with auditory neuropathy (AN) A. Haenecour1, X. Pepermans1, N. Deggouj2, M. Vast1, K. Dahan1, K. Claes3, E. De Synphilin-1 has been identified as an interaction partner of alpha-synuclein, Leenheer4, M. Vikkula1, Y. Sznajer1; 1Center for Human Genetics, U.C.L, Brussels, Belgium, 2Audiophonology Center, U.C.L, a key protein in the pathogenesis of Parkinson disease (PD). To further ex- Brussels, Belgium, 3Center for Human Genetics; U.Z Gent, Gent, Belgium, 4ENT Dept, UZ plore novel binding partners of synphilin-1, a yeast two hybrid screening Gent, Gent, Belgium. was performed and kalirin-7 was identified as a novel interactor. Kalirin-7 OTOF is a brain-specific guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) enriched in the postsynaptic density (PSD) of excitatory synapses. It contains a SEC14 do- gene mutations were identified causative for an isolated autosomal main, a spectrin-like domain, a RhoGEF domain and a Pleckstrin homolo- recessive form of congenital auditory neuropathy, DFNB9. Since 1998, mole- gy domain (PH) which control multiple functions of the protein. Kalirin-7 cular investigation identified absence of hotspot mutations, numerous poly- activates Rac1 and regulates dendritic spine morphogenesis, plasticity and mMaotreprhiaisl mans da nmde vtahroidasn:t s of unknown significance. The first 10 local patients development. An interaction of kalirin-7 with huntingtin-associated prote- were reported at ESHG 2011 meeting. Additional patients were studied. in 1 (HAP1), nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and disrupted in schizophrenia Patients were enrolled if they fulfill criteria for AN. 1 (DISC1) further links the protein to Huntington disease (HD), Alzheimer Molecular investigation reOliTedO Fon complete ORF sequencing (NM_194248.2, disease (AD), and schizophrenia. long isoform, 1997aa). Our molecular lab is the only one in Belgium to se- In order to evaluate the functional relevance of this newly discovered inter- quence complete ORF of gene. Substitutions were noted as ‘unclas- action, we first focused on the ability of synphilin-1 to promote inclusion sRiefiseudlt sv:a riants’ when absent from Ensembl and Uniprot databases or from formation, as this feature provides a functional overlap of kalirin-7 and syn- available publications. Family members were investigated when available. philin-1. By means of Co-immunoprecipitation, Fluorescent immunostai- Among 32 patients referred for AN, 24 had isolated NA among ning, and Live cell imaging, a novel role for kalirin-7 in aggresome dynamics whom 15 were congenital (prelingual).1/15 was identified with 1 homo- was identified. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org326 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.188 Parkinson disease: whole genome sequencing for the identification of novel genes EE9. Two novel mutations were detected in the PCDH19 gene: c.2705dupA; A. Verstraeten1,2, D. Crosiers1,2,3, P. Cras2,3, C. Van Broeckhoven1,2, J. Theuns1,2; p(Asp902Lysfs*6) and c.1091delC; p.Pro364Argfs*4 (both in heterozy- 1Neurodegenerative Brain diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, VIB, gous state). Surprisingly, the mother of the first patient was heterozygous Antwerp, Belgium, 2Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, asymptomatic carrier of c.2705dupA. She has never suffered epileptic seizu- 3Department of Neurology, Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium. res and intellectual impairment. The second mutation c.1091delC was de novo. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of a female heterozygous Gene identification studies can be instrumental in the elucidation of disease for a mutation in the PCDH19 gene who did not manifest any clinical fea- mechanisms underlying neurodegenerative brain diseases such as Parkin- tures. Usually, the PCDH19 mutations arise de novo, are inherited by the son disease (PD) and eventually support the development of earlier and unaffected carrier fathers or by affected mothers. The possibility for total- more accurate diagnostic tools as well as formulation of preventive or cu- ly skewed X inactivation is very unlikely as it has never been detected in ring therapies. PCDH19 mutation-positive patients. Thus, one could speculate that, due to We therefore performed whole genome sequencing in a Flanders-Belgian the complex interaction with other genetic, epigenetic factors, some PCDH19 PD patient with an onset age of 24 years and both unaffected parents. Suc- mutation carriers could even fully “escape” any disease manifestation, and cessive filtering of the identified variations was based on sequence quality, this could be the case in our patient’s mother. genomic location and frequency in both the ‘1000 genomes project’ and an Acknowledgments extended collection of Flanders-Belgian individuals. Finally, variations were The study was supported by Grant #49/2011, Medical University - Sofia, selected based on segregation in line with one of the four possible inheri- Bulgaria. tance patterns. Focusing on high-confidence coding and splice site variati- P12.191 ons we identified 115 de novo, 40 homozygous recessive, 55 heterozygous Identity-by-Descent Mapping Reveals a New Locus for Primary compound recessive and 11 X-linked variations. Genetic validation in an Congenital Glaucoma, GLC3E, on Chromosome 19p13.2 extended cohort of geographically matched control individuals (N=1000), H. Verdin1, B. Leroy1,2, B. D‘haene1, F. Coppieters1, S. Lefever1, P. G. Kestelyn2, E. De Baere1; to exclude polymorphisms, resulted in 16 variations in 10 genes with a high 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of potential to be linked to PD in this Flanders-Belgian nuclear family. We are Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. currently estimating the contribution of these variations to PD pathogenesis in our cohort of Flanders-Belgian PD patients (N=600) using various geno- typing platforms. Further we plan to sequence the selected candidate genes Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is caused by developmental anomalies using a custom MASTR-NGS assay to identify other mutations in these genes of the trabecular meshwork and the anterior chamber angle, resulting in an to further support a role in PD pathogenesis. Eventually, functional charac- increased ocular pressure (IOP) and optic nerve damage from birth or early terization of the probable pathogenic variant(s) will be performed to gain infancy. In general PCG displays an autoCsYoPm1Bal1 recesLsTivBeP i2nheritance and is insights into the mutation mechanism and disease processes. genetically heterogeneous. To date, four PCG loci are known (GLC3A-D), in P12.189 which two genes have been identified, and . Here, we aimed Caspase 8 and caspase 9 activation in peripheral blood lymphocytes to map the disease gene in a large, four-generation consanguineous fami- of patients with LRRK2-associated Parkinson’s disease ly with PCG, originating from Jordan. Mutations in known PCG genes were T. Usenko, A. Yakimovskii, A. Emelyanov, S. Pchelina; excluded. Identity-by-descent (IBD) mapping was performed in six affected Petersburg Nuclear Physics Institute, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. members using genome-wide SNP genotyping with 250K arrays. The com- mon IBD regions did not overlap with any known PCG loci. Filtering on both size of the region and number of consecutive homozygoBuEsS TS2NPs revealed a Mutations in the LRRK2 are the most frequent cause of familial Parkinson’s new candidate region on 19p13.2, named GLC3E. This region measures 2.67 disease (PD). Although the precise physiological and pathological role of Mb and contains 93 genes. Using prioritization tools, was selected LRRK2 is unclear, direct link between mutant LRRK2 and apoptosis has as the best candidate gene. Indeed, Best2 is expressed in non-pigmented been suggested. There are two main caspase activation pathways of apopto- epithelial cells of ciliary body, whBicEhS iTs2 responsible for formation of aqueous sis, receptor-mediated sequential activation of caspase-8, and cytochrome humour. Also, Best2-/- mice have significantly lower IOP than wild type lit- c-dependent mediated caspase-9 activation. Earlier we showed higher level termates. Sanger sequencing of in affected individuals revealed no of spontaneous apoptosis in patients with LRRK2-associated PD compared mutations however. To analyze the other genes in the IBD region, two af- to controls (persons without neurological disorders). fected individuals underwent exome sequencing for which data analysis is The aim of our present work was to examine the level of active caspase 8 and currently ongoing. We identified a potential new PCG locus, named GLC3E, caspase 9 in peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) after incubation (37°C, confirming the genetic heterogeneity of PCG, and representing a unique op- 5% CO2). PBLs of patients were isolated from venous blood. Cells were re- portunity to identify the third PCG gene. suspended in RPMI1640 with Fetal Calf Serum and were incubated for 48 P12.192 hours. We estimate the level of active caspase 8 of PBLs in two patients with Molecular genetic background of PEHO syndrome LRRK2-associated PD (the G2019S mutation) compared controls (n=4) after A. Laari1,2, A. K. Anttonen1,3,4, O. Kopra1,2, M. Somer5,6, E. Jakkula7, T. Joensuu1,2, A. E. 1h, 24h, 48h and caspase 9 after 24h of incubation by western blot analy- Lehesjoki1,2; sis. β-actin was tested as an internal standard. The active enzyme subunits 1Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Neuroscience center, University are 18kDa for caspase 8 and 10kDa for caspase 9. We found the activation of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 3Molecular Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, of caspase 8 in both patients with the G2019S mutation and in all controls Finland, 5Vaestoliitto, The Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 6Department after 1h, 24h, 48h of incubation. The active caspase 9 was detected in both of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7Institute for Molecular carriers of the G2019S mutation and in one from four controls after 24h of Medicine Finland (FIMM), Helsinki, Finland. incubation. Thus, predominant activation caspase 9 in patients with LRRK2- associated PD could be suggested. P12.190 The PEHO syndrome (Progressive encephalopathy with Edema, Hypsar- Novel PCDH19 mutations in Bulgarian epilepsy cases rhytmia and Optic atrophy; MIM 260565) is a severe autosomal recessive A. V. Kirov1,2, P. Dimova3, A. Todorova1,2, T. Todorov1,2, V. Bojinova3, V. Mitev1; inherited progressive infantile encephalopathy. The main features of PEHO 1Department of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical University Sofia, Sofia, syndrome are hypotonia, infantile spasms and/or hypsarrhytmia, psycho- Bulgaria, 2Genetic Medico-Diagnostic Laboratory Genica, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Child motor retardation, absence or early loss of visual fixation, edema of the face Neurology, St. Naum University Hospital of Neurology and Psychiatry, Sofia, Bulgaria. and limbs, and typical dysmorphic features. Brain atrophy is progressive and most prominent in the cerebellum, where the molecular layer is strongly reduced, Purkinje cells are abnormally small and misaligned, and the cells X-linked female-limited epilepsy is characterized by seizure onset in infancy of the internal granular cell layer are almost absent. Based on imaging and or early childhood and cognitive impairment. The spectrum of phenotypes neuropathological findings we have divided the PEHO syndrome into two has been extended to include female patients with early infantile epileptic types, the cortical atrophy and loss of myelin being pronounced in type 2. encephalopathy, type 9 (EIEE9). Heterozygous PCDH19 mutations were Using a 318 k genome-wide SNP scan we identified a 435 kb region on chro- identified in EIEE9 patients. Interestingly, only heterozygous females are mosome 17 that was homozygous in Finnish type 1, but not type 2 patients. affected, while hemizygous males are devoid of seizures or cognitive im- Sequencing of positional candidate genes revealed a missense mutation in pairment, although mosaic males can also be affected. This inheritance sup- a gene not previously associated with human disease in all but one pati- posed cellular interference as possible pathogenic mechanism. ent with type 1 PEHO. Mutations were not present in type 2 patients. The We report on two Bulgarian patients with typical clinical manifestation of EI- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 327 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 “PEHO1” gene encodes a protein possibly involved in transcriptional regu- in table 1. lation. It is widely expressed in the brain, the expression pattern being com- Table 1. Mutations of PAH gene in patients with PKU in Belarus. patible with the neuropathological findings. In developing mouse brain, the No. of Frequency Exon/Intron Mutation “PEHO1” protein expression is strong in neural progenitor and migrating Chr. % IVS2-13T>G 6 0,96 premature granular cells. Transient overexpression studies revealed no dif- I2 R111X 3 0,48 ference in subcellular localization. This is the first step towards understan- E3 D84Y 1 0,16 ding the pathogenesis of PEHO, that is genetically heterogeneous. P89S 1 0,16 P12.193 E5 R158Q* 40 6,4 Perrault syndrome: Evidence for genetic heterogeneity and whole- E6 E221D222FSAGdel 1 0,16 E280K 15 2,4 exome sequencing to identify novel molecular mechanisms R261Q* 9 1,44 F. E. Percin1, Y. Li2, B. Cavdarli1, B. Wollnik2; R252W 8 1,28 1Gazi University, Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey, P281L 4 0,64 2Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. E7 R241C 2 0,32 R243X 2 0,32 G272X 2 0,32 Autosomal recessively inherited Perrault syndrome (MIM233400) is a cli- R261X 1 0,16 L311P 3 0,48 nically and genetically heterogeneous disorder. It is typically characterized E9 I306V 2 0,32 bilateral hearing loss, ovarian dysgenesis in female patients, and can be as- IVS10-3C>T 5 0,8 sociated with neurological manifestations such as mental retardation and IVS10-11G>A* 3 0,48 I10 cerebellar ataxia. A proposed clinical classification suggests type I does not Y386C 2 0,32 E11 show neurological symptoms while type II patients do show variable affec- E390G 1 0,16 tion of the nervous system. Recently, mutations in HSD17B4 and in HARS2 c.1127_c1132dup** 1 0,16 IVS12+1G>A* 8 1,28 genes were described in some, but not all, patients with Perrault syndro- R408W 429 68,75 me. Here we report a 16 years old girl with Perrault syndrome born to con- I12 A403V 1 0,16 sanguineous parents, who presented with ovarian agenesis, microcephaly, E12 R413P 1 0,16 mental retardation, neurologic abnormalities including ataxic gait, and no Y414C 3 0,48 speech acquisition. Hearing impairment was not observed. Her karyotype del427C** 1 0,16 was normal (46,XX). We excluded homozygosity of regions of described ge- Unidentified 69 11,06 nes for Perrault syndrome by marker analysis. Subsequently, we performed Total 624 88,94 whole-exome sequencing. Our strategy for the identification of the causative gene is based on an initial determination of homozygous stretches using all * identified by RFLP-analysis identified variants followed by a prioritization of likely damaging variants ** novel mutation within these homozygous stretches. Using this innovative filter strategy we We identified two novel mutations, each on single chromosome: duplicati- aim to identify a new gene underlying Perrault syndrome giving more in- on c.1127_c.1132 in exon 11 and deletion 427C in exon 12. Both mutations sights into the pathogenic mechanism of the disease were found in compound heterozygosity with R408W. In addition to muta- P12.194 tion R408W, significant frequency in the Belarus population also have mu- A novel splice site B3GALTL mutation confirms typical Peters plus tations R158Q (6,4%), E280K (2,4%), R261Q (1,4%), R252W (1,3%) and syndrome in two Tunisian patients IVS12+1G>A (1,3%). O. Siala1, N. Belguith2, H. Kammoun3, B. Kammoun4, N. Hmida5, I. Chabchoub6, F. P12.196 Fakhfakh1; Improvement of the PKHD1 mutation database for autosomal 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, SFAX, Tunisia, 2Laboratory of medical recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) genetic, SFAX, Tunisia, 3Laboratory of Medical Genetic, SFAX, Tunisia, 4Service A. Venghaus, I. Rieck, J. von Bothmer, K. Zerres, N. Ortiz Brüchle; d’ophtalmologie, SFAX, Tunisia, 5Service de Néonatologie, SFAX, Tunisia, 6Service de Institute of Human Genetics, RWTH University Hospital, Aachen, Germany. Pédiatrie., SFAX, Tunisia. Mutations in the PKHD1 gene on 6p12 are associated with autosomal re- Peters plus syndrome is an autosomal recessive rare disorder comprising cessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD). This primary ciliopathy is cha- ocular anterior segment dysgenesis, short stature, hand abnormalities, di- racterized by enlarged bilateral polycystic kidneys and congenital hepatic stinctive facial features, and often other major/minor additional defects. fibrosis. The PKHD1 gene (longest ORF 66 exons) is highly complex due to Only six mutations in the B3GALTL gene were recently reported in patients its genomic size (470 kb). Its gene product polyductin/fibrocystin contains with Peters plus syndrome, leading to the inactivation of the B1, 3 -glucosyl- 4074 aa. Mutation detection rate is up to 90% with at least one detected transferase involving in the synthesis of a rare disaccharide that occurs on mutation. The mutations are scattered throughout the whole gene. The vast thrombospondin type 1 repeats of many biologically important proteins. In majority of PKHD1-mutations are “private” mutations. Pathogenic mutati- our study, we screened the B3GALTL gene in two unrelated Tunisian pati- ons divide into about 60% missense and 40% truncating/splice mutations. ents with typical Peters plus Syndrome. A novel homozygous c.597-2 A->G Our PKHD1 mutation database (http://www.humgen.rwth-aachen.de) has mutation was identified in both patients. Bioinformatic analyses using the been established to catalogue all changes detected in the PKHD1 gene in MFOLD and the EMBOSS programs showed that this mutation modulates a disease specific database e. g. for use in clinical practice. Here we report the pre mRNA secondary structure of the gene, and decreases the score va- about the revision and extension of the database with the aim to alleviate lue related to the formation of splicing loops. Moreover, the c.597-2 A->G the evaluation of PKHD1 variants regarding their possible clinical signi- mutation is located in a CpG island of the B3GALTL coding region, eliciting ficance. For this purpose evolutionary conservation and a more detailed a potential epigenetic role of this position including gene’s methylation and bioinformatic validation of the 329 included missense changes (PolyPhen2) regulation. These data confirm an important role of the B3GALTL gene test and segregation analyses data were re-evaluated and included. Additionally that provides diagnosis confirmation and improves dramatically genetic all changes were synchronized to dbSNP (version 135) entries, the allele fre- counselling for the families. quencies and rs-numbers of 116 changes were added. Furthermore about P12.195 50 new variants have been added. In total the database now includes 752 Molecular genetic analysis of PAH gene in Belarus: two novel entries dividing into 396 clearly pathogenic changes, 202 likely neutral and mutations 154 changes of unknown significance. Evaluation of these changes will be J. V. Tsukerman, K. A. Mosse; National Center of Applied and Research Medicine “Mother and child”, Minsk, Belarus. the topic of further studies. P12.197 AMH gene mutations in two Egyptian families with persistent Phenylketonuria (PKU) is one of the most common inherited monoge- mullerian duct syndrome nic diseases in Belarus, its frequency is 1:6000 newborns. Classical PKU I. Mazen1, M. El Gammal1, K. Amr1, M. Abdel Hamid1, A. Aref2; 1National research Center, Cairo, Egypt, 2Faculty of Medecine, Cairo, Egypt. (OMIM#261600) is caused by mutations in PAH gene. We completed the molecular-genetic analysis of R158Q, R261Q, Y414C, Introduction IVS10-11G> A and IVS12+1G>A mutations and sequencing of six exons of : The anti-mullerian hormone (AMH) is responsible for re- PAH gene in patients with PKU in Belarus. Identified mutations are shown www.eshg.org www.eshgrge.sosiorng of müllerian ducts during male sexual differentiation. Mutations 328 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.200 Mutations in a novel dynein assembly factor PF22 (DNAAF3) cause in AMH or its type II receptor lead to persistence of the uterus and fallopian cilia dysmotility and left-right-axis defects tubes in male children i.e. persistent müllerian duct syndrome (PMDS). Both M. Schmidts1, J. Freshour2, N. T. Loges3,4, A. Dritsoula1, D. Anthony1, R. A. Hirst5, C. cPoantideintitosn as nadre M treatnhsomdsitted according to a recessive autosomal pattern and O’Callaghan5, H. Blau6, T. Yagi7, H. Mussaffi6, E. Chung8, H. Omran3,4, D. Mitchell2, H. M. are symptomatic only in males. Mitchison1; : We report two unrelated Egyptian consanguineous 1Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London (UCL), London, United Kingdom, 2Cell & Developmental Biology, SUNY Upstate Medical families with PMDS. The first family comprised 3 affected prepubertal sibs University, Syracuse, NY, United States, 3Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent complaining of undescended testis, pelvic exploration and laparotomy re- Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics vealed mullerian derivatives. The other family was presenting with an ado- and Adolescent Medicine, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Germany, 5Department lescent male with impalpable left testis and pelvic exploration sho wed rem- of Infection Immunity and Inflammation, University of Leicester, Leicester Royal nant of fallopian tubes and rudimentary uterus. AMH levels were very low Infirmary, Leicester, United Kingdom, 6Pulmonary Unit, Schneider Children’s Medical and almost undetectable in all affected patients in both families.Direct se- Center of Israel, Petah-Tikva, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel- qCuoennccluinsgio onf the coding region of the AMH gene identified two homozygous Aviv, Israel, 7Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 8General and Adolescent Paediatric Unit, University mutations in exon 1, R95X in the first family and V12G in the second family. College London (UCL), London, United Kingdom. : These data confirmed the autosomal recessive type of the PMDS, which needs molecular investigations of this rare disorder on large number of cases with undescended testis in Egypt will be of great value for Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) is an autosomal recessive disorder arising proper diagnosis and genetic counseling. from dysmotility of cilia in the respiratory tract, brain ventricles, oviduct P12.198 and the embryonic node leading to chronic obstructive pulmonary disea- Phenotype and genotype variability of the PMM2 gene mutation se, reduced fertility and situs abnormalities. With a frequency of up to 1 in among the same Egyptian family 10,000 PCD is a rather common “rare disease”. To date, 12 genes causing S. Türkmen1, H. Afifi2, M. Zaki2; 1Charité Virchow-Klinikum Institut für Medizinische Genetik und Humangenetik, Labor approximately 40% of all cases have been identified, two encoding proteins Berlin Charité Vivantes, Berlin, Germany, 2National Research Centre Clinical Genetics (KTU, LRRC50) involved in cytosolic axonemal dynein co-assembly. Using Department, Cairo, Egypt. homozygosity mapping and subsequent Sanger sequencing we have identi- fied mutations in a new gene, C19ORF51 in PCD patients with absent dyn- ein arms. We find that the Chlamydomonas ortholog of C19ORF51, PF22, is Deficiency of phosphomannomutase (PMM2) is considered the most com- involved in the cytoplasmic assembly of the outer dynein arms preceeding mon congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG) and designated as CDG1a. their import into the axoneme. In PF22 mutants, axonemal dynein heavy Phenotypic presentation is variable from severe disorder to milder pheno- chain stability as well as co-assembly of heavy with intermediate chains is type. Here we describe an Egyptian family with 4 affecteds from 2 genera- significantly disturbed and PF22 appears to act downstream of KTU and tions with mutation in PMM2 gene with different genotype and phenotype LRRC50 in the dynein preassembly pathway. In zebrafish, PF22 knockdown presentation in each generation. The older generation with 3 affected who results in a typical ciliopathy phenotype (axis curvature, pronephric cysts, was the paternal side sibship for our proband and were derived from first hydrocephalus and situs inversus) due to loss of the axonemal dynein arms cousin parents. All of them had moderate to severe psychomotor retardati- resulting in cilia dysmotility. We therefore propose a conserved multi-step on, the male patient never experienced walking and was non educable The pathway for formation of assembly-competent dynein complexes, and that older female affected was able to walk at the age of 6 year, and the younger PF22 (renamed DNAAF3, “dynein axonemal assembly factor 3”) mutations female was able to walk with support and had a mild intellectual impair- causes PCD with situs inversus due deficient cytoplasmic dynein assembly ment. Interestingly, the female patients had no menstrual cycle. The hormo- resulting in absent dynein arms. nal and abdominopelvic sonar investigations revealed a premature ovarian P12.201 failure in the affected females. Our proband was a six years old male patient Novel molecular findings in patients with primary hyperoxaluria and from far relative parents with a normal cognitive function He had hypoto- implications for advanced molecular testing strategies nia, mild intesion tremors and ataxic gait although his MRI scans showed N. Reintjes1, A. Baasner1, A. Buescher2, S. Habbig3, M. J. Kemper4, P. Sikora5, C. Mache6, severe cerebellar atrophy. Strabismus was note in the second year of life M. Pohl7, M. Stahl8, B. Toenshoff8, L. Pape9, H. Fehrenbach10, D. E. Jacob11, B. Grohe12, M. T. Wolf13,14, G. Nürnberg15, G. Yigit1, E. C. Salido16, B. Hoppe3, B. B. Beck1; and corrected by surgical intervention. The sequence analysis of the PMM2 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, University gene revealed a compound heterozygous mutation in Exon 5 and in exon 8 Children´s Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany, 3Department of Pediatric and Adolescent in the proband and a homozygous mutation in Exon 8 in the other affected Medicine, Division of Pediatric Nephrology University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, family members. This consanguine family demonstrated a phenotype and Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University of genotype variability of the PMM2 gene. Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 5Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Medical University P12.199 of Lublin, Lublin, Poland, 6Department of Pediatrics, Nephrology Unit, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 7Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Division Mutations in Rotatin link primary cilia function to organization of the of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 8Department of human cerebral cortex Pediatrics, University Children’s Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, 9Department G. M. Mancini1, S. Kheradmand Kia1, E. Verbeek1, E. Engelen1, R. Schot1, R. Poot1, I. of Pediatric Nephrology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 10Department de Coo1, M. Lequin1, C. Poulton1, F. Pourfarzad1, F. Grosveld1, A. Brehm2, M. de Wit1, R. of Pediatric Nephrology Memmingen, Memmningen, Germany, 11Earth System Science Oegema1, W. Dobyns3, F. Verheijen1; Research Centre and Department of Geosciences, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, 1ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2University of Madeira, Funchal, Portugal, 3Center Germany, 12School of Dentistry, University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada, for intergative brain research, Seattle, WA, United States. 13Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Division of Pediatric Nephrology University Hospital Cologne,, Cologne, Germany, 14Pediatric Nephrology, Children’s Medical Center of Dallas, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, Polymicrogyria is a post-migratory organization defect of the cereb, rRaTl cToNrtex United States, 15Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, characterized by many small gyri with abnormal cortical lamination. Here, 16Center for Biomedical Research on Rare Diseases, Hospital Universitario Canarias, we identified autosomal recessive mutations in the Rotatin gene , in University La Laguna, Tenerife, Spain. patients with polymicrogyria from separate families. Rotatin determines early embryonic axial rotation as well as anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning in mouse. We show that Rotatin colocalizes wiBthM tPh4e bWaNsaTl 5bAo dies Primary hyperoxaluria (PH) constitutes a group of autosomal recessive dis- aWt NthTe2 Bprimary cilium. Cultured fibroblasts from patients have structural orders characterized by excessive endogenous oxalate synthesis resulting abnormalities of the cilia and show down-regulation of , and in nephrocalcinosis and/or urolithiasis. Currently three types of PH (PHI- , key regulators of planar cell polarity, expressed at the cortical hem, III) can be accuraHtOelGyA d1efined. In contrast to the well-characterized entities the cortex organizing center giving birth to Cajal-Retzius (CR) neurons. In- of PHI and PHII, the pathophysiology and prevalence of recently described deed, in mouse embryos Rotatin expression co-localizes with CR neurons. PHIII, caused by H mOGuAta1tions, is largely unknown. Knockdown experiments in human fibroblasts and neural stem cells confirm In this study, we analyzed a large patient cohort previously tested negative a role for Rotatin in cilia structure and function. Rotatin mutations thereby for PHI/II by complete sequencing. Seven distinct mutations, among link aberrant ciliary function to abnormal development and organization of them four novel, were identified in 15 patients. In patients of non-consan- the cortex in human patients. gInu ivnietroous European descent the previously reported c.700+5G>T splice-site mutation was predominant and represents a potential founder mutation. analysis of the c.700+5G>T mutation using a minigene assay sho- wed activation of a new splice site 52 bases downstream from the wild-type donor splice site leading to an in-frame insertion of 17 amino acids to the www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 329 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 HOGA1 native protAeGinX. TInterestingly, we furthermore identified a family where a ho- tion in the course of evolution, and chemico-physical parameters of wild-ty- mozygous mutation in (p.P190L) segregated in two siblings with an pe and mutant amino acids. A clear relation emerged between genotype and additional mutation (p.D201E). phenotype because 4 (80%) of the 5 probands with onset at birth showed First functional analysis revealed that HOGA1 deficiency is causing PHIII, FLT4 mutations and 4 (80%) of the 5 probands without distichiasis and with yet reduced HOGA1 expressiHonO GoAr 1aberrant subcellular protein targeting are FOXC2 mutations had an amino-acid substitution outside the forkhead do- unlikely the responsible pathomechanisms. main, in line with data recently reported by van Steensel MAM et al. (2009). Our results strongly suggest as a major cause of PH, indicate a greater Besides allelic heterogeneity shown by „private“ mutations in each proband, genetic heterogeneity of hyperoxaluria spectrum, and point to an exceptio- the absence of mutations in almost 75% of familial cases of primary lymphe- nally favourable outcome of PHIII despite incomplete or absent biochemical dema also suggests genetic heterogeneity. remission. Potential multiallelic inheritance in PH has implications for gene- P12.204 tic testing strategies and might represent an unrecognized mechanism for Restrictive dermopathy-like phenotype caused by the homozygous phenotype variability. mutation LMNA p.R435C due to partial uniparental disomy of P12.202 chromosome 1 Etiopathogenesis of primary lymphedema M. Wehnert1, P. Meinke1, S. Starke2, W. Schröder1, W. Kiess2, U. Felbor1; M. Amyere1, S. Greenberger2, D. Chitayat3, E. Pras4, K. Chong3, T. Uster3, H. Reznik-Wolf4, 1Institute for Human Genetics Greifswald, University Medicine Greifswald, Greifswald, D. Marek-Yagel4, A. Mendola1, M. Schlögel1, L. Boon5, P. Brouillard1, M. Vikkula1,5,6; Germany, 2Universitätsklinik und Poliklinik für Kinder und Jugendliche Department für 1Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, Université catholique de Frauen- und Kindermedizin Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. Louvain,, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vascular Biology Program and Department of Surgery, Children’s Hospital Boston and Harvard Medical School,, Boston, MA, United States, 3The Prenatal Diagnosis and Medical Genetics Program, Mount Sinai Hospital; University Restrictive Dermopathy (RD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder charac- of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4Danek Gartner Institute of Human Genetics, terized by intrauterine growth retardation, tight and rigid skin with pro- Sheba Medical Center, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 5Centre for Vascular Anomalies, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, 6Walloon minent sLuMpeNrAficialF vAeCsEs1elsF, AbCoEn1e mineralization defects, dysplastic clavicles, Excellence in Lifesciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), Université catholique de arthrogryposis and early death soon after biLrMthN. RAD can be caused by muta- Louvain, B-1200, Brussels, Belgium. tions in or . codes for the ZMPSTE24 protein, which is necessary for the processing of prelamin A. mutations may affect the cleavage site for ZMPSTE24 resulting in progeroid syndromes. We report Lymphedema is a soft tissue swelling resulting from abnormal accumulation a patient affected by a progeroid syndrome with RD-like features. Besides of interstitial fluid containing high molecular weight proteins due to abnor- missing hairiness, stagnating weight and growth, RD-like features including mal drainage of lymph by the lymphatic vasculature. Primary lymphedema skin swelling and solidification, acrocontractures, osteolysis and muscular is due to an abnormal development and/or function of the lymphatic system. hypotension were continuously LpMroNgAressiveF uAnCEti1l the patient died at the age Some of the cases are inherited with autosomal dominant or recessive mode of 11 month. For mutational analysis, the complete coding region including of inheritance with incomplete penetrance and variable expression. Muta- iLnMtrNoAn/exon boundaries of the and genes was amplified and tion screening of a large series (n=400) of sporadic and familial index pati- used for direct Sanger sequencing. As a result, the homozygous mutation ents led us to discover several mutations in syndromic and non-syndromic p.R435C was found. Interestingly, this mutation is not located at the patients in the known lymphangiogenic, including FOXC2, VEGFR3, SOX18, cleavage site necessary for processing of prelamin A by ZMPSTE24. This CCBE1, PTPN14, GCJ2, GATA2 and KIF11. Yet, only 10% of the patients are might explain the atypical phenotype compared to other published cases explained by (an) identified inherited dominant or recessive mutation, or of RD. Sequencing of the not consanguineous parents showed that the mu- a de novo change. Samples without a mutation are extremely valuable for tation was present only in the mother in heterozygous state, but not in the our ongoing genome-wide strategies to identify additional genes mutated father who was wild type. MLPA analysis confirmed that the patient had two in primary lymphedema. Among them, we have two consanguineous fami- copies of the gene. Direct Sanger sLeMqNueAncing of highly polymorphic markers lies with recurrence of a congenital lymphedema without a mutation in the on chromosome 1 showed a partial uniparental disomy of chromosome 1 known genes. Whole genome scan using Affymetrix SNP-Chip 250K was (1q21.3 to 1q23.1) including the gene. thus performed and no copy number change was identified in the affec- P12.205 ted members. Autozygosity mapping and parametric linkage analysis con- Homozygosity mapping of two Omani Arab families with progressive firmed the exclusion of the 8 candidate lymphedema-genes. Interestingly, myoclonic epilepsy three overlapping autozygous regions were identified in the two families. A. H. Alkhayat AlShehi1, H. Alshukaili1, A. Alasmi2, M. M. Alhabsi1, R. Nandhagopal3, S. These three identified loci are analyzed using massive parallel sequencing Alrasbi2, A. H. Crosby4; 1Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman, 2Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, to identify novel lymphedema-causing mutations and genes. Our findings Oman, 3Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, london, United Kingdom, 4St Georges provide clear evidence for the existence of (a) new causative gene / genes University of London, London, United Kingdom. associated with the autosomal recessive form of the disease. (miikka.vikku- la@uclouvain.be). P12.203 Progressive myoclonic epilepsy (PME) refers to a group of neurodegenera- Clinical and genetic study of 46 Italian patients with primary tive diseases which areclinically and genetically heterogeneous.Five speci- lymphedema fic disorders have identified as the most frequent causes of PME including: D. Degiorgio1, S. Michelini2, M. Cestari3, D. Corda4, M. Ricci5, M. Cardone2, A. Mander6, L. Unverricht-Lundborg disease (Baltic myclonus); myoclonus epilepsy and Famoso3, E. Contini4, R. Serrani5, L. Pinelli1, S. Cecchin1, M. Bertelli1; 1Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, International Association of Medical Genetics (MAGI- ragged red fibres (MERRF syndrome ); Lafora body disease (LBD); neuronal onlus), Rovereto (TN), Italy, 2Department of Vascular Rehabilitation, San Giovanni ceroid lipofuscinoses (NCL); and typ e I sialidosis. The main clinical feature Battista Hospital, Roma, Italy, 3Pianeta Linfedema Study Center, Terni, Italy, 4Centro shared by this group of disorders isprogressive neurodegeneration accom- Medico e Riabilitativo per la Ricerca la Diagnosi e la Cura del Linfedema, Polimedica panied by myoclonias and epilepsy.As a part of a larger research project San Lanfranco, Pavia, Italy, 5Medicina Riabilitativa, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria on the genetics of inherited neurological disorders in Oman, this study was Ospedali Riuniti di Ancona, Ancona, Italy, 6Rehabilitative Centre Vaclav Vojta, Roma, carried out to investigate genetic abnormalities in two Omani families with Italy. PME. The study comprised of two families with total of five affected indivi- duals initially diagnosed with PME . Age of onset ranged from 7-17 years. Sympt.o ms included progressively increasing myoclonic jerks with action Primary lymphedema is characterised by altered morphological develop- and stimulus sensitive myoclonus, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and ment of lymphatic vessels causing fluid accumulation in interstitial spaces. ataxia Some patients suffered also from memory and mental impairment In familial forms, it is transmitted as a dominant Mendelian trait with hete- and visual deterioration. Genome-wide homozygosity mapping was perfor- rozygous mutations in genes involved in lymphangiogenesis. We used PCR med using Illumina 33K SNP arrays. SNP microarray analysis identified a and direct sequencing to analyse only the region of the FLT4 gene encoding shared 1.7 Mb autozygosity region between the CaSffTeBct ed sibs on chromoso- the „tyrosine-kinase domain“ and the single exon of the FOXC2 gene, in 46 me 12q22.3, flanked by the two markers; rs13048089 and rs3788151. This Italian probands with primary lymphedema, 43 of whom had familial forms. region encompasses 54 genes, among which is which knowPnD XtoK cau- We identified 12 mutations in 12 patients (12/46, 26%), six in the FLT4 sTeR AmPyPoCc1lo0nic epilepsy of Unverricht and Lundborg (ULD, or EPM1). Other gene and six in the FOXC2 gene; most of the mutations (9/12, 75%) were candidate genes associated with epilepsy in this region include and new and none were identified in 100 healthy subjects or listed in the NCBI . Sequencing of candidate genes is in progress. dbSNP. Two of the new mutations determine the synthesis of a prematurely truncated protein, while the other seven cause amino-acid changes that we www.eshg.org classified in three distinct categories according to their degree of cownswerwva.-eshg.org330 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.206 Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Mutation in CUL3 is the cause for Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II in Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Animal Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, a Turkish family. and Department of Biology, School of Sciences, Islamic Azad University (IAU), Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Medical Genetics Department, E. C. Friesema, A. J. Verkerk, R. H. Koole, J. van Rooij, R. Kraaij, A. G. Uitterlinden, E. J. Sarem Women Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 6Department of Stem Cells Sijbrands, A. H. van den Meiracker; and Developmental Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Biology and Technology, ACECR, and Department of Developmental Biology, University of Science and Culture, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. A rare Mendelian form of hypWerNteKn1sion iWs NPsKe4udohypoaldosteronism type II (PHAKIIL)H, Lal3so knoCwULn3 as Gordon hyperkalemia-hypertension syndrome Rhizomelic ChondrodyPsEpXl7as,ia Punctata (RCDP) is a peroxiomal biogenesis (OMIM 145260). Mutations in and , and two recently identified disorder which is categorized into three types. The genetic abnormality that genes ( and ) have been reported as causes of monogenic hy- causes RCDP type1 is which is responsible for peroxisomal sorting of pertension. In a Turkish family (parents and 5 children) one daughter was peroxisomal targeting signal type 2 containing proteins. Peroxisomal targe- suspected of PHAII. This daughter has been diagnosed at age 24 years with ting signal type 2 consists of a nonapeptide that is located at the N-terminus severe hypertension (200/130 mm Hg), hyperkalemia (6.5 mmol/l; normal of several peroxisomal matrix proteins. range 3.5-5.1), and normdea nl orveonal function. All other family members are In the present study, mutational analysis performed on an Iranian patient’s healthy. WNK1 WNK4 fibroblast cells wPitEhX R7CDP distinct clinical phonotype. At the first step, total We hypothesized that a mutation in the daughter is the most likely RNA extraction and cDNA synthesis carried out. RT-PCR product consisting cause of her disease. Sanger sequencing of and and SNP array whole lPeEnXg7th of cDNA was inserted into T/A cloning vector and se- analysis (OmniExpress, Illumina) did not reveal any mutation or large chro- quenced. To evaluate functionality of detected mutation, mutant and normal mosomal abnormality. Full exome sequencing (Nimblegen SeqCapEZV2, Il- CDS of was cloned into an expression vector PDB2 and co-transfected lumina HiSeq2000) of all seven family members identified 34,733 unique into fibroblast cells. PEX7 variants in our patient. Filtering against dbSNP, 1000Genome project, vari- SeqPuEeXn7c e data revealed a missense homozygous mutation of G to A at nu- ants found in unaffected family members, and selecting loss or gain of func- cleotide 257 in exon3 of coding sequence. Moreover, genomic analysis tion mutations resudlet endo vino 481 possibleC dUisLe3ase-causing variants. By compa- of gene confirmed the mutation in the mentioned location. This muta- ring the recent mutations reported by Boyden et al (Nature, Febr 2012), we tPiEoXn7 c aused one amino acid residue substitution of Cys to Tyr at codoPnE 8X67 found an identical mutation in , a splice acceptor site mutation located on WD1 repeat domain region severely affected the functionality of in intdroe nn 8o vroesulting in the skipping of exon 9. This results in an in-frame 57 protein. Back-transPfEecXt7ion of vector containing mutant CDS of amino acid deletioCnU La3brogating the function of CUL3. did not restore the normal peroxiome function in RCDP patient’s fibroblasts This splice acceptor site mutation found in a second patient with unlike the native type of . PHAII confirmed as a cause of PHAII in line with Boyden et al. P12.209 P12.207 Renal tubular dysgenesis: report of one case RUNX2 overexpression provides evidence for the involvement of a T. Burjanivova1, M. Kalman2, G. Minarik3, P. Slavik2, V. Janusicova4, Z. Lasabova1, L. pro-osteogenic signaling pathway in pseudoxanthoma elasticum Plank2; M. J. Hosen1, O. M. Vanakker1, P. J. Coucke1, O. Le Saux2, A. De Paepe1; 1Department of Molecular Biology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Commenius University 1Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Dpt. of Cell and in Martin, Vrutky, Slovakia, 2Department of Pathology and National Consultation Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medecine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, Centre of Hematopathology, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Commenius University in United States. Martin, Martin, Slovakia, 3Institute of Molecular BioMedicine, Comenius University in Bratislava Faculty of Medicine, Bratislava, Slovakia, 4Department of Molecular Biology, Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Commenius Aim. Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) is characterized by oculocutaneous University in Martin, Vrutky, Martin, Slovakia. and cardiovascular manifestations, due to mineralization and fragmentation of elastic fibers. The pathophysiology of ectopic calcification is unclear and hypotheses include oxidative stress and an unidentified serum factor. PXE Renal tubular dysgenesis (RTD) is an autosomal recessive disease, which patients also have diminished vitamin K (VK) serum concentrations, leading was described in stillborn siblings in 1983 by Allanson. In 2005 Gribouval to inefficient activation of the VK-dependent mineralization inhibitor matrix et al. first reported that mutations in the genes coding renin-angiotensin sy- gla protein (MGP). MGP acts as inhibitor of the pro-calcifying Bone Morpho- stem (RAS) are associated with RTD. The disease is characterised by an early genetic Protein 2 (BMP2). One of several BMP2-associated pathways is the onset and persistent fetal anuria that results to oligohydroamnion, Potter ‚s “BMP2-Smad-RUNX2” pathway, where RUNX2 acts as transcriptional regu- syndrome, lung hypoplasia and calval hypoplasia. Inherited RTD represents lator of proteins involved in mineralization, osteogenesis and apoptosis. We a disease with a very severe course, which is lethal in most of the cases. studied the role of this signaling pathway in PXE. Specific pathomorphological change found in kidney with RTD are repre- Methods & Results. Immunohistochemistry for BMP2, Smad 1-4-5-8 and sented by either absence or poorly developed renal proximal tubules. Here RUNX2 in whiskers of Abcc6 knock-out mice and human PXE dermis sho- we report a casuistic of a newborn with RTD - this is the first reported case wed positive labeling, co-localizing with mineralization compared to con- of inherited RTD in Slovakia with evidence of a novel mutation in RAS. A trols, which was confirmed via qPCR on human PXE fibroblasts. TUNEL as- male infant died eleven hours after birth because of a respiratory failure. says revealed significant increase in apoptosis in PXE fibroblasts. Caspase 3 Renal histology and following genetic analysis confirmed diagnosis of renal stains demonstrated co-localization of apoptosis with mineralization foci in tubular dysgenesis. A novel homozygous R259C mutation in the gene coding all tissues. Comparable qPCR results and apoptosis rates were obtained on angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) was found. This mutation was evalu- PXE serum inoculated control fibroblasts. ated with the prediction tool PolyPhen-2. R259C mutation is predicted to Discussion & Conclusion. Our results indicate the involvement of the pro- be probably damaging with a score of 1.000. Consequent mutation analysis osteogenic BMP2-Smad-RUNX2 pathway in PXE. RUNX2 upregulation can found the same heterozygous mutations in both parents, who are asympto- explain the expression profile of proteins previously implicated in PXE, lea- matic. Identification of this mutation now allows genetic counseling and ding to ectopic mineralization or neovascularisation. By also demonstrating prenatal diagnosis. an effect of oxidative stress and PXE serum, three principal pathophysiolo- This work was supported by Center of Excellence for II ( co-financed from ES gical observations in PXE can be merged in this pathway, which may provide ITMS code 26220120036), by MBRKM (ES IMTS code 26220220113), and therapeutic options through small-molecule inhibitors of BMP receptors. by education grant from Pfizer code 26220220113. P12.208 P12.210 Mutational analysis of an iranian patient with rhisomelic High Prevalence of Mutations in the CRB1 Gene in Spanish Patients chondrodysplasia punctata type I (RCDP I) revealed a novel with Congenital and Child-Hood Onset Retinal Dystrophies homozygous mutation in WD1 domain of PEX7 gene S. D. Tatu1, M. Corton1,2, P. F. San Jose1, A. Avila-Fernandez1,2, F. Blanco-Kelly1,2, E. A. Salamian1, K. Ghaedi2, Y. Shafeghati3, A. Shoaraye-Nejati1, M. Nematollahi1, P. Vallespín1,2, I. Tapias3, D. Cantalapiedra1, R. Riveiro-Alvarez1,2, S. Bernal4,2, B. García- Mohamadinejad4, K. Karbalaie1, F. Hadipour5, M. Nasr-Esfahani1, H. Baharvand6; Sandoval3, M. Baiget4,2, C. Ayuso1,2; 1Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute 1Department of Genetics, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 2Centre for for Animal Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), ISCII, Madrid, Spain, 3Department of Ophtalmology, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Department Cell and Molecular Biology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Animal of Genetics, Instituto de Investigación Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Biotechnology, ACECR, and Biology Department, School of Sciences, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Genetics Research Center, University of Social Spain. Welfare Sciences & Rehabilitation, and Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women Purpose: Mutations in the CRB1 gene have been associated with severe con- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 331 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genital and early-onset forms of retinal dystrophies including Leber conge- swallowing and digesting areas. These symptoms arise in 6 to 18 months nital amaurosis (LCA), retinitis pigmentosa (RP) and cone-rod dystrophies. old girls, after an apparently normal development, when the deficit of the The aim of this study was to determine the incidence of CRB1 mutations in psychomotor abilities becomes more evident. Laboratorial diagnosis can be Spanish patients with congenital and/or early-onset retinal dystrophies. done by screening for mutations along the coding region of the MECP2 gene Methods: 91 LCA and 255 Early-Onset RP unrelated Spanish patients were and its adjacencies. This work focus on identifying and characterizing muta- first analyzed with an APEX based microarray (LCA or ARRP chip, Asper tions on the MECP2 gene in patients clinically diagnosed as Rett syndrome, Ophthalmics). All mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing and fami- and to study the relationship between their genotype and phenotype. DNA lial segregation was also verified. In patients without any mutation or with was extracted from blood samples after parents signing the informed con- only one mutation, high-resolution melting (HRM) and multiplex ligation- sent form, and High Resolution Melting technique and DNA sequencing were dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis were further performed to employed to screen for mutations. While searching for mutations in MECP2 complete the mutational screening of the CRB1 gene. Haplotype analysis exons, we have found a missence mutation (T158M) (GenBank X99686). All and whole genome homozygosity mapping were also performed in 143 fa- the four exons and the promoter region will be screened and genetic coun- milies. seling will be offered to the families carrying mutations. This methodology Results: Known variants in CRB1 were identified in 42 of 346 (12%) pati- is efficient for confirming the diagnosis of patients under suspect of Rett ents by genotyping microarray, of them 31 patients (10%) carried two pa- syndrome, a subdiagnosed pathology due to its complex clinical suspicion. thogenic disease alleles. Financial Support: FAPESP, INCTC. Conclusions: This study proved that 10% of Spanish patients with early on- P12.213 set Retinal dystrophies carried mutations in CRB1, ranging from 7% of ear- Comparison of MLPA, microarray and qPCR data in patients with ly-onset RP cases to 15% of LCA families. The most frequent mutation in our Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome and CREBBP deletions cohort was p.Cys948Tyr, which was present in 22% of the alleles (15/68) D. Galetzka, M. Linke, J. Schröder, S. Lechno, U. Zechner, O. Bartsch; in 13 families. Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz, Germany. P12.211 Next-generation sequencing of 53 known genes for retinitis pigmentosa and allied diseases identifies the causative mutations in the majority of 40 patients There are mainly three techniques for DNA copy number analysis in the T. Eisenberger1, B. Lorenz2, A. Gal3, S. Ghaffari4, C. Decker1, M. Schürmann5, S. Baig6, M. genome: (i) multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), (ii) Preising2, C. Schell-Apacik7, C. Friedburg2, C. Neuhaus1, C. Bergmann1,8, H. J. Bolz1,9; genome-wide microarray analysis, and (iii) quantitative PCR (qPCR). We ai- 1Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Department of med to compare the precision of MLPA and microarray results in breakpoint Ophthalmology, Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany, 3Institute of determination using a cohort of patients with RTS. Human Genetics, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, Using MLPA (Kit P313, MRC Holland), we identified 16 patients with Rubin- 4Comprehensive Genetic Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic stein-Taybi syndrome (RTS) and CREBBP deletions. Eleven patients (73%) Republic of Iran, 5Institute of Human Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 6Human Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Health Biotechnology Division, National had deletions extending beyond CREBBP: 7 patients (47%) showed (only) Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, Pakistan, 7Praxis für distally flanking deletions, 3 patients (20%) showed (only) proximally flan- Humangenetik am DRK-Klinikum Westend, Berlin, Germany, 8Department of Human king deletions, and one patient (7%) demonstrated a large deletion flanking Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, CREBBP on both sides, encompassing 860 kb and ~20 genes (from pter University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. to qter: ZNF597-NAA60-CLUAP1- NLRC3-SLX4-TRAP1-DNASE1-TRAP1- CREBBP-ADCY9-SRL-TFAP4-GLIS2-PAM16-CORO7-VASN-DNAJA3-HMOX2- NMRAL1-C16orf5). Four patients (27%) showed both breakpoints within Retinitis pigmentosa (RP), Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) and Stargardt the CREBBP gene. Excluding one case due to insufficient DNA, data on 17 disease (STGD) are genetically extremely heterogeneous conditions, ma- breakpoints within CREBBP could be precisely compared using MLPA, king mutation analysis difficult. We developed a diagnostic next-generation microarray analysis (Affymetrix 6.0), and qPCR. Comparison of MLPA and sequencing (NGS) approach targeting all coding exon s of 53 genes: 31 for microarray data yielded consistent results for 9 breakpoints, differences of autosomal recessive RP (arRP; 413 exons), 23 for autosomal dominant RP only 1 exon for five further cases, and for 2 and more exons in 3 cases with (adRP; 248 exons) and 15 LCA genes (196 exons). Weinvestigated 40 pati- qPCR in most cases confirming the MLPA data. Taken together, genome-wi- ents (33 with arRP, sporadic RP or STGD; 1 with adRP; 6 with LCA/early- de microarray analysis may at least in some cases give less precise data than onset severe retinal dystrophy). SequenceA vBaCrAia4nRtsP w1eCrRe Bid1enTtUifLiePd1 uEsYinSg an other methods like MLPA or qPCR and may, in particular, overlook small de- iPnD-hEo6uBse bioinformatic pipeline and JSI SeqNext-Software, and verified by letions. The combination of the three techniques may improve the diagnosis Sanger sequencing. BiaCll2eOliRc Fm7u1taMtiEoRnTs Kin RPGRIP, 1 CE, P290, RD,H 5 and and avoid later alternative and expensive diagnostics and/or management were found in 2 - 5 patients each and accounted for 50% of cases. strategies. Biallelic mutations in , , , and SAG were P12.214 identified in single individuals. In one patient, a heterozygous truncating Twelve new mutations in the EP300 gene in patients with Rubinstein- mutation was identified in PtRhPe Fa3u1tosomal recessive disease gene . Two Taybi syndrome. patients turned out to be affected by adRP that appeared sporadic due to M. J. van Belzen, C. A. C. van der Lans, D. J. M. Peters; incomplete RpHenOetrance of mutations in first-degree relatives, and Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. the only patient with a family history indicating adRP carried a novel he- terozygous mutation. In summary, we identified the genetic basis of disease in 29/40 patients (72.5%). The identification of dominant mutati- Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome (RSTS) is a rare disorder affecting approxi- ons in apparently recessive cases and the involvement of 14 genes (although mately 1/100,000 newborns. The syndrome is characterized by mental and mutations in 6 genes account for two thirds of cases) illustrate the benefit growth retardation and a particular dysmorphology mainly concerning the of massively parallel sequencing of all RP genes regardless of the assumed face, hands and feet. The most frequent cause of RSTS are mutations in the mode of inheritance. CREBBP gene, which are found in 30-50% of patients. Furthermore, micro- P12.212 deletions involving the CREBBP gene have been found in ~10% of patients. Clinical and molecular analysis of Rett syndrome patients from the Mutations in EP300 have been published, but seem to be rare with a fre- University Hospital of Medical School from Ribeirao Preto - Brazil quency of 1-3%. G. A. Molfetta1,2, T. M. Assis1,2, C. A. Ferreira1,2, W. A. Silva Jr1,2; In a cohort of 119 patients suspected of having RSTS, in 12 patients (6%) a 1University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil, 2National Institute of Science and pathogenic mutation in the EP300 gene was found. Eleven EP300 mutations Technology in Stem Cell and Cell Therapy, Regional Blood Center of Ribeirão Preto, were small sequence variants: three frameshift mutations, five nonsense Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. mutations, one splice site mutation, one insertion/deletion mutation and one (de novo) missense mutation in the functional HAT domain. In addition, a deletion of exons 24 to 29 was detected. About one third of patients in Rett Syndrome is a developmental disorder caused by mutations in the this cohort (32%) could be explained by a mutation in the CREBBP gene, so MECP2 gene located on X chromosome. Generally affects feminine individu- in the majority of patients no mutation could be identified. In conclusion, als with an incidence of 1 in each 10.000-15.000 newborn girls. The syndro- these results show that mutations in the EP300 gene are a rare cause of me leads to total or partial loss of cognitive, sensorial, emotional, motor and Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome, but perhaps not as rare as previously thought. autonomic functions of the brain. Patients generally present deficits in the areas of learning, speaking, sensorial perception, mood management, move- ments, breathing, heart function, severe scoliosis, and even on the chewing, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org332 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.216 The identification of the SCA36 intronic expansion in Spain further highlights the role of dysfunctional RNA processing in congenital anomalies. In such a patient with multiple congenital anomalies neurodegeneration we now observed an 150 kb deletion on chromosome 7q21.11 affecting the M. Garcia-Murias1,2, B. Quintáns3,4, M. Arias5, A. I. Seixas6, P. Cacheiro2, Z. Yáñez2, R. first exon of the axon guidance molecule gene SEMA3A. This deletion was Tarrío2,4, J. Pardo5, S. Arias-Rivas5, P. Blanco-Arias1,4, J. Sequeiros6,7, A. Carracedo1,2,4, I. inherited from the healthy father, but considering the function of SEMA3A Silveira6, M. J. Sobrido1,4; and phenotypic similarity to the knock-out mice, we assumed a recessive 1Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, defect. Sequencing of the SEMA3A gene in the patient revealed the de novo 2Genomic Medicine Group, School of Medicine, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 3Clinical in-frame mutation p.Phe316_Lys317delinsThrSerSerAsnGlu. Cloning of the Hospital of Santiago de Compostela- SERGAS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain, 4Center mutated allele in combination with two informative SNPs confirmed com- for Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases (CIBERER), Valencia, Spain, 5Department of Neurology, Clinical Hospital of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de pound heterozygosity in the patient. While the altered protein structure Compostela, Spain, 6IBMC- Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do was predicted to be benign, aberrant splicing resulting in a premature stop Porto, Porto, Portugal, 7ICBAS, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. codon was proven by RT-PCR to occur in about half of the transcripts from this allele. Expression profiling in human fetal and adult cDNA panels, con- firmed a high expression of SEMA3A in all brain regions as well as in adult SCA 36 was recently shown to be caused by a GGCCTG repeat expansion and fetal heart and fetal skeletal muscle. We therefore report the first bona in intron 1 of NOP56 in Japanese families. NOP56 encodes a component of fide human mutations in the SEMA3A gene delineating a novel autosomal the ribonucleoprotein complex and plays a role in transcription and spli- recessive disorder characterized by postnatal short stature with relative cing processes. We found the same mutation in ten families, including two macrocephaly, camptodactyly, septal heart defect and several minor anoma- very large kindreds from the coastal region in Northwestern Spain (Costa lies. Normal intellectual development in the patient was surprising but may da Morte, Galicia). The screening of the NOP56 expansion, carried out with be explained by the remaining 20% of SEMA3A expression level demonstra- Southern Blot analysis and repeat-primed PCR, revealed expanded alleles ted by quantitative RT-PCR. ranging from 650-2500 repeats, within a unique haplotype. The most recent P12.219 common founder chromosome was dated over 600 years ago. We have stu- Clinical, in-silico and experimental evidence for pathogenicity of two died 66 mutation carriers and observed both further expansions and con- novel splice site mutations in the SH3TC2 gene tractions of the repeat upon transmission. The main clinical characteristics P. Lassuthova1, M. Gregor2, L. Sarnová2, E. Machalová1,2, R. Sedláček2, P. Seeman1; of the disease are a late-onset cerebellar syndrome with upper and lower 1DNA lab, Department of Paediatric Neurology, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles motor neuron signs, oculomotor abnormalities and sensorineural hearing University in Prague a, Prague, Czech Republic, 2Institute of Molecular Genetics, Czech Academy of Sciences, Prague, Czech rep., Prague, Czech Republic. loss. SCA36 represents the most frequent SCA type so far in our region, with epidemiological implication for South American countries, the main destiny of traditional Galician emigration, where thus additional SCA36 cases might be identified. Together with the recent description of the intronic C9ORF72 Introduction: ChaSrHco3tT-CM2arie-Tooth (CMT) neuropathy is the most common inherited neuromuscular disorder. CMT is genetically very heterogeneous. hexanucleotide expansion in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, our findings further highlight the increasing recognition of a major role of abnormal RNA Mutations in the gene cause CharScHot3-TMCa2rie-Tooth neuropathy type 4C (CMT4C), a demyelinating form with autosomal recessive inheritance. processing in neurodegeneration.Acknowledgements: Xunta de Galicia- Two novel splice site mutations in the gene have been studied Consellería de Sanidade (PGIDT05SAN26PR), Consellería de Economía e In- (c.279G>A, c.3676-8G>A). dustria (10PXIB9101280PR) and Consellería de Innovación (Lucas Labrada Patients and Methods: Mutation c.279G>A was detected on one allele in two contract to MG-M). Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain: Miguel Servet contract to MS and ISCIII-SERGAS stabilization contract to BQ. unrelatedS Hfa3mTCilies with CMT4C in combination with a known pathogenic P12.217 mutation (c.S2H836T0C C>T in one family, c.505T>C in the other) on the second allele of 2. Variant c.3676-8G>A was detected in one patient on one Genotype-phenotype correlations in epilepsy patients with the SCN1A allele of the 2 in combination with c.2860 C>T on the other allele. point mutations D. Hoffman-Zacharska1, E. Szczepanik2, I. Terczynska2, R. Tataj1, J. Bal1; In-silico teSsHts3 TwCe2re performed and Exon Trap experiments were undertaken 1Department of Medical Genetics; Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 2Clinic to prove the effect of both mutations on proper splicing of SH3TC2. Frag- of Neurology of Child and Adolescents; Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. ments of were subcloned into pET01 Exon Trap vector (Mobitec) and transfected into COS-7 cells. Results: Aberrant splicing was predicted by computer tests for both mutati- SCN1A, the gene encoding the sodium channel alpha 1 subunit, is now one ons, which was confirmed by Exon Trap analysis. For c.279G>A it was shown of the most important epilepsy genes. SCN1A-related seizure disorders en- that 19 bases from intron 3 are retained in cDNA. For c.3676-8G>A it was compass a spectrum ranging from simple febrile seizures (FS), generalized shown that the mutation produces a novel splice acceptor site for exon 17 epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (GEFS+) to Dravet syndrome (DS) and and complexS Hch3aTnCg2es in splicing were observed. intractable childhood epilepsy with generalized tonic-clonic seizures (ICE- Conclusions: We present evidence that mutations c.279G>A and c.3676-8- GTC). Mutations of this gene were also detected in less common phenotypes. G>A in the SH 3gTeCn2e cause aberrant splicing and are therefore patho- More than 700 mutations in SCN1A gene have already been associated with genic and causal for CMT4C. This report broadens the spectrum of causal DS/GEFS+, mainly sequence alterations (80%). All mutations’ are dominant mutations in the gene. and most of them occur de novo, however familial cases also been described Supported by: IGA MH CR NT 11521-4 and AV0Z50520514. (5-10%). In such cases proband, usually shows the most severe form, while P12.220 the remaining family members milder phenotypes. Ciliogenesis associated signal transduction is altered by NEK1 We present analysis of the distribution and type of SCN1A point mutations, mutations in short rib-polydactyly syndrome type Majewski we have identified in 50 patients clinically diagnosed as DS/GEFS+ and re- K. Kessler1, A. Giessl2, J. H. Brandstätter2, A. Rauch3, C. T. Thiel1; ferred for molecular testing. Most of them showed sporadic form of disea- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Animal Physiology, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen- se (each with different mutation), but we also identified familial forms (3 Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, families). Because all identified familial cases have mutation at this same Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Switzerland. protein residue p.Arg1596 (p.Arg1596His and p.Arg1596Cys) we show not only phenotypic heterogeneity between family members but also interfamilial disease course and clinical picture differences. Defects of ciliogenesis have been implicated in a wide range of human phe- P12.218 notypes anNdE pKl1ay a crucial role in different signal transduction pathways and Delineation of a novel syndrome caused by biallelic SEMA3A cell cycle coordination. We recently identified nonsense and splice site mu- mutations tations in as the underlying cause of short rib-polydactyly syndrome K. Hofmann1, M. Zweier1, C. Zweier1, W. Wittmann2, H. Sticht3, J. Hoyer1, S. Uebe1, C. type Majewski (SRPS II) (Thiel et al. 2011). According to their phenotype Thiel1, A. B. Ekici1, A. Reis1, A. Rauch4; the short rib-polydactyly syndromes (SRPS) are classified into four distinct 1Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen- Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, 2Kinderzentrum St.Martin, Regensburg, Germany, 3Institute of types: Saldino-Noonan (I), Majewski (II), Verma-Naumhoff (III) and EBVeCem1/e2r, Biochemistry, Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen- Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, I(FIVT)8 a0n, d incDluYdNeC t2hHe1 p henotypically related asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy 4Institute of Medical Genetics, University of Zurich, Schwerzenbach-Zurich, Germany. (ATD) and Ellis-van Crefeld syndromes (EVC). Here, mutations in and have been observed. Absence of full-length NEK1 leads to a severely reduction of primary cilia Molecular karyotyping is commonly used to identify disease causing de novo length and a significant decrease of ciliated fibroblasts. The primary cilium copy number variants in patients with developmental delay and multiple acts as a chemosensor for important developmental pathways like hedge- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 333 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.223 Novel mutations in a family with Maroteaux type of acromesomelic hog, wnt and the platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) pathways. Thus we dysplasia and Sjögren’s syndrome associated with neuropathy performed quantitative real-time PCR experiments to elucidate expression C. Yang1, J. Wu1, F. Tsai2, Y. Chen1; level changes of the crucial genes of these pathways and the other known 1Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. SRPS genes. The overall difference of expression levels was increased up to 3.8 fold in our patient fibroblasts in comparison with controls. We further evaluated tNhEeK c1hanges of expression levels under starvation conditions to Sjogren’s syndrome is a chronic autoimmune disorder and displays a strong initiate ciliogenesis. These results confirm that disturbed cilia formation by female predominance. We identified a consanguineous family with one af- the loss of affect signal transduction in these pathways explaining the fected female with Maroteaux type of acromesomelic dysplasia (AMDM) clinical variability. and Sjögren’s syndrome associated with neuropathy. These symptoms are P12.221 inherited as autosomal recessive traits. Exome sequencing of one affected Shox2 and Tbx4 operate in a feedback loop during murine limb and one normal individual in the family using Illumina Hiseq2000 was sub- development jected and identified a homozygous nonsense mutation on a known AMDM A. Glaser1, R. Arora2, S. Puskaric1, L. Li3, N. Gretz3, K. U. Schneider1, V. E. Papaioannou2, G. gene, NPR2 gene, for the AMDM syndrome. For Sjögren’s syndrome asso- Rappold1; ciated with neuropathy, we identified a novel homozygous variant on a gene 1Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany, that is highly expressed in immune cells and is a neurogenesis inhibitor. This 2Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY, United variant is not present in 376 Taiwanese controls and we are now screening States, 3Medical Research Centre, University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany. for its allele frequency in other patients with Sjögren’s syndrome associated SHOX SHOX2 with neuropathy. SHOX P12.224 The paralogous genes and encode for homeodomain transcrip- Spectrums and frequencies of SLC26A4 and SLC26A5 genes mutation tion factors with important functions during embryonal development. among patients with non-syndromic hearing loss from different was identified as a human growth control gene as mutations in this gene regions of Russia lSeHaOdX t2o the skeletal deformities seen in Leri-Weill and Langer syndromSheo xa2s S. Lobov, L. Dzhemileva, E. Khusnutdinova; well as idiopathic short stature. AlthSohuogxh2 its closely related counterpart Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics of Ufa Science Center RAS, Ufa, Russian could not be linked to any human phenotype so far, analysis of Federation. deficient mouse models revealed that also plays a crucial role in limb development where it controls neural, muscular and skeletal processes. To gain more insight into Shox2 dependent signalling pathways, we searched Background: The molecular etiology of hearing impairment in Russia has not for target genes using microarray expression profiling and identified sever- been fully investigated. Study of GJB2, GJB6, GJB3, 12SrRNA, tRNASer(UCN) al interesting candidates such as different members of the T-Box traTnbsxc4rip- and MYO7A genes revealed that 55% of the patients with hearing loss car- tion factor Sfhaomxi2ly as well as extracellular matrix protein encoding genes. ried GJB2 mutations in different regions of Russia. The SLC26A4 and SL- For further analysis we focussed on the T-Box Sthraonxs2cription factor as C26A5 genes mutations are analyzed in this study. a putative target gene whiSchho hxa2s esTsebnxt4ial functions in skeletal and Methods: Two hundred and fifty unrelated deaf patients were included. The muscular developmeTnbtx o4f the limbs, similar to . We could dSehmooxn2stra- all coding exons of SLC26A4 and first ten exons of SLC26A5 genes were se- te a dynamic regulatSohroyx e2ffect of on specificTablxly4 in forelimbs. In quenced in all 250 patients, including 130 patients carrying bi- and mono- turn, we uncovered as a novel transcriptional activator of and allelic recessive GJB2 mutations, two patients carrying a known GJB2 domi- therefore postulate as a feedback modulator of during murine nant mutation c.224G>A (p.Arg75Gln), as well as six patients with mtDNA limb development. (m.1555A>G, m.961insC(n), m.961delTinsC(n) and m.7444G>A) mutati- P12.222 ons. Counteracting effects on the allosteric control of SHP2’s function drive Results: Eight patients (3,2%, 8/250) with non-syndromic hearing loss selection of the recurrent Tyr62Asp and Tyr63Cys substitutions in were found carrying SLC26A4 and SLC26A5 mutation and polymorphic va- Noonan syndrome riants. Among them, one patient with bi-allelic SLC26A4 mutations (c.85G>C S. Martinelli1, A. P. Nardozza2, S. Delle Vigne1, G. Sabetta2, P. Torreri1, G. Bocchinfuso2, (p.Glu29Gln) and c.149T>G (p.Leu50Arg)) had EVA by CT scan. One patient E. Flex1, S. Venanzi1, A. Palleschi2,3, B. D. Gelb4, G. Cesareni2,5, L. Stella2,3, L. Castagnoli2, M. with non-syndromic hearing loss was heterozygous for mutations c.919-2- Tartaglia1; 1Istituto Superiore di Sanita‘, Rome, Italy, 2Università „Tor Vergata“, Rome, Italy, 3IRCCS A>G in SLC26A4 gene. The most common SLC26A5 gene mutation, g.-53- Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS), Italy, 4Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, United 2A>G, accounted for 0,4% (1/250) of all SLC26A4 mutant alleles. Two pati- States, 5IRCCS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Rome, Italy. ents with non-syndromic hearing loss were heterozygous for polymorphic PTPN11 variant c.49548A>G (p.Gly740Ser) in SLC26A4, and one was heterozygous for polymorphic variant g.38190T>C in SLC26A5. The novel SLC26A4 gene APTctPivNa1t1ing mutations in cause Noonan syndrome (NS), the most mutation g.29607delA was identified in one patient with EVA. common non-chromosomal disorder affecting development and growth. Conclusion: Our results suggest that GJB2, SLC26A4 and SLC26A5 mutations encodes SHP2, an SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine phos- together make up a major cause of congenital hearing loss in the different phatase that positively modulates RAS function. Here, we characterized populations from Russia. functionally all possible amino acid substitutions arising from single-base P12.225 changes affecting codons 62 and 63 to explore the molecular mechanisms FL-SMN and PL3 expression in discordant spinal muscular atrophy lying behind the largely invariant occurrence of the Tyr62Asp and Tyr63Cys (SMA) siblings and asymptomatic SMN1 deletans substitutions recurring in NS. We provide structural and biochemical data G. Dubsky de Wittenau1, S. Radovic2, N. Passon3, F. Curcio3,4, C. Pucillo3, M. Morgante2,5, indicating that the autoinhibitory interaction between the N-SH2 and PTP R. Lonigro3,6; 1Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche, Università di Udine, P.le M. Kolbe 1, domains is perturbed in both mutants as a result of an extensive s6t3ructural Udine, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie e Ambientali, Universita’di Udine, via rearrangement of the N-SH2 domain. Most mutations affecting Tyr exerted delle Scienze 208, Udine, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche Università an unpredicted disrupting effect on the structure of the N-SH2 phospho- di Udine, P.le M. Kolbe 1, Udine, Italy, 4Dipartimento di Medicina di Laboratorio, SOC peptide-binding cleft mediating SHP2’s interaction with signaling partners. Istituto di Patologia Clinica, A.O.U. di Udine, P.le S.M. della Misericordia, Udine, Italy, Among all the amino acid changes affecting that codon, the disease-causing 5Istituto di Genomica Applicata, Parco Tecnologico L. Danieli, via J. Linussio 51, Udine, mutation was the only substitution that perturbed the stability of SHP2’s Italy, 6Dipartimento di Medicina di Laboratorio, SOC Istituto di Patologia Clinica, A.O.U., inactive conformation without severely impairing proper N-SH2’s phospho- Udine, Italy. peptide binding. On the other hand, the disruptive effect of the Tyr62Asp SMN1 change on the autoinhibited conformation of the protein was balanced, in PLS3 parPt,T bPyN le1s1s efficient binding properties of the mutant. Overall, our data de- Survival motor neuron1 gene( )isthe mSaMinN 1d eterminant for SMA di- monstrate that the selection-by-function mechanism acting as driving force sease while plastin3 ( FL-S)M isN referrPeLdS a3s a neuroprotective gene allowing for mutations affecting codons 62 and 63 implies balancing of coun- genotype/phenotype discrepancy for healthy deletans. We compared teracting effects operating on the allosteric control of SHP2’s function. the transcript levels of S ManNd1 in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) and EBV-immortalized cells from threeS iMndNi1viduSaMls Nh2arbou- ring a homozygous deletion of . Two subjSeMctNs 1are mSMalNe2 and female dis- cordant siblings hFaLp-SloMidNenticaPlL Sfo3r the SMA locus (0 /4 ), one subject is a asymptomatic unrelated female (0 /5 ). We analyzed the expression of and in those individualsbyqRT-PCR in PBMC www.eshg.org www.eshangd. oEBrVg-immortalized cells. All three individuals similarly express both ge-334 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.228 The mutation status of BMPR1A, SMAD4, PTEN and STK11 genes in nes in PBMC suggesting that none of the two is rFeLs-pSMonNsible for neuropro- Polish patients with hamartomatous polyposis syndromes tection of the asymptomatic females. In EBV-immortalized cells instead, we M. Podralska1, W. Cichy2, A. Pławski1, R. Słomski1; measured comparable expression levels only for transcripts across 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Karol the subjects tested, while a dramatic reduction for PLS3 transcripts, ranging Marcinkowski University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland. from 25 to 100-fold less, was observed in two out of three SMN1 deletans. A strong reduction of PLS3 expression could reflect an EBV-dependent event or particular feature of B lymphocytes. To address this question we compa- The hamartomatous polyposis syndromes are a heterogeneous group of red transcript levels of PLS3 in B and NON-B cells from the two unrelated, disorders that share an autosomal-dominant pattern of inheritance and are phenotypically discordant subjects and observed a decrease in B cells only, characterized by hamartomatous polyps of the gastrointestinal tract. These ranging between 1,6 and 5-fold less than those in PBMC. We conclude that syndromes not only carry the risk of developing colorectal cancer, but also PLS3 transcript levels, at least in pheripheral blood is unrelated to health/ increase the risk of malignant transformation in other organs. In this study disease condition of SMA deletans and that an EBV-dependent immortaliza- four hamartomatous polyposis syndromes (juvenile polyposis syndrome, tion could alter gene expression. Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, Cowden syndrome and mixed polyposis syndro- P12.226 me) were investigated. Mutations in SMAD4, BMPR1A, STK11 and PTEN are A novel SMAD3 variation in a family variably affected by symptoms of responsible for developing hamartomatous polyps. The study group consi- aneurysms-osteoarthritis syndrome sted of 62 Polish families. Mutation screening methods and MLPA techni- B. Keyser1, M. Mair2, J. Schmidtke1, E. Weis3, O. Bartsch3, M. Stuhrmann-Spangenberg1; que were used. The sequence analysis was performed for fragments with 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute difference SSCP/duplex patterns and for verification of MLPA method. As of Human Genetics, Saarland University, Homburg/Saar, Germany, 3Institute of Human a result of molecular analysis 32 pathogenic mutations in 34 patients were Genetics, University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, identified. Three mutations were detected in BMPR1A gene. In four families Germany. with juvenile polyposis syndrome has been identified pathogenic mutations in SMAD4. In STK11 gene was detected 12 types of mutations in 13 families with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. Two substitutions were detected in families Thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection (TAAD) is a condition which can with Cowden syndrome. Moreover, numerous of polymorphic changes in occur isolated or in combination with other syndromes, such as Marfan syn- both the coding and intronic sequences were observed. The majority of mu- drome or Loeys-Dietz syndrome. Recently a new syndrome, termed aneu- tations are large changes and they represent 40% of all detected mutations. rysms-osteoarthritis syndrome (AOS), has been described (van de Laar et Mutations established in Polish population have heterogeneous nature. Only al. 2011). AOS is an autosomal dominant disorder. The main features of AOS three mutations were recurrent. In addition, there was no strong genotype- are aortic aneurysms and dissection, osteoarthritis and aneurysms of other phenotype correlation in all studied hamartomatous polyposis. In all cases, vessels, such as the cerebral arteries. Mutations responsible for this disease MLPA analysis should be performed as a first step to improve efficiency of were found in the SMAD3 gene. The SMAD3 protein is activated by TGF-ß via molecular diagnostics.Supported by grant NN401014435 the TGF-ß receptors 1 and 2 and functions as a transcriptional modulator. P12.229 We report on a family in which the affected members present with diverse Modifiers of Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome and implication for symptoms, including aortic aneurysms, skeletal and ophthalmological ma- mutation databases nifestations, and with variable expressivity. We identified a novel sequence B. Lanthaler, J. Zschocke, M. Witsch-Baumgartner; variation, c.934G>A (p.Ala312Thr), in the SMAD3 gene. The variation is lo- Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. cated in exon 7 in the MH2 domain of SMAD3, which is responsible for oli- Background gomerization of SMAD3 with SMAD4. The mutated alanine residue is highly conserved among other species and biometric analysis predicted this varia- The Smith-Lemli-Opitz Syndrome (SLOS [MIM 270400]) is an tion to be pathogenic. In one family member with skeletal manifestations we autosomal recessive malformation syndrome that shows a great variability could not detect the SMAD3 variation. This could indicate that the SMAD3 regarding severity. SLOS is caused by mutations in the Δ7sterol-reductase variant acts as one of several genetic and non-genetic factors predisposing gene (DAHpoCER 7; E.C. 1.3.1.21) which disrupt cholesterol biosynthesis. Pheno- for the disease in this family. typic variability of the disease is already known to be associated with ma- P12.227 ternal genotype. ReDcHenCtRly7 a second modifier of this monogenic disease A restricted spectrum of mutations in the SMAD4 tumor-suppressor has been demonstrated which is ABCA1. The exiDstHinCgR L7OVD based mutation gene underlies Myhre syndrome databases includes the genotype for each phenotypical described V. Caputo1, L. Cianetti1, M. Niceta1, C. Carta1, A. Ciolfi1, G. Bocchinfuso2, E. Carrani1, M. L. pFiantideinntg. sIt oinnc mluoddesif tiehre so-called severity score, haplotypes, geogra- Dentici3, E. Biamino4, E. Belligni4, L. Garavelli5, L. Boccone6, D. Melis7, A. Generoso7, B. D. phic origin, and cholesterol data if present. Gelb8, L. Stella2,9, M. Silengo4, B. Dallapiccola3, M. Tartaglia1; 1Istituto Superiore di Sanita‘, Rome, Italy, 2Università di Roma „Tor Vergata“, Rome, Regarding ApoE there are the known allelic variants Italy, 3Ospedale Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 4Università di Torino, Turin, Italy, 5IRCCS ApoE2, E3, E4 determined in the mothers who play a role in phenotypic va- Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 6Ospedale Microcitemico, Cagliari, riability and cholesterol concentrations of the patient. Regarding ABCA1 it Italy, 7Università “Federico II”, Naples, Italy, 8Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, is the maternal genotype of the SNP p.Arg1587Lys that is associated with NY, United States, 9Neuromed, IRCCS, Pozzilli (IS), Italy. sImevpelriictya toiof tnh efo dri smeaustea atniodn i nd aanta ablraesaedsy unknown manner with the viability of SLOS foetus. The aim of patient based mutation Myhre syndrome is a developmental disorder characterized by reduced database is to interpret molecular findings concerning the accurate dia- growth, generalized muscular hypertrophy, facial dysmorphism, deafness, gnosis, getting information about prognosis and possible useful therapies. cognitive deficits, joint stiffness and skeletal anomalies. Here, by perfor- Hence the existing database is complemented now by additional data about mSMinAgD e4xome sequencing of a single affected individual coupled to a hypo- maternal ApoE genotype. Adding all known sequencing results (SNPs) of the thesis-driven filtering strategy, we establish that heterozygoudse mnouvtoatSioMnAsD in4 concerned genes, and additionally molecular data of modifier genes makes , which encodes for a transducer mediating TGFβ and BMP signaling particularly sense in atypical patients. branches, underlie this rare Mendelian trait. Two recurrent P12.230 mutations were identified in e50i0ght unrelated subjects. Both mutations were Study of positive modifiers of spinal muscular atrophy severity in missense changes altering Ile within the evolutionary conserved MAD ho- Russian patients. mology 2 domain, a well known mutational hot spot in malignanciesS. SMtAruDc4- M. Maretina1, A. Kiselev2, G. Zheleznyakova1, A. Egorova2, V. Baranov2,1; tural analyses suggest that the substituted residues are likely to perturb the 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott‘s Institute binding properties of the mutant protein to signaling partners. While of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. has been established as a tumor suppressor gene somatically mutated in pancreatic, gastrointestinal and skin cancers, and germline loss-of-function SMN1 lesions and deletions of this gene have been documented to cause disorders SpiSnMaNl m2 uscular atrophy (SMA) is autosomal SrMecNe1ss, ive neuromuscular dis- predisposing to gastrointestinal cancer and vascular dysplasias, the present order caused by homozygous mutation within the gene. The aSbMilNit2y report identifies a previously unrecognized class of mutations in the gene of gene, a nearly identicalcopy gene of toproduce 10% of full- with profound impact on development and growth. length transcript makes it principal positive disease modifier. The copy number correlates wSMithN 2patients’ phenotypes and is used as reliable biomarker for SMA diagnostics. The second positive disease modifier is c.859G>C substitution in gene. The aim is to evaluate role of positive disease modifiers in Russian patients. We have developed fast and reliable www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 335 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 test based on RFLP and sequence-specific primers to perform screening of loosely defined splice sites. Apart from alterations in conserved dinucleoti- c.859G>C mutation. TSoMtaNll2y 145 individuals with mild phenotypes were te- des, it is difficult to predict effect of mutations located in splice sites just sted. No patients with mutation were found which could be explained by po- from sequence change itself. Mutations in the first nucleotide of exons af- pulation differences. geSnMeN d2osage analysis was performed for 117 pa- fect splicing when found in AG-dependent 3‘ splice sites typically possessing tients with I (39), II (50) and III (28) SMA types by means of real-time PCR. weak and/or short polypyrimidine tracts while exons with AG-independent Most of type I patients had 2 copies (76,92%), 20,51% of patients had splice sites are resistant to this type of mutations. Recent study showed that 3 copies and one person (2,56%) had 1 copy. Most of type II patients showed mutations in the +1 G impaired splicing in exons with preceeding polypyri- 3 copies (78%), 12% and 10% of patients had 4 and 2 copies accordingly. midine stretches (PPS) from 4 nt do 10 nt long whereas those with PPS from 5SM0%N2 of type III patients had 4 copies, 46,43% - 3 copies and only one person 9bt tko 16 nt long were normally spliced. (3,57%) possess 2 copies. We observed marked difSfeMreNn2c es in frequency of We identfied three changes of first nucleotides of exons in our patients with gene copies between patients with different SMA types. Our results mutations. Two of them were point mutations of +1 G located in 3‘ splice confirm genotype-phenotype correlation between copy number and site with borderline PPS length (8 nt), though just one of them affected the SMA severity and allow to use it as important biomarker for determination process of splicing. The third mutation was a deletion of four nucleotides of disease phenotype. in a splice site with 10 nt long PPS (but tihne s ailfifceocted exon started with A P12.231 nucleotide). This mutation did not influence splicing of the gene. We sought Investigating autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias: clinical, to examine how the most commonly used splicing prediction tools biochemical and neuroimaging studies of 262 Brazilian patients would cope with the effect of these mutations on splicing. We found that all C. M. Lourenco, C. Sobreira, C. Funayama, W. Marques Jr; herein described mutations decreased predicted scores in NNSPLICE, Ma- University of Sao Paulo, Ribeirao Preto, Brazil. xEnt and PSSM. However, with an exception of MaxEnt program, the score change was rather mild. P12.234 Autosomal recessive cerebellar ataxias (ARCAs) comprise a heterogeneous Novel mutations in a family with spondylocostal dysostosis group of inherited neurodegenerative disorders that affect the cerebellum, J. Wu1, F. Tsai2, C. Yang1, Y. Chen1; the spinocerebellar tract and/or the sensory tracts of the spinal cord. They 1Inst. of Biomedical Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan, 2China MedicalUniversityHospital, lead to progressive cerebellar ataxia in association with other neurological Taichung, Taiwan. or extra-neurological signs. The epidemiological features and the relative frequency of such disorders are quite unknown yet. We prospectively stu- died 262 suspected ARCA patients from Brazil between 2005 and 2011. All Spondylocostal dysostosis (SCDO) is a heterogeneous group of disorders patients were evaluated in the neurogenetics clinics with a standard evalua- with multiple vertebral segmentation defects that results in hemiverte- tion, neuroimaging studies (CT scan, brain MRI with spectroscopy), ophtal- brae, rib fusions and deletions. We characterized a SCDO family with two mological and auditory evaluations, neurophysiological studies (EEG, ERG, affected children inherited as an autosomal recessive mode in Taiwan. Four and EMG/NCV), hormone and biochemical tests, muscle biopsy with respi- known genes causing autosomal recessive forms of SCDO were excluded to ratory chain mitochondrial analysis, screening for inborn errors of meta- be disease-causing gene for this family by direct Sanger sequencing. Exo- bolism (enzyme studies, peroxisomal and sterol panels, cholestanol dosage, me sequencing of this family using Illumina Hiseq2000 was subjected to organic acids, aminoacids chromatography), molecular studies for the FRDA identify novel homozygous variants and compound heterozygous variants. expansion , mitochondrial point mutations and SCAs 1, 2,3, 6,7,10,12,17 - A novel homozygous insertion variant that results in a frameshift in amino when indicated, nerve/skin biopsy for EM studies and karyotype were also acid sequence was identified in a gene that has caused other disorders with performed. A conclusive diagnosis was established for 196 patients. The vertebral malsegmentation and much severe clinical manifestations. This most frequent causes seen in our cohort were Friedreich ataxia, leukodys- variant is not present in 376 Taiwanese controls. This finding expends the trophies, Joubert syndrome, ataxia with oculomotor apraxia types I and II, phenotypic spectrum resulting from novel mutation of the gene. mitochondrial disorders and neurolipidoses. ARCAs are rare disorders with P12.235 a wide differential diagnosis. Recognition of the most frequent genetic cau- Genetic testing of Stargardt disease as a model for high-throughput ses of ARCA can lead to a sequential evaluation capable of establishing a analysis of heterogenous diseases definitive diagnosis in the majority of patients; new techniques as SNP ar- H. L. Schulz*1, L. G. Fritsche*1, F. Bambl2, B. H. Weber2; rays and exome sequencing can be extreme useful in identification of new 1* Authors contributed equally / Institute of Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Regensburg, Germany. ARCAs, although they were not available for our study. P12.232 Search for a novel gene locus for spinocerebellar ataxia in Stargardt disease (STGD), a frequent maculopathy with juvenile onset, is combination with leukodystrophy: Genome wide linkage, fine caused by mutations in ABCA4, CNGB3, and ELOVL4. To date, more than 550 mapping and exclusion of candidate genes in a German family I. Duske1, K. Hinderhofer2, S. Heinrich1, A. Köhler1, J. Zschocke3, U. Müller1, D. Nolte1; distinct ABCA4 mutations have been reported to cause disease. Neverthe- 1Justus-Liebig-Universität, Giessen, Germany, 2Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, less, the genetic heterogeneity of STGD and the complexity of the ABCA4 Heidelberg, Germany, 3Universität Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. gene, which has 50 coding exons, often hinder routine application in genetic testing. We therefore developed an Affymetrix-based resequencing array that allows analysis of STGD-related genes in a cost- and time-saving pro- We investigated three brothers affected by severe, progressive gait and limb cedure. ataxia in combination with dysarthria and nystagmus starting early in child- A challenging task is the interpretation of sequence data and the identifica- hood. MRI revealed white matter loss. Since the mother is also affected, but tion of disease-relevant variants. Consequently, we have generated an au- signs and symptoms started in her late twenties, we postulate autosomal tomated variant interpretation pipeline which is linked to ongoing interna- dominant or X-chromosomal recessive inheritance. tional DNA variant project efforts such as the 1,000 Genomes Project or the After exclusion of all known genes mutated in spinocerebellar ataxia (SCA), NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project which currently has data from 3,510 indi- we additionally excluded diseases such as Pelizaeus-Merzbacher Disease/ viduals of European descent. In addition, the pipeline automatically queries Paraplegia, Typ 2 (PLP) and Alexander Disease (GFAP). in-silico prediction tools such as MutationTaster and PolyPhen-2. Neutral Since we were not able to detect a disease-causing mutation in any of the and intronic sequence changes not affecting the canonical splice-acceptor or analyzed genes, we performed genome wide linkage analysis. Ten genomic splice-donor sites are analyzed with the Alamut decision-support software. regions linked to the disease were identified. Among those, regions on 1q, So far, we have included a total of 158 STGD patients in our analysis. This 3p, 7q, 7q, 21q and Xq. We subsequently further delineated the critical regi- identified 1,027 distinct variants, of which 20% (n=199) were defined as ons and searched for copy number variations. Linked regions and candidate pathogenic or likely pathogenic and 91 as variants of uncertain significance genes based on expression data and function will be presented. (UVs). From the 120 unique possibly pathogenic variants, 35 (29%) are no- P12.233 vel. These data provide an excellent starting point for functional assessment Influence of mutations in first nucleotides of exons on splicing of the of the defined variants. Overall, our approach provides the basis for further btk gene tackling the demanding task of introducing multi-gene analysis in routine L. Grodecká, B. Ravčuková, T. Freiberger; diagnostics. Molecular Genetics Laboratory, CKTCH, Brno, Czech Republic. Splicing is a crucial step of eukaryotic gene expression which takes place at www.eshg.org www.eshg.org336 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.236 Alu elements cause most common mutation of STK11 gene in Peutz Jeghers patients in this gene. The function of TTC37 in humans is not known but it is repor- P. Borun1, D. Lipiński1, T. Banasiewicz2, W. Cichy2, A. Plawski1; ted in databases as being the human ortholog of Ski3p, one of the yeast Ski 1Institute of Human Genetics, Poznan, Poland, 2University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, complex cofactors. The Ski complex is required for the exosome-mediated Poland. RNA surveillance including normal mRNAs regulation and non-functional mRNAs decay such as non-sense mediated mRNA decay, no-go decay or non-stop decay. Considering TTTTCC3377 homology with Ski3p, we assumed that The STK11 gene mutations cause the occurrence of the Peutz-Jeghers syn- other genes encoding Ski complex proteins might be responsible for SD in drome. These mutations are heterogeneous, but a significant proportion of patients without variation in and confronted this hypothesis with the them are large rearrangements. The occurrence of large mutations may be results of a linkage analysis performe. d in a consanguineous fSaKmIVil2yL w ith such associated with the presence of interspersed repeats or microhomologies. a patient. We noticed, in a region of homozygosity, aT gTeCn3e7 encoding another In the STK11 gene, only one type of interspersed repeats is observed -Alu cofactor of the Ski complex, SKIV2L Direct sequencing of in seven elements. Alu sequences represent 19% of the entire gene sequence. Among patients presenting typical SD without variation in identified stop or large mutations of STK11 gene the deletion of exons 2 and 3 has been de- frameshift mutations in all seven. scribed four times so far in different European populations. In two cases Although genetically heterogeneous, SD is extremely homogenous clinically the deleted sequence was described in detail and in another two, deletions suggesting that a defect in the Ski complex function is a key mechanism re- were identified only on the basis of the MLPA results. The deletion of exons sponsible for the clinical features. 2 nad 3 was also observed by us in one of the cases of Polish families. The Our results show that mutations in genes encoding cofactors of the human deleted sequence endpoints are localized in Alu elements. We can assume Ski complex cause SD, establishing for the first time, a link between defects that Alu elements localized in regions including nucleotides c.280+5594 and of the exosome complex and a Mendelian disease. c.464+384 are responsible for causing one of the most common recurrent P12.239 mutation of STK11 gene in Peutz-Jeghers patients. Mutational analysis for thoracic aortic aneurysm and dissection P12.237 (TAAD) using a custom resequencing array Sudden death and next generation sequencing: characterization of U. Kathiravel1, B. Keyser1, S. Hoffjan2, J. Kötting2, M. Müller3, S. Sivalingam3, M. heart disease using a 72-gene NGS panel Bonin4, M. Arslan-Kirchner1, Y. von Kodolitsch5, P. Binner3, T. Scheffold6, S. Manfred1, S. D. Garcia-Alfonso1, D. Cantalapiedra1, C. Collado1, V. Fernández-Pedrosa1, A. Romera1, Waldmüller3,6; V. Felipe1, J. Triviño1, S. Zúñiga-Trejos1, A. Forteza2, L. Moreno3, B. Pérez-Ortega4, P. 1Institute for Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany, 2Department of Human Genetics, Chevalier5, B. Gerull6, M. Martínez-Atienza7, A. Pereira8, G. Millat9, A. Jamsheer10, M. Gil1, Bochum, Germany, 3CorTAG, Dortmund, Germany, 4Institute for Human Genetics, R. Sáez-Villaverde11, A. Repáraz12, S. Santillán1; Tübingen, Germany, 5Department of Diagnostics and Interventional Radiology, 1Sistemas Genómicos, Paterna, Spain, 2Marfan Unit, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Hamburg, Germany, 6Institute for Heart and Circulation Research, Witten, Germany. Spain, 3Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital Virgen del Camino, Pamplona, Spain, 4Laboratorio Médico Echavarria, Bogotá, Colombia, 5Service de Rythmologie, Hôpital cardiologique Louis Pradel, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 6Departments of Medical Genetics TAAD is a severe cardiovascular complication that may occur in isolation and Cardiac Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada, 7Hospital Virgen de la (FTAAD) or as part of syndromic conditions such as Marfan Syndrome. To Nieves, Granada, Spain, 8Genia Genética Molecular, Montevideo, Uruguay, 9Laboratoire date, more than eight genes are known to harbour mutations causing TAAD. de Cardiogénétique Moléculaire - Centre de Biologie et Pathologie Est, Lyon, France, 10University of Medical Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 11Hospital Donostia, San Sebastián, Subsequent analysis of these genes with standard methods is costly and par- Spain, 12Complexo Hospitalario de Vigo Hospital Xeral, Vigo, Spain. allel sequencing on a single platform has not AyeCtT bAe2enC OeLst3aAb1lisFhBeNd1. MYH11 WNOeT dCeHs1criSbLeC a2 1A0100- kTbG rFeBsReq1uencinTgG FaBrrRa2y, the MFSTAAD chip, which allows the simultaneous resequencing of the genes , , , , Purpose - Genetic characterization of heart disease patients in a fast, com- , , and . A total of 181 positive controls prehensive, and cost-effective manner using a 72 gene NGS approach, cou- with known mutations such as point mutations, deletions and insertions pled with a bioinformatics pipeline. were used to determine the analytical sensitivity of the assay and FthBeN m1uta- Methods - A methodology was developed for resequencing 72 genes (44 tTiGonFB yRie2ld was evaluated in a cohort of 28 TAAD patients, 18 of these subjects genes associated with cardiomyopathies, arrhythmogenic right ventricu- were previously been tested negative for mutations in the genes and lar dysplasia, Marfan syndrome, aortic aneurysm, and 28 genes associated . An average call-rate of 99.9% was obtained using Sequence Pilot with Brugada syndrome, long QT and short QT syndromes, familial atrial SeqC data analysis software. The assay showed a high analytical sensitivity fibrillation and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia). for point mutations (100%) and an overall sensitivity of 85%. The largest The design included 750 Kb of exons, splicing regions, 5’ UTR and 3’ UTR. deletion could be detected by a striking decline in the hybridization line. Targets were captured (SureSelect, Agilent), and then sequenced in a SOLiD Upon analysis of the 28 TAAD patients, with this assay we could detect 4 v4 platform. The bioinformatics pipeline consisted of mapping and aligning known mutations and 6 possibly pathogenic point mutations (mutation reads against the GRCh37/hg19 sequence, classification and identification yield: 32%). of point variations, structural variations, and small indels, as well as their In conclusion, the MFSTAAD chip is a feasible tool that can facilitate the ge- involvement at the transcriptional level. Results were confirmed by Sanger netic analysis of TAAD in routine genetic testing. Future modification for the sequencing. A set of 12 cases with a known mutation was used for validation detection of gross changes such as deletions and insertions will make this studies. assay even more applicable. 47 patients were studied (20 cases with aortic aneurysm/Marfan syndro- P12.240 me, 2 cases with ARVC/D, 7 cases with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 1 case The first case of Tenascin-X deficient type Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in with dilated cardiomyopathy, 2 cases with familial cardiomyopathy, 6 cases Japan with long QT syndrome, 1 case with Brugada syndrome, 3 cases with fami- A. Watanabe1, A. Fujita1, M. Hatakeyama1, H. Watanabe1, T. SHIMADA1, K. Matsumoto2; lial arrhythmia, and 5 cases with family history of sudden death). 1Nippon Medical School, Tokyo, Japan, 2Shimane University, Shmane, Japan. Results - 91 relevant nucleotide changes were found: 14 pathogenic muta- tions; 77 unclassified variations, of which, using in silico predictions, 9 are likely pathogenic and 7 are unlikely pathogenic. Conclusions - Targeted resequencing enables the efficient analysis of genes associated with heterogeneous heart diseases. Tenascin-X is a large extracellular matrix glycoprotein and is known to be as- P12.238 sociated with an autosomal recessive type of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). Defects in the Ski complex, a multi protein complex involved in Here we report the first case of Tenascin-X deficient type EDS in Japan. The aberrant mRNAs decay, cause Syndromic Diarrhea patient of 39-year-old male was born in breech position, had cast immobili- A. Fabre1, C. Martinez-Vinson2, V. Colomb2, O. Egritas3, E. Sayar4, B. Roquelaure5, J. Sarles5, zation for congenital hip dislocation until 9months of age, diagnosed as EDS N. Levy1, C. Badens1; for skin hyperextensibility, laxity in finger joints, softness of heels. 1UMR 910- AP HM, Marseille, France, 2AP HP, Paris, France, 3School of medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 4School of medicine, Antalya, Turkey, 5AP HM, Marseille, France. At the age of 18months he was treated for inguinal hernia and snaping fin- ger of thumbs, left middle finger and right annular finger. Other skin mani- festation is easy bruising, but the wound repair had been normal. Recurrent Syndromic Diarrhea (SD) is a rare and severe disorder characteTrTizCe3d7 b y in- dislocations of the shoulders and sprains were seen from his childhood. His tractable diarrhea, dysmorphism, immunodeficiency and hair abnormalities. foot went flat when loaded. He had gone through keloid/ lump formation, This syndrome has been recently associated with mutations in in 21 hemorrhoid associated bleeding problems and diverticulitis several times patients but several other individuals with typical SD present no variation www.eshingto.o thrge adulthood. He was referred to our clinic after his fragile intestinal www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 337 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.243 The modifying effect of Xmn1-HBG2 on thalassemia phenotype is tract tTiNssXu-eB ruptured during his operation of diverticulitis. A complete ab- associated with its linked elements in beta globin LCR sence of tenascin-X was identified on triplicate testing of the proband’s se- M. Neishabury1, S. Zamani1, A. Azarkeivan2, F. Zamani1, S. Abedini1, H. Darvish1, H. rum. mutation analysis was performed and showed a homozygous Najmabadi1,3; 1-bp deletion in exon 25, encoding fibronectin type III repeat. The parental 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, serum tenascin-X values were both on the lower side of the normal distribu- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Thalassemia Clinic, Research Center, Iranian blood transfusion Organization(IBTO), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kariminejad and tion and intermediate between the proband and the background population. Najmabadi Pathology and Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Further analysis is currently underway. P12.241 The core sequence of 5′HS4-beta globin locus control region and Xmn1-HBG2 Leri‘s pleonosteosis results from a genetic defect causing site were analyzed and compared among 86 thalassemia patients with ho- dysregulated TGF-beta signalling mozygous or compound heterozygous beta globin gene mutations and 101 S. Banka, S. Cain, S. Daly, J. Urquhart, G. Erdem, M. Bottomley, B. Kerr, H. Kingston, S. normal individuals. Frequency of the G allele in the polymorphic palindro- Carim, C. L. R. Merry, C. M. Kielty, W. G. Newman; mic sequence of 5′HS4 (TGGGGA/G CCCCA) and positive Xmn1-HBG2 profi- University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. le was significantly higher in thalassemia patients compared to the normal population. Linkage disequilibrium was observed between the G allele and positive Xmn1-HBG2 profile in patient population. Furthermore, dominance The Transforming Growth Factor-beta (TGF-β) signalling pathway is key of IVSII-1 in the mutation spectrum of the patients enabled us to identify to many cellular processes and its dysregulation has been documented in linkage disequilibrium relationships between IVSII-1, positiveXmn1-HBG2 a number of Mendelian phenotypes characterised by joint contractures and and the G allele at 5′HS4. The frequency of milder clinical phenotype was scleroderma, including stiff skin syndrome, Myhre syndrome, acromicric significantly higher in patients with GG/++than cases with AA/--genotypic and geleophysic dysplasias. pattern in 5′HS4/Xmn1-HBG2 loci. These data together with biochemical Leri‘s pleonosteosis [MIM 151200] is a rare autosomal dominant condition evidence suggesting a role for the A/G polymorphism at 5′HS4 palindromic characterized by flexion contractures of the interphalangeal joints, restric- site on modifying chromatin structure and in the absence of any evidence ted motion of multiple joints, facial dysmorphism, bony overgrowths, short from functional studies relating the Xmn1-HBG2 site to the increased gam- broad hands and feet and occasional sclerodermatous thickening of skin. ma chain expression, suggest that the phenotype modifying role long time We genotyped the two most distantly related individuals in a large family assigned to Xmn1-HBG2 is possibly played by more functionally potent ele- with Leri‘s pleonosteosis by Affymetrix SNP6.0 array. Copy number analysis ments linked to it in LCR. revealed a shared ~1Mb duplication of chromosome 8q22.1 that segregated P12.244 with the phenotype and was confirmed by QPCR. The duplication was not A new TP63 mutation in a patient with cleft lip, split hand, and tibial present in polymorphism databases and over 500 controls. We identified an agenesis overlapping 8q22.1 duplication in an unrelated patient withS LDeCr2i‘s pleono- M. Simioni, R. G. Faria, T. K. Araujo, J. R. Prota, C. V. Maurer-Morelli, D. P. Cavalcanti, V. L. steosis to confirm the causal relationship. Gil-da-Silva-Lopes; The minimum critical reSgDiCo2n consists of six genes, including encoding Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Campinas, Brazil. the transmembrane heparan sulphate proteoglycan, syndecan-2. We show that overexpression of causing altered TGF-β signaling in fibroblasts is the major molecular contributor to the clinical phenotype. We therefore TP63 gene, located at 3q27 chromosome region, encodes a transcription add Leri‘s pleonosteosis as a further disorder to a spectrum of conditions factor that plays an essential role in the development of epidermis, upper lip characterized by dysregulation of TGF-β signaling and importantly, provide and limbs. Homozygous tp63 null mice exhibit craniofacial abnormalities, an insight into role of altered proteoglycan homeostasis in this pathway. limb truncations, and absence of epidermal appendages. In humans, mutati- P12.242 ons in TP63 can give rise to a series of syndromes characterized by various Multiplex assay for the detection of common Mediterranean beta- combinations of ectodermal dysplasia, limb malformations and orofacial thalassemia mutations clefting. The propositus here reported is the first child of a non-consan- B. L. Atanasovska, G. L. Bozhinovski, D. Plaseska-Karanfilska, L. Chakalova; guineous couple. Some individuals of the maternal family were referred, but Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Skopje, The Former not examined, to be affected by some of the malformations found in the pro- Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. positus, suggesting an autosomal dominant inheritance. The main clinical features included left cleft lip, bilateral split hand, bilateral tibial agenesis, club feet and absence of the right hallux. No ectodermal abnormalities were Hemoglobinopathies are the most abundant group of genetic abnormalities observed. Despite of mild hypotonia in the first months, neuropsychomotor in humans, caused by genetic defects affecting the globin genes encoding for development was apparently normal. The analysis of copy number variati- the hemoglobin alpha and beta chains. In particular, a great variety of mu- ons (CNVs) was performed using the Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 tations present in heterozygous, homozygous and compound heterozygous (Affymetrix). None potential pathogenic CNVs were found. Subsequently, states disturb the function of the HBB gene. Molecular characterisation of TP63 gene was sequenced. A four-nucleotide insertion (AGAG) was detected the causative genetic variants is an essential part of the diagnostic process. at 5’UTR region of this gene resulting in a frameshift mutation. Considering The unusually large number of individual mutations presents technical chal- the site of this mutation, it might have caused an alteration in the pattern lenges. However, in any particular population, a limited number of genetic of expression of TP63 gene. To our knowledge this is the first time that a variants are responsible for the vast majority of hemoglobinopathy cases. mutation in the TP63 has been associated with this pattern of malformati- Developing reliable, rapid and cost-effective molecular diagnostic assays on - cleft lip, split hand and preaxial limb reduction defect in lower limbs. targeting particular populations greatly facilitates routine hemoglobino- Financial support: Fapesp and CNPq. pathy investigations. We developed a one-tube single-nucleotide primer P12.245 extension assay for the detection of eight common Mediterranean beta-tha- Auto-regulation of the THAP1 (DYT6) gene and THAP1-mediated lassaemia mutations: IVS-I-110 (G->A), IVS-I-1 (G->A), IVS-I-6 (T->C), Codon activation of SGCE (DYT11) gene expression. 39 (C->T), IVS-II-745 (C->G), Codon 5 (-CT); CCT(Pro)->C--, Codon 6 (-A); F. J. Kaiser1, A. Erogullari1, P. Seibler2, D. Braunholz1, A. Grünewald2, R. Depping3, J. GAG(Glu)->G-G, and Codon 8 (-AA); AAG(Lys)->--G. According to available Eckhold1, A. Rakovic2, G. Gillessen-Kaesbach1, C. Klein2, K. Lohmann2; mutation frequency data, these eight sequence variations together account 1Institut für Humangenetik, Lübeck, Germany, 2Section of Clinical and Molecular for a large proportion of the hemoglobinopathy cases in Macedonia (89%). Neurogenetics at the Department of Neurology, Lübeck, Germany, 3Institute of The novel assay offers superior accuracy achieved through double mutation Physiology, Center for structural and cell biology in Medicine, Lübeck, Germany. interrogation on both genomic strands. We validated the new assays using previously genotyped samples obtaining 100% agreement between inde- pendent genotyping methods. Our protocol, applicable in a range of Medi- Mutations in Thanatos-associated [THAP] domain-containing apoptosis- terranean countries, provides a cost-effective diagnostic tool of unmatched associated proTteOinR 11A (THAP1) cause a form of pure dystonia (DYT6). THAP1 precision. It can be further adapted to particular populations by including/ encodes a transcription factor that regulates the expression of the DSYGTCE1 excluding assayed mutations. We facilitate future modifications by provi- dystonia gene . Here, we investigated whether THAP1 also influences ding detailed information on assay design. the expression of the myoclonus-SdGyCsEtonia T(DHYATP111) associated gene and its own expression. Using in-silico prediction and luciferase reporter gene assays, we characterized the and promoters. Interestingly, these two core promoters contained one or five THAP binding sequences www.eshg.org www.esh(TgH.AoBrSg). Luciferase reporter gene assays revealed that THAP1 activates 338 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 SGCE the expression of and that this activation is disturbed by different tation, identified among TRAPS patients involves a translation defect of THAP1 mutations. In addition, THAP1 represses its own expression. Bin- TNFR1-d2 suggesting that its altered function may accounTtN fFoRrS sFo1mAe of the dingS GofC ETHAP1 to the core promoters was demonstrated using chromatin inflammatory processes occurring in TRAPS. immunopreicni-pviitvaotion (ChIP). Further, THAP1 binding to the THABS within We suggested that the transcript ratio, depending on the alleles, the promoteTrH wAaPs1 confirmed by electromobility shift assay (EMSA). may partly account for the inter-individual variations observed in patients To test for changes of expression levels, we re-programmed fibro- with a TRAPS phenotype and possibly in patients suffering from other in- blast cells from a mutation carrier (Leu159fs180X) and controSlGs CtEo flammatory conditions and that, this new protein could have a role on the pluripotent induced stem (iPS) cells that were differentiated into neurons. physiopathology of TRAPS. QuantitTaHtiAveP 1PCR in these cells did not reveal a significant difference of P12.248 expression in a THAP1 mutation carrier compared to wildtype samples. Ho- Frequency of POLR1D, POLR1C and TCOF1 Mutations in a Large Cohort wever, THAP1 e, SxGpCreEssionT wHaAsP i1ncreaseidn vinit rmoutant THAP1 ceTllHsA sPu1ggesting of Patients with Treacher Collins Syndrome an autoregulation of THAP1. In conclusion, we identified two additional tar- A. W. O‘Rourke, M. Bowman, C. Archer, M. Oldridge, A. Seller, T. Lester; gets for and itself, and confirmed in vivo. Regional Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Oxford, United Kingdom. It is conceivable that the autoregulation compensates for alterations in the expression of other target genes to a certain degree. P12.246 Treacher Collins syndrome (TCS) is a disorder of craniofacial development Transcriptome profiling during early neuronal differentiation in characterised by a combination of bilateral downward slanting palpebral Lissencephaly associated with DCX mutations fissures, coloboma of the lower eyelid, micrognathia, malformation ToCf OtFh1e J. Schuster1, M. Sobol1, T. Bergström1, D. Raykova1, S. Kundu1, M. Bartish1, B. Anderlid2, G. external ear and bilateral conductive hearing loss. Annerén1, K. Forsberg Nilsson1, N. Dahl1; TCS type 1 is caused by dominant loss-of function mutations in the 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. gene. The Oxford Molecular Genetics Laboratory, UK, has provided a mole- cular diagnostic service for this gene since 2005. To date 119 referrals with a good clinical diagnosis of TCS have been analysed and pathogenic variants Genetic factors play a major role in a large proportion of patients with con- have been detected in [a1]pproximately 70% of patients (of which around 4% genital neurological and neurodevelopmental disorders. Despite the pro- were large deletioPnOsL)R 1.D In appPrOoLxiRm1aCtely 30% of referrals, no pathogenic gress related to genotype-phenotype associations, little is known about how variant was detected. specific gene mutations mediate abnormal cellular and molecular processes Mutations in the and , com ponents of RNA [p2]olymerases I during early neuronal differentiation. Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) and III, have recently been reported in individuaTlsC OwFit1h TCS . Sequencing technology has emerged as an indispensable tool to model genetically de- analysis of these genes was undertaken inPaO cLoRh1oDrt of 26 patients strongly termined phenotypes at the cellular and molecular levels in non-accessible suspected of having TCS, in whom a pathogenic variant was not de- tissues. We have initiated an iPSC based effort to model different monogenic tected. Probable pathogenic variants in the gene were detected in 6 phenotypes derived from neuronal or neural crest cells, e.g. Lissencephaly. out of the 26 patients (23%) tested to date. The mutation spectrum inclPudOeLs- Lissencephaly is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by abnormal Rno1vCe l fram. eshift, missense and nonsense variants, all predicted to result in cerebral surface, mental retardation and seizures. The disease is caused by loss of protein function. No pathogenic variants were detected in the insufficient migration of maturing neurons, although diDseCaXse mechanisms gene are not fully understood. We have generated iPSC from skin fibroblasts of DPOatLaR f1rDom our cohort suggests that approximately 7% of individuals with two Lissencephaly patients with different doublecortin ( ) mutations. a strong cliniecta al ldiagnosis of TCS may have a pathogenic mutation in the To study perturbations of neuronal differentiation and function in more de- gene.et al th tail we established iPSC lines from the Lissencephaly patients and healthy [1] Bowman ., 2012, EJHG, E-pub 8 Feb. controls. All lines were characterized and showed the capacity to form all [2] Dauwerse ., 2011, Nat.Genet. 43(1):20-22. three germ layers in embryoid body differentiation assays. IPSC lines were P12.249 differentiated into neuronal precursor cells (NPC) and further into neuronal A novel TRPS1 gene mutation in the family with cells. Total RNA samples are obtained from the iPSC and NPCs and sequen- Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome from Russia ced using the SOLiD platform. The aim is to identify and compare transcrip- T. V. Fedotova1, T. A. Adyan2, V. P. Fedotov1, A. V. Polyakov2; tome signatures during early neuronal differentiation. DCX 11 Regional Clinical Hospital, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Research Center for We present how this “pipe-line” may be used as a sensitive method to cha- Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. racterize and mirror molecular abnormalities associated with mutati- ons at early stages of neuronal differentiation. P12.247 Trichorhinophalangeal syndrome I (MIM 190350) is a malformation syn- A novel exon 2-skipped TNFR1 transcript: regulation by TNFRSF1A drome characterized by the distinctive craniofacial and skeletal abnormali- rs1800692 and possible role on TNFR-associated Periodic Syndrome ties and is inherited as an autosomal dominant. Patients have sparse scalp (TRAPS) phenotype hair, bulbous tip of the nose, long flat philtrum, thin upper vermilion border, C. Rittore1, E. Sanchez1, S. Soler1, M. Barat-Houari2, M. Albers3, L. Obici4, M. F. McDermott5, and protruding ears. Skeletal abnormalities include cone-shaped epiphyses I. Touitou1,2,6, S. Grandemange1; at the phalanges, hip malformations, and short stature. We presented five 1INSERM U844, Montpellier, France, 2CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 3University patients from four generation family with TRPS I type transmitted as an Medish Centrum, Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Biotechnology Research Laboratories, Pavia, autosomal-dominant trait from Russia. All patients had uniform symptoms. Italy, 56. NIHR-Leeds Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Leeds, United Kingdom, Proband 18-old man had the height 174 cm, typical symptoms: facial fea- 6Université Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France. tures included low-set, posteriorly rotated ears, prominent malar eminence and orbital ridge, bulbous nose, hypoplastic nasi alae nasi, hypotrichosis, and long philtrum. He also had brachymesophalangy, wide halluces, and flat Binding of TNFα to one of its TceNlFl RsuSrFf1aAce receptors, TNFR1 indu,ces various arches. Radiographs showed short metacarpals, cone-shaped epiphyses of cellular responses including cell death, differentiation or inflammation. Se- middle and proximal phalanges (2nd, 3rd, 4th fingers). This leads to varying veral polymorphisms in the gene, encoding TNFR1 have been degrees of brachydactyly without short stature. For this proband we con- repeatedly associated with diseases of the immune system, and heterozy- ducted direct automated sequencing of zinc finger transcription factor gene gous mutations are responsible for the dominant autoinflammatory disease, TRPS1, encodes the 1281 amino acids protein TRPS1, participating in the TNFR-associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS). regulation of chondrocytes and the perichondrium, as result the novel mu- We identified the first spliced transcrTipNtF nRaSmF1eAd TNFR1-d2. This novel tran- tation c.2800G>A (Gly934Ser) in exon 6 had been found in the heterozygous script, lacking exon 2, is expressed in a tissue-specifiTcN mFRanSFn1eAr. To search state. By the additional research, this mutation was not detected among the for a possible regulatory element of expression, we checked for 60 population samples (120 chromosomes). The same mutation was also a possible effect of polymorphisms present along the sequence. detected in the DNA sample of proband‘s mother suffering TRPS I type. We found the rs1800692 polymorphism (c.473-33C>T) in intron 4 of parti- Thus, these data support the fact that the detected change is a pathological cular interest because we observed that the T/T genotype was absent in our mutation. TRAPS group. Splicing alternative assays showed that this polymorphism can modulate exon 2 skipping and luciferase assays revealed that intron 4 contains transcriptionainl rveitgruol atory element. Thus the exon 2 skipping in TNFR1-d2 may be controlled via transcriptional regulation in a cell-specific manner. Moreover, by studies, we showed that one particular mu- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 339 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.250 Fragile X mental retardation 1 (FMR1) premutations: instability and associated phenotypes Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder with congeni- J. Loureiro1, P. Jorge2, I. Marques2, R. Santos2, A. I. Seixas1, M. Martins3, J. Vale4, J. tal sensorineural hearing impairment (HI) and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Sequeiros1,5, I. Silveira1; There are three clinical subtypes: USH1 presents with severe to profound 1UnIGENe and CGPP, IBMC- Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular, Universidade do HI, facultative vestibular impairment and early RP, whereas USH2 is cha- Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal, 2U&D Centro de Genética Médica Dr Jacinto racterized by moderaCtLeR tNo1 severe HI and RP in adolescence. USH3U SisH r3aAre Magalhães, INSA, Porto, Porto, Portugal, 3Maternidade Júlio Dinis, CHP, Porto, Portugal, and variable; it may resemble USH1 or USH2, and vestibular dysfunction Porto, Portugal, 4Serviço de Neurologia, Hospital de Egas Moniz, Lisboa, Portugal, may occur. Clarin-1 ( ) is the only known USH3 gene (locus: ). Lisboa, Portugal, 5ICBAS, Universidade do Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal. We have previously identified a consanguineous Lebanese family with an USH3 phenotype. Microarray SNP analysis identified three homozygosity- Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is the most common hereditary form of intellec- bNy-IdNeLscent regions: 1q43-q44 (8.54 Mb), 20p13-p12.2 (10.48 Mb), and 20p11.23-q12 (19.35 Mb). We excluded mutations in ninein-like protein tual disFaMbRil1ity with an estimated frequency of 1/4000 males and 1/8000 fe- males. FXS is caused by a (CGG)n expansion of over 200 repeats, in the 5’UTR ( ) on chromosome 20p11.21, an interactor of the USH protein com- of the gene, which as a result is methylated and gene silenced. Based plex. Using a capture array targeting all three candidate AreBgHioDn1s2 and next- on (CGG)n lenFgMthR,1 four classes of alleles can be distinguished: normal (5-44), generation AseBqHuDe1n2cing, we subsequently identified a homozygous nonsense mutation, c.193C>T (p.Arg65X), in a neighboring gene, . Of note, intermediate (45-54), premutated (55-200) and fully mutated (>200; FM) truncating mutations have recently been shown to cause PHARC, a alleles. Both -related primary ovarian insuffi cienFMcyR (1F XPOI) and fragile neurodegenerative disease with polyneuropathy, hearing loss, ataxia, retini- X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) have been described in pre- mutation carriers. To gain insights into instabilityof (CGG)n and asso- tis pigmentosa, and early-onset cataract. Both patients from our family dis- play HI, ataxia, RP, and cataracts, but no polyneuropathy. ABHD12 hydroly- ciated phenotypes, we assessed repeat-length in 541 individuals from 128 zes 2-arachidonoyl glycerol, an endocannabinoid lipid transmitter that acts Portuguese FXS families. We found 5.3% of intermediate, 29.9% of premuta- on cannabinoid receptors CB1 and CB2. This pathway is probably unrelated ted and 26.6% of FM alleles. For a total of 115 transmissions of the maternal to the USH interactome. Consequently, the phenotype in our family rather premutation, 26 (23%) with alleles ranging 60-98, the average expansion represents a variant of PHARC, an entity that should be taken into account was 17 repeat units, whereas 89 (77%) with alleles 66-199, expanded to FM. as differential diagnosis for Usher syndrome. In 44 transmissions of maternal FM, the offspring inherited the FM. For 10 P12.253 paternal transmissions of premutations, ranging 56-120, all the daughters Comprehensive molecular genetic analysis for Usher syndrome inherited a premutation, with an average expansion of 7 repeat units. We including conventional and next-generation sequencing and MLPA: identified one male with FXTAS and two females with FXPOI among seven Proposal of a diagnostic strategy investigated premutation carriers; the remaining premutation individuals C. Neuhaus1, T. Eisenberger1, K. Busch1, C. Decker1, B. Lorenz2, M. Preising2, I. were not yet examined. In conclusion, in Portuguese FXS families, allele in- Kennerknecht3, M. Pfister4, B. Schulze5, D. Mitter6, M. Kautza7, C. Bergmann1,8, H. J. Bolz1,9; stability upon transmission is in agreement with previous reports, where 1Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 2Department of the risk of premutation to FM expansion is linked to the premutation size of Ophthalmology, Justus-Liebig University Giessen, Giessen, Germany, 3Institute of Human the transmitting mother. Genetics, University of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Department of Otorhinolaryngology, P12.251 University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, 5Praxis für Humangenetik Dr. B. Schulze, Molecular diagnostic of tuberous sclerosis by next-generation Hannover, Germany, 6Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany, 7Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, sequencing technology Campus Kiel, Christian-Albrechts University Kiel, Kiel, Germany, 8Department of Human L. Běhalová1, I. Hikkel1, M. Hikkelová1, P. Iglauer2, A. Nagy3, J. Mešťánek3, M. Genčík1,2, A. Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Genčík1; University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 1Medgene s.r.o., Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Diagenos, Osnabrueck, Germany, 3ADINIS, Trnava, Slovakia. Usher syndrome (USH) is an autosomal recessive disorder with congenital sensorineural hearing impairment (HI) and retinitis pigmentosa (RP). USH1 Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is a rare genetic disorder, that belongs presents with severe to profound HI, facultative vestibular impairment and to neurocutaneous syndromes where both the skin and central nervous sy- early RP, USH2 with moderate to severe HI and RP in adolescence. USH3 stem are involved. It is characterized by an autosomal dominant pattern of is rare and variable. Because of the mostly large size of the 10 USH genes, inheritance and a variable penetrance. The symptoms of tuberous sclerosis vary from person to person and may includTeS sCe1izureTsS, Cd2evelopmental delay, gUeSnHe2tAic confirmation UofS tHh2eA diagnosis is the exception. We have applied a no- skin abnormalities, lung and kidney disease. vel and efficient diagnostic strategy to 32 patients. For USH2, we sequMeYnOc7eAd , followed by -MLPA and next-generation sequencing (NGS) TSC is caused by a mutations in the genes or , which encode the protein hamartin and tuberin respectively. These proteins act as tumor of all UUSSHH 2geAnes. For USH1 or atypical USH samples, we sequenced growth suppressors, agents that regulate cell proliferation and differentia- (USH1B) before NGS was available to us; now, theGy PdRir9e8ctly undergo NGS. We found mutations in 18 out of 19 USH2 patients, including large intra- tion. Moleculdaer naonvaoly sis can destect mutations in about 85% of cases and is com- genic deletioUnSsH a2nAd duplications. NGS revealed (USH2C) mutations plicated by the size of both genes, absence of mutations hotspots and a high in one USH2 patientM, bYuOt7 nAo USH gene CmDuHta2t3ions in the only patient with a monoallelic mutation. All three atypical USH patients and 4 of the 10 TraStCe1 of TSC2 mutation . Untill now DGGE mutations scanning, direct se- quence analysis in combination with deletions/duplications analysis of in USH1 casePsC cDaHrr1ie5d mutations. mutations were found in one or was performed in patients with suspected TSC. UMSYHO17 Apatient, and linkage analysis with subsequent sequencing and MLPA In respect to the progress of new molecularT SgCen1 etic teTcShCn2ologies we have iUdSeHn2tiAfied mutations in two USH1 families from Syria. NGS for three -negative USH1 patients is ongoing. In conclusion, our results with adapted next-generation sequencing (NGS, Roche GSJ) into routine testing of TSC patients. All relevant areas of genes and were amplified U aSsH t2hAe major USH2U gSeHn2eA and mutations more evenly distributed in USH1 support the following diagnostic procedure (in the order of listing): by gene-specific primers with universal tail and marked by MID adaptors USH2: sequencing, -MLPA, NGS. USH1 and atypical USH: NGS, (Multiplex Identifier Adaptors), to differentiate between patients. We used MLPA or linkage-based approaches where applicable. Geneious software with ADINIS-MultipluginG to handle NGS data. Here we report on our experience of routine diagnostics for TSC profiting from the P12.254 power of NGS. Mutations in KIAA1632 cause Vici syndrome, a multisystem disorder with defective autophagy P12.252 T. P. Cullup1, F. Smith1, B. Brandmeier2, M. Simpson3, C. Dionisi-Vici4, S. Abbs1, M. Gautel2, Targeted next-generation sequencing identifies a homozygous H. Jungbluth5; ABHD12 nonsense mutation in a family clinically diagnosed with 1GSTS Pathology, London, United Kingdom, 2Randall Division of Cell & Molecular Usher syndrome type 3 Biophysics, King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 3Genetics and Molecular Medicine, R. Slim1, T. Eisenberger2, A. Mansour3, C. Decker2, C. Dafinger4, I. Ebermann4, C. King‘s College, London, United Kingdom, 4Bambini Gesu Children’s Hospital, Rome, Italy, Bergmann2,5, H. J. Bolz2,4; 5Paediatric Neurology, Evelina Children’s Hospital, London, United Kingdom. 1Department of Human Genetics, McGill University Health Center, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, Germany, 3Department of Ophthalmology, American University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 5Department of Human Vici syndrome is a rare, recessively inherited multisystem disorder with Genetics, RWTH Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. markedly reduced life expectancy, characterised by callosal agenesis, ca- taracts, cardiomyopathy, combined immunodeficiency, hypopigmentation and an associated myopathy. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org340 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P12.259 KIAA1632 X-exome sequencing identifies the causal variant in a large pedigree We sequenced the exomes of four affected individuals from three families with X-linked intellectual disability, truncal obesity, gynecomastia, and found homozygous and compound heterozygous mKuItAaAti1o6n3s2 in hypogonadism and unusual face in all four patients. Affected indivKidIAuAal1s6 f3r2om eleven additional Vici syndro- M. Harakalova1, M. J. H. van den Boogaard1, R. J. Sinke2, S. van Lieshout1, M. van Tuil1, me families were analysed by Sanger sequencing of . Mutations K. Duran1, I. Renkens1, P. A. Terhal1, C. G. F. de Kovel1, I. J. Nijman1, M. M. van Haelst1, N. V. were detected in ten families. No mutations were identified in the A. M. Knoers1, G. van Haaften1, W. P. Kloosterman1, R. C. M. Hennekam3, E. Cuppen1, H. K. rKeImAAa1in6i3n2g family nor in two further families with similar features, sugge- Ploos van Amstel1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, UMCU, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics, sting locus heterogeneitye.pg-5 (ectopic pgl granules family member 5) University Medical Center Groningen (UMCG), University of Groningen, Groningen, was recently identified as the human homologue of the metazoan- Netherlands, 3Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center (AMC), Amsterdam, Amsterdam, specific autophagy gene (Tian Netherlands. et al) encoding a key protein of the autophagy pathway implicated in the formation of degradative autolyKsIoAsAo1m6e3s2. Immunohistochemical, histologi- cal and functional studies were consistent with homozygous or compound We characterized a large Dutch family with 7 males affected by a rare syn- heterozygous null mutationVs MinP 1 EI2 4causing autophagy defects. drome of X-linked intellectual disability (XLID), hypogonadism, gynaecoma- The remaining human homologues of thKeIA mA1et6a3z2oan-specific autophagy ge- stia, truncal obesity, short stature, small head, short ears and recognizab- nes identified in Tian et al, and , were screened in the three Vici le craniofacial deformities. Eight females in this pedigree showed a much syndrome / Vici-like families without mutations. No mutations milder expression of the phenotype, comprising learning disorder and re- were identified. cognizable facial features. We performed X chromosome exome (X-exome) Tian, Y., Z. Li, et al. (2010). „C. elegans screen identifies autophagy genes sequencing in five individuals from this family and identified a novel intro- specific to multicellular organisms.“ Cell 141(6): 1042-1055. nic variant in a histone deacetylation family member. The gene is located in P12.256 the region for which linkage was established in this family with a maximum A novel mutation in the distant sonic hedgehog (SHH) cis-regulator LOD-score of 4.93. The variant was shown to affect normal splicing, resul- ZRS in family with Werner mesomelic syndrome from Russia ting in exon skipping and introduction of a premature stop. The mutation V. Fedotov1, N. Galeeva2, A. Polyakov2; completely co-segregates with the phenotype in this family and is absent in 1Regional Clinical Hospital, Genetic counseling, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 2Research Dutch controls or available exome databases. Interestingly, affected female Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. carriers show a markedly skewed X-inactivation pattern in blood where all cells show the mutated chromosome X completely inactive. The mutated gene is important for epigenetic control of developmental processes and a Werner mesomelic syndrome (WMS)-autosomal dominant tibial hemimelia- knock-out model supports the facial phenotype present in our patients. In polysyndactyly-triphalangeal thumbs syndrome (MIM 188770). We present summary, we provide genetic evidence for the involvement of the histone a family with 2 affected members in 2 generations from Russia. Propositus, deacetylation pathway in a syndromic form of XLID. 17-old age boy and his mother, have bilateral hypoplasia of the tibia with P12.260 preaxial polydactyly in the feet and hands. The height of the boy is 128 cm Sequencing X-chromosome exomes: A diagnostic approach in non- and his mother is 135 cm. The right hand of the boy is characterized by 6 syndromic intellectual disability and the left hand by 7 isodactylous digits (on the left hand I and II digits P. Bauer, C. Dufke, C. Bauer, M. Sturm, C. Schröder, A. Dufke, A. Riess, U. Grasshoff, M. are triphalangeal), the thumbs is nonopposable. Also boy has short legs due Kehrer, O. Riess, A. Tzschach; to tibial hypoplasia (length of tibias is 152 and 54 mm) and bilateral prea- Department of Medical Genetics, Tübingen, Germany. xial polydactyly of the feet with 7 triphalangeal digits. Radiologically and MRI legs showed thicken of fibula and dysplasia of hip. His mother on the hands has 5 digits, I digits is triphalangeal on both hands, the thumbs is no- Non-syndromic intellectual disability (ID) imposes a considerable diagno- nopposable. On the feet she has 6 triphalangeal digits and tibial hypoplasia stic demand, as more than 100 genes have been associated with familial which lead to shortening of legs. The molecular-genetic study of boy and his forms of ID. Since X-chromosomal genes greatly contribute at least in affec- mother identified heterozygosity for a 403G>C transversion in the zone of ted males, diagnostic tools for the detection of causal genetic changes are a polarizing activity (ZPA) regulatory sequence (ZRS) in intron 5 of the LM- prerequisite for molecular diagnoses. BR1 gene in both patients. Population analysis of 150 unaffected people did In order to test, whether NGS provides us with a diagnostic platform in XLID, not detect this mutation. we have established a sequencing pipeline involving target enrichment for P12.258 all coding sequences of the X chromosome. Sequencing of males patients Novel mutations in the POU3F4 gene in patients with X-linked hearing with non-syndromic ID typically yielded in 60-100x coverage of X chromo- loss somal genes and a robust base calling in these hemizygous individuals. Mo- A. Schoener1, A. Giesemann2, H. Hartmann3, J. Schmidtke1, M. Stuhrmann1; reover, even drop-out of single exons could be monitored in our patients as 1Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 2Institute measured as a significant reduction in read coverage per exon. of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany, 3Clinic for Paediatric Nephrology, Hepatology and Metabolic Disorders, A first patient cohort of 12 XLID patients allowed us to work out the sensiti- Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. vity of the system for the analysis of 88 XLID genes: More than 50 genes have been completely sequenced > 10x and only four genes had less than 90% of all coding bases covered less then 10x (ARX, IQSEC2, IKBKG, and NHS). Up to half of the X-linked hearing loss cases are caused by mutations in the Typically, less than 3-5 novel variants were found per patient, and further single exon gene POU3F4 which encodes a 361 aa POU domain transcripti- validation steps allowed us to reduce the list of potential disease-causing on factor mainly expressed in the inner ear and central nervous system. In- variants to 0-1 observations. tragenic mutations as well as deletions of the coding region or the upstream In summary, X-ome sequencing represents a robust tool for the detection of region of POU3F4 have been reported. Most affected males show a profound established XLID and thus closes a longstanding gap in the diagnostic reper- sensorineural hearing loss with or without a conductive component (which toire for children with XLID. can be masked by the sensorineural loss). Common features are stapedial fixa- P12.261 tion and temporal bone anomalies (including dilation of the internal auditory Two forms of rare short stature syndromes in Yakuts canal, visible in computed tomography (CT)) leading to a perilymphatic gusher N. R. Maksimova1, A. Nogovicina2; 1Yakutsk Science Center of Complex Medical Problems of Russian Academy of Medical following stapedectomy or during cochlear implantation. Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Republican Hospital N1, Yakutsk, Russian We extracted DNA from blood samples of five patients with a characteristic Federation. temporal bone CT and sequenced the coding region of the POU3F4 gene and its flanking sequences. For the detection of larger deletions or duplications MLPA analysis was applied. In three patients we found intragenic mutations which Hereditary short stature syndrome is one of the major concerns in Yakuts. have not been described so far: one missense mutation (c.844C>T, p.Arg282Trp), We have identified 49 patients with short stature syndrome in 43 Yakut fa- classified as probably pathogenic by biometric analysis, and two frame shift milies with pre- and post-natal non-progressive growth failure, facial dys- mutations (c.226delC, p.Leu76Trpfs*6; c.346dupG, p.Ala116Glyfs*77) leading morphism and normal intelligence. A genome-wide linkage analysis for to a truncated protein lacking both DNA-binding domains. The two other pati- these families revealed linkage to region 6p21.1 with the highest multipoint ents showed deletions of the POU3F4 coding exon. LOD score of 24.6 at D6S282. We applied a homozygosity mapping approach Our study shows that POU3F4 mutations are frequently found in patients with and narrowed the causative gene to the same locus of the 3-M syndrome X-linked hearing loss and that genetic testing may contribute to the confirma- (Huber et al, 2005). We found a novel homozygous 4582insT mutation in tion of the clinical diagnosis. www.eshCgU.Lo7,r wghich resulted in a frameshift and subsequent premature stop codon www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 341 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Conclusion: at 1553 (Q1553X). Second form of short stature is characterised by auto- The R356W distribution in the Macedonian patients with clas- somal recessive inheritance, severe postnatal growth retardation, facial sic CAH is comparable whereas the Q318Xfrequencywas higher than re- dysmorphism with senile face, small hands and feet, normal intelligence, ported in the most European populations. However, these findings further Pelger-Hue¨t anomaly of leucocytes, and optic atrophy with loss of visual support a role of the severe mutations Q318X and R356W in the salt wasting acuity and colour vision. This new syndrome is designated as short stature form of the 21-hydroxylase deficiency. with optic atrophy and Pelger-Huet anomaly (SOPH) syndrome. Genomewi- P12.264 de homozygosity mapping was conducted in 33 patients in 30 families. The A genome-wide association study identifies risk loci for non- disease locus was mapped to the 1.1 Mb region on chromosome 2p24.3, in- syndromic sagittal craniosynostosis on chromosomes 20 and 7 cluding the neuroblastoma amplified sequence (NBAS) gene. Subsequently, C. M. Justice1,2, G. Yagnik3,2, Y. Kim1, I. Peter4, E. Wang Jabs4, X. Ye4, L. Shi4, M. L. 33 of 34 patients were identified with SOPH syndrome and had a 5741G/A Cunningham5, V. Kimonis6, T. Roscioli7,8, S. A. Wall9, A. O. M. Wilkie9,10, J. Stoler11, J. nucleotide substitution (R1914H) in the NBAS gene in the homozygous sta- Richtsmeier12, Y. Heuzé12, P. Sanchez-Lara13, M. Buckley7,14, C. M. Druschel15, J. L. Mills16, M. Caggana17, P. A. Romitti18, D. M. Kay17, C. Senders18, O. Klein18, J. Boggan18, M. te. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the NBAS protein is well Zwienenberg-Lee18, C. Naydenov18, S. Kim3, J. Kim3, A. F. Wilson1, S. A. Boyadjiev3; expressed in retinal ganglion cells, epidermal skin cells, and leucocyte cyto- 1Genometrics Section, Division of Intramural Research, IDRB, NHGRI, NIH, Baltimore, plasm in controls as well as a patient with SOPH syndrome. MD, United States, 2Authors with equal contribution, None, CA, United States, 3Section P12.262 of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, University of California Davis, Sacramento, ZNF750 downregulation in keratinocytes promotes cell proliferation CA, United States, 4Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai and decreases apoptosis School of Medicine, New York, NY, United States, 5Department of Pediatrics, Division I. Cohen1,2, R. Y. Birnbaum1,2, K. Leibson1,2, R. Taube3, S. Sivan1,2, O. S. Birk1,2,4; of Craniofacial Medicine and Seattle Children’s Craniofacial Center, University of 1The Morris Kahn Laboratory of Human Genetics, National Institute of Biotechnology in Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, the Negev, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 2Dept. of Molecular Genetics and University of California Irvine, Irvine, CA, United States, 7Department of Human Genetics, Virology, Ben-Gurion University, Beer Sheva, Israel, 3Dept. of Molecular Genetics and Nijmegen, Netherlands, 8School of Women‘s and Children‘s Health, Sydney Children‘s Virology, Ben-Gurion University, Beer-Sheva, Israel, 4Genetics Institute, Soroka Medical Hospital, UNSW, Sydney, Australia, 9Craniofacial Unit, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Center, Beer Sheva, Israel. Trust, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 11Division of Genetics, Children’s Hospital Boston, Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States, 12Department of Anthropology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, United States, 13Division of Genetics, Seborrheic dermatitis (SD) and Psoriasis are common dermatologic di- Department of Pediatrics, University of South California, Los Angeles, CA, United States, seases with overlapping features. Each of the two dermatoses affects 2-3% 14Department of Haematology and Genetics, SEALS, Sydney, Australia, 15Congenital ZoNf tFh7e5 p0opulation worldwide. The molecular mechanisms leading to excessi- Malformations Registry, New York State Department of Health, Albany, NY, United ve keratinocyte proliferation, the halZlmNFar7k5 0of both diseases, remain elusive. States, 16Division of Epidemiology, Statistics, and Prevention Research, Eunice Kennedy mutations were previously reported to be associated with psoriasi- Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, MD, United States, form SD and with familial psoriasis. encodes a putative transcripti- 17Division of Genetics, Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, on factor that is highlyexpressed in keratinocytes and represents a psoriasis NY, United States, 18Remaining affiliations in body of the poster, None, CA, United States. candidate gene. ZNF750 To understand ZNF750 function, we initially determined the sub-cellular localization of ZNF750 and assessed the effect of silencing on cell Craniosynostosis, the premature fusion of one or more cranial sutures in proliferation and apoptosis in the human keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT. Im- the skull, is a common malformation, affecting 1 out of 2,500 live born ba- munofluorescence and subcellular fractionation followed by western blot bies. Sagittal craniosynostosis is the most common type, accounting for 40 analysis showed nuclear localization of ZNF750. In addition, using EGFP- to 58% of all cases. We conducted the first genome-wide association study tagged constructs, we identified which of the two ZNF750 nZuNcFle7a5r0 locali- (GWAS) for non-syndromic sagittal craniosynostosis using 130 European zation signals is functional. As excessive proliferation of keratinocytes is a Am-1e4rican case-parent trios. The strongest associations reached p = 1.13 x hallmark of both psoriasis and SD, we examined the effects of ZN sFil7e5n0- 10-10 (OR = 4.57) in the 3‘ UTR of BMP2 on chromosome 20 and p = 1.61 x cing in HaCaT keratinocytes on cell proliferation (Ki67 assay) and apoptosis 10 (OR=0.19) in an intron -o32f BBS9 on chromoso-m15e 7. We replicated these (annexin V assay). In comparison to controls, HaCaT cells in which associations (p = 4.08 x 10 and p = 2.31 x 10 , respectively) in an in- expression was down-regulated exhibited a 10-fold increase in cell prolife- dependent European American population of 186 unrelated probands with ratZioNnF 7an50d a 3-fold decrease in apoptosis. non-syndromic sagitBtaMl Pcr2aniosynostosis and 564 unaffected controls. We We are currently performing genome wide expression microarray analyses focused our studies on the locus on chromosome 20. We did not find coding of silenced cells and ChIP-Seq analysis to identify downstream tar- region mutations of by direct sequencing; but by using quantitative gets of ZNF750. Unraveling the role of ZNF750 in keratinocyte cell prolife- real-time PCR, we found a significant increase in BMP2 expression in three ration and determining its downstream pathways might open new insights of eight calvarial osteoblast cell lines derived from affected individuals as to the events leading to excessive keratinocyte proliferation in psoriasiform compared to control calvarial osteoblasts. ELISA assays and protein immu- SD and psoriasis. noblots showed that two of the same osteoblast lines have higher levels of P12.263 BMP2 protein and increased phosphorylation of SMAD 1/5/8. In summary, Distribution of the Q318X and R356W mutations of the CYP21A2 gene we have identified two candidate loci for sagittal NSC and suggest that BMP2 in Macedonian patients with classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency plays a role in the genetic etiology of sagittal craniosynostosis. V. Anastasovska1, M. Kocova2; P12.265 1Genetic Laboratory, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, 2Genetic Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology and Genetics, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Improving genetic counselling in carriers of spinal muscular atrophy Republic of Macedonia. with two copies of the SMN1 gene. L. Alías1, S. Bernal2, M. Barceló2, R. Martínez-Hernández2, C. Vázquez3, A. Santana3, J. Background: Salazar1, L. González-Quereda1, M. Baiget1, E. F. Tizzano1; 1Hospital Sant Pau, CIBERER U-705, Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Hospital Sant Pau, Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase is present in 90-95% of all cases Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 3Hospital Materno Infantil de Las Palmas, Gran Canaria, with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), an autosomal recessive disor- Spain. der. Phenotype in all clinical forms of the disease: calssic salt wasting (SW) and simple virilizing (SV) and nonclassic late onset form (LO) corresponds SMN1 to the genetic lesion in the CYP21A2 gene. The Q318X nonsense and R356W Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is caused by mutations mMiestsheondse: mutations at exon 8 that totally ablate 21-hydroxylase activity are in the SSuMrvNiv1al Motor Neuron1 gene ( ) leading to loss of motor neu- most often associated with salt wasting disease. rons of the spinal cord. Carrier frequency is around 1/50. Detection of car- Using the PCR/ACRS method, we have performed direct molecular riers of deletions is crucial to define couples at risk for SMA offspring. detection of the Q318X and R356W mutations in 35 Macedonian patients One of the pitfalls in quantitative SMA carrier diagnosis is the presence of with classic clinical form of CAH (23 had SW and 12 had SV form), diagnosed two SMN1 genes in cis (2/0 carriers). We analysed 2827 individuals (810 aRcecsourldtisn: g to standard clinical criteria at the Department of Endocrinology parents and 2017 other relatives) for SMA carrier diagnosis. In the group of and Genetics, University Children’s Clinic, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia. parents, 786 (97%) showed one SMN1 copy. The remaining 24 showed two Mutations were detected in 20% (7/35) of all patients, Q318X in 5 copies and based on the inheritance of the at-risk alleles and quantitative (14.3%) and R356W in 2 (5.7%). In 17.4% (4/23) of the SW patients Q318X analyses of their parents or siblings, 18 individuals were considered 2/0 mutation was detected (three homozygotes and one heterozygote), and only carriers (2.25%) and 6 “de novo” cases (0.75%). In the group of relatives one was heterozygote for R356W (4.3%). Among SV patients mutations we detected 600 carriers with one copy, 1362 two copies, 50 three copies Q318X and R356W were detected in one heterozygote (8.3%) each. and 5 four copies. Using the same criteria as in the parent group, 27 of the www.eshg.org www.eshg.org342 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P13.03 Deletion of NT5E promotes dislipidemia, intramyocellular lipid cases with two SMN1 copies (4.3%) were considered 2/0 carriers. In 414 accumulation and results in peripheral insulin resistance individuals of the general population (partners of possible or confirmed S. Burghoff1, U. Flögel2, S. Bongardt2, V. Burkart3, H. Sell4, S. Tucci5, K. Ikels6, D. carriers) 15 (3.6%) showed one copy, 342 two copies, 36 three copies and 4 Eberhard7, J. Eckel4, J. Schrader2; four copies.We conclude that 2/0 carriers are detected using both, marker 1Institute of Human Genetics, Halle, Germany, 2Institute of Molecular Cardiology, and quantitative SMN1 analyses. For better genetic counselling, cases from Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research, Düsseldorf, Germany, 4Paul-Langerhans-Group “Integrative Physiology”, the general population can be identified after quantitative analyses of their Leibniz Center for Diabetes Research, Düsseldorf, Germany, 5Department of General parents when one parent show 3 SMN1 copies and the other one SMN1 copy Pediatrics – University Children´s Hospital, Düsseldorf, Germany, 6Institute for Animal (Supported by CIBERER/FIS 11-2606). Development and Molecular Biology, Düsseldorf, Germany, 7Institute of Metabolic Physiology, Düsseldorf, Germany. P13. Metabolic disorders NT5E Mutations in are the cause of nonfunctional CD73 in humans and sub- P13.01 sequently result in calcification of lower-extremity arteries and hand and Metabolarray®: targeted array-CGH for the detection of copy number foot joint capsules. CD73 converts extracellular AMP to adenosine, which changes in inherited metabolic disease is known to inhibit lipolysis. It is unknown, however, whether adenosine B. Pérez1,2,3, E. Vallespin4,3, J. Nevado4,3, F. Santos4,3, P. Rodríguez-Pombo1,2,3, B. Merinero2,3, C. Pérez-Cerdá2,3, P. Lapunzina4,3, M. Ugarte2,3, L. R. Desviat1,2,3; formed by CD73 is functionally relevant in lipid homeostasis. We there- 1Centro de Biologia Molecular Severo Ochoa CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de fore explored the effect of CD73-deri-v/-ed adenosine on lipid metabolism 1of Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares (CEDEM), Madrid, Spain, 3CIBERER, Madrid, transgenic mice lacking CD73 (CD73 ) at the age of 6-8 months. Us-/i-n g H Spain, 4INGEMM-Hospital La Paz, Madrid, Spain. MRI we found significant-/l-y decreased superficial fat content in CD73 mice (WT: 2.6±0.9 a.u.; CD73 : 1.4±0.5 a.u.)-/ -accompanied by increased serum free fatty acids (WT: -2/-03±65 µM; CD73 : 354±141 µM), triglycerides (WT: Clinical molecular testing in inherited metabolic disease (IMD) is current- 4.2±4.9 m-/-g/dl; CD73 : 15.4±12.2 mg/dl), blood glucose (WT: 111±14 mg/ ly PCR-based precluding the identification of deletions which account for a dl; CD-/7-3 : 146±24 mg/dl) and serum insulin levels (WT: 1.20±1.15 µg/l; variable fraction (1-25%) of mutant alleles depending on the gene involved. CD73 : 7.06±5.51 µg/l). Consistent with in1sulin resistance, intramyocellu- We have developed a high-resolution comparative genomic hybridization lar lipid levels as measured with localized H- /M- R spectroscopy were signi- array (Metabolarray®) for the detection of CNV in 205 genes involved in ficantly increased (WT: 1.01±0.31 a.u.; CD73 : 1.52±0.61 a.u.; n=10 each). IMD which are currently diagnosed in the laboratory. The array consists of Insuli-n/--induced Akt phosphorylation was reduced in skeletal muscle of 62,979 oligos spread genome wide, with 40,555 hybridizing to target genes CD73 mice. Islets from WT mice did not express CD73 at the mRNA and with an average spacing of about 250 bp and 26,678 covering the rest of the protein level, and glucose-stimulated ins-/u-lin release from pancreatic islets genome. For validation, we have retrospectively analyzed a series of IMD was not different between WT and CD73 mice. In contrast, high fat diet al- patients carriers of exonic deletions previously genotyped by different me- most completely downregulatNedT 5thEe expression of CD73 in WT mice, which thods (MLPA, SNP-arrays). All the heterozygous and homozygous deletions was also observed in adipose tissue finro vmiv oob/ob mice. Our findings sNugTg5eEst even of a single exon were detected using the Metabolarray®. We are app- that adenosine generated by /CD73 is an important insulin indepen- lying this tool prospectively to a series of patients with incomplete genotype. dent modulator of lipid metabolism , whereas non-functional / In one propionic acidemia patient with discordant Mendelian inheritance, CD73 results in peripheral insulin resistance. we have identified a novel 2 Kb deletion in the PCCB gene encompassing P13.04 exons 4 and 5. Our results show the clinical utility of this new molecular A novel cardiomyopathy syndrome due to dolichol kinase deficiency tool in the genetic diagnosis of IMD, allowing the detection of CNV at the E. Morava1, L. Kapusta1, H. Mandel2, D. Lefeber1, R. Wevers1; resolution of individual exons. 1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2University of Rambam, Rambam, Israel. P13.02 Association of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease and hypercholesterolemia with mutations on the genes LEP, UGT1A1, Congenital disorders of glycosylation are a growing group of inborn errors ATP7B. of protein glycosylation.Cardiac involvement is frequently observed in the A. Zarina1, L. Piekuse1, Z. Steinberga1, M. Kreile1, A. Krumina2, J. Keiss3, V. Sondore3; most 14 common form, PMM2-CDG, especially hypertrophic cardiomyopa- 1Riga Stradins university Scientific laboratory of molecular genetics, Riga, Latvia, thy. Dilated cardiomyopathy, however, has been only observed in a few CDG 2Latvian Biomedical Research and study center, Riga, Latvia, 3Infectology Center of subtypes, usually with a lethal outcome. We report on cardiac pathology in Latvia, Riga, Latvia. nine patients from three unrelated Israeli families, diagnosed with dolichol Introduction: kinase deficiency, due to novel, homozygous DK1 gene mutations. The car- diac symptoms varied from discrete, mild dilation to overt heart failure with Leptin (Lep), a polypeptide hormone probably have been im- death. Two children died unexpectedly with acute symptoms of heart failure plicated in pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) (Swel- before the diagnosis of DK1-CDG and heart transplantation could take place. lam M, et al, 2012). Wilson‘s disease (WD) is a severe disorder of copper Three other affected children with mild dilated cardiomyopathy at the time misbalance, caused by mutations in a gene ATP7B and is accompanied by of the diagnosis deteriorated rapidly, two of them within days after an acute accumulation of copper in tissues, especially in the liver, that can manifest infection. They all went through successful heart transplantation; one died aAsim li:v er pathology (including NAFLD). Gilbert syndrome could be involved unexpectedly and 2 others arecurrently (after 1-5 years) clinically stable. in lipid metabolism The other 4 children diagnosed with mild dilated cardiomyopathy are doing To determine whether the polymorphisms and mutations, mentioned well on supportive heart failure therapy. In most cases, the cardiac findings bMealotewri aalr aen ads msoectihaotedds: with dyslipidemia in patients with steatohepatitis dominated the clinical picture, 33 without central nervous system or multi- (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease). system involvement, which is unique in CDG syndrome. We suggest to test The study population included 39 patients who had for DK1-CDG in patients with dilated cardiomyopathy.Patients with discrete bHe1e0n6 9sQcreened for hypercholesterolemUiaG (Tt1oAta1l, cholesterol >5mmLoEl/Pl) and cardiomyopathy may remain stable on supportive treatment while others steatohepatitis, that liver biopsy revealed. Determinants were the mutation deteriorate rapidly. Our paper is the first comprehensive study on the phe- Results: in ATP7B gene, (TA)7 in gene I and D alleles in gene notype of DK1-CDG and the first successful organ transplantation in CDG 3’UTR region. In control population there were 56 individuals. syndrome. H1(0TA69)7Q allele frequency in affected individuals 0.5303 (p=0.47, OR P13.05 0.85, CI95% 0.46 - 1.58) - Deletion allele 0.39 (p=0.12, OR 0.63, CI 95% 0.35- Determing clinical revelance of gene conversion CYP21A2 and 1.14). allele frequency 0.01, in control group it was not found. Af- CYP21A1P tCeorn lcilnuesaiorn rse: gression analysis there were not found significant asssociation S. Herbst, B. Eichorn, R. Fahsold; (p>0.05) with any of biochemical marker. Mitteldeutscher Praxisverbund Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany. There have to be done larger study to evaluate genetic reason to find association for NAFLD and hypercholesterolemia. Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia (CAH) is a common autosomal recessive dis- order caused mainly by mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene (CYP21A2). The CYP21A2 is located at 6p21.3 about 30 kb apart from its pseudogene CAP21A1P, which encodes for an inactive protein due to the presence of 15 mutations. Gene and pseudogene are part of a tandemly repeated structure; www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 343 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P13.08 Cystic fibrosis related diabetes-risk factors hence they are often targets of intergenic recombinations causing small le- I. M. CIUCA1, L. Pop1, Z. Popa1, I. Velea1, L. Tamas2, I. Popa1; sions, deletions, duplications and gene conversions. Latter comprises fused 1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, genes with its 5`end and 3`end corresponding to CYP21A1P and CYP21A2 Romania. respectively, which are known to be pathogenic. Background However, here we demonstrate three patients with a fusion between CYP21A2 and CYP21A1P observed by a suspicious MLPA result. In all pati- : Cystic fibrosis related diabetes (CFRD) is frequent in female ents exons 1-3 of the gene are duplicated whereas the corresponding region with pancreatic insufficiency, caOrbrijeercst iovfe sso-called severe mutations . While of the pseudogene is deleted. Direct sequencing reveals that a part of the risk factors for type 1 diabetes are weMll-ektnhoowdns, CFRD risk factors who could gene (from upstream of the promoter to intron 3) indeed replaced the cor- be influenced are still looking. : Evaluate the risk factors for the responding region of the pseudogene. Even if the gene promoter is present, development of CFRD in our patients. : We performed retrospective the stop mutation in exon 7 of the pseudogene part generates a truncated seven years cohort study; 81 patients were evaluated. For all CFRD patients protein. In addition two intact CYP21A2 copies are present. were obtained data about familial hRisetsourylt sof diabetes, positive antecedent In conclusion, the described chimeric gene CYP21A2/CYP21A1P is not di- of rickets and early diet. Biannual biochemical evaluation was completed sease causing, while at least one intact copy of the CYP21A2 gene is present. in addition to clinical examination. : CFRD was diagnosed in eight We recommend performing a long-range PCR in combination with direct patients (9.8%), 50% carriers of class I mutations. Prevalence was signi- sequencing subsequent to the observation of aberrant MLPA pattern to vali- ficantly higher in girls (75%) compared to boys. Median age at CFRD debut date whether an intact gene copy is available. was 13.37 years and the mean age at CF diagnosis 7.27 years. We did not P13.06 noticed positive family history for diabetes in any of patients. Five patients Defect of cobalamin intracellular metabolism (cblC, cblD and cblF (62.5%) had rickets as toddlers, although vitamin D was given for prophyla- defects) masquerading as diabetic ketoacidosis xis . All of CFRD patients were nourished with cow`s milk formulas, one was S. Sharda, S. Angurana, M. Walia, S. V. Attri; breast fed for 2 months. Early Cinotnrcolduuscitoinon of gluten cereals (at 4 months) Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. was documented in 7 patients (87.5%). Unfortunately 50% of CFRD patients died from pulmonary disease. : Girls diagnosed late with CF, fed with cow`s milk and gluten nourishment in the early infancy, with positive Inborn errors of metabolism, especially aminoacidopathies, manifesting as history of vitamin D deficiency are more prone to develop CFRD. Early die- diabetic ketoacidosis or hyperglycemia are rare, only a few cases have been tary intervention especially in female patients with “severe” genotype might reported. We report a 13-month-old boy who presented with vomiting, de- be helpful. hydration, coma, hyperglycemia, high anion gap metabolic acidosis, and ke- P13.09 tosis mimicking diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA). Treatment with parenteral flu- Metabolic characterization of common variants of the FTO and id, electrolyte and insulin infusion lead to an improvement in hyperglycemia TCF7L2 loci by nutritional challenge tests but persistence of metabolic acidosis and lack of improvement of neurologic S. Wahl1, S. Krug2, C. Then3, T. Brand2, K. Ehlers2, M. Claussnitzer2, T. Skurk2, A. Lechner3, findings led us to suspect an inborn error of metabolism. Urinary organic H. Wichmann4, C. Huth5, C. Meisinger5, C. Prehn6, F. Stückler7, G. Kastenmüller7, J. acid analysis revealed increased methylmalonic acid levels. In addition to Adamski6, K. Suhre7,8, T. Illig9,1, H. Grallert1, H. Laumen2,10, J. Seissler3, H. Hauner2,10; 1Research Unit of Molecular Epidemiology, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, this, he also had increased plasma and urine homocystine tested by high Germany, 2EKFZ, Chair for Nutritional Medicine, Technical University Muenchen, performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). There was some improvement Freising, Germany, 3Diabetes Center, Medical Clinic Innenstadt, Ludwig Maximilians in neurologic status and metabolic parameters after treatment with low- University, Munich, Germany, 4Institute of Epidemiology I, Helmholtz Zentrum protein diet, vitamin B12, and L-carnitine but he ultimately succumbed to Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 5Institute of Epidemiology II, Helmholtz Zentrum nosocomial sepsis. Methylmalonic aceidemia presenting with DKA like sym- Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 6Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz ptoms has been reported. But to the best of our knowledge, this is probably Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 7Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems the first case report of late-onset combined methylmalonic acidemia and ho- Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 8Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Cornell Medical College, Education City, Qatar, mocytinuria (cblC, cblD and cblF defects) masquerading as diabetic ketoaci- 9Hanover Unified Biobank, Hanover Medical School, Hannover, Gabon, 10ZIEL, Research dosis. The early diagnosis of IEM is of utmost importance for the treatment, Center for Nutrition and Food Sciences, Technical University Muenchen, Freising, prognosis as well as genetic counseling for the family. High index of suspi- Germany. cion even in varied clinical presentation is the only way to diagnose these disorders in places where newborn screening is still not a routine practice. P13.07 Common single nucleotide polymorphisms in the FTO and TCF7L2 gene loci Genetic analysis of congenital disorders of glycosylation patients have been consistently associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, using candidate gene genomic capture and next generation respectively. The mechanisms underlying these associations remain poorly sequencing understood. Measuring metabolite response profiles by metabolomics du- C. Medrano1, C. Pérez-Cerdá1, P. Gómez-Puertas2, L. R. Desviat1, M. Ugarte1, B. Pérez1; ring nutritional challenges may help to unravel how the interaction of ge- 1Centro de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares-Centro de Biología Molecular, netic variants with lifestyle influences metabolism. We present an approach CIBERER, IDIPAZ, Madrid, Spain, 2Centro de Biología Molecular,, Madrid, Spain. combining detailed phenotyping, nutritional and intravenous interventions and metabolomics analyses to investigate early metabolic alterations in healthy risk allele carriers. 77 non-obese male participants of the KORA S4/ Congenital disorders of glycosylation are a heterogeneous group of disorders F4 cohort, aged 34 to 67 years, were recruited. 19/24 homozygous carriers caused by genetic defects in the protein glycosylation pathway. The clinical of the FTO locus risk allele rs9939609, 16/17 carriers of the TCF7L2 locus and subsequent biochemical diagnosis allow to classify the affected patients risk allele rs7903146 and 20/24 homozygous controls performed nutri- as CDG type I caused by defects in cytoplasmic and endoplasmic reticulum tional and intravenous challenge tests, respectively. Nutritional challenges proteins or CDG type II caused by defects in the Golgi apparatus. Genetic dia- comprised an oral glucose tolerance test after overnight fasting, a standar- gnosis is required to identify the affected gene using a high-time consuming dized fast food meal, and a lipid tolerance test within a two-day study peri- approach to sequence gene by gene. The aim of this study was to improve od. The intravenous challenge consisted of an intravenous glucose tolerance molecular diagnosis for congenital disorders of glycosylation by developing test and a subsequent euglycemic hyperinsulinemic glucose-clamp test. For a customized array.We present the initial results obtained by combination of metabolomics analysis, blood was sampled at three time points for each par- a targeted in solution capture from Agilent and subsequent next generation ticipant during each challenge and concentrations of 163 metabolites were sequencing using the Solid platform. In this work 16 barcoded patients have determined using the AbsoluteIDQTM p150 kit (Biocrates Life Sciences AG). been analyzed (seven CDGI and nine CDGII). On average, coverage was 45 We show the initial analyses of metabolite-response profiles to the different to 60 fold and we have detected close to one-hundred SNV per patient. The challenges. The presented approach intends to functionally characterize ge- SNV were filtered excluding common variants and also excluding synony- netic variants in the FTO and TCF7L2 loci and to identify novel markers of mous, deep intronic variants and also UTR changes. The initial results have prediabetes. The presented design provides a framework for further analy- allowed the identification of pathogenic mutations in DPAGT1, RTF1 and sis of additional risk variants. COG7 genes. In summary the development of next generation sequencing panels in the genetic diagnostic laboratory allows a most efficient genetic diagnosis compared with the conventional gene-by-gene sequencing. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org344 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P13.10 Investigation of CAT gene C1167T polymorphism in diabetic nephropathy further downstream targets, we have developed FGF23-inducible HEK293 C. Graunteanu1, A. Cimpoeru1, D. Clenciu1, E. Cioboata1, M. Bacu1, S. Serban-Sosoi1, M. cells that stably express KLOTHO (HEK293-KL). Stable cell clones were Stavarachi2, M. Ioana1, N. M. Panduru3, M. Mota1, E. Mota1; picked, expanded, and expression of KLOTHO was confirmed by Western 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Craiova, Romania, 2Genetics Department of blot analysis. By investigating the activation of MAPK pathway we could Bucharest University, Bucharest, Romania, 3“Carol Davila“ University of Medicine and show that HEK293-KL cells are FGF23-inducible. Moreover, we could inhi- Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania. bit the induction with FGF23 by the use of two small inhibitory molecules: (1) SU5402, an inhibitor of FGFR1 and (2) U0126, an inhibitor of MAPK pathway. Taken together, we have established a potent cell-based reporter Diabetic nephropathy (DN) is the most severe diabetic complication. Oxida- assay, which can now be used to investigate FGF23/KLOTHO/FGFR1 recep- tive stress may play a role in its pathogenesis. Antioxidant defense seems to tor signalling and receptor complex inhibition in more detail. We will try to be modulated by genetic variability. The aim of this study was to investigate identify novel downstream targets which may be candidates for regulatory the association of CAT gene C1167T (rs769217) polymorphism with DN in compounds involved in phosphate homeostasis. type 1 diabetes. P13.13 Clinical data and blood samples were collected from 269 Romanian patients A novel splice mutation and a novel exon deletion in the AGL gene in a with type 1 diabetes. They were divided in two groups according to the pre- patient with Forbes-Cori disease (GSD III) sence of DN - 108 patients without DN and 161 patients with DN. Genomic M. Kuhn1, C. Distler1, F. Wegner2, D. Glaeser1; DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes using commercial kits 1Genetikum, Neu-Ulm, Germany, 2Pediatrics, St. Marien-Hospital, Dueren, Germany. and the rs769217 polymorphism was assessed by TaqMan SNP assay on the ViiA7 Real-Time PCR system. Statistical analysis was performed using PLINK v1.07 software. Glycogen storage disease type III (GSD III) is an autosomal recessive disor- The sample population was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium. The frequen- der characterized by excessive accumulation of glycogen in the liver and in cy of minor allele (T) was 0.21 in DN group and 0.26 in the controls wit- skeletal / cardiac muscles. The typical symptoms are hepatomegaly, hypo- hout DN. In raw analysis neither T allele (OR=0.762, [95%C.I. 0.512-1.135], glycaemia and muscles weakness, also shown in our 4 years old male pati- p=0.18) or C allele (OR=1.312, [95%C.I. 0.881-1.954], p=0.18) conferred ent. GSD III is caused by a deficiency of the glycogen debranching enzyme risk or protection for DN. We performed adjustment for a minimal additive (AGL). We performed screening for mutations in the AGL gene by sequen- model (age, sex, duration of diabetes and glycated hemoglobin A1c), but the cing all exons including flanking intronic sequences. The analysis revealed results remained concordant with the raw analysis (ORT=0.773, [95%C.I. a heterozygous mutation at the donor splice site of exon 10. Considering 0.5073-1.178], p=0.23]. the autosomal recessive inheritance pattern of GSD III, this mutation can- In summary, CAT gene C1167T (rs769217) polymorphism does not seems not solely be responsible for the present phenotype in the patient. So it was to confer risk for DN in patients with type 1 diabetes. appropriated to search for possible deletions in the AGL gene. A gross de- P13.11 letion was excluded by Array-CGH. As there is no commercial MLPA kit for Type V Hyperlipoproteinemia with Neonatal Onset AGL available, we designed our own MLPA probes. Having established the C. Cladovan1, D. Dubau2, A. Szilagyi2, C. Jurca2; assay we analyzed DNA from the patient. We found a heterozygous novel 1University of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 2University single exon deletion in the AGL gene. This result was confirmed by junction of Oradea, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania. fragment analysis using flanking primers. Sequence analysis of the junction Introduction. fragment revealed a 2.3 kb deletion and the intronic break points. The de- letion could also be detected in paternal DNA and the splice mutation in Familial hyperlipoproteinemias in neonates are rarely en- maternal DNA. This demonstrates the compound heterozygosity of the two countered in clinical practice. ThCea isnec irdeepnocer tof Frederickson type V familial detected genetic alterations. Our results show that home-made MLPA tests hypertriglyceridemia is not estimated in childhood. The pattern of inhe- are an appropriate method to detect causative exon deletions in genes since ritance is autosomal dominant. . We present a case of sixteen there is no commercial MLPA kit available. days old newborn admitted in our department for milky plasma detected P13.14 in Maternity and association of severe bleeding disorders. Physical exami- Efficacy of enzyme replacement therapy with velaglucerase alfa in nation revealed pallor, dysmorphic face with xanthomas, mucosal bleeding, patients with type 1 Gaucher disease and marked thrombocytopenia abdominal distension. Laboratory findings identified extremely high values or splenomegaly for triglycerides (2500 mg/dl), cholesterol (1276 mg/dl initially then 336 A. Zimran1, D. E. Gonzalez2, M. Kabra3, E. A. Lukina4, P. Giraldo5, I. Kisinovsky6, M. Ben mg/dl with HDLc 19 mg/dl, LDLc 3,87 mg/dl), total fats (5317 mg/dl), the Dridi7, D. Elstein1, D. Zahrieh8, E. Crombez8, H. Ben Turkia7; test for chylomicrons positive, severe alteration of coagulation tests without 1Shaare Zedek Medical Center and Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, proof of clotting factors deficiency, transitory thrombCoocnytcolusissi.o Enc.hocardio- Jerusalem, Israel, 2Sanatorio Español, Asunción, Paraguay, 3All India Institute of Medical graphy revealed non-compaction cardiothmyopathy. First -degree relatives Sciences, New Delhi, India, 4Hematology Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, have evidence of dyslipidemia above 90 percentile. Our case 5CIBERER and Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 6Your Health presented a rare familial hyperlipoproteinemia type V with neonatal onset SA, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 7La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 8Shire Human Genetic Therapies, Inc., Lexington, MA, United States. associated with severe bleeding disorder and non-compaction cardiomyo- pathy. Background. P13.12 The responses of type 1 Gaucher disease (GD)-related throm- Development of a cell-based reporter assay for the analysis of regulatory interactions between FGF23/KLOTHO/FGFR1, small bMoectyhtoopdesnia and splenomegaly to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) are linked to their pretreatment severity. inhibitors and downstream targets . TKT032 and HGT-GCB-039 were parallel-group trials; eligible S. Diener1, B. Lorenz-Depiereux1, T. M. Strom1,2; 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, patients were ≥2 years old with untreated type 1 GD. In both trials, 1 treat- Institute of Human Genetics, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Klinikum Rechts der Isar der ment arm was allocated to velaglucerase alfa 60 U/kg ERT every other week Technischen Universität München, Institute of Human Genetics, Munich, Germany. (REeOsWul)ts. Patients completing either trial could enrol in a combined extension study, HGT-GCB-044. . 27 type 1 GD patients received velaglucerase alfa 60 U/kg EOW in The analysis of rare genetic disorders affecting phosphate homeostasis led TKT032 or HGT-GCB-039 and HGT-GCB-044 over 24 mo9nths. 15/27 patients to the identification of several proteins essential for the renal regulation of had a pretreatment (Bas9eline) platelet count <100×10/L; 6 of these 15 had phosphate homeostasis: PHEX (XLH [MIM 307800]), FGF23 (ADHR [MIM a platelet count <60×10/L. All 15 had an intact spleen. 6/27 patients had 193100]), SLC34A3 (HHRH [MIM 241530]), DMP1 (ARHR1 [MIM 241520]), severe Baseline splenomegaly (9splenic volume >15 multiples of normal); all ENPP1 (ARHR2 [MIM613312]), GALNT3 (FTC [MIM 211900]), and KLOTHO 6 had a platelet count <100×10/L. At 24 months, 14/15 (93%) patients had (FTC [MIM 211900]). A key regulator of phosphate homeostasis is the fibro- reached the platelet count therapeutic goal and 6/6 with severe Baseline blast growth factor 23 (FGF23). It is mainly secreted from osteocytes, cir- splenomegaly had reached th9e splenic goal. 5/6 (83%) patients with a9 Ba- culates in the blood, and binds to receptor heterodimers composed of FGF seline platelet count <60×10/L had a normal platelet count (≥120×10/L), receptor 1 (FGFR1) and KLOTHO in the kidney. FGF23 activates KLOTHO/ including 2 with severe Baseline splenomegaly (Table). FGFR1 to inhibit renal phosphate reabsorption and to suppress 1,25-dihy- droxyvitamin D3 synthesis. As a key signalling pathway mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway is employed. To analyse regulatory inter- actions between FGF23/KLOTHO/FGFR1, small inhibitory compounds and www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 345 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Table. Individual platelet and splenic responses: 24 months of study drug Splenic volume, multiples of HLA-A3/B7, HLA-A3/B62 and HLA-A3/B14 genotype carriers in association Platelet count, ×109/L Base- normal with both C282Y and H63D mutation. line Gender 24-m. 24-m. age, y Baseline Baseli- 12 24 change, Baseli- change, We suggHesFtE that heterozygous status for C282Y mutation may be a risk fac- Gender ne m. m. ne tor for IHD. HLA-A3 allele and HLA-A3-containing genotypes in combinati- age, y % % on with mutations may play important role in susceptibility to chronic idiopathic hepatitis. 7 M 44 124 148 236 31.6* −81.7 P13.17 9 M 66 92 134 105 35.0* 11.0 6.3 −82.0 18 M 77 188 228 196 8.9 4.1 3.2 −63.5 Diagnostic tests for the genetic defects of urate transporters 19 F 47 150 181 285 6.4 2.7 2.2 −66.2 I. Sebesta1, B. Stiburkova2; 23 F 50 102 152 204 10.8 5.1 3.5 −67.4 1Inst Med Biochem and Lab Dg,Inst of Inher Metab Dis, First Faculty of Medicine, Prague, 24 M 50 62 147 197 26.4* 16.0 6.2 −76.7 Czech Republic, 2Inst of Inher Metab Dis, First Faculty of Medicine,Charles University, 25 F 68 85 151 122 33.3* 7.7 4.3 −87.0 Prague, Czech Republic. 27 M 89 190 176† 99 9.5 4.3 3.7 −61.6 29 M 62 75 75 21 36.9* 17.2 12.3 −66.7 29 F 44 85 222 405 11.2 3.8 2.6 −76.4 31 F 99 193 192 94 5.7 3.4 2.7 −52.4 Introduction:Primary hereditary renal hypouricemia is a genetic disorder 36 F 99 101 163 66 7.2 4.3 3.5 −50.9 affecting renal uric acid (UA) reabsorption with clinical features such as 42 M 64 94 109 70 19.1* 10.3 7.1 −63.0 44 F 90 155 192 113 8.5 5.1 4.0 −52.7 nephrolithiasis and exercise-induced acute renal failure. The known causes 58 M 50 92 112 124 12.0 4.1 3.0 −75.3 are: defects in the SLC22A12 gene, encoding the human urate transporter *†Patients with spleens >15 multiples of normal in volume at Baseline. 1 (hURAT1), and also impairment of voltage urate transporter (URATv1), Below goal. encoded by SLC2A9 (GLUT9) gene. Diagnosis is based on hypouricemia (< Therapeutic goals by 2 yea9rs: splenic volume m9ust decrease 50-60%; Baseline platelet 9count 60-120×10/L must be ≥100×10/L; Baseline platelet count 119 μmol/l) and increased fractional excretion of UA (> 10%). To date more C<o6n0×c1lu0s/iLo mnust increase 2-fold. than one hundred Japanese patients with mutations in hURAT1 gene have been des:cribed. Hypouricemia is sometimes overlooked, therefore we have . Clinically significant improvements in platelet count and set up the flowchart for this disorder. splenic volume occurred in the first 24 months of velaglucerase alfa treat- Methods The patients were selected for molecular analysis from 640 Czech ment among patients with type 91 GD and severe Baseline splenomegaly hypouricemic patients. These cases were found in 3 700 blood and urine and/or a9 platelet count <100×10/L (including those with a platelet count samples . Serum and urinary UA and creatinine were determined. The se- <60×10/L). quence analysis of SLC22A12 and SLC2A9 genes were performed. P13.15 Results:Other secondary causes of hyperuricosuric hypouricemia were ex- The genetic origin of glutaric aciduria type I in Belarus cluded. The estimations of : 1) serum UA, 2) excretion fraction of UA, 3) and A. Zinovik, S. Miasnikov, N. Gusina; analysis of hURAT1 and URATv1 genes follow. We have found 3 transition, National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. 4 deletions in SLC22A12 gene and one nucleotide insertion in SLC2A9 gene in overall 7 C zech patients. Three patients had acute renal failure and urate nephrolithiasis. Glutaric aciduria type I (GA-I) is a rare organic aciduria caused by inherited Conclusions:Our finding of the defects in URATv1 gene gives further evi- deficiency of glutaryl-CoA dehydrogenase which is involved in the catabolic dence that SLC2A9 is a causative gene of primary renal hypouricemia. He- pathways of L-lysine, L-hydroxylysine and L-tryptophan. From 1975 more reditary renal hypouricemia is still unrecognized disorder and probably not than 500 patients were diagnosed worldwide. More than 200 disease-cau- wide spread in East Asia only. (Supported by project PRVOUK, MOLMED of sing mutations of GCDH gene (19p13.2) are known thus far, most mutations Charles University). are unique to individual families. In some countries GA-I is included in the P13.18 panel of diseases identified by expanded newborn screening. Identification of two novel isoforms of the HNF1A gene In Belarus the possibility to diagnose GA-I appeared after the beginning of D. Fernández García1,2, E. González Ruano1, C. Cieza Borrella1,2, I. Rodríguez acylcarnitine analysis by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). From 2007 Hernández1,2, J. Miralles García3, R. González Sarmiento1,2; 4120 patients passed selective screening by MS/MS, and four unrelated pa- 1Unidad de Medicina Molecular-Departamento de Medicina e IBMCC. Universidad de Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, 2IBSAL, Salamanca, Spain, 3Servicio de Endocrinología. tients, aged 7 months - 2 years, were diagnosed as having GA-I. The analysis Hospital Universitario de Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain. of GCDH gene revealed one common mutation, p.R402W, covering 75% (6 from 8) of all mutant alleles. High prevalence of p.R402W also among Rus- sian GA-I patients indicates possible Slavic origin of this mutant allele and Background suggests that screening for this mutation may be appropriate for the confir- HNF1A is a transcription factor that plays a central role in the regulation mation of biochemical and clinical diagnostic, identification of carrier status of pancreatic beta cells. It controls the transcription of key genes such as and prenatal diagnosis of GA-I in this region. insulin and GLUT2. Their mutations cause deregulation of certain processes P13.16 leading to the onset of MODY3 diabetes. So far it has been described three Association of HFE gene mutations with HLA-A and -B alleles in HNF1A isoforms. We have identified two new isoforms in liver cells. patients with idiopathic hepathobiliar disorders Methods O. Bilevych, D. Zastavna, H. Makukh, O. Terpylyak; HNF1A cDNA was synthesized in HepG2, Capan 1, Hek and MCF7 cells (ne- Institute of Hereditary Pathology, NAMS of Ukraine, Lviv, Ukraine. gative control). The reaction products were cloned to analyse the isoforms activity by luciferase assay in COS1 and HepG2 cells. We carried out a pre- dictive analysis of the structures of two new isoforms and their location was Hereditary hemochromatosis (HH) is an autosomal recessive disease cha- determined by immunofluorescence in both cell types. racterized by abnHoFrEmal accumulation of iron in parenchymal organs leading Results ultimately to organ dysfunction. This is the most common inherited liver di- We found two unreported transcripts: HNF1AΔ2, which lost exon 2 and the sease. HH gene ( ) is located within the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) reading frame, and HNF1AinsIVS8, who never missed the reading frame and class I region on chromosome 6. It is suggested linkage disequilibrium bet- inserts 31 amino acids in the protein. Luciferase analysis show a 77% reduc- ween these genomic regions which results in certain clinical features of HH. tion in expression levels of isoform HNF1AΔ2 and a twofold increase in the The aim of the study was to estaHbFliEsh the distribution of HLA-A and -B alleles activity of the isoform HNF1AinsIVS8 with respect to the Wt. The structure in patients with idHioFpEathic hepathobiliar disorders (IHD) in association with prediction shows a significant change in the case of isoform HNF1AinsIVS8. C282Y and H63D mutations in gene. Immunofluorescence analysis shows that this isoform maintain the nuclear The presence of mutations was established inH 7F0E patients with IHD localization. This isoform is expressed in Hepg2 cell line but not in Capan1, (chronic idiopathic hHeFpEatitis, liver cirrhosis, hepatomegaly) and in 60 HEK293T, JURKAT or MCF7. Analysis of HNF1AΔ2 isoform is underway. healthy controls. HLA typing was performed in 25 mutation carriers Conclusion and 20 non-carriers. mutations were screened for by RFLP performed We report two novel isoforms cloned by HNF1A gene that are expressed in on PCR products. HLA alleles were detected using allele-specific PCR. HepG2 cell line and could help to better understand HNF1A activity. Heterozygous C282Y mutation found in 142.3% of patients with IHD was si- gnificantly higher thanH iFnE control group (χ=4.625, P<0.05). The differences in H63D mutation frequencies were not reliable. An expected significant as2sociation between mutations and HLA-A3 allele was established (χ=3.902, P<0.05). 4 out of 5 patients with chronic idiopathic hepatitis were www.eshg.org www.eshg.org346 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P13.19 Molecular genetic analysis in patients with congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy: Identification of novel mutations in DNA assays included restriction analysis, allele-specific hybridization or di- ABCC8 and KCNJ11 and implementation of genetic diagnosis in disease rect sequencing. management Results and Conclusions: The IMD appeared the cause of liver disease in I. Wieland1, K. Mohnike2, S. Empting2, T. Meissner3, M. Lindner4, W. Barthlen5, M. Zenker1; 68% (1929/2837) of investigated patients. The following IMD were detec- 1Universitätsklinikum, Institut für Humangenetik, Otto-von-Guericke Universität, ted: galactosemia - 20 cases (mutant alleles Q188R and K285N - 64%), in- Magdeburg, Germany, 2Universitätsklinikum, Universitätskinderklinik, Otto-von- herited fructose intolerance - 2, glycogen storage disease type Ia - 2 (R43C Guericke Universität, Magdeburg, Germany, 3Universitätsklinikum, Zentrum für - 50%), Ib - 4, III - 1, VI-1, alfa-1-antitrypsin deficiency - 43 (PiZZ- 13, PiMZ Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Heinrich-Heine Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany, - 28, PiMS - 2), Wilson disease - 55 (H1069Q, 2299insC, I1102T, 3400delC 4Universitätsklinikum, Zentrum für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin Angelika- - 76%), Nieman-Pick type C - 4, CESD - 3 (E8SJM - 50%), hereditary hemo- Lautenschläger-Klinik, Ruprecht-Karls Universität, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Kinderchirurgie Universitätsmedizin, Greifswald, Germany. chromatosis - 5 (C282Y - 2, C282Y/H63D - 3), Gaucher disease type I - 8 and III - 2 (N370S, L444P, RecNciI - 77%), methylmalonic aciduria - 3, LCHAD deficiency - 3, VLCAD deficiency - 1, syndrome HHH - 3, CDG-syndrome -1, tyrosinemia - 3, Alpers syndrome - 1 (A467T/G268A), hepatocerebral mito- Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) causes persistent hypoglycemia due to chondrial depletion syndrome - 2, Zelweger syndrome - 2, citrullinemia type uncontrolled insulin secretion in newborns and infants. Since patients are 1 - 1, Gilbert’s syndrome - 1759. IEM are the frequent cause of liver disease at increased risk of neurological sequelae, a rapid diaAgBnCoCs8is aKnCdN dJ1is1eaGsLeU mDa1- and should be kept in mind working with such groups of patients. GnaCgKemHAenDtH isS mLCa1n4dAa1toHryN. FC4HAI is a hUeCtPe2rogenous condition at the clinical and genetic level. Mutations in several genes including , , , P13.22 , , , and haAvBeC bCe8en ideKnCtiNfiJe1d1 in approximate- Maternally inherited Leigh syndrome in a Hungarian patient with the ly half of the patients in several patient cohorts. The most severe forms of G13513A mutation CHI are caused by loss of function of the and genes encoding K. Komlósi1, P. Kisfali1, K. Hadzsiev1, L. Sztriha2, L. Kaizer3, K. Brinyiczki3, I. Bódi4, E. Pál5, B. Melegh1; subunits of the ATP-sensitive K(+) channel. They are usuaAlBlyC aCs8sociateKdC NwJi1th1 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Pécs, Pécs, Hungary, 2Department of unresponsiveness of pancreatic ß-cells to medical treatment. Recently, it has Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, Albert Szent-Györgyi Clinical Center, Szeged, Hungary, been suggested to implement rapid genetic analysis of and 3Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Albert Szent-Györgyi Clinical Center, in newborns with diazoAxBidCeC 8unrespKoCnNsJi1ve1 CHI to improve patient manage- Szeged, Hungary, 4Neuropathology Research Group, Clinical Neuroscience Department, ment. We report sequence analysis in 37 CHI patients referred to us within King’s College, London, United Kingdom, 5Department of Neurology, University of Pécs, one year. Mutations in and were observed in 7/17 patients Pécs, Hungary. aged less than one year and in 5/20 patients at age of more than one year. Seven patients harbored homozygous or compound heterozygous mutati- ons that cause diffuse form of CHI and five patients had paternally trans- Leigh syndrome (LS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with mitted single heterozygous mutations predicted to cause focal form of CHI. symmetrical lesions in the brainstem and/or basal ganglia in infancy and Together, 14 different mutationAs BwCeCr8e identKifCieNdJ1 a1nd 12 were novel with one childhood. Mutations in nuclear and mitochondrial genes of the energy me- recurrent mutation in two consanguineous families of Turkish descent. In tabolism have been associated with LS. The G13513A mutation in ND5, one conclusion, genetic analysis of and in CHI newborns and in- of the 7 mtDNA encoded subunits of Complex I, was originally reported in fants revealed mutations in about one third of the patients and contributed MELAS, but later identified in children with LS. to further patient management. We present the first Hungarian documented case of LS associated with the P13.20 G13513A mtDNA mutation in a 3,5 year-old girl. Psychomotor delay was no- Clinical signs of autosomal dominant inherited hypophosphatasia ted at the age of 1 year, unaided walking developed at 17 months, bilateral J. Engel1, S. Rost1, F. Jakob2, E. Kunstmann1; ptosis at 21 months, ataxia and intention tremor at 3 years of age. Elevated 1Human Genetics University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany, 2Muskuloskelettales blood and CSF lactate, multiple lesions in the cerebellum, brain stem, cauda- Centrum Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. te nucleus, internal capsule and thalami pointed to LS. Progressive deterio- ration from age 3 years on lead to death at age 3,5 years due to aspiration. Mutation analysis from blood showed a 60% heteroplasmy of the G13513A Hypophosphatasia (HPP) is a hereditary metabolic disorder of the bone. mutation, postmortem muscle and liver tissue revealed 70% mutation loads. It is caused by impaired activity of the tissue-nonspecific isoenzyme of al- No mutation was detected in blood from the mother. kaline phosphatase. Five clinical forms are distinguished depending on The G13513A mutation has not been detected in the 350 Hungarian mito- the patient’s age when clinical symptoms occur. Early onset of the disease chondrial encephalomyopathy patients from our Biobank so far. Despite the normally accompanies a severe clinical course, in this case HPP is normally variable phenotype, the course of disease and the absence of cardiologic ma- transmitted as an autosomal recessive trait. HPP due to a single mutation nifestations differentiate our case from previous reported ones. Since the in the ALPL gene and inherited as an autosomal dominant trait can cause A13513G mutation is often observed as a de novo change it is important to milder forms without clearly defined symptoms so far. carefully examine multiple tissues from the mother before genetic counse- Results: Here we present clinical data of 9 families and 22 individuals with ling can be given. one mutation in the ALPL gene. Stress fracture and impaired healing of P13.23 fractures are leading symptoms of dominant HPP. The majority of mutation Leigh Syndrome with mild neonatal Complex IV deficiency carriers show signs of odontohypophosphatasia like premature tooth loss, S. Seneca1,2, K. Van Campenhout2, J. Smet3, R. Van Coster3, L. Dom4, U. Ullmann1,5, W. tooth decay and caries. One third of the patients complained about joint Lissens1,2, S. Van Dooren1,2, L. De Meirleir6,2; pain, followed by pain of the muscles. Approximately a quarter of patients 1UZ Brussel, CMG, Brussels, Belgium, 2Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium, reported impaired physical fitness. Only few patients suffered from osteal- 3Ghent University Hospital, Division of Pediatric Neurology and Metabolism, Ghent, Belgium, 4ZNA Koningin Paola Ziekenhuis, Department of Child Neurology, Antwerp, gia. Belgium, 5Institut de Pathologié et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium, 6UZ Brussel, The majority of patients showed decreased activity of the alkaline phospha- Department of Child Neurology, Brussels, Belgium. tase. Eight missense mutations in the ALPL gene and no nonsense mutation were found. Conclusion: The clinical signs of dominant HPP are not well known and de- Isolated complex IV deficiency is a frequent cause of respiratory chain im- spite of decreased activity of the alkaline phosphatase diagnosis of domi- pairment and mitochondrial disease. Onset, nature and severity of the clini- nant HPP is rarely made. Therefore, these patients are often not treated in cal presentation or the genCoOtXy1p5e of these patients are heterogeneous. an appropriate way. Here, we report clinical, biochemical and genetic data of a male inndfant with P13.21 pathogenic mutations in . The patient was born as the 2 child to The inherited metabolic diseases of liver in genetic practice healthy, not related parents and has an healthy brother. He was hypotonic N. Gusina, E. Budzeika, T. Zimovina, T. Dzemidovitch, S. Dubovik, A. Zinovik, S. Miasnikov, and presented with feeding difficulties, failure to thrive, psychomotor re- O. Pechkurova; tardation, lactic acidosis and cardiomyopathy. His MRI was suggestive for National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. Leigh Disease. The cardiomyopathy progressed rapidly and the patient died of heart failure at five months of age. Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) enzyme activities were measured Objectives: To investigate the role of inborn errors of metabolism (IEM) as a using spectrophotometrical analysis. Biochemical analysis of the COX activi- cause of liver disease and their mutation spectrum. ty showed a very mild decrease in fibroblasts and a low normal range value Patients and Methods: A group of 2837 patients with hepatomegalia/he- in muscle tissue. Other respiratory chain activities were normal. Functional patosplenomegalia or jaundice of unknown etiology was investigated. The integrity of the five complexes was evaluated using blue native polyacryl- diagnosis of IMD was based on the results of biochemical investigawtiown. Twh.ee shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 347 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P13.26 GI microbiota and epigenetic markers in metabolic syndrome and amide gel electrophoresis followed by in-gel activity staining in muscle tis- caloric restriction sue, and showed a decreased amount of fully aCsOseXm15bled CI, CII, CIII and CIV, A. G. Haslberger, M. Remely, E. Aumueller, Y. Cen, B. Hippe; and the presence of subassembly products of CV. Univ. of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. Sequencing analysis oCOf tXh1e5 coding exons of the genes revealed that the patient is compound heterozygous p.Ser151X/p.Pro302Leu. Although the number of reported mutant patients is limited to four, the p.Ser151X Microbial diversity, abundance and metabolic activities contribute to a high- mutation was previouslyC OseXe1n5 in two unrelated families with a predominant ly individual GI tract microbiota. The metabolic syndrome is one condition, clinical presentation of cardiomyopathy. This mutation might represent a where host genetic factors, microbiota composition and microbiota-direc- hot spot location in the gene. ted regulation of gene expressions combined contribute to pathogenesis. P13.24 Intestinal symbiosis is maintained via the signaling activities of short chain Recurrent LMNA mutation in patients with familial partial fatty acids (SCFAs), bacterial LPS mediated immune reactions, but also via lipodystrophy Dunnigan-type epigenetic mechanisms, e.g. causing a hyporesponsiveness of toll-like re- D. Mitter1, C. Gläser2, K. Miehle3, J. Porrmann2, F. Stock1, M. Fasshauer3, K. Hoffmann2; ceptors (TLRs) towards the symbiotic and commensal constituents of the 1Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Leipzig, Germany, 2Institut für microbiota. Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum, Halle, Germany, 3Department Innere Medizin, We analyzed changes in microbiota and epigenetic regulation of inflamm- Universitätsklinikum, Leipzig, Germany. atory mediators in type 2 diabetic (n = 25) volunteers under caloric restric- tion in comparison to lean (n = 18) and obese (n = 8) healthy controls. The abundance of bacteria and bacterial subgroups we measured in fecal samp- Familial partial lipodystrophy (FPLD) Dunnigan type is an autosomal domi- les with quantitative PCR (qPCR) of 16S rRNA coding regions. nant disorder with abnormal distribution of adipose tissue. After puberty, Lactobacilli and Clostridium cluster XIVa differed significantly in type 2 dia- patients show excess fat on their face, neck, back, and absence of subcuta- betics compared to lean controls before intervention and after weight loss. neous fat of the extremities, trunk and gluteal region resulting in a muscular Obese individuals had a higher Firmicutse to Bacteroidetes ratio than lean appearance. Metabolic abnormalities include insulin-resistant diabetes mel- controls. In type 2 diabetics with weight loss the ratio of Firmicutes to Bac- litus, abnormal serum lipoproteins, and hypertension. FPLD is a heteroge- teroidetes increased throughout the study period. neous disorder with mutations in LMNA and other genes including PPARG, In addition to changes in the microbiota composition, we also report that AGPAT2, and PLIN1. We compared clinical and molecular findings in 15 pa- epigenetic mechanisms regulate gene promoters with relevance to inflam- tients presenting with FPLD. Sequencing of LMNA identified a heterozygous mation, antioxidation and DNA-repair in type 2 diabetes and that diet and missense mutation in exon 8 (p.R482Q) in 5 female patients from 3 families. caloric restriction have epigenetic regulatory effects. All 5 carriers of p.R482Q show a characteristic muscular habitus with ab- P13.27 normal fat distribution. Of note, 3 of 5 patients complained about muscle High endocannabinoid levels are genetically determined and are pain, which seems to be an additional characteristic feature. 3/5 patients associated with obese phenotype had mild elevated HbA1c (mean 6.2 %). One patient only required insulin A. Prossomariti1, F. Fanelli2, E. Marasco1, C. Fazio1, I. Belluomo2, V. Di Lallo2, M. Mezzullo2, therapy since the age of 47 years. Patients showed dyslipoproteinaemia A. Aquilano1, P. Garagnani3, U. Pagotto2, V. Mantovani1; with hypertriglyceridemia (3/5), elevated cholesterol (4/5), low HDL (3/5), 1Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, and elevated LDL (3/5). Additional features included hypertension (4/5), Italy, 2Unit of Endocrinology, S.Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 3Department of hepatic steatosis (2/5). None of the p.R482Q carriers but 8/10 of the other Experimental Pathology, Bologna University, Bologna, Italy. patients without LMNA mutations had pancreatitis. The overlap of metabo- lic features in FPLD and metabolic syndrome and the overrepresentation of female patients raise the possibility of significant under diagnosis of FPLD The endocannabinoid system (ECS) is involved in energy homeostasis and among patients with the reported metabolic changes. Especially men with a food intake. It was suggested that ECS hyperactivation may contribute to muscular habitus and less prominent metabolic changes may be suspected obesity development, however conflicting data are reported. to have metabolic syndrome instead of FPLD. Aim of this study was to investigate the association of variants in the ECS P13.25 receptor (CNR1) and degrading enzyme (fatty acid amide hydrolase, FAAH) Is histidinemia always a “non-disease”? and why truncating mutations genes with the obese phenotype and the plasma level of ECS mediators. in the HAL gene appear so rare? 736 randomly selected subjects were submitted to SNPs genotyping and A. Piton1, C. Redin1, F. Feillet2, L. Faivre3, M. Alice3, O. Chris4, J. Mandel1; measurement of EC plasma levels. Seven SNPs in CNR1 region (rs12720071, 1IGBMC, Strasbourg, France, 2Centre de Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du rs806368, rs806370, rs1049353, rs806381, rs6454674, rs10485170) and Métabolisme, Service de Médecine Infantile I, CHU Brabois Enfant, Vandoeuvre les the coding variant c.385C>A in FAAH gene (rs324420) were genotyped Nancy, France, 3Centre de Génétique, Centre de Référence Maladies Rares, Dijon, France, by MassARRAY platform. Circulating ECs, AEA, 2-AG, PEA and OEA were 4Unité de Biochimie métabolique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. measured by an LC-MS/MS method validated according to FDA’s guidance. Ge2notypes were compared to EC levels and to body mass index (BMI; kg/ m), waist circumference and waist-to-hip ratio. Histidinemia is an autosomal recessive defect with an incidence of 1/12000- EC circulating levels were significantly higher in overweight and obese 20000, due to a deficient activity of histidine-ammonia-lyase (HAL gene). In- (BMI>25,0) compared to normal weight subjects (AEA, PEA, OEA p=0,00001; itial studies in the 1970s suggested that it might be associated to intellectual 2AG p=0,008). FAAH 385A allele- 1c1arriers showed sign-7ificantly increased EC deficiency, epilepsy, autism or ataxia. Later assessment of cases identified levels, particularly OEA (p=8x10 ) and PEA (p=5x10 ), but they showed no through neonatal screening, who did not suffer from developmental delay significant association to obesity indexes. Coexistence of FAAH-predisposing or ID, led to consider histidinemia as a non-disease. A recent study has sug- genotype and increased EC levels also did not correlate with obesity. None of gested however that it may be a risk factor for autism (Miyachi et al. 2009). CNR1 SNPs showed association with obesity indexes, nor with EC increased Because of this lack of established clinical impact, interest in this trait has levels. In conclusion, our data show that the FAAH 385A allele has a direct subsided and a single mutation study in the HAL gene revealed only 4 diffe- effect on EC elevated plasma levels, and that the detected hyperactivation of rent missense mutations in a minority of tested cases ascertained through ECS may be a novel biomarker of obesity. neonatal screening. Following the identification of histidinemia in a girl with P13.28 developmental delay and ataxia, we initiated a mutation study. Prelimina- Efficiency of metformin treatment for obesity and metabolic ry results on 3 patients with ID revealed 5 different missense mutations, syndrome in children and adolescents depends on TCF7L2 genotype and one splice site mutation. In another case with no reported neurological O. S. Glotov1,2,3, I. A. Makchrova4,3, M. A. Glebova1,2, I. V. Pugacheva1,3, T. E. Ivashchenko1, N. phenotype, another homozygous missense variant was found, not predicted P. Shabalov5, V. S. Baranov1,2; pathogenic by SIFT or Polyphen2. Up to now, truncating mutations appear 1Ott‘s Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology RAMS, Saint-Petersburg, Russian underrepresented (one detected compared to 10 different missenses). The Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, spontaneous histidinemic mouse mutant (with no obvious neurologic phe- 3BioGlot Company Limited, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 4Mechnikov North- notype) is also due to a missense mutation. One may wonder whether phe- Western State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 5S.M. Kirov Military Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. notype in histidinemia depends on the level of residual activity, and whether total loss of function may be lethal or very severe. We are looking for colla- borations to extend this study to other cases with or without neurological involvement. Despite a large body of research, currently there is no common strategy for drug therapy of obesity and metabolic syndrome (MS) in children and ado- lescents. At present, Metformin is the drug of choice for treating children www.eshg.org www.eshwgit.ho MrSg over 8 years old. However, a number of patients remain refractory 348 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 PUS1 Conclusions: to Metformin. We investigated the contribution of TCF7L2 IVS3 C>T poly- homozygous 5-kb deletion on 12q24.33 affecting exon 4 of gene was morphism to response to Metformin in children with MS. 38 of 200 children revealed. Genome-WideS Huupmpoarnte SdN bPy 6r.e0s eAarrrcahy parlolojewcitn PgR dVeOteUcK- with obesity in the age of 10 - 17 enrolled in this study were treated with toifo tnh eo fC dhealrelteiso nUsn ilvaerrgseirt yt hina nP r7a0g0u be-pF iwrsats F sauccucletyss ofuf lMlye udsiceidn et o( pdreotgerrammin Me OgLe-- Metformin. Patients were diagnosed with MS in accordance with guidelines MneEtDic) d aiangdn gorsains ti nIG 3A o NuTt o 1f1 1158 p6a-5ti/e2n0t1s.0 . developed by International Diabetes Federation in 2007.Among 38 of 200 children treated with Metformin, one (2.6%) was diagnosed with MS, and in another 37 abdominal-type obesity with concurrent abnormalities was P13.31 manifested. Abnormalities included impaired glucose tolerance (in 35.1% Molecular modifications and bioenergetics in relation to phenotype of of children), hyperinsulinemia (in 32.4%), atherogenic dyslipidemia (in MILS-NARP syndrome 45.9%), hypertension (in 10.8%). 20 children taking Metformin were geno- D. Lin1, H. L. Liu2, N. C. Chiu1, C. S. Ho1; typed as C/C, 13 as C/T, and 5 as T/T. Postprandial glucose level in children 1Dept. of Pediatric Genetics, Mackay Memorial Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Chemical with C/T and T/T genotypes was higher than in children with C/C geno- engerineering and Biotechnology, National Taipei University of Technology, Taipei, Taiwan. type. During the treatment, the most pronounced improvements were ob- served for children with C/T genotype, namely, reduction in body weight Objectives: (p<0.001), body mass index (p<0.001), waist circumference (p<0.001), fa- Mitochondrial DNA mutations at m.8993T>G of the mtDNA AT- sting plasma (p=0.017) and postprandial (p=0.003) glucose levels, uric acid Pase 6 gene typically cause the Maternal Inherited Leigh Syndrome (MILS) level (p=0.05), atherogenic index (p=0.029). Our data suggest that Metfor- and neurogenic muscle weakness, ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa (NARP). To min treatment efficiently promotes body weight reduction and normalizati- elucidate the molecular-clinical correlations in MILS-NARP syndrome, the on of carbohydrate metabolism in children, suffering from obesity and MS, phenotype, biochemical parameters, mtDNA mutant loads, and bioener- with TCF7L2 C/T genotype. P13.29 gMeentthicosd ws:ere investigated in three generations of a pedigree harboring m.T8993G mutation. New probable pathogenic mutations in 22 tRNA mitochondrial genes Detailed neurological and ophthalmological phenotypes, bioche- in Iranian cytopathy patients A. Arastehkani1,2, F. Keshavarzi3, V. Ghodsinejadkalahroudi1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1,2, O. mical and metabolic status, mutant load, cellular bioenergentic and mole- Aryani2, M. Ashrafi4, M. Houshmand2,5; cRuelsaur lmts:odification were investigated in members of three generations of 1Department of Biology, Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad University, pedigree with MILS-NARP syndrome. Kurdestan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Special Medical Center, Dep. of Medical Genetics, The ATP6 mutation was ubiquitously distributed in various tissues Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology, Sanandaj branch, Islamic of the affected individuals. A remarkable high mutation load was demon- Azad University, Kurdestan, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran University of Medical strated in individuals with MILS and Retinitis Pigmentosa (RP), respectively. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5National Institute of Genetic Engineering & While a mutant load ranging from 5% to 97% was noted in those individuals Biotechnology, Dep. of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. with mild or absent clinical symptoms. Interestingly, the individual affected MTT with MILS showed remarkable elevation in the levels of lactate, pyruvate, and alanine, and deficiency of carnitine, impaired cellular bioenergetics, and Mitochondrial tRNA ( ) gene mutations are an important cause of hu- molecular compensation with glycolysis. While the fibroblasts from RP sho- man morbidity and are associated with a wide range of pathology, from isolated organ-specific diseases such as myopathy, hearing loss, MELAS, wCoendc mluoslieocnular modification through the nuclear respiratory chain complex pathway. MERRF, CPEO, Leigh syndrome through to multisystem disorders with ence- : The correlation between the mutant load in tissues and the phalopathy. The aim of this study was to detect any type of mutations, poly- severity of phenotype in MILS-NARP is very complex, and the genetic back- morphisms and possible pathogenic variations in blood samples of Iranian ground may play an important role in modulating the bioenergetics, bioche- cytopathy patients. We describe the result of extensive sequence analysis mical defects and clinical outcome. Our results emphasizes the complexity for tRNA genes in 18 patients selected according to sTerpveral criteria. The rLyes - of mechanism contributing in the phenotypic expression of the m.8993T>G sult included: repTosrted mutation as T5543C in tRNA , A8344G in tRNA , mutation and the need for caution in predictive counseling in such patients. G12236A in tRNA and Several P13.32 known polymorphism such as A12308G were obsTehrr ved. These findings arCyes A constant and similar assembly defect of mitochondrial respiratory besides to novel transAirtg ions, m.15930G>A in tRNA , m.5790C>A in tRNA chain complex I allows rapid identification of NDUFS4 mutations in and m.10467 in tRNA , in different patients who were negative for reported patients with Leigh syndrome mtDNA mutations. These nucleotide were moderated and they were absent A. Lebre1,2,3, M. Jambou2, M. Rio2, C. Bole-Feysot4, P. De Lonlay1,2,3, C. Barnerias2, I. in 100 control suggesting its pathogenicity . So further investigation inclu- Desguerre1,2, C. Bonnemains5, C. Guillermet6, J. Steffann2, A. Munnich1,2,3, J. Bonnefont1,2,3, des familial study, functional assay and nuclear genes analyses are needed. A. Rötig1,3, Z. Assouline2; P13.30 1Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 2Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris: Large-scale deletions on 22q13.33 and 12q24.33 detected in patients Services de Génétique, de Maladies Métaboliques et de Neurologie pédiatrique, Hôpital with mitochondrial disorders Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 3Inserm U781, Paris, France, 4Fondation Imagine, M. Tesarova1, A. Vondrackova1, K. Vesela1, K. Vinsova1, T. Honzik1, V. Stranecky2, H. Plateforme Génomique, Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France, 5Centre de Hansikova1, J. Zeman1; Référence des Maladies Héréditaires du Métabolisme, INSERM U 954, CHU Brabois 1Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles Enfant, Nancy, France, 6CHU de Besançon, Hôpital Saint-Jacques, Service de Pédiatrie 2, University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Besançon, France. Republic, 2Institute of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague 2, Czech Republic. Isolated complex I deficiency is a frequent cause of respiratory chain defects in childhood. In this study, we report our systematic approach with Blue native PAGE (BN-PAGE) to study mitochondrial respiratory chain assembly Mitochondrial disorders (MD) represent a group of clinically and genetically in skin fibroblasts from patients with Leigh syndrome and CI deficiency. We heterogeneous diseases whose molecular-genetic diagnosis is challenging. describe five new NDUFS4 patients with a similar and constant abnormal The standard diagnostic approach is direct DNA sequencing of candidate BN-PAGE profile and present a meta-analysis of the literature. All NDUFS4 gaeimnes. Nevertheless, this technique does not enable to detect large hetero- mutations that have been tested with BN-PAGE result in a constant and si- zygous deletions. SNP arrays with high marker density may be utilized. The milar abnormal assembly profile with a complete loss of the fully assembled of this study is to analyze large-scale deletions in group of 15 patients complex I usually due to a truncated protein and the loss of its canonical with MD of unknown etiology. Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 array (Affyme- cAMP dependent protein kinase phosphorylation consensus site. We also trix) was used for genotyping of DNA isolated from leucocytes of paStCieOn2ts. In report the association of abnormal brain MRI images with this characteristic 2T0Y%MP of patients, large deletions as a cause of MD were foTuYnMd.P InS C2O o2f them, BN-PAGE profile as the hallmarks of NDUFS4 mutations and the first foun- 175-kb, 87-kb resp. heterozygous deletions on 22q13.33 affecting and der NDUFS4 mutations in the North-African population. genes were deteTctYeMd.P M issense point mutations in , genes P13.33 resp. weSreC Oid2e ntified on the other allele. Patient 1 with MNGIE phenotype Mutations in the GCK gene are the most common cause of MODY- inherited c.261G>T in from father and 175-kb deletion from mother. Diabetes in a cohort of over 600 patients in Germany A novel mutation c.667G>A was found on maternal allele of patient P. J. Laitinen-Forsblom, S. Bingemann, C. Bayerl, D. Strohmayer, C. Nevinny-Stickel- 2 in combination with 87-kb deletion inherited from father. Interestingly, Hinzpeter; 175-kb deletion on 22q13.33 partially overlaps with two described copy- number variations (CNV; variation_5192 and variation_4139). In patient 3, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 349 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 synlab MVZ Humane Genetik München, Munich, Germany. I148T, representing 17.2% from panel 1 mutation. We found the following Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant patients genotypes: 21 pts homozygous for F508del, 10 pts with F508del/ form of diabetes mellitus. The clinical phenotype is mild in comparison to x , 5 pts F508del/G542X , 1 patient F508del/ N1303K . In 3 patients with type 1 Diabetes but diabetic coHmNpFl1icAa tions can occur. In patients with MODY compound genotype non-F508del , the other alella could not be identified, the insulin production or blood glucose level sensing is impaired. According complementary genetic testing done in parents have ruled out the possibi- to the literature, mutations in are the most common causes of MODY. lCitoyn ocfl uhsoimonosz:y gous non-F508del genotype. In 13 patients (32.5%) we could HMeartee rwiael daenscdr imbee tthheo dres:sults of a diagnostic mutation screening in MODY not fully identify the genotype, thus they were further tested with panel 2. genes conducted in the years 2008-2011 in a cohort of over 600 patients. Superposition of kits with identified mutations in CF Romani- 619 probands mostly of Caucasian origin with an patients is low, although kits contain the most frequent mutations used in clinical suspicion of MODY were referred to our laboratory for molecular Europe. Genetic heterogeneity in Romania limits significantly the possibility genetic analysis. The analysis was performed stepwise, beginning with the of detection of both alleles, the diagnosis rate of heterozygote being redu- genes known to be more commonly involved in the pathophysiology of ced. The question of using additional kits or methods like CF gene sequen- MODY. Based on the proband’s clinical picture some clinicians delineated cing raises the issue of a high cost. the diagnostics to specific MODY subtypes. P13.36 The causative genes for MODY subtypes HNF4A, GCK, HNF1A, IPF1 and Niemann-Pick type C disease: mutation analysis and genetic HReNsFu1lBts waenrde ddiirseccutslys isoenq:uenced. MLPA-analysis was performed to detect counselling in Czech and Slovak families large deletions and duplications. L. Dvorakova, H. Vlaskova, M. Hnizdova-Bouckova, H. Treslova, L. Stolnaya, V. Dostalova, H. Jahnova, K. Peskova, M. Elleder, M. Hrebicek; GCK In the 619 patients, altogether 163 mutations Instit. of Inherited Metabolic Disorders, General University Hospital in Prague and First were identified (Table). These data show that in our patient cohort muta- Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Praha 2, Czech Republic. tions in the gene are the most common cause of MODY. These results differ from published data and are likely to be more widely applicable to the German population. Niemann-Pick type C disease (NPC, OMIM #257220, #607625) is a severe HNF4A Patients Mutations % of all mutation- Gene autosomal recessive neuro-visceral disorder characterized by progressive GCK analysed (N) detected (N) positive samples HNF1A 238 10 6% neurological deterioration and hepatosplenomegaly. The most prominent IPF1 494 88 54% biochemical feature is complex lipid storage of free cholesterol and glycoli- HNF1B 489 52 31% pids. Molecular defects in two late endosomal/lysosomal proteins (NPC1 or 76 1 0,5% NPC2) cause symptoms of NPC. 208 12 7% Fifty four Czech and Slovak NPC patiens were diagnosed by histochemical P13.34 and biochemical methods. Prevalence based on these data is 1:109,000, Clinical features in 17 patients with Mucopolysaccharidosis significantly higher than the reported pan-ethnic prevalence of 1:150,000. B. G. Nur1, A. Toylu2, O. A. Clark2, E. Mihci1,2; Probands from 37 families were available for molecular genetic analysis. 1Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Antalya, Turkey, 2Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, Mutations in NPC2 gene were proved only in one family. Thirty nine pati- Antalya, Turkey. ents from 36 families belonging to NPC1 complementation group had highly variable clinical manifestations - from infantile neurological form to adult solely visceral form. By Sanger sequencing we have identified 32 different The mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) are a large group of inherited lysosomal mutations on 69 NPC1 alleles, 14 of them being novel. MLPA method did storage disorders. Each mucopolysaccharidosis subtype is caused by a defi- not reveal any deletion in NPC1 gene of three patients, in which only one ciency in the activity of a single specific lysosomal enzyme which required mutation was identified by sequencing. The most common mutations were for glycosaminoglycan degradation. The deficiency of these enzyme results p.R1186H, p.S954L and p.P1007A (16, 10 and 7 alleles, respectively). in the storage of the glycosaminoglycans in several tissues. In one family an unrelated partner of a carrier was tested during the pre- The clinical presentation and the natural course of the patients with MPS conception genetic counselling for mutations in four exons (18, 19, 20, 23) may be different among subtypes which are influenced by the presence of which encompassed 60% of all identified mutations. Unexpectedly, recur- the genetic background including functional polymorphisms and environ- rent mutation p. P1007A (exon 20) was identified. This case shows that mental problems. The general features are course facies, corneal clouding, molecular genetic analysis of unrelated partners may be important also in developmental delay, mental retardation, skeletal and joint abnormalities, very rare disorders. and cardiac abnormalities. Support: IGA MZ CR NT12239-5/2011, RVO-VFN64165/2012, VZ MSM CR We report frequency of the clinical symptoms of the MPS patients of our pe- 0021620806 diatric genetic clinic. Between January 1995 and December 2011, aged 2-18 P13.37 years, seventeen children (11 boys, 6 girls) were examined. The MPS III, MPS Clinical, Biochemical and Molecular Diagnosis of Niemann-Pick IV, and MPS I were the most frequent subtypes amongst the MPS patients, Disease type C, in three Iranian Patients, and two Novel Mutation in respectively. The patients were most frequently representing coarse facies, the NPC1 gene skeletal abnormalities, mental retardation and hepatomegaly. Y. Shafeghati1,2, A. Hamidieh3, F. Hadipour2; 1Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, Although MPS is a rare disorder, it is important to consider the MPS in the Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Department, Sarem Women Hospital, differential diagnosis of patients presenting coarse facies, skeletal abnor- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3BMT and SCT Unit, Pediatric Hematology and malities, neurodevelopmental disabilities and hepatomegaly. We could not Oncology Department, TMSU,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. forget the importance of the screening for oligosaccharides in children with neurodevelopmental delay with mild phenotypic symptoms. Early diagno- sis and effective medical management in some types can improve patient Niemann-Pick type C is a rare autosomal recessive neurometabolic disorder, outcomes and may reduce the disease burden on patients and caregivers. characterized by progressive neurodegeneration. It is a pan-ethnic disease Furthermore, it allows genetic counseling. with esNtiPmCa1t eodr NprPeCv2a,l ence of aro und 1 in 120 000 to 150 000 worldwide. P13.35 Age NoPf oCn1s et may vary from the perinatal period to adulthood. Two different Cystic fibrosis mutation detection- difficulties and traps genes, have beenidentified to cause disease, 95%N PisC 2d ugee ntoe L. Pop1, I. Ciuca1, Z. Popa1, L. Tamas2, I. Popa1, A. Anghel2; t(h1e4 q24.3) gene (18q11), its product is a large membrane glycoprotein that 1Pediatric II Department, Timisoara, Romania, 2Biochemistry Department, Timisoara, consists of 1278-amino-acids, and 5% have mutations in the Romania. which encodes a small protein that consists of 132-amino-acid a Background binds to cholesterol with high affinity. Clinical characteristic is hily variable. In the classic form, patients appear to be normal in the first 1 to 2 years, they Objective: : A characteristic aspect for Romania is the CF mutations hete- gradually develop neurologic abnormalities (ataxia, grand mal seizures, and rogeneity which leads Mtoe at hroeddusced percentage of genotype identification. myoclonic jerks), dystonia, vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, dementia, and Assessment of a mixed panel efficacy for CF mutation detection psychiatric manifestations, hepatosplenomegaly is less striking than NP- in Romanian patients. : We evaluated retrospectively 40 patients A/B. (pts) with typical CF, registered in the National CF Center Timisoara. The Diagnosis based on clinical suspicions and foamy histiocytes in BM aspira- genetic tests were performed using a mixed panel - (29 mReustautlitosn: s) - ARM tes, white matter involvement on MRI scanning, formal esterification stu- and another kit for 38 mutations-PCR. 18 mutations were common to the dies. Diagnosis would be confirmed by performing filipin staining on skin two kits; the total number of identifiable alleles was 49. The first fibroblast cell cultures and mutation analysis in NPC1 and NPC2 genes. www.eshg.org panel identified in order of frequency: ΔF508, G542X, N1303K, 621w + 1w Gw>T.,e shg.org350 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Here we report 3 Iranian affected cases that were confirmed by filipin stai- wide association study (GWAS) of cardiovascular patients, we found MEP1A ning and mutation analysis. We detected mutations in NPC1 gene in all of as a potential candidate gene in PCOS.MEP1A variants were replicated in them, in two patients the mutations were novel and have not been repor- 586 PCOS women and 105 controls. Metabolic, hormonal, functional and ted before. Two of the patients are under treatment with Miglustat and now anthropometric parameters were determined. In cell culture experiments, their general conditions are stable especially with amelioration of viscero- human hepatocellular carcinoma (HepG2) cells were treated with insulin, megaly. vitamin D and parathyroid hormone (PTH) for the expression of MEP1A. In P13.38 the replication cohort, MEP1A variants were not associated with the inci- Evaluation of the innate immunity in mucopolysaccharidosis: analysis dence of PCOS per se. However, the SNPs showed a significant association of the functional activity of phagocytes with insulin metabolism in overweight/obese PCOS. MEP1A GG-carriers L. C. Torres1,2, C. R. D. C. Quaio3, J. F. S. Franco3, I. Gomy3, D. R. Bertola3, L. D. Kulikowski3,4, showed a significantly increased HOMA index (p = 0.005), elevated fasting M. Carneiro-Sampaio5, C. A. Kim3; insulin (p = 0.006), and stimulated insulin after 30min (p = 0.003), 1h (p 1Translational Research Laboratory Prof. C. A. Hart, Instituto de Medicina Integral Prof. = 0.003) and 2h (p = 0.009). HepG2 cell experiments showed a relation of Fernando Figueira (IMIP), Recife, Brazil, 2LIM36 - Instituto da Criança da FMUSP, São MEP1A to the expression of bone genes and vitamin D. MEP1A is a possible Paulo, Brazil, 3Genetics Unit, Instituto da Criança da FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 4LIM3 - target for disease modifying in PCOS and potential new therapeutic options. Hospital das Clínicas da FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 5Instituto da Criança da FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil. It might contribute to the involvement of vitamin D deficiency in abnorma- lities of glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Whether MEP1A is a po- tential risk factor for PCOS and how it is associated with gene function will be further investigated. Mucopolysaccharidoses (MPS) are a group of inherited metabolic disorders characterized by the deficient activity of catabolic enzymes in the lysosomes P13.42 and its consequent abnormal accumulation of deposits of glycosaminogly- Homozygous 669-698del in exon 12 of HMBS gene in a Spanish cans (GAGs). The lysosomal dysfuction caused by this irregular storage is patient with acute intermittent porphyria responsible for the clinical manifestations seen in MPS. A. Zuñiga, C. Merino, L. Pedrola, Y. Bello; Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. Once the lysosome is also important for normal functioning of the immune system, playing a key role in the expression of cellular membrane receptors, the presentation of antigens, the secretion of cytokines and phagocytosis, Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP, MIM # 176000) is an autosomal domi- we presume that these processes may be impaired in patients with MPS. nant disease caused by a partial deficiency of hydroxymethylbilane synthase The presence of recurrent respiratory infections in these individuals may be (HMBS; EC 4.3.1.8). It is characterized by acute attacks of neurovisceral dys- a clinical clue of the immune dysregulation in MPS. function, often precipitated by several factors. Early detection of AIP carriers We studied the leukocyte oxidative burst activity and chemotactic function is very important for the prevention of acute attacks. The diagnosis of AIP of neutrophilic granulocytes and phagocytic activity and expression of miel- is based on clinical symptoms and increased urinary porphyrin precursors, operoxidase in phagocytes by flow cytometric immunoassay of 15 patients δ-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) and porphobilinogen (PBG), in combination with MPS types I, II, IV and VI. with the HMBS activity assay. All patients demonstrated normal phagocytic activity and n Eosrcmhearl icchhieam cootl-i We report a case of a female patient of 35 years old who came from a sou- actic function of neutrophilic granulocytes. Normal levels of reactive oxygen theastern region of Spain, with abdominal pain, neurospsyquiatric sym- metaboinli vteitsr oafter the stimulation with PMA and opsonized ptoms, hyponatraemia and tachycardia. Neurological checkup showed and normal expression of myeloperoxidase by granulocyte and monocytes. axonal polyneuropathy with proximal afectation in all the four limbs. In In our tests using widely available commercial kits, we were not able the past, she had two episodes of muscular weakness of limbs. Abdominal to find either quantitative deficiency or functional defects of granulocytes examination did not reveal any abnormality. There was no sensory impair- and monocytes. This is the first study in the literature of evaluation of the ment. Laboratory investigations showed the TLC of 6,300/cmm with a DLC innate immunity in patients with MPS. of P-52%, L-33%, M-13% and E-2%; hemoglobin was 7,9 g/dL. Urine was P13.39 strongly positive for ALA (172 mg/24h) and PBG (3,3 mg/24h). The mutant phenylalaninhydroxylase gene is more often found out in Genomic DNA was isolated from PBL, and all 15 exons and flanking regions alcoholics of the HMBS gene were amplified by PCR and sequenced in an ABIPRISM S. Khalchitsky1, A. Shaposhnikov1, I. Nikiforova1, I. Bulycheva2; 1Laboratory of Medical Genetics CPHS LD, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 3100 Genetic Analyzer. Patient was carrier of a homozygous 30 pb deletion 2Interdistrict narcological clinic, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. in exon 12 of HMBS gene. This mutation, 669-668del, causes a mutant pro- tein that lacks of 10 amino acids (p.Glu223-Leu232) and has been described previously in Spanish AIP of southern ancestral origin with a possible foun- It has been investigated 156 patients with alcoholism of both sexes at the der effect. age of 25-60 years on presence of mutation in the PAH gene. By PCR me- P13.43 thod the R408W mutation is established in 11 out of 156 alcoholic patients Novel variants in the CYP51 gene found in Caucasian mothers and (7,05%) and 10 out of 417 volunteers of the same age (2,39%). Metabolism neonates with potential to contribute to spontaneous preterm birth of Phe appeared to be impaired in chronic alcoholism as shown by an increa- M. Lewinska1, D. Rozman1, J. C. Murray2; se in concentration of Phe in blood serum as well as by elevation urinary 1Center for Functional Genomics and Bio-Chips, Institute of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Univer, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, excretion of Phe and phenylpyruvic acid. The most distinct impairment in Iowa City, Iowa, United States of America, Iowa City, IA, United States. Phe metabolism was observed in alcohol withdrawal syndrome (delirium tremens). This study aimed to investigate whether the mayor (about 60%) R408W mutation in phenylalaninehydroxylase (PAH) gene influences chro- Cholesterol is an essential component of cellular membranes, a precursor of nic alcoholism and delirium tremens cases. The data obtained indicate that steroid hormones, oxysterols, and bile acids. It is involved in many signaling decreased by R408W mutation activity of PAH and development of alcoho- pathways including the sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway. Sterols play crucial lism and especially delirium tremens are impaired. So, genetic rearrange- role in maintaining pregnancy, and a large amount of cholesterol is required ments in PAH are the contributing factor to development of alcoholism. during ontogenesis and embryogenesis. Defects in cholesterol synthesis P13.41 or intracellular transport result in serious malformations and mutations Genome-wide association study identified MEP1A in relation to in some cholesterol synthesis genes are associated with preterm delivery insulin metabolism in Polycystic Ovary Syndrome U. Lam1, E. Lerchbaum1, N. Schweighofer1, O. Trummer1, B. Genser2, E. Katharina3, A. (PTD). CYP51A1) Here we investigated for the first time variants in fetal and maternal lano- Groselj-Strele3, T. Pieber1, B. Obermayer-Pietsch1; 1Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, Medical sterol 14α-demethylase ( , a key gene of post-squalene choleste- University of Graz, Graz, Austria, 2BG Statistical Consulting, Graz, Austria, 3Center for rol synthesis, and we examined their contribution to PTD. Ten amplicons Medical Research, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria. covering exons, untranslated regions (UTR) and intron-exon borders have been investigated in 188 Caucasian women who had a spontaneous preterm delivery and 188 unrelated preterm infants born at a gestational age <37 There is a clear association between polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) and weeks. The study included neonates from singleton pregnancies, 94 of each cardiovascular events, which might be based on disorders of glucose meta- gender. bolism. Accumulating evidence suggests that insulin resistance and hyper- We identified 22 polymorphisms, where 11 represent rare, novel variants. insulinemia affect 65-70% of PCOS patients. Vitamin D has been shown to Three novel variants are heterozygous missense mutations in exons 1, 3 and influence both insulin resistance and other symptoms of PCOS. In a genome- 4. According to PolyPhen2 the mutation in exon 3 causes a probably dama- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 351 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P13.46 MECP2-related disorders and molecular investigation: Iranian aspect ging amino acid substitution in the substrate recognition site, resultCinYgP 5in1 J. Dadgar1, A. Arastehkani1, S. Dadgar1, O. Aryani1, M. Houshmand1,2; a T/G change causing a Y145D transversion. This amplicon was sequenced 1Genetic Department of Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, further in 1000 premature infants. The low frequency of the novel 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Pazhohesh Blv. 17th Km polymorphism suggests that this polymorphism has little contribution to Tehran-Karaj Highway, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. PTD. TaqMan genotyping of common variants in larger population is in pro- gress, together with further sequencing of the 5’ and 3’-UTRs. P13.44 MECP2-related disorders include classic Rett syndrome, variant or atypical Yeast, a simple and effective tool to study COQ gene mutations causing Rett syndrome, and mild learning disabilities in females and neonatal ence- primary CoQ10 deficiency phalopathy and mental retardation syndromes in males. Classic Rett syn- M. Doimo1, C. Santos-Ocaña2, P. Navas3, F. Hildebrandt4, L. Salviati1, E. Trevisson1; drome is a progressive neurologic disorder in girls characterized by normal 1Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Univeristy of Padova, Padova, Italy, 2Centro birth and apparently normal psychomotor development during the first six Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad Pablo de Olavide-CSIC and CIBERER, to 18 months of life. The girls then enter a short period of developmental ISCIII, Seville, Seville, Spain, 3Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, Universidad stagnation followed by rapid regression in language and motor skills. Fema- Pablo de Olavide-CSIC and CIBERER, ISCIII, Seville, Sevilla, Spain, 4Department of les with classic Rett syndrome typically survive into adulthood, but the inci- Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor, MI, United States. dence of sudden, unexplained death is significantly higher than in controls of similar age. Atypical Rett syndrome is increasingly observed as MECP2 mutations have been identified in individuals previously diagnosed with au- Primary coenzyme Q10 (CoQ) deficiency is associated to different pheno- tism, mild learning disability, clinically suspected but molecularly unconfir- types mainly affecting SNC, skeletal muscle or kidney and it is caused by mu- med Angelman syndrome, or mental retardation with spasticity or tremor. tations in genes involved in CoQ biosynthesis. Mutations in COQ6, encoding In this study PCR and whole MECP2 gene sequencing was performed in 57 a monooxygenase required for CoQ biosynthesis, have been reported in pa- cases clinically suspected to RETT syndrom. The result showed five repor- tients affected by early-onset steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome (SRSN) ted mutations in 7 patients. Two of them had C>T (Arg 168 Term), the other with sensorineural deafness. two patients showed C>T (Gln 406 Term) and each of these alterations C>T We employed a yeast model to evaluate the role of different isoforms of (Arg 106 Trp), C>T (Arg 270 Term), G>A (Val 288 Met) were found in 1 pati- COQ6 and to study the functional consequences of the mutated alleles on ents, respectively. Investigation about the new alterations which have been protein function. Human COQ6 encodes for at least two isoforms. In yeast seen in 12 patients without any reported mutations was under reviewed. there is only one COQ6 isoform and its deletion causes the loss of the ability The rest of our cases showed no alteration related to disease. to grow in non-fermentative carbon source (glycerol). P13.47 We proved that human isoform a but not isoform b can complement the de- High frequency of common mutation g.1541G>A in SCO2 gene leted yeast. We then modeled the “human” mutations on the corresponding responsible for cytochrome c oxidase deficiency in Polish population. residues of the yeast gene that are conserved throughout evolution. S. Łuczak, D. Piekutowska-Abramczuk, J. Trubicka, P. Kowalski, E. Ciara, M. Borucka- The yeast model proves to be simple and effective to validate COQ6 mutati- Mankiewicz, D. Jurkiewicz, A. Tańska, M. Pelc, M. Krajewska-Walasek, E. Pronicka; ons. All alleles, except for a nonsense mutation, show some residual activity The Children‘s Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, Poland. (as shown both by growth and CoQ6 content analysis); analysis of the CoQ/ SCO2 DemetoxyCoQ ratio in the mutants did not detect an altered ratio (as in the case of COQ2 mutations) suggesting that the mutations affect only COQ6 ca- Mutations in the gene (22q13) lead to severe COX deficiency obser- talytic activity but not the structure of the entire CoQ biosynthetic complex. ved mainly in muscles, heart and brain. SCO2 is one of the ancillary proteins Together these data show that all patients thus far identified still retain necessary for correct assembling and functioning of cytochrome c oxidase some residual endogenous CoQ biosynthesis, supporting the notion that (COX). It is involved in the transport and incorporation of the copper ions to complete lack of CoQ biosynthesis is embryonically lethal. the CuA enzymatic site on COXII subunit. A common substitution, g.1541G>A P13.45 (p.E140K), is identified at least on one allele in all reported patients. Characterisation of a novel metabolic defect in prolin synthesis and The aim of this study was to ascertain the frequency of g.1541G>A mutation pathomechanism in autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndrome type 2B in Polish population. T. Gardeitchik1, B. Fischer2, D. Kouwenberg1, M. Mohamed1, U. Kornak2, L. Nijtmans1, E. We examined 3080 anonymous newborn’s samples (dry blood spots - Gu- Morava1; thrie cards). Genotyping with Taqman’s probe (based on Real Time equip- 1UMC Nijmegen, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute, Berlin, Germany. ment) was used to identify of the specific mutation. Presence of the muta- tion in selected samples were confirmed by direct sequencing. The study revealed the presence of the common mutation in 21 carriers coming from Mutations in the Pyrroline-5-carboxylate reductase 1 (PYCR1; EC 1.5.1.2) 13 provinces (out of 16). The mean frequency was determined as 1:147 life gene have been recently discovered as the underlying etiology of patients birth with the highest result in lodzkie voivodeship. diagnosed with autosomal recessive cutis laxa syndrome (ARCL-2B). Intri- The obtained data enabled us to establish the high frequency of the common guingly this unique metabolic defect in proline synthesis, leading to a reco- mutation (g.1541G>A) in Poland and assess its regional variety. We hope gnizable dysmorphology syndrome, appears to be a mitochondrial disorder for that our study increase awareness of the severe clinical consequences of as well, based on careful evaluation of the phenotype. cytochrome c oxidase deficiency. PYCR1 is a mitochondrial enzyme, catalyzing AthLeD NHA1D8-(AP1)H-dependent con- The study was supported by the National Science Centre project no. 1154/B/ version of pyrroline-5-carboxylate to proline. This disease is closely linked P01/2011/40. with P5CS deficiency, caused by mutations in , a gene coding for P13.48 an enzyme catalyzing an earlier step in de novo proline synthesis. Both dis- Frequency distribution of NQO1*2 and SULT1A1*2 alleles in Polish orders are associated with progeroid features, lax joints, dysmorphic fea- population tures, microcephaly, intrauterine growth retardation and developmental O. Zakerska1,2, E. Ciemniejewska2, M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska3, A. Mikstacki4, B. Tamowicz4, delay. R. Slomski2,3; While patients diagnosed witPhY PC5RC1S deficiency have variable hyperammo- 1The NanoBioMedical Centre, Poznan, Poland, 2Department of Biochemistry and nemia and abnormal amino acid levels no obvious metabolic abnormalities Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3Institute of Human Genetics, have been described so far in PYC pRa1tients. Here we report on the pheno- Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Anaesthesiology and typic and metabolic characteristics of 5 novel patients with cutis laxa syn- Intensive Care Medicine, Poznan, Poland. drome diagnosed with recessive mutations. MitoPchYCoRnd1rial function, SULT1A1 respiratory complex activity and oxygen consumption have been evaluated in patient cell lines and in HeLa cells after knockdown of . Proline syn- The gene encodes a phenol sulfotransfNerQaOse1, which belongs to the thesis and itsP mYCeRta1bolic consequences were studied in different body fluids enzyme superfamily involved in the sulfonation of xenobiotics, hormones of patients by NMR analysis and in fibroblast cell culture media. Our results and drugs. Quinone oxidoreductase encoded by gene is a detoxificati- suggest that mutations lead to a metabolic defect altering the intra- on enzyme that catalyses the reduction of a wide range of substrates. Both cellular endogenous proline buffer, changing the balance in NAD(H) concen- enzymes participate in the biotransformation pathSwULaTy1 oAf1 populaNrQ aOn1aesthe- tration and mitochondrial membrane gradient, leading to early apoptosis. tic drug - propofol, catalyzing the secondary step of its metabolism. Changes in this metabolism step, related to variations in and genes may lead to adverse effects after propofol use. Large interindividual varia- bility in these enzymes activity has been shown and several polymorphisms in genes coding these enzymes have been described. Most of this variability www.eshg.org www.eshg.org352 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 NQO1 SULT1A1 is related to the polymorphism P187S in gene and R213H amino acid Results: 29 naïve (14 male/15 female; median age [range] 38.7yrs [12-74]) substitution in SUL Tg1eAn1e*, 2whNicQhO a1r*e2 responsible for decreased enzyme and 62 switch patients (33 male/29 female; 47.0yrs [5-84]) were assessed. activity. The aim of our study was to determine the frequency distribution Baseline median years since FD diagnosis were numerically lower in naïve of these two alleles , SinU LPTo1liAs1h* p2atients under propofol (1.1 [0.1-27.4]) versus switch patients (7.1 [0.9-49.3]), suggesting lower aNnQaOe1s*th2esia. We analyzed 232 alleles using pyrosequencing as a rapid ge- naïve patient disease burden. notyping method. The frequency of the allele was 19,3% and 12-month change from baseline was 14,2%. Disturbed enzyme activity in biotransformation pa- Mean (95%CI) thway may lead to increased risk of propofol toxicity. The current analysis is Naïve Switch an important initial step in bringing these polymorphisms into an optimal eGFR, mL/min/1.73m2 -1.3 (-10.2, 7.6) -3.2 (-6.6, 0.2)** planning of anaesthesia based on the modified pharmacodynamic response LVMI, g/m2.7 2.2 (-1.2, 5.6) 0.0 (-4.7, 4.7) of propofol. Plasma Gb3, nmol/mL -6.7 (-9.1, -4.3)** -2.6 (-3.6, -1.6)** P13.49 Creatinine-normalized urine Gb3, nmol/mg -2.1 (-4.2, 0.0)* -0.9 (-1.6, ATP7B expression measurement improves detection rate of newly -0.1)** diagnosed patients with Wilson Disease Plasma lyso-Gb3, nM -37.8 (-58.1, -17.4)** -3.0 (-7.3, 1.2) A. Stalke1,2, E. Pfister2, V. Wittig1, T. Krech3, M. Bredt3, B. Schlegelberger1, U. Baumann2, N. *p<0.05, **p<0.01 von Neuhoff1; 28 (96.6%) naïve and 56 (90.3%) switch patients experienced ≥1 treatment- 1Hannover Medical School, Institute of Cell and Molecular Pathology, Hannover, emergent adverse events (AEs; mostly mild/moderate; possibly/probably Germany, 2Hannover Medical School, Paediatric Gastroenterology and Hepatology, drug-related: 12 [41.4%] naïve, 26 [41.9%] switch). 7 (24.1%) naïve and 19 Hannover, Germany, 3Hannover Medical School, Institute of Pathology, Hannover, (30.6%) switch patients had serious AEs (1 possibly drug-related: transient Germany. ischemic attack). 2 naïve patients discontinued agalα (possibly/probably Background: drug-related); 1 switch patient died (not drug-related). Conclusion: After 12-months agalα, no statistically significant change in Wilson Disease (WD) is an autosomal recessiAvTe Pd7iBsorder LVMI (naïve/ switch) or eGFR (naïve) occurred. Switch patients showed leading to toxic accumulation of copper mainly in liver tissue. Currently, an eGFR drop of -3.2 mL/min/1.73m2. Plasma and creatinine-normalized more than 370 mutations are kAnToPw7nB in the disease-related gene urine Gb3 (naïve/switch) and lyso-Gb3 (naïve) dropped significantly. Agalα (OMIM#606882). However, standard investigations to diagnose WD occa- was generally well tolerated. sionally fail, e.g. disease-causing -mutationAsT sPo7mBetimes remain unde- P14.04 tected by direct sequencing. Generating a Mouse Model for Familial Dysautonomia Disease WMee tthhoedresf:o re aimed to evaluate quantification of mRNA as a new tool R. Bochner, Y. Ziv, R. Ashery-Padan, G. Ast; to improve WD diagnostics. Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Total RNA was extracted from snap-frozen and from FFPE liver Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel. tissue. After cDNA synthesis, real-time PCR was performed using HybPro- bes and TATA Box-binAdTinPg7 Bprotein (TBP) as reference gene. Expression de- termination was done by calibrator-normalized relative quantification with Familial Dysautonomia (FD) is an autosomal recessive congenital neuropa- efficiency correction. -expression of 12 snap-frozen liver specimens thy that ocIKcuBrKsA aPlmost exclusively in the Ashkenazi Jewish population . ITKhBe- from WD-patients was compared to that of 22 patients wAitThP h7eBpatocellular mKAaPjor mutation leading to FD is a T to C mutation at position 6 of intron carcinoma (HCC), 9 patients with biliary atresia, 8 clinically healthy donors 20 of the gene; this mutation causes aberrant splicing of the and 12 patients with other liver diseases. Furthermore, -expression gene prIoKdBuKcAt Pin a tissue-specific manner and reduces production of the iRne FsFuPltEs :l ivAeTrP t7isBsue from 8 WD-patients was compared to that of 4 hepatitis IKAP protein in the nervous system. The aim of this study was to establish a B and 5 biliary atresia patients. IhKuBmKaAnPiz ed knock-in mouse model that exhibits some of the charac- mRNA expression in snap-frozen liver tissue from WD- teristics of the human FD disease such as alternative splicing of exon 20 of patients was significantly lower (median 1.7) than in the control groups gene. We established two homozygous lhoxuPmlaoxnPized mice strains car- (median: HCC 5.3; biliary atresia 4.9; healthy 7.4; other 6.5). Comparable rying human exon20 and its two flanking introFDns:/ oFDne possIeKsBsKesA Pthe FD mu- rCeosnucltlsu swioerne: found in FFPE tissue (median: WD 1.08; hAeTpPat7iBti s B 3.50; bili- tation and the other one lacks it. The IKBKAP mouse demonstrates ary atresia 2.65). ATP7B a unique tissue-specific alternative splicing pattern of tNheeo mycin gene. Our findings suggest that quantification of mRNA provi- We also generated two oltoxhPeNero humanized knock-in mice strains similar to de a novel tool for the diagnosis of WD in patients where no mutation the strain described aboFDve exc/+ept that they contain a cassette in is found. Prospective studies in larger patient cohorts are necessary to vali- intron 20. The IKBKAP mice wIKeBreK AsuPp plemented with phosphati- date our results for clinical practice. dylserine (PS), a food supplement that was previously showInK BinA oKuPr lab to P14. Therapy for genetic disorders increase mRNA and protein levels of loxPNeo in cell lines generated from FD patients. We demonstrated thloxaPt PlSoxF PDt reatm/+ent increased mRNA levels in various tissues of the IFKDBK/AFDP mice. P14.03 Here we show that the IKBAKP IKBKAmPice have great potential for use as Effect and tolerability of agalsidase alfa in patients with Fabry disease a model to evaluate the effects of PS and other potential therapeutic agents who were treatment-naïve or formerly treated with agalsidase beta on the mRNA and protein levels of . Hence, this mouse model provi- O. Goker-Alpan1, K. Nedd2, S. Shankar1, H. Lien3, B. Barshop4, E. Boyd5, M. Holida6, R. des a medical breakthrough in the research of FD for preliminary evaluation Hillman7, J. Ibrahim8, R. Mardach9, N. Weinreb10, B. Reever11, R. Forte12, A. Desai13, A. of drugs that may improve the clinical status of FD patients. Wijatyk14, P. Chang14, R. Martin14; P14.05 1Lysosomal Disorders Research & Treatment Unit, Springfield, VA, United States, Polymorphism in gene encoding drugs and xenobiotic metabolizing 2Infusion Associates, Grand Rapids, MI, United States, 3Emory U, Atlanta, GA, United enzyme CYP2D6 as a risk factor for drug response in colchicine States, 4AKDHC, Tucson, AZ, United States, 5Fullerton Genetics Center, Asheville, NC, United States, 6U Iowa Health Care, Iowa City, IA, United States, 7U Missouri, Columbia, unresponsive FMF patients MO, United States, 8St Joseph’s Children’s Hospital, Paterson, NJ, United States, S. Atik1, F. Ozen2, S. Gur3, A. Uludag1, C. Silan4, F. Silan1, O. Ozdemir1; 9Kaiser Permanente, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 10University Research Foundation 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart for Lysosomal Storage Disorders, Coral Springs, FL, United States, 11Central Coast University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Nephrology, Salinas, CA, United States, 12North Shore University Hospital, Manhasset, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of NY, United States, 13Stuart Oncology Associates, Stuart, FL, United States, 14Shire HGT, Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 4Department of Lexington, MA, United States. Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey. Background: Agalsidase alfa (agalα) effect and tolerability were assessed in Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is a recessively inherited autoinflamm- patients with Fabry disease (FD; treatment-naïve or previously agalsidase atory disorder characterized by recurrent attacks of fever and serositis. beta-treated [switch]). Methods: An ongoing, multicenter, open-label, treatment protocol (HGT- Although colchicine is the standCaYrPd2 Dth6erapy for preventing attacks and REP-059) evaluated estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), left ven- suppressing inflammation, 5%-10% of compliant patieCnYtsP 2aDre6 colchicine- resistant. We report the effect of in FMF with colchicine unrespon- tricular mass index (LVMI), biomarkers (globotriaosylceramide [Gb3]; glo- siveness. The genetic polymorphism results in different xenobiotic botriaosylsphingosine [lyso-Gb3]), and tolerability after 1-year intravenous metabolisms phenotypes namely extensive metabolizers (EM), intermediate agalα (0.2mg/kg every other week). www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 353 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P14.08 MEFV A phase II randomized placebo-controlled double-blind pilot clinical metaCbYoPl2izDe6rs (IM), and poor metabolizers (PM). Total genomic DNA samples trial to test the safety and effectiveness of Ascorbic acid and Alpha- from 60 FMF patients of colchicine unresponsiveness were used for tocopherol on behavioral and learning problems in the Fragile X and genes profile analyses. Target genes were genotyped by multi- syndrome pCYlePx2 PDC6R based reverse hybridization stripAssay method. 12 (20 %) pati- I. Fernandez Carvajal1, L. Perez Costillas2, C. Quintero3, R. Calvo Medina4, R. Heredia ents were poor metaboliser, 48 (80 %) were intermCYePd2iaDt6e metaboliser for Farfan5, L. Sanchez Salido5, E. Lima Cabello5, Y. de Diego Otero5; gene. Every one patient of five was poor metaboliser and was also 1IBGM-Universidad de Valladolid-CSIC. Unidad de Genética de Genética Molecular de colchicine unresponsive. Our results indicate that polymorphisms la Enfermedad, Valladolid, Spain, 2Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Salud Mental. Hospital Carlos Haya, Málaga, Spain, 3Laboratorio de investigación. Fundación IMABIS. Hospital were associated with colchicine resistance in nonresponder FMF patients Carlos Haya, Málaga, Spain, 4Unidad de Gestión Clínica de Pediatría. Hospital Carlos during the common therapy protocol. Haya, Málaga, Spain, 5Laboratorio de investigación. Fundación IMABIS. Hospital Carlos P14.06 Haya, Valladolid, Spain. The Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor Theory in Fragile X Syndrome: Introduction and Objectives: testing the safety and efficacy of AFQ056/Mavoglurant in adults and adolescents T. Jaecklin1, A. Angelov2, B. Koumaras2, C. Collober1, J. Lee2, F. N. Hossain2, J. Lustig1, S. Fragile X Syndrome (FXS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting intel- Satija3, M. Brinkman4, G. Apostol1, A. Graf1, F. von Raison1; ligence and behaviour.The treatments available today are unable to norma- 1Neuroscience Development, Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland, 2Neuroscience lize these symptoms. We demonstrated that an excess of oxidative stress is Development, Novartis Pharmaceutical Corporation, East Hanover, NJ, United States, 3Neuroscience Development, Novartis Healthcare Pvt. Ltd., Hyderabad, India, present in FXS-mouse brain and a treatment with antioxidants could reverse 4Neuroscience Clinical Research, Novartis Pharma GmbH, Nuremberg, Germany. hallmarks of the FXS-mouse phenotype. We propose a combination of ascor- bMica taecriida la anndd a Mlphetah-toodcso:pherol to improve learning abilities in young male patients. Fragile X syndrome is the most common cause of inherited mental retar- dation and is FasMsRoc1i ated with behavioral problems including hyperactivity, Phase II randomized placebo-controlled double-blind pilot clinical trial to attention deFfiMciRt d1,i sorder and autism. It is caused by the expansion of a CGG treat 30 selected FX male patients(15 treated patients and 15 in placebo) in repeat in the gene, leading to hypermethylation and transcriptional two groups: A:6 to 12 and B:13 to 18 year olds. Mean age (SD) 11.67 (4.20) silencing of and absent or reduced levels of the translational repres- [treated subgroup: 12.13 (3.44); placebo subgroup: 11.71 (4.86)]. sor FMR1 protein (FMRP). The metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) A questionnaire to evaluate clinical data and neuropsychological tests was theory hypothesizes that without FMRP, uncontrolled protein synthesis oc- performed at the beginning of the trial (T0) and at 12 weeks of placebo ver- curs in response to activation of synaptic mGluRs and may lead to the clini- sRuess utrletsa:tment (T1). The principal variable: the Wechsler Intelligence Scale cal symptoms of FXS. for Children (WISC-R) tested by simple linear regression (p<0.05). Randomized controlled data suggest that the mGluR5-a(ntagonist AFQ056/ Mavoglurant might improve behavioral symptoms of FXS, especially in pa- Significant improvements in direct scores in total manipulative and total tients with fully-methylated FMR-1 promoter regions 30 points improve- vCeornbcallu ssuiobnscsa:les were observed in young patients compared to the placebo ment on Aberrant Behavior Checklist-Community edition (ABC-C) vs. pla- group only when they were not taking psychoactive medication. cebo, n=7). Novartis currently conducts the largest clinical development program in FXS, Clinical trials for Fragile X Syndrome are necessary due to the absence of testing the efficacy and safety of AFQ056/Mavoglurant. It is the first pro- effective therapies and the side effects of available psychopharmacological gram conducted in Europe (Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Switzer- treatments. We present our positive results about improvement in learning land, Sweden, UK) and across multiple languages and cultures. Adults (18- problems measured with the WISC-R scale after 12 weeks of treatment with 45 years) and adolescents (12-17 years) are randomized in two separate aS ocuormcbei noaft iFounn odf itnwgo well known vitamins with a potent antioxidant capa- studies to up to 4 months treatment with AFQ056/Mavoglurant or placebo. bility, ascorbic acid and alpha-tocopherol. ABC-C (primary outcome), other behavioral scales and safety parameters : Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (grant are measured. After completing these studies, patients can enroll into open- number SAF2008-00486), Spanish Ministry of Health (TRA152, EC10-191, label, long-term studies with AFQ056/Mavoglurant for ≥24 months. EC11-434), Andalusian Regional Health Ministry (grant number PI2009- In summary, the AFQ056/Mavoglurant program is testing the mGluR theory 0507), and Andalusian Regional Economy, Innovation and Industry Ministry in FXS and attempts to replicate the promising results seen previously. It is (Grant numbers CTS-546, P10-CTS-05704) actively recruiting patients worldwide. Studies in smaller children and over P14.09 longer treatment periods are planned. Current efforts towards population screening and therapeutic drug P14.07 discovery for Friedreich Ataxia The mGluR5 antagonist AFQ056 does not affect methylation and D. Oglesbee1, C. Kroll1, O. Gakh1, J. Solberg2, E. Deutsch3, D. Lynch3, K. Raymond1, D. Gavrilov1, S. Tortorelli1, P. Rinaldo1, D. Matern1, D. Hook2, G. Isaya1; transcription of the mutant FMR1 gene in vitro 1Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 2University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, E. Tabolacci1, F. Pirozzi1,2, B. Gomez-Mancilla3, F. Gasparini3, G. Neri1,2; United States, 3Childrens Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Rome, Italy, 2Catholic University, Rome, Italy, 3Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland. Background: Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) is a neurodegenerative disease cha- Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the leading cause of inherited mental retardation, racterized by progressive ataxia and cardiomyopathy with an incidence of is due to expansion and methylation of a CGG sequence in the FMR1 gene, 1:50,000. FRDA is typically diagnosed by identifying GAA-repeat expansi- which result in its silencing and consequent absence of FMRP protein. This ons, or mutations, in FXN that cause reduced frataxin expression. We de- absence causes loss of repression of metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 scribe a Luminex immunoassay to measure frataxin in whole blood (WB) (mGluR5)-mediated pathways resulting in the behavioral and cognitive im- and dried blood spots (DBS) for population screening and therapeutic moni- pairments associated with FXS. In a randomized, double-blind trial it was toring of FRDA. In addition we adapted this assay to a MesoScale Discovery recently demonstrated a beneficial effect of AFQ056, a selective inhibitor of platform and completed an initial screen of a Library of Pharmogologically metabotrobic glutamate receptor type 5 (mGluR5), on fully methylated FXS Active Compounds (LOPAC 1280) in FRDA patient cells. Results: Recovery patients respect to partially methylated FXS ones. To determine whether for frataxin is 99% from WB and DBS. Intra-assay imprecision is 4.9-13% AFQ056 may have secondary effects on the methylation and transcription of CV and inter-assay imprecision is 9.8-15.8% CV. The LOD is 0.07 ng/mL and FMR1, here we treated three FXS lymphoblastoid cell lines and one normal reportable range is 2-200 ng/mL. The reference range for adult and pedia- control male line. A quantitative RT-PCR was performed to assess transcrip- tric normals is 15-82 ng/mL (median: 33) for DBS and WB. FRDA carriers tional reactivation of the FMR1 gene. To assess the methylation status of (n=30) have frataxin levels of 12-30 ng/mL (median: 18) and FRDA patients the FMR1 gene promoter it was carried out a bisulphite sequencing analy- (n=82) of <26 mg/mL (median: 6). Frataxin was stable for over 6 months sis. Both FMR1-mRNA levels and DNA methylation were unmodified with at 22°C, 4°C and -70°C. An initial screen of LOPAC 1280 has yet to uncover respect to untreated controls. These results demonstrate that the AFQ056 a positive hit but it also has not provided evidence that EPO, pentamidine, effect on fully methylated FXS patients is not due to a secondary effect on or bisbenzimide enhance frataxin expression as observed by others in dif- DNA methylation and consequent transcriptional activation of FMR1. ferent experimental settings. Conclusions: We validated a high-throughput Supported by FRAXA Foundation and Telethon Onlus. assay for frataxin that is applicable to diagnosis and population screening and modified the method for FRDA drug discovery. Ongoing work includes expanding the drug screen beyond LOPAC 1280. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org354 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P14.10 P14.12 Two-year efficacy and safety of velaglucerase alfa in patients with The investigation of the ITPA and XDH genes variants in Polish IBD type 1 Gaucher disease switching from imiglucerase: Phase III trial patients treated with thiopurine drugs HGT-GCB-039 and extension M. Skrzypczak-Zielinska1, J. Widomska2, O. Zakerska3,2, L. Jakubowska-Burek4, M. P. Giraldo1, E. Crombez2, N. Wang2, P. S. Kishnani3, H. Ben Turkia4, D. E. Gonzalez5, A. Szalata1,2, A. Dobrowolska-Zachwieja4, R. Slomski1,2; Zimran6, M. Kabra7, E. A. Lukina8, I. Kisinovsky9, A. Bavdekar10, M. Ben Dridi4, N. Gupta7; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 2Department 1Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER) and of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, University of Life Sciences, Poznan, Poland, 3The Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Shire Human Genetic Therapies, NanoBioMedical Centre, Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan, Poland, 4Department of Inc., Lexington, MA, United States, 3Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United Gastroenterology, Human Nutrition and Internal Diseases, University School of Medical States, 4La Rabta Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia, 5Sanatorio Español, Asunción, Paraguay, Sciences, Poznan, Poland. 6Shaare Zedek Medical Center and Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel, 7All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India, 8Hematology Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation, 9Your Health SA, Buenos Aires, Argentina, Thiopurine drugs are widely used in the treatment of inflammatory bowel 10KEM Hospital Research Centre, Pune, India. disease (IBD). However, even among patients treated with azathioprine Objective (AZA) or 6-mercaptopurine varied responses to treatment were observed. Thiopurines in as many as 30% of patients are not effective and in 20 % of : To determine the efficacy and safety of velaglucerase alfa in type patients side effects occur. Identification of genetic factors is essential in op- 1 Gaucher disease (GD1) patients switched to velaglucerase alfa in an open- timizing the individual treatment in IBD patients. In the metabolism of thio- label extension study (HGT-GCB-044 [ClinicalTrials.gov, NCT00635427]) purines besides well-established thiopurine methyltransferase, also other aMfteetrh oredcseiving imiglucerase in a double-blind, randomized, Phase III trial enzymes as inosine triphosphate pyrophosphohydrolase (ITPase) and xan- (HGT-GCB-039 [NCT00553631]). thine oxidase (XO) are involved, which are encoded by ITPA and XDH genes. : In HGT-GCB-039, treatment-naïve GD1 patients aged ≥2 years re- Two sequence variations in the ITPA gene have been described as associated ceived velaglucerase alfa or imiglucerase as a continuous 60-minute intrave- with ITPase deficiency (P32T, IVS2+21A>C). Changes R149C and T910L in nous infusion (60 U/kg every other week [EOW]; 9 months). Imiglucerase- the XDH gene are the most common alleles responsible for a decreased en- treated patients completing HGT-GCB-039 could enroll in ongoing extension zyme activity. The aim of our study was to determine the frequency of these study HGT-GCB-044, switching to velaglucerase alfa (60 U/kg EOW). Assess- 4 sequence variations. We established pyrosequencing method. We tested mReesnutslt swere conducted after 15 months in HGT-GCB-044 (total of 2 years’ 91 of Polish IBD patients treated with thiopurine drugs, where 11 did not enzyme replacement therapy). have any therapeutic effect of thiopurine treatment and where adverse drug : Sixteen patients receiving imiglucerase in HGT-GCB-039 entered reactions existed. Allele frequencies estimated in our study for ITPA gene HGT-GCB-044 (median age, 27 years; male, n=7; splenectomized, n=10). were lower to the determined in other Caucasian populations. Allele P32T Mean changes from baseline (HGT-GCB-039 entry) at 9 months and 2 years, was identified with frequency of 4.95%. The frequency of IVS2+21A>C al- respecti9vely, were 1.40 g9/dL and 1.98 g/dL for hemoglobin concentration, lele was 8.24%. Investigated alleles in the XDH gene were not observed in 149×10/L and 164×10/L for platelet count, −1.18% and −1.67% body- this study group of Polish IBD patients and in 200 healthy Polish individuals weight for liver volume, and −2.79% and −3.63% bodyweight for spleen additionally, what suggested probably no role of this alleles on thiopurine volume. Adverse events (AEs) reported by ≥20% patients: arthralgia and in- metabolism in the Polish population. fluenza in HGT-GCB-039; headache and upper respiratory tract infection in P14.13 HGT-GCB-044. Three serious AEs occurred in 3 patients (none study drug- The effect of losartan on the TGF-beta pathway in vascular smooth related or life-threatening). Anti-velaglucerase alfa antibodies were not de- muscle cells of patients with bicuspid and thoracic aortic aneurysms tCeocntecdlu isni oannys patient receiving velaglucerase alfa, including 3 patients who G. Belge1, A. Radtke2, R. Nimzyk1, M. Kirkgoez2, J. Bullerdiek1, H. Sievers2, S. Mohamed2; developed anti-imiglucerase antibodies in HGT-GCB-039. 1Center for Humangenetics, Bremen, Germany, 2Department of Cardiac Surgery, : GD1 patients continued to improve across 4 key clinical pa- University of Schleswig-Holstein Campus Luebeck, Luebeck, Germany, Luebeck, Germany. rameters after switching from imiglucerase (9 months’ treatment) to ve- Introduction laglucerase alfa (15 months’ subsequent treatment). No patient exposed to velaglucerase alfa developed anti-velaglucerase alfa antibodies. The renin-angiotensin system is believed to participate in P14.11 the development of thoracic aortic aneurysms (TAA) by targeting the TGF- Evaluating the effects of olesoxime, a mitochondria-targeting drug beta pathway. Blockade of the renin-angiotensin system by the angiotensin on the behavioral and neuropathological phenotype of a Huntington II Type 1 receptor (AT1) antagonist, losartan, has been shown to prevent Disease rat model aneurysm growth in Marfan syndrome. We therefore aimed to investigate H. Nguyen1, L. Clemens1, T. Wlodkowski1, M. Michaud2, L. Yu1, A. Redensek1, E. Portal1, J. tMheet ehfofedcst aonf dlo sRaerstaunlt son the TGF-beta pathway in vascular smooth muscle Magg1, C. Calaminus3, B. Pichler3, T. Bordet2, R. Pruss2, O. Rieß1; cells (VSCM). 1Department of Medical Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany, 2Trophos, Parc Scientifique de Aortic cells were cultivated and characterized as Luminy, Marseille, France, 3Laboratory for Preclinical Imaging and Imaging Technology VSCM. The cells were grown to 80 percent confluency and incubated in of the Werner Siemens-Foundation, Tuebingen, Germany. serum-free media for 24 h. Next, 1 µM losartan was added to the media fol- lowed by incubation for 24 h. The cellular RNA was extracted, reverse tran- Olesoxime, a cholesterol-oxime is a neuroprotective compound and was scribed into cDNA, and the expre2ssion of 84 genes related to the TGF-beta pathway quantified using the RT Profiler PCR Array from Qiagen. Several found to exert its beneficial effects by an improvement of mitochondrial function. Since mitochondrial dysfunction also plays a prominent role in genes related to the TGF-beta pathwEdayo gdleinmonstrated significaSnOtX c4hanges in Huntington disease (HD), we evaluated its effects on the behavioral and neu- expression aftCeDr Clo2s5aArtan treatment, altho ugh none of these changes were ropathological phenotype of the BACHD rat, a full-length mutant huntingtin Dabisocvues tswioon f old. Among these were (-1.14, p = 0.005), (-1.25, p = 0.006), and (-1.24, p = 0.0008). (mhtt) model of HD. Behavioral observations were carried out during a 12- Our study revealed the complex relationship between the renin- months study period and neuropathology was investigated subsequently. angiotensin system and the TGF-beta pathway in aortic smooth muscle cells. BACHD rats displayed clasping behavior and had severe problems to run on The relatively mild changes in gene expression may indicate that the losar- a rotating rod already at 6 weeks of age, indicating early-onset motor dys- tan dosage used is not sufficient to fully antagonize the AT1 receptor in VSMC function. A simple swimming test carried out at 8 months of age revealed a obtained from bicuspid aneurysmal tissue. deficit in reversal learning. Furthermore, BACHD rats showed metabolic ab- normalities, deteriorating with disease progression. However, no difference P14.14 was found between rats treated with olesoxime and untreated rats. NMRI Losartan therapy in operated patients with Marfan syndrome after revealed a specific reduction in cerebral and not cerebellar volume in the aortic aneurysm: prevention of re-dissection of the aorta R. Zhuraev; BACHD rats. Immunostaining of brain slices further showed cytoplasmic ag- Lviv National Medical University after Danylo Halytski, Lviv, Ukraine. gregation and intranuclear accumulation of mhtt in most cerebral brain re- gions as well as a decreased width of axonal bundles within the corpus stria- Background. tum. Treatment with olesoxime increased overall brain volume in BACHD but also in wild type rats, and by trend reduced nuclear mhtt accumulations Aortic root dilation, dissection and rup ture are major clinical problems in Marfan syndrome. Marfan patients require specialized interdis- within the prelimbic cortex. It remains unclear, how olesoxime exerts these ciplinary care for optimal out-come and life quality.Westudy the efficacy effects and whether there is an interaction between olesoxime and mhtt. and tolerability of angiotensin II receptor blockade Losartan to prevent pro- However, the beneficial effects found ex vivo did not lead to an improvement of the behavioral phenotype of the BACHD rat. gMreetshsiovde sd. ilation of aortic root and dissection in other parts of the aorta in patients with Marfan syndrome operated on aneurysms of ascending aorta. We examined 41 patients with Marfan syndrome after aortic valve- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 355 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 replacing root operations. All patients are meeting strict diagnostic criteria blindness in cultured fibroblasts. In further studies this new function of for Marfan syndrome based on the original Ghent nosology and underwent Neurofibromin in mechanotransduction will tested in more detail. aortic valve-replacing root operations. We collected clinical data, biological P14.17 sRaemsuplltess. (DNA/blood samples, aorta/valve tissues), and echocardiographic. Artificial over expression of NT3 and its receptor TrkC in bone We make two groups: one treated and one non-treated with losartan. marrow stromal cells In the 20 patients who received losartan experienced better control Z. Hajebrahimi1, M. Movahedin2, S. J. Mowla3; of blood pressure during the day, previously normalized clinical parameters, 1Department of Physiology, Aerospace Research Institute, Tehran, Islamic Republic of quality of life, none of the patients did not require repeat surgery. The chan- Iran, 2Department of Anatomy, School of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Biological ges in aortic distensibility and cross-sectional compliance were similar bet- Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. ween the two groups. Mean aortic diameter increased 0.5 mm/year, while iCno npcaltuiesniotsn ws.ho have not received losartan 1.6 mm/year. Left ventricular function was better in patients treated with losartan. The adult mammalian nervous system has a very limited capacity to replace The results of this clinical study could lead to profound modi- neurons lost following an injury. In the last few decades, transplantation of fication of the management of aortic risk and complications in patients with neural-like cells derived from stem cells has been carried out as a potenti- Marfan syndrome. The uniqueness in our study is related to the fact that the al treatment for neurodegenerative diseases. The potential success of the additive effect of losartan evaluated in patients with Marfan syndrome who transplantation process, however, depends on the functional activity of the have already undergone surgery. grafted cells in their new environment. Bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) P14.15 which are capable of differentiating into neural cells, has been employed The differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cell in to neural cells for cell and gene therapy of neurodegenerative diseases. Neurotrophin-3 S. Karimian1, S. Kaviani2, M. Soleimani2, M. Hashemi3; 1Departemen of Genetics , Faculty of Basic Sciences , Olum Tahghighat Branch , Islamic (NT-3) is a member of the neurotrophin family of growth factors, best cha- Azad University ,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Hematology and racterized by its survival- and differentiation-inducing effects on developing Blood Banking , Faculty of Medical Sciences , Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, neurons.Our previous studies revealed that BMSCs do not express NT-3 and Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Departemen of Genetics , Tehran Medical Branch , Islamic its receptor, TrkC, either before or after differentiation into neural like cells. Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Since during the development of the brain, NT-3 expresses earlier than other NTs, we used electroporation technique to introduce NT-3 and TrkC genes into the BMSCs by pDsRed-N1 and pCMV vector, respectively. PDsRed-N1 is The differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cell to neuron like cell on a mammalian expression vector that encodes a variant of red fluorescent engineered nanofibrous scafolds have a great potential for bionanomateri- protein. Vectors transformed into E coli DH5α. Expression of NT-3 and TrkC al- cell transplautation therapy of neuro degenerative disease and injuries confirmed using fluorescence microscopy and RT-PCR method. Our results of the nerous system. showed that BMSCs have the potential for being genetically manipulated We investigated the potential of human bone marrow derived mesenchymol and electroporation can serve as a fast, easy, and efficient method for it. We stem cell (MSCS) for neural differentiation in vitro on polycaprolacton (PCL) successfully obtained cells could express RFP, NT3 and TrkC. Due to the ex- nanofibrons scafolds.Studies in this fild have led to the realization that invi- pression of RFP, the fate of cells can be easily traced after transplantation vo cells intract with the extra cellular matrix , composed of nanofibrous at into tissues. sub- micron scale , which not only provides the mechanical support to the P14.18 cells but also plays akey role in regulation of cellular behavior with stem Induction of embryonic microRNA (miR) cluster 302 and pluripotency cells is emeraging as an important tool in the development of tissue engi- genes in human mesenchymal stroma cells under hypoxic culture neering and regenerative medicine. conditions PCL characterizations were carried out using SEM , contact angle and tensile S. Foja1,2, M. Jung3, O. Pelz-Ackermann4, I. Schroeder5; instrument. 1Department of Human Genetics, Halle/Saale, Germany, 2Translational Centre for The differentiation of MSC was carried out using neural inducing factors in- Regenerative Medicine, Leipzig, Germany, 3Translational Centre for Regenerative cluding Retinoic acid , epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fibroblast growth Medicine, Leipig, Germany, 4BD Biosciences GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany, 5Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Halle/Saale, Germany. factor (FGF-2) and Ibmx in DMEM/F12. Scaning electron microscopy results showed normal morphology and proli fration of Mesenchymal cell on PCL nanofibrous scaffolds. Multiple ways and cells sources for the generation of induced pluripotent The expression of neural protein markers was analyezed by immunocyto- stem (iPS) cells using for analysis of pathogenesis and personalized treat- chemistry. The differentiated Mesenchymol cell on nanofibre scaffold were ment are currently under investigation. We hypothesized that due to their found to express the neural protein , - tubulin III and Map2 ,On day 14 a fter multipotency human mesenchymal stroma cells (hMSC) could be more culture by immuno- fluorescent. easily reprogrammed than other somatic cells. Therefore, we investigated Our studies on the differentiation of MSC to Neural cells on nanofibrous whether cultivation of MSCs under hypoxic culture conditions, known to scaffold suggest their potentioral application towards nerve regeneration. support pluripotency in embryonic stem (ES) cells, would suffice to induce P14.16 pluripotency in MSCs. In particular we analysed the expression of pluripo- Partial mechano-sensoric blindness to micrometer topography in tency-associated genes and the microRNAs (miRs) 302, specific for pluri- NF1 haploinsufficient cultured fibroblasts indicates a new function of potent embryonic stem cells, as parameter for reprogramming. Therefore neurofibromin in mechanotransduction D. Kaufmann1, J. Hoesch1, L. Deeg1, K. Mellert1, S. Biela2, S. Jungbauer2, Y. Su2, J. Spatz2, R. primary human MSCs obtained from bone marrow aspirates and the MSC Kemkemer2; cell line L87 were cultured under hypoxic (5%O2) and normoxic (20%O2) 1Institute of Human Genetics, Ulm, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent culture conditions with and without FGF2 supplementation. We foundO tChTa4t Systems, Stuttgart, Germany. undeNrA hNyOpGox ic culture condition in the presence of FGF2, MSCs showed hig- her proliferative capacities and decreased senKeLscFe4nce. FcG-MF2Y Cinduced and analyzed by real-time-RT-PCR. In combination with hypoxia this Cells sense their physical environment and translate geometries into bio- effect was potentiated. If not already present, and were likewi- chemical signals enabling them to adapt to cues in their surroundings. In se induced. Most importantly, in contrast to many retroviral methods, the this studyN, Fc1ell responses to surface topography of micro-structured poly- combination of hypoxia and FGF2 led to an induction of the miR302 cluster dimethylsiloxane substrNaFte1s were investigated in cNuFlt1ured human cells dif- similar to that found in ES cells leading to the repression of their predicted fering in . Age matched dermal fibroblasts from five patients with Neu- targets at day 14. In summary, we showed that hypoxia is a safe, easily appli- rofibromatosis type 1 ( +/-) and five controls ( +/+) were tested. As cable and sufficient tool to induce pluripotency-associated genes and miRs response indicator the mean cell orientation along micro-structured grNoFo1- in multipotent MSCs. This may serve as a first step to generate clinical-grade ves with heights of 175 or 200 nm and distance of 2 µm was systematically iPS-cells. examined by analysis of microscopy images using ImagNeJF. 1The tested haploinsufficient fibroblasts were significantly less affected by the topogra- phy than those from healthy donors. Incubation of the +/- fibroblasts with the farnesyltransferase inhibitor FTI-277 disrupting constitutive H- Ras-specific acNtFiv1ation of MAP kinase ameliorates significantly the cell ori- entation. These data indicate that the response to surface topography can be altered by haploinsuffiency resulting in a partial mechano-sensoric www.eshg.org www.eshg.org356 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P14.19 P14.21 Bezafibrate as treatment option in patients with mitochondrial Testing Riluzole in a conditional mouse model of SCA3 complex I deficiency J. Schmidt, A. Kaiser, O. Rieß, T. Schmidt; B. M. Haberberger1,2, P. Freisinger3, V. Strecker4, K. Heim2, U. Ahting5, B. Rolinski6, T. University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. Haack1, J. Mayr7, W. Sperl7, E. Wilichowski8, M. Schuelke9, T. Klopstock10, M. Zeviani11, I. Wittig4, T. Meitinger1,2, H. Prokisch1,2; 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany, 2Institute Spinocerebellar atMaxJDia- 1type 3 (SCA3) or Machado-Joseph disease (MJD) is of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum, Munich, Germany, 3Department of Paediatrics, an inherited neurodegenerative disorder caused by the expansion of a CAG Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany, 4Molekulare Bioenergetik, Zentrum der Biologischen Chemie, Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 5Städtisches repeat within the gene resulting in a polyglutamine repeat in the en- Klinikum München GmbH, Department Klinische Chemie, Munich, Germany, 6ELBLAB coded protein ataxin-3. SCA3/MJD therefore belongs to the group of poly- Gmbh, Riesa, Germany, 7Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical University glutamine diseases. Up to now, no treatment is available for this disease. Salzburg, Salzburg, Austria, 8Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Neurology, In a recent study, a positive effect of riluzole (benzothiazol, Rilutek), was University Medicine Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 9Department of Neuropediatrics observed in a heterogenous group of patients suffering from different types and NeuroCure Clinical Research Center, Charité University Medical Center, Berlin, of cerebellar ataxias after just eight weeks of treatment with riluzole. Ho- Germany, 10Department of Neurology, Friedrich-Baur-Institute, Ludwig-Maximilians- wever, in the mentioned study, only short-term effects were analyzed which Universität München, Munich, Germany, 1111Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics may be just symptomatic. In order to analyze whether riluzole may also be Fondazione, Istituto Neurologico „Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy. beneficial for SCA3 and whether also long-term effects of riluzole treatment can be observed, we treated our recently generated inducible mouse model of SCA3 with riluzole. This mouse model allows us not only to measure a Mitochondriopathies are inherited metabolic disorders with a severe clini- possible effect of riluzole on disease progression but also to quantify this cal phenotype affecting different organ systems. A majority of them affect effect by comparison with an “optimal treatment” (i.e. turning off the ex- the respiratory chain and the cellular ATP production but even these clinical pression of ataxin-3). We started the treatment once significant deficits in manifestations are highly variable, extending from early childhood encepha- the rotarod performance were obvious in the generated mice and followed lopathies to adult-onset myopathies. In spite of rapid progress identifying the outcome of the treatment using Rotarod and measurement of home cage the molecular cause, curative therapeutic options are barely available. Ba- activity. Mice were sacrificed at different time points and brain tissue was stin et al. (2008) and Wenz at al. (2008) provided evidence from in vitro stu- analyzed for inclusions and neuropathology using Western-Blot and immu- dies and mouse models that activation of the PPAR/PGC-1-alpha pathway nohistochemistry. Tissue was also analyzed on RNA level to exclude that ri- with bezafibrate could be a new therapeutic approach. In order to verify luzole influences the expression of the transgenic ataxin-3. this effect, we collected 28 fibroblast cell lines from patients with isolated complex-I deficiency and a defined molecular diagnosis. The complex I ac- P14.22 tivity in patient fibroblasts ranged from 10% to 80% compared to controls. The prevalence of VKORC1 1639 G>A and CYP2C9*2*3 genotypes in Bezafibrate treatment led to significant improvement of complex I activity in patients that requiring anticoagulant therapy in Turkish population C. Silan1, O. T. Dogan2, F. Silan3, F. M. Kukulguven4, H. F. Asgun5, S. Ozdemir6, A. Uludag3, S. more than 50% of the cell lines. In a subgroup of 13 cell lines, the treatment Atik3, B. Gungor1, S. Akdur1, H. E. Aksulu1, O. Ozdemir3,7; effect was additionally analyzed on genome-wide expression levels, reve- 1Department of Pharmacology,Faculty of Medicine,Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, aling increased expression of genes involved in lipid and fatty acid metabo- Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Chest Diseases,Faculty of Medicine,Cumhuriyet lism and transport. In 5 cell lines which responded to bezafibrate treatment University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, with significant increase of complex I activity, we found increased amounts Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 4Department of of complex I assembled in supercomplexes by two-dimensional blue native Emergency,Faculty of Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 5Department SDS-PAGE experiments. These results support bezafibrate as a promising of Cardiovascular Surgery,Faculty of Medicine,Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 6Department of Nuclear Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale treatment option in a well defined subgroup of patients. They have to be Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 7Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of verified in other mitochondrial disorders like COX-deficiency. Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey. P14.20 Vascular malformations and soft tissue tumours in segmental overgrowth disorders respond to mTOR inhibitors, in spite of normal The VKORC1 and CYP2C9 genotypes were investigate in anticoagulant PTEN and AKT1 function therapy requiring patients in two different Turkish populations. Cohort E. Lausch1, R. Keppler1, E. Maas2, B. Zabel1, C. Niemeyer1, J. Rössler1; included 292 patients that need anticoagulant therapy with the history of 1University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany, 2Olgahospital, Stuttgart, Germany. deep vein thrombosis and/ or pulmonary artery thromboembolism.Geno- mic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood samples and StripAssay re- verse hybridization technique was used for genotype analysis. Genotypes Vascular malformations are common among patients with segmental over- for CYP2C9 were detected as; 165 (56.5%) for CYP2C9*1/*1, 67 (23.0%) growth disorders. Very recently, a recurrent activating AKT1 mutation was for CYP2C9*1/*2, 25 (8.6%) for CYP2C9*1/*3, 9 (3.0%) for CYP2C9*2/*2, identified in Proteus syndrome lesions and loss-of-function mutations of 21 (7.2%) for CYP2C9*2/*3, 5(1.7%) for CYP2C9*3/*3 for CYP2C9 and the PTEN are known to cause SOLAMEN syndrome. Genetically, both aberra- allele frequencies were; 0.723 for allele*1, 0.182 for allele*2 and 0.095 for tions are predicted to increase downstream phosphoinositide 3-kinase allele*3 respectively. Genotypes for VKORC1 were detected as; 64 (21.9%) (PI3K) signalling pathway activity. A significant number of patients, howe- for GG, 220 (75.4%) for GA and 8 (2.7%) for AA alleles. The G allele frequen- ver, do not show mutations in either PTEN, or AKT1, and the pathogenesis cy was detected as 0.596 and A allele frequency was 0.404. The VKORC1 of hamartomatous tumours and associated vascular malformations remains 1639 G>A and CYP2C9 mutation prevalence and allele frequency of current unresolved. Over the past years, we provided clinical care and molecular results showed similar great variable profiles when compared to the other diagnosis for patients affected by vascular and hamartomatous tumours. No results from Turkish population. constitutive PTEN mutation was detected in a cohort of eleven children with P14.23 segmental overgrowth disorders, mainly classifiable as Proteus, or Proteus- Sodium butyrate and Valproic acid as a splicing restoring agents in like syndrome. Molecular analyses of tumour tissues failed to demonstrate erythroid cells of β-thalassaemic patients somatic activation of AKT1. Mosaic mutations were neither found in dermal S. M. Derakhshan, M. S. khaniani, M. tagizade; fibroblasts derived from affected regions, nor in vascular malformations, Tabriz university of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. nor in soft tissue tumours. Nevertheless, experimental therapy with mTOR inhibitors was able to induce rapid remission in three of three treated pati- ents, proving efficacy against diverse lesions, including intestinal haeman- β-thalassaemia is a common autosomal recessive disorder in humans gioma, intra-thoracal lipomatosis, and retro-orbital lymphangioma. In view caused by a defect in β-globin chain synthesis . Over two hundred different of the poor outcome and high complication rate of surgical approaches, mutations have been found to cause β-thalassaemia, with the most common mTOR inhibition therefore holds the promise of a well-tolerated first line being splicing mutations (1). Most of these mutations activate aberrant medical alternative for this group of disorders, regardless of mutational sta- cryptic splicing of 5’ or 3’ splice sites without abolishing completely normal tus of proven disease genes. Our results provide clear evidence for genetic splicing. Some mutations allow a significant level of normal splicing (e.g. heterogeneity in segmental overgrowth disorders, especially in Proteus, and IVSI-6), leading to thalassaemia intermedia, while others reduce normal Proteus-like syndrome. Preliminary molecular data suggest a common pa- splicing to low (e.g. IVSI-110) or very low levels (e.g. IVSI-5 and IVS2-654) thogenic mechanism involving the PI3K/PTEN/AKT/mTOR pathway. and lead to blood transfusion dependency in the homozygote forms. In most of these cases, the normal splicing sites are not mutated, resulting in com- petition between the normal and aberrant splice sites and the production of variable amounts of normal mRNA . Modulation of splicing can be achieved www.eshbgy .aoctrivgation or suppression of transacting factors such as SR proteins and www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 357 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 hnRNPs through drugs. Here, we demonstrate restoration of IVSI-110 muta- organisation. tion obtained by sodium butyrate, iso butyramide and valproic acid, histone (The study includes data that have been reported earlier: Chromosome Res. deacetylase inhibitors, known to upregulate the expression of splicing fac- 2009; 17: 23-24). tors. These results highlight the therapeutic potential of splicing modulation P15.03 for genetic diseases caused by splicing mutations. Comparing Ion Torrent’s PGM™ Sequencer and the 5500 SOLiD™ System with Sanger sequencing: Next generation resequencing of the P15. Laboratory and quality management CFTR gene using PCR and sample multiplexing R. Achmann1, R. Greither2, A. Rico2, L. He2, A. Sartori2, M. Wenz3, S. Berosik3, N. Rieber4, B. Auber1; P15.01 1MVZ genteQ GmbH, Hamburg, Germany, 2Life Technologies GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany, A novel StripAssay for the detection of genetic factors modulating the 3Life Technologies, Foster City, CA, United States, 4Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, risk of developing AA amyloidosis Heidelberg, Germany. S. Németh1, L. Obici2, S. Grandemange3, I. Touitou4, H. Lachmann5, C. Oberkanins1; 1ViennaLab Labordiagnostika GmbH, Vienna, Austria, 2Biotechnology Research Laboratories, IRCCS Fondazione Policlinico San Matteo, Pavia, Italy, 3Inserm U844, Almost 2000 mutations have been described in the Cystic Fibrosis (CF) as- Montpellier, France, 4Unité médicale des maladies auto-inflammatoires, Hôpital Arnaud sociated CFTR gene. In a few populations the mutation spectrum is well de- de Villeneuve, Montpellier, France, 5National Amyloidosis Centre, London, United fined and screening tests for the most frequent mutations exist. Sequencing Kingdom. of the entire CFTR gene would be preferable especially in less well characte- rized populations, but Sanger sequencing is expensive and tedious. Thus, we tested two next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms (Ion Torrent Perso- Systemic reactive (AA) amyloidosis represents the most important compli- nal Genome Machine™ (PGM™) and 5500 SOLiD™ System) concerning their cation within TNF receptor associated periodic syndrome (TRAPS), familial throughput, ease of use and analytical sensitivity. Mediterranean fever (FMF) and other autoinflammatory syndromes, pro- Testing of 20 human samples with different known CFTR genotypes (va- gressively leading to endstage renal failure. The homozygous condition of lidated by Sanger sequencing on 3500xL Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosy- the serum amyloid A (SAA) vMaEriFaVnt SAA1.1 is significantly associated with stems), using a Multiplicom™ multiplexing assay for the CFTR gene, samp- the occurrence of AA amyloidosis in TRAPS patients (unpublished results). le barcoding and subsequent NGS with the 5500 SOLiD™ System and the Likewise in FMF patients the mutation c.2080A>G (M694V) correlates semiconductor-based IonTorrent PGM™ Sequencer. with amyloidosis and the presence of a SAMAB1L.12 / SAA1.1 genotype increases Sanger sequencing identified a total of 33 mutations and 53 SNPs in the 20 the clinical severity (age at disease onset, amyloidosis, arthritis). An assMoBciLa2- samples. Using the SeqNext software module (JSI medical systems GmbH), tion between mannose-binding lectin 2 ( ) alleles and AA amyloidosis all mutations except one insertion/deletion mutation were identified cor- in TRAPS patients is not conclusively established, but the analysis of rectly with data from both NGS systems. The SNP detection rate was highly variants is of considerable diagnostic interest TaNlsFoR iSnF 1clAosely related fields, dependent on the coverage reached for a particular region of interest. For including rheumatoid arthritis or TinNnFaRteS Fim1Amunity. Still under discussion of sequence coverage of 100-fold or higher the detection rate reached 100% being a modulating risk factor for TRAPS, the intron 4 polymor- for both NGS systems. phism c.473-33C>T is involved in expression. If a sufficiently high coverage can be realized, Ion Torrent and Solid NGS se- We devMeBloLp2ed anTdN vFaRliSdFa1teAd a reverse-hybridization assay (StripAssay) for quencing produce reliable data. Bioinformatic analysis of more complicated detection of genetic factors modulating the risk of developing AA Amyloi- variants still needs to be improved. dosis. anTdN FRSF1A variants canM bEeF iVdentified as well, but theSiAr Aro1le The products referred to in this abstract are for Research Use only, not inten- within amyloidosis needs to be cleared. Our panel of markers encomMpaBsLs2es ded for animal or human therapeutic or diagnostic use. c.473-33C>T ( ); c.2080A>G ( ), c.209C>T, c.224T>C ( ); P15.04 g.4447 C>G, g.4776 C>G, g.5000 C>T, c.154C>T, c.161G>A, c.170G>A ( ). Scanning and genotyping of CFTR mutations and common SNPs using The StripAssay is based on multiplex PCR and reverse-hybridization of bio- snapback primers tin-labeled amplification products to a parallel array of allele-specific oligo- L. Zhou1, F. Ye1, J. Chen1, B. Palais2, C. T. Wittwer1; nucleotides immobilized on membrane teststrips. The test follows a simple 1Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt lake City, UT, protocol and requires only small amounts of DNA for comprehensive genetic United States, 2Department of Mathemetics, University of Utah, Salt lake City, UT, United analysis. States. P15.02 Accreditation of cytogenetic laboratories K. Miller; Complete genotyping of CFTR mutations is currently performed exclusive- Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany. ly by sequencing, a costly and time-consuming procedure. High-resolution melting analysis with snapback primers can be used to genotype all com- mon mutations and scan for rare mutations more rapidly and economically. The accreditation of a laboratory is the formal recognition of its competence There are 23 common mutations listed by the American College of Medical to perform specific tests. It requires regular inspections by qualified exter- Genetics and 7 common SNPs in the CFTR gene. Twenty seven CFTR gene nal assessors. In medical laboratories, the usual standard is ISO 15189. exons were amplified in 39 exon/intron fragments due to length conside- This report presents the experience of 75 inspections in 40 cytogenetic la- rations for some of the exons. High-resolution melting was performed on boratories in Germany. The requirements concern: technical aspects such as all 39 fragments on the LightScanner® to scan the intramolecular amplicon accommodation, equipment, methods, pre- and post-examination procedu- melting curves for common and rare mutations or SNPs. The twenty exon/ res, reporting, quality control, and competence of staff. intron fragments that may contain common mutations or SNPs were am- In total, 226 non-conformities were found. On average, 5.6 (range 0-12) plified using snapback primers. After scanning, these amplicons were then non-conformities were reported at first accreditation and 2.4 and 3.2 at diluted in H2O to favor intermolecular hybridization, denatured by heating, subsequent second and third controls, respectively. cooled, then melted again on the LightScanner®. The resulting snapback The highest number of non-conformities (26.6%) was reported for exami- probe melting peaks detect intra-molecular hybridization and identify the nation procedures. Of these, 33% concerned validation, 28% documentati- genotype at the loci all of common mutations or SNPs. Twenty six CFTR mu- on and 23% procedure itself. tation cell lines from Coriell, 25 pretested CF patient and 80 none patient Laboratory equipment was the reason for 25.6% of non-conformities; in- samples were used for blinded testing. All of the loci of common mutations sufficient documented or expired consumables accounted for 28%, mainte- and SNPs were genotyped correctly by high-resolution melting with snap- nance and surveillance for 26% and data security for 19% of these. back primers. The method genotyped all but 0.3% samples require sequen- About 19% of the observations concerned accommodation and environ- cing. Genotyping CFTR mutations by using snapback primer with high-reso- ment, of which almost 40% concerned security aspects and 23% inadequate lution melting analysis is reliable, rapid and inexpensive. The fewer than 1% storage. amplicons that were not directly genotyped by the method were detected Inadequate reporting was the reason for 16.8% of the non-conformities of for subsequent sequencing. which 55% were due to incorrect use of ISCN. Staff, pre- and post-examination procedures, and quality control were found only rarely among the non-conformities. The observations show an improvement of the performance of accredited laboratories. The laboratories with a high number of non-conformities in www.eshg.org the first inspection profited from the external evaluation to improwvew thwei.re shg.org358 ESHG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 P15.06 Pyrosequencing Assay Panels For Genotyping Disease-Associated Polymorphisms/Mutations Several genetic factors implicated in the pathogenesis of venous thrombo- D. Ciglidag Dungul1, B. Metin1, E. Sakalli1, B. Torun1, S. Richardt2, F. Narz2; emboFl1is2mC4 h6aTve been reported in tDhAeB li2tIePrature. The aim of this study was 1ATQ Biotechnology, Ankara, Turkey, 2Qiagen GmbH, Hilden, Germany. to automate the methods of genetic analysis of mutations: Factor V Leiden, Background: and and rs7025486 of gene. Methods: DNA extraction was performed by MagnaPure Compact (Roche). We designed an assay of Molecular diagnostics are increasingly used to guide diagnosis TaqMan allelic discrimination by real-time PCR 7500 (Applied BioFs1y2stCe4m6)T. and therapy of human diseases. The detection of key polymorphic variants/ Were selected DNA samples from patients (n=50) from whom the mutations mutations in human genes provides valuable information about diagnosis, were previously genotyped by other assays. Factor V Leiden and DAB2IP risks or therapeutic regimens. mutations were performed by real-time PCR with allele-specific probes with Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) is an autosomal-recessive disease which the Light Cylcer 2.0 analyzer (Roche). The rs7025486 mutation of affects Armenian, Arab, Jewish, Greek, Turkish and Italian populations. Beta gene (c.18554G>A) was performed Tbayq dmiraenct sequencing with Analyzer Ge- thalassemia (BTAL) is a blood disorder that reduces the production of he- netic 3500 (Applied Biosystems). Results: We designed assays using real- moglobin. BTAL is common in Mediterranean countries such as Greece, Italy, time PCR 7500 with allele-specific probes in 96-well plate format Spain, Cyprus, but occurs as well in North Africa, the Middle East, India, and samples. In all samples we obtained the same genotype for each mutation Eastern Europe. Thrombosis is a blood clot inside a blood vessel, obstruc- with both methods (sensitivity and tMinegt hoord ssto: pping the flow of blood through the circulatory system. Thrombo- specificity of 100 %). However, the automated process by real-time PCR ge- tic diseases are one of the main causes of mortality worldFwacidtoer. II, Factor V, notyping plate allows us to analyze a large number of samples in each run MTHFR, PAPIy-1rosequenMcEinFgV assays were HdeBvBeloped targeting key mutations/ (n = 92) including matched controls (n =a q4M). aIfn this protocol were employed polymorphisms in genes associated with thrombosis ( using automated DNA extraction, the full process would last 2 hours until ), FMF ( ) and BTAL ( ). The important disease related the report of the results. Conclusion: T allelic discrimination assay deletions, insertions, point mutations and polymorphisms in these genes provides a good alternative tool in detection of SNPs associated with venous wReesruel tdse: termined by pyrosequencing. Plasmids coding for FMF, BTAL and thrombosis. Red RECAVA RD 06/0014/0016. Generalitat de CatalunyaAG- thrombosis variants were used to study assay precision. AUR 20095GR1147. All assays allow flexible, fast and reliable genotyping of the mutati- P15.10 oCnons cinlu DsNioAn sis: olated from whole blood with excellent concordance to Sanger Quality assurance practices in Europe: a survey of molecular genetic sequencing. testing laboratories Pyrosequencing was shown to be highly suitable to detect, S. Berwouts1,2, K. Fanning1,2, M. A. Morris3,2, D. E. Barton4,2, E. Dequeker1,2; identify and quantify important polymorphisms/mutations in human di- 1Department of Public Health, Biomedical Quality Assurance Research Unit, Leuven, sease-associated genes. The newly developed assays have a significant lo- Belgium, 2EuroGentest, Leuven, Belgium, 3Molecular Diagnostic Laboratory, Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland, 4National Centre for wer turn-around time and are easier to interpret raw-data compared to the Medical Genetics, UCD School of Medicine & Medical Sciences University College Dublin, current gold standard Sanger sequencing and maintain the flexibility of a Our Lady’s Children’s Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin, Ireland. sequencing-based method. P15.07 Guidelines for the genetic diagnosis of hereditary recurrent fevers In the 2000s, a number of initiatives were taken internationally to improve Y. Shinar1, L. Obici2, I. Aksentijevich3, I. Touitou4; quality in genetic testing services. To contribute to and update the limited 11FMF Molecular Diagnostics Lab, Sheba Medical Center, Tel HaSomer, Israel, 2Amyloid literature available related to this topic, we surveyed 910 human mole- Center, Biotechnology Research Laboratories, Fondazione IRCCS, Pavia, Jersey, 3National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4UMAI laboratoire de cular genetic testing laboratories, of which 291 (32%) from 29 European génétique, Montpellier, France. countries responded. The majority of laboratories were in the public sector (81%), affiliated with a university hospital (60%). Only a minority of labo- ratories were accredited (23%), and 26% were certified. 22% of laborato- Hereditary recurrent fevers (HRFs) are a group of monogenic autoinflamm- ries did not participate in external quality assessment and 28% did not use atory diseases characterized by recurrent bouts of fever and serosal in- reference materials. The main motivations given for accreditation were to flammation that are caused by pathogenic variants in genes important for improve laboratory profile (85%) and national recognition (84%). Nearly the regulation of innate immunity. The discovery of the molecular defects all respondents (95%) would prefer working in an accredited laboratory. responsible for these diseases has initiated genetic diagnostics in many In accredited laboratories, participation in external quality assessment countries around the world including the Middle East, Europe, USA, Japan (p<0.0001), use of reference materials (p=0.0014) and availability of con- and Australia. However, diverse testing methods and reporting practices are tinuous education on medical/scientific subjects (p=0.023), specific tasks employed, and there is a clear need for consensus guidelines for the HRF (p=0.0018), and quality assurance (p<0.0001) were significantly higher genetic testing. than in non-accredited laboratories. Restriction of the development of new techniques (p=0.023) and the improvement of work satisfaction (p=0.0002) Draft guidelines were prepared based on current practice deduced from were significantly overestimated by non-accredited laboratories. By using a previous HRF External Quality Assurance (EQA) schemes and data from the quality implementation score, we showed that accredited laboratories (ave- literature. The draft document was disseminated through the EMQN (Eu- rage score 92) comply better than certified laboratories (average score 69, ropean Molecular genetics Quality Network) for broader consultation and p<0.001), and certified laboratories better than other laboratories (average amendment. A workshop was held in Bruges (Belgium) on September 18 score 44, p<0.001), with regard to the implementation of quality indicators. and 19, 2011 to ratify the draft into a final consensus document. We conclude that quality practices vary widely in European genetic testing laboratories. This leads to a potentially dangerous situation in which the An agreed set of best practice guidelines was proposed for genetic diagno- quality of genetic testing is not consistently assured. stic testing of HRFs, for reporting the genetic results, and for defining their P15.11 clinical significance. Quality assurance of PCR based molecular genetic tests through Supported by EU projects EuroGentest (FP6-512148), Eurotraps (FP7- elimination of thermocycler variability during assay validation 2008-200923), la Région Languedoc-Roussillon, Eurofever (EAHC, Project M. Span1, M. A. W. Verblakt2, M. T. M. Hendrikx1; 2007332). 1CYCLERtest BV, Landgraaf, Netherlands, 2GENOtronics BV, Landgraaf, Netherlands. Associated authors: B Bennetts, F Austrup, I Ceccherini, JM Costa, A De Leener, M Gattorno, U Kania, I Kone-Paut, S Lezer, A Livneh, I Moix, R Nishikomo- Validation and verification of PCR methods and procedures before their use ri, S Ozen, L Phylactou, L Risom, D Rowczenio, T Sarkisian, ME van Gijn, M in clinical molecular genetic testing is essential for producing correct and Witsch-Baumgartner, H El-Shanti, M Jakobsen, K Konstantopoulos, D Mar- clinically relevant results. torana, MG Pomponi, A Bybee, C Rydlewski, M Morris, HM Hoffman Over the past decades many validation studies and external quality assess- ments have addressed the difficulties of producing and reproducing PCR, P15.09 qPCR and HRM molecular diagnostic results. Non consistent PCR results are Automated analysis by using real-time PCR assays of mutations: often attributed to different purities of template DNA and reagents used, but Factor V Leiden, F12C46T and rs7025486 of DAB2IP gene I. Tirado, I. Coll, B. Cuevas, E. Martínez-Sánchez, J. Mateo, J. Fontcuberta; seldomly to variations in thermocycler performance as thermocyclers are Hospital Sant Pau.Unitat d‘Hemostàsia i Trombosi, Barcelona, Spain. perceived as a constant rather than a variable. In this study the thermal performance of over 10.000 thermocyclers has been evaluated. The temperature calibration data show a large spread, both www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Posters 359 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 between and within thermocyclers. This variability is expressed in inconsi- ly used criterion “average quality value” alone is too inaccurate and not suf- stent, false negative, lower positive or incorrect PCR results. ficient for clinical uses. Typically, thermocyclers can not be adjusted and therefore solutions must We demonstrated that with a combination of three parameters (average be sought to deal with this variability in the design and validation of PCR quality value, relative sequence intensity and electropherogram profile), it assays. Currently, accredited laboratories consider PCR assays as sufficiently is possible to determine accurately the quality of any sequence. validated when an empirical validation study on a limited number of ther- P15.14 mocyclers has produced comparable results. However, the large variability SNPflow - A laboratory information system for automated data as measured during this study reveals the severely underestimated risk of processing and quality management of SNP genotyping results using limited numbers of thermocyclers for empirical validation studies. H. Weißensteiner1, M. Haun1, S. Schönherr1,2, M. Neuner2, L. Forer1, G. Specht2, A. Kloss- Through this detailed study we have generated guidelines for easy, straight- Brandstätter1, F. Kronenberg1, S. Coassin1; forward, analytical validation of PCR based molecular genetic tests. These 1Division of Genetic Epidemiology, Department for Medical Genetics, Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 2Research guidelines are accepted by auditors around the world. group Databases and Information Systems, Institute of Computer Science, University of P15.12 Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. The Unified Sample Identifier - A universal sample coding system to manage large numbers of biological samples S. Herms1, J. E. Bolz1, A. Reinscheid1, T. F. Wienker2,3, M. M. Noethen4,5, S. Cichon1,6,4, P. High-throughput genotyping projects in large epidemiological study popu- Hoffmann1,4; 1Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, lations require sophisticated laboratory information management systems Bonn, Germany, 2Institute of Medical Biometry, Informatics and Epidemiology, University (LIMS). Small to medium sized genotyping facilities often lack such LIMS of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany, 3Gene Mapping Center, Max-Delbrueck- and thus have to rely on basic R or VBA scripts for the quality control of Center, Berlin, Germany, Berlin, Germany, 4Institute of Human Genetics, University of their genotyping experiments. Since modern genetic epidemiological stu- Bonn, Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany, 5Deutsches Zentrum fuer Neurodegenerative dies often comprise >10,000 individuals, automated workflows are, ho- Erkrankungen, Bonn, Germany, Bonn, Germany, 6Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine wever, required to handle and review the large amount of genotypic data (INM-1), Structural and Functional Organization of the Brain, Genomic Imaging, generated by modern multiplex genotyping approaches such as Sequenom Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany, Juelich, Germany. iPLEX. To address this issue, we developed the web application “SNPflow”. This solution provides automated data management and quality control for genotyping experiments employing the ABI 7900 HT-platform (e.g. TaqMan, Since the introduction of high-throughput DNA genotyping and sequencing KASPar Assays) or the Sequenom iPLEX platform. It automatically merges technologies, the number of DNA samples analyzed for genetically complex single raw output files of different DNA plates, converts them to ready-to- phenotypes has tremendously increased. Furthermore it has become very use genotype lists and stores the quality-controlled genotypes in a dedica- important to combine samples from different sites to further increase stati- ted MySQL database. For each SNP assay QC values such as call rates, dis- stical power to detect small genetic effects. This has led to serious challen- cordance rates and Hardy Weinberg Equilibrium (HWE) are calculated and ges concerning the individual sample coding. Often encountered problems a comparison of the observed genotype frequencies with the HapMap data which hamper the unambiguous identification of individual samples include is generated. It even provides a fast overview on these QC values for dozens samples having the same identifier by chance as well as spelling errors in of SNPs in one list. All data can be finally exported in well-arranged files the sample identifier. for further analysis. Our software is, to the best of our knowledge, the first To address these problems we have developed an universal sample coding completely freely available, web-based application for an automated quality system the Unified Sample Identifier (USI) over the last years. The USI is control of Sequenom iPLEX genotypes and can be accessed at genepi.i-med. based on the ISO certified IBAN system which is used in the international ac.at/snpflow. It significantly improved the handling of and the overview on banking system since more than 30 years. The USI includes a checksum ma- our genotyping projects in various cohorts. king it very resistant to spelling errors and data about project, study, sample P15.15 type and aliquot, but does not include any information on the affection sta- Experience and outcome of the EMQN External Quality Assessment tus, diagnosis, gender and ethnicity. Scheme for molecular analysis of Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) Here we present data on the implementation of the USI in our database sy- H. H. Lemmink1, V. Karcagi2, O. Kamarainen3, S. Patton3, S. Eraslan4; stem, the use of automatically generated barcodes and the evaluation of the 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, checksum system. We especially analyzed the probable risk of collisions - 2Department of Molecular Genetics and Diagnostics, National Institute of Environmental different lab codes sharing the same check sum - in the normal lab context. Health, Budapest, Hungary, 3National Genetics Reference Laboratory, St. Mary‘s We checked for random one letter changes first and focused on common Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Bogazici University CHE Biosystems Eng. human letter recognition issues in a second analysis. Based on these results Research Group, Istanbul, Turkey. we are further optimizing the algorithms for automatic correction of coding errors. P15.13 Spinal muscular atrophy is a hereditary motor neuron disease characterized About sequence quality: impact on clinical applications by proximal muscle weSaMknNe1ss due to degeneration of the anterior horn cells T. Noguchi1, V. Bourdon1, H. Sobol1,2; of the spinal corSdM. NAp1proximately 94% of patients with SMA reveal homo- 1Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 2Faculté de Médicine, Aix-Marseille zSyMgNo1us absence of the gene. However, small intragenic mSuMtNat1ions are Université, Marseille, France. not detected by gene dosage analysis andd teh neo pvroesence of two normal copies on one chromosome 5 can mask a deletion of on the other chromosome 5 (carrier). Subsequently, mutation rate is re- Advance of sequencing technologies is accelerating with a surprisingly fast latively high. Accurate risk assessment and clinical genetic counseling are rhythm, and it is clear that next-generation sequencing (NGS) should be in particularly important due to the genetic complexity and high SMA carrier clinic in near future. Recent survey shows that the introduction of desk- frequency. This external quality assessment scheme was designed to assess top sequencers like Ion Torrent PGM and Illumina MiSeq will be a primary laboratories’ abilities to correctly genotype cases suspected of having SMA growth driver for this new market. and to identify carriers of SMA. Each year three DNA sampleSsM (Nac1c ompSaMniNed2 Nevertheless, it doesn’t necessary mean the end of Sanger sequencing: re- by mock clinical information) were distributed to approximately 70 labora- cent comparative studies show that performance of NGS platforms varies tories from more than 30 countries after validation of the and considerably and different NGS instruments produce different types of er- gene copy numbers. Each laboratory sent in their written reports, usually rors. In short, the current NGS workflows are too heterogeneous for their accompanied by raw lab data. Each of the written reports iSsM mNa1rked for ge- technical characteristics to conceive any standardized clinical platform. Also notyping and subsequent interpretation according to predetermined eva- several surveys show a recent development of new markets for Sanger se- luation criteria. Most laboratories used MLPA to quantify gene copy quencing instruments designed for diagnosis, especially in China and one number for diagnostic and carrier analysis. The genotyping error rate has in- can imagine easily potential weight of this market. creased concomitant to a decreased number of labs with full interpretation Sanger sequencing remains the sequencing “gold-standard” for accuracy, score. A full report of the results of the SMA schemes and recommendations reliability and easy of use: used to validate the results of NGS. for best practice guidelines for molecular analysis of SMA are presented. However, even in Sanger sequencing the sequence quality definition re- mains fuzzy and too empirical for clinical applications. We realized a heuristic analysis of more than 31 000 sequence traces gene- rated in the clinical diagnosis and demonstrated that the sequence traces www.eshg.org qualities are inherently variable in routine practices and the most cwomwmwon.-eshg.org360 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genetic counseling ESHG Published Abstracts M. L. Sprincean1,2, E. Halabudenco1, N. Barbova1,2, M. Stratilă1, V. Nour1, V. Secrieru1; 1National Centre of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, 2State University of Medicine and Pharmacy “N. Testemitanu”, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova. J01. Genetic counseling, including Psychosocial aspects, Genetics education, Genetic services, and Background: The role of genetic counseling in prevention of chromosomal abnormalities as genetic diseases is emphasized in the study. Public policy Methods: Retro-prospective investigation included medico-genetic counse- ling of 572 pregnant women in 2006-2010. Were analyzed data regarding ultrasound examination, nuchal translucency, outflow tracts, biochemical J01.01 screening, double test, fetal karyotype in the second trimester of pregnan- Genetic counseling: association of microdeletion 22q11.2 and Fragile cy. X syndromes in one family Results: Prenatal diagnosis identified severe fetal pathologies to pregnant N. Rumiantsava, N. Venchikova, I. Novikova, O. Khurs, A. Polityko, L. Isakovich, K. Mosse; women. Chromosomal abnormalities spontaneously occur, regardless of Republican Medical Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. degree of genetic risk, as an outcome of ,,de novo” mutations. Diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities to fetuses by cytogenetic methods (amniocen- tesis) contributed to the detection of deviations in fetal karyotype before Association of few genetic disorders in one family is not rare. Quality of ge- their birth. netic counseling for the outcome prognoses (model of inheritance, risk) de- The age of pregnant women of low, medium and high genetic risk groups pends on the accuracy of nosologic diagnose. was from 17 to 44 years (average age 26,7 ± 5,1 years). We present results of clinical, genetic, laboratory, prenatal and morpho- The study of fetal karyotype in amniocentesis (at 16-18 weeks of gestation) logical investigations of the family, affected by del22q11.2 and Fragile X allowed to identify numerical and structural chromosomal abnormalities syndromes (FraX), detected by FISH and DNA studies. Parents were young, in 70 patients (12,2 %). From it: Down syndrome (n=28), Patau syndro- healthy, nonconsanguineous. G1: population risks, standard combined pre- me (n=4), Edwards syndrome (n=13), Turner syndrome (n=6), Klinefelter natal screening (SCPS) results were unremarkable, healthy girl was born. syndrome (n=5), other chromosomal abnormalities (n=14). Data analysis G2: SCPS data were normal at 1-st trimester, but heart defect, suspected via of fetal ultrasound indicated that the most frequent in the structure of the sonography at 16 weeks, was confirmed at 20 weeks of gestation. Fetus ka- serious fetal pathologies are the abnormalities of cardio-vascular system ryotype: 46,XX. Pregnancy was terminated due to fetus malformations. Mor- (7.0%), followed by the abnormalities of central nervous system (3.2%), phological examination showed heart defects (membranous VSD, bicuspid osteomuscular system anomalies (2.63%), renal system (2.7%) and dige- aortic valve, aortic stenosis, hypoplastic aorta ascendens, interrupted arch), stive system (1.06%). thymus aplasia, cleft palate. Presumably DiGeorge syndrome (del22q11.2) Conclusion: Using of prenatal diagnosis methods (fetal ultrasound, bioche- was confirmed by FISH (autopsy, lymphocytes of umbilical cord blood). mical screening, karyotyping) in genetic counseling helps to reduce the fre- Karyotype: ishdel(22)(q11.2q11.2)(N25-)dn. Parents had normal karyoty- quency of chromosomal abnormalities and congenital malformations. pes (GTG, FISH), low risk of del22q11.2 for offspring. G3: normal SCPS, but J01.04 pregnant had mentally retarded non-examined brothers (halfsibs) and nee- The Role of Genetic Counselling in the Prevention of Hereditary ded an outcome prognoses. FraX was detected by PCR in both (mother was Haemochromatosis: the perception of health professionals requesting obligate carrier of CGGn expansion). The daughter was not examined becau- HFE genotyping in Portugal se fetus (female) had low risk. G4. Pregnant underwent DNA examination of B. Leandro1, M. Paneque1, J. Sequeiros1, G. Porto2; FRM1 gene because of possible risk of FraX for fetus (male). Expansion of 1Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto, Portugal, 2Centro Hospitalar do Porto - CGGn was excluded (low risk), healthy boy born. Next pregnancy prognosis: Hospital Geral de Santo António, Porto, Portugal. population risks, SCPS. Scheme of genetic counseling and prenatal diagno- AIM - stics protocols, made for each pregnancy will be presented. J01.02 To understand physician’s main motivations behind requests for Are DentalFaculty Knowledgeable About Genetics and Understand its molecular tests of hereditary haemochromatosis and for consultation of ge- Implication forClinical Dental Practice and Education? netic counselling, accessing to current medical practices of screening and R. J. Crout1, G. T. Casto2; eRaErSlyU LdTiaSg n- osis of hereditary haemochromatosis and considering whether 1West Virginia University, Morgantown, WV, United States, 2Indian River State College, these can be improved to increase the effectiveness of prevention. Fort Pierce, FL, United States. There is still a lack of awareness by physicians (especially by Objective: general practitioners) about the patient cases that should be sent for genetic counselling or for molecular test in hereditary haemochromatosis. This can In a companion study, dental students at the West Virginia Uni- versity School of Dentistry (WVU SOD) were lacking “Knowledge, Skills, and cCoOmNpCrLoUmSiIsOeN th - e prevention of the disease (early diagnosis and treatment) and a primordial family-based screening. Attitudes Required for Oral Health Professionals to Care for Patients with It’s necessary to disclose more information about hereditary Genetic Conditions” utilizing the Report of Panel 3 of the Macy Study. The haemochromatosis among health professionals in order to improve strate- Maimet hiso tdos investigate the genetic knowledge, skills and attitudes of West Vir- gies for screening and diagnosis. ginia (WVU SOD) faculty utilizing the same report for specific questions. J01.05 : All full time dental faculty (32) were invited to answer 16, pri- Pregnant women disorders and indications of legal abortion in Iran marily Likert style questions (1= Strongly Agree to 5 =Strongly Disagree). M. Amirian1, A. Solimanpour2, Z. Nafei3; Questions included Knowledge: of genetic transmission; molecular biology 1Yazd Legal Medicine Organization -Legal Medicine Research Center, yazd, Islamic of the human genome; principals of population genetics; Skills: to perform a Republic of Iran, 2Yazd Legal Medicine Organization, yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, head/neck exam with special attention to signs of major genetic disorders; 3Shahid Sadoughi Medical University, yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. recognize when to refer a patient for genetic screening, testing, and counse- lRinegs;u Alttstitude: to understand the potential for genetics to contribute to the development of new approaches to prevention, diagnosis and treatment. Maternal mortality in the world has decreased because high level of health : 15 (46.9 %) participated. When it came to their Knowledge of trans- and medical science. But some medical conditions such as cogenital heart mission, biology of the human genome, principals of population genetics disease in pregnancy can cause maternal mortality. and Skills to perform a head/neck exam and when to refer, 62.2%, 51.2%, During pregnancy, pregnant women suffer from some diseases it can lead to 95.5% and 69.1% disagreed respectively. Attitude, however, revealed that infirmity, before sixteen weeks from last menstrual period, therefore the le- 6C6o.n7c%lu asigornee:d they understood the potential for genetics to contribute to gal abortion is recommended . This subject in Iran would be done by reque- new approaches of disease with 86.7 % interested in a CE update. sting from judicial authorities. It would be accepted by three experts who Although baseline knowledge and skills of the WVU SOD facul- are related to pregnant women disorders, then the legal abortion is issued ty were lacking, they recognized the importance of this new technology and by the legal medicine organization and eventually the legal abortion will be were interested in a CE update. done by Obstetrics and gynecologist in public hospital. J01.03 This case is about a twenty four years old woman who three years ago due Importance of prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities in to aortic valve stenosis after the first pregnancy, before sixteen weeks of pregnancy, abortion was permitted and performed but she desire to have children regardless of comment her doctor was pregnant and died during www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 361 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 delivery. A recent research has shown that there are important conflicts in and the generally inquisitive, to be the first comprehensive web-based gene- main branches of Islam that is related to the legal abortion but any disor- tics resource and to promote and increase awareness of genetic counselling ders which can lead to infirmity or critical condition for pregnant woman in South Africa. is an issue related to the legal medicine organization in Iran and the legal The website is intended to be accessible and informative to both the lay abortion is issued. public and medical professional. The focus is on genetic counselling and J01.06 its available services but the site also includes pages on knowledge share Assessing teaching and learning Medical Genetics (customised talks, corporate consults and continual professional develop- R. Dragotoiu; ment), resources (our pamphlets, and links to external information sites), Medical and Pharmacy University „Carol Davila“, Bucuresti, Romania. local and international news and events, and local support groups. In due course we intend to use this as the foundation to build the ultimate genetics resource in South Africa. In the last years I have tried to improve the outcome of teaching genetics to J01.09 medical first year students. This time I have questioned whether useful or Using internet social media to enhance public understanding of not to send the lessons by e-mail. genetics and provide support for the psychosocial concerns of genetic Students from the Medical and Phramacy University ,,Carol Davila” in carriers. Bucharest, were given twice the same two open questions during the first J. Karwoski; term. 132 students participated in the practicals I taught in the academic University of Nevada, Las Vegas, Las Vegas, NV, United States. year 2010/2011. 6 of them did not come to any of the two tests and 5 did not come to the second testing. In this academic year from 106 students 6 were absent at both tests. This year’s students received the lessons by e-mail. Communication is crucial to disseminating information and facilitating In this study I compared only the marks obtained by my students during the understanding. The Internet age provides unprecedented opportunity for second testing in the two different academic years. communication of ‘virtually’ anything at all. This presentation will introduce In case of this year’s students the higher marks were more frequent (table). a selection of current social media tools that are, or can be, used to faci- In both years the students received twice the questions, so that the repetiti- litate supportive communication among previously isolated individuals and on could not bias the result. The comparison was made only for the second families from around the world who are dealing with relatively rare gene- testing, when most of this year’s students became aware of having received tic health concerns. Several examples from the well over 500 online social by e-mail everything I had previously taught. networks will be considered in depth. The use of multilingual tools such as This study assessed the use of written material received from the teacher Facebook and Twitter will be summarized. and it showed that the purpose was achieved, students having better results Although many individual genetic disorders have a presence on the Inter- after learning individually, what was taught during oral presentations. net, their focus is understandably on what can be done for those with the Comparison between students achievements in disorder. But reproductive decision making is fraught for parents of affected the academic years 2010/ 2011 and 2011/ 2012 children, as well as for persons awSMare of their genetic risk prior to starting Marks obtained 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 a family. One site, MyBlueGenome (.org), aims to address issues of interest by students to genetic carriers regardless of the particular disorder of concern. Instead Students marks 0.8307.44 6.61 9.09 10.74 13.22 13.22 9.92 11.57 17.36 of dealing deeply with one disorder, it deals broadly with one aspect com- in 2010/ 2011 (%) Students marks mon to many disorders: coping with carrier status. The emphasis is on those in 2011/ 2012 (%) 3 1 6 1 5 9 7 10 18 18 22 psychosocial dimensions that require long-term engagement and the sup- J01.07 port of peers who have been through similar experiences. Resources such as Twinning antecedents in families of patients with Down Syndrome understandable summaries of research articles for the lay public and links S. Turyk, M. Sakurai; to related sites can do much to expand the genetic knowledge available to Hospital Britanico de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina. the public. J01.10 Pharmacogenomics and public health: Implementing Twinning has been reported in association with many chromosome abnor- populationalized medicine malities . It has been suggested that the incidence of Down Syndrome (D.S.)is L. A. Mette; significantly higher in multiple pregnancies than among singletons. The aim Charite Universitatmedizin, Berlin School of Public Health, Berlin, Germany. of this study is to describe the association of twin pregnancies in families of patients with D.S.. Contained within this report is a detailed clinical and genealogical history of 72 patients with Down Syndrome. Statistics show Pharmacogenomics is most commonly used in personalized medicine to that 41 (56,9%) with 47,XY,+21 karyotype and 31 (43,1%) with 47,XX,+21 individualize therapy for a patient where it holds the potential to increa- karyotype. The mean maternal age was 35,7 (age range 22-43 years) and se therapy benefits and minimize adverse drug reactions. Applying this the mean paternal age was 39,1 ( age range 19-58 years). The antecedent technology to a population would produce the same benefits, in addition of multiple pregnancies was found in 11 (15,2%) families. The rate of twin- to saving already scarce health resources. The objective of this study is to ning antecedents in D.S. families is significantly higher, compared with 2131 review what has been researched and published in the fields of pharmaco- families in the control group. It is very important for families with twinning genomics and public health, regarding how the two sciences can construc- antecedents to have genetic counselling in order to make prenatal diagno- tively intersect. Literature addressing pharmacogenomics in terms of glo- sis. bal burden infectious diseases, public health initiatives, and public policy J01.08 were researched in the PubMed database. Six major themes were identified Promoting genetic counselling in South Africa by creating a and further discussed: interactions between public health and pharmaco- comprehensive web-based genetics resource genomics, pharmacogenomics and drugs, pharmacogenomics and diseases, S. Erasmus, N. Kinsley; benefits of including pharmacogenomics in public health policy, keys for GC Network, Johannesburg, South Africa. implementing pharmacogenomics into public health policy, and points for consideration. Pharmacogenomics can prove to be a beneficial addition to a public health policy by maximizing therapeutic benefits, decreasing adverse Genetic counselling in South Africa is a developing field with 16 practising drug reactions, and allowing for a better allocation of resources. Indirect genetic counsellors. Annually, approximately 57,000 individuals with gene- health benefits can also be realized through economic advantages and in- tic defects are born in South Africa, while genetic counsellors see around ternational collaboration. The pharmacogenomics research surrounding 2,000 clients. To date, no genetic counselling information and/or genetics major infectious diseases (malaria, tuberculosis, and HIV/AIDS) is limited, resource website exists in South Africa even though internet usage is rapidly although important discoveries have been made. The implementation of increasing with 14% of the population accessing the internet in 2011 com- this information and its implications are far reaching, and deserve extensive pared to the 5.5% in 2000. More than 80% of the population have mobile consideration. In order to realize the full benefits of this technology, sup- phones that can potentially access the internet. port is needed from the private, public and governmental sectors in order The growth of, and access to genetic counselling in South Africa is hindered to ensure the appropriateness, acceptability and affordability of this tech- by the lack of awareness and knowledge by the public and healthcare pro- nology within a society. viders. To address this need, a new website http://www.geneticcounselling. co.za was created. The ultimate goals of this website are; to build an online www.eshg.org genetic counselling community thereby connecting professionals, wpawtiewnts.e shg.org362 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02. Clinical genetics and Dysmorphology diagnosis of autism is based on impairments in reciprocal social interaction and communication, and restricted and stereotyped patterns of interests J02.01 and activities, with abnormal development apparent within the first 3 years Detection of polymorphism µ-opioid receptor in addicted people to of life. Autistic spectrum disorders (ASDs) include: autistic disorder, child- opiate hood disintegrative disorder, pervasive developmental disorder-not other- A. Dinarvand1, M. Hashemi2, M. Zarindast3, R. Dinarvand3; wise specified, Asperger syndrome and Rett syndrome. There is substantial 1Islamic Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of evidence from twin and family studies to support the involvement of genetic Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, factors in ASDs. 3Tehran medical university, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. We report a case of 3 years old boy with echolalia, irrelevant talk, not com- prehensible. Muttered to himself occasionally, poor social interaction and avoided eye contact. He was unable to follow commands and responded to Addiction is a social problem in Iran and other countries. Studies have his name very rarely. The child was born after 8 yrs of a non consanguineous shown that addiction may be related to some factors including environment, marriage, gestation was controlled and it was a full term caesarean delivery. genes and fetal developmental events. This study has evaluated the effect The provisional clinical diagnosis was autistic features with hyperactivity. of gene and gene mutations in the mu opioid receptor (MOR). One of the Karyotype was normal, X-fragile syndrome analysis w®as nor®mal too and most important genes involved in addiction is the mu opioid receptor (MOR) was performed a genetic analysis using MLPA (SALSA MLPA Subtelome- gene located on the human chromosome number 6. This gene has multip- ric Screening P070, X-linked mental retardation P106 and Microdeletion le exons including exon number 3. Various mutations have been detected Syndromes P245). Analysis results showed a deletion in SHANK3 gene in in this exon which are involved in the effects of MOR gene. This study has 22q13.3. Parents were not carrier of this deletion. investigated the presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the exon Several studies have described similar results and these findings have led to 3 of MOR gene in Iranian people. 213 male and female individuals divided the hypothesis that haploinsufficiency of SHANK3 may cause the behaviou- into two groups of addicted and non-addicted subjects participated in the ral phenotypic consequences of severe expressive language delay, severe/ study. After preparing blood samples from subjects, DNA was extracted with profound mental retardation and at times autism. G-DEX kit. MOR gene exon 3 was amplified with thermocycler equipment. J02.04 PCR products were sequenced. And analysis by DNA MAN software, a 877 Beckwith-Wiedemann Syndrome in a newborn caused by aberrant G>A mutation and 759 C>T mutation was detected. Both of these samples methylation in KvDMR domain in 11p15 were belonged to non-addicted male subjects. Furthermore, in addicted, a G. Pi, A. Zuñiga, L. Pedrola, Y. Bello; 1043 G>C mutation was found. After analysis by x2 analysis. no significant Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. relationship between addiction and genotype and significant relationship between addiction and sex was obtained(P<0.05). This is the time which 1043 G>C mutation has been reported in Iran. Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) is an overgrowth disorder usually J02.02 (but not always) present at birth characterized by an increased risk of child- Phenotypic variant of Alpers syndrome in a Hungarian family hood cancer and certain congenital features. Five common features are used K. Hadzsiev1, K. Komlósi1, G. Kosztolányi1, A. Gál2, M. Molnár2, G. Csábi3, K. Hollódy3, B. to define BWS are: macroglossia, macrosomia, midline abdominal wall de- Melegh1; fects (omphalocele, umbilical hernia, diastasis recti), ear creases or ear pits, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Pécs, Hungary, 2Clinical and Research Center for and neonatal hypoglycemia. This condition is caused ba a genetic or epige- Molecular Neurology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary, 3Department of Pediatrics, Pécs, Hungary. netic alteration within two domains of imprinted growth regulatory genes in chromosome 11p15, leading to deregulated expression of the imprinted genes within this region. Approximately 60-70% of the patients have im- Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome is an auPtOoLsGom1al recessive mitochondrial printing abnormalities, other causes are uniparental disomy, mutations in DNA depletion syndrome that has been associated with pathogenic mutati- the CDKN1C gene as well as small deletions and translocations. ons in the mitochondrial polymerase γ ( ) gene. Comprised oxidative We report a case of a premature newborn of 7 months old referred to Neu- phosphorylation leads to progressive hepatoencephalopathy manifesting in ropaediatric Service. Parents were moroccan origin and without consangui- severe, often intractable seizures, myocloni and stroke-like episodes, psy- nity, with two previous normal children. Pregnancy was controlled and it chomotor regression and variable hepatic dysfunction. SympPtoOmLGs 1usually was diagnosed an appear following normal early development, initial symptoms are often omphalocele at 20 week. Birth was premature at 34 week with a weight infection-induced. The phenotypic spectrum associated with muta- 3,100 g, length 43,5 cm, cranial perimeter 34 cm and Apgar 8-9. There was a tions is very heterogeneous, even intrafamilial phenotypic variablity is ob- defective closure in abdominal wall of 3 cm with intestinal loops recovered served. with the We present a case of a 19 months-old boy in whom myocloni, lethargy and umbilical cord. Karyotype was normal and he was diagnosed as a phenotype elevated liver enzymes following a viral infection and a positive family hi- of BWS®. Genetic an®alysis was performed using DNA from PBL and MLPA story raised the possibility of Alpers syndrome. HisP sOisLtGer1 died at 18 months (SALSA MS-MLPA BWS/RSS ME030-C1). Methylation analysis showed an after an adenoviral infection provoked fulminant hepatoencephalopathy, aberration methylation of KvDMR domain in the 11p15 region, confirming however, no diagnosis was achived at that time. mutation analyis diagnosis of BWS. MS-MLPA results a low cost technique that is suitable for in our patient revealed compound heterozygosity for the common c.1399 detecting imprinting alterations. G>A (p.Ala467Thr) mutation and a novel, so far unpublished missense mu- J02.05 tation, c.3589 T>C (p.Cys1127Arg) in the polymerase domain. During the Late diagnosis of non-syndromatic intrahepatic biliary atresia. Case 11 months of follow-up no progression or neurologic deterioration and no presentation hepatopathy has been observed in our patient, despite abnormal EEG fin- O. N. Belei1, M. Pop2, T. Marcovici1, A. Militaru1, C. Daescu1, M. Puiu3; 1First Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, dings. The fulminant course in his sister might have been precipitated by Romania, Timisoara, Romania, 2Third Pediatric Clinic, University of Medicine and several environmental factors, including valproate therapy and adenPoOviLrGu1s Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania, 3Genetics infection. Department, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” Timisoara, Romania, Our case points to the difficulty of phenotype-genotype correlation in POLG1 Timisoara, Romania. mutation associated disorders. We recommend investigation of mtDNA de- pletion and multiple deletions from muscle tissue and analysis of the gene in all children with progressive neurodegeneration accompanied by Biliary atresia (BA) is a progressive obliteration of intra or extrahepatic bi- episodic, therapy resistent epilepsy and hepatic involvement. liary system occurring in neonatal period. During the perinatal period an J02.03 exogen factor influences the innate immune system of a genetically predis- Deletion of SHANK3 gene detected by MLPA in a patient with autistic posed individual inducing an uncontrollable immune response with conse- features and hyperactivity cutive atresia of the intra/extrahepatic bile ducts.Genetic factors that could F. Gonzalo, A. Zuniga, L. Pedrola, Y. Bello; account for the disease are assessed by recent studies.GWAS identified a Hospital de la Ribera, Alzira (Valencia), Spain. susceptibility locus for BA on 10q24.2, while other authors suggested region of potential disease susceptibility on 2q37.3. The authors present a case of a 3 months female uninvestigated by the time Autism is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder and one of the most heri- of admission.The infant was admitted for sclero-tegumentary jaundice table neuropsychiatric syndromes, with a male to female ratio of 4:1. The present since the first day of life and grow retardation.The family medical www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 363 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 history was insignificant.Clinical examination showed cutaneous trophic married, with normal parent. The mother was 39 year old gravid 6, and fa- disturbances and hepatosplenomegaly.The infant didn’t associated phenot- ther was 46 year old. They have recurrent abortion in pervious pregnancies, hypic particularities or others malformations.Biological assessment showed and 2 daughters. In examination the baby has dysmorphic features, who increased conjugated bilirubin, increased colestasis enzymes, hipertrans- had microgonathia, wide fontanel, Prominent eyes, Poor sucking, Congeni- aminasemia, hipercholesterolemia and negative serology for maternofetal tal heart disease, Asymmetric face, Ambigus genitalia, Reduction anomaly infections.The abdominal ultrasound combined with billiary scintigraphy in right hand, hypoplastic distal phalanges of 3th fingers, and thumbs, hip and liver biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of intrahepatic BA.The differential dislocation, and partial absence of clavicles(cleidocranial dysplasia).Her ka- diagnosis was made with Alagille syndrome-an autosomal dominant disor- ryotype analysis is normal. der that associates intrahepatic BA with heart, skeleton, eyes malformations J02.09 and characteristic facial appearance. A girl with possible Harboyan syndrome-a connection between corneal Besides medical treatment ursodeoxycholic acid, bile acid sequestrants and clouding and endolymph based hearing loss ? parenteral liposoluble vitamins, the patient was proposed for liver trans- T. B. Vamre; plantation. Dept. of medical genetics, Oslo, Norway. The particularity of this case was the late stage of BA diagnosis associating chronic cholestatic hepatitis (Knodell 14/Fibrosis 3).The diagnosis should be established in the first weeks of life at every infant with prolonged cole- She was born two weeks after term after an uneventful pregnancy. At the static jaundice by increasing the awareness about this condition to primary age of six months it was noticed that she had corneal clouding. Cornea was care physicians. oedematously thickened centrally. She made good eye contact. Visual acuity J02.06 was reduced; she could not see her parents five meters away, but play with Clinical features of a child with chromosomal abberation toys that she kept close to her eyes. She developed normally. 46,XY,der(9),t(9;12)(p24;p11.2) At the age of two she was diagnosed with Corneal endothelial dystrophy J. Jovanovic-Privrodski, I. Kavecan, M. Obrenovic, J. Rudež, L. Gacina, T. Tarasenko, D. (CHED2). She was homozygous for the c.2240+1G>A in the SLC4A11 gene Radovanov; on chromosome 20p13p12. It is a congenital dystrophy of cornea probably Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. due to failure in the function of sodium borate transporter. Swelling of the endothelial cells leads to destruction of cornea. Ion transporter SLC4A11 has been associated with sodium-dependent In this paper we report on a case of 17-months-old male child with chromo- transport of borate and flux of sodium and hydroxyl across cell membranes. somal abberation 46,XY,der(9),t(9;12)(p24;p11.2). This is first child from The maintenance of ion concentration influences several organs, including first pregnancy. Ultrasound examination during pregnancy showed normal the cornea, the status. Invasive prenatal diagnosis wasn‘t done. Diagnosis of chromoso- ear and the kidney. mal abberation was made after child was born. Karyotype of mother was At the age of four it was found that she had impaired hearing at the routine normal: 46,XX. Karyotype of father was presented balanced translocation: screening. Her hearing loss was mild, bilateral and basin shaped. Percepti- 46,XY,(9;12)(p24;p11.2). This child had: hypertelorism, epicanthic fold, high ve deafness is thought to be associated with ion concentration in the endo- forehead, thick eyebrow, anteverted nostrils, delayed skeletal maturation, lymph of the inner ear. small hand, mental retardation. Parents are counseled that they have risk in The hearing loss in Harboyan syndrome is progressive. One person in Great every next pregnancy of having fetal chromosomal aberations and they are Britain is reported to have this mutation, but in a heterozygous state. We are counseled for importance of having invasive prenatal procedure (amniocen- presenting this girl hoping to learn about the hearing loss. tesis or chorionic villi sampling) for diagnosis of unbalanced chromosomal J02.10 abberations because husband has balanced translocation. In this situation it New diagnostic problems in clinical genetics is importante for paretns to understand the risk for future pregnancy. Y. Lacassie; J02.07 Department of Pediatrics, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center and Phenotypic description of interstitial deletion of 6q in a 13-year old Children‘s Hospital, New Orleans, LA, United States. girl V. Okur, O. Cetin, A. Ayaz, F. Duzcan; Pamukkale University, Denizli, Turkey. The major goal of clinical evaluation in genetics is to establish the etiological diagnosis, the cornerstone for providing genetic counseling. Historically, the percentage of diagnoses established by geneticists has been low compared Approximately half of the dysmorphic patients have remained undiagnosed. to other medical specialties in which a phenotypic diagnosis may be enough. However, with implication of CGH and aCGH into clinical studies, most of With the recent advent of microarray-based comparative genomic hybridi- these cases are being diagnosed as chromosomal abnormality. Here, we re- zation (aCGH) which allows the rapid detection of submicroscopic genomic port, to best of our knowledge, the largest interstitial deletion of 6q with deletions and duplications, the number of etiological diagnoses established translocations of short arms of chromosomes 2 and 10. has progressively increased. However, there are many old and new diagno- 13-year-old girl, born to nonconsanguineous couple, had referred to us with stic problems, frequently neglected, that contribute to make it difficult to developmental delay/mental retardation, deafness, insomnia, dysphagia, establish the diagnosis. characteristic expressionless glance and dysmorphic findings of skeletal At the Latin-American Association of Genetics (ALAG)’s meeting in Mexico system. We, first, cytogenetically detected distal deletion of 6q with trans- in 1994, we first presented a classification delineating four groups of pro- location of chromosomes 2 and 10.Then we performed subtelomeric FISH blems. For teaching and educational purposes, we recognized problems analysis which revealed intact subtelomeric signals of both 6pter and 6qter. due to the patient, the disease, the observer, and the environment. This Hence, we determined that the chromosomal abnormality of our patient is systematic review and illustration of different diagnostic problems creates interstitial deletion of long arm of chromosome 6 between bands of 6q16 to awareness and improves the effectiveness of medical practice. With the 6q25 with t(2;10)(p14;p13). The next step is to perform aCGH to identify new technologies, big advances have been made but also new problems deletion size and exact breakpoints in order to correlate dysmorphic fin- have been recognized. In 2008 this classification was expanded to include a dings with genotype of patient. fifth group: problems of informatic due to the interpretation of microarray J02.08 (aCGH) results mainly secondary to the incomplete knowledge about CNV First Alive Case of Yunis-Varón syndrome in Iran, and phenotype-genotype correlation. The application of aCGH to diagnosis Z. Hadipour, Y. Shafeghati, F. Hadipour; is evolving and requires intense communication among clinical geneticists Genetic Department ,Sarem Cell Research center & Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Republic of and the laboratory specialists about their specific clinical queries or trou- Iran. blesome cases. In this presentation we will review the diagnostic process and will illustrate and discuss different diagnostic problems. J02.11 The Yunis-Varón syndrome (YVS) represents a rare autosomal recessive Variable expression of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome in sibs syndrome of easy recognition characterized by cleidocraneal dysplasia, os- E. Sukarova-Angelovska, M. Kocova, N. Angelkova, S. Palcevska; sification defects, absence of thumbs and halluces, distal aphalangia, ecto- Pediatric Clinic, Skopje, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. dermal anomalies, generalizedHypotrichosis, and poor outcome. It is a mul- tisystem disorder which, affect the skeletal, ectodermal, and cardio respira- tory system. The molecular basis is unknown. Here, we report a 3.5 month Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a diverse group of syndromes caused by old female neonate with Yunis-Varón syndrome, born to a consanguineously defect synthesis of collagen. It affects mostly skin, joints and blood vessels. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org364 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.14 Facio-audio-symphalangism Syndrome in a patient with partial There are six major subtypes described so far, with variable mode of inheri- 17q22monosomy involving NOG gene tance. Additional subtypes are described linked with other comorbidities. V. Ginocchio1, G. Cappuccio1, P. Boemio1, R. Genesio2, G. Minopoli1, A. Casertano1, A. We describe two sibs with major features of EDS. Two sibs - older sister Mormile2, P. Tedeschi2, L. Nitsch2, G. Andria1, D. Melis1; and younger brother share the same facial features - broad face with coarse 1Department of Pediatrics Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Cellular facial features, sagging cheeks, long, smooth filtrum, sparse hair, joint laxity, and Molecular Biology and Pathology Federico II University, Naples, Italy. thin lax skin with skin wrinkling, hyperextensibility, poor skin healing with forming an atrophic scars. Both children had mitral valve prolaps. The girl , now aged 25 years started to lose her hair progressively, have mild form of Multiple Synostosis Syndrome (SYNS - also called Facio-audio-symphalan- kyphoscoloisis and experiencing menstrual irregularities. The boy develops gism) is an AD disorder characterized by fusion of the proximal interphalan- seizures at the age of 14 years. EEG revealed spike-wave complexes. CT scan geal joints of the hands, multiple and progressive joint fusions in the hands, and magnetic imaging showed demyelinisation that progressed in years. feet, cervical vertebrae, hips, brachydactyly, subluxation of the radial heads, During the last several years his mental and motor abilities deteriorated. associated with facial anomalies, strabismus and conductive hearing im- Also the kyphoscoliosis that has been noticed at puberty became significant. pairment. It is commonly caused by NOG (17q22) mutations, as a part of the The diagnosis in both children was established by skin biopsy and histology so-called “NOG-related Symphalangism Spectrum Disorders”. We report a evaluation so far, showing destruction of collagen fibers. 11-years old boy presenting with synostosis of the proximal interphalangeal Last classification of EDS is made upon major signs and symptoms that are joints of the fifth finger of the hands, tall stature, facial anomalies (broad present in the patient. Intrafamilial variability is described. In this case ky- nasal bridge, hypoplastic alae nasi, thin upper lip, prognatism), webbed se- phoscoliotic type with variable expression can be suspected . Since both cond and third toes, pes valgus, synostosis of cervical vertebrae C3-C4, sub- children had aged appearance that progresses with age, also progeriod form luxation of the radial heads, conductive hearing loss; he had normal mental is assumed as well. Further evaluation is needed in this family. development. CT-scan of temporal bones and brain MRI showed normal J02.12 data. A clinical diagnosis of SYNS was proposed. It is noteworthy that tall Examination of SCN1B in Iranian epileptic patient stature has been described in 2 other cases of SYNS. Search for mutations B. Sedaghatikhayat1, N. Hatamnejadian1, M. Moghaddasi2, S. Zeinali3, M. Fallah4, A. in the NOG gene resulted negative. Array-CGH analysis with a resolution of Ebrahimi1; 100 Kb revealed a partial monosomy of 17q22, extending for about 320 kb, 1Parseh medical Genetics Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Rasool Akram including the NOG gene. Deletions of the 17q22 have been associated to a Hospital, Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Kawsar Human Genetics more complex phenotype, including microcephaly, developmental delay, Research Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Kawsar human genetics research heart malformations, limbs anomalies (including symphalangism), tracheo- center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. esophageal fistula and hearing loss (either sensorineural or conductive). To our knowledge, this is the first case of SYNS due to a specific NOG gene deletion. Epilepsy is a common chronic neurological disorder that is characterized J02.15 by recurrent unprovoked seizures. Molecular studies of candidate genes Fibrochondrogenesis in a 26-week fetus: Hepatic fibrosis can help us to define a correct differential diagnosis. So we studied SCN1B U. Çetincelik, A. Atıs, D. Sakız; gene in Iranian patient with Idiopathic Epilepsy includes Febrile Seizure, Sisli Etfal Training & Research Hospital, İstanbul, Turkey. Generalized Epilepsy with Febrile Seizure (GEFS+) or Dravet syndrome, diagnosed clinically, to explain genotype-phenotype correlation. Materials and Method: We screened 34 selected epileptic unrelated Iranian propends Fibrochondrogenesis is a rare condition, neonatally and perinatally lethal for all coding regions of SCN1B by PCR amplification and direct Sequencing. osteocondrodysplasia with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance. The All families and propends were previously screened for SCN1A and mtDNA disease is clinically characterized by a flat midface with a small nose and an- mutations. Results: PCR amplification of whole coding regions and splicing teverted nares, significant shortening of all limb segments and a small bell- site of SCN1B followed by direct sequencing revealed tow novel sequence shaped thorax with a tuberant abdomen. We report a 26-week male fetus variation in patients (p.248 R>S, p.210 L>P) which did not detected in the in which the diagnosis of lethal osteochondrodysplasia was suspected on healthy normal family members. Conclusions: According to final results it prenatal ultrasound. After termination of pregnancy, fibrochondrogenesis seems that these two novels SCN1B variations are not causative mutation in was confirmed in the postpartum physical and radiological examination, the epileptic patients but they can act as genetic predisposition factors in epi- histopathological study showed us the presence of hepatic fibrosis in addi- leptic phenotypes which introduce susceptibility especially in response to tion to fibrochondrogenesis. Here we present a new case of fibrochondroge- antiepileptic drugs. nesis with hepatic fibrosis which is not previously described. We discussed J02.13 the molecular pathogenesis of the case. Clinical and genetic studies in in Ewing sarcoma J02.16 R. Stefanescu, S. Dumitriu, C. A. Popa, M. Puiu; Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP) in Cyprus: First case University of Medicine &Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. report and management issues G. A. Tanteles, T. Delikurt, E. Spanou, A. Kotti, V. Anastasiadou-Christophidou; Cyprus Institute of Neurology & Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. Throughout the latest years the results in treatment for familial Ewing’s sarcoma, in the metastasis-free stages, have considerably improved. The prognosis remains somber for the metastatic disease patients at the first Fibrodysplasia Ossificans Progressiva (FOP; MIM#135100), is a very rare diagnosis time point or in case of relapse after therapy. Inefficient chemo- and severely disabling autosomal dominant genetic disorder characterised therapy and the relapse are the major mortality causes in Ewing’s sarcoma by congenital malformation of the great toes and progressive heterotopic patients. For improving the therapy outcome in patients with potential re- endochondral ossification in specific anatomic patterns. Bone forms at ex- lapse, the discovery of reliable markers that predict the tumor “behavior”, traskeletal sites within tissues such as skeletal muscles, tendons, ligaments, help making the diagnosis or identifying the therapeutic molecular targets fasciae and aponeuroses. Attempts to surgically remove heterotopic bone when relapse, is mandatory. risk provoking explosive and painful new bone growth. Although most cases The study group includes 5 cases with Ewing syndrome, diagnosed and occur in individuals with no prior family history of FOP, autosomal domi- treated in the Pediatric Oncology & Hematology Clinic in Timisoara. The dia- nant inheritance has been observed in a small number of families. gnostic protocol has included genetic testing (cytogenetic and molecular) We report a 27-year-old lady with FOP, the first case ever reported in Cyprus. and morphopatology testing (histomorphology, immunohistochemistry). She presented with a long standing history of joint stiffness, episodic painful This article’s scope is to highlight this way, the present concepts of the sar- inflammatory soft tissue swellings over the arms aAnCdV bRa1c k and increasing coma genesis in Ewing’s sarcoma and the comparison of different molecu- mobility difficulties starting from her early teens. Analysis revealed that she lar markers which could affect its prognosis or contribute to the develop- was heterozygous for the c.617G>A (p.Arg206His) mutation, repor- ment of future therapies. A better understanding of the cells of origin and ted in all classically affected FOP patients. She has recently started having the molecular pathways that regulates carcinogenicity in Ewing’s sarcoma reduced could help in finding new therapies in Ewing’s sarcoma. temporomandibular joint mobility and chewing difficulties. The case illu- strates management complexities for rare disorders particularly in relative- ly small centres. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 365 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.17 Identification of a novel de novo mutation in FLNA in a patient with late onset temporal lobe epilepsy abnormalities may be responsible for some forms of HCM. Point mutations A. Beleza-Meireles1, L. Ramos1, U. Hehr2, F. Sales3, J. M. Saraiva1; and deletions in the two hot spot regions of mtDNA were investigated by 1Department of Medical Genetics, Paediatric Hospital, CHUC EPE, Coimbra, Portugal, PCR and sequencing methods. Results: Some unreported point mutations 2Center for and Department of Human Genetics, University of Regensburg, Regensburg, have been found in this study but no deletion was detected. Meanwhile some Germany, 3Department of Neurology, Coimbra University Hospital, CHUC EPE, Coimbra, of these point mutations have been investigated among HCM patients for the Portugal. first time. Conclusions: A8860G transition was detected in a high proporti- on, raising the question whether this rare polymorphism is associated as a secondary effect in HCM disease. Cortical malformations associated with defects in neuronal migration result J02.20 in severe developmental consequences including intractable epilepsy and Hemifacial microsomia: case report - from diagnosis to management intellectual disability. However, female carriers of X-linked disorders may C. D. Bratu, D. Belengeanu, M. Stoian, A. Belengeanu; present very subtle clinical manifestations. University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania. We present the case of previously healthy 34 year old woman, daughter of consanguineous parents, referred to our clinic due to late onset partial focal epilepsy. The initial presentation consisted of lightheadedness, dysphoric Hemifacial microsomia (HFM) is the most frequently encountered form of episodes and other unspecific symptoms, sometimes followed by loss-of- isolated facial asymmetry and is the second most common facial anomaly. consciousness. The diagnosis of temporal lobe epilepsy was suggested. An The prevalence is 1 in 3000 up to 1 in 5600 births. HFM is an early vascular MRI scan of the brain identified bilateral symmetric periventricular nodular disruption, possible associated with chromosomal anomalies. Males appear heterotopias. to be more affected than females and the right side of the face is affected There was no relevant family history. Since the patient was planning a preg- more frequent. We report a 13 year old male patient with right hemifacial nancy, she was referred for genetic counseling at the Medical Genetics De- microsomia and discuss the management steps from diagnosis to treatment partment. Due to her parents’ consanguinity, we performed linkage analysis aiming to improve the facial and occlusal aspects. The orthodontic diagno- for the ARFGEF2 locus, which revealed that the patient was homozygous for stic was class II division 1 malocclusion with frontal open bite. The maxilla all informative markers. We proceeded to sequence analysis of this gene, was narrowed on the involved side with decreased palatal width and unila- which identified no mutation. de novo teral crossbite. Three-dimensional CT reconstruction showed hypoplastic, We then performed sequencing of FLNA, associated with X-linked periven- malformed right mandibular body, minimal underdevelopment of the con- tricular nodular heterotopia. A missense mutation p.Pro97Ser was dyle and unilateral aplasia of the mandibular ramus, with absence of the identified in exon 2. This mutation has not been described previously, and is glenoid fossa. On the involved side: zygomatic arch was incomplete, maxilla, predicted to be disease causing. squamous temporal and malar bone were small; ear presented malformed The knowledge of this mutation will allow specific genetic counseling to this lobule with rest of pinna absent and bony atresia of external auditory canal; patient, who is at risk of having severely affected sons. This report also high- hypoplasia of facial muscles has also been observed. Orthodontic treatment lights the importance of considering de novo mutation in consanguineous and partial aesthetic solving of the disability with silicone implant on the families. affected part improved the patient’s facial appearance. The treatment of pa- J02.18 tients with HFM requires an interdisciplinary approach including at least Clinical and genetical study of patients from Republic Bashkortostan maxillofacial surgery, plastic surgery and orthodontics. Co-operation not with novel mutation in GJB1 gene. only within the team, but also with the patients and their families is essenti- D. Galieva1, E. Saifullina1, I. Skachkova2, I. Khidiyatova2, R. Magzhanov1, E. al in order to achieve the best results. Khusnutdinova2; J02.21 1Bashkir State Medical University, Ufa, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Ufa, Russian Federation. Hereditary multiple exostoses - clinical study of nine illustrative cases M. GROZAVU1, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha1, L. Butnariu3, M. Panzaru3, S. Popa3, R. Ababei3, C. Iacob3, E. Gorduza3, C. Rusu3; 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2Pediatric Hospital „Sfanta Maria“, Hereditary motor-sensory neuropathy IX occurs in 13,7 % of all HMSN ca- Iasi, Romania, 3University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Grigore T.Popa“, Iasi, Romania. ses in the Republic of Bashkortostan. Two out of three GJBI missense mu- tations were previously described: p.Pro87Ala (259C>G) and p.Arg22Gln (c.65G>A). The p.Thr86Ile (c.257C>T) mutation is novel. In the family with Hereditary multiple exostoses (HME) is a rare medical condition in which novel mutation the disease began in two males in their second decade of multiple bony spurs/lumps (exostoses/osteochondromas) develop on the life and was characterized by severe impairment of the peripheral nerves bones of a child. The prevalence is estimated at 1:50,000 and seems to be with CNS involvement. Their clinical picture was presented by progressive higher in males (male/female ratio 1.5:1). weakness and wasting of distal extremities, reduced sensation of proprio- We present a clinical study of 9 cases of HME (6 male and 3 female) dia- ception, sensitive ataxia, bilateral pes equinovarus deformity. Generalized gnosed in our Medical Genetics Center, to discuss suggestive features, par- postural tremor, muscle fasciculations in the hands were seen in one of the ticularities, long term follow-up, management and genetic counseling. This patients. Median motor conduction velocity (MCV) was 33 m/s, the M-am- exploratory descriptive aims also to study the impact on daily living activi- plitude was 3 mV. In one of female patients, first signs of the disease also ties and quality of life. appeared in her second decade of life. Her clinical picture was presented by According to literature, most commonly involved bones are the femur(30%), bilateral pes equinovarus deformity, distal hypoestesia, mild weakness of di- radius/ulna(26%), tibia(20%) and fibula (13%). Hand deformity, resulting stal parts of the hands, moderate weakness of the legs. Four female patients from shortened metacarpals, is common. Axial sites, such as the pelvis, sca- had no health complaints. Meanwhile, physical examination showed the ab- pula, ribs and spine are more commonly the location of degeneration of sence of the Achilles reflexes in two of them. In the remaining two patients osteochondromas to chondrosarcoma. - neuropathy signs were identified by electroneuromyography alone. In our study exostoses are present in all patients. The most frequently invol- J02.19 ved bones were tibia and fibula - 6 cases (66.7%), ribs and scapula 4 cases Is 8860 variation a rare polymorphism or associated as a secondary (44.4%), humerus, radius/ulna and fist 3 cases (33.3%), the femur and knee effect in HCM disease? are affected in 2 cases (22.2%), the spine and elbow in 1 case (11.1%). 3 M. Montazeri, P. Bahgdadi, M. Houshmand, M. Ataei, M. Salek; cases were familial. No tumoral degeneration was identified. National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic Other associated anomalies are: scoliosis, lower-back pain, moderate pec- of Iran. tus excavatum, tumefaction of the elbow joint, brachydactyly, clinodactyly of fifth finger, long fourth finger, genu valgum. In conclusion, we present the clinical study of 9 illustrative HME cases, Introduction: mtDNA defects, both deletions and point mutations, have been discussing particularities and consequences on daily living and quality of associated with hypertrophic cardiomyopathies. The aim of this study was life, as well as management and genetic counseling issues. to establish a spectrum for mtDNA mutations in Iranian hypertrophic cardio - myopathy (HCM) patients. Material and methods: The control group was chosen among the special medical centre visitors who did not have hypertro- phic cardiomyopathy or any related heart disease. Hypertrophic cardiomyo- pathy (HCM) is widely accepted as a pluricausal or multifactorial disease. Because of the linkage between energy metabolism in the mitochondria and cardiac muscle contraction, it is reasonable to assume that mitochondrial www.eshg.org www.eshg.org366 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.22 Clinical and imagistic correlations among pathological forms of Terminator XL holoprosencephaly respectively, were analyzed using direct terminatorsequencing technology M. Boia, D. Iacob, A. Manea; (ABI-BigDye- v1; 3130 ). In DCM a panel of the most frequent University of Medicine and Pharmacology ‚V.Babes‘, Neonatology, Timisoara, Romania, dRiesseualstes :genes LMNA (encoding for Lamin A/C), MYBPC3, MYH7 and TNNT2 Timisoara, Romania. respectively, underwent analyses. In HCM of 104 pts in n=54 pts (52%) using the HCM diagnostic pa- nCeoln ac mluustiaotnios:n in one of the disease genes could be found, whereas in DCM of Introduction: 22 pts in n=3 pts (14%) using the DCM diagnostic panel could be detected. The absence or the incomplete cleavage of prosencephalon into diencepha- In molecular diagnostics of serial HCM and DCM patients lon and telencephalon in the 4-8 th weeks of fetal life, leads to holoprosen- using specific panels of the most frequent disease genes in HCM more than cephaly. This is often associated with severe facial anomalies, microcephaly, a half of all patients and in DCM more than 10% of all cases could be geno- hipertelorism and labio-palatine clefting. typed positively. This is comparable to study based data. These findings indi- There are multiple and various genetic implications (chromosomal deleti- cate the positive transfer of scientific data into clinical routine use in favour ons 2p21; 7q36; trisomy 13) which are associated with multiple environ- of a better patients care in the field of genetic counseling. mental factors. J02.25 In this paper the authors aim to process the clinical and imagistic data resul- KID syndrome: multiple joint contractures in Lithuanian patient with ted from the study of 4 clinical cases. GJB2 gene mutation Material and method: B. Burnyte1,2, A. Utkus1,2, H. Gabriel3, V. Kučinskas1,2; The study lot consisted of 4 newborn: 3 on term newborn with GA (gestatio- 1Department of Human and Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Vilnius University, nal age)= 39-40 weeks and BW (birth weight)= 3500-4000 g and 1 new born Vilnius, Lithuania, 2Centre for Medical Genetics, Vilnius University Hospital Santariskiu with IUGR (intrauterine growth restriction). Klinikos, Vilnius, Lithuania, 3Diagenos, Osnabrueck, Niedersachsen, Germany. On term newborn presented labio-palatine clefting; two of them presented cardiac malformations (Atrial septal defect and Ventricular septal defect); they were classified as having Semilobar Holoprosencephaly. Keratitis-ichthyosis-deafness (KID) syndrome is a rare congenital ecto- Newborn diagnosed with Semilobar Holoprosencephaly had altered pheno- dermal disorder, characterized by the presence of localized erythematous type: hipertelorism (2 clinical cases); labio-palatine clefting (3 clinical ca- scaly skin lesions, sensorineurGaJlB d2eafness and severe bilateral keratitis. We ses); micrognathia; flattened nose and upper implanted ear. present the first Lithuanian patient with a heterozygous missense mutati- Cranial ultrasound and MRI showed anomalies of the interhemisferic split, on c.148G>T (p.Asp50Tyr) in . The boy has typical clinical features for agenesis of the posterior region of corpus callosum, various degrees of fusi- KID syndrome consisting of diffuse hyperkeratotic erythroderma, bilateral on of the lateral ventricles, the absence of cavum septum pellucida. keratoconjunctivitis, moderate bilateral sensorineural hearing loss, parony- Conclusions: chia with nail dystrophy, alopecia totalis. Besides, he developed multiple Semilobar Holoprosencephaly is a severe form of illness due to the brain joint contractures at the age of 3. To our knowledge, these findings have not malformation which determines growth anomalies and severe neurological been reported previously. We propose that the multiple joint contractures retardation. observed in our patient with p.Asp50Tyr are a severe subtype of Keratitis- ichthyosis-deafness syndrome, thus expanding the spectrum of connexin- J02.23 associated keratodermias. MLPA analysis in 25 Brazilians individuals with Holoprosencephaly B. F. Gamba1, C. C. Legnaro2, M. C. S. Sandri2, A. Richieri-Costa2, L. A. Ribeiro-Bicudo2; J02.26 1Universidade Estadual Paulista - Unesp/Brazil, Botucatu, Brazil, 2Hospital de Possible mosaicism in a case of lingual plexiform neurofibroma Reabilitação de Anomalias Craniofaciais - HRAC-USP, Bauru, Brazil. F. F. Cionca1, L. Cionca2, C. Nastasia2, C. Ardeleanu1; 1“Victor Babes“ National Institute for Research and Development in Pathology and Biomedical Sciences, Bucharest, Romania, 2“Prof. Dr. Dan Teodorescu“ Clinical Hospital of Oro-Maxilo-Facial Surgery, Bucharest, Romania. Holoprosecephaly is a common disorder of the developing forebrain in humans, occurring with a frequency of 1:250 conceptuses. The etiology is heterogeneous and complex, as this developmental disorder can be due Introduction to environmental factors, chromosomal aberrations, or genetic anomalies. Neurofibromatosis type I is typically an autosomal dominant inherited dis- SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes are the four major genes implicated in the order with complete penetrance and variable expressivity, generated by the susceptibility to HPE, but have only been found to explain 25% of the ge- neurofibromin mutation, a tumor suppressor gene located on chromosome netic cases, including mutations and microdeletion. We analyzed a cohort 17q11.2. 26 individuals within the holoprosencephaly spectrum thought Multiplex 50% of the cases are mutations de novo, with no other affected family mem- Ligation Dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique using P187 Ho- bers. Somatic mosaicism accounts for many sporadic cases. loprosencephaly Kit (MRHC-Holland®). All individuals have been previous- The classic NF1 is characterized by multiple neuro-fibromatous tumors, in- ly analyzed for mutation in SHH, ZIC2, SIX3 and TGIF genes. We found one cluding the plexiform neurofibroma, cafe-au-lait spots, freckling of the groin case with deletion in SHH gene. Numerous isolated HPE case reported have or the axilla, Lisch nodules in the eye and skeletal abnormalities. shown that most of the chromosomes have been implicated, emphasizing The patients have increased susceptibility to develop other benign or mali- the genetic heterogeneity of HPE. Considering this multigenic aspect of the gnant tumors, so they need regular follow-up to detect malignant degenera- disease, investigation of HPE loci and identification of new HPE genes must tion, an early recurrence or appearance of other manifestations. be continued. Mutations and deletions in HPE genes do not always lead to A particular aspect is described in some patients, presenting only one clini- physical signs of HPE, however this information may be helpful for genetic cal criterion of diagnostic, possibly generated by a mosaic form and having, counseling purposes. in this situation, serious implications for the patient’s evolution and its fa- Grants: Fapesp n° 2010/18740-2 mily. J02.24 Case presentation Findings in a routine setup of molecular diagnostics in Hypertrophic A 29 years old male was hospitalized for a large tumor located on the right and Dilated Cardiomyopathy hemi tongue. There were no other clinical findings in physical examination. C. Meyer-Kleine1, P. Binner1, W. Maerz2, T. Scheffold3; 1synlab MVZ Bad Nauheim, Bad Nauheim, Germany, 2Institute of Public Health, The pathological personal antecedents and the family history were negati- University Heidelberg, Mannheim, Germany, 3Celenus Fachklinik, Freiburg, Germany. ve. Histological examination demonstrated the presence of a lingual plexiform Background: neurofibroma. Many findings has been published regarding the genetic Conclusion background of hypertrophic (HCM) and dilated (DCM) cardiomyopathies. Despite their occurrence in the head and neck region, neural sheath tumors Hundred of mutations in a vast number of disease genes could be identified. are rare in the oral cavity; oral manifestations are reported much often in However, most data were established using well defined study populations. patients affected by neurofibromatosis. IMna ctoenrtiraalsst a, onndl ym feewth doadtsa: are available about routine patients without study Because of this, we think our patient may present a form of mosaicism and based preselection bias. needs genetic testing for NF1 mutations, considering the possible implica- We studied n=104 consecutive patients with HCM tions. and n=22 cases with DCM. In HCM a panel of the most frequent disease genes MYH7, MYBPC3, TNNT2, and TNNI3 encoding for ß-myosin heavy chain, myosin binding protein C, cardiac troponin T and cardiac troponin I www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 367 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.27 Investigation of Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) in 25 Iranian NF1 patients teria in adults which are unsatisfactory in children. The responsible gene v. ghodsinejadkalahroudi1, a. arastehkani1, m. balali1, o. aryani1, m. houshmand2; is the tumor-suppressor coding for the neurofibromin. Approximately 1special medical center, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute for Genetic 50% of cases represent new mutations. Engineering and Biotechnology, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. We describe the phenotypic and genetic variations in 39 Greek NF1 pati- ents anNdF p1o int out the significance of early genetic testing, aged 7-months to 34-years (21 males/18 females).13 patients underwent molecular analysis Familial Mediterranean fever (FMF) is an Autosomal recessive disorder cha- of the by cDNA sequencing of all exons and were found positive, 6 of racterized by recurrent Attacks of fever and inflammation in the peritone- them were younger than four years. If no mutation was detected the pre- um, synovium, or pleura, accompanied by pain. FMF is caused by mutations sence/absence of deletions was verified by MLPA. Our patients presented in MEFV gene that is located at 16p13.3 and encodes a protein, pyrin or ma- the following NF1 clinical features: café-au-lait spots in 34/39, two or more renostrin. neurofibromas in 15/39, axillary or inguinal freckling in 9/39, optic glioma In this study , PCR and sequencing method was performed for four high rate in 2/39, two or more Lisch nodules in 5/39, bony lesions in 13/39 and a mutation exons of MEFV gene (2,3,5,10) in 25 unrelated Iranian patients. first-degree relative affected with NF1 in 15/39. 5/39 patients had tumors The most frequent homozygote mutation was R202Q (in %24), followed by (except neurofibromas) and mental retardation presented in 7/39 individu- M694V (in 16%), and M680I (in 8%). Eight percent were compound hetero- als older than 3 years. 15/39 patients had abnormalities in the brain MRI. zygotes for three mutations (V726A, E167D, F479L). 4/13 patients analyzed, carried novel mutations, 4/13 had missense, 2/13 J02.28 frameshift, 6/13 nonsense and 1/13 a large deletion. Proband with Hunter syndrome: ten years later From our small group of NF1-patients we must strongly recommend the M. O. Mkheidze, E. S. Shabanova; implementation of molecular testing at an early age as clinical diagnosis is The North-West State Medical University named after I. I. Mechnikov, St.Petersburg, difficult in young children. The sooner the molecular analysis is performed Russian Federation. the more beneficial it is for the family counselling and the follow-up of the patients. J02.31 Mucopolysaccharidosis II, Hunter syndrome (MPS II, OMIM 309900, Xq28, A particular presentation in a possible case of segmental IDS, OMIM 300823), is a rare disorder caused by deficiency of the lysosomal neurofibromatosis Type I enzyme iduronate sulfatase ((EC 3.1.6.13), leading to progressive accumu- F. M. NEDELEA1, L. Turculet1, V. Plaiasu2, C. Ailenei1, G. Peltecu1,3; lation of glycosaminoglucans in nearly all cell types, tissues, and organs. We 1Clinical Hospital Filantropia, Bucharest, Romania, 2Institute for Mother and Child reported on this case of HS in EJHG, v.11, Suppl 1, P. 166, 2003. Now proband ”Alfred Rusescu”, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Medicine ”Carol Davila”, Bucharest, is 18 yr aged. His intelligence is normal and the youth is the tenth grader of Romania. a comprehensive school. Proband has progressive coarsening of facial fea- tures, short stature (124cm) and underweight (32kg), skeletal deformities of thorax and feet, protuberant abdomen, hypermetropic astigmatism (S=D), Neurofibromatosis type I is an autosomal dominant condition, with birth chronic purulent ethmoiditis, cerebral ventricular dilation, cardiac valvular incidence 1/3500 and a high degree of variability of clinical expression. disease (myxomatosis of mitral valve and mitral regurgitation, cardiomyo- Segmental or regional neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is diagnosed in in- pathy), hepatosplenomegaly. Joint mobility is decreased, and the fingers dividuals who have features of NF 1, restricted to a part of the body and have clawlike deformities. Laboratory findings and imaging studies were has an incidence approximately 1/40.000. Some of those patients displaying found to show moderate abnormalities. Unilateral auditory prosthetics was only pigmentary changes or dermal neurofibromas, and others having both made. Care for our patient with HS involves a multidisciplinary approach features . and includes pediatrician, neurologist, orthopedist, otolaryngologist, oph- In some cases the unusual distribution of features is probably just a chance thalmologist, geneticist etc. To our regret ERT was not available. occurrence in a individual with NF1. In other individuals segmental neurofi- J02.29 bromatosis type I represents mosaicism for a somatic NF 1 mutation. Novel mutations detected in the NF1-gene We report a case of a 30 years old woman who associates plexiform neuro- F. Joncourt, S. Gallati; fibroma in lumbar region,and has also a pigmented area with asymmetrical Division of Human Genetics, University Hospital, Bern, Switzerland. distribution in lumbar region, flanks, and downwards on superior parts of the legs. She is the first affected person in her family. Because the tumor growth is progressive and patient associates also pain the surgical remo- Mutations in the NF1 gene are the cause of Neurofibromatosis type1, the val is the first priority.Patient wants to have children after this interventi- most common tumor-predisposing disorder in humans. As the mutation rate on, but counselling is very difficult, knowing that have been reported cases in the NF1-gene is among the highest known, analysis of the NF1 gene conti- with segmental NF1 whose children have typical NF1. Prenatal diagnosis is nues to reveal novel mutations in many patients. Because of the large size of controversial and limited , because even in presence of molecular diagnosis the gene, the lack of a mutation hot spot and the diversity of pathogenic mu- severity of the disease cannot be predicted in affected fetus tations found NF1 analyses have long been laborious and sometimes yielded J02.32 unsatisfactory results. Newer techniques are more efficient and allow detec- Congenital heart defects in oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum tion of a causative mutation in the great majority of NF1-patients. We report M. C. Panzaru1, C. Rusu1, M. Volosciuc2, E. Braha1, L. Butnariu1, L. Caba1, M. Macovei1, R. on 7 novel NF1 mutations not yet described in the HGMD mutation database Popescu1, E. V. Gorduza1; (version 9.12.2011). Among them a spectrum of different mutation types 1“Grigore T. Popa“ University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Iasi, Romania, 2“Sf. Maria“ Children Hospital, Iasi, Romania. was found: 3 splice site mutations, caused by a small deletion (c.654+2delT), a duplication (c.2325+1dupG) and a base change (c.7126+1G>A) respective- ly, all concerning splice site consensus sequence positions. Furthermore we The oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS) is a non-random association detected 2 missense mutations (c.3503G>A, c.6718C>T), 1 nonsense muta- of hemifacial microsomia with mandibular hypoplasia, ear malformations, tion (c.4720C>T) and 1 duplication leading to a frameshift (c.6676dupA). preauricular tags and ocular dermoid cysts. Most cases are sporadic. The Two of the patients were adults, for whom genetic analysis served the con- underlying genetic mechanism remains unknown. Congenital heart defects firmation of the clinical diagnosis. The patients who benefit most from the (CHD) have been reported in 5-60% of the patients. ameliorated mutation detection, however, are young patients with only little We have analysed the types of CHD in 18 children with OAVS recorded in the clinical manifestations and hence uncertain diagnosis. This was the case for files of Iasi Medical Genetics Center between January 2006 and December five of the patients, who at the time of diagnosis were 11 years old (1 pati- 2011. There were 7 girls and 11 boys. The diagnosis was based on the pre- ent) or younger than two years (4 patients). sence of the characteristic features of the disorder. CHD were present in 8 J02.30 children - atrial septal defect (5/18), Fallot tetralogy (2/18) and ventricular Genetic testing for Neurofibromatosis (NF1). When and why? H. Fryssira1, A. Syrmou1, S. Psoni1, S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, A. Mavrou1, K. Claes2, E. Kanavakis1; septal defects (1/18). The prevalence of heart defects was higher in boys 1Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens, «Aghia Sophia» Childrens (54,54%) than in girls (28,5%). We found no correlation between the seve- Hospital,Greece, Athens, Greece, Greece, 2Center for Medical Genetics-OMRB, Ghent rity of the clinical manifestations and the association with CHD. In the lite- University Hospital, Gent, Belgium, Belgium. rature ventricular septal defect and Fallot tetralogy are the most frequent CHD associated with OAVS. The comparison of our data and the literature data will be presented in detail. The diagnosis of Neurofibromatosis (NF1), a common autosomal dominant In conclusion we present a study of 18 cases with oculo-auriculo-vertebral disorder affecting 1/3500 individuals, is based on well-defined clinical cri- spectrum, 44,44% of them having heart defects. Cardiac defects are com- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org368 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 monly associated to OAVS and males are more frequently broblasts. affected than females. Echocardiography should be a routine investigation Here, we report a 7-month-old female with bilateral cataract, punctate calci- in patients with OAVS. fications around the large cartilage, and postnatal growth retardation. Plas- J02.33 ma phytanic acid level was elevated aPnEdX l7o ng chain fa. tty acids levels were Oral-Facial-Digital Syndrome (type I): A case report. normal. The clinical phenotype and biocPhEeXm7ical tests were consistent with R. A. Cedeno; RCDP and we analyzed our patient for mutations Sequence analysis of Medical Genetic Unity, Maracaibo, Venezuela, Bolivarian Republic of. aGlNl ePxAoTn s anAdG inPtSr on-exon boundaries of showed no mutation. Enzyme analysis for subtyping and mutation analysis of the corresponding genes, and are in progress. Oral-facial-digital syndrome type 1 (OFDI; OFD1; OMIM 311200) is a rare J02.36 developmental disorder transmitted as an X-linked dominant condition A Case of Sirenomelia Sequence with Aprosencephaly with embryonic male lethality. OFD1 is characterized by malformation of M. Ikbal1, H. Kahveci2, M. Y. Alp1, B. A. Aksoy2, F. Laloglu2, E. Kacmaz2; the oral cavity, face, and digits. Central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities 1Karadeniz Technical University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical Genetics, and cystic kidney disease can also be part of this condition. Lesions in the Trabzon, Turkey, 2Nenehatun Obstetrics Hospital, Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, mouth include median pseudoclefting of the upper lip, clefts of the palate Erzurum, Turkey. and tonge, lingual tumors and dental anomalies (missing or supernumerary teeth, enamel hypoplasia, and teeth malpositions). Dysmorphic features af- fecting the face include hypertelorism, frontal bossing, micrognathia, facial Sirenomelia sequence is a rare congenital anomaly. This is also known as asymmetry, alar hypoplasia and broadened nasal ridge. The digital abnor- “mermaid syndrome” because of typical feature of lower limb. Sirenomelia malities are syndactyly, clinodactyly, brachydactyly and, rarely, pre or post- sequence is characterized with a single midline lower limb. Our case is an axial polydactytly. Less frequently expressed phenotypic anomalies include infant delivered at 34 gestational weeks by spontaneous vaginal delivery skin milia, alopecia, deafness and trembling.It is considered to be a ciliopa- from a 34 years old gravida 2, para 0. Parents are not relative. Infant has one thy caused by mutations in the OFD1 gene. A variety of mutations have been femur, one tibia and one phalanx at lower extremity. Calcaneus, metatarsals described, and a genotype-phenotype correlation has been suggested.This and other bones of the footh are absent. Patient has anal atresia and renal disorder is due to mutations in the OFD1 gene that encodes a centrosomal agenesy. Determinig of sex was impossible since external genitalia was ab- protein localized at the basal bodies at the origin of primary cilia. sent. Ultrasonographic examination revealed aprosencphaly. Altough some The proband was a female newborn, sporadic case with suspected OFD1. risk factors (e.g maternal diabetes) have been suggested, etiolgy of sireno- This newborn had many of the typical manifestations, including frontal bos- melia sequence is debated. In this report, we describe a premature infant sing, micrognathia,lingual tumors, cleft tonge, clynodactily and others less with sirenomelia sequence because of very rare presentation. frequently signs findings : alopecia and skin milia. We extended the pedigree J02.37 to three proband‘s generations, performing a thorough physical examina- Gross deletion in the SLC22A5 gene tion .In the light of this case, the author discuss the variability phenotypic A. Stepanova1, S. Lisicina2, A. Polyakov1; 1Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Research Center for Medical Genetic, Moscow, expression of OFD1 gene and the genetic counseling in this family Russian Federation, 2Research Сenter of Pediatrics and Child Surgery, Russian Health J02.34 Ministry, Moscow, Russia, Moscow, Russian Federation. Pathological findings of a male fetus with familial Pelizaeus- Merzbacher disease caused by a 320.6Kb Xq22.2 duplication S. Kitsiou-Tzeli1, A. Konstantinidou2, C. Sofocleous1, K. Kosma1, A. Syrmou1, K. Giannikou1, Systemic primary carnitine deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder S. Sifakis3, P. Makrythanasis4, M. Tzetis1; 1Department of Medical Genetics, Medical School, University of Athens, Athens, Greece, of fatty acid oxidation. Disorder is affected by mutation in SLC22A5 gene, 21st Department of Pathology, Medical School, University of Athens, Greece, Athens, which consists of 10 exons, maps to chromosome 5q31 and encodes the no- Greece, 31st Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Crete,, Heraklion, vel organic cation transporter (OCTN2). Affected patients can have a predo- Greece, 4Service of Genetic Medicine, University Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. minant metabolic or cardiac presentation. We have studied the patient with systemic primary carnitine deficiency. Pri- mers for sequence analysis of coding regions and flanking intronic SLC22A5 Pelizaeus-Merzbacher disease (PMD) is a disorder with clinical variability, gene were chosen. PCR products of exons 8, 9, 10 were not received. Exons ranging from the severe connatal form to the classical form. We present the 8, 9, 10 were amplified in diplex PCR with the control marker - exon 13 PAH clinical and molecular findings of two affected males, three carrier females gene, mapping outside the SLC22A5 gene. PCR product was found only from and an aborted male fetus with familial PMD. The two male probands exhi- the control marker. bited severe PMD phenotype and intellectual disability (ID). High resoluti- Therefore, a homozygous novel mutation - the deletion of exons 8, 9, 10 of on oligonucleotide based array comparativPeL Pge1nomic hybridization (aCGH) the SLC22A5 gene was found. identified Xq22.2 duplication of 320.6Kb [102641391-102961998, hg18], As a result diagnosis of systemic primary carnitine deficiency was confir- including the proteolipid protein 1 gene( ) and surrounding chromo- med for the first time in Russia by molecular genetic methods. somal region. Postmortem exaPmLiPn1ation was completed in the aborted male J02.38 fetus. To our knowledge this is the first report of specific neuropathological Coexistence of Townes-Brocks syndrome and Albinism in a case lesioPnLsP i1n a fetus with familial duplication. The observed early degene- K. Nadir, D. Gün, T. Çora, H. Acar; rative brain lesions occurring before the onset of myelination suggest that Selçuk University, Selçuklu Medical Faculty,The Department of Medical Genetics, Konya, the gene has a more complex role in human brain development excee- Turkey. ding its structural function in myelin formation. J02.35 A case with Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata Townes-Brocks syndrome (TBS) is a genetic disorder. The most common E. KOPARIR1, A. Gezdirici1, A. Koparır1, H. Ulucan1, G. Güven1, E. Yosunkaya1, M. Seven1, A. features of this syndrome are anal atresia, abnormally shaped ears, and Yüksel2, M. Ozen1; hand malformations that most often affect the thumb. Most people with 1Istanbul university cerrahpasa medical school, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Bezmialem Vakif this condition have at least two of these three major features. Albinism is University, Istanbul, Turkey. one of the archetypal inborn errors of metabolism. It is usually defined as a congenital hypopigmentation of the skin, hair, or eyes. In this report, we present 9 months male case having dismorphic features. The patient‘s mo- Rhizomelic chondrodysplasia punctata (RCDP) is an autosomal recessive ther and father were not consanguineous. Cytogenetic analysis was normal. peroxisomal disorder with a phenotype of proximal shortening of humerus The patient had an anal atresia, low and simple ears, ear tag, simian line and and femur, punctate calcifications around the large cartilage, possible cal- short palpebral fissure. In addition to these findings, he has also a congenital cification of the intervertebral discs, cataract, severe mental deficiency,and hypopigmentation of the skin, hair and eye, indicating albinism. This finding postnatal growth retardation. It usually results in death in the first decade of was seen in his mother diagnosed as albinism. This is the first case having life. Characteristic biochemical criteria were present: decreased plasmalo- coexistence of TBS and albinism in the literature. It is not clear whether this gens, elevated levPeElsX o7f GplNaPsAmTa phyAtaGnPicS ,a cid, and norm al levels of very long syndrome is associated with the other or independent event. chain fatty acids. Three variants: RCDP1, RCDP2 and RCDP3 are caused by mutations in the , and respectively.The clinical picture in RCDP2 and RCDP3 is similar with RCDP1, which is the most frequent type. To distinguish the subtypes, enzyme analysis is necessary from the skin fi- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 369 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.39 The wide phenotypic variability of Tricho-rino-phalangeal syndrome type I - a five cases study births), more common in males. Low recurrence risk and heterogeneous R. Ababei1, M. Volosciuc1, M. Panzaru2, L. Butnariu2, E. Braha2, S. Popa1, A. Grozavu1, C. causality are characteristic. The presence of at least three congenital mal- Iacob1, E. Gorduza2, C. Rusu2; formations (Vertebral defects, Anal atresia, Cardiac anomalies, Tracheoeso- 1Medical Genetics Center, „Sfanta Maria” Children’s Hospital, Iasi, Romania, 2”Grigore phageal fistula, Esophageal atresia, Renal anomalies, Limb defects) would T. Popa ” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Medical Genetics Department, Iasi, specify diagnosis. Limb anomalies restricted to upper ones and cardiac sep- Romania. tal defects are common. Intrauterine growth retardation and difficult weight gaining are noticed. Neurocognitive impairment is uncharacteristic. The ma- nagement includes surgical correction of life-threatening abnormalities and Tricho-rino-phalangeal syndrome (TRFS) is a rare autosomal dominant long-term follow-up of their sequelae. Material and methods: We present a 5 syndrome, characterized by short stature, typical facial dysmorphism and months old male infant with multiple congenital anomalies (absence of right skeletal abnormalities. forearm, atrial septal defect, esophageal atresia, proximal tracheoesophage- We present 5 cases of TRFS in order to illustrate this rare disorder, to pre- al fistula) admitted for pneumonia. He is the product of a full-term pregnan- sent particularities and long term follow-up and to discuss management and cy complicated with hydramnios and threatened miscarriage. Birth weight genetic counseling. was 2,600 g. Primary defects in family members and exposure to environ- Case 1: growth retardation, dysmorphic face (sparse/fine/depigmented mental factors were denied. Full assessment (history, clinical examination, hair, medial flare of eyebrows, bulbous nasal tip, hypoplastic nostrils, thin biological and imagistic tests, neurological, cardiovascular and genetic eva- lips, microretrognathia), brachydactyly. Associated anomalies: scaphoce- luation) was done. Results: Productive cough, stridor, intermittent expirato- phaly, hemangioma, cryptorchidism and right inguinal hernia. ry wheezing and mild weight deficit were noticed. Psychomotor acquisitions Case 2: growth retardation, dysmorphic face (sparse/fine hair, lateral thin- were age-appropriate. Barium swallow radiograph diagnosed gastroespha- ning of eyebrows, bulbous nose, hypoplastic nostrils, long/deeply grooved geal reflux and ruled out esophageal stricture. Child’s complex pathology philtrum, thin lips), broad thumb, preaxial polydactyly (foot). Associated and mother‘s depressive disorder altered quality of family life. Conclusions: anomalies: umbilical hernia. VACTERL association is probable in this case. Amniotic band syndrome with Case 3: short stature, dysmorphic face (sparse/fine/depigmented hair, late- congenital amputation of the right forearm has been considered. Efficient ral thinning of eyebrows, bulbous nose, long philtrum, thin lips, microdontia, orthopedic backing, genetic and family counseling, physical and occupatio- micrognathia), thick nails. Hand X-ray: metacarpal shortening, cone-shaped nal therapy are needed long term. Multiple and prolonged hospitalizations epiphyses (middle/distal phalanges), delayed bone age. Associated anoma- for recurrent pneumonia may worsen the prognosis. lies: empty sella, posterior fossa arachnoid cyst (head CT), hypothyroidism. J02.42 Case 4: growth retardation, dysmorphic face (sparse/fine/depigmented The evaluation of stress in 40 molecularly-confirmed patients with hair, hypoplastic nostrils, long philtrum, high palate, abnormal tooth posi- Williams-Beuren syndrome tion, retrognathia), brachydactyly, kyphosis, scapulae alatae, mild mental V. A. A. S. Amaral1, C. R. D. C. Quaio1, R. L. Dutra1, R. S. Honjo1, L. D. Kulikowski1,2, M. N. retardation. Hand and forearm X-ray: slightly curved radius, clinodactyly. Moreira1, I. Gomy1, M. C. T. V. Teixeira3, D. R. Bertola1, C. A. Kim1; Case 5: low weight, dysmorphic face (sparse scalp hair, abnormal columella, 1Unidade de Genética, ICr/FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 2LIM 3 - Hospital das Clínicas - long/deeply grooved philtrum, thin lips, micrognathia, large ears), mild hy- FMUSP, São Paulo, Brazil, 3Universidade Presbiteriana Mackenzie, São Paulo, Brazil. potonia. Associated anomalies: trigonocephaly, left inguinal hernia. In conclusion, we present five cases of TRFS, in order to illustrate this rare genetic disorder, to discuss phenotypic variability and particularities found Psychological studies in Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) describe varying in our patients, as well as long term follow-up, management and genetic degrees of mental retardation, weakness in visuospatial/executive function, counseling. overfriendliness, empathy, a fluent speech and hyperacusis. They also show J02.40 stereotyped behaviors, aggressiveness and some psychiatric disorders. The- Karyotype and treatment response correlations in Turner Syndrome se characteristics may increase the vulnerability of these patients to stress. A. Chirita Emandi1, I. Micle1, M. Marazan1, C. Pienar1, M. Puiu2; The objective of this study is to determine the real extent of the stress in in- 1„Louis Turcanu” Emergency Hospital for Children Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, dividuals with WBS and to identify the major events in their lives that might 2University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania. modulate a stress reaction. Aim: A standard questionnaire based on DSM-IV-TR, the Brazilian version of intel- ligence measurement scales (WISCIII/WAIS-III) and objective stress scales To assess treatmMenett hroesdpso:nse to growth hormone (GH) and estroge- (Lipp’s Children Stress Scale or Lipp’s Adult Stress Scale) were applied to nic therapy in girls with Turner syndrome (TS) and find possible correla- 40 individuals with WBS. The stress scales were also applied to 40 normal tions with karyotype. Nine girls diagnosed with TS that received individuals. treatment with GH for at least 2 years. We evaluated differences in height The major events related to stress reactions in the patients with WBS were standardR deesvuialttsio: n score (HSDS), at baseline, at one and two years from ba- excessive noise (60%), discrimination (58%) and excessive homework seline; and pubertal stage development in patients with or without estrogen (35%). The average IQ in WBS was 68.5(SD: 8.89). Patients with WBS pre- therapy. Median age was 12.1+/-3.7 years. Chromosomal analysis sented statistically significant (p<0.001) higher levels of stress (mean: 39.5) revealed six girls (66%) with pure 45X monosomy, while 3 (33%) had mo- when compared to controls (mean: 24). No difference in subgroups of WBS saic form. The patients had a baseline mean HSDS=-3.29±0.65. After 2 years patients stratified by gender (p: 0.74), level of IQ (p: 0.935) or whether they of GH treatment only one patient achieved HSDS>-2 value for normal girls. attended special education (p: 0.14) was observed. Mean difference in HSDS after 1 year was 0.27+/-0.31; after 2 years it was Patients with WBS are at risk for stress. Hyperacusis was the most common -0.17+/-0.22 (p=0.047). Regarding estrogen replacement therapy: two pa- stressor and, then, should be properly addressed in an attempt to improve tients from study did not reach puberty onset age; four of them had spon- the quality of life of patients with WBS. taneous puberty without treatment; two girls responded well to estrogen J02.43 therapy, while one did not. We found weak correlations between pure mo- Meningomyelocele in the offspring of a patient with Waardenburg nosomy aCnodn tchleu nseiocnesss:ity for estrogen therapy (r=0.5;p=0.17) and between type 1 syndrome: a genetic counselling dilemna pure monosomy and mean HSDS difference after 2 years with GH (r=-0.35; M. Irabe1, J. Orbegozo1,2, V. Mandengue3, V. Pingault4, L. Van Maldergem1; p=0.34). Results showed great variability in treatment re- 1Centre de génétique humaine, Besançon, France, 2Dept of Pediatrics, University sponse in girls with TS, in both GH and estrogen treatment, which could not Hospital, Besançon, France, 3Dept of Gynecology & Obstetrics, Regional Hospital, Vesoul, be strongly correlated with karyotype. Larger studies are needed to assess France, 4Dept of Biochemistry & Genetics, CHU Henri-Mondor, Université de Paris-Est- these important correlations that could guide therapy for these patients in Creteil, Créteil, France. the future. J02.41 dystopia canthorum We describe two cases of Waardenburg syndrome type 1, one being dia- Primary polytopic developmental anomalies - a particular form of gnosed in a 5 y-old male with moderate mixed deafness, , VACTERL association? T. Marcovici1,2, O. Marginean1,2, O. Belei1,2, C. Daescu1,2, A. Militaru1,2, L. Olariu1,2, D. causing subtle skin pigmentary changes of upper limbs and the other one in Chiru1,2, O. Sarbu2, M. Puiu1,2; the unrelated 31 y-old husband of a 29 y-old female after termination of a 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 2“Louis 22 weeks pregnancy for lumb sacral meningomyelocoele and Arnold-Chiari Turcanu“ Children‘s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. malformation diagnosed by serial ultrasound screening. Family history of the genitor was unremarkable, except for a recent diagnosis of modedryas-- te deafness, in the context of familial premature graying of hair before 25 Background: VACTERL association occurs sporadic (16 cases/100,000 live years of age (mother, sister, brother). On clinical examination, he has www.eshg.org www.eshg.org370 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 topia canthorum, J02.46 Left Dominant Arrhythmogenic Cardiomiopathy caused by a novel suggesting a diagnosis of autosomal dominant Waarden- nosense mutation. burg syndrome type1.Neural tube defects are thought to occur sporadically I. Gomez-Milanes1, J. Ayala2, E. Garcia-Molina1, M. Sabater Molina1, I. Perez1, F. Ruiz- as the consequence of multifactorial inheritance. Based on this assumption, Espejo1, D. Lopez-Cuenca1, I. Tovar1, J. Gimeno2, M. Valdes3; a low recurrence risk is usually given (<3%), and folic acid supplementa- 1Genetic Diagnosys Laboratory, University Hospital Virgen Arrixaca, Clinic Analisys tion (4mg/d) in the periconceptional period MreTcHoFmRmended in the future Service, Murcia, Spain, 2Cardiology departament. Universitary Hospital Virgen Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 3University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain. pregnant woman. Rare occurrences of NTD due to mendelian disorders have bVaeenn G odgehsc ribe PdA. XT3hey include, among others, homozygous mutati- ons, and Meckel syndrome with respect to autosomal recessive inheritance, and mutations when considering autosomal dominant inhe- INTRODUCTION ritance. If the diagnosis of Waardenburg type 1 syndrome is eventually estaa- Some mutations in the desmoplakin gene generate an autosomal dominant pbrliisohreid in the genitor of the malformed fetus, a recurrence risk of 10% (em- inheritance pattern related to the involvement of the left ventricle (LV) in pirical value) has to be taken into consideration, three fold-higher than the ARVC. 3% risk in the present case. We recommend to be aware of premature METHODS graying, dystopia canthorum and/or deafness when counseling for NTD. It has made the study of 28 patients (14 women and 14 males), belonging to 3 families affected by ARVC. This cohort was obtained from a screening of 64 J02.44 ARVC patients. The analysis of the 28 individuals was performed by sequen- Novel synonymic transthyretin gene mutation N98N in cing of exons and flanking intronic regions for the DSP gene. cardiomyopathy patient from St. Petersburg, Russia K. V. Solovyov1, N. A. Grudinina1, E. N. Semernin2, E. V. Shliakhto2, A. Y. Gudkova3, M. M. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS Shavlovsky1; We found a gene variant (Q447X) that is a heterozygous nonsense type not 1Department of Molecular Genetics, Research Institute of Experimental Medicine, previously described. Is a C to T transition that generates a stop codon re- Northwestern Division, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Almazov Federal Center of sulting in a peptide 85% smaller than the wild type and an autosomal do- Heart and Blood, Federal Agency of High Technology Medical Assistance, St. Petersburg, minant inheritance pattern with high penetrance (91%). In most cases, stop Russian Federation, 3Pavlov State Medical University, Institute of Cardiovascular codon mutations are disease cause. Diseases, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. Eleven of the 28 studied patients were mutation carriers and ten of them were affected by ARVC. The rest were healthy patients. The eleven carrier patients consisted of eight women and three men. Over the past several years we have been searching transthyretin (TTR) gene The amino acid 447 is located in one of the globular head domains of des- mutations in patients with cardiomyopathies from St. Petersburg (Russia). moplakin to participate in the binding of this protein with plakoglobin and In our previous work TTR gene mutations H90N, V30M and deletion (del9) plakophilin. It is noteworthy that several mutations in this gene have been were found in patients with restrictive amyloid cardiomyopathy. In the pre- associated with the development of arrhythmogenic left ventricular domi- sent investigation new TTR gene mutation was identified in patient with nance and even isolated involvement of the ventricle and simulating idiopa- hypertrophic cardiomyopathy without amyloidosis. Screening TTR gene thic dilated cardiomyopathy. We conclude this gene variant Q447X could be for mutations was provided with SSCP-analysis followed by sequencing. possibly the cause of ARVC with predominant LV. Nucleotide substitution in position 6819 C>T according to NCBI reference J02.47 sequence NC_000018.9 (c.354C>T according to NCBI reference sequence R14Del, a Dutch phospholamban mutation in a spanish family. NM_00371.3) was found. This mutation leads to TTR codon substitution in Genotype-phenotype aspects. the 98 position (from AAC to AAT, p.N98N (p.N118N according to the mRNA M. Sabater-Molina1, I. Gomez Milanes1, E. Garcia-Molina1, I. Perez1, F. Ruiz-Espejo1, D. sequence)) in the 4-th exon of TTR gene which doesn‘t lead to the aminoa- Lopez-Cuenca1, J. Lopez Ayala2, J. Gimeno2, M. Valdes3, P. Martinez1; cid substitution in the TTR polypeptide sequence. The N98N mutation was 1Genetic Diagnosis Laboratory. University Hospital Virgen Arrixaca. Clinic Analysis detected in heterozygous state. The mutation revealed in this study was not Service, Murcia, Spain, 2Cardiology departament, University Hospital Virgen Arrixaca, previously identified in other populations and was not previously described Murcia, Spain, 3University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain. in literature and databases. The causal relationship of this mutation with the INTRODUCTION disease is an object for further discussion. J02.45 Is there Influence of the Genetic Variations Associated with TMhErToHugOhD gSenetic screening of dilated cardiomyopathy patients, we identi- Thrombophilia on Sports Success? fied a previously described deletion of arginine 14 (PLN-R14Del). V. P. Pushkarev1, D. A. Dyatlov1, E. V. Lekontsev1, J. E. Pushkareva2, V. J. Vishnev1, L. M. Kulikov1; NREinSeU iLnTdSividuals were evaluated using dHPLC and bidirectional sequencing 1Ural State University of Physical Culture, Chelyabinsk, Russian Federation, 2State of the exon and intron regions flanking the PLN gene. Medical Academy, Chelyabinsk, Russian Federation. Seven of the nine patients studied were mutation carriers although only two of them met diagnostic criteria of dilated cardiomyopathy: the proband Regular physical activity reduces risk of thrombosis development. However and her asymptomatic maternal grandmother. Five carriers´s ECG showed cases of thrombosis in different sports are described. There is unresolved strikingly low voltage QRS complex, despite no echocardiographic abnor- question, what influence of the genetic variations associated with thrombo- malities in 3 (mother and 2 maternal aunts). Apart from proband all carri- philia on sports success. ers were asymptomatic with no history of arrhythmia evidenced. Proband´s The study was approved by Ethics Committee of the Ural State University of father belongs to another family affected by Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, Physical Culture (USUPC). All participants gave written informed consent to although the father himself only express mild left ventricular hypertrophy genotyping. Junior group was consisted of 245 persons, who participated in with normal ECG. sport competition and training on regular basis. Sportsmen group was con- R14Del mutation was described in 40 families to date. There is information sisted of 300 athletes from different sports (sub-elite level - 47%, elite level available from 68 carriers. This mutation was identified as a mutation with - 53%). Healthy sedentary control group was consisted of 255 students, em- founder effect in up to 14% of cases in a cohort of Dutch patients with dila- ployees of the USUPC. All participants were unrelated Caucasians living in ted and arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. Carriers from this cohort charac- Ural region of Russia. DNA was isolated from buccal epithelium. Genotyping tCeOriNzCedL UbSyI OloNw voltage QRS and negative T waves in lateral leads similar to was done using a TaqMan® SNP Genotyping Assays by use StepOne™ Real- that evidenced in carriers of some desmosomal mutations. Time PCR System (AppliedBiosystems, USA). The genotyping results were analyzed by using TaqMan® Genotyper Software (AppliedBiosystems). Low voltage ECG has a high sensitivity to identify PLN mutation carriers. Frequencies of het eMroTzHyFgRote carriers of Leiden and prothrombine mutati- Echocardiographic phenotype can be mild or normal in most carriers of ons in control group were identical - 2,4 %. Frequency of T/T genotype of R14Del mutation who can remain asymptomatic throughout life. Severe C677T variation of gene in control group was 9,8 %. Frequencies Fo2f phenotype can be consequence of double mutations. Interpretation of ge- studied sequencFe5 variations at juniorsM aTnHdF aRthletes either didn‘t differ, or notype-phenotype correlations should be done in the context of large family were a little above, than in control. Apparently, variations rs1799963 in trees and complete cardiac evaluation. gene, rs6025 in gene, rs1801133 in gene, associated with throm- bophilia, don‘t render strong negative influence on sports success. Possibly, prothrombotic action of the investigated variations is compensated by ad- aptive changes of a hemostasis as response on aerobic trainings. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 371 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.48 Age-related penetrance in genetic carriers of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy tion, there was associated dysmorphic facial features and abnormal brain A. Romero-Puche1, I. Perez2, M. Sabater-Molina3, E. Garcia-Molina2, I. Gomez Milanes2, D. structure. Molecular karyotyping detected a homozygous deletion of 11 Lopez-Cuenca2, M. Oliva4, F. Ruiz-Espejo5, J. Gimeno4, P. Martinez5; oligonuleotide probes at 5q12.1, spanning approximately 248 kilobases. 1Hospital Reina Sofia, Murcia, Spain, 2genetic diagnisis laboratoy, Murcia, Spain, 3genetic The deleted region contains two known genes, ERCC8 (OMIM # 609412) diagnosys laboratoy, Murcia, Spain, 4Cardiology departament, University Hospital and NDUFA2 (OMIM # 609653). Mutations of ERCC8 are associated with Virgen Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain, 5Genetic diagnosys laboratoy, Murcia, Spain. Cockayne syndrome, and mutations in NDUFA2 are associated with mito- chondrial complex I deficiency. Both of the parents were confirmed to be heterozygous for the same deletion. We believe that this chromosomal dele- Introduction and Purpose:The aim is study the age-related penetrance of tion contributed to the complex phenotype on this patient. Ultraviolet light HCM in pa tients with different MYBPC3, MYH7 and TNNT2 mutations to de- toxicity assay and mitochondrial study are still in progress. terminate whether the age at diagnostic depends on genetic background. J02.51 Methods:We included 195 HCM causal mutation carriers (55% males, age An Egyptian patient with cholestasis lymphoedema syndrome 40±16 years); 64.8% had clinical manifestations of the disease. All patients (Aagenaes syndrome) were diagnosed in inheritance cardiomyopathy consultation, in a reference T. Abdel Ghaffar1, S. Elsayed2,1; hospital. 146 patients were carriers of at least one mutation in MYBPC3 1Yassin Abdelghaffar Charity Center for Liver Disease and Research, Cairo, Egypt, (IVS23+1G>A (72), Arg891fs (37), A107fsX116 (26), A216T (11), V896M 2Medical Genetics Center, Cairo, Egypt. (4) ), 21 were carriers of a mutation in MYH7 (T1377M (21), D928N (4), E1348Q (8), E1356Q (4), R1382Q (4)) and 8 patients were carriers of R278C in TNNT2. IVS23+1G>A, the most prevalent mutation, was present in 18 un- Lymphoedema cholestasis syndrome (Aagenaes syndrome) is a rare auto- related families. We performed time-to-diagnosis analysis according to the somal recessive disease consisting of hereditary, recurrent cholestatic liver affected gene and the most prevalent mutations. disease and generalized lymphoedema from birth or childhood. The disease Results: No differences in time to diagnosis were detected between the was first described by Aagenaes et al. in 1968 in Norway. Since then, most most prevalent mutations. Median age at diagnosis was 46±2 years old for patients reported are originally from the same part of Norway. Fewer than IVS23+1G>A, 44±3 years old (Arg891fs), 43±2 years old (A107fsX116), 40 cases have been described elsewhere. To the best of our knowledge, none 44±7 years old (T1377M) and 51±9 years old (A216T); log rank p=0.963. was described in Arab countries. Here, we describe the clinical and laborato- Simila rly, there were no differences according to the 3 analyzed genes (log ry characteristics of the first Egyptian patient with Aagenaes syndrome. rank p=0.935). Median age at diagnosis for the whole was 47±2 yrs. Conclu- He is a 3.5 year old boy, the second in birth order of first cousin marriage sions:Mutations in MYBPC3 encoding myosin binding protein C could be after uncomplicated pregnancy. He had an older brother who developed considered more benign form of HCM than initially was considered. Now, jaundice soon after birth and died at the age of 35 days without any availab- genetic diagnosis reveals that HCM-phenotype can appear later in life, rea- le investigation. Our patient has severe form of the disease with progressive ching near full penetrance in the elderly. cirrhosis and relatively low GGT and cholesterol levels. He also developed J02.49 progressive arthritis, a feature which was not described before in this syn- Imprinting defect in patients with Albright’s Hereditary drome. Although molecular analysis was not done yet, we suggest that our Osteodystrophy and platelet Gs hypofunction patient could have a different severe form of the disease associated with B. Izzi1, I. Francois2, V. Labarque2, C. Thys1, C. Wittevrongel1, K. Devriendt3, E. Legius3, A. arthritis that has a different locus than LCS1 similar to the Serbian Romani Van den Bruel4, M. D‘Hooghe4, D. Lambrechts5, F. de Zegher2, C. Van Geet6, K. Freson1; patient described by Frühwirth et al., 2003. 1Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Department J02.52 of Paediatrics- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3Center for Human Genetics- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 4General Hospital Sint Jan Brugge, Brugge, Belgium, 5Vesalius Research An atypical case of Langer-Giedion-syndrome: the role of additional Center- KULeuven and VIB, Leuven, Belgium, 6Center for Molecular and Vascular Biology chromosomal abnormalities and Department of Paediatrics- KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium. G. Cappuccio1, V. Ginocchio1, P. Boemio1, R. Genesio2, G. Minopoli1, A. Casertano1, B. Granese1, A. Mormile2, L. Nitsch2, G. Andria1, D. Melis1; 1Department of Pediatrcs Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 2Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology Department of Pediatrcs Federico II University, Pseudohypoparathyroidism (PHP) indicates a group of heterogeneous dis- Naples, Italy. orders whose common feature is represented by impaired signaling of hor- mones that activate Gsalpha, encoded by the imprinted GNAS gene. PHP-Ib patients have isolated PTH resistance and GNAS epigenetic defects while Langer-Giedion syndrome (LGS), is defined as a contiguous gene disorder PHP-Ia cases present with hormone resistance and characteristic features caused by the loss of functional copies of TRPS1 and EXT1 genes usually jointly termed as Albright‘s Hereditary Osteodystrophy (AHO) due to ma- secondary to 8q microdeletion. ternally inherited GNAS mutations or similar epigenetic defects as found for This condition combines features of trichorhinophalangeal syndrome type PHP-Ib. Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) patients with an AHO I (sparse scalp hair, bushy eyebrows, bulbous nose, long philtrum, cone phenotype and no hormone resistance and progressive osseous heteropla- shaped epiphyses, short stature), multiple exostosis, mild to moderate men- sia (POH) cases have inactivating paternally inherited GNAS mutations. tal deficiency (MD). We here describe 16 PPHP subjects and 1 POH patient with platelet Gs hypo- We report a case of a 4-year-old girl presenting with facialdysmorphisms function but lacking Gsalpha mutations. The methylation for the three diffe- and skeletal abnormalities, short stature, congenital heart disease (CHD), rentially methylated GNAS regions was quantified via Sequenom EpiTYPER. central nervous system (SNC) anomalies, severe MD. A diagnosis of LGS was Patients showed significant hypermethylation of the XL amplicon compared suspected. to controls (36±3 vs. 29±3%; p<0.001); a pattern that is reversed to XL hy- The HR karyotype showed a reciprocal balanced translocation between: pomethylation found in PHPIb. Methylation for NESP and ExonA/B was si- 2p24 and 11p15 chromosomes. The parental high resolution karyotype was gnificantly different for some but not all patients, though most patients have normal. Array-CGH analysis revealed an interstitial deletion involving chro- site-specific CpG methylation abnormalities in these amplicons. Since some mosome: 8q23.3-q24.11. AHO features are present in other imprinting disorders, the methylation of Our patient shares with LGS: microcephaly, sparse hair, dysmorphic facial IGF2, H19, SNURF and GRB10 was quantified. Surprisingly, significant IGF2 features, growth retardation, multiple exostosis. hypermethylation (20±10 vs. 14±7%; p<0.05) and SNURF hypomethylation The presence of CHD, CNS anomalies (hypoplasia/agenesis of corpus callo- (23±6 vs. 32±6%; p<0.001) was found in patients vs. controls, while H19 sum (CCA), pituitary gland dysmoprhism), severe MD has never been descri- and GRB10 methylation was normal. bed in patients with LGS. In conclusion, this is the first report of epigenetic defects in PPHP and POH The Array-CGH confirmed clinical diagnosis. Up to date, this is the smallest though additional studies are needed to correlate epigenotype with the cli- deletion causing LGS. nical phenotype. The patient also showed a balanced chromosomal translocation involving J02.50 2p24 region where maps ASXL2 gene. Recently, a patient carrying a balan- Contiguous Gene Deletion of ERCC8 and NDUFAF2; Case Report ced translocation involving the same 2p24 region has been described sho- A. H. Al-Awami1, N. A. Al-Sanna‘a1, H. Y. Al-Abdulwahed1, M. Kruer2; wing CCA and MD. 1Dhahran Health Center, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 2Oregon Health & Science University, We speculate that ASXL2 gene disruption might be responsible for the more Portland, OR, United States. severe neurological phenotype described in the current patient. Here we describe a patient with clinical manifestation of Leigh’s disease www.eshg.org including persistent lactic acidosis and chronic encephalopathy. wIn wadwdi.-eshg.org372 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J02.53 Pathology, Uppsala University Rudbeck Laboratory. Dag Hammarskjöldsv., Uppsala, An Italian case of X linked reticulate pigmentary disorder with Spain, 8Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University systemic manifestations (XLPDR) Rudbeck Laboratory. Dag Hammarskjöldsv., Uppsala, Sweden, 9Department of M. Gabaldo1, G. Tadini2, M. Brena2, L. Pezzani2, P. Gentile3, T. Balducci4, M. Passarin5; Pediatrics, University of Torino., Torino, Italy, 10ECEMC, Estudio Colaborativo Español 1Clinical Genetics, MD, Verona, Italy, 2nstitute of dermatological science, Hosp. Maggiore, de Malformaciones Congénitas, ISCIII., Madrid, Spain, 11ECEMC, Estudio Colaborativo Milan, Italy, 3XLPDR Italian association group, Como, Italy, 4Pediatric Surgeon MD,, Español de Malformaciones Congénitas, ISCIII,, Madrid, Spain, 12Department of Medical Verona, Italy, 5Department of Neurology,ULSS 22 Orlandi Hospital, Bussolengo (Verona), Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 13Center for Human Genetics, K.U Leuven, University Hospital Gasthuisberg., Leuven, Belgium, 14Department of Italy. Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, UVA, Amsterdam, Netherlands. We report eight unrelated individuals with intellectual disabilityand The X- linked reticulate pigmentary disorder with systemic manifestations overlapping submicroscopic deletions of 8q21.11 (0.66-13.55 Mb in (XLPDR) is a rare skin disorder affecting males and mildly females, and it‘s size). The deletion was familial in one and simplex in seven individu als. characterized by a hyperpigmentation disorder of the skin and several vis- The phenotype was remarkably similar and consisted of a round face ceral problem. This disorder in females shows brown pigmentation of the with full cheeks, high forehead, ptosis, cornea opacities, underdevelo- skin which follows the lines of Blaschko, while it is appears as reticulate ped alae, short philtrum, cupid’s bow of the upper lip, down-turned sheets in males. Males also suffers of systemic manifestations as severe ga- corners of the mouth, micrognathia, low-set and prominent ears, and strointestinal disorders in infancy with failure to thrive, corneal dystrophy mild finger and toe anomalies (camptodactyly; syndactyly; broadening with severe photophobia, chronic respiratory disease and, in the most sever of first rays). Intellectual disability, hypotonia, decreased balance, sen- cases, early death No causative mutation has been identify yet. sorineural hearing loss, and unusual behavior were frequently obser- We report a case of a 3-year-old boy with clinical features that are consistent ved. High resolution oligonucleotide array showed different proximal with the diagnosis of XLPDR match the one typically described, characteri- and distal breakpoints in all of them. Sequencing studies in three of zed by brown diffuse and reticulate hyperpigmentation of the skin reflux, the individuals revealed that proximal and distal breakpoints were lo- hypohidrosis , cated in unique sequences with no apparent homology. The smallest growth retardation, electrolyte imbalance, dry skin, unruly hair, eyebrow region of overlap was a 539.7 kb interval encompassing three genes: a flare, digital clubbing, photophobia due to corneal diskeratosis. Retinitis Zinc Finger Homeobox 4 (ZFHX4), one micro RNAof unknown function pigmentosa, lymphoedema and failure to thrive. The boy has been suffering and one non-functional pseudogen. ZFHX4 encodes a transcription fac- also of recurrent tor expressed in adult human brain, skeletal mu scle and liver. It has pneumonia and severe colitis and diarrhea The family history shows that been suggested to be a candidate gene for congenital bilateral isolated the mother of the boy is affected by incontinentia pigmenti and the boy‘s ptosis. Our results suggest that the 8q21.11 submicroscopic deletion sister is apparently unaffected, none of the other member of the family show represents a clinically recognizable entity and that a haploinsufficient symptoms of the disease. So far this case is the 6th case of XLPDR described gene or genes within the minimal deletion region could underlie this in literature. syndrome. J02.54 Lymphoma in a patient with Noonan syndrome F. Santos1,2,3, Y. Aoki4, I. González-Casado5, R. Gracia6, P. Lapunzina1,2,3; J03. Cytogenetics 1INGEMM; Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2CIBERER, Madrid, Spain, 3Idipaz, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Medical Genetics; Tohoku University School of Medicine, Tokio, Japan, 5Pediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, J03.01 Spain, 6Pediatric Endocrinology; Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. Characterization and isolation of a beta neurotoxin- Bt from scorpion venom G. Eskandari; Noonan syndrome (NS) is a well recognizable syndrome characterized by Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Molecular Biology, National Academy of short stature, facial dysmorphism, heart disease and cryptorchidism. Gain Sciences of Ar, Yerevan, Armenia. of function mutations in the PTPN11 oncogene are identified in half of the patients. Apart from the T73I mutation, there is no clear relationship bet- ween PTPN11 mutations and increased cancer risk. GH treatment has been Scorpion venoms are a particularly rich source of neurotoxic proteins/pep- proved to improve growth in these patients tides that interact in a highly specific fashion with discrete subtypes of ion We report on a 30 year old man who had been diagnosed in infancy with channels in excitable and non-excitable cells. Scorpion venom has historical- Dubowitz syndrome and due to short stature, had received treatment with ly been one of the richest sources of polypeptide toxins with unusually high growth hormone. On examination, he has typical facial features of NS, short degrees of specific actions on and interactions with the ion-channel mem- stature, normal intelligence and has recently developed a lymphoma with brane proteins of both excitable and non-excitable cells. In this study, we good response to chemotherapy. His 2 year old son has clinical features con- report the characterization and isolation of a beta neurotoxin- Bt, from the sistent with NS (short stature, typical facial features, cryptorchidism and venom glands of scorpion Androctonus crasicauda venom Kuzestan (Iran). normal development). Both are heterozygotes for the E139D (c.417C>G) Scorpions were collected from the Khuzestan province and transported to mutation in exon 4 of the PTPN11 gene. the reference laboratory of the Razi Institute . cDNA was synthesized with The E139D mutation is not known to increase cancer risk in NS patients, extracted total RNA as template and modified oligo(dT) as primer. Using RT- but has been previously reported in two patients with NS who developed a PCR techniques, a 281 bp cDNA fragment encoding a beta neurotoxin active cerebral glioma. Both our patients have had normal cerebral MRIs. on mammals or on insects have been isolated from the telsons of scorpion This is the first report of this mutation related to a lymphoma in a NS pa- Androctonus australis. All cDNA sequences displayed one major open rea- tient. It is difficult to assess what the relationship between the E139D mu- ding frame of about 310 nucleotides. The deduced precursor open-reading tation and the GH treatment have with the development of the lymphoma frame is composed of 59 amino acid residues that consist of a signal peptide or if this is a casual finding. With current evidence, the risk of treating our of approximately 22 amino acid residues. This polypeptide has a molecular proband with GH seems to outweigh its benefits. mass of 9324.86 kDa with an Isoelecric point of 4.96 which is closely packed J02.55 by three disulfide bridges. Amino acid alignment and secondary structure Characterization of a 8q21.11 microdeletion syndrome associated prediction revealed that the peptide deduced from cloned cDNA is a functio- with intellectual disability and a recognizable phenotype. nKaely hwoomrdolso: gA donf rpoocttaosnsuius mcr acshicaanundeal-blocking neurotoxins from the venoms M. Palomares Bralo1,2, A. Delicado1,2, E. Mansilla1,2, M. L. de Torres1,3, E. Vallespín1,3, L. of other scorpions. Fernández1,2, V. Martínez-Glez1,2, S. García Miñaur1,2, J. Nevado1,2, F. Santos Simarro1,2, V. L. , beta toxin, scorpion Ruíz-Pérez4,2, S. A. Lynch5, F. H. Sharkey6, A. C. Thuresson7, G. Annerén8, E. F. Belligni9, M. L. Martínez Fernández10,2, E. Bermejo11,2, B. Nowakowska12,13, E. Bocian12, E. Obersztyn12, M. J03.02 L. Martínez Frías10,2, R. C. M. Hennekam14, P. Lapunzina1,2; Chromosome abnormalities in children 1Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular. Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, A. Vibe, E. Moldagulova, D. Samatkyzy; 2CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, National Research Center for Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. Madrid, Spain, 3CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras, ISCIII, Madird, Spain, 4IIB, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de Madrid (Centro Superior Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, For the purpose of studying of frequency of chromosomal abnormalities cy- Madrid, Spain, 5National Centre for Medical Genetics, Our Lady‘s Childrens Hospital, togenetic research of lymphocytes of peripheral blood was carried out of Crumlin., Dublin, Ireland, 6Microarray Unit, Cytogenetics Laboratory, Western General Hospital Edinburgh,, Edinburgh, Spain, 7Department of Immunology, Genetics and 1546 children. The results of research study had found out in the 212 (13,7%) cases. An- euploydia was found in the 186 cases (87,8 %) and structural abnormalities www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 373 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy„Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania, 2Emergency Children Hospital „Louis Turcanu“, Timisoara, Romania. were revealed in the 26 cases (12,2 %). Among aneuploydia were detected Down‘s syndrome in the 117 (63 %), Turner‘s syndrome in the 25 (13,4 %), Klinefelter‘s syndrome in the 23 Here we report a duplication of chromosome 16 at q11.2 to q21 and the (12,4 %), Edwards‘s syndrome in the 9 (4,8 %), an androgen insensitivity pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 at p11 to q13 identified by routine syndrome (AIS) in the 5 (2,7 %), 47, in the 4 (2,2 %), the Patau‘s syndrome karyotyping in a one month old male patient. Pure duplications of 16q have in the 1 (0,5 %), 47, in the 1 (0,5 %), the 69, in the 1 (0,5 %) cases. only been reported in a small number of individuals. Partial trisomy for the Were carried out following abnormalities: del(5)(p15.1), 46,XY,del(2) long arm of chromosome16 is a rare condition,uncommonly identified in (p15p21), 46,,add(7)(q31), 47,,add(X)(q27) 46,,t(6;13)(q26;q13), children and adults. Cytogenetic aberrations on chromosome 9 have been 46,,t(3;13)(q23;q32), 46,XX,t(14;18)(q13;q23), 46,XX,t(10;16)(q23;q11.2), reported to be one of the most frequent abnormalities. The pericentric in- inv(9)(p11q13), 46,XX,t(8;20)(q22;p18.1), 46,XX,t(9;12)(q34;q24.1), inv(3) version of chromosome 9 inv(9)(p11q13) is one of the most common ba- (q23p26), 46,,t(10;12)(q23;q15), 45,,der(13;14)(q10;q10), 45,,der(14;15) lanced structural chromosomal aberrations found in 1 to 3% of the general (q10;q10), 46,X,i(X)(q10), 46,XX,t(7;9)(q11;q31), 46,XX,t(7;13) population. (q11.2;p11.1), 46,,t (X;5)(q23;p15.2), 46,,t(X;1)(q27;p22) among 26 struc- Physical examination of the ours patient revealed mild dysmorphic features tural chromosomal abnormalities. including low set ears with slightly redundant/extracrease of the helix bila- J03.03 terally, micrognathia, deep creases in the sole soft he feet and mild bilateral Human Infertility: the importance of cytogenetic analysis 5th finger clinodactyly. Conventional cytogenetics (G banding) revealed a F. Lopes1, P. Botelho2, M. Souto2, I. Gaivão1, Z. Gomes3, M. Martins2, O. Moutinho3, R. Pinto male karyotype with an apparent duplication in the long arm of chromo- Leite2; some16 and the pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 [46,XY,dup(16) 1Department of Genetics and Biotechnology, CECAV, University of Trás-os-Montes and (q11.2q21), inv(9)(p11q13)] in all the 30 metaphase plates screened. Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 2Genetic Service, Cytogenetic Laboratory, Hospital Center of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal, 3Obstetrics and Gynecology J03.06 Service, Hospital Center of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal. A case of inverted duplication deletion of the short arm chromosome 5 in an infant girl without “cri du chat” V. Antonenko, N. Shilova, T. Zolotuhina, M. Minzhenkova, Y. Kozlova, N. Gerasimenko; Researsh Centre for Medical Genetics RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Infertility is a failure to conceive after at least one year of unprotected inter- course. It has been estimated that approximately 15% of the population in industrially developed countries are affected. Reproductive difficulties are Proband is the first child of healthy unrelated parents. During pregnancy associated intimately with cytogenetic abnormalities that could be structu- there were no complications, and the dates of prenatal screening were nor- ral aberrations such as translocations, inversions and supernumerary chro- mal. Her birth weight was 3310g, length - 53 cm, occipitofrontal circumfe- mosome (#); or, constitutional aneuploidies such Klinefelter syndrome, 47, rence - 34 cm. She did not have unusual cry. At the age of 1 year 3 months XYY, Turner syndrome and 47, XXX. her motor development was slow: she could poise her head, but she couldn’t The authors present two cases (two couples) that have been followed in in- sit or crawl. According to physical examination she had muscular hypotonia, fertility consultation. Cytogenetic study and semen analysis were required. dolyhocephaly, enlargement of fontanelle (3,5x4 cm), her weight was 8200g The technical procedures (blood culture, GTL and CTL banding, FISH assay) (<3cd), length - 74cm (<3cd). She showed minor dysmorphic features inclu- and cytogenetic analysis was performed according standards protocols and ding: prominent forehead, preauricular pigs, epichantus folds, strabismus, guidelines. Semen analystihs was done according to World Health Organizati- coloboma of right iris, wide nasal bridge, long filtrum, carinate deformation on Laboratory Manual (5 Edition-2010). In the first case we found a normal of chest, thin skin, venous rete at the chest. Abdominal, transfontanellar and female karyotype (46, XX) and a male karyotype with a reciprocal translo- cardiac ultrasounds revealed right pyelectasis, enlargement of right corns of cation involving the short arm of #4 and the long arm of #22 [46, XY, t(4;22) lateral ventriculuses of brain, patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular septum (p16.1;q11)]; in the semen analysis a low spermatozoa concentration was defect and ectopic of mitral valve cords. detected and concerning morphology a border line value was found (4%). In The standard cytogenetic analyses revealed the additional chromosomal the second case the female karyotype presented a paracentric inversion of material on the short arm of chromosome 5. Parental karyotypes were nor- #14 [46, XX, inv(14) (q13q24.3)] and the male has a normal karyotype (46, mal. The FISH-analyses with the subtelomere probes for short and long arms XY) with a normal semen analysis. of chromosome 5 (TelVision 5p, TelVision 5q, Vysis Abbott) revealed ab- This study strongly point out the importance of cytogenetic analysis of infer- sence of signal on the p-arm with additional chromosomal material. M-FISH tile couples to allow an appropriate genetic counseling. (24xCyte, MetaSystems) analyses revealed that additional material was due J03.04 to chromosome 5. Consequently the karyotype of patient was interpretaited Clinical features and a de novo t(1;12)(p22;p12-13) in a 22-year-old as inverted duplication with loss of subtelomeric region: 46,XX,der(5)del(5) man with myotonic distrophy (p15.3)dup(5)(p15.3p14)dn. This case confirms assumption that inverted H. Acar, N. Kocak, T. Cora, Z. B. Bulut; Selcuklu Medical School, Konya, Turkey. duplications deletions are not very rare forms of chromosomal rearrange- ments. J03.07 We report on a 22-year-old patient presenting with attached ear lobule, Fragile sites in recurrent pregnancy loss thight skin, long height, short phalanges, gynecomasty, mucsle weakness, D. Mierla1, V. Radoi1,2, C. Bara2; 1Life Memorial Hospital, Bucharest, Romania, Bucharest, Romania, 2UMF Carol Davila, short philtrum, long neck, webbed neck. The clinic features are overlapped Bucharest, Romania. with myotonic distrophy. Standard cytogenetic analysis showed a de novo Introduction: translocation, 46,XY,t(1;12)(p22;p12-13) karyotype. Three hypotheses have been postulated to explain such phenotype abnormalities, including a break Early pregnancy loss in the first trimester is the most com- in a gene, a positional effect and a cryptic deletion or duplication. According mon complication affecting at least 15 - 20% of the all clinically recognized to the literatüre, coexistence of t(1;12)(p22;p12-13) karyotype with myoto- pregnancy. Chromosomal structural abnormality in either parent is an im- nic distrophy features has not been reported. This is the first case presenting portant cause of recurrent pregnancy loss but increased spontaneous chro- both features and karyotype. As for myotonic distrophy, there are two types mObojseocmtiev ei:n stability was reported in couples with recurrent spontaneous in adult onset. This identity may not be associated with the present karyo- abortions but without constitutional chromosome aberrations type. Therefore, it will be clarified of these two findings. This case places Material aInnd t hmise rtehpoodrst :w e present the cytogenetic findings of the expressi- further emphasis on the importance of cytogenetics analysis in the study on of fragile sites in couples with two or more spontaneous abortions. of de novo translocations with this abnormal phenotype. In conclusion, fine We studied 636 couples with recurrent sponta- mapping and cloning of cytogenetically translocation chromosome break- neous abortions (>3) referred to Maternal - Fetal Medicine and Assisted points in patients with multiple malformations are a promising strategy for Reproduction of Life memorial Hospital. No subject presented with obvious the isolation of new genes that may be related with myotonic distrophy. Now phenotype of chromosomal rearrangements. we have foced on the patient for the fonctional study. Cytogenetic investigations were carried out from peripheral blood lympho- J03.05 cytes using standard techniques. The routine analyses was performed on Partial trisomy 16q and pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 in a GR ebsaunltdse:d chromosomal preparations. Karyotypes of the fetuses were not young patient with a complex phenotype studied. C. A. Popa1,2, M. Puiu1,2, S. Arghirescu1,2, M. Serban2; ConclusioAnut osomal fragile sites were found in 8 cases (0,62%). The fragile site was not typically folate-sensitive, being expressed in standard medium. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org374 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 The role of fragile sites in causing abortion is still very difficult to asses. Fra- the total number of analyzed examinees. gile sites may possibly predispose to chromosome breakage and rearrange- For each sample were analyzed 1000 binuclear lymphocytes and determi- ments in meiosis and consequent infertility ned total number of MN, cells with MN as well as their distribution (number J03.08 in cells). MN was determined according to proposed HUMN criteria. Heterochromatin variants of human chromosome 9 and the Statistical analyze revealed following conclusions: reproduction failure 1. There is significant difference among number of MN found among gen- A. Sipek jr., A. Panczak, R. Mihalova, L. Celbova, M. Janashia, M. Kohoutova; ders (p<0, 05). Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 2. There is highly significant difference in frequency number of MN among Prague, Czech Republic. different age groups (p<0,001). 3. There is significant difference in frequency of 2 micronucleus and smo- king habits of examinees while that difference is not present for 1 micronu- Pericentric inversion of chromosome 9 - inv(9) - is considered to be clini- cleus frequency. cally insignificant heterochromatin variant of human karyotype. However, The results of this study considering age, gender and smoking habits are in various author repeatedly mention possible association of inv(9) and selec- accordance with results determined for general population of healthy peop- ted pathologies, especially with reproduction failure. This can cause some le in other cytogenetic laboratories else in the world. consultation dilemma, especially when inv(9) is identified in potential ga- J03.11 mete donor. Multiples and different chromosome aberrations in a healthy female Some authors also suggest the same role for other variants of the hetero- patient chromatin region of the human chromosome 9 (like 9qh+ or 9qh) as well. L. Rodríguez, M. García, M. Sánchez, E. Abarca; Using the data from our cytogenetic laboratory - we analyzed the clinical Laboratorio AbaCid-Genética. Hospital de Madrid., Madrid, Spain. indications among 383 patients with heterochromatin variant of chromo- some 9 and we have found the reproduction failure to be the most common diagnose (more then 43 %). That was far more, then was the incidence of It is widely known that the presence of a chromosome alteration in a patient reproduction failure in our control group of patients with normal karyotype. has usually associated different congenital abnormalities, nevertheless the This difference was also statistically significant. vertical transmission of a chromosomopathy has also been described to be We have confirmed heterochromatin variants of chromosome 9 as relatively associated with no phenotypic effects, defined as “variants”. common finding, this time in population in the Czech Republic. The clinical In fact, once a chromosome alteration is found in a patient, such a chromo- significance, however, remains subject of discussion. Possible association somopathy is present in all cells, unless it is a mosaicism (with two or three of heterochromatin variants of human chromosome 9 with reproduction different cell lines) or it is a chromosomal instability syndrome, such as Ni- failure had quite low statistical significance and will require further inve- jmegen syndrome. stigation. Here we present a very atypical case where multiples and different chro- J03.09 mosome alteration were diagnosed in a peripheral blood karyotype of a 32 Cytogenetic abnormalities detected in patients with non-obstructive years old healthy female patient, who wanted to have a baby. As an antece- azoospermia and severe oligozoospermia inNorth-West of Iran dent she refers to have had a Hodking lymphoma 8 years ago, which was A. Jalili1, S. Abdollahi Fard2, K. Hasanzade2, N. Karimiyan2, Z. Seyedi1, S. Rahmani1; treated with chemotherapy for 6 months and with radiotherapy for 21 sesi- 1Islamic Azad University, Ahar, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tabriz university of medical ons (30 greys). Once she was cured, she decided to have a baby although the sciences, Tabirz, Islamic Republic of Iran. chromosome findings in the lab where frightened scared, showing multiples and different chromosome aberrations in 20% of cells. The karyotype was repeated and the same findings were observed. The question is: Could it be Introduction-Chromosomal anomalies have been postulated to be as one of any relation between the lymphoma treatment which happened 8 years ago the principal genetic factors in male infertility. find the frequency and types and the multiple chromosome alterations? If so, is there any risk for a preg- of major chromosomal abnormalities with nonobstructive azoospermia and nancy in our patient? Should she avoid her ovocites and consider a donor? severe oligozoospermia in men who were referred because of primary in- Is there any other patient describe with a similar karyotype? Shall we check fertilityto give appropriate genetic counseling before assisted reproduction her hematology looking for another lymphoma? techniques in north-west of Iran, and investigate the general characteristics J03.12 in this infertile male population,was objective of study. Incidence And Clinical Significance Of Pericentric Inversion Of Material & methods-A total of 50 infertile males (35 were azoospermic, Chromosome 9. 15severe oligospermic) were studied for the cytogenetic evaluation prior to S. Eren, N. Çine, B. Doğruoğlu, Z. İlkay, R. U. Akkoyunlu, E. Gümüşlü, D. Sünnetçi, H. Savlı; use of assisted reproduction techniques. Also, 60 fertile males as a control Kocaeli University, Kocaeli, Turkey. group were studied. Karyotyping was performed on peripheral blood lym- Aim: phocytes according to the standard methods. Results -The total prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities was found to be BackgTrhoeu animd: of the study was to study the frequency of inv(9) and its clini- 16% (8/50), includingfive patients (10%) were 47,XXY;one patient (2%)46 cal correlation with human genetic diseases ,XY/47,XXY;one patient (2%) 46,XY/45,XO. All of them were azoospermic Pericentric inversion of the chromosome 9 is such a common males , and one patient (2%) 46,XY,del(Y)(q11.2) that was Oligozoospermic, occurrence that some cytogeneticists would consider them as normal va- And in control males except one case that was 46,XYY and fertile man,all riants. The frequency estimated to be 1 to 3% in the general population. control males had no chromosomal abnormalities. Despite being categorised as a minor chromosomal rearrangement which Conclusions-Comparison of our results with the review of the literature does not correlate with abnormal phenotypes, there have been many con- shows a relatively similar incidence of chromosomal anomalies in infertile troversial reports indicating that it may lead to abnormal clinical conditions men.The occurrence of chromosomal abnormalities among infertile males sMuacthe arsia slusb afenrdt iMlitey,t hreocdusr:r ent abortions, leukemia, dysmorphic features and strongly suggests the need for routine genetic testing and counseling prior psychosis. to the employment of assisted reproduction techniques. We studied retrospectively the incidence and cli- J03.10 nical significance of pericentric inv(9) from the collected peripheral blood Cytogenetic biomonitoring of general population of FB&H using kRaersyuolttysp: es of 1,800 cases being referred to our department with suspected micronucleus assay test genetic diseases over a 3-year period. S. Ibrulj1, M. Mackic1, I. Aganovic1, D. Celik2; Pericentric inv(9) was detected in 21 cases (1% ). Ten cases were 1Center for genetics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2Cathedra for Epidemiology and adult patients, four (40% ) of them were with obstetric and fertility pro- Biostatistics, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. blems, five adult patients ( 50% ) had a sibling or offspring with inv(9) and 1 adult patient (10% ) had the diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia. Eleven cCaosnecsl (u5s2io%n): were paediatric patients with dysmorphic features and conge- The aim of this study is to determine values of Micronucleus Assay from nital anomalies. peripheral blood lymphocytes of 200 healthy examinees both gender from general population of Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We have de- The significance of inv(9) is still mostly unknown and hence to understand termine micronucleus frequency and number of cells with micronucleus for the clinical significance of the pericentric inversion of Chromosome 9 it will each examinee, average (median) frequency of MN for each group of exami- be required reporting of new additional cases with detailed chromosomal nees divided into groups by the age (20-30y; 30-40y; 40-50y; 50-60y; 60- studies. 70y), as well as the gender (20M: 20F) and their smoking habits. 200 was www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 375 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J03.13 Cytogenetics abnormalities of spontaneous abortion I. I. Kavecan, J. Jovanovic Privrodski, M. Obrenovic, M. Kolarski, L. Gacina, J. Rudež, M. interphalanx and radiocarpal joints; recurvation of ulnar joints; hypomyo- Fojkar; tonia. Institute for Children and Youth Health Care Vojvodina, Novi Sad, Serbia. From integuments were taped: the expressed dryness, ecdysis, diffusive pig- mentation, signs of a follicular hyperkeratosis. The accompanying somatic pathology is diagnosed for the patient: a peptic ulcer duodenum and an iron The loss of the desired pregnancy is always a stressful event deficiency anemia. Developmental anomalies in the given observation it did for both partners/spouses, and therefo re it is always important to establish not become perceptible. tRhees ceaaursceh t ohbatje lecdti vtoe sthe loss of pregnancy and how to achieve success in the The proband karyotype has been identified as 46,XX,del(18)(:p11.31→qter). next pregnancy and get a healthy child. From parents of the patient it was possible to survey only mother, it has a Materials and metho: dTos determine the frequency, distribution normal karyotype.The phenotype of our patient corresponds to clinical de- and type of pathological karyotypes of spontaneous abortions. scriptions of patients with a partial monosomy of a short shoulder of 18 : The study group consists of partners who under- chromosomes which were published earlier. However, along with characte- went kCaornycoltuyspiionng of spontaneously aborted fetuses. The analysis of 549 ristic craniofacial dismorphias and a delay of mental development, expressi- samples of spontaneous abortions revealed 19.85% of chromosomal aberra- on of somatic and dermal implications pays attention to itself. tions. : Most frequent chromosomal aberration in spontaneous J03.16 abortion group was the Turner syndrome, followed by triploidy, trisomy of A case of 16p subtelomeric duplication with vascular anomalies chromosome 18, trisomy of chromosome 15 and Down‘s A. Laku (Babameto); syndrome. Rare chromosomal aberrations were frequently present in ear- University Hospital Center „Mother Teresa“, Faculty of Medicine, Tirana, Albania. lier gestation ages. Women with spontaneous abortion, which is caused by a chromosomal aberration often have a history of adverse outcome of pre- vious pregnancies. We report a patient, a boy 12 months old, with karyotype 46,XY,der(4), J03.14 recognized by standard cytogenetic techniques, presenting with facial fea- Probability rates of different pregnancy outcomes and meiotic tures, neurological impairment and pulmonary hypertension. He was the segregation analysis of spermatozoa in carriers of t(1;11) first child of healthy nonconsanguineous parents. Family history was un- (p36.22;q12.2) remarkable. Distinct facial anomalies included microcephaly, high frontal A. T. Midro; hairline, blond thin hair, bilateral blepharophimosis and palpebral ptosis, Department of Clinical Genetic Medical University Bialystok Poland, Bialystok, Poland. short nose, everted upper lip, cleft palate, micrognathia, cupped anteverted ears. He had also hypoplastic distal phalanges and bilateral inguinal hernia. Pulmonary hypertension with tricuspidal regurgitation and cavernous liver The unique rearrangement i.e. t(1;11)(p36.22;q12.2). ish t(1;11)(RP11- hemangioma were found in our patient. Subtelomeric analysis by Multiplex 1115A15-,RP11-476D13-,RP11-498B2-,RP11-807G9-,RP11-496H15- Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA) technique (a set of probes ,RP11-575L21-,RP11-874A11+;RP11-855010-,RP11-881M11+,799F14+) for testing subtelomeric imbalances in the SALSA P070 and P036B human was found in two relatively large pedigrees of carriers studied due to oc- telomere test kits, MRC-Holland, Amsterdam, Netherlands) demonstrated a currence of three miscarriages (pedigree 1) and the birth of newborn with duplication of the subtelomeric region of chromosome 16p and a deletion hydrocephalus and myelomeningocele (pedigree 2). The same hybridization of the subtelomeric region of chromosome 4q, suggesting a translocation pattern was found in both families indicating similar, if not the same, rear- between 4q and 16p. A duplication of the subtelomeric region of 16p in the rangement. STS marker walking analyses using hybrid containing derivative parents was excluded by MLPA technique. The imbalance of our patient re- chromosome 1 did not allow us to define the 1p36 and 11q12.2 breakpoints sulted de novo. In comnclusion, we have confirmed the clinical features of in this rearrangement at the sequence level. Segregation analysis of cumu- patients with dup16p, involving the terminal 16p13.1-p13.3 region. Vascu- lative data of pedigrees was performed by indirect method of Stengel-Rut- lar anomalies have been previously described in association with dup16p. kowski and showed that probability rate for unbalanced child at birth was Thus, pulmonary vascular disease and other vascular anomalies can be a 0/40 i.e. <0.9.% after ascertainment correction, the risk for stillbirths/early feature of dup16p, suggesting that this subtelomeric region in some patients newborn deaths was 1/40 i. e. 2.5%±2.5.% and for miscarriages was 15/40 could be related to vascular anomalies. (37.5%±7.6 %). We didn’t found any differences between males and females J03.17 carriers. Cytogenetic effects in Chernobyl accident liquidators in delayed terms Meiotic segregation pattern after the sperm analysis by three-colour FISH following radiation exposure method of one male carrier from pedigree showed all possible combinations O. W. Shemetun, M. A. Pilinskaya; after 2:2 and 3:1 segregations. The most common segregation types were National Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. alternate and adjacent I (similar frequency). Low frequency was observed in adjacent II type, in opposite to 3:1 segregation with the high proportion of unbalanced gametes. However we suggest, that only one form of chromo- Genome response to radiation exposure caused by mutagenic effects both some imbalances i.e. monosomy 1p36.22→pter with trisomy 11q12.2→qter in the exposed targeted cells as well as in the unexposed bystander cells. In may be observed in progeny at birth but with limited survival after delive- delayed terms following radiation exposure during cytogenetic examination ry. of Chernobyl accident liquidators the frequency of all types of chromosome Obtained results of risk estimation of different pregnancy outcomes for car- aberrations in their lymphocytes with the help of G-banding chromosomes riers of t(1;11)(p36.22;q12.2) may be used in genetic counseling of carriers staining had been established. The elevated chromosome aberrations fre- of this rearrangement. quency in Chernobyl accident liquidators lymphocytes exposed in doses J03.15 270-690 mGy formed due to translocations that are stored in the genera- Case of diagnostics of a rare syndrome 18p-. tions of irradiated target cells and chromatid breaks induced by bystander- A. R. Shorina1, T. A. Gayner2, V. A. Makasheva1; type effect in the untreated cells had been established. The frequency of 1Novosibirsk Regional Children‘s Clinical Psychoneurological Dispansery, Novosibirsk, deletions, dicentrics and centric rings had no significant difference from Russian Federation, 2Center of New Medical Technologies of the Siberian branch of the control that was result of their elimination in time. In lymphocytes of Cher- Russian Academy of Science, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. nobyl liquidators exposed to radiation in doses 1010-2540 mGy the level of chromosome aberrations exceeded the population’s one at the expense of high frequency of stable cytogenetic markers of radiation exposure, rings Partial monosomies of short and long shoulders of a chromosome 18 are chromosomes and chromatid breaks. The results obtained confirmed the clinically distinguished syndromes. Considering a rarity of these syndromes, persistance of bystander-type cytogenetic effects in somatic cells of exposed data on new cases deserve special attention. We result a case of diagnostics persons for many years following radiation exposure. Our data confirm the of a partial monosomy of a short shoulder of 18 chromosomes at the woman need to asses the frequency of stable chromosome aberrations as basic cy- of 24-th years who have addressed for medicogenetic consultation. The pa- togenetic markers of radiation exposure under the cytogenetic dosimetry tient had an expressed psychoneurological semiology: an intellectual deve- in the late terms following human irradiation and incorrect using such indi- lopment delay (F70), organic disorder of the person. At survey became per- cators as the „frequency of aberrant cells“ and „mean level of chromosome ceptible phenotypic signs: mycrocephalia; hypertelorism; ptosis; mandible aberrations“ that may be overestimated because of chromosome instability hypoplasia; dysplasia of auricles; an asthenic constitution; the low growth markers (chromatid type aberrations) due to the induction of bystander- and the lowered mass of a body; kyphoscoliosis of thoracal department of type effect. a backbone; short neck; cross-section-longitudinal platypodia; clinodactyly of little fingers; hypoplasia of trailer phalanxes of brushes; hypermobility of www.eshg.org www.eshg.org376 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J03.18 Clinical characterization of five patients with microdeletion at 15q13.2-q13.3 lances are implicated in the etiology of Developmental Delay (DD)/Mental K. Õunap1,2, E. Oiglane-Shlik2,3, I. Talvik2,3, R. Teek1,2, O. Zilina1,4, K. Kuuse1, M. Yakoreva1, Retardation (MR). However, most of these cases could not be diagnosed by T. Reimand1,2; conventional cytogenetic techniques. We aimed to establish (a-CGH) techni- 1Tartu University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of que and assess its potential as a diagnostic tool of chromosomal imbalances Pediatrics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Tartu University Hospital, Children‘s and to detect chromosomal aberrations in patients with DD/ MR. Subjects Clinic, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Cell and Molecular & Methods: A cohort of 47 patients diagnosed as having DD/ MR with or Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. without congenital malformations were referred to the CEGMR for cytoge- netic analyses. We used both conventional cytogenetic G-banding and Fluo- rescent in-situ hybridization techniques, besides we applied (a-CGH) high Individuals with 15q13.3 microdeletion may have wCidHeR NraAn7ge of clinical resolution Agilent scanner with 1X244 K array format, and Affymetrix 2.7 manifestations including intellectual disability (ID), cardiac malformati- M cytogenetics array. Chromosomal aberrations could be detected in 6/47 ons, seizures, autism and schizophrenia. Deletion of gene in this (13%) patients by G-banding technique and 4/47 (8%) by FISH technique, region is causative for the majority of neurodevelopmental phenotypes in however, 14/47 (30%) were diagnosed by a-CGH techniques. The following the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome. Subsets of persons with the deleti- microdeletion syndromes were detected: (Del 15 (q11.2); Del 15 (q13-14); on have no obvious clinical findings. During 2009-2011 the chromosomal Del 22 (q11.2); Del 7 (q11.23); Del 18 (q21 q23); Del 1 (p36); and duplica- microarray analysis (CMA) was performed in 596 individuals due to their tions: dup 18p (tetrasomy); dup 15 (q11 q23); dup 18 (q23).We noticed the clinical indications. In four individuals 15q13.3 microdeletion was found. In increased number of CNVs detected by a-CGH which need further investiga- one patient 15q13.2-q13.3 microdeletion was diagnosed previously during tion for contribution to phenotypes. Our results indicate the strength of high research study of the children with ID. Here we present the clinical features resolution genomic arrays in diagnosing cases of unknown etiology and in of five patients with 15q13.2-q13.3 microdeletion. detection of contiguous genomic alterations in the wide spectrum of cases All our patients (aged 6-17 years, among them two sibs) had normal grow- with DD/mental retardation. th parameters, except one boy with larger deletion 15q13.2-q13.3 who had J03.21 short stature and microcephaly. Mild or unspecified ID, speech delay and Clinical correlation of mentally retarded individuals suffering mild facial dysmorphism was noticed in all patients. Abnormal EEG was from pervasive developmental disorders (PDDs) in South Indian found in three of them (60%) and one boy has severe treatment resistant population generalized epilepsy (20%). Positive family history for epilepsy was docu- S. Rajiv1, V. G. Abilash1, M. Papakumari2, M. Murugan2; mented in two families. Therefore, it is highly possible that their epilepsy 1VIT UNIVERSITY, VELLORE, India, 2Rama Rao Polyclinic, Chennai, India. may be also caused by 15q13.3 microdeletion (not investigated yet) as in 1-2% of individuals with generalized epilepsy 15q13.3 microdeletion is found. Cardiac anomaly was occurred in three children (60%). Aim and objective: To clinically correlate and analyse the relation between Microdeletion 15q13.3 is one of the most common microdeletions found mentally retarded individuals suffering from PDDs. by CMA in individuals with ID. In our cohorts of patients it was detected in Methodology: From 130 cases suffering with PDDs a sample of 30 indivi- 0.7% of investigated individuals. duals showing MR were chosen according to diagnostic and statistical ma- J03.19 nual of mental disorders (DSM-IV). We performed cytogenetic analysis by Gene polymorphisms and the frequency of chromosomal aberrations measuring the extent of chromosomal aberrations (CA) along with cytokine- in persons exposed to long-term occupational irradiation (Microarray sis-block micronucleus (CBMN) assay in human leucocytes. This assay was for using) performed to measure more specifically the DNA damage occurring in peri- L. G. M. K. Takhauov R.M.; pheral blood leucocytes. Buccal cells were collected and analysed for measu- Seversk Biophysical Research Center, Seversk, Russian Federation. ring DNA damage using micronucleus assay. We also checked three genes namely CNTNAP2, SHANK3 and MECP2 for mutations and its association with MR through molecular analysis by Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR), There has been studied the correlation between SNP and the frequency Single Stranded Confirmation Polymorphism (SSCP) and sequencing. and range of chromosomal aberrations in 96 employees (male) of Siberian Result: Cytogenetic analysis (i.e) chromosomal aberrations study ,CBMN Group of Chemical Enterprises, exposed to chronic γ-radiation: European, assay in leucocytes and micronucleus assay using buccal cells showed si- Age - 45-65 year, Cumulative Dose 100-300 mSv. At all employees, the analy- gnificant variations in all MR cases, when compared with control samples. sis of frequency and range of chromosomal aberrations has been carried out Molecular analysis revealed mutations in CNTNAP2, SHANK3 and MECP2 (not less than 300 metaphases). Genotyping were performed by using the through PCR, SSCP and Sequencing. microarray „Cancer_SNP_Panel“ (http://www.illumina.com/Documents/ Conclusion: The study showed a variety of cytogenetic abnormality along products/datasheets/datasheet_cancer_snp_panel.pdf). Panel contains 1 with significant changes in base pair content in the three genes considered 421 SNP of 406 genes. for this study in the MR individuals. More number of these studies with a SNP with Call Rate below 80% (25 SNP), SNP with the frequency of rare much larger sample size has to be conducted. So that it helps in biomoni- alleles below 10% (134 SNP), 80 SNP with genotype frequencies, that do not toring and creating awareness in the population. Such studies will help in meet Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium, were excluded from the analysis. All in developing a simpler diagnostic method that can help identify the preva- all p-value of 1 262 SNP were calculated with Bonferroni correction for re- lence of MR in PDDs. cessive model („SNPassoc“ program). There were analyzed the frequencies: J03.22 aberrant cells; single chromatid breaks; paired fragments; point fragments; Cytogenetics and molecular analysis of beedi workers among Vellore dicentric and ring chromosomes; translocations; chromatid exchanges. population Studies have shown that 23 SNP (mutant genotype) (rs2725349, rs2392221, V. G. Abilash, P. Vasantha Srinivasan, S. Soumit, S. Nishu, S. Rajiv; rs1041163, rs2114443, rs6083, rs7462102, rs1760904, rs1051690, VIT University, Vellore, India. rs4986894, rs488133, rs5742694, rs2373721, rs5742667, rs1269486, rs1149901, rs2873950, rs1574154, rs10934500, rs4688046, rs889162, rs230532, rs312016 rs4807542), associated with the high frequency of dif- Beedi is a thin South Asian cigarette made of 0.2-0.3g of tobacco flake wrap- ferent types of chromosomal aberrations, including 11 SNP associated with ped in Tendu (Diospyrox melanoxylon) leaf and secured with colored thread more than one type of chromosomal aberrations. at both ends. This work is based on the study of the beedi workers who J03.20 are extensively engaged in beedi making in Elagiri village, Vellore for ge- Whole Genome Array- CGH analysis in patients with Developmental nerations. Workers roll an average of 500-1000 beedies per day, handling Delay/ Mental Retardation /Congenital Malformations in Saudi 225-450 grams of tobacco flake, and inhaling tobacco dust and other volatile Arabia components. Our aim is to study the induced chromosomal abnormalities by I. M. R. Hussein1, A. G. Chaudhary1, R. Bassyouni2, A. PeerZada1, H. Schulten1, M. M. Al tobacco, a potent carcinogen from cytogenetic and molecular aspects. Quaiti1, S. Sogati3, M. H. Al-Qahtani1; Cytogenetic analysis was performed to check the chromosomal aberrations 1King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, 2Ministry of Health, Al-Taif, Saudi Arabia, 3Maternity & Child Hospital, Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. in the beedi workers. Totally 27 workers samples and 15 controls are coll- ected; the result shows that there is a significant increase in the aberrant cells to the workers than the control. Also there is an increased evidence of chromosomal aberration to the workers having the habit of smoking than Microarray - based Comparative Genomic Hybridization (a-CGH) has enabled the non-smokers. The aberration differences observed is due to smoking wide investigation of the genome at high resolution and has been imple- while the other group got tobacco exposure indirectly through tobacco dust mented in different centers as a clinical diagnostic tool. Chromosomal imba- www.eshwgh.ioler mganufacturing. www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 377 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J04.02 Frequency of mutation FV Leiden among the women of reproductive In molecular analysis, DNA was extracted from the blood samples followed age living in the Novosibirsk region, and communication of this by PCR amplification with primers specific for the cyp1a1 gene (Exon-1). mutation with reproductive losses The PCR amplification product was determined by 1% agarose gel electro- L. F. Mitrohina1, A. B. Maslennikov1,2, A. R. Shorina1, E. V. Maslova1; phoresis, then SSCP (Single Strand Conformational Polymorphism) was car- 1State Novosibirsk Regional Clinical Diagnostic Center, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, ried out to detect mutation by deletion or addition in bands. In this study 2Scientific research institute of molecular biology and biophysics of the Siberian branch 3 deletions were observed out of 10 beedi workers when compared with of the Russian Academy of Medical Science, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation. control. J03.23 F5 Study of methylparathion on bone marrow cells from mice, in vivo: Factor FV Leiden mutation (replacement G on A at nucleotide position 1691 Micronucleus assay gene ) is the autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes affected per- I. P. Aranha; sons to venous thromboses and may have an increase risk for pregnancy- Dept. Genética, IBRAG, Univ. do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. related venous thromboembolism finally leads to pregnancy loss. In control group of 238 women Fo5f genital age with the normal obstetric anamnesis, living in the Novosibirsk region and selected by epidemiological Methylparathion is a largely used pesticide. To exert its biological effect it criteria, frequency of 1691A gene has made 0,0044 (in the absence of ho- must be biotransformed into methylparaoxon. Previous work in our labo- mozygous genotypes). Results of inspection of 303 women, which anamnFe5- ratory, using the chromosome aberrations assay in human lymphocytes in sis has been burdened by spontaneous interruption of pregnancy on term vitro has shown that while methylparathion had no clatogenic or aneugenic till 24 weeks, testify about authentic to higher frequency of 1691A gene . effect on chromosomes, methylparaoxon was responsible for the alterations In this group its frequency has made 0,03F956 , thus two women have homozy- in structure observed. The objective of the present work was to study the gous genotypes. The received results confirm the importance replacement effect of methylparathion on chromosomes of mice bone marrow in vivo, G on A at nucleotide position 1691 gene as one of genetic factors contri- using the micronucleus assay. Animals were separated into four groups. In buting to early reproductive losses and confirm the big prognostic value of the first group, 6 animals received methylparathion intraperitoneally during molekuljarno-genetic testing of the FV Leiden mutation at mediko-genetic fitvhe consecutive days in a concentration equivalent to 25% of the LD50. In the consultation of families in which there were early reproductive losses, and 6 day, animals were sacrificed, their femurs removed, the bone marrows families which plan pregnancy. collected and smears were made for slides preparation. After 24h cells were J04.03 stained with Giemsa Gurr (2%) and analyzed under optical microscope. As Study of Oct4 and Sox2 Genes expression in Haematopoietic Stem positive control, 6 animals received cyclophosphamide (50mg/mL) once. Cells Six animals were injected intraperitoneally with the solvent (corn oil) and 6 S. Sajadi1, M. Hashemi1, M. Soleimani2; animals not exposed to any drug served as negative control for the experi- 1Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Hematology and Blood Banking , Faculty of Medical Sciences , Tarbiat ment. In the test group, 12000 cells were observed and 199 showed micro- Modares University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. nuclei. In the group exposed to the solvent, 12000 cells were analyzed and none had micronucleus. In the positive control group, 12000 cells were ob- served and 102 had micronuclei and in the negative control group, of 12000 Every tissue in body needs to regenerate itself after injury. Stem cells be- cells observed, none had micronucleus. The chi-square test for indepen- cause of their abilities of differentiation and self-renewal can expand and dence showed that our results were extremely significant (P<0.0001). They give cells to the tissues. Stem cells have various types; one of them is hema- suggest that methylparathion is responsible for the micronuclei observed. topoietic stem cells; in addition to differentiation of hematopoietic cells hsc J04. Reproductive genetics can also differentiate in to neural, mascular, and cartilage cells. This unique possibility can help us in investigation of new treatments for cancers. So recognition of machanisms in this process has multipular importance. In the J04.01 present study expression of sox2 and oct4 genes -known as main genes in Genetic and demographic aspects in Kaluga region and among the self renewal - were considered with RT-PCR from cord blood CD133+ cells. families with reproductive losses Our results show that both genes expressed in the first and 8th day of ex- B. Ginzburg; pantion but at 12th day despite of sox2 expression; oct4 was not expressd. Regional Hospital of Kaluga, Kaluga, Russian Federation. Because of necessity of oct4 for keeping multipotency; loss of expression will cause to differentiation which seems to appear after 12th day.Our study demonstrated that mechanism of self-renewal in CD133+ cells are similar The national composition of Kaluga region is chiefly represented by Russi- to embryonic stem cells or embryonic carcinoma cells and different with ans (93.5%). mesenchyme CD105+34-. Beginning from 2000 the parity of childbirth in Kaluga region changed as J04.04 follows: the number of primiparas decreased by 5 %, while the number of The role of the genetic factors in the recurrent miscarriage women giving second birth increased by 3%, and the number of women I. Sultanov1, N. S. Osinovskaya2; with three childbirths increased by 2%. The number of women with 4 and 1St.Petersburg State University, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Ott’s Institute of more childbirths remained unchanged (4%). Obstetrics and Gynecology, St.Petersburg, Russian Federation. Within the last 11 years Kaluga region birth rate increased by 30%, this fact being accompanied by the increase of childbearing women’s average age from 25,05 to 26,85 years. Recurrent miscarriage (RM) is a serious problem of the modern obstetrics. In the group of 957 families with reproductive losses the average age of wo- Adrenal hyperandrogenism, which come from congenital adrenal hyperpla- men ranges from 26,92 to 28,5 years, which is distinctly higher than general sia (CAH), is one of the common reasons of RM. We analyzed 10 mutations population rate. The expected Down syndrome frequency among the fami- of the CYP21A2 gene (P30L, I2splice, del8bp, I172N, V236E, V281L, Q318X, lies with reproductive losses amounts to 14,46 per 10000 neonates, general R356W, P453S, delA2) and the presence of two types of chimeric genes in population rate being 11,51. This fact may initiate age-related fetal patho- two groups of women. The population group (first group), consisted of 82 logy and cause present and future reproductive losses. The average age of women, and the second one included 102 women with RM. the men from the families with reproductive losses amounts to 29,46, which Mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene were detected in 15,5% (17/102) of turns out to be lower than general population rate (30 years). Based on this, women with RM and in 2,5% (2/80) of women from population group (p = the fact described above should not influence the frequency of age-related 0.0013). fetal pathology in the families with reproductive losses. The chimeric genes were identified in 25% (25/102) of women in the se- Thus, we obtained certain evidences of possible influence of the age of wo- cond group and in 8,5% (7/80) of women in the first group (p = 0.0093). men from the group with reproductive losses on the increase of age-related We have studied 76 women of population group and 73 women with RM by neonates pathology frequency and possible increase of repeated reproduc- means of the Real time-PCR method, in order to detect the CYP21A2 gene tive losses among them due to fetus trisomies. and CYP21A1P pseudogene copies. We found a statistically significant diffe- rence between both groups in gene duplications and deletions of pseudoge- ne (p = 0.0235, p = 0.0345, respectively). Thus the presence of mutations in CYP21A2 gene and chimeric genes has a substantial impact on development of recurrent miscarriage. It is notable that both studied groups differ from each other by the number of pseudoge- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org378 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 ne copies, that might be due to the presence of unknown mutations. Further patients with thrombophilia. 94 were women and 10 men. In 38 women studies are needed to clarify the role of CYP21A2 gene in the development were conducted karyotype. of RM. Results: The study group showed a rate of 92.1% associated mutations. Only J04.05 7.9% of patients had a single form of thrombophilia. Thus, 89.5% showed Interaction between maternal KIR and fetal HLA-C in success of PAI mutation, MTHFR C677T mutation - 52.6% , A1298C MTHFR mutation- pregnancy 21.1% , double mutation MTHFR in heterozygous form - 4 patients , factor M. Khosravifar1, M. Sanati1, H. Gourabi1, R. Habibi1, N. Chaparzadeh2; XIII mutation- 12 patients, fibrinogen mutation in 4 and factor V Leyden, 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Center, Royan Institute for factor II, protein S deficiency and GPIIb / IIIa each in 2 patients each. Reproductive Biomedicin,ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 21- Department of Of the 38 patients, 28 had different chromosomal polymorphisms. The most Biology, Faculty of Science, Azarbaijan University of Tarbiat Moallem, Tabriz, Islamic common were the presence of satellites in 12 patients: chromosome 13 , 21, Republic of Iran. 14, 15 and 22. The remaining 16 patients had combined changes, both sa- Introduction: tellites and constituent heterocromatina. Constituent heterocromatina was present on chromosome 1, 9 and 16, all with PAI1 mutation. 26 patients Killer-cell Immunoglobulin-like receptors (KIR) expressed achieved pregnancy. No differences were found between patients without by natural killer (NK) cells at the site of placentation, can bind to human changes in karyotype and those with this chromosomal satellites, but the leukocyte antigen (HLA-C) molecules on trophoblast cells. Both systems are patients with combined changes, only 6 (37.5%) have achieved pregnancy. genetically highly polymorphic, in which their interactions result in release Conclusions: Both chromosomal changes and status of thrombophilia cau- of varieties of cytokines and chemokines. The factors modulate placental se repeated reproductive failures. Further studies are needed to specify the relationship between mother and her fetus. Thus, it has been hypothesized combination of mutations at greatest risk and how therapeutic dose should tMhaatt eeraicahl so f& th Me petahrtoicdusl:a r maternal KIR/fetal HLA-C genotype combinations be adjusted to be effective. have different effect in pregnancy success. J04.08 The patients were 92 couples and 8 women with Detection of AZF Factor of Y Chromosome three or more recurrent miscarriage (RM) with no physiologic or pathologic B. Kamaliyeva, G. Abildinova; reason for their problem. Also, 100 healthy poKrIoRu2sD Sw1o, mKIeRn2 DwSe2r,e K sIeRl2eDctLe1d, National Research Center for Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. aKsI Rc2oDnLtr2o, lK gIrRo2uDpL. 3DNA were isolated from the whole blood specimens and gReensoutlytsp:e d for HLA-C groups and 5 KIR genes ( ) using PCR-sequences-specific primer method (SSP). Molecular genetic study of AZF region deletions of Y chromosome was car- Statistical analysis shown, that frequency of the HLA-C2 group is ried out in order to investigate reproductive disorders in men. The material raised in the affected female compared with porous women. The frequen- of the study were 177 men with a history of reproductive disorders (57% cies of activating KIRs in the male of partner of RM were similar to controls astenoteratozoospermia, oligoastenoteratozoospermia in 32% and azoo- wCoonmceluns wiohnil:e it had been decreased in the affected female compared with spermia in 11%). Cytogenetic and molecular genetic studies were carried porous women although these don’t reach significant. out. Our findings support the idea that interaction between mater- Normal karyotype - 46, XY was diagnosed in 159 cases. The 18 cases (10%) nal KIR on NK cells and paternal HLA-C expressed trophoblast cells, affect showed chromosomal abnormalities: 16 patients -47, XXY - Klinefelter‘s the successful placentation. syndrome, in one case- disomy of Y chromosome-47, X YY, and one structu- J04.06 ral abnormality - 45,XY,der(14,15)(q10;q10). Investigation of association between FABP9 gene mutations and The 88 men with infertility and normal karyotype - 46, XY received mole- sperm morphological defects in a group of Iranian Men cular genetic study. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood by F. Pouresmaeil, J. Jamshidi; «Promega» set, USA. Multiplex polymerase chain reaction (multiplex PCR) Department of medical genetics, faculty of medicine, Shahid Beheshti university of was performed using Taq-polymerase. 9 STS-markers, specific to AZF-locus, medical science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. were used, the results of amplification were evaluated by electrophoresis in 7% polyacrylamide gel. 7 patients had deletions of AZF locus, of which AZFa in the 15%, AZFb in the 15%, AZFa+b in the 15%, AZFc in the 55%. The ob- Introduction : The male germ cell-specific fatty acid-binding protein 9 (FA- tained results allowed to establish the genetic cause of spermatogenic disor- BP9/PERF15) is the major constituent of the murine sperm perforatorium ders, to avoid unnecessary treatment and the tactic of IVF / ICSI program. and perinuclear theca. Because of its cytoskeletal association and sequence J04.09 homology to myelin P2 (FABP8), it has been suggested that FABP9 tethers Use of Y chromosome specific repeat sequencing for sexing by PCR sperm membranes to the underlying cytoskeleton. Furthermore, its upregu- and Single cell PCR lation in apoptotic testicular germ cells and its increased phosphorylation A. Mahjoubi, F. Mahjoubi; status during capacitation suggested multiple important functions for FA- Department of Clinical Genetic, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and BP9. Also recently it is shown that it can affect sperm morphology in mice . Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. According to these data , we designed a study to evaluate if mutations of this gene can affect sperm morphology in human. Material and methods : The DNA was extracted from peripheral blood from Embryo sexing is one of the important ways for sex selection of offspring. the infertile males that their sperm count was normal but the number of This is a potential method to considerably improve animal breeding and the morphologically abnormal sperms on their semen was above normal. Then efficiency of dairy and meat production. A novel repeated sequence specific the exon sequences of the FABP9 gene was amplified by PCR. These exons to male cattle has been identified and named S4. S4 is a 1.5 Kb repeating unit were sequenced and then analyzed for detection of potentially mutations. contains various internal repeated sequence. S4 is localized on long arm of Results : We couldn’t detect any mutation in the four exons, intron 3 and the Y chromosome in the region near to ZFY genes. Aim: The objective of this splice sites of the FABP9 gene in our 100 samples which we studied. study was to establish a simple, sensitive, reliable, reproducible and cost ef- Conclusion : As there was no mutation in the exons of this gene in our samp- fective PCR based technique for sexing. Materials and Methods: Genomic les, we can conclude that the mutations of this gene may have a neglectable DNA was extracted from the whole blood samples of male and female cattle. effects on sperm morphological defects and the infertility caused by that. PCR and single cell PCR were performed using specific primers for this regi- However, because we didn’t analyze the promoter and introns 1 and 2 of this on. Result: By this PCR based methods we could differentiate between fema- gene, we couldn’t say this surely. le and male genomic DNA. Discussion: With this technique we can distinct J04.07 male from female using as much as 0.1pg DNA. Using this method we could Human karyotype changes associated with hereditary thrombophilia determine the sex of embryo (4 blastomers). This method may optimize for R. Mihaescu1,2, A. Stoian2, C. Gug1, S. Negru1,2, A. Dan2, C. Serban1; the quantitative detection of Y chromosomes in semen. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania, 2Oncomed, Timisoara, Romania. J04.10 Effect of Oxidative Stress on MicroRNAs Expression in Testis, Sperm Quality and Testis Histopathology in Mature Mouse N. Fatemi1,2, H. Gourabi1, M. Sanati1,3, M. Jamali Zavarei4, H. Ayat2; Background: Thrombophilia is a inappropriate tendency to thrombus for- 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research Center, Royan Institute mation. In recent years numerous studies were conducted in the field of for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department thrombophilia, in an attempt to prevent the consequences of thrombotic of Genetics, Faculty of Basic Science, Shahrekord University, Shahrekord, Islamic disease. Methods: Between 02.2010-01.2012 in Oncomed Center we evaluated 104 www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 379 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical Biotechnology, National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Pathology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, (TUMS), Tehran, Islamic Republic of RsaIG/A - in ERβ gene, and Asn680Ser and Thr307Ala in FSHR genes - re- Iran. sRpeescutlivtse:l y. Both selected groups (clinical and control) meet all requirements for conducting associative studies. No differences were found between the alleles distribution in Male infertility is responsible for approximately 50% of infertility in the patients andα controls for STK11 gene, PvuII T/C in ERα, RsaI G/A in ERβ, world. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) is one of the causative agents of infer- Asn680Ser and Thr307Ala polymorphisms in the FSHR. XbaI A/G polymor- tility in males which effects on sperm quality and function. In this study, the phism in ER gene was related to a higher risk for PαCOS since the prevalence effects of oxidative stress induced by tertiary-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) of A alleles was 67.2% in PCOS group vs. 46.9% in the controls (p=0.032). were investigated on sperm quality, testis tissue and miRNAs expression. Women with two shorter (TA)n alleles in the ER gene were found more Adult male mice strain Balb/c was randomly selected from mouse colony. oCfotnencl uamsioonngs : PCOS patients in comparison to healthy women (44.1% vs. After a primary study to determine LD50, TBHP was injected at the concen- 18.8%, p=0.036).α tration of 1:10 LD50 for 2 weeks. The mice were sacrificed and their testis Our study suggested that the XbaI A/G and (TA)n polymor- tissues were used for cell viability, macroscopic-histopathology analysis, phisms of the ER gene could be related to the development and clinical ROS assay and miRNAs expression. Epididymis was also surveyed for sperm features of PCOS.Larger studies in different ethnic groups are needed to analysis by CASA system. establish the precise role of the estrogen receptor polymorphisms for the The sperm motility, count and viability were decreased in the TBHP treated ovarian function. mice in comparison of the control m•i- ce. The flowcytometry analysis showed J04.13 a significant increase in H2O2 and O2 levels in both testis and sperm 2 weeks Comparison between Molecular and Histopathological Methods for after intra-peritoneal injection. Body weights revealed no treatment-related Assessment of Spermatogenesis in Non-Obstructive Azoospermic men effects but atrophy of testis and decrease of testis cells viability, the expres- M. Eghbali1, M. Akhondi2, H. Soltanghoraee3, H. Zeraati4, H. Edalatkhah1, N. Lakpour2, M. sion of mmu-miR-34a and mmu-miR-181b was observed. Results showed Sadeghi2, M. Modarressi1; that exposure to TBHP can lead to morphological changes in somniferous 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical tubules. Science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Reproductive Biotechnology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute (ARI), ACECR, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic Republic of TBHP-induced oxidative stress caused to decrease in sperm vitality and mo- Iran, 3Avicenna Infertility Clinic, Avicenna Research Institute (ARI), ACECR, Tehran, Iran., tility and testis cells viability. Results indicated that oxidative stress induc- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Epidemiology and Biostatistics Department, School Ktioeny wino tredssti:s • -reduced its normal function. That is due to an increased level of of Public Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran., Tehran, Islamic H2O2 and O2 in testis and their deleterious effects on genomic levels. Republic of Iran. male infertility, oxidative stress, miRNA. J04.11 No association between gr/gr deletions and non-obstructive In Non-Obstructive Azoospermic (NOA) men, evaluation of spermatogenesis azoospermiain Iranian males is performed with histopathological techniques as a gold standard. Patholo- R. Mirfakhraie1, A. Movafagh1, N. Salsabili2, S. Rahmani3; gical assessment of testes could be imprecise due to randomized biopsy and 1Department of Medical Genetics, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, presence of focal spermatogenesis. NOA men showed a variety of defects in Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2IVF Dept, Mirza Kouchak Khan Hospital, Tehran spermatogenesis stages, therefore molecular analysis of the stage-specific University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Islamic Azad University, Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of gene expression in the testis could be confirmatory of histopathological techniques in evaluation of spermatogenesis in NOA men. In this study, spermatogenesis status evaluated through expression of germ cell specific genes (DAZ, TSPY1, SPTRX3 and SPTRX1) in testicular tissue of Objective: Genes located in the azoospermia factor (AZF) region including azoospermic men. Histophatological evaluation was performed using H&E AZFa, AZFb, AZFc and AZFd on the long arm of Y chromosome play an im- routine method. Semi-nested RT-PCR was performed on synthesized cDNA. portant role in spermatogenesis. Microdeletions in these regions have been The molecular results prepared from gene expression were compared with seen in 10% of infertile males with azoospermia or oligozoospermia. Partial the histopathological findings using Kappa test. deletions of the AZFc region were also reported to be a significant risk factor RT-PCR results showed a significance difference (Kappa coefficient=0.009, for oligo/azoospermia. In this study, we estimated the frequency of partial P value = 0.894) with the histopathological results. TSPY1, DAZ, SPTRX3 AZFc microdeletions in Iranian azoospermic men with spermatogenic failu- and SPTRX1 were expressed in 94%, 94%, 17.6% and 52.9% respectively in re and in fertile controls. azoospermic men diagnosed as Germ cell aplasia. Detection of DAZ, TSPY1 Methods: A total of 150 Iranian azoospermic infertile men were selected and SPTRX1 transcripts in testicular tissue can be used to predict the pres- for the molecular study of Y chromosome microdeletions. Patients without ence of mature spermatid / sperm in the testis especially in men diagnosed classical AZFa, AZFb and AZFc deletions and with elevated serum FSH levels as spermatogenesis arrest using histopathological technique and may provi- were analyzed for detection of partial deletions in the AZFc region. 100 fer- de the better chance of finding the mature sperm to use through ART. tile men were also studied as the control group. The presence or absence of the AZFc gr/gr subdeletion in all subjects was J04.14 tested by multiplex PCR using sY1191, sY1291, sY1206, sY1201, sY142, Complex molecular study of Klinefelter syndrome V. B. Chernykh, T. M. Sorokina, L. F. Kurilo, O. P. Ryzhkova, E. A. Bliznetz, A. L. Chukhrova, sY1258, sY1197, sY1054 and sY1161 STS markers. The unique absence of A. V. Polyakov; sY1291 product was considered as a gr/gr deletion. Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Results: The prevalence of gr/gr deletions in patients and controls were Russian Federation. 8.45% (12/142 cases) and 10 % (10/100 cases) respectively. Statistical ana- lysis showed no significant differences in the frequency of gr/gr deletions between the patient and control groups (p>0.05). We examined 46 KS patients with following karyotypes: 47,XXY (n=37), Conclusion: The present study revealed no evidence of association between 47,XXY,t(3;8)(q23;p21) (n=1), 47,XY,derX (n=1), mos 46,XY/47,XXY (n=4), the occurrence of gr/gr deletion and male infertility in Iranian azoospermic mos 47,XXY/48,XXXY/46,XY (n=1), mos 46,XX/47,XXY (n=1) and 48,XXYY infertile men. (n=1). J04.12 Molecular study included the analysis of Y chromosome microdeletion, CAG- Genetic polymorphisms and predisposition to a polycystic ovary repeat of exon 1 of the Androgen Receptor (AR/HUMARA), X chromosome syndrome inactivation (XCI) and PCR amplification of 12 STR loci of the X chromosome T. Hristova; (Investigator Argus X-12 Kit, Qiagen). National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria. No classic (complete) AZF deletion was found. Partial AZFc deletions (b2/ Background: b3, n=4; gr/gr, n=1; del sY1197 and sY1206, n=1) were detected in 6 of 46 (13%) patients. AR CAG-repeats number varied from 16 to 30, alleles with Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is one of the most common 26-30 repeats were found in 7 of 43 (16.3%) patients. Homozygosity and reproductive health problems of women. It is characterized by hyperandro- heterozygosity for CAG-allele was revealed in 17 and 26 of 43 examined in- genia, oligoovulation or anovulation and polycystic ovaries. Although a ma- dividuals, respectively. Eleven homozygous for AR-allele patients were te- jMore tgheondetsi:c contribution is suspected, no particular genes or family of genes sted for 12 STR loci. We found that X chromosomes were different in 3 cases have been confirmed to be causal for PCOS. (two 47,XXY and one 48,XXYY), and X-haplotypes were the same in 8 cases. 34 women with PCOS aαnd 32 healthy female controls were ge- XCI was evaluated in 21 of 26 AR-allele heterozygous individuals. Skewed notyped by RFLP and SSCP techniques for polymorphisms PvuII T/C and XCI with the rate 70-80% was found in 3 of 21 (14.3%) 47,XXY men, 4 pati- XbaI A/G and (TA)n repeats in ER gene; C polymorphism in STK11 gene; www.eshg.org www.eshengt.so prregsented XCI rate (67-69%) near to skewed.380 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 HSD17B3 In contrast to partial deletions classic AZF deletions no found in KS. No in gene provides crucial information for genetic counseling and strong genetic and phenotypic correlation was revealed between KS pati- prenatal diagnosis. ents with or without Y chromosome microdeletion, normal or high AR CAG- J04.17 repeats, and random/skewed XCI. However severe oligozoospermia was Genetic investigation of mov10L1 gene in azoospermic men with detected only between KS patients with normal CAG-repeats, not-skewed complete maturation arrest XCI and without AZF deletion. H. Sarkardeh1, H. Gourabi1, M. Totonchi1, M. Sadighi Gilani2, N. Almadani1, P. Borjian1; J04.15 1Department of Genetics, Reproductive Biomedicine Research center,Royan Institute for Reproductive Biomedicine, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2 Department Male infertility and polymorphisms in CREM, LRP8, ABCA1, SMPD1 of Andrology, Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute, ACECR, Tehran, Islamic genes. Republic of Iran. H. Jaklič1, N. Teran2, B. Zorn3, I. Novaković4, M. Ristanović4, C. Tulić4, B. Peterlin1; 1Institute of Medical Genetics,Dep.of Obsterrics and gynaecology,University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Institute of Medical Genetics,Dep.of Obsterrics and Gynaecology,University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 3Dep.of Thousands of genes are involved in spermatogenesis. Alterations in any of Obsterrics and gynaecology,University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, these genes could be one cause of infertility in men. Mov10L1 gene is one 4Institute of Human Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, of the genes that are expressed specifically in germ cells. Genetic disruption Serbia. of this gene in mouse stops spermatogenesis during Meiosis I and causes Azoospermia. In this study, the genetic changes of mov10L1 gene analyzed in a population The lipid metabolism genes play essential role in mouse spermatogenesis, of 30 infertile patients with a complete cessation of spermatogenesis as the but their role in human infertility has not been fully established. Products of patient group and 70 fertile men who had at least one child as the control CREM gene are essential for the initiation of spermatid maturation and de- group. velopment. Mice lacking CREM gene exhibit specific arrest of round sperma- After DNA extraction from blood samples of selected individuals, PCR-SSCP tid development, fenotype similar to some human infertility conditions. Few method was done to classificate individuals and ultimately sequencing was studies have shown that CREM deficiency is associated with spermatogenic used to confirm genetic changes of the mentioned area. disorders in man. ATP-binding cassette transporter 1 (ABCA1) mediates li- Analyzing the data shows, from 30 azoospermic patients, 6 patients had pid efflux from Serotoli cells and influences male fertility. Apolipoprotein E (C25A) and (A101G) changes in exon 18and also(G105A) change in exon receptor-2 (LRP8) and acid sphingomyelinase (SMPD1) play important role 18 was seen in only three of patients . Change (A101G) causes the Arginine in sperm development, maturation and function in mice. This case-control amino acid convert to Glutamine at its protein level, while the other two study investigated associations between polymorphisms in the CREM, LRP8, Changes are nonsense polymorphisms. The changes were not observed in ABCA1 and SMPD1 genes of lipid metabolism and male infertility. the control group. Screening of eight polymorphisms (CREM: rs1531550,rs17499247, Based on the results, it is expected that mutations and polymorphisms in LRP8: rs17108177,rs3737983, ABCA1: rs2230806,rs2066714, SMPD1: mov10L1 gene could be a genetic factor in the incidence of infertility in men rs1542705,rs1050239) was performed in 522 Slovenian and Serbian men which requires further studies. with azoospermia and/or oligoasthenospermia and in 445 Slovenian and Serbian controls. J05. Prenatal and perinatal genetics Distribution of genotypes and alleles of investigated polymorphisms were in accordance with Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in different groups or with the total population. We have found significant differences in genotype J05.01 frequencies of ABCA1 gene rs2066714 polymorphism (p<0,002) between An analysis of 2000 cases of amniocentesis in our hospital over 30 group of patients with azoospermia and control group. However, no signi- years ficant differences in genotype frequencies of other tested polymorphisms Y. Goto1,2, A. Kondo1,2, S. Sato1,2, Y. Ohnuki2, H. Moriya2, K. Tsuji2, H. Yokoyama2, M. Mizoguchi2, S. Izumi1,2; (CREM,LRP8,SMPD1) and male infertility were observed (azoospermia 1Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tokai University School of Medicine, Kanagawa, and/or oligoasthenospermia). Japan, 2Clinical Genetics, Tokai University Hospital, Kanagawa, Japan. The ABCA1 gene rs2066714 polymorphism might represent a possible risk factor for infertility susceptibility in Slovenian and Serbian men. Further studies with a larger sample size are needed to confirm these findings. Amniocentesis is one of the prenatal diagnosis which is an invasive procedu- J04.16 re. In 1966, Steele et al. performed amniocentesis first and they succeeded A novel nonsense mutation in HSD17B3 gene in a Tunisian patient the fetal chromosome analysis. Our hospital performed the first amniocen- with sexual ambiguity tesis in 1976. Since then, we have done more than 2000 cases over 30 years. B. Ben Rhouma1, N. Belguith1,2, M. Mnif3, T. Kamoun4, N. Charfi3, M. Kamoun3, F. When we started amniocentesis, we examined amnio fluid and fetus by fee- Abdelhedi1,2, M. Hachicha4, H. Kamoun1,2, M. Abid3, F. Fakhfakh1; 1Faculty of medicine, Sfax, Tunisia, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Hedi Chaker ling with the hands because ultrasonography had not developed enough. In Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia, 3Department of endocrinology, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, addition, obstetrician had to cultivate cells because there was no processing Tunisia, 4Department of Pediatrics, Hedi Chaker Hospital, Sfax, Tunisia. section. Ultrasonography has become a common tool and it makes us to perform amniocentesis easier. We could perform amniocentesis with more information such as placentation, fetus and leiomyoma. We also could order 17 β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 isoenzyme H(HSDS1D71B73B 3) is pre- chromosome analysis to a commercial company. sent almost exclusively in the testes and converts delta 4 androstenedione Amniocentesis is getting easier and more people would like having it, so we (Δ4 androstenedione) to testosterone. Mutations in the gene cau- have to consider more carefully about the ethical and social aspects of the se HSD17B3 deficiency and result in 46 XY disorders of sex development prenatal diagnostic examinations. Before performing prenatal diagnostic (DSD). test, we have to give some information such as the maternal and fetal risk The present paper is the first to report on 46,XY DSD case due to HSD17B3 and complications and also have to discuss together what the clients would deficiency in Tunisia. The two years old patient belongs to a consanguineous like to do after knowing the results. family, her clinical presentation and endocrinology evaluation showed a In this report, we show patient’s motives, age, gestational weeks and chro- sexual ambiguity (Prader IV) and testosterone/Δ4 androstenedione ratio mosome results of amniocentesis in our hospital and discuss about the ideal equal to 0.16, reflecting a defect in HSD17B3 enzyme activity (normal range way of amniocentesis. is>0.8). The karyotHySpDe 1w7aBs3 realized by standard G banding technique and J05.02 was 46,XY and the mutational analysis identified a novel homozygous non- Laboratory investigation of affected fetuses in beta-thalassemia sense mutation in gene in the exon 9 (c.618 C >A) leading to the F. Bayat, A. Valaei, M. Taghavi Basmanj, S. Ahmadi, Z. Kainimoghadam, M. substitution p.C206X. The protein lacked 105 amino acids in the C-terminal Mortezazadeh, A. Amirian, F. Navab Moghadam, A. Sanjari, M. Choobini, N. Sabokbar, F. Maryami, A. Kordafshari, M. Karimipoor, S. Zeinali; region. According to the multiple alignments, the missing 105 amino acids of Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. the C-terminal region were almost conserved in different species. This con- servation together with the absence of the mutation in 50 controls support the pathogencity and explain the 46,XY DSD observed in our patient. introduction In conclusion, we detected and reported, for the first time, a novel nonsense The beta thalassemia is the group of blood disorder in which the function of mutation leading to 17BHSD3 deficiency in a Tunisian patient. Based on the one or both beta hemoglobin genes is affected. About 13 beta-globin mutati- present data, the screening of this mutation could help contribute to the ra- ons encompass 70 - 90% of mutation spectrum in Iran .The total annul Iran pid diagnosis of HSD17B3 deficiency. The genetic confirmation of mwuwtatwio.ne shg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 381 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 with more than 1800 affected individuals, represents one of the areas in the Above cited data most visually reflects necessity of carrying out of prenatal word with an unusually high prevalence of beta thalassemia. invasive diagnostics at pregnant women of group of high risk on chromoso- Material and Method mal anomalies. Couples of beta-thalassemia were referred to Pasteur Institute of Iran from J05.05 Primary Health Care(PHC)center. Fetal samples of chronic villous were coll- Quantitative Real-time PCR for non-invasive rapid and reliable ected according to the gestational age .DNA extraction was performed accor- diagnosis of Turner Syndrome ding to standard methods by Roche kit. We used PCR -ARMS and RFLP and J. Ezzati1, M. Hashemi2, R. Mahdian3; direct sequencing technologies, for detection mutations of fetuses. 1Islamic Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Result 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3- Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of We detected mutations from 360 couples who were beta thalassemia car- Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. riers. 192 of these couples referred for prenatal diagnosis. 28 families had more than one pregnancy. The Result of our study shown that 25/2% of fetuses were affected. 24/8% were normal and remained were carrier. 60% The aim of the study is a method of non-invasive for prenatal diagnosis, of fetuses were compound heterozygous and 40% were compound homozy- which is based on quantitative real-time PCR. Materials and Method: Ge- gous. The expected compound homozygous were (IVS II-1/ IVS II-1) &(IVS nomic DNA were extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes of Turner I-5/ IVS I-5) and the expected compound heterozygous were (IVS II-1/IV- syndrome subjects (n=15), and normal controls (n=10) that were tested by SI-6),( IVS II-1/ IVS I-5),( IVS II-1/CD 8/9),( IVS II-1/CD30). quantitative real-time PCR. This technique was applied by a MGB TaqMan Discussion probe based real-time PCR assay for rapid diagnosis of monosomy X-linked Since the Iranian population is mixture of different ethnic group, it is neces- status in Turner syndrome. In the present study, we have measured and de- sary to determine the frequency and distribution of mutations. It helps us termined the gene dosage of FVIII (target gene on X chromosome) relative to diagnosis prenatal and preventing to birth of affected fetus in couples at to PMP22 (reference gene on 17p11.2). Results: The formula ratio = 2-ΔΔCt -risk of having an affected child. applied for the calculation of the FVIII/PMP22 ratio. The gene dosage ratio J05.03 was quel 1.005±0.00342 and 0.4867±0.00797 for normal individuals and Detection of Fragile x chromosome mutation in males with Turner syndrome, respectively. Conclusion: This technique, including quan- developmental delay / mental retardation titative real-time PCR can be used as a rapid and standard and reliable me- A. Erjavec Skerget1, V. Kuncnik2, Š. Stangler Herodež1, B. Zagradišnik1, A. Zagorac1, N. Kokalj Vokač1; thod for rapid detection of prenatal diagnosis of monosomy X-linked. 1University Medical Centre Maribor, Maribor, Slovenia, 2University Medical Centre J05.06 Maribor, Ljubljana, Slovenia. Investigation of Hb variants among patients referred to Pasteur institute of Iran M. Taghavi, S. Ahmadi, F. Bayat, A. Valaei, A. Amirian, Z. Kainimoghadam, M. The fragile X syndrome gene (FMR1) contains a highly variable repeat of Mortezazadeh, A. Kordafshari, A. Sanjari, N. Sabokbar, M. Choobini, S. Sadegh, F. Navabmoghadam, F. Maryami, M. Karimipour, S. Zeinali; the nucleotide triplet (CGG). A variety of clinical conditions is associated Pasteur Inistitute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. with the expanded allele sizes that predominantly affect males. Fragile X syndrome is caused by a large expansion of CGG repeat (full mutation) Background and Objective: which silences the FMR1 gene and stops the protein (FMRP) production. More than 700 hemoglobin variants have been An important feature of the syndrome is mental impairment which may in- described, of which clinically most important ones requiring diagnosis are clude mental retardation, autism, etc. It is therefore important to exclude HbS ,HbC ,HbE ,HbD Panjab and Hb O Arab. Here We have investigated the FXS whenever patients are in diagnostic procedure for developmental delay affecting mental capabilities. Mfreaqteureinaclise sa anndd tmypeetsh oodf Hs:b variants in β-globin gene among patients refer- red from primary health care to Pasteur institute of Iran. For the detection of the FXS patients, a PCR-based technique, designed as an After obtaining informed consent, the blood exclusion test, was used. This technique is useful for the detection of normal samples were collected in tubes containing EDTA. Genomic DNA was extrac- variants of the CGG repeat number in males and heterozygous females. The ted using the salting out method. ARMS- PCR was used for molecular charac- definitive diagnosis of FXS based on molecular genetic analysis, Southern terization of HbS. The region containing exon 3 was amplified for HbD and blot technique, which is labour intensive and time consuming. We analyzed DNA samples from 97 male subjects from North Eastern Slove- the PCR product of t his amplicon was digested by EcoRI restriction enzyme. nia referred for genetic testing because of developmental delay / mental re- DReNsAu sltesq aunednc dinisgc tuescshinoinq:ues were used to analyze for samples without fin- ding any mutations. tardation. The PCR amplification for FXS was successful in 92 patients out of 97 (94.8%). The presence of normal CGG sequence variations was detected In this study we showed that Hb D was the most common Hb variant in 91 subjects; in one patient (1.08%, 1/92) FXS was suspected and subse- with(50%) and after that Hb S with(36%), in order of frequency by Hb quently confirmed by Southern blot analysis. C(5.5%),Hb E(2.7%),Hb monoro(2.7%),Hb G(2.7%).These Hb variants Presented methodology, based only on PCR assay as screening test, is sui- other than Hb S are probably rare(except Hb D) because they do not provide table as a preliminary test to exclude FXS in males or heterozygous females. any selective advantage for any severe disease and usually do not any health With this approach we detected full mutation in 1.08% of males. problem even in homozygous states. J05.04 J05.07 Prenatal invasive diagnostics chromosomal pathology The relationship between polymorphisms & sites of beta-globin gene M. Bayanova, G. Abildinova, A. Kostina, E. Moldagulova; National Research Center for Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. A. Valaei, F. Bayat, S. Ahmadi, M. Taghavi basmanj, Z. Kainimoghadam, A. Amirian, N. Sabokbar, M. Mortezazadeh, F. Navab moghadam, A. Sanjari, M. Choobini, F. maryami, A. Kordafshari, M. Karimipour, S. Zeinali; Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The prime value among actions for the prevention of a birth of children with Introduction a hereditary pathology belongs to prenatal diagnostics the leading part in which is taken away to invasive methods. In 3432 cases for the purpose of diagnostics of a chromosomal pathology at The thalassemia syndrome the most common monog. enic disorders in the a fetus in the first and second trimesters of pregnancy for prenatal karyoty- world . Polymorphism in biology occurs when two or more clearly different ping Indications for prenatal research were: the age of the pregnant woman phenotypes exist in the same population of a species The term is also used of 35 years also is more senior, a deviation of indicators of the biochemical somewhat differently by molecular biologists to describe certain point mu- serum markers, ultrasonic markers of a chromosomal pathology at a fetus. tations in the genotype, such as SNPs( IVSII-666 , CD2,⋯ ). IVSII-666 and In 95 % cases (3260) have defined the normal karyotype - 46, /46, has been CD2 are located in the second intron and first exon of the β-globin gene re- diagnosed. Percent of detestability of chromosomal aberrations - 5,0%. At Mspaetcetirvieallys.& In M tehtish oreds:earch we investigated relationship between polymor- prenatal diagnostics of a fetus it has been taped - 172 cases of a pathology. phisms and haplotypes. From them 83,1% cases of aneuploidy (143), the 16,9% structural aberrati- ons: translocations, duplications, inversions (29). Informed consent was obtained in all cases before the collection of blood Structure of a chromosomal pathology: the Down′s syndrome - 47,5 % (68), samples.DNA extraction was performed by salting out method.175 unrela- Edwards′s syndrome - 20,3 % (29), the Patau′s syndrome - 6,3 % (9), the ted families of heterozygous thalassemia that referred to Pasteur Institute of Turner′s syndrome - 8,4 % (12), the Klainfelter′s syndrome - 3,5 % (5), tri- Iran including carrier of α and β-thalassemia that didn’t find any mutation plo X - 4,9 % (7),the other aneuploidy - 9,1 % (13). www.eshg.org www.eshwgas. oinrvgestigated. we were determined by direct sequencing using Big Dye 382 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J05.10 Mutation spectrum of CD40LG gene in Russian families with X-linked Rfreosmu lAtsB:I. With RFLP was studied at 3 sites within the beta-globin gene clu- HIGM ster, including 3`ψ βHincII, βAvaII, βHinfI. I. Sermyagina, V. Zabnenkova, A. Poliakov; Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. total of them 20% ha. d different polymorphisms there were relationship between IVSII-666 and CD2 polymorphisms with three sites within the β-globin gene cluster This results were shown that about 90% pattern of Defects in CD40L gene are the cause of X-linked immunodeficiency with ADvisecIIu /sβsi sointe: in IVSII-666 , CD2 was -/+ . about 70% pattern hyper-IgM type 1 (HIGM1). HIGM1 characterized high or normal by levels of 3`ψHincII /β site in IVSII-666 , CD2 was -/+ and in HinfI/β was +/+ IgM and low IgA, IgG and IgE concentrations. The clinical manifestations of HIGM1 include current infection of respiratory ways, an intermediate With sequencing method we found pattern of 3 sites in the cluster of beta pneumonia, a chronic diarrhea, oral ulcers, sclerosing cholangitis and a he- globin. So, These relations can help us in Prenatal Diagnostic. patitis. Gene CD40L includes 5 exons, 4 introns, and mapped to Xq26. In the J05.08 given work we describe nine patients of a various family tree which have Two cases of 22q11 deletion syndrome prenatal detection various mutations in CD40L gene. A search of mutations was performed by Y. Kozlova, N. Shilova, M. Minzhenkova, E. Yudina; direct DNA sequencing analysis of all exons and exon-intron junctions and Federal State Budgetary Institution “Research Centre for Medical Genetics” of the PCR-RFLP. The mutations identified in this research include one combined Russian Academy of, Moscow, Russian Federation. mutation (c.[744C >A;745C >A]), two splice site mutations (c.156+2T>C, c.346+1G>A ), and four deletions/insertions defects (c.13_14delTA, c.158_161delTAGA, c.207_208insA, c.532delT). Two additional patients 22q11 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) is a well known syndrome with the with the large deletions included exons 1-2 and exons 4-5, but exact borders occurrence of 1 in 4000 life births. Up to 75% of 22q11DS detected due to of defects are not defined. As a whole, this supervision confirm heterogenei- presence of congenital heart defect (CHD), mostly conotruncal. It is widely ty of mutations in HIGM1. The splice site mutation c.346+1G>A and deletion described and detected in pre- and postnatal diagnosis. Despite ultrasound c.158_161delTAGA are in hotspot for these mutations in CD40LG. Mothers (US) techniques improvement and specialists’ awareness of the possible of all patients were heterozygous for a mutations. Also, seven prenatal dia- fetal phenotype suggestive for this deletion, 22q11DS prenatal diagnosis gnostics of HIGM1 have been made. remains complicated because of atypical phenotype that may present and J05.11 difficulties of the syndrome’s earliest detection. We evaluated two groups Unbalanced translocation with two partial monosomies in fetus with of pregnant women referred to invasive procedures in 1st (22 cases) and 45 chromosomes 2nd (27 cases) trimesters due to US findings. Two fetuses were found to S. Mandal1, B. B. Ganguly1, N. N. Kadam1, N. M. Oza2; carry 22q11 deletion. Indications of the 1st trimester were increased nuchal 1MGM Centre for Genetic Research & Diagnosis, Navi Mumbai, India, 2Oza‘s Maternity translucency (NT) -19 (none detected) and lymphatic formations in the neck Hospital, Navi Mumbai, India. area - 3 (1 detected). In the 2nd trimester one of 20 fetuses with CHD had 22q11 deletion and none of 7 with intrauterine growth retardation and/or palatal malformations was found to carry 22q11 deletion. 22q11DS prena- Constitutive unbalanced translocations are generally inherited from one tal diagnostics in 2nd trimester could be proposed when US reveals CHD, parent carrying balanced translocation, and described as derivative or re- e.g. conotruncal, while in 1st trimester the main US-findings are increased combinant chromosome carrying partial monosomy of one and partial tri- NT, lymphatic malformations (edemas, cysts), which may later transform to somy of the other chromosome. However, transmission of partial monoso- CHD. For now isolated NT is admitted as unreliable US-key for 22q11DS, my of both chromosomes of a parental balanced translocation is a very rare so we suppose that such a rare symptom as lymphatic formations could be phenomenon. In the present case, increased fronto-nasal angle detected another indication for 22q11DS investigation in early diagnostics. Further through routine ultrasound imaging as a measure of antenatal screening was elaboration of diagnostic criteria’s for early deletion detection can help ge- the only deformity to consider fetal karyotyping. FISH test was also perfor- netic consultation of these families. med for quick testing of the numerical status of chromosomes 13, 18, 21, X J05.09 and Y, which appeared normal. However, conventional G-banding karyotype Prenatal case of Pallister-Killian syndrome in conjunction with appeared with 45 chromosomes and monosomy 21. Since interphase FISH unbalanced t(15;18) presented two normal signals of 21, a critical analysis following high reso- N. V. Shilova, Y. O. Kozlova, M. E. Minzhenkova, E. V. Yudina, Z. G. Markova, T. V. lution banding was performed and could trace the second 21 rearranged Zolotukhina; on 9p. Therefore, the fetus was carrying 45,XX,der(9)t(9;21)(p22;q11.2) ka- Federal State Budgetary Institution „Research Centre for Medical Genetics“ under the ryotype with a constitutive abnormality. Subsequently parental karyotyping Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation. confirmed mother being the carrier of t(9;21)(p22;q11.2) transmitted the unbalanced translocation. The present fetus had 45 chromosomes without the other derivative chromosome resulting in partial monosomy of both A 28-year-old primigravida was carried cordocentesis after an expert fetal chromosomes. Therefore, it is apparent that meiotic nondisjuction, most li- ultrasound at 22 weeks of gestation which revealed increased nuchal trans- kely maternal, resulted in aneuploid condition. Had the child inherited the lucency, hypoplasia of nasal bone, smoothed profile, intrauterine growth normal 21 from the mother, the child would have had partial trisomy 21q retardation (2-3 weeks), micromelia of predominantly rhizomelic type, a which might have produced clinical expressions of Down syndrome. This is left severe congenital diaphragmatic hernia, right-sided displacement of the the first case to describe two partial monosomies in an aneuploid fetus with heart, hypoplasia of the left lung, small for the gestation age ears. GTG-ban- 45,XX,der9t(9p22;21q11.2). The study also describes the complementation ding karyotype in cultured fetal blood lymphocytes showed 46,XX,der(15). of FISH and G-banding techniques in prenatal diagnosis. mFISH (24XCyte, MetaSystems) revealed an additional material of chromo- J05.12 some 18 on q-arm of chromosome 15. FISH with subtelomere 18p/q DNA- Gene expression profile as a prenatal test for Down syndrome probes (TelVysion, Vysis, Abbott) showed presence of 18q-material. Paternal M. Volk, A. Maver, L. Lovrečić, B. Peterlin; karyotype was normal and mother was found to have balanced translocati- Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, UMC Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. on 46,XX,t(15;18)(q24;q21). Since ultrasound phenotype was also rather suggestive for Pallister-Killian syndrome (PKS), FISH-analysis was perfor- med with CEP12 DNA-probe (Vysis, Abbott) on non-cultured fetal blood. The effect of supernumerary chromosome 21 in Down syndrome (DS) on Three copies of D12Z1 loci were revealed in 10% of cells. Two metaphase global profile of gene expression in various cell types has been demonstra- spreads with supernumerary i(12)(p10) also were found by FISH-analysis ted in several previously performed studies. However, diagnostic utility of of cultured lymphocytes with XCAP 12 short DNA-probe (MetaSytems). these transcriptional alterations has been poorly studied. For this reason, Thus fetal karyotype was determined as 46,XX,der(15)t(15;18)(q24;q21) we performed global expression profiling to find differentially expressed ge- mat[58]/47,XX,der(15)t(15;18)(q24;q21)mat,+i(12)(p10)[2]. Considering nes (DEG) and subsequently performed targeted validation and diagnostic severe life prognosis, the family opted for termination of pregnancy after performance evaluation on a larger group of case and control samples. genetic counseling. Postmortem examination corroborated ultrasound fin- Initially, transcriptomic profiles of amniocytes from 10 fetuses with trisomy dings. Prenatal detection of PKS remains significant and also complicated 21 and 9 euploid fetuses were determined using Agilent 4x44K expression because of well known tissue specific mosaicism and low presence of addi- microarrays. DEG were discovered using linear regression modelling im- tional isochromosome 12p in cultured lymphocytes. Thus, if fetal phenotype plemented in limma package. Subsequently, top DEG were validated using is suspected of PKS, despite of normal karyotype in cultured lymphocytes, RT-PCR quantitation on independent sample of 16 cases with DS and 32 it is necessary to use FISH with chromosome-specific 12 DNA-probes on di- controls. The classification was performed using support vector machine rect blood samples or another fetal tissues. www.eshcgla.sosifrigcation kernel and evaluated using leave-one-out cross validation ap- www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 383 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 proach. RDS cases Global profiling has revealed 1292 DEG in trisomy 21 samples at the adju- Genes polymorphism associations sted p-value cut-off set at 0.05. Of these, 8 upregulated and 1 downregulated Medical interventions ACE AT2R1 MTHFR genes were incorporated in the validation core set, and the significant diffe- Medical I/D A1166C C677T interventions rences in expression were confirmed in all but one gene in core set. Classi- Necessity of emergency care p<0,01 p>0,05 p<0,01 fication performance of this core gene set attained discriminatory rate with Duration of hospitalization p<0,02 p>0,05 p<0,03 p<0,01 AUC values reaching 0.985. Necessity of oxygen therapy p<0,001 p>0,05 p<0,03 p<0,001 In conclusion, we demonstrate good classification performance of a small expression biomarker set. As expressional alterations reflect both, causal CDounractliuons ioof no:xygen therapy p<0,04 p>0,05 p<0A,0C1E,p T<N0,F0-3a, MTHFR and reactive cellular mechanisms, such biomarker may thus have potential The investigated polymorphism of genes in diagnosis of a wide array of heterogeneous diseases that result from ge- is involved in the RDS development and necessity of medical interventions. netic, epigenetic or environmental disturbances. The further analyzes may be useful for new personalized approaches in the J05.13 treatment. The impact of gene-gene interaction in the development of necrotising enterocolitis in the neonates J06. Cancer genetics N. Gorovenko1, Z. Rossokha2, S. Kyryachenko3; 1National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Reference-centre for molecular diagnostics of Ministry of Public Health, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3State Institute of J06.01 Genetic and Regenerative Medicine Academy of Medical Sciences, Kyiv, Ukraine. Association of 3a4 *1g gene Polymorphism in the development of Background: Acute Leukemia S. Vuree, A. C, N. Dunna, V. Satti; aim Necrotising enterocolitis (NEC) is a widespread disability in Department of Genetics, Hyderabad, India. the neonates but its developing mechanism is not completely investigated. TMheet hodso: f our study was to evaluate gene-gene interaction in the develop- ment of NEC in the neonates. I/D, A1166C, G308A, C677T Acute leukemia is a progressive malignant disease of the blood-forming or- We coAnCdEu, cAtTe2dR a1 ,c aTsNeF-c-ao,n MtrToHl sFtRudy of 69 neonates with NEC and gans, marked by distorted proliferation and development of leukocytes and 110 healthy neonates (control group). The po- their precursors in the blood and bone marrow. Human cytochrome P450 lymorphism of genes were detected using PCR 3A enzyme catalyzes the metabolism of exogenous and endogenous com- and RFLP analysis. Statistical analysis was performed to assess the effects of pounds. SNPs in the gene encoding this enzyme are known to be associated aRlel saunlatlsy:zed genes and their combinations (Statistica 6.0) and MDR model with altered expression and function. Hence the genetic variation within the (MDR_2.0)). CYP3A4 gene may contribute to interindividual variability in drug metabo- We observed significant differences of several investigated geno- lism. types between neonates with NEC and neonates from control group [ta- The present study consists of 392 acute leukemia cases collected from MNJ ble1]. The statistical model including all investigated genes had the higher Regional Cancer Institute and Nizam institute of Medical Sciences, Hydera- predictive value (Percentage Correct=69.3, p <0.0001), but we found no ad- bad as well as 264 age and sex matched healthy controls. The CYP 3A4 *1G ditive interaction between investigated genes. polymorphism was analyzed by PCR-RFLP technique. Table 1. The results of statistic analyses ACE (ID) 2 Heterozygous GA genotype frequency was slightly elevated in acute leuke- Gene (genotype) x p OR 95% CI mia patients (54.0%) when compared with controls (49.0%) indicating the ACE (DD) 2,54 >0.05 1,64 0,89-3,00 presence of G allele might predispose to acute leukemia. When the data was TNFa (AG) 12,48 <0.001 3,6 1,73-7,49 stratified with respect to type if leukemia, the elevation GA genotype fre- TNFa (AA) quency was observed only in AML group. 5,37 <0.05 2,12 1,12-4,04 MTHFR (CT) Attempt was also made to evaluate the interaction of genotype with con- 4,7 <0.05 5,14 1,01-26,3 MTHFR (TT) founding epidemiological variables like age at onset, occupation, habits and 10,2 <0.05 2,72 1,46-5,06 area of living as well with clinical variables like WBC count, Platelet count AT2R1 (AC) 4,25 <0.05 3,15 1,01-9,83 and complete remission rate. AT2R1 (CC) 1,67 >0.05 1,57 0,79-3,11 J06.02 Conclusion DD 6,16 <0.0A5CE 6,1 ,3 C,2C3-30,26 AT2R1 , AG, AA Antimutation and anticancer effects of Morin in human cutaneous T cell lymphoma TNF-a , TT, CT MTHFR : genotype of gene genotypeof gene M. Khademi1, R. Karimi2, M. Hashemi1, K. Parivar2; 1Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, genotypesof gene genotypes of gene in the neonates 2Islamic Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. is independent risk factors with high predictive value for the NEC develop- ment. The further research with including other prognostic factors may be useful for new approaches to early diagnostics. At present cancer is one of the mortality factors in the world and treating J05.14 it debilitates the patient.Therefore,prevention can be considered as impor- The association of genes polymorphism with necessity and duration tant as treatment in cancer.Diet can play a vital role in cancer prevention. of oxygen supplementation in respiratory distress syndrome cases Nowadayes the scientists are looking for natural food which can prevent the S. Kyryachenko1, Z. Rossokha2, N. Gorovenko1; cancer occurrence.The purpose of this research is to examine antimutage- 1National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education named after P.L. Shupic, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Reference-centre for molecular diagnostic of Ministry of Public Health, Kyiv, nicity and Ukraine. anticancer effects of morin in Cutaneous Human T cell Lymphoma(Sezary syndrome). Background: In this Experimental study HUT-78 cell line were cultured in %90 RPMI1640 aim The role of genes polymorphism in the development and , supplemented with10%fetal calf serum,l-glutamine,peniciline,streptomyc course of perinatal lung disorder in the neonates is studied insufficiently. in and then incubated at 37°cfor2days.The cancer cell line was treated by MTheet hodso:f this study was to evaluate the influence of genes polymorphism different morin concentrations and cellular vital capacity was determined on neonatal course in neonates with respiratory distress syndrome (RDS). by MTT.The morin was subsequently evaluated in terms of antimutagenicity I/D A1166 WC, eG c3o0n8dAu, cCt6e7d7 aT case-control studyA oCf E1,5 A1T n2Reo1n, TatNeFs- wa,i MthT RHDFSR (in- and anti cancer properties by a standard reverse mutation assay[Ames test cluding preterm, full-term) and 110 healthy neonates (control group). The This , polymorphism of ge- was performed with histidine auxotroph strain of Salmonella nReess uwletsre: analyzed using PCR and RFLP analysis. Statistical analysis was per- typhimurium[TA100] .Thus, it requires histidine from a foreign supply to formed to assess the analyzed influence (logistiAcC regression, StaAtTis2tRic1a 8.0). ensure its growth.The aforementioned strain gives rise The risk of RDS was significantly increased for neonates with mu- to reverted colonies when expose to carcinogen substance [Sodium Azide]. tant allele of all investigated genes, excluding genotype of gene. During MTT,Tcell lymphoma cancerous cells reveaed to have a meaningful We found the influence of certain genotypes on neonatal adaptation course cell death when compared with controls[p<0.001 ].In Ames test morin pre- among neonates with RDS [table1]. vented the reverted mutations and the Table 1. The influence of gene polymorphism on neonatal adaptation among hindrance percent of morin was 98.16 % this value in anticancer test was www.eshg.org www.eshwgas. o99r.g23 %. These results have revealed morin has anticancer and antimu-384 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 tagenesis effects in the Sezary Syndrome in vitro. chondrial membrane potential is an early universal event of apoptosis. Nu- J06.03 merous somatic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been found in Dose- and Time-Dependent Response of Human Leukemia Cell Line, various types of neoplasms, including breast cancer. Cytochrome b (CytB) of NB4, to Arsenic Trioxide Treatment mitochondrial electron transport complex III is encoded in mtDNA 14747- M. Sharifizadeh1, M. Hashemi2; 15887 and has also been reported mutated in a large variety of human tu- 1Islamic Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, mors as breast cancer. Establishing the mtDNA mutation pattern in breast 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cancer cells may enhance the specificity of cancer diagnostics, detection and prediction of cancer growth rate and/or patients‘ outcomes; and therefore be used as a new molecular cancer bio-marker. Mitochondrial DNA of 24 Background: Although arsenic trioxide was shown to be a potential drug in patients comprising the coding complex III was analyzed by PCR-sequen- treatment of APL, most notably in patients with relapsed APL, the nderlying cing methods. The aim of this study is to summarize data on mtDNA muta- mechanisms remains unclear. In this study, the cytotoxicity effect of ATO on tion involvement in breast cancer and estimate effects of resulting amino APL cancer cells was evaluated. acid changes on mitochondrial protein function. Also T14783C, T14798C, Material and methods: In this basic-applied study, the human leukemia A14820C, G14831A, C14872T, C14929T, C14953T, G15043A, G15110A, (NB4) cell line was used as a model to evaluate the cytoxicity effects of arse- T15115C, G15148A, A15158G, A15203G, A15283G, G15301A, C15452A, nic trioxide in APL cells. NB4 cells were exposed to different concentrations A15488T, T15514C, G15617A, G15768A, T15793C polymorphisms were of ATO (0.5, 1, 2 µM) for 2, 4 and 6 days and dimethylthiazol diphenyl tetra- found in cyt b. zolium bromide (MTT) assay was applied on them. The polymorphism A15326G resulting in the change of T194A in the Cytb Results: Data obtained from this assay indicated that arsenic trioxide signi- protein was found in the large majority (>95%) of patients. So we think this ficantly reduced the viability polymorphism may use as biomarker in breast cancer but more investigati- of NB4 cells and inhibited cell growth in a time and dose dependent man- on needs to prove it. ner. J06.06 Conclusion: Findings from the present study indicate that arsenic trioxide is C14766T polymorphism in mitochondrial complex III as biomarker in highly cytotoxic to human leukemia cells, supporting its use as an effective Iranian breast cancer patients ? therapeutic agent in the management of acute promyelocytic leukemia. V. Safarpour1, M. Arabzadeh2, S. Eslamizadeh2, M. Ghaffarpour3, V. J06.04 Ghodsinejadkalahroudi2, A. Arastehkani2, M. Houshmand3; Is The BCL-2 Prompter (-938C>A) Polymorphism Associate with 1Islamic Azad University, Dezful, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Special Medical Center, IRANIAN Breast Cancer Patients Susceptibility? Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3National Institute of Genetic Engineering and B. Motahari1, M. Ghaffarpour2,3,4, F. Fereidooni5, G. Javadi1, M. Houshmand2,4; Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. 1Dep of Biology,Science and Research Branch,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical Genetics Department, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Iranian Research In most pathways of apoptosis, the release of mitochondrial cytochrome b Organization for Science and Technology(IROST), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, and apoptosis-inducing factor are also key events in initiating the cascade of 4Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5The Cancer Institute of Iran reactions leading to apoptotic cell death. Mitochondria play a decisive role in ,Imam Khomeini Hospital Complex, Tehran University of Medical Science, Tehran, the regulation of apoptosis. Mitochondrial dysfunction is relevant to the ge- Islamic Republic of Iran. nesis of many types of cancers , including breast cancer. Numerous somatic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations have been found in various types of neoplasms, including breast cancer. Cytochrome b (CytB) of mitochondrial electron transport complex III has been reported mutated in a large variety Background and aim: Breast cancer is the first most common of human tumors as breast cancer. Mitochondrial DNA of 24 patients com- cancer among the females in Iranian cancer patients. Apoptosis and cellular prising the C14766T was analyzed by PCR-sequencing methods. The aim of proliferation play role an important role during normal mammary develop- this study is to summarize data on mtDNA mutation involvement in breast ment &carcinogenesis of the mammary gland.Bcl-2 is the one of the most cancer and estimate effects of resulting amino acid changes on mitochondri- important anti apoptotic genes.Bcl2 gene has been demonstrated with bre- al protein function. Amongst patients with breast cancer, this alteration is ast cancer development and a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP-938C present in 33.3% of affected females. The polymorphism C14766T resulting >A) has been identified recently.The aim of this study was to identify wh- in the change of Threonine to Isoleucine missense mutation in the Cytb pro- ether Bcl-2(-938C>A) polymorphism which is located in the inhibitory P2 tein was found in the large majority (33.3%) of patients. It is therefore pos- promoter of Bcl-2 is associate with breast cancer ,as well as clinicopatholo- sible that the C14766T SNP constitutes an inherited predisposition factor gical characteristics. Materials and methods: patients and tissue specimens: for the development of breast cancer.So we think this polymorphism may tissue samples were obtained from 34 consecutive patients with BC from use as biomarker in breast cancer but more investigation needs to prove it. IRANIAN National Tumor Bank ,National Cancer Institute, Imam Khomaini J06.07 Hospital Complex, A12308G alteration in tRNA Leu(CUN) as a biomarker or usual Medical Tehran University,Tehran,Iran. Histopathological examinations polymorphism in Iranian breast cancer patients? were performed, and all tumors were confirmed as adenocarcinoma. Mu- S. Eslamizadeh1, M. Arabzadeh1, M. Ghaffarpour2, V. Ghodsinejadkalahroudi3, A. tational analysis of Bcl-2 (-938C> A) in tumour samples: fresh tumours and Arastehkani3, S. Rahmani1, M. Houshmand2; their adjacent were extracted for genomic DNA using the QIAamp Mini Kit 1Islamic Azad University, Ahar, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute . We searched for of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special -938C>A in this gene.The Bcl2 (-938C>A) analysis were made by means of Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. PCR sequencing. Result and conclusion: 10 of 34 (29%) samples were analyzed. The frequency of polymorphism in Bcl2 (-938C>A) was not present in the samples (0%).It also was not a signi- Mitochondrial dysfunction is relevant to the genesis of many types of can- ficant associated with histopathological grade, age or cancer stage in Iranian cers , including breast cancer. mitochondrial tRNA genes perform several Breast Cancer Patients. Although some study have been shown in BC,Bcl- functions including processing and translation and are essential compon- 2(-938C>A) polymorphism, our study was not shown and more samples ents of mitochondrial protein synthesis. Until now only few somatic mito- should chondrial tRNA mutations have been reported in cancer cells. In this study be investigated in Iranian Breast Cancer patients. all 22tRNA genes in 24 Iranian females with breast cancer were investigate J06.05 by PCR-Sequencing methods. A novel homoplasmic C12187T mutation lo- High prevalence of A15326G alteration in mitochondrial complex III cated at the Tloop site for the tRNAHis and A12308G, G12192A, T15968C in Iranian breast cancer patients. polymorphisms in TrnaLeu, tRNAHis and tRNAPro were found respectively. M. Arabzadeh1, S. Eslamizadeh1, M. Ghaffarpour2, A. Arastehkani3, V. The mtDNA A12308G polymorphism is highly conserved between species Ghodsinejadkalahroudi3, S. Rahmani1, M. Houshmand2; during evolution and also encodes for the most represented amino acid in 1Islamic Azad University, Ahar, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute the oxidative phosphorylation, suggesting a key role of this tRNA in mtDNA- of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Special coded OXPHOS subunits. Inaddition, recently have been shown that breast Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. cancer cell lines with the higher mutation frequency of A12308G are highly metastatic. Amongst our Iranian patients with breast cancer, this alteration is present in 23% of affected females. This SNP has been also reported in Mitochondria play a decisive role in the regulation of apoptosis and thereby many types of disease as Alzheimer, Ataxia, CPEO, LHON, MERF, MELS and... exhibiting major changes in their structure and function. A decrease in mito- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 385 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 in Iranian patients. So it needs more investigate to prove the role of this In this study, we used the competitive RT-PCR technique to determine the alteration as a common polymorphism or an inherited predisposition factor number of bcr/abl transcripts. The internal control designed from a non-hu- for the development of breast cancer. man DNA source with the same flanking sequences but a smaller size than J06.08 the target segment. After amplification and purification of internal control Cisplatin and MNPs(Fe3O4) Synergistically Alter Apoptotic Genes DNA, PCR products quantified based on copy numbers. In order to optimi- Expression zing the reaction condition, competitive Z. Hosseinian1, A. Akbarzadeh2, M. Mokhtari1, M. Taghavi1, M. Hashemi1; RT-PCRs carried out separately on target and internal control DNAs each 1Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Pasteur Institute of Iran, with specific copy numbers and final products of all concentrations runed Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. on agarose gel electrophoresis. The simultaneous reactions of target RNA with different copy numbers of internal control DNA that Breast cancer is a common cancer in women. Cisplatin is an anticancer drug. showed the copy numbers of target RNA can be determined by comparison There is high rate of cisplatin resistance in breast cancers, therefore cispla- of dye density emission of DNA bands(target and control DNA) on the gel. tin is not the first choice in treatment of breast cancer. The mechanism of This study shows that competitive RT-PCR is a partially efficient and cheap cisplatin is interaction with DNA and induction of apoptosis. Apoptosis is method for quantitative a common pathway that finally mediates the killing functions of cisplatin determination of bcr/abl transcripts, compared to other methods such as anticancer drug. In order to induce apoptosis, many gene functions must Real-time PCR. be altered. In this study, MCF-7 breast cancer cell line was used. The aim of J06.11 this study was investigate the potential benefit of combination therapy with Antimutagenicity and Anticancer Effects of mother‘s milk on Acute magnetic nanoparticles of Fe3O4 (MNPs(Fe3O4)) and cisplatin. Viability of Promyelocytic Leukemia(APL) cell line cell was studied by MTT assay and gene expression was studied by RT-PCR. M. Entezari, M. Hashemi; Analysis of viability percentage and apoptotic genes expression alteration Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. showed that combination of cisplatin and MNPs(Fe3O4) have a potent cyto- toxic effect on MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines. Combination of cisplatin and MNPs(Fe3O4) reduced IC50 of drug in 24 h fromB C4L22 μM to 10.35 μM in MCF-7 Currently cancer is considered as one of the main factors of mortality glo- cell lines. MNPs(Fe3O4) and cisplatin can synergistically enhance induction bally. Diet can play a vital role in cancer prevention. The purpose of this of apoptosis. Cisplatin by itBseClLf 2can not change expression in MCF-7 cell research is to examine antimutagenicity and anticancer effect of mother‘s line, but combination of MNPs(Fe3O4) and cisplatin can reduce expression milk.In this basic-applied study, the human leukemia (NB4) cell line was of an antiapoptotic gienn vei t,ro , after 48 h and 72 h. Thus cisplatin thera- used as a model to evaluate the cytoxicity effects of mother‘s milk.in APL peutic dose can be reduced and consequently cisplatin side effects can be cells.NB4 cells were exposed to different concentrations of mother‘s milk decreased. Thus our data strongly suggest a potential application of (2, 5, 10 µl) and dimethylthiazol diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) as- a combination of MNPs(Fe3O4) and cisplatin for treatment of breast cancer say was applied on them. The mother‘s milk was subsequenthy evaluated in cell lines. terms of antimutagenicity and anticancer properties by a standard reverse J06.09 mutation assay Up regulation of NM23H1 a metastasis suppressor gene in the MCF-7 (Ames Test). For Ames Test the particularity of the strain of salmonella ty- breast cancer cell line treated by cisplatin phimurium chosen TA100 resides in the fact that undergone a specific mu- M. Hashemi1, M. Mokhtari2, A. Akbarzadeh3, R. Mahdian4; tation in the Histidine operon,and for this same reason it requires histidine 1Islamic Azad University,Tehran Medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, from a foreign supply to ensure its growth.The afore mentioned strain gives 2Islamic Azad University,Science and Research Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, rise to reverted colonies when expose to carcinogen substance (Sodium Azi- 3Pilot Biotechnology department, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic de).Data obtained from this assay indicated that mother‘s milk significantly of Iran, 4Department of Molecular Medicine, Biotechnology Research Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. reduced the viability of NB4 cells and inhibited cell growth in a dose depen- dent manner. In Ames Test Mother‘s Milk prevented the reverted mutations and the hindrance percent of mother‘s milk was 46% in Antimutagenicity Breast cancer is one of the most common cancers in developed countries. test and this value in anticancer test was 53%. Findings from the present Most of cancer deaths are due to the development of metastasis. Nm23-H1 study indicate that mother‘s milk is highly cytotoxic to human leukemia gene is an anti metastatic factor whose expression is correlated inversely cells.These results have revealed antimutagenicity and anticancer effect of with tumour metastatic potential in breast. Nm 23-H1 encodes nucleoside mother‘s milk. diphosphate kinase A, which is responsible for the synthesis of most non- J06.12 ATP nucleoside triphosphates, suggesting that this protein might be invol- Limitations in management of neuroblastoma in children - a ved in a wide variety of biological phenomena in the cell. Cisplatin is the key retrospective analysis anticancer drug in the therapy of a wide spectrum of cancers. In the present E. Boeriu1, M. Puiu2, M. Cucuruz2, A. Chirita Emandi3, E. Badescu3, S. Arghirescu2, M. Serban2; study, the expression of Nm23-H1 gene in MCF-7 cells treated with different 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2University of Medicine and concentrations of cisplatin at 24h was evaluated. Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania, 3Emergency Hospital for Children „Louis In this study, MCF-7 cells were treated with different concentrations of Turcanu“, Timisoara, Romania. cisplatin at different times. The IC50 was determined. RNA was extracted by RNX Solution. Then cDNA was synthesized. Precise primers were designed for Nm23-H1 and TBP genes by specific software. Quantity of Nm23-H1 Background: Last decades have brought great improvement in survival rate gene expression compare to TBP gene in different concentrations of cispla- in neuroblastoma (NB) in children, due to precocious diagnosis and a mul- tin was analyzed using very sensitive quantitative Real-time PCR. timodal approach. Still, several limitations remain in current practice. Aim: Nm23-H1 gene expression in MCF-7 cells treated by different concentrati- To evaluate factors that influenced survival rate in children with NB. Mate- ons of cisplatin at 24h was increased. rial and method: We proposed a retrospective analysis of cases admitted The results of quantitative Real-time PCR indicated that cisplatin can pro- to our clinic between 1996-2011. Thirty-four children diagnosed with NB bably decrease metastasis, by up-expression of Nm23-H1 metastasis sup- were selected. Onset age was between 11 months and 12 years, sex ratio pressor gene in MCF-7 cells. male:female was 1:1. We performed a retrospective analysis of medical J06.10 charts. Kapplar-Meier survival curve were calculated. Citostatic (protocol Quantitative detection of Major BCR-ABL gene transcripts by NBL 98) and surgical treatment were performed in all patients. Results: Sta- competitive RT-PCR in chronic myeloid leukemia(CML) patients tistic data regarding localization of primordial tumor, stabilization, regional A. Nazemi1, M. Hashemi2; and distance metastasis spread; along with paraclinical data: histological 1Islamic Azad University,Tonekabon Branch, Tonekabon, Islamic Republic of Iran, analysis, vanilmandelic acid, LDH, feritin levels are discussed. Molecular bio- 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical Branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. logy and DNA index cannot be assessed in our clinic. Complications related to disease were: distance metastatic spread in half of children; locoregio- nal metastasis in 29,16% cases, intestinal occlusion in 4,1%, blindness in Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML) is a form of leukemia with chromosomal 4,1%, paraplegia in 4,1%. Two cases presented relapse of disease. Survival translocation and fusion bcr/abl genes. The purpose of this study is deve- at 3 years was seen in 45,8% cases, 41.6% deceased and 12.5% were lost to lopment of a simple and low-cost technique for follow-up. Conclusions: NB was diagnosed late and with advanced stage, in quantitative detection bcr/abl transcripts in CML patients. our population and this correlated with unfavorable evolution and compli- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org386 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 cations related both, to disease and treatment. Genetic assessment is very vironment with cancer-associated SNPs and expression of multidrug resi- important in guiding treatment differentiation, which finally prolongs sur- stance (MDR) genes. vival rate in patients with NB. Improvement in this area is much needed in Materials and methods: Tubular, alveolar, trabecular morphological structu- our department. res and their local microenvironment were isolated by laser microdissection J06.13 from 10 micron-thick sections of FFPE breast tumor. The isolated and who- IgY production against 3 epitop of the hauman DR5 le amplified DNA and cDNA (RNA) were used for analysis of SNPs with the S. Amirijavid1, M. Hashemi2, A. Akbarzadeh3, K. Parivar1; Cancer SNP Panel (Illumina) and assessment of expression of MDR genes: 1Islamic Azad University,Science and research branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of ABCB1, ABCC1, ABCC2, ABCC5, GSTP1, and MVP. Iran, 2Islamic Azad University,Tehran medical branch, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, Results: SNP array emerged as an effective tool to detect somatic alterations. 3Biotechnology pilot Center, Pasteur Institute of Iran,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Despite of low microarray call rate, probably caused by degradation of DNA during formalin fixation, the Cancer SNP Panel demonstrated significant differences in genotypes both among the different types of morphological The proinflamatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor- α (TNF-α) plays a im- structures and their local microenvironment. In particular, the genotype portant role in diverse cellular events such as septic shock, induction of variations affected rs6179 (GHR gene), rs3740616 (LMO2), rs717620 other cytokines, cell proliferation, differentiation, necrosis, Malaria, AIDS (ABCC2), rs4623993 (k-Ras), rs1050008 (MX1), rs569421 (GATA3), and and apoptosis. In response to TNF therapy several cell signaling pathways rs529359 (PGR). MDR genes expression acts as indispensable hallmark of activated in ells that in different manner can lead to apoptosis or necrosis. cancer. Similar to the SNP results, their expression was significantly differed However induction of witch of them is dependent on the receptors that oc- between both the studied types of morphological structures and their mi- cupied with TNF-α and subsequently activation molecules. Tumor necrosis croenvironment. The differences were displayed in both number (type) of factor- related apoptosis- inducing ligand (TRAIL) and specially the DR5 expressing genes and level of expression. one, is generating considerable interests as a possible anticancer therapeu- Conclusion: Data obtained here show that the different types of morphologi- tic agent because of is selective activation of apoptosis of this receptor as a cal structures of breast tumor may be independent tumor clones with own superior affinity to ligands (TNF) show up and injected to separate hens to specific microenvironment. achieve high affinity IgY that can recognize DR5 specially and start exclusi- The study was supported by the Russian Federation President grant (MK- vely apoptotic signaling in the cell. 1259.2012.7). J06.14 J06.16 GSTP1 gene methylation profiles in Helicobacter pylori (+) and (-) Origin and clonality of primary multiple superficial bladder cancers antral intestinal metaplasia and distal gastric tumour patients in A. Babayan1,2, Y. Andreeva3, D. Zaletaev1,4, M. Nemtsova1,4; Turkish population 1Research Institute for Molecular Medicine, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Institute of G. Sen1, E. Kasap2, S. Orenay Boyacioglu3, M. Korkmaz4, E. Kahraman4, B. Unsal5, E. Tumor Biology, University Medical Center Hamburg Eppendorf,, Hamburg, Germany, Saritas Yuksel5, H. Yuceyar2; 3Moscow Herzen Oncological Research Institute, Moscow, Russian Federation, 4Sechenov 1Celal Bayar University Medical High School, Manisa, Turkey, 2Celal Bayar University Moscow Medical Academy, Moscow, Russian Federation. Medical High School Gastroenterology Department, Manisa, Turkey, 3Celal Bayar University Medical High School Department of Medical Genetics, Manisa, Turkey, 4Celal Bayar University Medical High School Department Of Medical Biology, Manisa, Turkey, Primary multifocality is a common phenomenon in superficial bladder can- 5Ataturk Research and Training Hospital, Gastroenterology, Izmir, Turkey. cer (SBC). According the monoclonal theory, coexisting primary tumors ari- se from a single malignant transformed cell, which proliferates and spreads throughout the urothelium or might be spread during the intravesical ma- Background /Aim: Gastric cancer (GC) is the second most common malig- nipulations. Another theory explains multifocality as subsequent events se- nancy worldwide, with a high mortality rate. The incidence of GC has de- condary to a field-cancerization effect, so tumors are expected to be geneti- clined in the western countries during the last decades. The Glutathione cally non-identical. The question weather coexisting tumors arise from the S-transferases comprise a group of enzymes that are critical in the detoxi- same tumor clone or develop independently has a great clinical relevance fication of carcinogens. In this study we aimed the relationship GSTP-1 me- to surgery and treatment approaches. Molecular analysis of alterations pat- thylation in patients with intestinal metaplasia with and without helicobac- terns in each of coexisting tumors may give us an answer. ter pylori infection, gastric cancer and controls. We examined tumor samples from 22 patients with primary multiple SBC Methodology: The methylation status of GSTP1 gene between September 2009 to November 2011was analyzed by Methylation Specific PCR after bi- (PMSBC) (2-5 tumors/ patient). Genomic DNA samples were prepared from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded sections. Our panel included LOH analy- sulfate modification in H. pylori (+) (n=25) and (-) (n=25) intestinal meta- sis at 9p21 and 17p13(microsatellite assay). plasia (IM) patients, GC (n=25), and control subjects (n=15) who underwent Three out of 22 (13.6%) patients had non-informative state of microsatellite endoscopic examination were included into the study markers. In nine out of 22 patients (40.9%) was shown concordant pattern Results:When we considered the GSTP1 gene methylation profile in all of the of LOH in at least one of loci. In ten out of 22 (45.5%) patients we showed groups; 26 (28%) patients had methylated GSTP1 gene, 31 (34%) patients discordant patterns of allelic alterations. Moreover, in 5 of these 10 cases had unmethylated GSTP1 gene and 33 (36%) patients had heterogeneously (50%) tumors of the same patient differed from each other by presence or methylated GSTP1 gene. absence of allelic misbalance, while in other 5 cases (50%) LOH of different There was no significant difference in the methylation profile between the allele in tumors of the same patient were revealed. four groups (p>0.05).Unmethylation in the control group was more preva- Our results show that coexisting multiple tumors show in almost equal pro- lent than GC and H.Pylori (+) IM (p=0.015).Unmethylation in H.Pylori (-) IM portion either concordant of discordant pattern of molecular alterations, was more prevalent than H.Pylori (+) IM (p=0.00004). Heterogeneous me- which might mean monoclonal or oligoclonal origin correspondently. thylation in GC and control group was more prevalent than H.Pylori (-) IM J06.17 (p=0.00002, 0.025). Investigation of microRNA expression changes in HepG2 cell line The relationship between H.pylori and GSTP1 methylation profile, there was in presence of URG4/URGCP and in the absence of URG4/URGCP no significant difference in metyhlation, unmethylation and heterogeneous suppressed by RNA interference methylation between the groups. Y. Dodurga1, N. G. Yonguc2, C. Biray Avci3, G. Bagci4, C. Gunduz3, L. N. Satiroglu-Tufan4; Conclusion: GSTP1 gene methylation profile is not appropriate for early dia- 1Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, Denizli, gnosis of cases with gastric cancer. Turkey, 2Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Anatomy, Denizli, J06.15 Turkey, 3Ege University School of Medicine Department of Medical Biology, İzmir, Turkey, Molecular genetic characterization of intratumoral heterogeneity in 4Pamukkale University School of Medicine Department of Genetics, Denizli, Turkey. invasive ductal NOS breast carcinoma E. V. Denisov1, L. A. Tashireva1,2, T. S. Dultseva2, M. M. Tsyganov3, N. V. Litviakov1, M. V. Zavyalova1,2, V. M. Perelmuter1,2, N. V. Cherdyntseva1; Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) originates from liver cells and is one of the 1Cancer Research Institute, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical most common malignant cancers in the world. MicroRNAs (miRNA), are sin- University, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 3Tomsk State University, Tomsk, Russian gle strand non-coding RNA molecules with the length of 18-25 nucleotides. Federation. miRNAs play an important role in the development of HCC, briefly miRNAs have a significant impact on multistep hepatocellular carcinogenesis inclu- ding cellular migration and invasion. URG4/URGCP (Up-regulated gene-4/ Aim: To characterize the different types of morphological structures, pre- Upregulator of cell proliferation) is up-regulated in the presence of HBxAg viously demonstrated in tumors of invasive ductal breast carcinoma not and has been identified and characterized by Satiroglu-Tufan et al. The full- otherwise specified, NOS (Zavyalova et al., 2011), and their local microen- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 387 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 length URG4/URGCP clone is 3.607 kb. Overexpression of URG4/URGCP in sing evidence of its role in self renewal in various cancers, SALL4 is intro- the presence of HBV X protein may function as a putative oncogene that duced as potentially interesting therapeutic targets to reverse a number of contributes importantly to multi-step hepatocarcinogenesis. In this study, aberrations that promote colorectal tumor maintenance and development. we aimed to investigate potential miRNA expression changes in HepG2 cell In conclusion, we presented the first evidence for mRNA overexpression of line model system in the presence of URG4/URGCP and in the absence of oncogene SALL4 in cancerous colorectal samples which might enlighten URG4/URGCP which was suppressed by RNA interference. To functionally new approaches for cancer therapy. characterize URG4/URGCP, independent cultures of HepG2 cells were stably J06.20 transfected with pcDNA3 or pcDNA3-URG4/URGCP. Relative quantificati- Gene-gene interaction predicts chemotherapy response in multiple on of whole genome miRNAs was analyzed by Light Cycler 480 Real Time myeloma patients PCR using Human Whole Genome miRNA qPCR Profiling Kits. Among the Z. Rossokha, S. Kyryachenko, N. Kostukova, S. Vydyborets, N. Gorovenko; 1034 human miRNAs investigated by the arrays, 77 miRNAs were up-regu- National Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Kyiv, Ukraine. lated and 9 miRNAs were down-regulated in the presence of URG4/URGCP. In conclusion, we have comprehensively analyzed miRNA profiles in the HepG2 cells with the presence or absence of URG4/URGCP gene. Some of Background. Multiple myeloma (MM) is plasma cell neoplasm with low sen- these miRNAs may play roles in the URG4/URGCP gene related disease de- sitivity to alkylating agent-based chemotherapy. The aim of study was to velopment through the regulation of different signaling pathways. evaluate gene-gene interaction in the development of drug resistant cases. J06.18 Methods. We examined 51 newly diagnosed patients treated alkylating Differentially methylated genes in breast cancer agent-based chemotherapy. 30 pGaStTieTn1t, sG hSaTdM c1linical respoAn3se1 3aGnd 2G1S pTaPt1i-, N. A. Skryabin1, I. N. Lebedev1, N. V. Cherdyntseva2; eCn3t4s3 h5aTd noM rDesRp1o nse. 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Institute of Oncology, Tomsk, The deletion polymorphism of genes and of Russian Federation. of genespolymorphism were detected using PCR and RFLP analysis. Statistical analysis was perforGmSTedM t1o investigate the influence of all analyzed genes and their combinatioGnSsT (TM1D, GRS_T2M.01 P, rMoDgrRa1mme). Breast cancer (BC) is characterized by abnormal DNA methylation. To date Results. The main effect was found for deletion polymorphism [Table the methylation status of many oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes has 1]. The interaction model including genes had higher been investigated. However the genome-wide analysis of methylation status Testing Balance Accuracy - 83,10. of many genes is necessary for identification of pathogenetic pathways of Table1. Testing balanced accuracy and cross validation consistency for the cancer development. This study was aimed to identify the functional groups best MDR models for the prediction of chemotherapy resistance of genes abnormally methylated in BC. We analyzed 16 samples with BC and Gene Testing Bal. Acc. Permutation test CV consistency 6 control histologically normal epithelium samples from women with BC GSTM1 0,8286 0,001 10/10 using Illumina GoldenGate Cancer Panel I (Illumina, USA). Differential me- GSTT1/GSTM1 0,7476 0,05 8/10 thylation was observed at 318 CpG-sites. Among them 252 (79.2%) were hy- permethylated and 66 (20.8%) were hypomethylated. The identified diffe- GSTT1/GSTP1/MDR1 0,8310 0,001 10/10 rentially methylated genes were analyzed using Gene Ontology Enrichment GSTT1/GSTM1/GSTP1/MDR1 0,7918 0,05 10/10 Analysis. Hypermethylated genes belong to two functional groups: positive regulation of cell differentiation (n=8) and regulation of cell proliferation Conclusion: We propose to evaluate gene-gene interaction for drug resi- (n=12). Hypomethylated genes belong to two groups as well: cell migration stance prediction in MM patients. Further research may develop new me- (n=2) and the protein amino acid phosphorylation (n=3). Hypermethylati- thods of chemotherapy resistance prevention. on of genes involved in positive regulation of cell differentiation and proli- J06.21 feration may indicate the important role of their epigenetic inactivation in Examination of UVR-Induced DNA damage and repair and its BC development. Hypomethylation of genes involved in cell migration and association with apoptosis in human keratinocytes and fibroblasts phosphorylation of proteins may promote invasiveness, metastasis of can- M. Karbaschi1, M. D. Evans1, S. Macip2, M. S. Cooke1; cer cells, and inhibition of tumor suppressor proteins by phosphorylation. 1Department of Cancer Studies and Molecular Medicine, University of Leicester, Thus, the abnormal methylation status of these functional groups of genes Leicester, United Kingdom, 2Department of Biochemistry, University of Leicester, may play a significant role in breast cancer development. Leicester, United Kingdom. J06.19 Elucidation of SALL4 oncogenic role in colorectal cancer; the first report Skin cancer has an increasing incidence in countries with large populations M. M. Forghanifard1, R. Raeisossadati2, M. Moghbeli2, A. Tavassoli3, M. Montazer4, M. of white skinned individuals. UVR, by initiating the DNA damage, can lead Gholamin5, M. R. Abbaszadegan1; to mutagenesis and is regarded as the prime cause of most skin cancers. As 1Department of Biology, Mashhad Branch, Islamic Azad University, mashhad, Islamic a result, UVR protection is of primary importance to prevent UVR-induced Republic of Iran, 2Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna skin cancers. Cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPD) are an important form Research Institute, Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, mashhad, Islamic Republic of DNA damage induced by both UVA and UVB and removed by nucleotide of Iran, 3Endoscopic and Minimally Invasive Research Center, Qaem Hospital, mashhad, excision repair. The persistence of CPDs, compared to other forms of DNA da- Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Department of Pathology, Omid Hospital, Mashhad University mage, is understood to be a major contributory factor to their mutagenicity. of Medical Sciences, mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5Division of Human Genetics, Immunology Research Center, Avicenna Research Institute, Mashhad University of Using the T4endonuclease V-modified comet assay on human keratinocytes Medical Sciences, Mashhad, Islamic Republic of Iran. and fibroblasts, we noted that there was rapid initial repair of CPDs over the first 6h post-irradiation, following either UVA or UVB treatments, but whilst this slowed significantly in the UVB-irradiated cells, it continued to be rapid Human cancer cells resemble stem cells in expression signatures leading to in the UVA-treated cells with levels approaching baseline within 36h. This share some features notably self-renewal. A complex network of transcripti- confirmed the widely accepted slow repair of UVB-induced cyclobutane thy- on factors and signaling molecules are required to continuance of this trait. mine dimers, but we uniquely noted far more rapid repair of UVA-induced SALL4 is zinc finger transcriptional activator crucial for maintenance of cyclobutane thymine dimers. There were no significant differences in cell self-renewal in stem cells which its expression rate is not yet elucidates in viability between the two treatments over the first 6h post-irradiation, but colorectal tumor cells. To clarify this rate and probable clinicopathological at 24h post-irradiation viability had decreased significantly only in the UVB- consequences, an expressional analysis was performed. Freshly tumoral and irradiated cells. These data suggest that for at least the first six hours follo- distant tumor-free tissues of thirty eight colorectal samples were enrolled wing UVB irradiation, the majority of cells were viable and capable of repair, to comparatively examine the expression level of SALL4 by real-time PCR. after that time increasing numbers of cells enter apoptosis, and therefore Compare to normal tissues, greater than two-fold expression of SALL4 was fail to repair the damage. interestingly detected in 89.5% of related tumors. SALL4 expression was si- gnificantly correlated with the number of involved lymph nodes especially in moderately differentiated tumor samples (P<0.05). Furthermore, higher levels of SALL4 mRNA expression was significantly associated with older age of patients whom their tumor cells were being in the lower stages (I/II) (P<0.05). These results elucidate the direct impact of SALL4 overexpression on the process of tumor cell metastasis to lymph node and consequently www.eshg.org development of tumors into advanced stages (III/IV). Along with thwe pwromwi.-eshg.org388 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J07.03 J07. Cancer cytogenetics Radiation-induced modification of human somatic cells’ chromosomes sensitivity to testing mutagenic exposure of bleomycin in vitro in lung cancer patients in delayed terms following Chernobyl J07.01 accident Symmetric nuclei support PMN chemotaxis and reflect genomic order M. A. Pilinskaya, S. S. Dibskiy, Y. B. Dibskaya; J. P. Chaudhuri1, J. U. Walther2; National Research Centre of Radiation Medicine, Kijiv, Ukraine. 1Genzyme Genetics / LMU Kinderklinik, Munich, Germany, 2LMU Kinderklinik, Munich, Germany. With the help of modified „G2-bleomycin sensitivity assay“ above back- ground level of cytogenetic effect which considered as the marker of hidden Segmentation, condensation and bilateral symmetry of the nuclei of poly- chromosome instability (HCI) in 4 groups - liquidators of Chernobyl acci- morphonuclear leukocytes seem related to their function. Segmentations dent, liquidators of Chernobyl accident with lung cancer, unexposed healthy of the nuclei into two or more lobes and their condensation facilitate their persons, patients with lung cancer who denied conscious contact with ioni- passage (diapedesis) through the endothelial layer of blood vessels to the zing radiation were cytogenetically observed. In all groups significant inte- extravasal space and subsequent locomotion through the interstitial com- rindividual variations of cytogenetic effects induced by bleomycin in vitro in partment of different tissues. Bilateral symmetry of these nuclei along with testing concentration 5.0 mcg/ml and lack of positive correlation between their association to the cytoskeletal fibres contribute to their efficiency in lo- background and above background frequencies of chromosome aberrations comotion by alignment of the axis of nuclear symmetry to the axis of cellular were found. It was established that group of Chernobyl liquidators with lung polarity, which orients towards the direction of locomotion in response to cancer had been the most aggravated as by expression of above background cytokines and other stimuli. Moreover this same mechanism may maintain cytogenetic effects (77.3 aberrations per 100 metaphases) as by number genomic order in spheroid nuclei of mononuclear cells all through the cell of persons with HCI (66.6%) in comparison with 14.3, 42.4, 53.4 aberra- cycle and support and coordinate the allelic functions. Our observations of tions per 100 cells; 33.3, 46.7, 53.3% hypersensitive persons in unexposed the cytogenetic facets of intranuclear order in blood and bone marrow cells healthy donors, unexposed patients with lung cancer and Chernobyl liqui- support these assumptions. dators without cancer, accordingly. The data obtained not only confirmed J07.02 possibility of radiation-induced modification of genetically determined sus- Complex chromosomal clones in hematological malignancies: Study ceptibility of human somatic cells’ chromosomes to mutagenic exposure, on 50 cases but also permit to suggest existence of an association between radiation- B. B. Ganguly; induced increase of individual sensitivity to testing mutagenic exposure and Genetics Center, Navi Mumbai, India. realization of cancer in persons exposed to ionizing radiation. The results obtained showed acceptability of «G2-bleomycin sensitivity assay» under cytogenetic monitoring of irradiated contingents for determining HCI as one Hematological malignancies are well understood with the consequences of of the informative markers of human predisposition to oncopathology. chromosomal alterations and likelihood of treatment outcome. Employment J07.04 of advanced technologies in the field facilitates better understanding of di- Identification of a new rearrangement involving chromosomes 6 and seases with an aim in drug development. However, conventional cytogene- 11 in a juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia with mutation in CBL gene tics plays an important role for primary diagnosis, monitoring and relapse E. Tassano, E. Tavella, M. Lanciotti, C. Micalizzi, C. Cuoco, C. Morerio; management. During January 2012, chromosomal analysis was carried out IRCCS Giannina Gaslini, Genova, Italy. on 50 cases with leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome by employing con- ventional bone marrow culture and G-banding. Karyotypic analysis by using IKAROS had detected multiple clonal abnormalities with rare chromosomal Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a rare and aggressive clonal rearrangements including numerical and structural alterations (Table). Nor- myeloproliferative disorder of infPanTtPsN a1n1d yRoAuSng cNhiFld1ren, refractory to che- mal karyotype and classical abnormalities were recorded in 32% and 42% motherapy and responding only to hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. cases respectively whereas 26% cases were detected with multiple complex Somatic or germiCnBaLl mutation in , , or and moRnAoSsomy 7 are rearrangements. Two AML cases were recorded with t(9;22) in association known to be the essential genetic or chromosomal abnormalities in this di- with monosomy 7. One case with provisional diagnosis of AL showed three sease. Missense mutations, mCuBtLually exclusive of other activating double minutes in cells with varying numerical abnormalities. Case wise mutations, have been recently found in JMML, arising de novo or inherited detail description on chromosomal rearrangements and numerical altera- with invariable loss of the normal allele in leukemic cells. A 3-month-old tions will be presented with clinical and hematological expressions. Such boy was referred to us for hepatosplenomegaly, fever, leucocytosis with mo- complex structural and numerical or both rearrangements might indicate nocytosis, presence of myeloid precursors, bilinear cytopeniaN, RanAdS nKoRrAmSa2l poor prognosis and interfere in treatment outcome. The study highlights levPeTl oPfN H11bF. Hypersensitivity to GM-CSF was observed in the colony assay. the importance of conventional cytogenetics in management of hematologic A diagnosCisB oLf JMML was made. Molecular studies showed no , , malignancies and strongly recommends its application in the field. or mutations, but a c.1246 T>C heterozygous missense mutation in Table: Data on chromosomal analysis on 50 leukemia cases exon 9 of gene was found, resulting in p.416C>R amino acid sostitution. Provisional diagnosis Case-wise chromosomal data (no.=50) Multiple clonal abnormalities Multiple clones with 90%:47,XY,+8,t(10p;16q), 80%:complex rearrangements & 39-46 AL (4) with 31%: 48, 22%:51, 3 minutes with 46-54 del(13q), del(20q) chromosomes 47%:46,XY,der(14)t(10p;14q32) chromosomes ALL (2) 46,XY 100%: 46,XY,t(4;11),i(12q) 76%:45,XY,-7,t(9;22)(q34;q11) 45,XX,-7,t(9;22)(q34;q11), AML (9) 3 cases: 46,XX 45,X,-Y,t(8;21)(q22;q22) 24%:46,XY,-7,t(9;22)(q34;q11),+Ph breaks 30%:Hypodiploid with 41-45 46,XY,t(15;17)(q22;q21) 47,XX,+11,t(16p;16q) chromosomes Anemia (3) 1 Fanconi anemia 2 aplastic anemia 75%:46,XX,del(3p),t(9;22)(q34;q11) CML (10) 46,XY 7 cases: 46B,XCYR,t-A(9B;L22)(q34;q11) 10%:48,XX,del(3p),+8,t(9;22)(q34;q11),+19 15%: 49,XX,del(3p),+8x2,t(9;22)(q34;q11),+19 46,XY,t(1;4), -ve (FISH) and hyperdiploid 11 cases with MDS (20) 45,X,-Y 46,XY,+breaks 46,XX,+breaks normal karyotype 46,XX,del(5q),-11, der(12) 90%:45,XY,-7 and 46,XY and 46,XY,del(5q) t(11q;12p),+mar 3: hyperdiploid 2: hyperdiploid 12%:46,X,-Y and 50%: 49,XX,+4,+6,+8 2 cells with octaploidy Lymphoma (2) 30%: 46,XX,t(14;18) - DLBCL 75%: 47,XX,+21 and breaks www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 389 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Likely, the homozygous mutation was not detected since bone marrow with Caucasian population. low level of leukemic cells was used for analyNsUisP. 9T8he chromosome analysis J08.03 on BM and peripheral blood showed 46,XY,t(11;16)(p15;q23)/46,XY karyo- Investigation and validation of five different microsatellites in HLA- type. FISH analysis with specific probes for gene (11p15) excluded DRB1 region in the Iranian population the involvement of this gene in the breakpoint. The caseCs BoLf JMML charac- M. Shaykholeslam Esfahani, S. Vallian Broojeni; terized by chromosomal translocations as sole cytogenetic abnormality are University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Islamic Republic of Iran. rare and described in individual cases. The importance of in hematopoi- esis has been demonstrated, however the effect of this chromosomal rear- rangement on the propensity to develop JMML has to be clarified. Association between HLA-DRB1 and a large number of diseases such as multiple sclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis has been demonstrated. In the J08. Statistical genetics, includes Mapping, linkage present study, we attempted to identify and characterize some potential mi- and association methods crosatellites in HLA-DRB1 gene region with the aim of identification of spe- cific markers for this gene. STR markers located next to or within HLA-DRB1 iInnc sliulidcoing M2_3_22, M2_2_36, D6S2878, D6S2805, D6S2879 and D6S2880 J08.01 were selected from Major Histocompatibility Complex database (dbMHC). Association polymorphisms of IL-18 genes (137G/C, 607C/A,133C/G) analysis revealed that among all investigated markers, only M2_3_22 in patients with allergic rhinitis in the Iranian population was specific for HLA-DRB1. M2_3_22 existed as single copy in all MHC haplo- S. Ramazi1, m. Motovali bashi2, M. Hashemzade chaleshtori22; type sequences and located next to the HLA-DRB1. The presented primers 1Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical, Shahrekord, for this STR marker at dbMHC and uniSTS were not compatible with some Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of the last published MHC haplotype sequences. Therefore, a new set of pri- of Medical, shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. mer pair was designed and used to amplify this marker in 164 DNA samples Background: obtained from Iranian unrelated individuals. M2_3_22 was successfully am- plified in all DNA samples, and three different alleles were identified. The Allergic rhinitis (AR) is an inflammatory disease of the na- marker was found in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (P>0.05) in the studied sal mucosa induced by an IgE-mediated reaction, following exposure to an population. Together, the findings suggested that M2_3_22 could be introdu- allergen. Inflammatory reactions in allergic rhinitis are regulated by many ced as a specific locus among all the markers present in the HLA-DRB1 gene cytokines.The. IL-18 is a member of tIhLe1 8IL -1 family.It was originally descri- region for linkage analysis and disease association investigations. bed as IFN-γ -inducing factor (IGIF),and is known to influence the balance J08.04 of Th1/Th2 immune response. The gene has two promoter regions, Genetic variation in the CYP19 gene and recurrent spontaneous promoter 1 and promoter 2. Three SNPs are located in promoter1, two are abortions in exon 1, and three are in the promoter 2. This study aimed to examine the C. Koutsothanasi1, K. Agiannitopoulos1, D. Pantos2, K. Lamnissou1; aMsesothcioadtiso n: of three different (SNPs) located in IL-18 gene (-607 C/A, -137 1Dept of Genetics & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, Athens, G/C and-133 C/G) on chromosome 11q22 with allergic rhinitis. Greece, 2‘Genesis Athens Clinic”, Center for Human Reproduction, Athens, Greece. Genomic DNA was obtained from the blood samples of 300 AR patients and 200 healthy control volunteers. The IL-18 polymorphism was aRneasluylztesd: by polymerase chain reaction and restriction fragment length Po- Background. The CYP19 gene encodes aromatase, a key cytochrome P450 lymorphism (PCR -RFLP) analysis. enzyme that converts androgens to estrogens in the ovarian tissues of pre- The frequency of the GG genotype of the IL-18/-137 gene polymor- menopausal women. Polymorphic variations in the CYP19 gene result in phism was greater in allergic rhinitis patients than in control. The data of modified estrogen levels t hrough augment aromatase activity. In the present tChoen IcLlu-1s8io(-n6s0:7C/A and -133 C/G ) gene polymorphisms will be analyse to study, we investigated the association between the C/T single nucleotide po- determine the distributions of alleles. lymorphism (SNP) of theCYP19 gene and the risk of recurrent spontaneous This study suggests that IL-18 gene variants may be participa- abortions (RSA). te as a risk factor in the pathogenesis of AR or in intermediary phenotypes. Methods: In this prospective case-control study 120 RSA patients and 100 So Further studies are needed to reveal the associations between the IL-18 healthy controls were studied. All cohors were Greeks. The PCR-RFLP me- promoter polymorphism and allergic diseases in other populations. thod was used in order to genotype the subjects. J08.02 Results: The frequencies of CC, CT, TT genotypes were 0.275, 0.500, 0.225, Study for association between the polymorphism rs10046 of the gene respectively, in the patient group and 0.262, 0.532, 0.206, respectively, in the CYP19 A1 and the risk of premature coronary artery disease control group. The allele frequencies were 0.525 and 0.475 for C and T, in K. Babali1, M. Georgoutsou1, D. Babalis2, A. Mouzarou2, K. Agiannitopoulos1, K. the patient group and 0.528 and 0.472 for C and T, respectively, in the con- Lamnissou1; trol group. The data between the two groups were analyzed by chi-square 1Department of Genetics & Biotechnology, Faculty of Biology, University of Athens, test. The results showed that there are no significant differences in genotype Athens, Greece, 2KAT General Hospital, Athens, Greece. or in allele frequencies between the patient and the control group. Conclusion: The CYP19 C/T polymorphism cannot be used as genetic mar- ker for RSA risk assessment in our Caucasian population. J08.05 Objective: It is well documented that sex hormones influence the risk of Association analysis of the Alu-element Ya5NBC51 with the level developing cardiovascular disease. Several genes are involved in the syn- IL1RA of serum thesis of sex hormones. The CYP19A1 gene encodes the enzyme aromatase I. Nikolaev, E. Vasileva, E. Vorobjeva, V. Gorbunova; (P450aro) that is involved in th e production of oestrogens from androgens. Bashkir State Pedagogical University name of M.Akmulla, Ufa, Russian Federation. In the present study, we investigated whether the rs10046 single nucleoti- de polymorphism (SNP) of theCYP19A1gene is associated with developing premature coronary artery disease (CAD). INTRODUCTION: Cytokine System is one of the major body systems. Alu- Methods: A total of 168 Caucasian CAD patients, documented by coronary element Ya5NBC51 localized in the third intron of the gene interleukin-1 angiography, aged less than 58 years and 120 healthy receptor accessory protein IL1RAP. This protein serves as a coreceptor of controls were studied. To genotype the subjects we used the PCR-RFLP me- proinflammatory cytokines, forming, together with IL1R receptor complex. thod. MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied DNA samples from 178 people Results: The frequencies of CC, CT, TT genotypes were 0.278, 0.481, 0.240, aged 18-65 years living in the Republic of Bashkortostan. ELISA was per- respectively, in the patient group and 0.266, 0.522, 0.212, respectively, in the formed IL1RA level in blood serum. Analysis of gene polymorphisms was control group. The frequencies of T and C alleles were 0.518 and 0.481in the performed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Assessing the impact of patient group and 0.527 and 0.473 in the control group. Statistical analysis Alu-insertion in a gene on the data IL1RAP linked ELISA was performed by indicated no significant differences in genotype or in allele frequencies bet- ANOVA. ween the patient and the control group. RESULTS: Genotype IL1RAP *I/*I is associated with increased levels of se- Conclusion: rum IL1RA and allele IL1RAP*D with decreased (F = 4,68; p = 0,032). Thus, The results of this study suggest that there is no association of the rs10046 Alu-element in IL1RAP gene associated with susceptibility to inflammation. polymorphism of the CYP19A1 gene with the risk of developing prematu- re coronary artery disease. Therefore, we may conclude that this polymor- phism cannot be used as genetic marker for CAD risk assessment in our www.eshg.org www.eshg.org390 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J08.06 Association of vitamin D receptor gene BsmI polymorphisms with bone mineral density in a population of Iranian women mere gene mutations and fabry disease. The aim of this study was to screen J. Jamshidi, F. Pouresmaeili; GLA gene mutations in patients with HCM phenotype for a disease-specific Department of medical genetics, faculty of medicine, Shahid Beheshti university of treatment with enzyme replacement therapy (ERT). 106 patients with HCM medical science, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. phenotype were examined. Alpha galactosidase A level was evaluated in 57 men. Patients with reduced level of alpha galactosidase A and 49 women un- derwent GLA gene mutation screening by PCR-SSCP method. It is, however, OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association of vitamin D receptor (VDR) gene apparent that further expression and genetic association work is necessary BsmI (rs1544410) polymorphisms with bone mineral density (BMD) in a to try and clarify the mixed findings that have been reported until now. population of Iranian women. METHODS: Blood samples were obtained J09.03 from 146 pre- and/or postmenopausal Iranian women, aged 35-80 years, ApoE gene polymorphism in rheumatoid arthritis patients stratified for BMD into normal and osteoporotic groups. Anthropometric M. Siniauskaya1, S. Vakyla1, M. Shaptyrenko1, L. Maslinskaya2, T. Tyabut2, O. Davydenko1; parameters including age, body height and weight were all recorded. BMD 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology, National Academy of Sciences Belarus, Minsk, of the lumbar spine (L1-4) and femoral neck were measured using dual en- Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical Academy of Post-Graduate Education, Minsk, Belarus. ergy x-ray absorptiometry. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) technique was used to detect and analyze VDR gene BsmI polymorphisms distributions of our study groups. RESULTS: Objective:Many studies indicate the importance of genetic polymorphism as The frequency of AA and GG genotypes were significantly different in normal factors predisposing for cardiovascular diseases and rheumatoid arthritis. and osteoporotic groups (P < 0.05), frequency of AA was higher in patients Cardiovascular complications associated with atherosclerotic vessel lesions and GG was higher in normal group. Also the GG genotype was significantly - one of the leading reason of life -time shortening in RA. ApoE allele types associated with increased BMD in the lumbar spine (P < 0.05). This associa- determine plasma lipid levels and could be the factor of relative atherosc- tion was not significant in femoral neck (P > 0.05). CONCLUSION: VDR gene lerosis risk, also facts testified the importance ApoE alleles in Alzheimer‘s polymorphisms have an association with the BMD in lumbar spine and may disease (AD) and immunoregulation. So possibly ApoE isoforms could influ- have a less effect on proximal femur BMD in women. enced disease progress in RA and also could serve as predisposing marker for further atherosclerosis development. J09. Complex traits and polygenic disorders Method: 74 rheumathoides arthritis patients and 107 healthy control were included in research. PCR-RFLP was carried out in order to check allelic fre- quencies investigated gene polymorphism. J09.01 Results: ApoE E3/E3 genotype was less common in RA group comparing to Specific risk factors predisposing to adolescent alcohol dependence: control - 57,5% and 72 % correspondingly (P<0,05). ApoE E2/E3 together genetic pilot study in a Belarusian population. with E2/E4 allele composed 28,7% in RA patient group, whereas in controls I. Halayenka1, A. Kapytau2, H. Kandratsenka1, N. Danilenko1, O. Davydenko1; - 17,8% (P<0,05). 1Institute of Genetics and Cytology of National Academy of Sciences of Belarus, Minsk, Conclusions: it should be some link between key genes in RA and cardiova- Belarus, 2Belarusian Medical State University, Minsk, Belarus. scular disease, so separation of some loci could help in subdividing special patient group more sensitive for cardiovascular disease- it will be the pur- pose of future work. Adolescent alcohol abuse is the real problem of contemporary society. Bela- J09.04 rus, according WHO, is among nine countries with extremely high alcohol TNF-alpha gene promoter polymorphisms: lack of association with consumption. About 17000 adolescents younger than 18 are included in susceptibility to asthma in Romania state preventive list. The aim of the investigation: the search of molecular- O. M. Popa1, C. E. Berghea1, M. I. Dutescu2, M. Meirosu3, C. Bara1, L. O. Popa4; genetic markers predisposing to regular alcohol consumption of adolescent. 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Bucharest, Romania, 2National Institute of The influence of genetic factor and “family climate”: presence of relatives Blood Transfusion, Bucharest, Romania, 3University of Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, with alcohol abuse, parental attention and physical punishment was also 4Grigore Antipa National Museum of Natural History, Bucharest, Romania. taken into consideration. Four male groups were analyzed, namely, those who started regular alcohol consumption at: 12-18 years old (125 patients); 18-25 (110) ; 3) after 25 (104); controls (103) , all 442 persons from the Re- Asthma is a complex disease characterized by chronic airway inflammation publican research and practice center of mental health. 74,4 % adolescents, and bronchial hyper-responsiveness. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha is who started regular alcohol consumption before 18, had relatives with alco- a pro-inflammatory cytokine that has been implicated in many aspects of hol abuse comparing to control group (42 %, p=0,0002), and two groups of the pathology in asthma, but a clear understanding of the exact role in asth- elder patients (55,5% and 53,8%, p=0,001). We revealed that the proporti- matic patients is yet to be determined. on of DRD2 A1A2 heterozygotes was significantly increased among young- Objectives: The aim of this study was to investigate the association of TNF- sters that suffered from frequent physical punishment comparing with the alpha gene single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with susceptibility to control group (p=0,009), we did not observe this effect for elder patients. asthma in Romania. Genotype A1A2 conditions the effect of poor parental attention on regu- Methods: Three SNPs from TNF-alpha gene promoter (-308G/A, -238G/A lar alcohol consumption for the youngest test group (p=0,018) but not for and -857C/T) were examined for association and linkage disequilibrium “18-25” and “after 25” groups. Alcohol dependence is a result of specific in- in a sample of 106 Romanian asthmatic patients and 147 ethnically match terplay between the genetic and environmental factors that differ between healthy controls. The genotyping method was TaqMan Allelic Discrimi- adolescents and adulthood. nation with SNP Genotyping Assays C_7514879_10, C_2215707_10 and J09.02 C_11918223_10 (Applied Biosystems, USA). All the statistic tests were per- Screening of Alpha Galactosidase A gene mutations in patients with formed with the software package PLINK v 1.07. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy phenotype Results: Patients and controls groups were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibri- L. Emrahi Govar1, N. Karimian1, M. Ziadi1, T. Moharrami1, H. Saadatian1, J. um for all polymorphisms. The minor allele 857*T was overrepresented Gharesouran1, M. Toufan Tabrizi2, M. Mohaddes Ardebili1; in patients versus controls (23.1% vs 19%), but not statistically significant 1Department of Genetic,Faculty of Medicine , Tabriz University of Medical Science, (p=0.2). Three main haplotypes were constructed based on the studied Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cardiovascular Research Center of Madani Hospital, Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. SNPs, the most frequent being 857C/308G/238G, 58% in patients versus 64% in controls. We found that neither alleles or genotypes among all three SNPs nor reconstructed haplotypes were associated with susceptibility to asthma in our population. Fabry disease is an inherited storage disorder caused by a defect in the lyso- Conclusion: TNF-alpha gene promoter polymorphisms are not a risk factor somal enzyme alpha galactosidase A. GLA gene encoding alpha galactosidase for asthma in the Romanian studied population. A is located on the X-chromosome and more than 300 mutations have been reported in all 7 exons. This deficiency leads to accumulation of glycosphin- J09.05 golipids throughout the body including heart, kidney and nervous system. Study of clinical significance of genetic variant c.2808G>T in CFH gene Cardiac involvement leads to progressive concentric, asymmetrical or apical in Russian population left ventricular hypertrophy that is the most frequent cause of death in fa- E. V. Mymrikov1,2, N. N. Babenko1, M. M. Kaabak1, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya1; 1Russian Research Centre of Surgery named by Petrovski, Moscow, Russian Federation, bry disease in both genders. Fabry diseases may resemble sarcomere-gene 2Lomonosov Moscow State University, School of Biology, Department of Biochemistry, associated hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. On routine echocardiography and Moscow, Russian Federation. electrocardiogram (ECG), there are no characteristic patterns useful for dif- ferentiation between hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) caused bwy wsarwco.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 391 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Background. Atypical hemolytico-uremic syndrome (aHUS) is a rare in- SNP, common Restriction Gene dbSNP herited disease characterized by progressive renal failure requiring renal designation Enzyme transplantation, thrombocytopenia, and microangiopathic hemolytic ane- Multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1) C3435T rs1045642 MboI mia. Number of genes is linked with this syndrome, but the most common Beta-2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB2) Gly16Arg rs1042713 NcoI genes involved into aHUS pathogenesis are CFH, CFI, and MCP genes. Muta- Gln27Glu rs1042714 BseXI tion detection in responsible genes predisposes to higher risk of transplant Interleukin 4 (IL4) C-589T rs2243250 BsmFI dysfunction and should be taken into account in making decision related Interleukin 13 (IL13) Arg130Gln rs20541 AluI with transplantation. Methods: Sequencing of coding and contiguous intronic areas of CFH, CFI, Results. Distribution of genotypes was similar to other European popula- and MCP genes of patients with aHUS. Detection of SPNs of interest in 103 tions. We revealed numerous associations of genotypes 3435CC, 27GluGlu adult healthy individuals by allele-specific PCR. and alleles 16Gly, -589T, 130Gln with increased risk of BA progression and Results: We did perform screening of those three genes in two patients with with unfavorable therapy-resistant BA course. clinical manifestation of aHUS. We revealed the same genetic variant in both patients in 19th exon of CFH gene (rs1065489, NM_000186.3:c.2808G>T) Allelic variant Clinical finding Statistics leading to p.E936D substitution. None of genetic variants of apparent or 3435CC Increased risk of BA OR=3.92 (95%CI 1.74-8.79) unclear clinical significance were found in three major genes. One patient OR=5.22 was heterozygote, and another one was homozygote carrier of this missence 3435CC Increased risk of severe BA (95%CI 2.11-12.92) variant. This SNP was previously described in UniProt database as a poly- OR=6.12 3435CC Increased risk of therapy-resistant BA morphism associated with aHUS and basal laminar drusen. To elucidate the (95%CI 2.42-15.48) OR=17.31 clinical significance of this genetic variant we screened 103 healthy adult 16Gly Increased risk of respiratory failure (95%CI 2.01-149.28) Russian individuals without any signs of renal pathology (206 chromoso- OR=3.35 mes). We detected 31 heterozygous (G/T) and 3 homozygous (T/T) carriers. 27GluGlu Increased risk of therapy-resistant BA (95%CI 1.16-9.66) The frequency of minor allele (c.2808T) was 18%. We suspect that means -589T High rate of BA complication p=0.002 that clinical significance of missence variant c.2808G>T in aHUS developing High dose of intravenous -589T p=0.033 is low, at least in Russian population. glucocorticosteroids J09.06 130Gln Increased risk of moderate BA OR=2.76 (95%CI 1.35-5.63) Association analysis schizophrenia, Alzheimer‘s disease and OR=2.09 alcoholism susceptibility gene polymorphisms relationship to 130Gln Increased risk of therapy-resistant BA (95%CI 1.01-4.30) psychodiagnostic traits in the West Siberian population A. V. Marusin1, A. N. Kornetov2, M. G. Svarovskaya1, K. V. Simonova1, E. S. Pavlenyk2, V. A. Conclusion. Analysis of MDR1, ADRB2, IL4 and IL13 polymorphisms is use- Stepanov1; ful for both preventive care (revealing subjects with increased predispositi- 1Institute for Medical Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical on to BA) and BA treatment (pharmacotherapy optimization due to predic- Sciences, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2Siberian State Medical University, Tomsk, Russian Federation. tion of BA severity at the beginning of disease). J09.08 Calreticulin mutations in major psychiatric disorders M. Ohadi, A. Mirabzadeh, S. Farashi; Natural selection plays an important role in maintaining genetic variati- Genetics Research Center, University of Social Welfare and Rehabilitation Sciences, on for mental constitution. Currently, the behavior genetic variability re- Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. mains poorly understood. The purpose of this study: association analysis of Alzheimer‘s diseaGsAeB, 2sc, hCiLzUo,p PhIrCeAnLiMa a, DndIS aCl1c,o rhso1l3is2m19 s3u5s4c,e ZpNtiFb8il0it4yA g, GenAeBsR pAo2-, SlyLmC6oArp4h, iAsmDC wYi3t,h MmIeRn9t-a2l,, pCsByXc7hodiagnostic traits, intelligence and anxiety. Development- and tissue-specific expression of the calreticulin (CALR) gene The effect of the in the gray matter in late adolescence and early adulthood coincides with loci polymorphisms on psychodiagnostic the expression of psychosis. To identify novel mutations in the regulatory traits was invesptiegrastoedn ailnit ys tiundveennttso royf Siber.iGaAnB SRtAa2te MeGdAicBa2l University regions of the CALR gene in major psychiatric disorders.We report novel (Tomsk). All individuals (n=141) completed IQ, Cattell’s, Spilbeprgeerrs oannxaileittyy low frequency mutations in the CALR promoter and intronic sequence that isncavleen, tLoeroynhSaLrCd6 A4 tests and gene poGlAy-- co-occur with the spectrum of major psychiatric disorders including schizo- BmRoAr2phisms were associaPteICdA wLMith „hisCtLriUonic“ on the Leonhard phrenia, schizoaffective disorder and bipolar disorder type I, which did not CBX7 . locus revealed the relationship with the scale “B”, exist in the control pool (pA increases gene expression in human and mouse wiZthN Fth8e0 4scAale “E”, and with “Q4” and “Q3” scales and the neuroblastoma cell lines. This mutation is the first instance of a functional gene polymorphism was associated with the “A” scale by Cattell’s test. cognition-deficit mutation reversing a human gene promoter to the primi- For the pers oloncaulsit ywe identified associations with the „emotiveness“ tive type. We found that VPA increases gene expression in the cells with the (hiPgIhC,A eLxMcessive emotionality), „histrionicD“I aSnCd1 „disequilibrium“ accordingly wild-type -220C construct, whereas a dramatic decrease in gene expression to Leonhard questionnaire. For the same test the relationship was observed in the cell lines with the mutant construct (p<0.000004). A of with the „disequilibrium” and polymorphisms with the „ex- novel 1-bp insertion was also detected in intron 1 at IVSI-310, in a case of citaMbiIlRit9y-”2 was revealed. amphetamine-induced psychosis. As for the psychosis-linked CALR promo- The greatest number of statistically sigpneirfsicoannat laitsys oincivaetniotnosr ywere observed ter mutations identified to-date, the IVSI mutation was not detected in the for polymorphism with the “C”, “F”, “H”, “F2” Cttell’s scales, “hyper- control pool. This mutation creates a RREB-1 transcription factor binding thymia” and “dysthymia” on Leonhard , personal and site within the first intron.We propose that major psychiatric disorders are, situational anxiety on Spielberger test. Possibly the identified associations at least in part, a collection of low frequency mutations with possibly large suggest substantial contribution of genetic variability in individual mental effect, each contributing a small fraction of the disorders. Re-sequencing of constitution. the candidate gene regulatory regions will further clarify this model. This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for Basic Research J09.09 (project no. 11-04-98069-r_sibir’_a). Study of gene Caveolin3 in Latvian population. J09.07 J. Stavusis, B. Lāce, I. Inashkina, E. Jankevics, I. Radovica; Association of MDR1, ADRB2, IL4 and IL13 polymorphisms with LR Biomedical Study and Research centre, Riga, Latvia. therapy-resistant bronchial asthma in Russian patients A. S. Ulitina1,2, Z. A. Mironova1, V. I. Trofimov1, M. V. Dubina1, E. D. Yanchina1; 1I.P.Pavlov State Medical University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Almazov A research was carried out in order to find out more about neuromuscular Federal Heart, Blood and Endocrinology Centre, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. diseases in Latvia. As a part of this project a certain gene - CAV3 was re- searched in Latvian control population of one hundred seemingly healthy people. The particular gene was never before researched in any of Baltic Background. Bronchial asthma (BA) is a wide-spread polygenic disease. states. Methods of genomic sequencing were being used. Since gene is con- Aim. To assess severity of BA and effectiveness of BA pharmacotherapy (glu- servative, changes in the nucleotide sequence are quite rare, but can cau- cocorticosteroids, beta-2-adrenergic agonists) in patients with different ge- se severe muscular diseases, like Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy - LGMD netic background. 1C, isolated HyperCKemia - H-CK, rippling muscle disease - RMD and Distal Methods. Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral leukocytes. We investi- myopathy - DM. gated 5 SNPs by PCR-RFLP in 122 BA patients and in 103 healthy controls. www.eshg.org www.eshTghe. orersgults found were quite interesting. Six polymorphisms (rs1974763, 392 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 rs1008642, rs11922879, rs57159780, rs13087941, rs139985460) and one morphisms in the DRD2 gene were not associated with Turkish chilhood deletion (rs116840772) already existing in databases were found. Frequen- obesity susceptibility. Further researches are needed to confirm the exact cies of some of them differed from ones found in databases. The deletion had role of DRD2 gene polymorphism on chilhood obesity. a sequence mismatch in comparison with one found in database, being shor- J09.12 ter by two nucleotides. In addition to that five new polymorphisms were Possible additional effect of rare SNP rs35995925 of the FAS gene on found. Two in the 5’ untranslated region (1-44G>A, 1-36G>A) without any predisposition to preeclampsia oinb sviiloicuos ly possible impact on health. However three of them (220C>A, R74S, Z. Lasabova1, V. Janusicova1, I. Svecova2, A. Stanclova3, P. Zubor2, M. Telkova1, K. 220C>T, R74C, 257T>C, L86P) were found in protein coding region and after Biskupska-Bodova2, G. Szabo4, J. Rigo4, B. Nagy4, J. Danko2; testing by PolyPhen2 were acknowledged as possibly damaging. 1Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Molecular Biology, Martin, Slovakia, 2Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Dept. of Obstetrics and Further work is needed to verify these results. This research is quite Gynecology, Martin, Slovakia, 3Comenius University, Jessenius Faculty of Medicine, Dept. meaningful for our society, since the data acquired have become a basis and of Pathological Anatomy, Martin, Slovakia, 4Semmelweis University, Dept. of Obstetrics are being used to help treat people with neuromuscular diseases. and Gynecology, Budapest, Hungary. J09.10 FAS The polymorphism of hemostasis system genes in newborns with neurologic abnormalities from Russia. The polymorphism of the gene rs1800682 (-670 A>G) is a common O. E. Gromyko1, E. N. Arsenieva1, N. V. Zhurkova1, O. B. Kondakova1, A. N. Evdokimova1, G. SNP with a MAF of 0.4777. The G allele was shown to be associated with V. Yatsyk1, I. A. Belyaeva1, V. G. Pinelis1, A. Y. Asanov1,2; preeclampsia. Within the 100 bp region surrounding rs1800682, there are 1Scientific center of Children’s Health, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, Moscow, three rare SNPs - rs150130637, rs2234768 and rs34995925, which is 8 bp Russian Federation. upstream. The aim of the study is the analysis of possible additional effect of rare variants pooled with common variant on genetic predisposition to preeclampsia. The study cohort was made up of 112 patients with pree- Neurologic abnormalities in newborns with cerebral ischemia (CI) inclu- clampsia and 90 from women withF ApShysiological pregnancy. For genotype ding intraventricular hemorrhages and thrombosis have become a focus of analyses, the HRMA and dideoxysequencing were performed on DNA ex- attention, as it is associated with neurodevelopmental disabilities and mor- tracted from peripheral blood. For expression, RNA was extracted from tality. There are limited data on the predisposing risk factors of the neurolo- 19 placental tissues and the deltadeltaC method was applied. The presence gic abnormalities in newborns regarding an influence of the polymorphism of G allele was observed in 88 patients (78.6%) compared to the 63 (70%) of hemostas4i5s 5sGys/tAem gFeBnGesG o2n0 2it1s 0dAevelFoIpImGe1n6t9. 1A FV T1565C GPIIIa individuals from control group. The OR for subjects carrying genotypes GG 4InG /p5rGesenPt AwI-o1r k theC 6a7ll7eTle anMdT gHeFnRotype frequencies of polymorphisms of and GA was 1.5417 (95%CI 0.830-2.974). The preliminary sequencing data six genes (- of , of , of , of , of 37 preeclamptic and 45 control samples confirmed the HRMA results for of and in ) were studied in newborns with CI. rs1800682. Additionally, two preeclamptic patients with rs1800682 AA al- The total of 50 patients with CI including 28 newborns with thrombosis leles were heterozygous for rs34995925 and none in the control group. The and hemorrhages (group I) and 22 newborns having no hemorrhages and relative gene expression in placental samples showed none association with thrombosis (group II) and 50 healthy controls were followed. DNA was ex- the genotypes. We have detected rare alleles in preeclamptic women close tracted from peripheral blood samples and hybridization with biochips was to the performed for the detFeVct iLoeni doefn each polymorphism. Significant differences in t he aMllTeHleF fRre6q7u7eCn cies between the group I and con- STAT1 binding site with possible additional effect on predisposition to pree- trols were found for mutation (0.540 versus 0.00, respectively; clampsia. Following this we plane to perform allele-specific transcript ana- p=0.019). The frequencyof allele was higher in the group I lyses to study the effect of these rSNPs in placental tissue. compared to the group II (0.286 versus 0.125, respectively; p=0.045), but not significantly higher compared to the controls (p= 0.123). The distributi- J09.13 ons of genotypes and alleles for other1 g6e9n1eA polFyVmorph6is7m7Ts weMreT nHoFtR s igni- Angiotensin-converting enzyme gene I/D polymorphism and fica ntly different between studied groups and controls. fibromyalgia in a Turkish population Thus our data obtained suggest that of and of alle- N. Karakus1, A. İnanır2, S. Yigit3, S. İnanır4, S. Okan5, A. Rustemoglu6; lesmay contribute to the higher risk of intraventricular hemorrhages and 1Ondokuz Mayis University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, thrombosis development in newborns with CI. Samsun, Turkey, 2Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Physical J09.11 Medicine and Rehabilitation, Tokat, Turkey, 3Gaziosmanpasa University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology, Tokat, Turkey, 4Gaziosmanpasa University, Influence of Dopamine D2 receptor (DRD2) gene polymorphisms on Faculty of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry, Tokat, Turkey, 5Gaziosmanpasa childhood obesity. University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, N. Col-Araz1, M. Nacak2, S. Oguzkan Balci3, N. Benlier2, S. Pehlivan3, A. Balat4, M. Araz5; Tokat, Turkey, 6Gaziosmanpasa University, Medical Faculty, Department of Medical 1University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Gaziantep, Biology, Tokat, Turkey. Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 5University of Gaziantep, School Fibromyalgia (FM) is a multifactorial disease, characterized by a clinical hi- of Medicine, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Gaziantep, Turkey. story of generalized muscle pain for more than three months and by specific tender points. The aim of the present study was to examine the possible role of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) insertion/deletion (I/D) gene po- Objectives: Feeding is associated with dopamine release in the dors (al stria- lymorphism as a risk factor in the development of FM. This study comprised tum and the degree of pleasure from eating correlates with the amount of 150 FM patients, 137 females and 13 males, and 199 healthy controls, 127 dopamine release. The number of striatal Dopamine D2 receptor DRD2) females and 72 males. Peripheral blood samples were genotyped using po- receptors has also been related to obesity and increased body mass index lymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis. (BMI). The purpose of the present study was to examine the association bet- The frequency of D allele was 60.6% in patients and 55.5% in controls ween common polymorphisms of the DRD2 gene and chilhood obesity. (x2=1.65, p=0.19). The distribution of ACE DD, ID, and II genotypes in FM Methods: Eighty six obese and 100 healthy children were included in the patients were 40; 41.3 and 18.7%, respectively; the corresponding numbers study. Two polymorphisms (Taq1A and Taq1B) in DRD2 gene were geno- for the control group were 29.1; 52.8 and 18.1%, respectively. The distribu- typed by PCR-RFLP method. tion of the ACE gene genotypes frequencies weren’t statistically significant Results: For DRD2 Taq1A polymorphism, the distribution of A1/A1, A1/A2, between patient and controls groups (x2=5.33, p=0.07). But the percentage and A2/A2 genotypes was 3.5%, 29.1% and 67.4% in obese children com- of DD genotype is relatively higher in patient group than control group. pared with 4%, 31% and 65% in controls. The allele frequency of A1 and A2 Many studies showed that the ID and DD polymorphism is strongly asso- was 0.180, 0.820 in cases compared with 0.195, 0.805 in controls (p=0.4). ciated with the increased plasma or serum ACE levels. Thus the ID and DD The distribution of B1/B1, B1/B2 and B2/B2 genotypes for Taq1B polymor- polymorphism favors high ACE expression and activity, hence may predis- phism was 3.5%, 22.1% and 74.4% for cases and 3%, 27% and 70% for the pose individuals to FM and its complications. In this study we have demon- controls. The allele frequency of B1 and B2 was 0.145, 0.855 in cases com- strated that genotype and allele frequencies of ACE gene I/D polymorphism pared with 0.164, 0.836 in controls (p=0.2). Genotype distribution did not were not statistically association with FM. Further studies with a larger differ significantly from those predicted by the Hardy-Weinberg Equilibrium number of patients are needed. distribution ( p>0.05 ). Conclusion: According to our preliminary results, Taq1A and Taqw1Bw pwoly.-eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 393 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J09.14 Association of the TPO gene in petrochemical women workers with rs12979860 autoimmune thyroid diseases ned virological response (SVR) following peginterferon alfa-2a and ribavirin O. Kochetova, T. Viktorova; (PEG-IFNalfa-2a+RBV) therapy and the wildr Ts1T2 g9e7n9o8t6y0pe at is a Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Russian Federation. negative predictor of response to PEG-IFNalfa-2a+RBV therapy. A similarly unexpected observation is that a T allele at is more common in HCV infected patients. Autoimmune thyroid diseases (AITD) are common, with important epide- We analyzed total of 475 Roma, 453 healthy control and 853 HCV patients miological data, supporting a strong genetic background on the etiology of bCCy Taqman SNP Genotyping Assay. Total of 393 HCV patients have been AITD. It is known that the formation of the AIT affect toxic substances. The treated with PEG-IFNalfa-2a+RBV for at least 24 weeks. The rs12980275 aim of this study was to assess the relationship between two polymorphisms genotypein HCV patients occurred with lower frequency than in healthy of Thyroid Peroxidase gene (TPO) serum level of Anti-TPO titer and serum controls (24.6% vs. 49.2%; OR=2.56; p=0.0252). Treated patients with the level of hormones TTG and T4 in petrochemical women workers. A sample of CC genotype achieved SVR in higher rate, than those who have TT alleles 159 participants from the “Gazprom neftekhim Salavat” was selected as the (56.9% vs. 36.6 %; OR=2.57; p=0.0482). The Roma and Caucasian populati- case (N=61) and control healthy women (N=98). Inclusion criteria for cases on show similar genotype distribution. were Anti-TPO 30U/L with a history of hypothyroidism. Anti-TPO level in As the IL28B polymorphisms are one of the essential contributing factors subjects was measured by the ELISA kit. Genomic DNA was extracted using for high SVR in chronic HCV patients, genetic data may be used to select the Salting-out/Proteinase K method. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms optimal treatment regimes in IFN-based therapy. (SNPs) (rs4927611 and rs732609) were tested in TPO. These two markers J09.17 were chosen considering that the polymorphism changes the encoded ami- The search for new candidate genes associated with hypertension no-acid and a minor allele frequency, MAF, ≥0.3. SNP typing was carried out advancement in children of Northwest Russia by means of PCR-RFLP and ARMS-PCR methods. Deviations from the HWE M. Kanaeva1, A. Glotov1,2; were not observed. D‘=0.36, r2=0.11. Association of frequent variant AA po- 1Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2The D.O.Ott lymorphic locus rs732609 C>A TPO gene with AITD occurred only at over- Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. weight women p interact=0.044). Variant CC was associated with increased levels of anti-TPO (TT 173±288.4 pmol/L; vs. CC 374.6±407.4 pmol/L; P = 0.029) and increased levels of T4 (TT 14.19±2.77 vs. CC 15.79±5.23 pmol/L; The risk of hypertension in children is associated with renin-angiotensin ge- P =0.027). The selected polymorphism of exon 7 has no effect on increased netic system as was earlier demonstrated in our studies. In the present stu- levels of Anti-TPO and hormones. dy 7 other polymorphic genetic markers were analyzed in group of children with hypertension (100 samples) and in the control group of children (100 J09.15 samples). The frequencies of genotypes and alleles have been recorded for Association of a single nucleotide polymorphism in the adiponectin 3 genes involved in arachidonic acid turnover - biologically active substance gene (ADIPOQ) with gestational diabetes mellitus in Bulgarian population possessing both vasodilatatioCnY P&4 vAa1s1o c(onstriction properCtiYePs2 aJn2d thus most O. Beltcheva1, M. Boyadzhieva2, I. Atanasova2, O. Angelova1, R. Kaneva1, V. Mitev1; probably ipnrvoosltvaegdla innd hiny-pI esrytnetnhsaisoen progression. The following SNPs of re- 1Molecular Medicine Center, Dept. of Medical Chemistry and Biochemistry, Medical levant genes were studied: rs1126742 T>C), (rs890293 University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2University Hospital of Endocrinology , USBALE “Acad. G>T) and (rs6090996 G>A). Comparative analysis Iv. Pentchev“, Medical University-Sofia, Sofia, Bulgaria. did not revealed any significant differences between genotypes or alleles frMeTquHeFnRc)ies of these genes iCnD tKhNe 2stBuAdSi)ed groups (X-squaredC<D1H.6143, p>0.43). Four other SNPs (rs11191548 T>C (intergenic variant), rs17367504 A>G Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is characterized with impaired glucose ( , rs4977574 A>G ( , rs11646213 A>T ( )), identi- tolerance with onset during pregnancy. It is a multifactorial disease, which fied by GWAS in adult hypertension patients could not be confirmed in the affects between 3% and 10% of all pregnant women (data from different present study (X-squared<2.44, p>0.29). Different metabolic pathway in in- surveys). GDM is associated with adverse health outcomes for both mother fant and adult hypertension syndrome could be suspected. and baby - newborns larger than normal for their gestational age, pre- J09.18 eclampsia, higher risk of developing diabetes following the pregnancy, etc. Prevalence and spectrum of MYBPC3 gene mutations in patients with There is accumulating evidence that adiponectin plays a role in the patho- hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from north-west of Iran physiology of diabetes. In patients with type 2 and gestational diabetes lo- M. Mohaddes Ardebili1, L. Emrahi Govar1, M. Toufan Tabrizi2, J. Gharesouran1; wer levels of the protein have been observed. Several common single nu- 1Department of Genetic,Faculty of Medicine ,Tabriz University of Medical Science, Tabriz, cleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in the adiponectin gene (ADIPOQ) have been Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Cardiovascular Research Center of Madani Hospital,Tabriz associated with predisposition to type 2 diabetes. One of those, rs266729 in University of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. the promoter of ADIPOQ, has been proposed to affect its transcription. The aim of the present study was to check if this variant was associated with GDM in Bulgarian population. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the most common genetic cardiova- The study involved 260 pregnant women, 130 with GDM and 130 controls, scular disease with a prevalence of 1 in 500 normal populations. The disease recruited from local antenatal clinics in Sofia, Bulgaria. Genotyping was car- is the major cause of sudden cardiac death in the young and morbidity in the ried out using TaqMan assay and statistical analysis with Plink. The geno- elderly individuals. HCM is inherited as an autosomal dominant single gene typing success rate was over 98% and there was no deviation from Hardy- disease, characterized by unexplained ventricular myocardial hypertrophy. Weinberg. cMYBC is a sarcomeric thick filament protein that interacts with titin, myo- The rare allele (G) was found in 22% of the affected and 30% of the non sin and actin to regulate sarcomeric assembly. Mutations in MYBPC3 gene affected women and the difference was statistically significant (p= 0.027, are one of the most frequent genetic causes of the HCM disease. The aim of OR= 0.64). the present study was to investigate the frequency and kind of MYBPC3 gene To the best of our knowledge this is the first study identifying an associati- muations in the population of north-west of Iran. DNA was extracted from on of the rs266729 polymorphism in the adiponectin gene with gestational 60 HCM patients by salting out method. All exons and exon-intron flanking diabetes. regions of MYBPC3 gene were evaluated by PCR-SSCP assay. It is, however, apparent that further expression and genetic association work is necessary J09.16 to try and clarify the mixed findings that have been reported until now. Differences in IL28B promoter region rs12979860 variants in healthy Hungarian Caucasian and healthy Hungarian Roma patients versus J09.19 with Hepatitis C Virus infected ones. IL1B and IL8 polymorphisms involvement in recurrent corneal P. Kisfali1, B. Duga1, G. Par2, B. I. Melegh1, A. Pár2, B. Melegh1; erosion in patients with hereditary stromal corneal dystrophies 1Department of Medical Genetics and Child Development, Pécs, Hungary, 21st A. Kucherenko1,2, V. Pampukha2, G. Drozhzhina3, R. Gulkovskyi1,2, L. A. Livshits2; Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pecs, Pecs, Hungary, Pécs, Hungary. 1Taras Shevchenko Kiev National University, Educational and Scientific Centre „Institute of Biology“, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, 3SI “The Filatov Institute of Eye Diseases hepatitis and Tissue Therapy, AMS of Ukraine”, Odesa, Ukraine. It is estimated that about 3% of the world‘s population is living with chronic HCV (hepatitis C virus). HCV infection may cause acute , which is self-resolving inh e2p0a ttoit 5is0% of cases but does not confer permanen t immu- Deposits accumulation in patients with hereditary stromal corneal dystro- nity. In 50 to 80% 1o9f qc1as3es, HCV infection becomes chronic and might re- phies (HSCD) leads to impaired attachment of epitheliocytes to basement sult in chronic , cirrhosis, and hepatocellular carcinoma.Recently membrane - corneal erosion. Proinflammatory microenvironment in the rs12979860 in the region has been shown to have impact on sustai- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org394 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 IL1B IL8 region of wound is crucial for its healing, induILc1in g cell migra tion,I Ln8e utro- nian patients with knee OA. The D repeat polymorphism was genotyped in phils attraction etc. Two main inflammatory cytokines genes and 100 knee OA patients and 100 control subjects, and the allelic association are upregulated in injured corneal epithelium. gene -511 /and gene of the D repeat was examined. Our data suggest that the D15 allele could -781C/T variants influence these genes expression in epithelium. be considered a risk allele significant only for females (p=0.045) of Iranian To establish possible involvement of -511 /T and -781C/T polymorphisms population. This association is partially similar to Greeks, that D15 allele in corneal erToGsFioBnI development we investigated them in 2 groups. Case was considered a risk allele. group - lattice HSCD typeI (n=46) and IIIA (n=23) patients with confirmed J09.22 presence of Arg124Cys or Hys626Arg mutations respectively. This Interleukin-1 β Gene Polymorphisms in Iranian Patients With Uterine group consisted of individuals with history recurrenTt GeFroBsIion (n=56) and Fibroid, A Case- Control Study without it (n=13). Control group - healthy individuals (n=105) from Ukrai- f. taghizade mortezai, s. Miraj, M. Hashemzade Chaleshtori, E. Farrokhi, S. Khairi; ne. Genotyping for both studiIeLd1 Bp olymorphisms and mutations was Cellular and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord Univ. of Med. Sci. Shahrekord Iran, performed by PCR followed by RFLP analysis. shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. No significant differences in -511 /T genotype or allelic frequencies Backgroundand abjective between patients with erosion and without it were found. Whereas a trend to decrease of I-L5811TT genotype frequency in group with erosion (3,7%) : Uterine leiomyoma or fibroid is currently the comparing to control (6,7%) was observed. most common estrogen- dependent reproductive system tumor. Almost a Frequency of -781TT genotype was significantly (P<0,05) lower in quarter of women of reproductive age are affected with this benign tumor. group with erosion (10,7%) comparing to patIieLn8t s without erosion (30,8%) These tumors are the most common reason of hysterectomy and women and control (25%). IL8 surgery and seriously affect women health. The aim of this study is investi- Our results revealed possible involvement of -781C/T polymorphism in gMaetitohno odf oILf -1inβv-e5s1t1igaantdi oILn-1β 3954 Polymorphisms association with uterine corneal erosion development. -781TT genotype is associated with nega- leiomyoma between in Iranian women of Charmahal & bakhtiari province. tive prognosis for recurrent erosion in patients with HSCD. : In this study , 276 patients with uterine leio- J09.20 myoma and 157 healthy women as control are studied. The genetic poly- Genetic Polymorphism TNF-α 308G>A and Ischemic Stroke in morphisms for IL-1β-511and IL-1β 3954 were analyzed by polymerase Northern Romania cFhinadini nrgeaction restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). and F. M. Petrisor; the results analyzed with SPSS software and χ² test Department of Medical Genetics U.M.F “Iuliu Hatieganu”, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, Cluj- : genotypes and allelic frequencies compared are two groups. A si- Napoca, Romania. gnificant difference in the allele frequencies of the IL-1 β -511 C>T polymor- pChoinscmlu isni oleniomyoma groups and normal controls was found (P < 0.05). No difference was found in the IL-1 β -3954 polymorphism in studied cases. Background. TNF-alpha is a proinflamatory cytokine. Evidence in support : Our findings indicated that there is a significant association for a role for TNF-alpha in this respect is emerging as evidence on de novo between IL-1 β -511C>T promoter Polymorphism and risk increase of ute- upregulation of TNF-alpha following ischemia is now well established. rKienyew leoirodmyoma on the women of our study and this polymorphism might Objectives. The aim of the present study is to evaluate the connection bet- participate in developed this disease. ween TNF-alpha polymorphism and ischemic stroke in a group population : leiomyoma, polymorphism, IL-1β from Northern Romania and to determine whether it has an influence on the J09.23 risk of cerebral events . Association between MDR1 gene polymorphisms and its expression in This is a cross-sectional, randomized, case-control study for the evaluation Iranian CRC patients. of the frequency of TNF-α 308G>A polymorphism alleles among patients S. Samanian1, F. Mahjoubi1, B. Mahjoubi2, R. Mirzaee3; with ischemic stroke. 1Department of Clinical Genetic, National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Material and methods. The study included 100 cases of patients diagnosed Biotechnology (NIGEB), Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2DHAZRAT RASOOL Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3HAZRAT RASOOL with ischemic stroke (neurological and CT scan examination), and 86 Hospital, Iran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. healthy unrelated controls. TNF-α 308G>A genotyping was carried out using PCR amplification of re- levant gene fragment was followed by restriction enzyme digestion. Detec- Increase expression of multidrug resistance gene (MDR1) gene is one of the tion of TNFα 308G>A alleles was determined through analysis of resulting mechanisms responsible for drug resistant to chemotherapy. restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) followed by gel electro- There are different mechanisms such as polymorphism that result in MDR1 phoresis. over expression. Results. Molecular analysis did not reveal an increased frequency of GA mu- It has been reported that the C1236T and C3435 polymorphisms of the tant genotype in the study group compared to the control group (p = 0.744, MDR1 gene have substantial impact on expression or activity of P-glycopro- OR = 1.174, CI = 0.6183 - 2.229). The AA genotype was not present in any tein (Pgp). subjects, probably because of the smaller number of AA carriers present in In this study, we investigated the possible association between MDR1 gene the population, since the A allele is very rare. C3435 and C1236T polymorphisms and its expression in Iranian CRC pati- Conclusions. We found no significant difference in distribution of the TNF-α ents. 308G>A polymorphism between the ischemic stroke and control groups. ARMS and RFLP PCR were used for the detection of this single nucleotide J09.21 polymorphism in 60 CRC patients and 60 healthy individuals. Investigation of the Asporin gene polymorphism as a risk factor for We concluded that there was no significant association between MDR1 ex- knee osteoarthritis in Iran pression and polymorphism in patients; the results of the present study de- R. Jazayeri1, S. Qoreishi2, M. Babanejad1, H. Seyyed Hoseinzadeh2, H. Najmabadi1, S. Jazayeri2; monstrate that these polymorphisms may not play a role in inducing drug 1. Genetics Research Center, University of Soscial Welfare and Rehabilitation Science, resistance by altering the expression level of MDR1 gene. Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Medical School, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical J09.24 Sciences & Health Services, Orthopedic Surgery Center of Excellence, Health Services & Current experiences with newborn screening & case finding in Iran Medical Education of Akhtar Hospital,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. S. Farshidi, S. Gafari, B. Farokhi; Hope gene center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative disease of the joints characterized by degradation of the hyaline articular cartilage and remodeling of the sub- This review presents the current experiences with newborn screening & chondral bone with sclerosis. Asporin (ASPN) gene encodes a cartilage ex- case finding in Iran. Iranian population is about 70 million, with high birth tracellular protein that is member of the small leucine-rich proteoglycan fa- rate and an estimated 1 million per year. The population is characterized mily. Polymorphisms in the aspartic acid repeat region in the second exon of by a high consanguinity (25-70%) . Inherited metabolic disorders common this gene, that is consist of GAT repeats, are associated with a susceptibility among the population. Although research spending is rather soft in the re- to osteoarthritis. The D14 allele (an allele containing 14 D repeats) is asso- gion, there are numerous pilot studies that highlighted the high incidence of ciated with increased OA susceptibility in Japanese and Han Chinese, but is genetic defects and the need for newborn screening programmers. not an important factor in OA etiology among Caucasians, although the D15 1 : we searched for IEM in ill infant & children admitted in clinics or hospi- allele is considered a risk allele for Greek population. To apprise the possible tals (2007-2010). association, that seems controversially, we explored the ASPN effect in Ira- Mass screening using tandem mass spectrometry(MS/MS) and selected te- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 395 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J09.27 Replication of the results of genome-wide association study for sting was initiated to determine IEM. Parkinson‘s disease in patients and controls from Bashkortostan From April 2007 to March 2010, 13,500 infants and children were screened Republic of Russia for organic, amino and fatty acid metabolism disorders and aminoacidopa- G. Akhmadeeva1, I. Khidiyatova1, I. Gilyazova1, A. Safiullina2, D. Baizigitov2, E. thies. In these group we had 2% positive result (264). Out of 264 patients , Khusnutdinova1; the spectrum included OA (98), aminoacidopathies (78) ,UCD (54), neuro- 1Institute of biochemistry and genetics Ufa Scientic Centre RAS, Ufa, Russian Federation, transmitter conditions (12) and lysosomal disorders main lbyy MPS (14) , with 2Bashkir State University, Ufa, Russian Federation. a sensitivity of 97.67%, a specificity of 99.28% . 2: we searched for IEM in 5000 newborns (2009-2010), Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) for >20 markers of disease in a sing le assay. Limited The purpose of the investigation was to replicate the results of genome- information is available for setting the marker cutoffs andfor the resulting wide analysis (GWAS) of Parkinson‘s disease (PD) on DNA samples of pa- positive predictive values. tients and controls - residents of Bashkortostan Republic. The analysis of We identified 22 babies with aminoacidophaties (5), OA (10) and FAO(7). alpha-synuclein (SNCA) gene polymorphisms at three loci (rs356219, J09.25 rs356165, rs2737020) in 382 PD patients (143 - Russians, 157 - Tatars, 72 The Future of Migraine Genetics - Bashkirs, 10 - other ethnic origin) and 530 healthy individuals, matched L. A. Rudkjoebing1,2, A. Esserlind1, J. Olesen1; for sex and age (133 - Russians, 307 - Tatars, 88 - Bashkirs, 2 - other ethnic 1Danish Headache Center, Department of Neurology, Glostrup, Denmark, 2Department of origin) was performed. The association with PD development was found Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. for loci rs356219 and rs356165. A comparison of total cohorts of patients Background and controls revealed genotypes and alleles associated with the disease in each locus: the genetic marker of the increased risk for PD development at rs356219 was allele *G (OR=2,02), the frequency of which was 0,45 and 0,39 Migraine is a commonly occurring, neurological disorder with a substantial in patients and controls, respectively; the protective markers for PD deve- genetic component. With the exception of the rare monogenic forms of mi- lopment were genotype * A * A (OR = 0,71) and allele * A (OR = 0,73); at graine, current technology has not proved efficient in revealing the under- rs356165 - allele * G (OR = 1,36) and genotype * G * G (OR = 1,51) increased lying genetics of migraine. Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and allele * A (OR = 0,73) decreased risk of PD development. The compari- have identified four single nucleotide polymorphisms significantly related son of ethnically devided PD patients samples and controls demonstrated to migraine. However, these polymorphisms explain only a small part of the similar statistically significant associations (p <0,05) only in Bashkirs, while heritability. The missing heritability might be hidden in rare variants, calling Russians and Tatars showed only a trend of such associations. for a more detailed sequencing to be applied and developed. Sequencing the J09.28 entire genome by exome sequencing and whole genome sequencing (WGS) Analysis of LRRK2 and parkin gene mutations in Slovak Parkinson are techniques undergoing an enormous development and might help to re- disease patients vMeeatlh tohdes genetic mystery of migraine. We aim to explore future possibilities C. Bognár1, M. Baldovic1, A. Zatkova2, L. Kadasi1,2; for migraine genetics given by the new developing technologies. 1Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Institute of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia. Since the technology evolves much faster than the literature, the study is predominantly based on interviews with genetics experts. Also, we evalu- aCtoendc lsutsuiodnies regarding migraine genetic and next generation sequencing, The Parkinson‘s disease (PD) is the second most common progressive neu- which were identified using PubMed search. rodegenerative brain disorder caused by loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons, which affect the control of body movements, with inclusion forma- The future research in migraine genetics will be dominated by the next ge- tion (Lewy bodies) in surviving neurons. It affects 1-2% of the global popu- neration sequencing. However, at the present time, prices and analyzing lation above 65 years and its prevalence increases to approximately 4% in tools limit its use, and in cases with sporadic migraine, GWAS appear to be those above 85 years. Parkinson’s disease is a complex neurodegenerative the best choice. Conversely, in cases with familial migraine, exome or whole movement disorder characterized by bradykinesia, resting tremor, rigidity genome sequencing will be the preeminent choice. In order to gain insight in and postural instability. the heritability of migraine, studies in the upcoming years will require large To detect the most common mutations in selected exons of LRRK2 and par- sample sizes and cooperation between migraine genetic consortia. kin genes responsible for late and early onset form of disease, respectively, J09.26 we applied a gene scanning approach using dHPLC method. In this study, we May quantity of low functionality alleles of folic acid metabolism evaluated the prevalence of LRRK2 mutations in exons 31, 35, 41, 48 and of genes be important? parkin (PARK2) mutation in exons 2, 6 and 7 in a cohort of 216 consecutive, H. Makukh, L. Chorna, H. Akopyan, D. Zastavna, O. Hnateyko; State institution “Institute of Hereditary Pathology of Academy of Medical Science of unrelated Slovakian patients with familial or sporadic PD, including early Ukraine”, Lviv, Ukraine. and late onset patients. We have found one exonic, eight intronic polymorphisms and a heterozy- gous point mutation p.Arg275Trp (c.823C>T, rs34424986) in exon 7 of par- MTHFR, MTRR and MTR genes SNPs polymorphisms have been associated kin gene in one patient with age at onset 62 years. In the exons 31 and 41 with many disorders, however, findings have been inconsistent. of gene the LRKK2, and in exon 6 of the gene parkin we did not observe any DNA of 274 studied cases (55 female with neural tube defect fetuses (MNTD), variant chromatographic profile after DHPLC analyses. 35 mother children with Down syndrome (MDS), 35 mother children with J09.29 cleft lip and/or palate (MCL/P), 84 women with RSA (recurrent sponta- Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha, Interleukin-2 and Interleukin-2 neous abortion), 35 CL/P patients, 35 chorion villi from miscarriages (CV)) Receptor Beta Gene Polymorphisms in Patients with Psoriasis and and 225 control subjects was isolated using the salting out method and the Psoriatic Arthritis analysis of SNPs polymorphisms was performed by PCR-RFLP assay. A. Gulel1, H. S. Inaloz1, S. Pehlivan2, T. Sever2; The differences of the MTHFR 677C→T and 1298A→C, MTR 2756A→G and 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology MTRR 66A→G allele and genotype frequencies between studied and control and Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey. groups were not significant besides higher incidence of MTRR 66G allele in MDS group (p=0.009; OR=2.10; CI:1.20 - 3.70). As all the studied conditions are polygenic we attempted to calculate the In this study, our aim is to investigate association between TNF-α, IL-2 and quantity of MTHFR 677T, 1298C, MTR 2756G and MTRR 66G as low func- IL-2RB gene polymorphisms/expressions and susceptibility for psoriasis tionality alleles. We speculate that accordingly to obtained results for four and psoriatic arthritis. analyzed loci person could have from 0 to 8 low functionality alleles. Intere- Seventy four patients with psoriasis and 74 healthy volunteers were en- stingly, no one case with the presence more that six low functionality alleles rolled in the study. In all study subjects, the genes analysed by PCR-RFLP was detected. method. Then, data compared between the study groups. The accumulation in the female genotype of 5/8 alleles: MTHFR 677T, AA genotype in TNFα(-308) (high expression), AA genotype in TNF-α(-238) MTHFR 1298C, MTR 2756G and MTRR 66G in homo-/heterozygous state and GG, TT genotypes in IL-2(-330) are significantly increased in patients is associated with significantly increased risk of delivering child with NTD with psoriasis in comparison with control group. However, GG genotype in (OR=5.90; CI:1.11 - 31.43, p=0.032); CL/P (OR=9.08; CI:1.58 - 52.2, p=0.014) TNF-α(-238) and GT genotype in IL-2 are significantly decreased in patients and RSA (OR = 9.83; CI:2.14 - 45.20, p=0.0004). These observations were with psoriasis in comparison with control group. Also gene polymorphis- not found in MDS, CL/P and CV groups. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org396 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 RESULT: Statistically significant differences found between ACE II ge- notypes: 26.8% II in patients versus 15% II in controls. There were a ms were analyzed according to the clinical characteristics of the psoriasis high frequency of AA genotype and very low frequency of CC genotype patients. IL-2/GG genotype frequency was significantly decreased and the in both groups for the AGTR. There was no correlation between Factor frequency of IL-2/TT genotype was significantly increased among patients V, Factor II variations in case and control groups. with psoriatic arthritis in comparison with psoriasis patients. The frequen- Conclusion: Statically significant different was found between ACE II cy of IL-2/TT genotype was significantly increased in mild psoriasis pattient genotype in both groups (p<0.05).Our results suggest that ACE II ge- according to moderate-severe psoriasis patients. Also IL-2RB/CC genotype notype is responsible for stroke susceptibility in Persian Population. was significantly increased, among patients with late-onset psoriasis in We report that Insertion/Insertion genotype of ACE gene was an inde- comparison with early onset psoriasis group. IL-2RB/TC genotype frequen- pendent risk factor for Persian stroke patients in contrast to verified cy was significantly decreased and TT genotype frequency was significantly studies. increased in p atients with positive family history of psoriasis according to negative family history patients. In conclusion,polymorphisms of TNF-α (-238 and -308/high expression) J09.32 and IL-2 genes may contribute to susceptibility to psoriasis. Also, the IL-2/ Estrogen receptor α gene polymorphisms and reproductive history in TT genotype may be a risk factor for the development of psoriatic arhritis, women with systemic lupus erythematosus whereas the GG genotype may be a protective factor against psoriatic ar- S. Andonova1, R. Robeva2, D. Tanev3, M. Nikolova4, M. Stoycheva5, A. Tomova2, P. thritis. Kumanov2, R. Rashkov3, A. Savov1, Z. Kolarov3; 1National Genetic Laboratory, Sofia, Bulgaria, 2Clinical Center of Endocrinology and J09.30 Gerontology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 3Clinic of Rheumatology, Medical The study and comparison of serotonin gene receptor (5HT3A) University, Sofia, Bulgaria, 4Clinic of Nephrology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria, expression profiles in rheumatoid arthritis and systemic Lupus 5Department of Social Medicine and Health Management, Medical University, Sofia, erythematous patients Bulgaria. M. Sadeghi Koupaei1, s. nazari2, g. ahangari3; 1Department of Basic Sciences, Paramedical Sciences School, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Background: Systemic lupus erymathosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease Hematology & Oncology, Mofid Hospital, Shaheed Beheshti University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Medical genetic, National that affects predominantly females. Estrogens could modulate the immune Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB),, Tehran, Islamic Republic system functions through an estrogen receptor dependent mechanisms. of Iran. However, the influence of the estrogen receptor alpha (ERα) gene polymor- phisms on the reproductive function in autoimmune disorders (and espe- cially in women with SLE) is not clarified. Background and Aims:Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and Systemic lupus ery- Objectives: The aim of the study was to investigate whether two ERα-gene thematous (SLE) are both autoimmune disease that their causes are still polymorphisms were related the reproductive history in SLE-women. unknown. Serotonin (5HT) plays roles as a neurotransmitter and a neuro- Methods: A total of 103 women with SLE were genotyped for ERα polymor- modulator with functions in brain and peripheral tissues. Recent studies re- phisms PvuIIT/C and XbaIA/G by RFLP analysis. The absence of PvuII and veal that in addition to the CNS, immune cells synthesis neurotransmitters XbaI restriction sites were indicated by „P“ and „X“ and their presence by such as serotonin can regulate immune functions. The aim of this study is to „p“ and „x“, respectively. The presence of menstrual disorders, pregnancies, evaluate the serotonin receptor gene expression level on peripheral blood miscarriages and live births as well as the age of menarche were registered mononuclear cells of RA and SLE patients compared to normal individuals. in all women. Material and Methods: In the present study, we investigated serotonin re- Results: XbaIA/G and PvuIIT/C polymorphisms were not significantly rela- ceptor gene expression in PBMCs of 40 RA and SLE patients and 20 healthy ted to the frequency of pregnancies, miscarriages or live births in SLE pa- individuals using Real Time-PCR. The specificities of the obtained Real time tients (p>0.05). Menstrual disturbances were reported less frequently by PCR products for the respective serotonin receptors fragments were confir- women with Xx genotype than by patients with XX or xx genotypes (8% vs. med by sequenced analysis capillary system (ABI3700, Applied Bio system, 24.5%, p=0.033). The age of menarche was not influenced by the ERα poly- USA). morphisms (p>0.05). Results: The results showed that 5HT3A receptors mRNA Expression signi- Conclusions: XbaIA/G and PvuIIT/C polymorphisms of the ERα-gene were ficantly altered in PBMC of RA and SLE patients. Compared to normal indivi- not related to the reproductive outcome in women with lupus. Further duals, statistics analysis shown that 5-HT3A expression level in RA patients studies are needed to confirm and explain the relationships between the decreased while this level in SLE patients increased. XbaIA/G polymorphism and menstrual disorders in women with lupus and Conclusion: It appears that both genetic and environmental factors play a other autoimmune diseases. role in pathogenesis of RA and SLE diseases. In this study it is suggested that The study was granted by research grant 26/2010 from MU-Sofia, Bulgaria serotonin and its receptors possibly can have an effective role in pathophy- J09.33 siology of RA and SLE diseases. Attitude and controversial aspects in systemic lupus erythematosus Keyword: Serotonin receptor gene expression, Rheumatoid arthritis, Syste- onset mic lupus erythematous C. Daescu1,2, I. Maris1, O. Margineanu1,2, T. Marcovici1,2, A. Militaru-Somogy1,2, A. J09.31 Craciun1,2, O. Belei1,2, D. Chiru1,2, M. Puiu1,2; 1“Victor Babes” University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, 2“Louis Association between ACE, AGTR, Factor II and Factor V gens with Turcanu” Children’s Emergency Hospital, Timisoara, Romania. Stroke Subtypes in an Persian Population A. Sadr-Nabavi1, M. Ghasemi1, M. Pirhoushiaran1, P. Zargari1, P. Sasannejahad2, M. Azarpajooh2; 1Medical Genetic Institut Mashhad University of medical Since, Mashhad, Islamic Introduction: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multi-organic auto- Republic of Iran, 2Neurology Institut Mashhad University of medical Since, Mashhad, immune disease with numerous immunological and clinical manifestations. Islamic Republic of Iran. A genetic predisposition in SLE disease is well documented. Material and Background and aims: Stroke is the third cause of death in the world method: We present a 12 years old girl referred to our hospital for SLE as after the cancer and cardiovascular disease. In Persian population, Is- presumptive diagnosis. Results: The patient’s family history is highly signi- chemic stroke incidence was also considerably greater than reported ficant for SLE: a maternal aunt died at age 26, due to SLE complications. in other regions. It is the first gene-association study, which determi- Her daughter (patient’s cousin) was also diagnosed with SLE. Her evolution nes the relationship between ACE, AGTR, Factor V Leiden, Factor II va- was unfavorable, despite extra-renal epuration. She presented important riations and stroke. A stroke Database bank was design for this pro- cardiovascular comorbidities, but the cause of death was renal failure, at 16 ject. Matched controls were randomly selected from the same geogra- years. In these circumstances, the onset of malar rash and photosensitivity phically area. The aim of this study was to determine the association demands further evaluation of other markers of SLE, in our case. Complete between mentioned gene ′s variations and stroke. investigation ruled out the following diagnostic criteria: discoid rash, serosi- Method: 153 patients of stroke and 153 healthy controls were matched tis, oral ulcers, arthritis, hematological disorders, renal involvement, antinu- for age and sex. Additionally, control subjects were matched in some clear antibodies, immunologic phenomena and neurological pathology. Two stroke risk factors such as diabetes mellitus, low-density lipoprotein, out of the eleven diagnostic criteria were serially present during follow-up. high-density lipoprotein, triglyceride, total Cholesterol hypertension Discussion: The presence of HLA-A1, B8, DR, the null complement alleles and ischemic heart attack. The gens were determined by Multiplex and congenital deficiencies of complement (especially C4, C2, and other ear- ARMS- PCR, Real Time PCR, and PCR-RFLP. ly components) increase the risk of SLE in this case. If a mother has SLE, her daughter‘s risk of developing the disease is estimated at 1:40. For this girl, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 397 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 the risk is even higher, due to SLE family aggregation. Conclusions: Genetic trauma, cancer etc, while common hereditary factors are F5 (coagulation testing should be performed to clarify the diagnosis of SLE in this case. Psy- factor V Leiden) 1691G-A gene mutation, F2 (coagulation factor II, pro- chosocial aspects and genetic counseling can influence patient and family thrombin) 20210G-A gene mutation and MTHFR (methylenetetrahydrofola- quality of life. te reductase) thermolabile polymorphism (677C-T mutation. J09.34 In this study, 100 individuals were genotyped: 70 grouped by their clini- The prevalence of genes HLA-DQ in children with diabetes type 1 of cal background (40 individuals on hemodialysis (HP) and 30 individual Krasnodar region with breast cancer (BC)), and 30 healthy volunteers with no clinical back- N. V. Tarasenko1, E. I. Kondrat‘eva2, I. J. Chernjak3; ground as control group. All samples were genotyped for MTHFR 667C-T, F2 1State Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Tomsk, Russian Federation, 2GBOU VPO 20210G-A and F5 1691G-A mutation using in-house optimized Sybr® green KubGMU Minsravsocravitiya Rossii, Krasnodar, Russian Federation, 3Children’s Regional method.In all three groups we found one heterozygote (GA) for F5 Leiden Clinic, Krasnodar, Russian Federation. mutation. All other samples had wild type genotype. Only in control group HLA-DQA1 we found one homozygote (AA) for F2 20210G-A mutation, and one hete- HLA-DQB1 rozygote (GA). We also found one heterozygote in HP group and two in BC Objective: study of the frequency of polymorphic genes alleles group. MTHFR genotypes in HP group are 45% of CC - wild type genotype, and in children and adolescents with type-1 diabetes (T1D) in 37,5% of CT genotype and 17,5% of TT genotype. BC and control group had the Russian population living of the Krasnodar region. the same percentage - 60% of CC, 37% of CT and 3% of TT genotype. Methods: examination of 110 patients with T1D and 34 healthy siblings. De- J09.37 fining gene alleles HLA-DQA1 (8 specificities) and HLA-DQB1 (12 specifici- The association between VEGF -2578C/A polymorphism and ty) was perfoHrmLAe-dD uQsAin1g sets of „DNA-Technology“. HLA-DQB1 amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Russian population. Results: the data were analyzed protecting and predisposing alleles for T1D E. V. Lysogorskaia, N. I. Abramycheva, M. N. Zakharova, S. N. Illarioshkin; for the genes (*0301, *0501, *0102, *0103, *0201) and Research Center of Neurology, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, Russian (*0201, *0302,H *0LA3-0D4Q, *0401, *0301, *0602). Patients with T1D revealed the Federation. following relationship of diabetogenic alleles: the presence of four predis- posing alleles was observed in 39% of patients with T1D; 2 to 3 alleles was observed in 42%, and <1 allele was detected in 19%. In healthy Background. The association of -2578C/A, -1154G/A, and -634G/C SNPs siblings we observed the following: 4: 6%, 2-3: 50%, and <1: 44%. The most with ALS was found in some European populations (Lambrechts et al., common haplotype, which includes four predisposing allele, was encoun- 2003). However, there was no such association in different other popula- tered in 72% of T1D. Haplotype DQA1*0301-DQB1*0201 was observed in tions (Brockington et al., 2005; Del Bo et al., 2006; Van Vught et al., 2005; 43% of patients, haplotype DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 was observed in 51%. Zhang et al., 2006). We suppose the important role of VEGF in ALS pathoge- Preventing alleles were observed in 41% of patients with T1D, of which 8% nesis. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between VEGF with the observed combination of alleles DQA1*0102 and DQB1*0602. In -2578C/A polymorphism and ALS in Russian population. 74% of healthy siblings we identified protecting alleles, of which haplotype Methods. The peripheral blood was extracted from 197 patients with ALS DQA1*0102-DQB1*0602 was observed in 18%. and 156 controls. The ALS group included 54% (107/197) males and 46% Conclusions: T1D patients inH thLAe -RDuQs sian p.opulation of the Krasnodar regi- (90/197) females aged from 20 to 83 years (51,2 ±13,4) and was compa- on are characterized by a „classic“ for European populations, protecting and rable with controls. All of persons were the Slavs. TaqMan PCR was used for predisposing for T1D alleles genes detection of -2578C/A SNP. J09.35 Results. The significant difference of the distribution of -2578A allele in ALS Association of two IL-23R gene variations with ulcerative colitis in cases and controls was observed (p=0,014). The VEGF -2578A/A genotype Iran increased ALS risk to an adjusted odd of 1,58 (95% CI, 0,04-0,95). There N. Naderi1, A. Farnood2, T. Dadaei1, H. Balaii1, M. Habibi1, H. Mirtalebi1, M. Zali1; was no increased risk for males (OR=1,84, 95% CI, -0,06-1,27). The asso- 1Research Center for Gastroenterology and Liver Disease, Shahid Beheshti M.C, Tehran, ciation between VEGF genotype and clinical characteristics of ALS wasn’t Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Imam khomeini Hospital, Keshavarz Blvd, Tehran, Islamic detected. But the patients before 45 years old had a weakly increased risk of Republic of Iran. ALS (OR=1,27, 95% CI, -0,47-0,95). Conclusions. Our data showed that VEGF genotype isn’t a major cause of motor neuron degeneration in ALS, but it can modulate the risk of ALS in Background and aim: Ulcerative colitis (UC), a chronic inflammatory bowel Russian population. Thereby VEGF genotype could be useful in choice of ALS disease, occurs in genetically susceptible individuals who mount inappro- pathogenetic therapy. priate immune responses to endo-luminal antigens. Interleukin 23 receptor J09.38 (IL23R) gene has been reported as a genetic factor associated with ulcera- Investigation of mitochondrial tRNAThr and tRNAPro genes mutations in tive colitis and other autoimmune-mediated diseases. This study was per- autism formed to evaluate two interleukin-23 receptor (IL-23R) polymorphisms F. Piryaei, M. Houshmand, Z. Piryaei; association with UC in Iranian patients. National Institute of Genetics Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic Material and methods: A number of 102 patients with ulcerative colitis of Iran. and 152 sex- and age-matched healthy controls from the same origin were Objectives participated. The PCR-RFLP method was used to evaluate IL23 R SNPs, rs 10889677 (Exon-3‘ UTR) and rs 11209026 (Arg 381 Gln), of IL23R gene in : Autism as one of three recognized condition in the autism spec- our population. trum disorders (ASDs) is a neurodevelopmental, multifactorial disorder. Results: The frequency of mutant allele of rs10889677 was 46.5% in UC and Autism is noticeably reported to be affected by mitochondrial dysfunction 45.7% in controls. The frequency of rs11209026 mutant allele was 2.9% which impairs energy metabolism. mtDNA encodes 22 tRNAs working as and 5.2% in UC and controls, respectively. None of the evaluated polymor- amino acid transporters for synthesis of the respiratory chain enzymes. In- phisms of IL23R gene were more frequent in UC patients, compared to volvement of mutations within tRNA genesP rhoave been Twhrell documented in healthy controls. mitochondrial disorders. In this study, tRNA and tRNA were investigated Conclusions: Our results demonstrated that rs10889677 and rs11209026 to find mutations which are related to autism pathogenesis, as these two mutations of IL23R are not associated with UC in Iranian patients. Additio- gMeentehso mdsutations have been reported to be involved in some neurological nal variants in this gene might play a role in UC disease susceptibility in disorders. Iran. : In this study, a cohort of 24 unrelated idiopathic patients and 100 J09.36 ethnically-matched Persian control individuals were obtained. PCR sequen- Valuation of inherited venous thromboembolism risk within two cRiensgu oltfs mtDNA fragments was employed to investigate the involvement of clinically unrelated populations mitochondrial variations in autism. N. Lojo - Kadric, L. Kapur - Pojskic, J. Ramic, K. Radic, K. Bajrovic; : A substitution , G15928A, was identified in two groups without a Institute for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina. significant difference (P = 0.179, P> 0.05). A new homProoplasmic substitusion, A15973G, was identified within the T-loop of tRNA gene in 1 patient as it had not been reported before. This variation is moderatelyly conserved Venous thromboembolism is disease where a blood clot is formed in human (C7o5n %clu) saimonong species and also, was not detected in blood sample from the venous system. This disease includes deep venous thrombosis (DVT) and patient’s mother. pulmonary embolism (PE). Venous thromboembolism results as a combi- : Investigation on mitochondrial varations may strengthen the nation of hereditary and acquired factors. Acquired factors include surgery, role of genetics in association with autism. To reveal the relation of A15973G www.eshg.org www.eshg.org398 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 and autism, more delicate molecular methods could be done for determining in E (APOE) to myelin repair, neuronal plasticity, and cerebral inflammatory the percentage of heteroplasmic mtDNA in mother’s sample of the patient. processes suggest that it may be relevant in MS. The main goal of this study J09.39 wMaast etroi adlest&erMmeitnheo wdsh:ether the APOE genotypes and alleles are associated The BDKRB2 gene I/D polymorphism in Russian athletes with MS patients. L. J. Mustafina1, Y. I. Timshina2, I. V. Astratenkova2, I. I. Ahmetov1; Totally,147 MS cases and 168 control subjects from 1Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation, 2St Petersburg Research Iranian population were genotyped for APOE gene using PCR-RFLP method. Institute of Physical Culture, St Petersburg, Russian Federation. GReensuotlytspe and allele frequencies for APOE genewere calculated and compa- red between MS cases and control subjects by Chi2 Por Fisher’s exact test. :The frequency of APOE-ε2ε3 genotype was significantly higher in Background control subjects than MS patients (14.3%vs.6.1%P, =0.009,OR=0.39) whe- Bradykinin is a potent endothelium-dependent vasodilator and acts via the reas APOE-ε3ε4 genotype frequency was significantly higher in MS cases bradykinin B2 receptor (encoded by BDKRB2). The absence (-9), rather than compared with conPtrol subjects (8.2%vs.3.6%, =0.03,OR=2.4). APOE-ε2 the presence (+9), of a 9 bp repeat sequence in exon 1 has previously been allele frequency in cases was significantly lower tPhan that of control sub- shown to be associated with increased gene transcription, higher BDKRB2 jects (4.4%vs.8.0%, =0.03,OR=0.52). Also male controls were significantly mRNA expression and higher efficiency of muscular contraction (Williams more likely toP have APOE-ε2 allele (7.8%vs.1%, =0.01,OR=0.11). APOE- et al. 2004). Studies suggest that insertion-deletion (I/D) polymorphism in εC4o nacllleulsei ofrnequency in cases was significantly higher than control group BDKRB2 gene is associated with aerobic capacity and elite endurance ath- (4.8%vs.2.1%, =0.03,OR= 2.35). lete status. The aim of our study was to investigate the association between : The allele frequency of APOE-ε4 in our population is lower than the BDKRB2 -9/+9 polymorphism and athlete status in Russians. the general population (3.5%vs.15-20%). It seems that individuals carrying Methods APOE-ε4 allele and/or APOE-ε3ε4 genotype develop MS two times more One thousand three hundred and seventy nine athletes from different spor- than non-carriers. Also APOE-ε2ε3 genotype or APOE-ε2 allele may have a ting disciplines and 507 controls were involved in the study. The athletes protective role against MS development in Iranian population. Further in- were prospectively stratified into 5 groups according to the event duration vestigation would be warranted to understand the role of APOE alleles and and distance, covering a spectrum from the more endurance oriented to the genotypes and risk of MS. more power oriented. Genotyping was performed by PCR. J09.42 Results. Analysis of distribution of allele frequencies revealed no signi- Research association of polymorphic markers of candidate genes with ficant differences between a whole group of athletes and the control group ischemic heart disease with the development of oxidative stress in (-9 allele: 47.8 vs 45.9%; P=0.319). However, the frequency of the -9 allele elderly and senile patients living in the Rostov region was significantly higher among endurance-oriented athletes and athletes T. Nguyen; with mixed activity (endurance, power/strength): long distance running Southern Federal University, Rostov on Don, Russian Federation. (P=0.014) and long distance swimming (P=0.022), wrestling (P=0.009) and archery (P=0.002). In conclusion, our results are in agreement with the previous studies and in- The study selected patients with ischemic heart disease (n = 300). The con- dicate that the BDKRB2 -9 allele is favourable for endurance performance. trol group (n = 280) consisted of a random sample of both sexes with no si- J09.40 gnificant signs of ischemic heart disease. It was found that the development The PPARG gene Pro12Ala polymorphism is associated with power of coronary heart disease in elderly and senile patients living in the Rostov athlete status region, increases the rate of production of activated oxygen species, nitric E. S. Nasibulina, A. A. Arkhipova, A. V. Kuznetsova, A. V. Borisova, I. I. Ahmetov; oxide metabolite levels, the intensity of lipid peroxidation in plasma and red Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. blood cells, reduces the activity of the enzymes superoxide dismutase, ca- talase in erythrocytes increases the oxidase activity of ceruloplasmin in the blood plasma and violates the stability and the structural organization of Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor gamma (PPARG) gene regula- erythrocyte membranes. It was also found that residents of elderly, a mani- tes the expression of genes involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, festation of coronary artery disease is associated with polymorphic markers differentiation of adipocytes and myoblasts, insulin sensitivity and glucose T174M gene AGT; L33P gene ITGB3; L28P gene APOE; C3238G APOC3 gene homeostasis. The 12Ala variant of the PPARG gene Pro12Ala polymorphism and the C786T gene eNOS. It is more common combination of two or more is associated with decreased receptor activity [Deeb et al., 1998], leading to polymorphic alleles in the heterozygous and homozygous states. Identified insulin hypersensitivity and enhanced glucose utilization [Ek et al., 2001]. polymorphisms in genes that regulate hemostasis and endothelial function As a consequence, the carriers of the 12Ala allele show better glycaemic re- are associated with the development of oxidative stress and impaired struc- sponse to exercise training [Adamo et al., 2005], higher rates of skeletal mu- tural homeostasis of erythrocyte membranes. scle glucose uptake [Vanttinen et al., 2005] and greater cross-sectional area J09.43 of muscle fibers [Ahmetov et al., 2008]. In a study of Russian power-oriented Haplotypes in IL-8 Gene are Associated to Age-Related Macular athletes a higher frequency (23.8 vs. 15.1%, P < 0.0001) of the PPARG 12Ala Degeneration allele compared with controls has been reported [Ahmetov et al., 2008]. The t. lepre1, f. taglia1, r. cascella1, f. missiroli2, c. de felici2, a. cusumano2, s. zampatti1, c. aim of the present study was to investigate the association of the PPARG eandi3, g. staurenghi4, f. ricci2, g. novelli5, e. giardina1; Pro/Ala polymorphism and athlete status in an independent cohort of Rus- 1Department of Biopathology, Centre of Excellence for Genomic Risk Assessment in sian athletes. Two hundred and fifty eight athletes and 1174 controls were Multifactorial and, rome, Italy, 2UOSD Patologia retinica Fondazione PTV “Policlinico involved in the study. The frequency of the 12Ala allele was not significant- Tor Vergata“, rome, Italy, 3Department of Clinical Physiopathology, Eye Clinic, University of Torino, Torino, Italy, 4Luigi Sacco Hospital, Milan, Milan, Italy, 5Agenzia di Valutazione ly different between a whole cohort of athletes and controls. However, in del Sistema Universitario e della Ricerca (ANVUR); San Pietro – Fatebenefratelli accordance with the previous study, we found statistically significant dif- Hospital, Rome, rome, Italy. ferences in genotype distribution (weightlifters: Pro/Pro - 71.2%, Pro/Ala - 22.0%, Ala/Ala - 6.8%; controls: Pro/Pro - 72.1%, Pro/Ala - 26.0%, Ala/Ala - 1.9%; P = 0.043) and Ala/Ala frequency (P = 0.013) between weightlifters Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is the main cause of blindness in and controls. Thus, the PPARG gene Pro12Ala polymorphism is associated the developed world. The etiology of the disease is multifactorial, due to the with power athlete status. interaction between genetic and environmental factors. Genetic and func- J09.41 tional studies have confirmed that inflammation plays a pivotal role in the Apolipoprotein E polymorphisms statues in Iranian patients with development of the disease. It’s well known that interleukins mediate many Multiple Sclerosis of the effector phases of immune and inflammatory responses. Moreover M. Rafiei1, M. Zarif Yeganeh2, S. Sheikhol Eslami2, E. Gozalpour3, M. Hedayati2; activated macrophages secrete many proteolytic enzymes able to fragment 11. Reference Health Laboratory, Ministry of Health and Medical Education, Tehran, Bruch’s membrane leading to the neovascularisation. In our study, we show Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Obesity Research Center, Research Institute for Endocrine Sciences, Shahid Beheshti University of, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, the association between IL-8 gene and age-related macular degeneration. 3Dept of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, We performed a case-control association study, testing for the Single Nu- Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, The Netherlands, Nijmegen, Netherlands. cleotide Polymorphism rs2227306 a total of 1381 Italian subjects: 721 cases Background and 660 controls. On the basis of our positive preliminary results (p-value: 4.15*10-5; OR for T allele: 1.39 [1.19-1.62]), we also sequenced the entire : Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory demyelina- IL-8 regulatory and coding regions of 60 patients and 30 controls stratified ting disorder in the central nervous system. Evidences linking Apolipoprote- for their genotype at rs2227306. We identified two different haplotypes in- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 399 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J09.46 Extensive mutational analysis of CDK5 and CDK5R1 in patients with volving rs4073 (A/T), rs2227306 (C/T), rs2227346 (C/T) and rs1126647 non-syndromic mental retardation reveals novel variants in CDK5R1 (A/T): A-T-T-T (p-value: 2.08*10-9; OR: 1.68 [1.43-1.97]) and T-C-C-A (p-va- 3’-UTR lue: 7.07*10-11; OR: 0.60 [0.51-0.70]). Expression analysis on RNA extrac- S. Moncini1, P. Castronovo1, A. Murgia2, S. Russo3, M. F. Bedeschi4, P. Riva1, M. Venturin1; ted from whole blood of 50 donors failed to reveal evidence of correlation 1University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2University of Padua, Padua, Italy, 3Istituto Auxologico between genotype/haplotype and RNA expression. Our results suggest the Italiano, Milan, Italy, 4Fondazione IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, association between IL-8 gene and the development of the disease, although Milan, Italy. further studies should be encouraged to clarify the functional effects as well as the causative variants. J09.44 CDK5 and its activator p35, encoded by CDK5R1 gene, are highly expressed Influence of metabolic gene polymorphisms on athletic performance in CNS where they have a fundamental role in neuronal migration and diffe- O. N. Fedotovskaya1, D. V. Popov2, E. V. Lyubaeva2, L. J. Mustafina3, O. L. Vinogradova2, I. rentiation during CNS development. Their fundamental role in CNS develop- I. Ahmetov1,2,3; ment and function, and their involvement in the pathogenesis of neurode- 1Saint-Petersburg Institute of Physical Culture, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, generative disorders makes CDK5 and CDK5R1 strong candidate genes for 2Institute for Biomedical Problems of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian the onset of mental retardation. We carried out the mutation screening of Federation, 3Kazan State Medical University, Kazan, Russian Federation. CDK5 and CDK5R1 coding regions, as well as of CDK5R1 3’-UTR, on a cohort of 344 patients with non-syndromic mental retardation (NS-MR). In fact, we recently demonstrated that 3’-UTR has a key role in the post-transcriptional Genetic factors play important role in determination of functional physiolo- regulation of CDK5R1 expression, through the binding of protein factors and gical, biochemical characteristics and athletic performance. Regular intensi- microRNAs belonging to miR-15/107 family, and this evidence prompted us ve training helps elite athletes to be at the peak of human physical perfor- to include this region in the mutational analysis. We found one silent muta- mance, which makes them the best objects for studyin g molecular mecha- tion in CDK5, and three silent and two missense conservative mutations in nAisMmPsD o1f energy supply forC KmMuMscular activity. TheG a6iPmC2of this study was to CDK5R1 coding region. Four novel variations in intronic regions of CDK5 dMiCscTo1v er whether polymorphisms of genes involved in metabolic pathways were also found but never predicted to cause splicing defects. Interestingly, ( C/T rs17602729, A/G rs8111989, G/A rs560887 and we found nine heterozygous variations in CDK5R1 3’-UTR: among these, six A/T rs1049434) are associated with elite athlete status and common were single base substitutions and three were small deletions. None of these phenotypes related to sports performance. DNA samples of 996 Russian variations was present in 450 healthy controls. Of particular interest is the athletes and 1389 non-athletic Russian controls were analyzed for four gene deletion of one predicted miR-15/107 family binding site, found in one pa- polymorphisms by PCR-RFLP analysis. Sporting intermediate phenotypes tient. Luciferase constructs containing the mutations observed in CDK5R1 were assessed in subgroups of athletes by measuring of aerobic capacity, 3’-UTR will be used to verify if these variations have an effect on CDK5R1 ex- strength, anthropometric parameters, muscle fiber characteristicsA, MblPoDod1 pression levels and therefore constitute susceptibility variants for NS-MR. lactPate and CglKuMcoMse coPncentratioGn6sP. CF2our ‘ePndurance aMllCeTle1s’ wePre overre- J09.47 presented in a group of endurance athletes compared with controls: Analysis of polygenic hypercholesterolemia candidate gene variants C ( =0.01), A ( =0A.M00P1D)1, P G ( =0.C0K0M04M), P A ( <G0.60P0C021). I. De Castro-Orós1,2, M. Solanas3,2, M. León4,2, M. Cofán5, J. A. Casasnovas4,2, J. C. TPhe frequeMnCcTy1 of foPur ‘power alleles’ was higher in strength/power athletes Rodríguez-Rey6, E. Ros5, F. Civeira3,7,4, M. Pocoví1,2,4; compared with controls: C ( <0.0001), G ( =0.007), G 1RECAVA, Dpto. Bioquímica y Biología Molecular y Celular. Universidad de Zaragoza. ( =0.14), A ( =0.004). Associations of polymorphic variants with pre- (RECAVA), Zaragoza, Spain, 2Insituto Aragonés de Ciencias de la Salud (I+CS), Zaragoza, disposition to certain types of physical activity (endurance and strength/ Spain, 3RECAVA, Unidad de Lípidos. Laboratorio de Investigación Molecular, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, Spain, 4Aragon Worker Health Study, Zaragoza, power) were consistent with results oAfM cPoDrr1e, lCaKtiMonM a, nGa6lPysCi2s of th MesCeT p1oly- Spain, 5Unitat de Lípids, Servei d’Endocrinologi i Nutrició, Institut d’Investigacions morphisms with measured physiological, morphometric and biochemical Biomèdiques August Pi Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Hospital Clinic, and CIBER Fisiopatología parameters of skeletal muscle. Thus, and ge- de la Obesidad y Nutrición (CIBERobn), Barcelona, Spain, 6Dpto. Biología Molecular, notypes are associated with sporting intermediate phenotypes as well as Facultad de Medicina. Instituto de Formación e Investigación Marqués de Valdecilla with athletic status. (IFIMAV), Santander, Spain, 7Insituto Aragonés de Ciencias de la Salud (I+CS), Zaragoza, J09.45 Austria. No major clinical impact of a common variant in Toll-like receptor 4 Introduction: gene on Temporal Lobe Epilepsy. I. Manna1, A. Labate2, L. Mumoli2, G. Palamara2, E. Ferlazzo3, U. Aguglia3, A. The main factor for atherosclerosis development is high LDL Gambardella1; cholesterol (LDLc) levels. Majority of hypercholesterolemia cases are due to 1Institute of Neurological Sciences - CNR, Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute of Neurology, cAoimmp: lex interactions gene-environment being the most common cause the University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 3Regional Epilepsy Centre,Hospital of Reggio polygenic hypercholesterolemia (PH). Calabria, Reggio Calabria, Italy. MethoOduor loobgjye:c tive was to identify candidate gene variants as conLDtrLibRutors tAoP dOeB genetic cause of PH. 378 unrelated subjects, without mutations in andth Evidences support the hypothesis that inflammation and neurogenesis play genes, were selected according to the Aforlalogwonin Wg ocrrkitienrgia H: LeaDlLthc ≥S t9u0dy an important role in the pathogenesis of temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE). Co- percentile and Tryglyceride levels ≤ 200 mg/dl. Moreover, a control group ding variants in Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) gene have been reported to be with 525 normolipemic subjects from the APOE APOB PCSK®9 associated with inflammatory diseases, so TLR4 may represent a reasonable (NARW5AH2S)S wRaEsB aFn1alyseLdD. ALlRl subjects were genotyped using Solexa (Illumina ) functional candidate gene for TLE. The aim of this study was to determine Rteecshunlotlso: gy for 18 SNPs located in 5’UTR region of the , , , whether a functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), an A>G base , and genes. transition at position 896 from the transcriptional start site of TLR4 (refer- We have observed different allelic distribution between the PH po- red to as Asp299Gly), contributes to TLE. We also investigated whether this pulation and the AnPoOrmBolipemic subjects within 5 genetic variants. Our re- variant may influence the TLE phenotype. We used a case-control approach sults have shown a higher frequency of the minor allele in PH versus control comparing the frequencies of Asp299Gly polymorphism between unrelated population of the SNPs: rs51235 (0.497 vs 0.444, p<0.0250), rs617314 TLE patients and matched controls. In the second step, we evaluated the (0.333 vs 0.272, p<0.0055) and rs58429712 (0.092 vs 0.027L,D pL<R0.0001); patient group in terms of the major clinical variables related to the epilep- while a lower frequency was observed in the PH group for the NR5A2 po- togenic process. lCyomnocrluphsiiosmn: rs9427440 (0.260 vs 0.387, p<0.0001) and the variant The study group included 345 patients (189 women and 156 men; mean ± rs17248720 (0.087 vs 0.164, pA<P0O.0B001), are inversely related to PH. SD age: 47.43±18.24) with a diagnosis of non-lesional TLE, based on com- WLeD hLaRve ideNnRt5ifAie2d 5 SNPs associated with the phenotypic ex- prehensive clinical, electroencephalographic, and magnetic resonance eva- pression of PH disease. The 3 SNPs are directly related to PH pheno- luations, and 370 (186 women and 184 men; mean ± SD age: 48.46±20.96) type while the and polymorphisms seem to be protective to the healthy controls. All individuals were genotyped for the SNP Asp299Gly in hypercholesterolemia development. the TLR4 gene using a TaqMan 5‘ allele discrimination assay. Analysis of genotype and allelic frequencies between patients and controls showed no statistically significant difference. Moreover, the Asp299Gly variant did not influence age of epilepsy onset, duration of epilepsy, and response to me- dication. Our results illustrates that a major clinical impact of variant as a disease modifier in TLE is probably unlikely www.eshg.org www.eshg.org400 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J10. Evolutionary and population genetics, and features of COPD. Since that, variants of genes involved in inflammatory Genetic epidemiology response and protection from oxidative stress, which may alter these pro- cesses, might initiate and/or progress COPD. We performed a case-control study in order to examine the role of functional J10.01 variants of tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) and glutathione-S-transferases Armenian HLA profile in the genetic context of Middle East (GSTs) in. Total number of 86 COPD patients and 100 controls were geno- A. Margaryan1, Z. Khachatryan1, A. Harutyunyan1, A. Khudoyan2, L. Yepiskoposyan1; typed for TNFα G-308A, GSTM1 null, GSTT1 null and GSTP1 Ile105Val va- 1Institute of Molecular Biology, Yerevan, Armenia, 2Institute of Man, Yerevan, Armenia. rvisants. vs Statistical significance was observed for TNFα -308GG genotype (82.5% Armenians are an indigenous people of the South Caucasus with strong 69%, OR=v2s..13, p=0.04) in COPD controls. The statistically significant and distinct ethnic and cultural characteristics. Despite the important geo- results were also obtained for combination of TNFα -v3s0.8GG and GSTM1 null (48.8% 31.0%, OR=2.12, p=0.016), as well for combination of TNFα graphic location of historical Armenia in terms of ancient migrations and -308GG, GSTM1 null and GSTP1 105Val/ (Val) (30.2% 15.0%, OR=2.46, spread of Indo-European languages and agriculture, the genetic profile of p=0.014). the Armenian population is not well studied yet. In this work, we aimed to This is the first study in which TNFα -308GG genotype was associated with answer the following questions: i) is the Armenian population geographical- pathogenesis of COPD. In addition, TNFα -308GG genotype in combination ly stratified based on HLA markers despite their ethnic unity, and ii) what with GSTM1 null and GSTP1 105Val/(Val) was associated with the disease, is the place of the Armenians on the genetic landscape of the Middle-East? that further confirmed importance of -308GG genotype for COPD pathoge- To answers these questions we analyzed the genetic structure of three lar- nesis. ge Armenian territorial groups, Karabakh, historical Western Armenia, and Single and complex genotypes revealed in this study indicate the importance Iran, as well as ethnically different populations from Middle East, Europe, of the analysis of larger number of candidate genes which might contribute Africa and Far East. Initial information on HLA typings were taken from pu- to elucidation of COPD pathogenesis and might be valuable in prevention of blished papers and analyzed relying on low resolution genotyping results of the disease. HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-DRB1 loci. All the three Armenian territorial groups J10.04 were assessed for haplotype frequencies estimated by the EM (Expectation- Genetic polymorphism and haplotypes of HLA-A,-B,-DRB1 loci Maximization) algorithm using Arlequin software package. It was shown distribution analysis in North-West region of Russian Federation that the three Armenian subpopulations despite their ethnic homogeneity E. Kotelevskaya1,2, S. Smirnova1,2, K. Shunkina2, A. Smolyaninov1,2; are geographically stratified which is in compliance with the results based 1Reseach laboratory of cell technologies of the North-Western State Medical Academy on the Y-chromosomal markers. The pattern of genetic relatedness between named after I. I., St. Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Stem Cell Bank „Pokrovski“, St. the three Armenian groups and the comparative data sets revealed that the Petersburg, Russian Federation. Armenians along with Mediterranean ethnic groups form a distinct cluster on a Principal Coordinate plot and Neighbor-Joining tree based on standard genetic distances, which is supporting the Mediterranean origin of Arme- Umbilical cord blood contains hematopoietic stem cells and can be used as nians. an alternative to bone marrow transplantation in certain cases. The most J10.02 important factor of effective transplantation is the degree of HLA matching. Monitoring of congenital malformations in population of Republic of There is a great genetic variety in HLA among representatives of different Moldova nationalities. The aim of given investigation is to determine the major histo- V. V. Egorov, N. Barbova, M. Stratila, E. A. Halabudenco; compatibility complex antigens of umbilical cord blood samples from public National Center of Human Reproduction and Medical Genetics, Chisinau, Republic of bank, by a molecular-genetic method, to analyze loci and haplotypes HLA- Moldova. A,-B,-DRB1 polymorphism of the North-West region of Russia residents. Du- ring the work 500 samples of cord blood were analyzed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with sequence specific primers (SSP). In Republic of Moldova congenital malformations (CM) occupies second It was identified that the most frequent alleles are: HLA-A*02 - 28,3%, *03 pTlhaece a iinm s toruf cptureres eonf tin sftaundtiyle mortality. Monitoring of CM in our country acts - 15,8%, *24 - 13,6%; HLA-B*07 - 12,6%, *35 - 11,4%, *44 - 8,2%, HLA- since 1991, and since 2009 they carry out work jointly with EUROCAT. DRB1*15 - 15,8, *13 - 15,0%, *03 - 12,5%. The most frequent haplotypes was evaluation of prevalence and structure of are: HLA-A*01-B*08-DRB1*03 - 0.55%, HLA-A*03-B*07-DRB1*15- 0.45%, CM in Republic of Moldova based on genetic monitoring during the period HLA-A*03-B*35-DRB1*01- 0.45%. 2006 - 2010. Obtained results of genetic polymorphism of HLA-A,-B,-DRB1 loci distributi- The system of genetic monitoring in Moldova based on registration of all on in the North-West region of Russia inhabitants can complement existing the range of congenital pathologies in live newborns, stillborn and children information database on population genetics and associated diseases. dead after birth with weight less than 500 g. on term of 22 weeks and more. J10.05 CM registered in children during first year of life. Sequence analysis of the GJB2 gene in Romanian children with In the territory of Moldova during the period 2006 - 2010 was born 195837 hearing impairment children, including 3562 with CM. During this period there were 144 preg- C. Dragomir1, A. M. Stan1, L. Savu1, E. Severin2; nancies terminated conform medical indications due to congenital or here- 1Genetic Lab, Bucharest, Romania, 2Univ Med Pharm, Bucharest, Romania. ditary pathology (such as CM, chromosomal aberrations), revealed prenatal before 22 weeks of gestation. Overall prevalence of CM was 18,92 for 1000 newborns. Maximal prevalence of CM was in 2006 - 22,19 for 1000 and mi- Congenital hearing loss is one of the most common sensorial impairments nimal in 2007 - 16,38 for 1000. in human, affecting approximately one in 1000 children. DFNB1 locus, com- In structure of CM in Moldova first place occupies anomalies of musculo- prising GJB2 and GJB6 genes, is responsible for up 50% of cases with con- skeletal anomalies, cardio-vascular and multiple anomalies. genital nonsyndromic prelingual deafness in many population. More than The prevalence of individual forms of CM (esophageal atresia, palate/lips 100 mutations have been reported in exon 2 of the GJB2 gene, whereas two clefts, omphalocele, Down syndrome) corresponds to indexes of EUROCAT. mutations has been described in the donor splice site of intron 1. Anal atresia, spina bifida and polydactyly were more rare than in EUROCAT, In this respect, the purpose of the study was to investigate genetically child- and reductional anomalies were more frequent. ren with prelingual nonsyndromic hearing loss. Here we report the first stu- J10.03 dy of GJB2 gene sequencing performed in Romania. A combined influence of TNFα and GSTs genetic variants in The study was carried out on a group of 11 children with prelingual hea- pathogenesis of COPD ring loss. The children were previously found negatives for the three most M. Stankovic1, A. Nikolic1, N. Petrovic-Stanojevic2, V. Dopudja-Pantic2, M. Andjelic-Jelic2, common mutations involved in nonsyndromic deafness in Europeans na- M. Mitic-Milikic3, L. Nagorni-Obradovic3, D. Radojkovic1; mely 35delG GJB2 gene, del(GJB6-D13S1830) and del(GJB6-D13S1854). To 1Institute of Molecular Genetics and Genetic Engineering, Belgrade, Serbia, 2Zvezdara University Medical Center, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Institute for Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, amplify the entire coding exon 2 we used three primer sets. The primers Belgrade, Serbia. for non-coding exon1 were chosen so as to include the donor splice site of intron 1. The sequence analysis of the GJB2 gene revealed the recessive splice site The etiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is multifac- IVS1+1G>A (-3172G>A) mutation. This variant was homozygous in two sub- torial, including genetic and environmental factors, as well their interac- jects. The mutation was also confirmed by MPLA analysis. The other deaf tions. Increased inflammation and oxidative stress are the most prwomwinwen.te shcghi.lodrregn were found negatives for the mutations in the GJB2 genes. www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 401 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 The results are promising and continuing the study will make possible the and 18 patients with CD (totally 40 patients) included in the study. The most construction of a data base regarding hearing loss in Romanian population. common 10 MEFV mutations detected by using microarray method after Molecular diagnosis will also allow timely intervention at children with hea- PCR amplification of DNA samples. MEFV mutations found in 14 patients. ring impairment. In CD patients E148Q mutation allele, in UC patients M694V mutation alle- J10.06 le was found to be signaficantly more frequent. In conclusion, our study is Uninterrupted CCTG tracts in the myotonic dystrophy type 2 important in terms of showing distribution of MEFV allele among Turkish associated locus - are they really rare? patients with UC and CD. MEFV mutation allele frequency is higher in CD J. Radvansky1, L. Kadasi1,2; patients than UC patients. 1Inst. of Molecular Physiology and Genetics, SAS, Bratislava, Slovakia, 2Faculty of Natural J10.09 Sciences, Comenius University, Bratislava, Slovakia. Prevention of mutagenic effects in human populations P. Izhevskij; Burnasyan Federal Medical Biophysical Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. Myotonic dystrophy represents the most common form of adult muscular dystrophies. The first genetic form of the disease, myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), is caused by expansion of the (CTG)n repeat tract in the DMPK The human genome is constantly exposed to attacks by environmental mu- gene. The second genetic form, myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2), is caused tagens. The permissible levels of exposure and the concentration of muta- by expansion of the (CCTG)n repeat tract in the ZNF9 gene. The CCTG tract is gens are established on the basis of preventing acute effects. It does not take generally interrupted in healthy range alleles and is uninterrupted in patho- account of possibility of long-term (stochastic) effects - unfavorable preg- logically expanded alleles. Our study reports the variability of the healthy nancy outcomes (UPO) in exposed individuals. Requires a quantitative as- range DM2 alleles found during a population study in Slovakia. In compari- sessment of risk of stochastic effects, and measures for their prevention. son with previous studies, we identified wider range and higher frequency To determine the external dose doubling the incidence of UPO’s in the fa- of healthy range alleles containing uninterrupted CCTG tracts. As uninter- milies of exposed persons and the development of preventive measures rupted alleles were so far reported mainly on larger alleles, they were con- long-term effects of radiation in human populations. Results: During the sidered as possible DM2 premutations. Our findings, however, suggest that 1985-2006 years based on the data about outcomes of pregnancies and the uninterrupted CCTG parts are not restricted to large alleles and can be found health of the offspring in populations exposed to ionizing radiation over a continuously throughout the whole range of healthy range alleles, from the wide dose range, defined as follows:1. Frequencies UPO‘s in 226 populati- smallest up to the largest ones. This emphasizes the need for further studies ons exposed to radiation after the Chernobyl accident. Additional to the na- aimed partially to the better characterisation of boundaries between meio- tural background radiation dose were calculated for the period from 1986 tically and mitotically stable alleles and those which can be considered as to 1992 ranged from 4 to 152 mSv. 2. The radiation dose, doubling the in- unstable DM2 premutation alleles. cidence of UPO‘s in the 1st-generation offspring of exposed individuals. 3. J10.07 The frequency of congenital anomalies among infants in the population and Development and validation of a methodology to analyze the families of personnel of industrial enterprises are constantly contact with molecular phylogeny of the family Piperaceae, Piper genus, of species mutagens. 4. It is proposed package of measures for prevention UPO‘s in the found in the Western Brasilian Amazon families of personnel continually exposed to mutagens, and the population D. Delani; living near industrial plants - the sources mutagens. Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Porto Velho, Brazil. J10.10 Index endogamy in Republic Tatarstan, Russia G. I. Elchinova, P. S. Igumvov, R. A. Zinchenko; Family Piperaceae, especially Piper genre, presents a fascinating array of Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow, plant species for the study of natural products in organic chemistry, phar- Russian Federation. maceuticals and ethnobotany. The best use of these species and handling the genre can be provided with the incorporation and association studies of genetic variability. Therefore, knowing the distribution of genetic varia- In 13 areas of Tatarstan on the basis of total sample of marriage records for bility among and within this population is essential for the establishment 1990-2000 (N=31837 after an exception of marriages of persons of postre- of appropriate use, as well as better enforcement. Thus, this study aims to productive age and inhabitants of other regions registering marriage on the evaluate, from the DNA, the genetic structure of natural populations found historical native land) the index endogamy is counted up that appeared to in the western Brazilian Amazon, with a view to advancing knowledge and be lowest in the Pestrechinsky area (0,45) like Kazan (between Pestretsy manipulation of species, favoring the development of conservation strate- and Kazan there are 28 km), the highest (0,74) - in Aktanyshsky (to Kazan gies and stimulating the application of a breeding program to actively par- of 307 km), the most remote from Kazan from all 13 studied areas. We will ticipate. Preliminary data from our lab established the best methodology to noticed while endogamy index calculating for representatives of the va- be applied in this analysis. The results show that the method described by rious ethnoses occupying these areas, distinctions in migratory activity of Doyle & Doyle (1990) and modified by Faleiro et al. (2003) was the most ef- representatives of various ethnoses are not revealed. Rural endogamy has ficient in obtaining DNA of better quality and in sufficient concentrations to appeared low enough - from 0,06 in the Old Drozhzhanoe to 0,25 in Men- be used in studies of genetic diversity in plants. To molecular analysis in this zelinsk. In cartographical extrapolation the minimum values of endogamy population, in a comparison with different techniques, RFLP, RAPD, AFLP are found out near to big cities - Kazan and Nizhnekamsk, and maximum and SSR, the results indicates that RAPD (random-amplified polymorphic - in marginal areas: Drozhzhanovsky (0,70), Baltasinsky (0,69), Kukmorsky DNA) can be successfully used (Powell, 1996). This reinforces the use of this (0,67), Alkeevsky (0,70) and Aktanyshsky (0,74). These results show high technique in studies of genetic variability. It is worth emphasizing that in degree of isolation of rural populations of Russia. this work we shall present our findings and especially focus on the recom- J10.11 mendations that were the conclusion of this part of the investigation. Application of 52 Autosomal SNPs (SNPforID) to Forensic Casework in J10.08 Malaysia Distribution of MEFV Gene Mutations among Turkish Patients with S. Alimat1,2, W. Goodwin1; Crohn’s Disease and Ulcerative Colitis:Preliminary Results 1School of Forensic and Investigative Sciences, Faculty of Science and H. Salifoglu1, G. Kilciler2, M. Karkucak1, A. Tuzun2, Y. Tunca1, S. Bagci2; Technology,University of Central Lancashire, Preston, United Kingdom, 2Forensic 1Departments of Medical Genetics, Gulhane Military Medical Academy, School of Division, Department of Chemistry Malaysia (KIMIA), Ministry of Science and Medicine, Ankara, Turkey, 2Department of Gastroenterology, Gulhane Military Medical Technology, Petaling Jaya, Malaysia. Academy, School of Medicine, Ankara, Turkey. The analysis of degraded DNA can be problematic. Recent advances in the Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and Familial Mediterranian Fever(FMF) identification and analysis of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) have may share some clinical and biological features; they are both inflammatory demonstrated the advantage of these markers over short tandem repeats disorders characterized by the same chronic relapsing behaviour, infiltrati- (STRs) in that they only require small amplicons. However, before applying on by neutrophils at the site of injury, and abnormal regulation of apoptosis. to casework, it is important to develop allele frequency databases from There is a few studies about Mediterranean Fever (MEFV) gene mutations three Malaysian major ethnic groups; Malay, Chinese and Indian. in Turkish patients with Crohn’s disease(CD) and Ulcerative Colitis(UC). In In order to genotype the pfooprulation samples reliably and robustly, four sets this study, we aimed to investigate the frequency and distribution of MEFV of 13-plex SNPs were developed for 52 autosomal SNP markers (that have mutations in Turkish adult patients with IBD. Twenty-two patients with UC been identified in the SNP ID project). A total of 150 DNA Malaysian samp- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org402 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J10.14 Characteristics of mitochondrial DNA HVS-1 sequence in patients and les were genotyped using this multiplex assays and full, complete and clear aborted fetuses with aneuploidies profiles were generated. Data were collected and evaluated statistically. V. Pankratov, N. Danilenko; Across the three ethnic groups, few significant departures from HWE were Institute of genetics and cytology, Minsk, Belarus. observed in Malay, Chinese and Indian ethnic groups, for example, at marker Background: rs2107612, no heterozygosity was observed at all in Malay group (Ho=0) but the Indian group showed higher heterozygosity (above 80%).The com- Aneuploidy is strikingly frequent in humans: up to 20% of bined mean matec-1h8 probabiel-i1t8i es for the 5e2-1 8SNPs of Malay, Chinese, and In- all zygotes have an abnormal number of chromosomes. Despite intensive dian are 2.1974 , 6.0042 and 1.1756 , corresponding to a combined research little is known about the origin of aneuploidy and its risk factors. power of discrimination of >99.99999999%, respectively. Paired Fst values Here we analyze mitochondrial DNA of aneuploid fetuses and patients to obtained in the study suggest that Malay group is closely related to Chinese rMeevethalo dwsh:ether certain features of mtDNA of primary oocytes make them compared to Malay-Indian or Chinese- Indian. more prone to non-disjunction. As for forensic casework, we have demonstrated these multiplexes with the Hypervariable segment 1 of mtDNA was sequenced in 48 patients samples that in some instances the SNPs can generate full profiles from DNA with Down’s syndrome, 22 aborted fetuses with DS and 2 aborted fetuses extracts that yielded no or partial STR loci. wReitshu lEtsd:ward’s syndrome - altogether 72 samples. Previously published J10.12 HVS-1 sequences of 267 Byelorussians were used as controls. Prevalence and co-infection of 3 human Torque teno viruses in the Attention was focused on frequencies of 16189C and its combi- Romanian population nation with 16183C as these substitutions create a polyC stretch which in- S. SPANDOLE1, D. Cimponeriu1, N. Panduru2, P. Apostol1, M. Toma1, M. Stavarachi1, C. terferes with the replication of mitochondrial DNA and is reported to be a Serafinceanu3, A. D. Ion2; risk factor for metabolic syndrome and cancer. 16189C is 1.6 times more 1Department of genetics Bucharest, Bucharest, Romania, 2Department of frequent in the group of aneuploids compared to the control one (p=0.07), Pathophysiology “ Carol Davila” UMP, Bucharest, Romania, 3NIDNMD N Paulescu, whereas 16183C+16189C haplotype is 3.7 times overrepresented among Bucharest, Romania. aneuploids (p=0.005). Another allele, 16300G, shown to be a risk factor for bipolar disorder, was found in 3 cases with DS, although it is absent from the The TT viruses (TTVs) recently discover DNA viruses and included in the Cstoundcieluds pioonpsu:lation of healthy Byelorussians. 16292T and the rCRS haploty- pe are significantly underrepresented among aneuploids (p<0.05). Anelloviridae family. The strains that infect humans are Torque teno vi- 16189C (and its combination with 16183C) and 16300G in rus (TTV), Torque teno midi virus (TTMDV) and Torque teno mini virus mother’s mtDNA may be a risk factor for aneuploid conceptions. 16292T (TTMV). and the rCRS haplotype may be linked with some protective SNPs in the co- The aim of the study was to determine the prevalence and distribution of the ding region of mtDNA. TT viruses, and the co-infection pattern in several human pathologies. J10.15 Materials and Methods: The viral DNA was studied in the blood of patients FVII R353Q and GP1a C807T polymorphisms in Ukrainian ischemic with diabetic nephropathy, breast cancer, colorectal cancer, thalassemia, stroke patients healthy controls and in the saliva of healthy subjects using nested-PCR. The M. Burlova-Vasylieva1, S. Kravchenko2, L. Livshits2; amplification products were analyzed by agarose gel electrophoresis. For 1Educational and Scientific Centre “Institute of Biology” of National Taras Shevchenko additional genotyping, high resolution melting (HRM) was performed. University of Kyiv, Kyiv, Ukraine, 2Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics of of Results: The average frequency of TTV and TTMV was approximately 85% National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Department of Human Genomics, Kyiv, among all the subjects, while for TTMDV was 60%. The average frequency of Ukraine. co-infection was 55%, and the highest rate of triple co-infection (80%) was found among the thalassemic patients. The highest frequency of the viruses was also found among the patients with thalassemia. The most commonly Ischemic stroke is a complex pathology, with a variety of genetic and envi- found virus was TTV and least common was TTMDV. ronmental risk factors. The aim of our study was to establish the possible Conclusions: TT viruses‘ prevalence is the highest among the patients with involvement of the FVII R353Q and GP1a C807T polymorphisms into ische- thalassemia. The co-infection pattern is not correlated to a specific patholo- mic stroke development. gy. The viruses can be easily detected in the subject‘s saliva. The estimated Case-control study including 179 patients aged 39 to 81 years with ische- frequency is consistent with the values reported in other populations. mic stroke and 88 patients aged 59 to 92 (control I), as well as population Acknowledgements: This paper is supported by the Sectoral Operational control (control II, n=97) without a history of stroke has been performed. Programme Human Resources Development, financed from the European Genotyping was performed by the PCR followed by RFLP analysis. Social Fund and by the Romanian Government under the contract number Comparative analysis of genotype distribution in ischemic stroke and con- POSDRU/89/1.5/S/ 64109. trol I showed a marginal association of the RR genotype of R353Q polymor- J10.13 phism with stroke (OR=1.79; 95% CI, 0.99-3.23; P=0.05). Also, there was Clinical and genetic spectrum of single gene disorders among Saudi a significant association between RR genotype and stroke compared to Arab control II (OR=2.03; 95% CI, 1.15-3.59; P=0.01). Obesity as one of the stro- H. Y. Alabdulwahed, N. A. Al Sannaa; ke risk factors itself showed a strong association with stroke in our study saudi aramco, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia. (OR=2.35; 95% CI, 1.51-4.8; P=0.008). Moreover, while analyzing the joint effects of R353Q and obesity, interaction between these risk factors was re- vealed (Synergy factor=6.9, 95% CI, 1.34-36.39; P=0.02). The RR individuals The high consanguinity rate had resulted into increased incidence of rare with obesity had a significant susceptibility to ischemic stroke (OR=4.03; autosomal recessive disorders in The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Some of the- 95% CI, 1.64-9.89; P<0.01). No significant association was found between se disorders had been observed to be more specific for certain tribes and ischemic stroke and C807T polymorphism. families with an evidence of gene founders. This had facilitated providing a Our study suggests that RR genotype of R353Q polymorphism may be an selective genetic testing for this population. additional ischemic stroke risk factor in patients with obesity, while GP1a A retrospective review of 1359 patients with single gene disorders seen C807T polymorphism is not associated with a risk of ischemic stroke in within our medical facility was done. We found that this population has si- Ukrainian patients. milarities in the disease-causing molecular mutations with nearby Arabian Gulf countries*. However, novel mutations were detected for the following J11. Genomics, Genomic technology including disorders; Arthrogryposis-Renal Dysfunction-Cholestasis syndrome, He- bioinformatics methods, gene structure and gene reditary motor and sensory neuropathy with agenesis of the corpus callo- product function and Epigenetics sum, Aicardi-Goutieres Syndrome 3, Pelizeaus-Merzbacher-Like Disease 1, Pelizeaus-Merzbacher-Like Disease 1, spondyloconstal dysostosis type 2, h ypophosphatasia*,Gangliosidosis 1, Alstrom syndrome, IRAK4 defeicency , J11.01 Abetalipoproteinemia, Fabry disease and mucopolysaccharidosis type I. We Epigenetic identification of stem cells: From embryonic toadult hope that this data will help to guide researchers and medical professionals A. Tayaranian Marvian1, S. Esfahani moghaddam2; within the region in molecular diagnosis of their patients. 1University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Sari Agricultural Sciences and Natural Resources University, Sari, Islamic Republic of Iran. www.eshSgte.mo rcgells, like other incredible properties they have, possess unique epi- www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 403 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 genetic structure. Growing evidence suggests that the potency of these cell dynamic or VMD is the most frequently used programs. One of the beneficial to regenerate from low to complete differentiated cell lines is accurately properties of the VMD is its ability to be extendable by designing new plug- depend on epigenetic processes occurring on DNA and chromatin. DNA me- in. We introduce here a new and easy to use facility of the VMD for distance thylation and histone modifications are the major contests which lead to the analysis and radius of gyration of biopolymers such as protein and DNA. Our establishment of chromatin states in these cells. It seems that these contests plug-in is a user friendly package which calculates mentioned analysis for have fundamental regulatory effect on the potency of different stem cells structure or simulation trajectories with 3D representation center of mass. and make embryonic cells to be unique for their stemness characteristics J11.05 compare to adult cells. Tracing these epigenetic change from embryonic Epigenetic aberrations in leukocytes of patients with schizophrenia: stem cells to adult stem cells would be an appropriate approach to investi- Association of global DNA methylation with antipsychotic drug gate the function of the events in reducing stemness capacity. More study in treatment and disease onset this field would help to establish new approachs to induce pluripotency in P. A. Melas, M. Rogdaki, U. Ösby, M. Schalling, C. Lavebratt, T. Ekström; different cell types; especially in multipotent adult stem cells and it would Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. be useful for therapeutic approaches. In this review we summarize current progress in field of embryonic and adult stem cells epigenetics and also we try to illustrate conceptual regard to epigenetic changes during embryonic Even though schizophrenia has a strong hereditary component, departures development and beyond. from simple genetic transmission are prominent. DNA methylation has J11.02 emerged as an epigenetic explanatory candidate of schizophrenia’s non- Customized DNA microarray fabrication for gene expression analysis Mendelian characteristics. To investigate this assumption, we examined of multiple sclerosis genome-wide (global) and gene-specific DNA methylation levels which are A. Pourjahed1, M. Rabiee1, M. Sanati2, M. Ataei2; associated with genomic instability and gene-expression activity, respec- 1Amirkabir University of technology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Iran National tively. Analyses were conducted using DNA from leukocytes of schizophre- Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. nic patients and controls. Global methylation results r-e6vealed a highly signi- ficant hypomethylation in schizophrenics (P < 2.0*10 ) and linear regressi- on among patients generated a model in which antipsychotic treatment and Multiple Sclerosis (MS) is a complex autoimmune disease, involved many di2sease onset explained 11% of the global methylation variance (adjusted pathophysiological processes which should be considered in designing R = 0.11, ANOVA P < 0.001). Specifically, haloperidol was associated with diagnostic, prognostic studies. In recent years, microarray technology be- higher (“control-like”) methylation (P = 0.001) and early-onset (a putative comes a valuable tool for identifying good biomarkers in diagnostic as well marker of schizophrenia severity) was associated with lower methylation as prognostic processes for all diseases. Also better drug treatments may be (P = 0.002). WS-iCtOh MreTgard to the gene-specific methylation analyses, and in obtained by identifying new drug targets and studying drug effects via this accordance with the dopamine hypothesis of psychosis, we found that the technique . promoter of was hypermethylated in schizophrenics (P = 0.004). In this work, we designed a customized microarray for 76 susceptible ge- In conclusion, these data support the notion of an aberrant epigenetic re- nes in MS, which involved in different pathophysiological processes (e.g. in- gulation in schizophrenia which may be subject to certain antipsychotic flammation, demyelination, axonal damage and repair mechanisms) based treatments. Additionally, blood DNA-methylation signatures show promise on peripheral blood analysis. Poly-l-lysine coated glass slides was used to of serving as a schizophrenia biomarker in the future. fabricate this microarray by BioRad vers-array spotting robot. Fabricated J11.06 microarray can be used to study gene expression of MS patients and healthy Role of the genes encoding NMDA receptors in the development of controls in various clinical conditions. neurologic pathologies during influenza infection J11.03 M. A. Plotnikova, S. A. Klotchenko, V. V. Egorov, A. V. Vasin; Development and validation of multiplex (4-plex) PCR-based assay to Research Institute of Influenza, St. Petersburg, Russian Federation. assess DNA degradation M. S. Nazir, W. Goodwin, J. Smith; School of Forensic and Investigative Sciences, University Of Central Lancashire, Preston, Influenza is one of the most widespread respiratory viral diseases, infecting United Kingdom. humans. Influenza virus may cause various neurologic complications which can lead to chronic diseases characterized by different cognitive dysfunc- tions. However, until recently very little was known about the molecular bio- To assess the degradation of DNA in the model organisms (pig, rabbit and logical mechanisms of activity disbalance of the central nervous system in human), Multiplex (4-plex) PCR- based assay was developed. Sequence data case of influenza disease. One of the dominant roles in this process probably for a nuclear gene; recombination activating gene 1 (RAG-1) from rabbit, pig belongs to the ionotropic glutamate receptors selectively binding N-methyl- and human was aligned to identify conserved regions for primer design that D-aspartate (NMDAR). The main aim of this study was to analyze the expres- would amplify 70 bp, 194 bp, 305 bp and 384 bp amplicons. PCR was opti- sion level of the genes encoding NMDAR during influenza infection. Native mised so that it worked over a wide range of template amounts (0.03 ng to NMDARs are thought to function only as heteromeric assemblies containing 75.83 ng). Multiplex (4-plex) PCR assay was validated following the guideli- both NR1 and NR2 subunits. The NR1 family is encoded by a single gene. nes of Scientific Working Group on DNA analysis Methods (SWGDAM). The The NR2 family of subunits consists of four members arising from separa- multiplex PCR was tested for its specificity, reproducibility, sensitivity and te genes (GRIN2A, GRIN2B, GRIN2C, GRIN2D). The novel mRNA which can stability using ABI 310 and 3500 genetic analysers (Applied Biosystems). be encoded by GRIN2B gene was found. We used postmortal human lung Samples treated with various environmental regimes and DNeasy1 were tissues from patients who died because of complications against pandemic also included in this study. The multiplex (4-plex) PCR was found to work influenza virus disease. PCR analysis of IL-10 mRNA expression shown that efficiently in triplicate samples of all three species until 0.3 ng of DNA tem- the nonspecific products were irrefutable obtained. Sequence of this ampli- plate, although, partial profile is also obtained with 0.03 ng DNA template. con aligns with the intron 2 of GRIN2B. Gene-specific primers for detecting The result of this validation study promises that this multiplex can be used expression level of human and mouse NMDAR were designed using Primer- in forensic analysis to assess DNA persistence in human decomposing bo- BLAST program. To test these primers we used total RNA isolated from dies following mass disasters and in experimental animals (rabbit and pig) mice tissues section. We are now planning to investigate the expression of and therefore is recommended for forensic purposes. NMDAR genes in cell cultures infected by pandemic and seasonal influenza J11.04 virus H1N1. The work is supported by RF President’s Grant. VMD DisRg: New user-friendly implement for calculation distance and J11.07 radius of gyration in VMD program Cafe Variome: sharing diagnostic sequence variants with the research S. Falsafi Zadeh1, Z. Karimi2, H. Galehdari3; community 1Toxicology Research centre, Jundishapur Medical Science University, Ahvaz, Islamic O. Lancaster1, R. Dalgleish1, D. Atlan2, A. J. Brookes1; Republic of Iran, 2Bioinformatics unit, Department of Genetics, Shahid Chamran 1University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 2PhenoSystems, Lillois, Belgium. University, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Genetics, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. The internet-based Cafe Variome is designed to function as an exchange portal for gene variant (mutation) data produced by diagnostics laborato- Molecular dynamic simulation is a practical and powerful technique for ries, offering users a secure environment through which to announce and analysis of biopolymers structure. Several programs have been developed discover a comprehensive listing of observed neutral and disease-causing to facilitate the mentioned investigation, under them the visual molecular www.eshg.org www.eshvagr.iaonrtsg in patients and unaffected individuals.404 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 PLEKHG5 To achieve this, Cafe Variome facilitates the “publication” of data from re- PITX2’s Binding sites and conservation of promoters revealed that several searchers, diagnostics laboratories, and others, to any stakeholders who genes directly affected by PITX2.among these, promoter of were may wish to, for example, check for evidence of causal influence upon cer- cloned into PGL4-14 vector then this construct co-transfected into HeLa tain disease states, and/or incorporate the data into locus-specific databa- cells with expression vector of PITX2. ses. While data generators generally do not object to disseminating anony- IPnLtEeKreHsGti5ngly Dual luciferase assay revealed that PITX2 transcription factor, mised diagnostic data, they are not motivated to do so because of the effort which is known to be involve in ocular development, increase the activity of and time involved. Cafe Variome specifically addresses these issues by: promoter and expression of its downstream gene. - Enabling data analysis tools used by research and diagnostic laboratories J11.10 with a “data submission” function which automatically pushes diagnostic Next generation sequencing for molecular diagnosis of data to Cafe Variome, which acts as a universal data reception and adverti- neuromuscular diseases sement point N. Vasli1,2,3, J. Böhm1,2,3, S. Le Gras11,2,3, J. Muller1,2,4, C. Pizot1,2,3, B. Jost1,2,3, A. Echaniz- - Offering manual support to laboratories to move their variant datasets into Laguna5, V. Laugel6, C. Tranchant5, R. Bernard7, F. Plewniak1,2,3, S. Vicaire1,2,3, N. Levy7, J. Cafe Variome (legacy data and new data in batches or in real time). Chelly8, J. Mandel1,2,4, V. Biancalana1,2,4, J. Laporte1,2,3; 1IGBMC(Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire), ILLKIRCH, The development of Cafe Variome (based at the University of Leicester) France, 2Inserm, U964, Illkirch, France, 3CNRS, UMR7104, Illkirch, France, 4Laboratoire involves the cooperation of diagnostic software companies PhenoSystems Diagnostic Génétique, Faculté de Médecine, CHRU, Strasbourg, France, 5Département (Gensearch) and Interactive Biosoftware (Alamut) as well as academic de Neurologie, Hôpital Civil de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 66Service de Pédiatrie, partners in the Bioinformatics Support Group at Leiden University Medical Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHU), Strasbourg, France, 7Faculté de Médecine de Centre (LUMC) whose Mutalyzer data-validation tool will allow us to feed- Marseille, Université de la Méditerranée, Inserm UMRS 910 Génétique Médicale et back data-inconsistencies to submitters, and at NGRL Manchester who have Génomique Fonctionnelle, Marseille, France, 8Institut Cochin, INSERM Unité 1016, CNR extensive expertise in diagnostic databases through their development of UMR 1408, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France. DMuDB. Introduction: J11.08 Mutation screening of ATP13A2 in early onset Iranian Parkinson‘s disease patients Neuromuscular diseases (NMD) are debilitating disorders with a strong M. Malakouti Nejad1, A. Alavi2, M. Hashemi3, G. Shahidi4, E. Elahi2; impact on the individuals and society. Despite tremendous research and 1Science and Research Branch,Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, clinical efforts, the molecular causes of NMD are still unknown for about 2School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic 40% of patients and additional genes remain to be found. In order to provi- Republic of Iran, 3Tehran medical Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic de a faster and cheaper molecular diagnosis for NMD patients and to detect Republic of Iran, 4Tehran University of Medical Sciences, University of Tehran, Tehran, dRieffseurletnst types of mutations, we have validated sequence capture, DNA bar- Islamic Republic of Iran. coding and next generation sequencing (NGS). : Using targeted re-sequencing of 267 genes implicated in NMD, we sequen- Parkinson’s disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative move- ced 16 patients (4 pools of 4 DNAs) with different types of mutations where ment disorder whose average age of onset is 60 years. Individuals in whom we knew the mutations in half of them. We could successfully detect all the symptoms first manifest before age of 40 years are classified as earlpya ornkisnet disease-causing variants in the 8 patients with known mutations (covering PD (EOPPDI)N cKa1ses. DJ1 ATP13A2 point mutations, intronic (-10nt from splice site), a small indel and a large To date, 4 genes rAeTsPp1o3nAsi2b le for early EOPD have been identified, / dCeolnectilouns)io.Fnor patients with unknown mutations, we used a ranking program PARK2, /PARK8, /PARK7 and /PARK9. Among these ge- and we could find the disease-causing mutations in several of them. nes, mutaAtTioPn1s3 Ain2 are the least common. Mutations in PARK9 have : been reported to cause autosomal recessive early onset Parkinson’s disea- We conclude that NGS is a powerful approach to identify potential disease- se (PD). is located on chromosome 1p36, contains 29 exons, and causing variants, a prerequisite for genetic counseling and better healthca- codes a transmembrane protein of 1180 amino acids which belongs to the re. it should allow reducing the diagnosis time and its cost. Group 5 P-type ATPase superfamily. The function and substraLtReR sKp2ecPifRicKiNty It might represent a first screening without the need for detailed clinical oDfJ 1the codPeIdN pKr1o tein remains unknown. Here we present results of mutation criteria for inclusion that may be absent in atypical forms of the diseases or screening in 14 Iranian EOPD patients in whom mutations in , , when the disease begins. In addition, the analysis might be proposed before ATP,1 a3nAd2 were previously ruled out. The average age at onset of the the need of more invasive investigations such as biopsy. This emerging stra- Iranian patients was 20 years, and the range was 11-31 yeaIrVsS. 8T+h1e 9wGh>oAle tegy is likely to become a standard tool for routine genetic diagnosis. coding region (29 exons) and exon-intron boundaries were se- J11.11 quenced from genomic DNA. A novel homozygous variation ( ) Mitochondrial Defects in Trisomy 21 Fetuses might contribute to the was identified in non-coding region in one sporadi.c patient. To identify the Down Syndrome Neurological Phenotype effect of this variation in splicing, NNsplice software wPRasK Nused.The results A. Izzo1, F. Bonfiglio1, R. Manco1, M. Prisco1, C. Piccoli2, F. Gentile3, G. Calì3, N. Capitanio2, showed, thAisT Pva1r3iAa2tion isn’t effective on splice site This patient also had a A. Conti1, L. Nitsch1; polymorphism (c.1.138G>C) in heterozygous state in . Thus we con- 1University of Naples Federico II, Naples, Italy, 2University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy, clude that genetic variability is unlikely to cause or influence the 3Institute of Experimental Endocrinology and Oncology, National Council of Research, development of PD Naples, Italy. J11.09 Effects of PITX2 as a Transcription factor in ocular development on their Target genes Hsa21 trisomy has been associated to mitochondrial dysfunction in Down H. Moazzeni1, A. Sadighi gilani1, H. Paylakhi2, E. Elahi1; Syndrome (DS) mouse models and the dysregulation of genes encoding mi- 1University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2University of Damghan, tochondrial proteins has been demonstrated in human trisomic fetal brains Damghan, Islamic Republic of Iran. by microarray analysis. Since mitochondrial function has a central role in many neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer and Parkinson, it has been hypothesized that the mitochondrial defect might contribute to the DS The development of the eye comprises a series of inductive events. A number mental retardation. of genes that include transcription factors, growth factors, nuclear proteins The aim of this study was to fully characterize the mitochondrial defect in and enzymes are involved in multiple cascades of events in ocular develop- fibroblasts derived from trisomic human fetuses. ment and other developmental processes. These developmental regulatory Genes mapping to chromosomes different from 21, and implicated in multip- networks are therefore not only important in the development of the eye but le mitochondrial functions such as respiratory chain, mitochondrial bioge- also in the development of the whole embryo as well. nesis and structure, were studied by qRT-PCR. Many of the analyzed genes, The Pituitary homeobox 2 (PITX2) and Forkhead box C (FOXC1) proteins are including PGC-1 α, a gene that plays a key role in mitochondrial biogenesis, examples of such transcription factors.PITX2 is a member of the paired-bi- were significantly down-regulated in trisomic versus euploid fibroblasts, coid family of homeodomain (HD) transcription factors. Pituitary homeobox supporting the hypothesis that Hsa21 trisomy perturbs the expression of proteins are actively involved in a wide range of developmental processes, mitochondrial genes. Mitochondria ultrastructure, assessed by electron including formation of the pituitary gland, hind limb and anterior segment microscopy, revealed morphological abnormalities in trisomic fibroblasts, of the eye. 41 genes for PITX2 were identified by Expression profiles derived like giant mitochondria with irregular shape, breaks of both inner and outer using microarray. membranes and altered cristae pattern. Functional studies demonstrated a Usage of Bioinformatics tools for determination of promoter region, finding significant reduction of oxygen consumption rate and of respiratory chain www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 405 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J12.02 High expression of IL-10 in Netherton Syndrome complex I activity, a decrease of mtDNA copy number and an increased pro- S. Pehlivan1, S. Oguzkan Balci2, S. Inaloz3, E. Kucukosmanoglu4, T. Sever2, O. Keskin4, A. duction of reactive oxygen species in trisomic fibroblasts. Gülel3, K. Erciyas5; These results are indicative of a widespread mitochondrial dysfunction and 1University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and support the hypothesis that it might contribute to the DS neurological phe- Genetics, Gaziantep, Turkey, 2University of Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 3University of Gaziantep, Faculty notype. of Medicine, Department of Dermatology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 4University of Gaziantep, J11.12 Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Allergy, GAZIANTEP, Turkey, 5University of Extended comparative analysis of high resolution array platforms for Gaziantep, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Periodontology, GAZIANTEP, Turkey. genome wide detection of CNV Objectives: A. E. Urban1, R. Haraksingh1, M. Haney1, A. Abyzov2, M. Gerstein2, M. Snyder1; 1Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 2Yale University, New Haven, CT, United Netherton syndrome (NS) is a rare autosomal recessive disor- States. der, characterized by congenital ichthyosiform erythroderma, trichorrhexis invaginata and severe atopic diathesis. Considering that cytokines are invol- ved in NS pathogenesis and that cytokine gene polymorphism may affect cy- High-density oligonucleotide array CGH is now a widely available tool for the analysis of genomic copy number variation (CNV), in discovery studies, tMoektinheo dpsro:duction, our purpose was to investigate the association between NS and IL-6, IL-10, IFN-γ, TGF-β1 and TNF-α polymorphisms. for the validation of CNVs detected with other means (i.e. sequencing) and increasingly in cytogenetic diagnostics. Results: Cytokine genotyping and haplotyping were performed in a family with NS by PCR-SSP method. Various platforms are available from several different suppliers, utilizing We observed GCC GCC haplotypes (high expression) of IL-10 gene either array Comparative Genome Hybridization (aCGH) alone or in combi- nation with SNP genotyping. pCoolnycmluosripohnis:ms (-1082 A/G, -819 T/C, -592 C/A) in proband with NS and no association with IL-6, IFN-γ, TGF-β1 and TNF-α polymorphisms. Earlier [Haraksingh et al., PLoS One, 2011] we carried out a quantitative GCC GCC haplotypes which leads to high expression levels of comparison analysis of the performances of twelve leading genome-wide IL-10 may be associated with etiopathogenesis of NS. CNV detection platforms. We tested the ability of the different array types to J12.03 accurately detect Gold Standard sets of CNVs in the genome of HapMap CEU Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease in Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) sample NA12878. The Gold Standards used were a 1000 Genomes Project P. I. Gurieva1, N. R. Maximova1,2, T. Y. Nikolaeva1, A. L. Sukhomyasova3,2; sequencing-based set of 3997 validated CNVs and an ultra high-resolution 1M.K.Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2Yakut aCGH-based set of 756 validated CNVs. Scientific Center of complex medical problems, Siberean Branch of the Russian Academy The arrays that were originally analyzed were the NimbleGen 4.2 M, 2.1 M of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Republican Hospital №1 - National and 3×720 K Whole Genome and CNV focused arrays, the Agilent 1×1 M CGH Medical Center, Yakutsk, Russian Federation. and High Resolution and 2×400 K CNV and SNP+CGH arrays, the Illumina Human Omni1Quad array and the Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array. We have since then added the NimbleGen 12-plex and 6-plex platforms, respectively, to the Background: Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) is the largest region in Russia. comparative analysis. It is located in the North-East part. Population of republic makes 958,021 We compared the arrays with the criteria of sensitivity, total number detec- persons. The leading place in structure of a genetic pathology in Yakutia is ted, size range and breakpoint resolution of CNV. We found that arrays with occupied with hereditary disease of nervous system among which one of the genome-wide CNV-focused design principle generally outperformed the most common is Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT). Prevalence CMT in whole-genome (evenly spaced tiling) designs. Our results should be useful the world makes 4,7-40 per 100,000 population, in Yakutia prevalence has when designing CNV detection strategies in both research and clinical set- made 11,8 per 100,000. Methods: the research is carried out by the materi- tings. als from Republican Genetic Registry of inherited and congenital pathology of Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) in medical-genetic consultation Department J12. Molecular basis of Mendelian disorders of the National Medical Center. The diagnosis was established on the basis of anamnestic data, data of neurological examination, genealogic analysis, electroneuromiography and molecular-genetic analysis with the use of mar- J12.01 kers 17 dup4, 17 dup5 in gene PMP22 (locus 17 p12-p11.2). Results: we Ataxia with oculomotor apraxia, type 2 (AOA2) in a Russian family studied 113 medical records of patients with CMT in the age of 6 to 75 (ave- M. V. Kurkina, E. Y. Zakharova, G. E. Rudenskaya; rage age is 33,30±1,45), male - 60 (53%), female - 53 (47%). There were Medical Genetics Research Centre, Moscow, Russian Federation. 87 Sakha patients (77%), Russians - 22 (20%) and 4 other nations (3%). SETX The CMT1A type was established in 37 out of 113 cases (33 %), the rest of patients had unknown mutations. For CMT1A is characterized by the onset AOA2 is an autosomal recessive ataxia caused by various mutations in in childhood, the high arch of the foot, the reduction or absence of tendon gene. Typical age of onset is 15-20 years (variability 3-30). Progressing reflexes, upset sensitivity on polyneuritic type, hypotrophy of peroneal mu- ataxia due to cerebellar atrophy and polyneuropathy are main disabling scles, occurrence of stepping gait. features. Oculomotor apraxia (OA), AinPaRbXil ity to coordinate eye movements, J12.04 is a spePcIiKfi c3 sRi5gn seen in half of patients. Serum alpha-fetoprotein raise is A further case of lamellar ichtyosis having H435Y mutation in helpful. AOA group includes AOA1 ( gene) with onset in 4-5 years and CYP4F22 gene AOA3 ( ) described in 2012 in a Saudi family. OA is typical also for E. Arslan Ates1, F. Hazan2, S. Yamacı2, H. Onay1, F. Ozkinay1; Louis-Bar ataxia-telangiectasia. Recently an AOA1 case was confirmed in 1Ege University Faculty of Medicine, Izmir, Turkey, 2Dr. Behçet Uz Children‘s Hospital, our laboratory. A first Russian AOA2 case in a 25-year-old male, an only child Izmir, Turkey. in the family, is presented. The disease started in 18 years, in 23 years he lost independent walking due to incoordination and weakness; ataxia in hands and dysarthria were moderate. OA was found on neurological examination Autosomal recessive congenital ichthyosis (ARCI) is a rare keratinisation but produced little symptoms. Sensorimotor axonal polyneuropathy was disorder with an estimated prevalence 1:100.000-300.000. It is classified confirmed by electroneuromyography. MRI showed moderate cerebellar into two groups: Lameller Ichthyosis (LI) and congenital ichthyosiform atrophy. Alpha-fetoprotein level was tenfold raised. A hereditary ataxia was erythroderma (CIE). The major difference between these two forms is sca- consideSreEdT Xfr om the disease onset, and a number of genetic tests were per- le property. Although plate-like, dark brown scales are common in LI, fine formed, but AOA2 was recognized only seven years later. On direct sequen- scales are mostly observed in CIE patients. ARCI is a genetically heterogenic cing of exons 6-8 a novel frame-shift mutation c.2623-2626 del 4 in disease. To date mutations in TGM1, ALOX12B, ALOXE3, NIPAL4, CYP4F22 heterozygous state was detected which is sufficient for AOA2 confirmation; and ABCA12 genes have been have been described in ARCI. the allelic mutation is in search. DNA diagnostics permits genetic counseling We report a five-months-old girl with lameller ichtyosis. Parental consan- and prenatal testing in AOA families. OA should be purposefully searched for guinity in this case strongly suggested autosomal recessive inheritance. She in children and young adults suspicious of autosomal recessive ataxias. was born with collodion membrane and had grayish scaling. There were no mutations in the molecular genetic analysis of TGM1 and NIPAL4 genes. Following this, CYP4F22 gene was sequenced and a homozygous c.1303 C >T (p.H435Y) mutation was found in the index patient. The parents were heterozygous for the mutation. The case presented here is the first Turkish ARCI case having this particular mutation. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org406 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J12.05 Profile of Iranian Genome variation of connexin 31 gene M. Falah1, M. Houshmand2, Y. Ghavami1, M. Balali1, M. Farhadi1; receptor-binding region known as high conservative site-B (3359-3369) of 1Department and Research Centre of ENT & Head and, Tehran, Islamic Republic of apoB fused to 5‘-terminus of GFP gene. Fragment of apoB gene was ampli- Iran, 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, ficated through PCR. The template was human DNA. Vector was constructed Islamic Republic of Iran. bapy odBir ect cloning of apoB gene fragment with SalI and HindIII endonucleases. Also we have inserted sequence encoding polyhistidine tag to 5‘-terminus of to mE.ackoeli the metal chelate affinity chromatography of fusion protein Background & Objective: The connexins are a family of at least 20 homolo- possible. Plasmid was successfully sequenced and studied by restriction gous proteins in humans that form aqueous channels connecting the interi- analysis. cells transformed with this plasmid vector and incubated in ors of coupled cells and mediating electrical and chemical communication. IPTG-containing medium showed presence of fluorescent protein. Mutations in GJB3, the gene encoding the gap junction protein Connexin 31 Maximums of excitation and emission of fusion protein are equal to GFP cha- (CX31), have been pathogenically linked to erythrokeratodermia and non- racteristics. This protein has been extracted and purified on nickel agarose syndromic autosomal dominant (DFNA2) or recessive hereditary hearing column. Synthesized fusion protein could become basis for diagnosticum of impairment (HHI). FH, with which functionalality of LDL-receptor could be measured. Studies In the present study, we aimed to characterize the genome variation of GJB3 of binding of fusion protein to cells receptor in cultures of hepatocytes and in Iranian patients with hearing impairment. fibroblasts are taking place. Methods: Twenty five non-syndromic autosomal recessive hearing loss pa- J12.08 tients who were normal for two major responsible genes of non syndromic To characterize and analyze the haplotypes of normal and “at risk of hearing loss (GJB2 and GJB6) were tested with direct sequencing of entire expansion” FMR1 CGG repeat alleles coding region of the GJB3 gene. M. S. Khaniani, S. M. Derakhshan; Results: Single nucleotide sequence alteration was present in 15 out of 25 Tabriz university of Medical Science, Tabriz, Islamic Republic of Iran. patients (60%) and 40 % of patients were normal. Five different variations that were detected are: G866A (34%), G798T (20%), C856A (6%), C357T (2%) and C93T (2%). The mechanism of instability of FMR1 alleles during transmission from Conclusions: 60 percent of patients showed single polymorphism in coding mother to offspring and the exact timing of CGG repeat expansion are still and non coding part of GJB3. All patients were normal for sequencing of two unknown and recently the investigation of instability of the FMR1 gene has well known genes for non syndromic hearing loss (connexin 26 and conne- been a major goal in Fragile X research. xin 30). Therefore this high percentage of genetic variation in GJB3 may have The haplotypes which are in linkage disequilibrium with these unstable alle- pathogenic effects on Iranian population, but this needs more investigation les provide not only potential markers of those with the potential to expand on normal subjects but also clues to their inherent susceptibility. This approach is important as J12.06 it might contribute to understanding the mechanism for instability of CGG Early-onset primary dystonia (DYT1) in Iranian patients repeats in the initial steps of small CGG expansion. H. Moshiri1, V. ghodsinejadkalahroudi1, O. Ariyani1, M. Houshmand2; To address this issue and make a contribution to understanding the basis 1Special Medical Center, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institutes of Genetic of the mutational process, three flanking microsatellites markers (DXS548- Engineering & Biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. FRAXAC1-FRAXAC2 ) and two SNPs (ATL1 and FMRb) were genotyped in a large cohort and haplotype associations compared among subgroups of normal and intermediate alleles. It was of special interest whether there Early-onset primary dystonia (DYT1) typically presents in childhood or ado- were differences in the distribution of haplotypes across the normal and lescence and only on occasion in adulthood. Dystonic muscle contractions intermediate allele ranges in two different cohorts. causing posturing of a foot, leg, or arm are the most common presenting J12.09 findings. Dystonia is usually first apparent with specific actions; e.g., wri- Determination of the nucleotide variations in exon 2 of GJB2 and ting or walking. Over time, the contractions frequently (but not invariably) exan3 of GJB6 genes in central part of IRAN. become evident with less specific actions and spread to other body regions. s. Asadollahi1, M. seyedhassani1, m. neshan1, s. kalantar2, f. saeb1; No other neurologic abnormalities are present, except for postural arm tre- 1Dr.seyedhassani genetic center, yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2yazd medical science mor. Disease severity varies considerably even within the same family .Iso- university, yazd, Islamic Republic of Iran. lated writer’s cramp may be the only sign. DYT1 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner with reduced penetrance. TOR1A, encoding the protein torsin-1A (torsinA), is the only gene known to be associated with this disea- INTRODUCTION: GJB2 & GJB6 are human genes encoding for gap junction se. DYT1 is diagnosed by molecular genetic testing of TOR1A revealing the protein. Defects in these genes lead to the most common form of congenital three-base pair deletion c.907_909delGAG in most affected individuals. deafness. Some variations are reported in different countries. Oral medications are usually tried first and include anticholinergics, bacl- METHODS: 120 individuals were evaluated by pcr-sequencing. Some of ofen, and others alone or in combination (levodopa, clonazepam and other them were suffering from deafness & others were their relations that were benzodiazepines, carbamazepine, and dopamine-depleting agents). referred for carrier detection. We investigated molecularly 12 cases suspected to DYT1 using PCR and se- RESULTS: of the 120 individuais,22 had GJB2 mutations,6 were found to be quence analysis of TOR1A gene. C.904_906delGAG heterozygote was found heterozygous for 35delG,4 were heterozygous for C:127 G>A (R>H),one case in one patient. This result showed that this alteration was observed in less was heterozygous & one was homozygous for C:143 C>T (R>W),5 were he- than %10 of our cases. The rest of cases are being investigated for the other terozygous for C:153 A>G (V>I),that 3 of them were deaf & 2 of them were relevant genes for familial dystonia. healthy but one case was homozygous for this mutation & he wasn’t deaf. J12.07 One was heterozygous for C:30 A>G & one was heterozygous for 57delT.one Plasmid vector encoding recombinant protein ApoB100(site B) - GFP individual had a compound heterozygous mutation of 35delG/C:143 C>T. for measuring functional disruptions of LDL-receptor there wasn’t any change in exon 3 of GJB6 gene. There was only one silent V. A. Zhemkov1, E. A. Vasileva1, D. S. Polyakov2, N. A. Grudinina2, K. V. Solovyov2, T. D. variant in sequencing of this gene.(G>A (T>T)) Aleynikova2, M. M. Shavlovsky2; CONCLUSION: these results can help genetic counseling & molecular geneti- 1Faculty of Medical Physics and Bioengineering, Saint-Petersburg State Polytechnical tion in evaluation of GJB2 & GJB6 variation. University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, 2Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. J12.10 Investigation of EPM2A and NHLRC1 Mutations in Turkish Patients with Lafora Disease O. Ozdemir1, F. N. Tuncer1, I. Karacan1, S. U. Iseri1, B. Baykan2, C. Gurses2, A. Dervent2, U. Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH, OMIM 143890) is rather widespread Ozbek1, N. Bebek2; autosomal dominant disease leading to increased level of low-density lipo- 1Institute for Experimental Medicine, Department of Genetics, Istanbul, Turkey, 2Istanbul proteins (LDL) what in turn leads to higher risk of atherosclerosis. FH is University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, Istanbul, Turkey. associated with disorder of LDL-receptor. Investigation of Lafora Disease Mutations in Turkish Population Apolipoprotein B100 (apoB) is the only protein component of LDL particles providing their binding to receptor. Sub-clinical diagnostics of FH, such as genetic analysis, is difficult due to large size of LDL-receptor gene. Study of The progressive myoclonic epilepsies (PMEs) are composed of a rare group intermolecular interactions between receptor-active domain of apoB (3359- of inherited neurodegenerative diseases with a prevalence of 1% of epilep- 3369) and LDL-receptor gives new opportunities of measuring functionality tic syndromes in children and adults around the world. of LDL-receptor. For this purpose we created the plasmid vector encoding Among PMEs, Lafora disease (OMIM #254780) has been recognized as the www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 407 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J12.13 Mutation detection in a large Iranian family with spinocereberllar most common and severe form of adult-onset progressive epilepsy with an ataxia type 6 (SCA-6) autosomal recessive form of inheritance. Affected individuals exhibit epilep- S. Ahmadlou1, M. Keramatipour1, M. Togha2; tic seizures with a progressive deterioration to status epilepticus combined 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical with progressive dementia, and starch-like polyglucosans called Lafora bo- Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Neurology, Sina Hospital, dies detected in skin biopsies. The age of onset usually occurs betweeEnP Mag2eAs Tehran University of Medical Sciences,, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of 12 and 17 years, and patients usually die within 10 years of onset. Appro- ximately. N80H%LR oCf1 affEePcMte2dB individuals have displayed a mutation in gene located on chromosome 6q24, which encodes laforin; a tyrosine phos- Spinocerebellar ataxia is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disor- phatase ( ) gene, recently mapped to chromosome 6p22, der characterized by slowly progressive ataxia. 30 different loci have been encodes E3 ubiquitin ligase, and was shown to carry mutations responsible reported to be responsible for cerebellar ataxia. In general SCA 1-7 are the for the disease. most frequent forms and account for 50-80 % of ADCA in most studies. The The proposed study comprises mEuPtMa2tiAonal anNaHlyLsRisC o1f 9 patients diagnosed mutation associated with these loci is abnormal expansion of CAG repeat. with the Lafora disease after all necessary clinical examinations. All exons The frequency of SCA subtypes varies in different ethnic groups. and exon-intron boundaries of and genes were PCR am- We here investigated a large Iranian pedigree with clinical presentation of plified from genomic DNA and analyzed for mutations through direct DNA ADCA consisting of 13 affected members in three generation. sequencing.NHLRC1 Genomic DNA was extracted from blood of patients with cerebellar ataxias One of the patients’ revealed homozygous c.436G>A missense mutation and unaffected individuals. To amplify a fragment of SCA6/CACNA gene con- (D146N) in gene, which was previously reported in Danish fami- taining the CAG repeat, the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was perfor- lies. med. PCR products were run on 3% agarose gel, wild-type and expanded This is the preliminary result of the study which is continuing with a larger alleles were extracted from the gel and were sequenced with both forward group of patients. and reverse primers. Analysis of the sequence data determined the number J12.11 of repeats for the normal and expanded allele as 11 and 24 repeats respec- Novel deletion c.22-1320_633+1224del in gene CYB5R3 in patients tively. The results were confirmed by capillary electrophoresis using fluo- with recessive congenital methemoglobinemia in Russia rescent primer labeled with 6-FAM. The size of the normal and expanded N. Galeeva1, I. Kleymenova2, S. Nenasheva3, A. Poliakov1; alleles were determined as 128 bp and 169 bp respectively with capillary 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Voronezh Regional electrophoresis. Pediatric Medical Hospital № 1, Voronezh, Russian Federation, 3Region Medical genetic Investigating patients in different generation showed a stable number of consultation of the Samara Oblast, Clinical Hospital MI Kalinin, Samara, Russian repeats, with no sign of increase in the number of repeats. This finding was Federation. consistent with the clinical findings in patients because no sign of anticipa- tion, such as earlier age of onset and more severe clinical presentation was seen. Recessive congenital methemoglobinemia (RCM) type I and II is a rare auto- J12.14 somal disease, which characterized by deficiency of soluble or soluble and Clinical and molecular characterization of two large families membrane-bound forms of NADH-cytochrome b5 reductase (cytb5r) ap- segregating severe tooth agenesis propriately. The more severe type II form is characterized by cyanosis with D. Gabrikova, J. Bernasovska, D. Grejtakova, A. Bozikova, I. Boronova, S. Macekova; mental retardation, the only symptom for type I is cyanosis. Mutations in Department of Biology, Faculty of Humanities and Natural Sciences, University of gene CYB5R3 is the molecular-genetics cause of both types of disease. We Presov, Presov, Slovakia. have investigated patient with type II of disease and found deletion of exons 2-7 in homozygous state. Also we have investigated two sisters with type I of RCM and found in two sisters only one mutation p.Val253Met in exon 9 in Tooth agenesis is the most common abnormality affecting formation of heterozygosis state, which was previously described. Analysis of haplotypes dentition in humans. The absence of six or less teeth is usually referred as for 4 markers, which flank gene CYB5R3, detected one general haplotype hypodontia, while oligodontia is a term used for agenesis of more than six in patient with type II in homozygous state and in two sisters with type I teeth excluding third molars. Tooth agenesis can be found either in isolated in heterozygosis state. Then we developed system, which permitted us to form (non-syndromic) or it can be associated with systemic condition or detect exact borders of the deletion in introns 1 and 7. The size of deletion syndrome, such as various types of ectodermal dysplasia (syndromic tooth formed 12 kb and the name of deletion was c.22-1320_633+1224del. In next agenesis). In addition to previously known genes (PAX9, MSX1, AXIN2, EDA, step we developed system, which permitted us to detect deletion c.22-1320 EDAR), mutations in EDARRAD and WNT10 gene were recently found to be _633+1224del in homo- and heterozygosis state, and we revealed this dele- involved in isolated forms of tooth agenesis. Here we report unusual cases tion in two sisters. Our patients with type I and II of RCM are not relations of two large families of Roma origin segregating non-syndromic oligodontia but they live in Volga region in Russia. with very variable phenotype (4-17 missing teeth in family I, 2-12 missing J12.12 teeth in family II). Molecular analysis of seven suspected genes will be pre- Screening DFNB59 gene mutation in non-syndromic genetic hearing sented. loss in Iran This work was supported by projects LPP-0331-09 and ITMS f. azadegan, N. Bagheri, M. Abolhasani, E. Farrokhi, M. Hashmzadeh Chaleshtori; 26220120041. Cell and Molecular Research Center, Shahrekord University of Medical Sciences, J12.15 Shahrekord, Islamic Republic of Iran. GJB2 caused hearing loss in patients from Belarus Background and aim E. A. Bliznetz1, D. N. Martsul2, O. G. Khorov3, T. G. Markova4, A. V. Polyakov1; 1Research Centre for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation, 2Grodno regional : Hearing Impairment (HI) is the most prevalent hospital, Grodno, Belarus, 3Grodno State Medical University, Grodno, Belarus, 4National Neurosensory disorder which is heterogeneous and can also occur due to Research Centre for Audiology and Hearing Rehabilitation, Moscow, Russian Federation. environmental causes. The majority of hearing deficiencies are of genetic GJB2 origin affecting about 60% of the HI cases. A novel gene DFNB59 encods pejvakin has been recently shown to cause deafness. This study aims to de- Mutations in Connexin 26 gene ( ) aGreJB r2esponsible for more than half of all tMeremthioned :the frequency of DFNB59 gene mutations in coding region the gene cases of prelingual nonsyndromic recessive deafness in CGaJuBc2a sians. The carrier in Iran. frequency of the c.35delG mutation in gene was found to be as high as In this descriptive experimental study, we investigated the pres- 1-4% in the European populations. Here a prevalence of caused cases and ence of DFNB59 gene mutations in Exons (2-7) of the gene in 80 deaf sub- a mutation spectrum in 112 unrelated probands (and 8 their sibs) with pre- jects. DNA was extracted using standard phenol -chloroform method. The lingual nonsyndromic deafness from Belarus are shown. Among the probands sRcerseuelntisn:g of gene mutations was performed by PCR-SSCP/HA procedure. there were different an ethnic groups iGnJcBlu2ding Belarusians (53%), Poles, Rus- Finally, the possible mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing. sians, Ukrainians, AzerbaijaGnJBia2ns. In 50 probands and in all their sibs with hea- In all, 9 polymorphisms 793C>G were found in 80 non-syndromic, ring loss (45%) biallelic mutations in gene were detected. We revealed 8 gCeonnectliuc shioeanr:ing loss subjects studied. However no DFNB59 gene mutation pathological defects in the gene: the most common mutation c.35delG (al- was identified. lelic frequency: 84%), c.313_326del14 (7%), c.-23+1G>A (IVS1+1G>A) (2%), We conclude that the association of DFNB59 gene mutations p.Met34Thr (2%), p.Glu120del (2%) and less frequent c.235delC, c.167delT with hearing loss is very low in samples studies. and p.Ile82Met. TGhJBe2 carrier rate in hearing individuals from Belarus for mutati- on c.35delG was estimated as 3% (8/234). A prevalence of hearing loss caused by mutations in gene was calculated to be 1/2500 in Belarus. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org408 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J12.16 The heterozygous carrier frequency of ABCA4 gene mutations in Russia tion al loci have been associated with ARCI. Mutations in these genes account M. T. Bondarenko, A. Chukhrova, A. Loginova, A. V. Polyakov; for disease in 70-75% of the patients. Research Center for Medical Genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Weperformedwhole genome homozygosity mapping in an Iranian ARCI fa- mily using high density SNP chips. Disease status in the family linked to a homozygous region of 2.2 Mb on Stargardt disease is the most common hereditary early-onset macular dege- chromosome 17. The ALOX12B gene associated with ARCI lies within the neration. It characterized by slowly progressive loss of central vision. region and mutation screening revealed a homozygous mutation causing Autosomal-recessive Stargardt desease type 1 (STGD1) is caused by muta- p.Arg442Gln. The missense mutation p.Arg442Gln (c.1325C>T) in exon 10 tions in the ATP-binding cassette transporter gene (ABCA4). ABCA4 gene just was reported in one Japanese patients as compound heterozygous and includes 50 exons, encodes 2273 amino-acid and mapped to 1p22. There are p.Arg442Gln mutation was not found in his parents and was thought to be about 500 mutations in the ABCA4 gene have been reported. a de novo mutation. But, R442Q mutation in ALOX12B in our patients was 882 unrelated control individuals and 100 unrelated STGD1 patients from homozygous in both patients and heterozygous in their parents. Phenotypic Russia were screened for the prevalent European ABCA4 gene mutations: similarities and variations among the mutation carrying patients are de- Gly863Ala, Ala1038Val and Gly1961Gln by multiplex ligation-dependent tected but, two patients showed a striking palmoplantar hyperlinearity. It probe amplification (MLPA) and subsequent gel electrophoresis. In the con- seems mutation in ALOX 12B gene is associated with mild form of ARCI and trol group the allele frequency of Gly863Ala, Ala1038Val and Gly1961Gln hyperlinearity in palms and soles. were 0.17%, 0.51% and 0.62%, respectively. In STGD1 patients the allele J12.19 frequency for mutations Gly863Ala, Ala1038Val and Gly1961Gln were 1.0%, Molecular Genetic Diagnostics of Phenylketonuria in Kazakhstan 17% and 6.0%, respectively. Heterozygous carrier frequency of mutation G. Svyatova, G. Berezina, Z. Makhmutova, D. Salimbaeva; Gly863Ala is high in different countries of Europe (up to 1 out of 18 in Nort- The Scientific Center of the obstetrics, gynecology and perinatology, Almaty, Kazakhstan. hern Europe), but it is significantly lower in Russia (1 out of 294 by our data). Mutation Ala1038Val is the most frequent in Russian STGD1 patients, but The aim of our study was to determine the spectrum and frequency of the prevailing mutation in control group is Gly1961Gln. The possible explana- most common mutations of RAH gene in patients with phenylketonuria in tion is the heterozygous state of Gly1961Gln mutation provokes an age-re- Kazakhstan. lated macular degeneration (AMD) and reduces this mutations` frequency Materials and methods. Molecular genetic analysis of mutations in PAH gene in the group of STGD1 patient. This reseach is the first attempt to define (R408W, R261Q, R252W, IVS10-11, IVS12 +1, R158Q, P281L, IVS14 +5) car- the heterozygous carrier frequency of ABCA4 gene mutations in Russian ried out using PCR technique. We studied DNA from blood of 44 patients population. with phenylketonuria and their parents. J12.17 Results. The results of our study showed that in Kazakhstan the most impor- Homozygosity mapping of a family with a mixed dystonia phenotype tant are the six mutations: R408W with frequency 0,455, mutation R261Q E. Jaberi1, M. Nemati1, G. Shahidi2, M. Rohani2, I. Safari1, E. Elahi1; with frequency 0,136, IVS12nt1, IVS10nt546, P2812L, IVS12+1G>A with the 1School of Biology, University College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic same frequency 0,023. Besides, we had neutral polymorphism V245V in 7 Republic of Iran, 2Department of Neurology, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, exon of a PAH gene that described earlier (Dworniczak et al., 1990). University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Conclusions: The examination of mutant alleles in patients and their fami- Introduction: lies or investigation of alleged heterozygous carriers with pathological mu- tations provided good possibility for prenatal diagnosis of the fetus. This is Dystonia results from involuntary concomitant contraction of important factor for prevention of hereditary diseases in families. agonist and antagonist muscles, with overflow of unwanted muscle contrac- J12.20 tions into adjacent muscles. Several classifications of dystonia are based on Whole exome sequencing combined with linkage analysis identifies topographic distribution, age at onset, cause, or genetics. According to the novel variations in a large Coronary Artery Disease family etiologic classification this syndrome includes primary dystonia, secondary K. Inanloo Rahatloo1, E. Elahi1, S. Davaran2, T. Fan3; dystonia, dystonia-plus syndromes, and paroxysmal dystonia. Presently, 1School of Biology, University College of Science,Tehran University, Tehran, Islamic eleven genes and seven additional loci have been reported to be associated Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Sciences,University of Tehran, Tehran, with monogenic primary dystonias. We report the mapping of a family from Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA, United States. IMraante wriiathls a &n amuetothsoomdsa:l recessive form of dystonia-plus syndrome with se- vere hearing impairment linked to the chromosome 13. Whole genome homozygosity mapping was perfor- We sought to use exome sequencing in conjunction with linkage information med in a consangu.ineous Iranian family with two dystonia affected children to identify candidate causative mutations in a large family with CAD. Linka- and five unaffected family members using high density single nucleotide po- ge analysis of this family comprising six affected and 4 unaffected individu- lRyemsuorltpsh: ism chips Patients had childhood-onset form of dystonia, muscle als revealed linkage signals at 3 Loci with maximum LOD score of 2.1. We atrophy, and severe hearing impairment. captured exomes of two affected individuals from a family and performed We observed a large homozygosity region of 15 Mega bases on sequencing analysis by a second-generation sequencer with a mean cove- chromosome 13 in all affected individuals of this family but no among the rage of 30× and sufficient depth to call variants at ~97% of each targeted nCoonn-caluffseicotneds individuals. Nearly 200 annotated genes exist within the linked exome. The shared genetic variants of these two affected individuals in the region. family being studied were filtered against the 1000 Genomes Project and : These findings indicate that the causative gene exists on chro- the dbSNP131 database. After annotation and functional expectation, three mosome 13. Because these patients are suffering from a mixed phenotype, variations were found to be candidates for CAD. we have chosen some candidate genes related to dystonia, hearing loss, and J12.21 muscle atrophy in this chromosomal region. Exome sequencing and muta- Genetic study of demyelinating form of autosomal-recessive Charcot- tion screening of candidate genes within the linked region is being perfor- Marie-Tooth diseases in Russian families med. T. B. Milovidova, E. L. Dadali, G. E. Rudenskaya, O. A. Schagina, N. V. Punina, A. L. Chuchrova; J12.18 Research centre for medical genetics, Moscow, Russian Federation. Homozygousity mapping in one Iranian pedigree affected with Autosomal Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis (ARCI) reveals linkage to region 17p13 and mutation in ALOX12B gene A. Alavi1, P. Rasooli2, M. Malakooti Nejad3, M. Mirshams Shahshahani4, E. Elahi1; Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is the most common inherited neuropa- 1University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2School of Biology, University thy. During of the scale analysis of demyelinating form of CMT in Russia the College of Science, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Science and necessity was presented of research of autosomal-recessive CMT (AR-CMT). Research Branch, Islamic Azad University, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Tehran The aim was focused on molecular analysis of the selected genes associated University of Medical Sciences, University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. with AR-CMT and construction of a molecular and genetic diagnostic algo- rithm in this group of disorders in the Russian population. We analyzed a group of 92 unrelated patients with probably autosomal Ichthyosis is clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of disorders recessive inheritance. The studies covered analysis of coding regions of characterized by abnormal skin scaling over the whole body. Autosomal the GDAP1 gene using sequencing and molecular genetic analysis of eight Recessive Congenital Ichthyosis (ARCI) is a subgroup of ichthyosis that ex- frequent occurrence mutations using two Multiplex Ligation Probe As- hibits autosomal recessive inheritance. To date, eight genes and three addi- say (MLPA) systems. The first MLPA-system contained six of frequent oc- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 409 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 currence mutations in four genes: FGD4 (Met298Thr, Met298Arg), FIG4 thinner fibrils, with a nFoKrBmPa1l 0to decreased collagen:organics ratio shown (Ile41Thr), GDAP1 (Leu239Phe), SH3TC2 (Arg954Stop, Arg658Cys). The by Raman micro-spectroscopy. In conclusion, this is the third phenotype second MLPA-system contained two frequency Gypsies mutation in two ge- caused by mutations in , adding contractures with osteopenia to the nes: NDRG1 (Arg148Stop) and SH3TC2 (Arg1109Stop). previously described severe OI with and without contractures; the Kuskok- In result the cause of AR-CMT was determined in 26% of cases (24 patients). wim mutation specifically affects collagen cross-linking. Mutations in GDAP1 gene were most frequent (18,5% or 17 patients). The J12.24 mutation Arg148Stop of NDRG1 gene was found of three patients (3,2%). Identification of mutations in PANK2 in Pantothenate kinase Mutations Arg954Stop of SH3TC2 gene and Ile41Thr of FIG4 gene were associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) patients found of two patients (2,2%). M. Ansari Dezfouli1, I. Safari1, M. Ansari Dezfouli1, M. Rohani2, G. Shahidi2, E. Elahi1; This is the first study focused on the autosomal recessive Charcot-Marie- 1University of Tehran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Tehran University of Medical Tooth disease in the Russian population, which is essential for molecular Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. diagnostics in CMT disease. J12.22 Abnormal Type I Collagen folding and matrix deposition in a Pantothenate kinase associated neurodegeneration (PKAN) is a rare auto- Cyclophilin B KO mouse model of recessive Osteogenesis Imperfecta somal recessive genetic disease classified within the group of Neurodegene- W. A. Cabral1, E. Makareeva2, M. Weis3, A. M. Barnes1, W. Chang1, S. Leikin2, D. Eyre3, J. C. ration with Brain Iron Accumulation (NBIA) disorders. Its reported preva- Marini1; lence is less than 1/1,000,000. PKAN diagnosis is based on clinical features 1Bone & Extracellular Matrix Branch, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Section and magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) and genetic analysis. Its clinical pre- on Physical Biochemistry, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 3Orthopaedic sentations include dystonia, speech defects, dysphangia, and intellectual im- Research Laboratories, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States. pairment. Dementia, severe mental retardation and severe movement disa- bility may develop at later stages. In MRI T2 weighted images, all affected individuals exhibit hypodensity in the globus pallidus region. Only in some Recessive OI is caused by deficiency of proteins involved in collagen post- cases, a region of hyperdensity in the center of the region of hypodensity translational interactions, including the collagen prolyl 3-hydroxylation creates an “Eye of Tiger” sign. complex consisting of CRTAP, P3H1 and PPIB. The function of α1(I) Pro986 Here, we report first genetic screening of Iranian PKAN patients. The sub- 3-hydroxylation is unknown, but roles in fibril alignment and matrix cross- jects included eight cases. The three patients, all of them presented the Tiger linking are speculated. PPIB, a prolyl cis-trans isomerase also known as cy- Eye,P hAaNrKbo2r ed homozygous mutations. The mutations affected Arg>Trp and clophilin B, is thought to catalyze the rate-limiting step in collagen helixP fPoIrB- Arg>Leu and Arg>Pro . All mutations were checked in 100 control individu- mation. To further charactePrpizibe -t/-he role of PPIB in collagen folding, Ppib-null als. PAmNuKt2a tion was not observed in any of the five cases without “Eye mice were generat ed from a gene-trap ES cell clone with half-normal . of TigPeArN” Ksi2g n, consistent with the proposal that there is a tight association ePxppibr-e/-ssion. Homozygous mice were verified by real-time RT-PCR between mutations and this imaging feature. The five patients wit- to completely lacktranscripts in skin,P fpibibroblasts, osteoblasts and femora hout mutations will be pursued for identification of another causing mice weigh one-third less than WT a-/n-d Het littermates. Ppib protein genes. was absent and P3h1 reduced 50% in cultured fibroblasts and osteo- J12.25 blasts. As expected, α1(I) P986P 3pi-bhydroxylation was reduced to 5-11% of The results of KRT5 and KRT14 analysis in Polish patients with WT. In agreement with previously d-e/-scribed patients with decreased P986 epidermolysis bullosa simplex 3-hydroxylation, collagen from cells had delayed electrophoretic mo- K. Wertheim-Tysarowska1, A. Giza1, C. Kowalewski2, K. Woźniak2, A. Kutkowska- bility on SDS-Urea PAGE. However, thermal stability, 5-lysyl and 4-prolyl Kaźmierczak1, A. Sobczyńska-Tomaszewska1, J. Bal1; hydroxylation of fibroblast collagen were norm-/-al. Inhibiting hydroxylation 1Medical Genetic Department, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland, of collagen with α,α’-dipyridyl resulted in Ppib collagPepnib alpha chains with 2Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland. faster elecrophoretic migration than WT chains, suggesting altered confor- mation due to loss of peptidyl-prolyl isomerization. In -/- fibroblast cul- tures, collagen deposition was decreased by 70% vs WT cultures, despite Simplex epidermolysis bullosa (SEB) is characterized by blister formation only moderate delay of secretion. These data suggest unique roles for Ppib within basal or suprabasal layers of epidermis. Twelve clinically distinct in collagen post-translational processing and extracellular matrix incorpo- subtypes of SEB have been distinguished. The localized SEB, Dowling-Meara ration, in addition to its chaperone function for folding. SEB and other generalized SEB subtypes caused by mutations in KRT5 and J12.23 KRT14 are most often. Keratins 5 and 14, encoded by them, form interme- Kuskokwim Disease, a recessive congenital contracture disorder, is diate filaments in basal keratinocytes. According to the consensus on SEB the third syndrome caused by an FKBP10 mutation diagnosis and classification, this three subtypes are inherited in an auto- A. M. Barnes1, M. Weis2, W. A. Cabral1, E. Mertz3, E. Makareeva3, G. Duncan4, W. Paton5, S. somal dominant manner. The aim of present study was to investigate the Leikin3, D. R. Eyre2, S. J. Bale6, J. C. Marini1; spectrum of mutations in Polish SEB patients. The 34 probands (10 locali- 1BEMB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2University of Washington, Seattle, zed SEB; 2 Dowling-Meara SEB; 5 other generalized SEB, 17 undefined) dia- WA, United States, 3SPB, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Christchurch gnosed on the basis of clinical symptoms or immunofluorescence mapping Hospital, Christchurch, New Zealand, 5Alaska Native Medical Center, Anchorage, AK, were included. Coding regions of KRT5 and KRT14 were analyzed by direct United States, 6Gene Dx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States. sequencing. We found 9 distinct variants in KRT5 and 7 in KRT14, inclu- ding overall 7 novel changes. In 17/34 cases full genotype was established; in remaining patients molecular analysis has not been completed yet or no Kuskokwim Disease (OMIM %208200), found solely among Alaskan Eski- mutations were identified. The most frequent mutation found in 3 distinct mos along the KuskokwimFK rBivPe1r0 delta, is a recessive syndrome characteri- families was p.Glu170Lys in KRT5, including siblings with mild SEB, where it zed by multiple congenital joint contractures, predominantly in knees and was in trans with p.Val143Ala. Both parents of these patients seem to be un- ankles. Null mutations in (Chromosome 17q21.2) have been shown affected carriers. Only few patients with compound heterozygosity in KRT5 to cause recessive osteogenesis imperfecta (OI), with (Bruck Syndrome 1) have been reported previously, however, to our knowledge, none of them or withoutF KcoBnPg1e0nital contractures. Linkage mapping of Kuskokwim Di- involved p.Val143Ala. Our preliminary results broaden the knowledge about sease to chromosome 17q12-q2F1K, tBoPg1e0ther with contractures as a variable SEB epidemiology and pathogenesis. The results have also practical impact feature of mutations, led us to sequence this gene. We identified on preparing the Polish molecular diagnostics scheme. a homozygous 3 nt deletion in exon 5 (c.875_877delACT), which J12.26 causes deletion of p.Tyr2F9K3B,P i1n0 probands from three Kuskokwim pedigrees. Limb-girdle muscular dystrophys with expressed defeats of a This mutation occurs in the 3rd PPIase domain of FKBP65 and is highly con- myocardium served among species. expression by real-time PCR ranged from T. Adyan, E. Dadali, A. Polyakov; 0.75-1.67 of control in five probands, suggesting that the transcripts are not Medical Genetics Research Center, Moscow, Russian Federation. degraded. FKBP65 protein was present in proband fibroblasts at 2.5-7.5% of control levels, demonstrating destabilization of the protein. Steady-state type I collagen biochemistry has near normal migration. Additionally, colla- Severe lesions of the myocardium at limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) gen cross-linking is decreased in probands, with 0-25% hydroxylation of the are the serious problem, sharply reducing quality and life expectancy of pa- telopeptide lysine involved in cross-linking and an 80% reduction in mature tients. In most cases a myocardium is involved in the pathological process to cross-linked collagen deposited in culture, despite normal collagen secre- a greater extent than the skeletal muscles, which causes the characteristic tion. Collagen in extracellular matrix appears more diffuse, perhaps from clinical picture, in which the main symptoms are different types of arrhyth- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org410 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 mias and malfunctions of cardionector. It is shown that the most severe dis- S532P, M539L, A543T, D545N and A550V): the most prevalent phenotype orders of the heart are observed at the following three genetic variants of was DCM/LVNC or DCM. High penetrance and early onset of disease were LGMD: LGMD 1B, LGMD 1D and X-linked form of Emery-Dreifuss muscular common (52% of affected were <21 years). The evolution was severe: 3 dystrophy, caused by mutations in genes LAMIN, DES, EMD, respectively. deaths from heart failure, 4 HTxs, 1 myectomy. CONCLUSIONS. We identi- Early diagnostics of the given forms will allow to prevent heavy complica- fied 3 novel mutations in MYH7 related to early-onset DCM and LVNC. This tions at patients and to increase duration of their life. By means of direct phenotype is shared by other mutations affecting the same sub-domain of automatic sequencing we analyzed coding sequences and adjacent introns MYH7. Such a site-specific approach could help interpreting the pathogenic of the three above mentioned genes among a sample of 12 patients (6 men, role of previously undetected mutations. 6 women), were under our supervision. At 4 from them the vertical type of J12.29 inheritance of disease in a family was observed, the others were isolated. Mutation analysis of the GRIN2B gene in Alzheimer’s Disease As a result, we obtained the following data: for 7 patients were identified F. Trecroci, R. Cittadella, E. V. De Marco, M. Liguori, P. Spadafora, G. Di Palma, V. mutations in the LAMIN gene (58,33%), for 4 in the EMD gene (33,33%) and Andreoli; for 1 in the DES gene (8,33%). Revealed some features of the clinical picture Institute of Neurological Sciences-National Research Council, Pianolago di Mangone (CS), Italy. for patients with mutations in the genes analyzed. The data obtained may be the basis for the algorithm of molecular genetic diagnosis of LGMD with severe cardiac conduction system. Various mechanisms may contribute to neurodegeneration in Alzheimer‘s J12.27 disease (AD), including glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity. This excitoto- A novel missense mutation (p.Arg309His) in the nuclear localization xic effect appears to be mediated by the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors signal sequence of spastin protein causes a complicated form of (NMDARs). The NMDAR subunit 2B (NR2B) has attracted more attention Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia A. Magariello1, C. Tortorella2, A. Patitucci1, R. Tortelli2, M. Liguori1, R. Mazzei1, F. L. due to its characteristic distribution and selective reduction in AD brain. The Conforti1, L. Citrigno1, C. Ungaro1, I. L. Simone2, M. Muglia1; potential involvement of the GRIN2B gene, encoding NR2B, in the risk for AD 1Institute of Neurological Sciences -CNR-, Piano Lago di Mangone (CS), Italy, 2Institute was evaluated in an independent series of Southern Italy samples. Clinical of Neurology, Department of Neurological and Psychiatric Sciences, University of Bari, data and blood sample were collected from 270 selected AD patients, after Bari, Italy. inform consent. All coding exons and exon-intron junctions were amplified and a mutational screening was done by DHPLC and direct sequencing. Alt- hough the six detected variants are in the coding sequence, they are silent Hereditary spastic paraplegia (HSP) is a clinically and genetically hSePteArSoT- polymorphisms: Ala5; Pro122; Ser555; Cys838; Thr888 and His1178. First, geneous group of neurodegenerative diseases causing slowly progressive we investigated Ser555 in exon 8 and His1178 in exon 13 of the GRIN2B in spasticity and weakness of the lower extremities. Mutations in the our patients and 250 healthy-matched controls. No statistically significant gene are responsible for approximately 40% of autosomal dominant HSP differences were found in GRIN2B genotype and allele frequencies (Ser555 and 6-15% of sporadic cases. Here we report the case of a 53-years old man P=0.142; His1178 P=0.868) between the AD sample and controls, even when who was complaining for a progressive gait difficulty in the last 4 years. At the subjects were stratified by gender, APOE and age of disease onset in AD the time of the study his neurological examination showed spastic parapa- patients. The results of the Ala5 and Cys838 polymorphisms were omitted resis with mild spasticity of the legs, slight weakness of the thigh and big toe (low frequencies detected), while the analysis of the Pro122-Thr888 vari- extensor muscles, hyperreflexia of arms and legs, and left extensor plantar ants are in progress.Systematic mutation search of the GRIN2B gene in our sign. Brain MRI showed diffuse T2-hyperintensities in the posterior peri- patients with AD failed to identify any functional changes. However, we will ventricular white matter, possibly due to chronic vascular damage, and a continue with a more comprehensive screening of GRIN2B polymorphisms mild atrophy of cerebellar vermis and hemispheres. The family history was that might be useful to determine the involvement of this gene in AD. negative for neurological diseases and consanguinity was excluded. Geno- J12.30 mic DNA was extractSePdA fSrTom peripheral leucocytes using the salting out me- Identification of TNFRSF13B (TACI) mutations in pediatric patients thod, after receiving informed consent from the patient. Sequencing of all 17 with Cerebellar Hypoplasia and Common Variable Immunodeficiency coding exons of the gene revealed a c.926 G>A transition in the exon (CVID). 6. The change substitutes the arginine 309 with an histidine (p.Arg309His) G. Zanni1, S. Barresi1, A. Finocchi2,3, S. Cascioli2, R. Cusmai4, V. Moschese3, R. Carsetti2, P. in the functional nuclear localization signal sequence (NLS) of the spastin Rossi3,2, E. Bertini1; protein. This novel mutation was not found in 200 normal chromosomes. 1Dept of Neurosciences, Unit of Molecular Medicine, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, Arg309 is conserved among species and the PolyPhenS-2P AmSTod elling analysis Rome, Italy, 2Dept. of Pediatric Immunology, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy, 3University of Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy, 4Dept of Neurosciences, Unit of Pediatric predicts the aminoacid substitution to be “probably damaging”, with a score Neurology, Bambino Gesù Children‘s Hospital, Rome, Italy. of 0.991. The change p.Arg309His represents the first mutation iden- tified in the NLS spastin domain. J12.28 Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID) (OMIM#240500) is the most A mutation-site approach helps predicting the phenotypic expression prevalent human primary immunodeficiencTy,N dFiRagSnFo1s3eBd on the basis of an of MYH7 mutations impaired ability to produce specific antibodies after vaccination and mar- A. Mazzanti1, C. Medrano2,3, L. Cazon1, M. Perez_Barbeito1, M. Rodriguez_Garcia1,4, C. Fernandez_Otero1, I. Lesende_Rodriguez1, M. Vazquez_Alvarez2,3, F. Rueda_Nunez4, D. kedly reduced serum levels of IgG and IgA . , the gene encoding Garcia1, R. Barriales_Villa1, L. Monserrat4; transmembrane activator and calcium modulator and cyclophilin ligand 1INIBIC - Instituto de investigación biomédica, La Coruña, Spain, 2Pediatric Cardiology. interactor (TACI) a member of the TNF( Tumor Necrosis Factor) receptor Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, Madrid, Spain, 3MyEstela Study family , is mutated in 5-10% of patients with CVID. C104R together with Group, Madrid, Spain, 4Complejo Hospitalario Universitario, La Coruña, Spain. A181E are the most frequent coding variants accounting for 90% of TACI mutations. The C104R mutation abolishes ligand binding and, consequent- ly TACI signalling which plays a fundameTnNtaFlR rSoFle1 3inB immunoglobulin class PURPOSE. We describe 3 novel MYH7 mutations (b-myosin heavy chain) switching, production and in B-cell homeostasis regulation. We analyzed by associated with Dilated Cardiomyopathy (DCM) and Left-Ventricular-Non- direct sequencing all five coding exons of in 9 pediatric patients Compaction (LVNC), localized within the region of actomyosin interface. (5 sporadic patients and 4 siblings belonging to two families) presenting METHODS. Clinical assessment of 3 children with MYH7 mutations (E525K, with hypogammaglobulinemia, cerebellar hypoplasia, psychomotor delay M528I, F540L) was performed in dedicated clinics. Genetic study included and mild to bordeline intellectual disability. WTe NidFRenStFi1fi3eBd the recurrent sequencing of MYH7,MYBPC3,TNNT2,TNNI3,TPM1,ACTC1,LDB3,LMNA C104R mutation in heterozygous state, in two affected males in one family and TAZ. Mutations occurred once in >500 samples and were predicted as and in one sporadic patient. In all patients with mutations, we pathogenic by in-silico analysis. RESULTS. E525K was found in a newborn also analyzed by RT-PCR, TACI expression on peripheral lymphocytes, which with DCM/LVNC without familial history of cardiac disease. She underwent was not impaired. Recent evidence suggests that tumor necrosis factor re- a heart transplant (HTx) at 5 months. The M528I variant was detected in ceptor superfamily members (TNFRSF) are expressed in an overlapping re- a girl with LVNC and mitral regurgitation. The mutation was inherited by gulated pattern during neuronal development, participating in the regulati- the father‘s family. F540L was identified in a 16 year-old boy with DCM/ on of neuronal expansion, differentiation and development. The association LVNC. His mother and 2 siblings were affected. The mutations lie within the between TACI muTtNaFtiRoSnFs1 a3nBd cerebellar hypoplasia has not been described 50k lower sub-domain of the globular myosin head, in a region with surface before and could provide interesting clues for investigating the non-immu- hydrophobic helical peptides that are part of the binding site actomyosin. nological role of in brain and cerebellar development. Other mutations in the same subunit have been described (G529D, M531R, www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 411 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J12.31 2Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Magna Graecia, Are synaptophysin (SYP) mutations causing a syndromic form of Catanzaro, Italy, 3Neuroimaging Research Unit, National Research Council, Catanzaro, X-linked intellectual disability? Italy, 4University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy. A. K. Philips1, K. Avela2, S. Haas3, H. Hu3, M. Somer2, V. Kalscheuer3, I. Järvelä1; 1Department Of Medical Genetics, Helsinki, Finland, 2Department Of Medical Genetics,Family Federation of Finland, Helsinki, Finland, 3Max Planck Institute for Hereditary aceruloplasminemia (HA) is a rare autosomal recessive disease Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. characterized by anemia, iron overload, diabetes and progressive neurode- Background generation, caused by homozygous mutation of the ceruloplasmin (CP) an necessary enzyme for the normal transportation of iron by plasma transfer- ring. Recently, some authors have demonstrated that all their patients with To date, about 100 genes have been identified to underlie XLID (http://xlmr. HA showed on T2* scans, a pattern of brain iron deposition characterized by interfree.it/home.htm). involvement of globus pallidus, putamen, caudate, thalamus, dentates and SequenScYiPng of the coding region of X-chromosome has revealed four muta- substantia nigra. Here, we report a case of patient affected by HA with an tions (T92fs*45, N59_K60>K*, D277fs*59 and G217R) in the synaptophysin atypical pattern of neuroimaging. The patient was a 47-years-old man who gSeunbeje (cts a)n adt MXpe1th1o.2d3s-p11.22 encoding an integral membrane protein of presented progressive psychiatric symptoms, neurological symptoms and small synaptic vesicles (Tarpey et al. 2009) in families with ID. type I diabetes. A patient’s cousin with a biochemical diagnosis of acerulo- plasminemia was asymptomatic. Laboratory findings showed mild anemia, Exome sequencing using AgilentSureSelectHumanX-chromosome kit and low serum iron concentration and high ferritin concentration value. CP was single-read76nt NGS on the Illumina GAII sequencer was applied to find the undetectable. Liver function test were normal. Genetics screening for he- causative gene in the index patient belonging to a large Finnish family with a mochromatosis, HFE and CP genes was performed and demonstrated in CP tRoetsaul oltfs nine male patients with ID in three generations. DNA of six patients gene a novel mutation (IVS6+1G/A) into a splice donor site on the intron and their mothers were available for the study. SYP 6. The same mutation was found in the asymptomatic cousin, confirming the biochemical diagnosis of HA. The T2*-MRI scans, showed the brain iron A novel missense mutation c.879G>A (p.Gly293Ser) in exon 6 of was deposition as a marked hypointensity in all the typical cerebral structures. identifiedthat perfectly co-segregates with the disease in the family. The No abnormalities were found in the globus pallidus as typically occurs in a mutations were not found in 440 Finnish anonymous blood donors respec- patients with HA. In conclusion, this is the first evidence of a patient affec- tively. In detailed clinical investigation of the three affected patients (III/5, ted by HA with the brain iron deposition which does not involve the globus IV/1 and IV/2) similar dysmorphic features were identified including hy- pallidus. pCeornpcllausstiico nsuspra-orbital ridges, straight eyebrows, deep set eyes, and short J12.34 philtrum. The carrier mothers were nSoYrPmal. Sacsin-related ataxia caused by the novel missense mutation Arg272His in a patient from Southern-Italy We anticipate that mutations in the gene cause a previously undescri- F. Cavalcanti1, A. Nicoletti2, G. Annesi1, P. Tarantino1, M. Gagliardi1,3, G. Mostile2, V. bed syndrome of with X-linked intellectual disability. Dibilio2, A. Quattrone4,5, A. Gambardella1, M. Zappia2; Grants: The Sigrid Jusélius Foundation, Helsinki, Finland 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Cosenza, Italy, J12.32 2Department of Neurosciences, University of Catania, Catania, Italy, 3University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 4Institute of Neurology, Department of Medical Analysis of the GJB2 coding region in Tuvinian deaf patients (the Tuva Sciences, University of Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy, 5Neuroimaging Research Unit, Republic, Southern Siberia) National Research Council, Catanzaro, Italy. M. S. Bady-Khoo1,2, N. A. Barashkov3,4, I. V. Morozov5, E. V. Duvak2, O. L. Posukh1,6; 1Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 2Republican Hospital #3, Kyzyl, Republic of Tuva, Russian Federation, 3Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, Siberian Autosomal recessive spastic ataxia of Charlevoix-Saguenay (ARSACS) is Branch of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 4M.K. an early-onset cerebellar ataxia with spasticity, amyotrophy, nystagmus, Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 5Institute of dysarthria, and peripheral neuropathy. SACS is the only gene known to be Chemical Biology and Fundamental Medicine, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy associated with the ARSACS phenotype. The gene was initially reported to of Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russian Federation, 6Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, be encoded by a single gigantic exon. Recently eight additional exons were Russian Federation. identified upstream of the giant exon. The SACS protein product, sacsin, is GJB2 believed to integrate the ubiquitin-proteasome system and Hsp70 chape- rone machimery. Recent studies indicates a role for sacsin in regulation of Mutations in the gene, encoding the gap-junction protein connexin 26 mitochondrial dynamics. To date, more than 70 different mutations, predo- (Cx26), are the most common cause of non-syndromic deafness. To invGeJsBti2- minantly located in the giant exon, have been identified worldwide; of these gate the molecular basis of non-syndromic deafness in the Tuva Republic only seven, exclusively located in the giant exon, were identified in Italian (Southern Siberia, Russia), we analysed nucleotide sequences of the patients. The authors identified a novel homozygous variation c.815G>A, gene entire coding region in 90 deaf patients of Tuvinian ethnicity. The Tuvi- which results in the missense mutation p.Arg272His (R272H) in a patient nians are the indigenous population of the Tuva Republic located northwest from Southern-Italy. This mutation was present in heterozygosis in both of Mongolia and directly east of the Altai Republic. Most of the Tuvinians are unaffected parents as in one unaffected sibling and in several unaffected descended from ancient Turkic-speaking Central Asian tribes and Mongoli- relatives. The phenotype of our patient closely resembled the classic pheno- an-speaking groups assimilated by them. Mutations p.W172C (c.516G>C), type. R272H missense mutation falls in the seventh coding exon of the SACS p.L79fs (c.235delC), p.V37I (c.109G>A), p.H100fs (c.299_300delAT) in gene, hence not in the carboxyterminal giant coding exon which contains homozygous or compound heterozygous state or as a single allele were most reported sacsin mutations. R272H represents the first described Ita- found in 24 out of 90 patients (26.7%). Besides, 18.9% of studied Tuvini- lian mutation located upstream of the giant exon of the SACS gene. The re- an chromosomes were carrying polymorphisms p.V27I (c.79G>A), p.E114G sidue is completely conserved in evolution. The missense mutation R272H (c.341A>G), and p.F192L (c.571T>C). Interestihnegtlye,r wozey ogbosuesr vfoerd high pre- was not detected among 200 control chromosomes. Although it is also in a valence of the p.W172C mutation (79.4% out of all mutant chromosomes): well-conserved region of the protein, no functional domain is defined for 7 patients were homozygous and 13 patients - p.W172C. this region. The p.W172C was first reported in the Altaians (the Altai Republic) (Posukh J12.35 et al., 2005) and then in one Mongolian deaf patient (Tekin etG aJlB., 22010). The Lack of the VPS35 Asp620Asn mutation in southern Italian patients p.W172C change is located in the second extracellular domain of Cx26 pro- with familial Parkinson’s disease tein. Based on evolutionarily conservation of c.516G in the sequence G. Annesi1, M. Gagliardi2,3, P. Tarantino1, F. Cavalcanti1, M. Caracciolo1, A. Bagalà1, A. in many species and the PolyPhen analysis, p.W172C (c.516G>C) was con- Gambardella1, T. Mirante1, A. Quattrone4; sidered to be probably pathogenic. The study was supported by RFBR grant 1Instit Neurol.Sciences National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 2Instit. #11-04-01221-à and by grant of the Chairman of the Tuva Republic Govern- Neurol.Sciences National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, 3University ment for young scientists. Magna Graecia,, Catanzaro, Italy, 43Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, J12.33 Catanzaro, Italy Neuroimaging Research Unit, Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Germaneto, Catanzaro, Italy. A Novel Mutation of Ceruloplasmin Gene in a Patient with Atypical Pattern of Neuroimaging P. Tarantino1, M. Salsone2, L. Passamonti3, F. Rocca3, M. Gagliardi1,4, F. Cavalcanti1, M. Caracciolo1, A. Gambardella1, A. Quattrone2,3, G. Annesi1; Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder, affec- 1Institute of Neurological Sciences, National Research Council, Mangone (Cosenza), Italy, ting 2% of those over the age of 75 years. Although generally considered a sporadic disease, Mendelians forms of the disease are described (SNCA and LRRK2 for causing autosomal dominant PD and 3 genes causing autosomal www.eshg.org www.eshg.org412 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 recessive, juvenile PINK1, Parkin, DJ1). Recently using an exome sequencing lerosis will be important to clarify the regulatory mechanisms involved in based approach, 2 indipendent groups have identified a missense mutation pathogenesis of CAD. in vacuolar protein sorting 35 homolog (VPS35 c.1858G>A; p.Asp620Asn) as J13.03 the probable cause of late onset PD in a number of kindreds. To estimate the A Case of Persistent Neonatal Hypoglycemia frequency of the Asp620Asn mutation in VPS35 in familial PD, we screened A. Manea1, M. Boia1, D. Iacob1, D. Nicoara2, R. Iacob3; for this variant in a southern Italy PD cohort. Our population included 114 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 2Clinical patients with familial PD, having at least 1 relative among their first degree, Emergency of Children Hospital, Timisoara, Timisoara, Romania, 3County Emergency Hospital Arad - Departmentt of Pediatric Surgery, Arad, Romania. second degree, in third degree family members with a formal diagnosis of PD (major PD genes had been analyzed and positive cases ( 9 LRRK2) were Introduction: not excluded. This variant was not detected in any of the 150 analyzed fa- milial PD cases, thus indicating that this mutation is rare among familial PD Hyperinsulinism is the most common cause of persistent cases in the southern Italy. hypoglycaemia in early infancy. Hyperinsulinemic infants are usually ma- crosomic, reflecting the anabolic effects of insulin during pregnancy; also, in J13. Metabolic disorders most cases there is no history of maternal diabetes. Common symptoms of hCyapseo grleypcaoermt: i a are non-specific and include increasing demands for feeding, hypotonia, irritability, jitteriness, and frank seizures. J13.01 Two days old female newborn from a mother with no history The diagnosis and the clinical features of a rare disease; Alpha- of diabetes was admitted to our clinic presenting with macrosomia and se- mannosidosis vere hypoglycaemia for further management. Glucose level upon arrival was B. G. Nur, E. Mıhcı; extremely low, 0.72 mg/dL (0.04 mmoL/L) and despite vigorous therapy Akdeniz University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Antalya, the severe hypoglycaemia persisted throughout the first two months of life. Turkey. Further investigations revealed inappropriately elevated insulin levels at Alpha- the time of documented hypoglycaemia, as well as lack of acidosis or keton- alpha uCroina.c lTuhseio pnrse:s ence of organomegaly, structural abnormality, and tumours mannosidosis is a rare autosomal recessive lysosomal storage disea- was assessed by abdominal echography and CT scan se of glycoprotein catabolism caused by a deficiency of lysosomal - Blood glucose levels should be closely monitored in infants mannosidase activity. The incidence is approximately 1 of 500,000 live with hyperinsulinism even if the baby does not present with jitteriness, births. Characteristic clinical features include mental retardation, coarse frank seizures or other signs of hypoglycaemia. An increase in glucose level facial features, ataxia, hearing loss, dysostosis multiplex, and immunodefi- of at least 40 mg/dL proves that glucose mobilization has been inhibited by ciency. Three clinical subtypes include a mild form recognized after age ten insulin and that the mechanisms of glycogenolysis are intact. years with absence of skeletal abnormalities, myopathy, and slow progressi- J13.04 on (type 1); a moderate form recognized before age ten years with presence Does inherited thrombophilia influence the course of Wilson disease? of skeletal abnormalities, myopathy, and slow progression (type 2); and a A. Gusina, S. Dubovik, S. Miasnikov, N. Gusina; severe form manifested as prenatal loss or early death from progressive cen- National Research and Applied Medicine Centre “Mother and Child”, Minsk, Belarus. tral nervous system involvement (type 3). Assay of acid alpha-mannosidase enzyme activity in leukocytes or other nucleated cells is the confirmatory diagnostic test. We presented a 8-year-old girall pwhitah- psychomotor develop- Wilson disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disorder of copper balance ment delay. She was an adapted child. She attended a special education. On leading to hepatic damage and neurological disturbance. Clinical manifesta- her physical examination was consisted with mannosidosis. The uri- tions include hepatic disease ranging from acute liver failure to chronic liver ne tests for mucopolysaccharides showed small amount of dermatan sul- conditions more frequently. Mechanisms that influence the course and clini- fate. The alpha-mannosidase enzyme activity was lp1.h6a u-mol/g/h (normal cal presentation of WD are not well understood. Here we describe two young range: 100-800 umol/g/h), 3.2 umol/l/h (no rlmpahla r-ange: 20-100 umol/g/h) (25 and 20 years old) female patients whose WD manifested as acute liver in white cells and plasma, respectively. Although a mannosidosis is a failure first. Patient 1 was pregnant woman developed signs of preeclampsia rare disorder, it is important to consider thea mannosidosis in the dif- and acute liver failure at 30 weeks gestation. Patient 2 had thromboembo- ferential diagnosis of young patients with neurodevelopmental disabilities. lic complications after the liver transplantation performed for acute liver We could not forget the importance of the screening for oligosaccharides failure. Inherited thrombophilia testing was performed in both patients be- in children with neurodevelopmental delay with mild phenotypic signs and fore the diagnosis of WD was made and both were heterozygous for Leiden symptoms. Early diagnosis allows more effective medical management and mutation. Later WD was confirmed and they were found to be compound genetic counseling. heterozygotes for p.H1069Q and unknown mutation of ATP7B gene. The J13.02 incidence of WD is 1 per 11000 and the frequency of heterozygous Leiden Inflammatory cytokine gene expression profile in patients with mutation is 2,9% in B-6elarus. The probability of random coincidence of these coronary artery disease conditions is 2,6x10 . We conclude that more studies are necessary to inve- J. Tavakkoly-Bazzaz1, M. M. Amoli2, M. Khojasteh-Fard1, P. Amiri2; stigate the influence of inherited thrombophilia on course of WD. Inherited 1Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical thrombophilia testing can be useful for patients with acute liver failure. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center (EMRC), Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. J13.05 Preliminary Results of Early Diagnostics of Lysosomal Storage Objective. Diseases by Tandem Mass-Specrometry A. Nagimtayeva, G. Abildinova, M. Bayanova, B. Kamaliyeva, A. Kostina; Both adaptive and innate immune systems are involved in coro- National Research Center for Maternal and Child Health, Astana, Kazakhstan. nary artery disease (CAD). The aim of this study was to evaluate cytokine ex- pMreetshsioodns .profiles in un-stimulated peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBMCs) of patients with coronary artery disease. To measure the enzyme activity of dried blood spots by tandem mass spec- Expression profiles of IL-4, IL-6, IL-10, IL-17, IL-23, INF-γ, TNF-α trometry had used standard operation protocols (SOP) for the diagnosis aRneds uTlGtsF.-β1 were determined in individuals with and without CAD using of lysosomal storage diseases. Had examined the enzyme concentration Real-time PCR. IL-4, and IL-10 gene expression were decreased in un-stimulated β-glucocerebrosidase (ABG), galactocethrebrosidase (GALC), α-galactosidase (GLA), α-iduronidase (IDUA) from 46 of newborns in dry blood spots by PBMCs of patients with CAD, while IFN-γ gene expression as a prototype tandem mass spectrometry. of Th1 immune response and IL-6, were increased in patients with CAD The substrate molecule had subjected to degradation products under the compared to individuals without CAD. However, the differences were not action of enzymes in extracts of dry blood spot. The appearance of products significant. Nevertheless, a significant decrease in IL-23 gene expression in is directly proportional to enzyme activity. uCno-nsctlimusuiloante.d PBMCs of patients with CAD compared to those without CAD The results of research had showed that the concentration of metabolites was found (p<0.001, 95% CI: 0.29-0.80). did not differ from the control of standard indicators. The values of enzyme Our data reinforce the potential role of the IL-23-IL-17 axis as activity were in the range of 95 percent and are consistent with low, medium a critical regulatory system that bridges the innate and adaptive arms of and high levels of standards. the immune system in the complex mechanisms associated with the deve- lopment of atherosclerosis. Since IL-23 is main cytokine in Th17 pathway, future studies focusing on the role of Th17 immune response in atherosc- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 413 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J13.06 J13.09 A novel IDUA gene mutation in an Iranian family affected by Two New Mutations in Iranian Niemman-Pick patients mucopolysaccharidosis type I M. Dehghanmanshadi1, F. Keshavarzi1, S. Dadgar2, A. Arastehkani3, O. Aryani4, T. H. Aryan1, A. Tajik1, M. Sanati2; Zaman5, M. Houshmand6; 1Fazeli-Sanati genetic laboratory, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National institute 1Department of Biology ,Science and Research branch, sanandaj, Islamic Republic of for genetic engineering and biotechnology, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. Iran, 23Special Medical Center, Dep. of Medical Genetics, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Department of Biology ,Science and Research branch, Islamic Azad university, sanandaj, Islamic Republic of Iran, 4Special Medical Center, Dep. of Medical Genetics, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 5tehran university of medical sience, tehran, Islamic Republic Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (MPS I) arises from a deficiency in the α-L- of Iran, 6National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Dep. Of Medical iduronidase (IDUA) enzyme. MPS-I is an autosomal recessive disease. Alt- Genetics, tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. hough the clinical spectrum in MPS I patients is continuous, it was possible to recognize 3 phenotypes reflecting the severity of symptoms, viz., the Hur- ler, Scheie and Hurler/Scheie syndromes. In this study, One Iranian MPS I Types A and B Niemann-Pick disease both result from the deficient activity family was investigated. The proband was a three years old girl who had of the lysosomal hydrolase, acid sphingomyelinase. Type A Niemann-Pick di- severe symptoms of MPS-I including gibbus deformity of the lower spine, sease is a severe neurodegenerative disorder of infancy which leads to death progressive skeletal dysplasia and linear growth ceases. After clinical inve- by three years of age, whereas Type B disease has a later age at onset, little stigation, DNA extracted from proband was sequenced for whole IDUA gene. or no neurologic involvement, and most patients survive into adulthood. In sequencing results 1 novel mutation was identified. It was a 32bp homo- The first symptom in NPD-A is hepatosplenomegaly, usually noted by age zygote deletion located in IVS 5 and c.590-607 (exon6) deletion codon: 197- three months; over time the liver and spleen become massive. Psychomo- 2K0ey2 .w Foorrd ms: ore investigation and confirmation of the mentioned deletion we tor development progresses no further than the 12-month level, after which examined parents. Result approved heterozygote deletion for parents. neurologic deterioration is relentless. Acid sphingomyelinase (ASM) defici- mucopolysaccharidosis type I, α-L-iduronidase, novel mutation. ency is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. SMPD1 is the only gene J13.07 known to be associated with acid sphingomyelinase deficiency. Molecular Study of Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 2 in Iranian The SMPD1 gene is composed of six exons and is located on chromosome Patients 11p15.1-11p15.4. S. Dadgar1, M. Dehghan Manshadi1, O. Aryani1, M. Houshmand1,2; This study included 20 patients suffering from Niemann-Pick disease. The 1Special Medical Center, Dep. of Medical Genetics, Tehran -Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic initial diagnosis was based on clinical and biochemical findings. of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, Pazhohesh Blv. 17th For genetic diagnosis ,all exons amplify and sequence to find defective mu- Km Tehran-Karaj Highway, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. tations in this gene. The result showed Gly 508 Arg was found in 6 patients . This mutation was reported previously .Val 36 Ala was found in 3 patients And del CT in codon 473 was found in one patients. These mutations were Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN 2) is classified into three subty- not reported. pes: MEN 2A, FMTC (familial medullary thyroid carcinoma), and MEN 2B. All J13.10 three subtypes involve high risk for development of medullary carcinoma of Association of the angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) gene I/D the thyroid (MTC). MTC typically occurs in early childhood in MEN 2B, early polymorphism with sarcoidosis in Turkish patients adulthood in MEN 2A, and middle age in FMTC. G. Sarı1, E. Kurt1, F. Saydam2, I. Değirmenci2, H. V. Güneş2; RET is the only gene known to be associated with MEN type 2. Molecular 1Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chest Diseases, genetic testing of the RET gene identifies disease-causing mutations in 98% Eskişehir, Turkey, 2Eskişehir Osmangazi University Faculty of Medicine, Department of of individuals with MEN 2A, more than 98% of individuals with MEN 2B, and Medical Biology, Eskişehir, Turkey. in about 95% of families with FMTC.All MEN 2 subtypes are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The probability of a de novo gene mutation is 5% or less in index cases with MEN 2A and 50% in index cases with MEN 2B. Sarcoidosis is a chronic inflammatory disease of complex pathogenesis and Offspring of affected individuals have a 50% chance of inheriting the mutant unknown etiology characterized by noncaseating epithelioid granuloma that gene. Approximately 98% of families with MEN 2A have a RET mutation in invades the lung, eye, liver and other organs. Angiotensin converting enzy- exon 10 or 11 Prenatal testing is possible. me (ACE) gene insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism has been investiga- Testing for known common and rarer mutations is performed in our labo- ted for a genetic predisposition to sarcoidosis in different populations, but ratory. PCR and Sequence analysis of exons 10, 11, 13, 14, 15, and 16 (hot results have been inconsistent and inconclusive. This study was carried out spotes exons) was applied to detect these mutations. to detect the frequencies of I/D polymorphism genotypes and allele of ACE Up to now, we investigated molecularly 7 cases suspected to MEN type 2 gene in Turkish patients with sarcoidosis. Genomic DNA obtained from 154 syndrome (majority with thyroid papillary carcinoma), each of these hete- persons (70 patients with sarcoidosis and 84 healthy controls) was used in rozygote mutations C 630 R (exon 11) , C634 F(exon11) , G691 S(exon11), the study. DNA was amplified by polymerase chain reaction using allele-spe- L790 F(exon 13) were found in one patient , respectively. cific primers. Amplified products were assessed with UV transilluminator J13.08 by being exposed to 2% agarose gel electrophoresis. The allele frequencies New frameshift mutation in the SMPD1 gene causesNiemann pick and genotype distribution of the groups were analyzed with the chi-square disease type A in a child from southwest Iran: A case report test. There were no statistically significant differences betw2een controls and H. Galehdari; sarcoidosis cases with re2spect to genotype distribution (x=4.202, p=0.122) Genetics, Ahwaz, Islamic Republic of Iran. and allele frequencies (x=1.358, p=0.244). Our results suggest that there is no genetic predisposition to sarcoidosis in Turkish population. ACE genotype distrubution and allel frequencies NiemannS pMicPkD d1i sease type A (NPA: OMIM #607608) is a variants of a group in Turkish patients with sarcoidosis and controls. of lipid storage disorders that is inherited in an autosomal recessive man- Genotype Genotype Genotype Groups N Male Female D allele I allele ner. The gene encoding the enzyme sphingomyelinase is disrupted II (%) DD (%) ID (%) by pathogenic mutations, which leads to accumulation of sphingomyelin in Control 84 41 43 18 (21.4) 14 (16.7) 52 (61.9) 0.524 0.476 different organs. Sarcoidosis 70 18 52 15 (21.4) 21 (30) 34 (48.6) 0.457 0.543 We report firstly a 2.5 years old boy with NPA in southwest Iran. Initially, the J13.11 diagnosis resulted on the basis of consultation and ScMlinPiDca1l symptoms. The VEGF gene mRNA expression in un-stimulated PBMCs of patients suspected individual was subjected to the molecular genetics diagnostics. with coronary artery disease and its association with -2578*C/A A novel mutation was observed at codon 247 in the gene that might polymorphism be causative for the formation of the disease. M. M. Amoli1, J. Tavakkoly-Bazzaz2, P. Amiri1; The present report is the firstS mMoPlDec1ular genetics diagnosis of the NPD type 1Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center (EMRC), Tehran University of Medical A in south west Iran. Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 2Department of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. The detected deletion in the gene is remarkable because of its no- velty. Objective: Based on previous reports on association between VEGF and pathogenesis of vascular disorders the aim of this study was to verify the expression of VEGF mRNA in unstimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of patients with and without coronary artery disease (CAD) and comparing the expression of VEGF expression in patients carrying va- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org414 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 Methods: ATP7B. rious genotypes for VEGF -2578*C/A polymorphism. Wilson disease (WD) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of copper (Cu) The study was performed patients who underwent coronary homeoostnasseist that is caused by mutations of gene WD patients mostly artery angiography and patients with >50% stenosis in vessels considered present hepatic and/or neurological manifestatiAoTnPs,7 hBowever, severity and as case groups (CAD+) and normal vessels group as control (CAD-). VEGF age of are variable. We explored whether Cu resistance of tissuAeT Pcu7lB- mReRsNuAlt se:x pression was examined using quantitative real-time PCR and geno- ture cell lines that express specific mutations oAf TP7B can predict severity typing for VEGF -2578*C/A was performed using ARMS-PCR technique. and course of disease. Chinese Hamster Ovary cells that lack intrinsic VEGF mRNA expression was significantly decreased in CAD+ pati- expression were used for stable expression of mutants by retrAoTvPir7aBl ents compared to CAD- patients (p=0.01, 95%CI=-4.2- -0.4).Also in patients vectors. 12 mutations were chosen for analysis from reports of homozygo- cCaornrcyliungsi AonA: genotype VEGF mRNA expression was increased compared to tic patients. To determine Cu resistance MTT assay was established. patients carrying CC and CA genotype. protein expression was determined by Western-blot analysis. Cu resistance Increased expression of VEGF in patients without CAD is in- of the cell linAeTsP a7pBpeared to be highly specific and could be classified into dicating an important role for VEGF in CAD development. More studies on three groups. The first group showed high copper resistance similar to that larger number of samples are required to further confirm the results obtai- of wild-typAeT P7B . The second group showed low copper resistance similar ned in our study. to native CHO cells, theA TthPi7rdB group displayed intermediate resistance. Ma- J13.12 gnitude of protein expression correlated with level of Cu resistance in Prevalence of signs of Hurler and mild Hunter syndrome in infants of most but not all cases. mutants found in patients having a mild clini- the first year of life cal presentations were highly resistant to Cu. In contrast, an early onset and N. V. Buchinskaya, O. V. Kalashnikova, M. M. Kostik, V. G. Chasnyk; severe disease was found in the group of mutants that showed low Cu resi- State Pediatric Medical Academy, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. stance. The third group with interm ATedPi7aBte Cu resistance was heterogenous Background: with respect to clinical manifestation of disease. Our observations indicate that functional characterization of mutants can give further insights The prevalence of mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) is 1 case in into the understanding of individual mutations and for prediction of WD. 16,000-30,000 births, and MPS II accounts for 80% of all cases. Clinical pre- J13.15 sentations depend on the type of enzyme defect. Usually patients with MPS The mutational spectrum of Phenylketonuria in Egypt : A unique iOnbitjieaclltyiv heasv:e normal development and the signs of pathology are seen later in pattern of mutations including four common mutations and five novel childhood, which causes late diagnosis and makes lower their quality of life. mutant PAH alleles. Materials anTdo meveatlhuoadtes :the prevalence of pathologic signs du ring the first L. K. Effat; year of life in patients with MPS I and MPS II in order to diagnose MPS early. Division of Human Genetics and Genome Research, giza, Egypt. Results: 7children with MPS I (Hurler) and 5children with MPS II (mild Hunter) were examined and their history was analyzed. Only 29% of MPS I and 20% of MPS II cases were diagnosed during Phenylketonuria (PKU) is one of the most common inborn errors caused the first year of life. During the first/second half of the first year of life MPS I by deficiency of the hepatic phenylalanine hydroxylase gene (PAH). Exten- manifested with hydrocephalus (71% / 86%), mental and neurologic retarda- sive studies identifying mutational spectrum of PKU have been published tion (43% / 71%), hearing impairment (29% / 43%), corneal clouding (29% during the last two decades. The frequencies of the different mutations vary / 43%), hepatomegaly (14% / 14%) while MPS II manifested with hydroce- in different locations of the world. On the basis of phenotype/genotype cor- phalus (80% / 80%), umbilical or/and inguinal hernia (40% / relations, determination of phenylketonuric genotype is crucial fPoArH better 60%). In addition in the second half of the first year coarse facial features classification of the clinical phenotype and treatment, including tetrahydro- (C4o3n%cl)u asniodn usm: bilical hernia (14%) were revealed in MPS I and kyphoscoliosis biopterin therapy. We report here on the mutational spectrum of gene (40%), coarse facial features (20%), hepatomegaly (20%) in MPS II infants. in 150 Egyptian families using the following systems: (1) PCR-RFLP analysis The revealed prevalence of clinical signs can help a pediatrician for common Mediterranean mutations; (2) single stranded conformational to diagnose MPS I and mild MPS II during the first year of life. polymorphism; (3) direct sequencing; and, (4) Long range PCR for detection J13.13 of large deletions. Of the 300 mutant alleles, 288 (96%) were genotyped Analysis of side effects due to valproic acid in patients with epilepsy and a total of 25 distinct mutations were identified including 5 novel muta- respective of SNPs polymorphisms in CYP2C9, CYP2C19 and MDR1 tions. R176X, R243X, Y198fs and IVS10-11G>A were prevalent mutations in M. M. Danilova1,2, A. S. Glotov1,2, T. V. Sergeeva3, V. S. Baranov1; our population. The mutational data obtained reflects a unique pattern of 1D.O.Ott Research Institute of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Saint-Petersburg, Russian mutations in Egyptian patients with PKU which will permit precise carrier Federation, 2Saint-Petersburg State University, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation, detection, prenatal diagnosis and genetic counseling for these families. 3Bekhtereva’s Institute of Human Brain, Saint-Petersburg, Russian Federation. J14. Therapy for genetic disorders Epilepsy is a chronic disorder caused by brain lesion and characterized by repeated convulsive and/or other seizures. The valproic acid (VPA medica- J14.01 tion is the basic approach to the therapy of epilepsy. Detoxification of VPA Strong association between ABCB1 gene (MDR1) 3435 C>T and its major metabolites is known to be carried out by cytochrome P450 polymorphism and multiple drug nonresponder patients of chronic enzyme system with special emphasis on CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 as CwYePl2l Ca9s hepatitis C on ATP-binding cassette ,( ACYBPC2) Ctr1a9n sporter, P-glycoMprDoRte1in-MDR-1. Analysis O. Ozdemir1, H. Alagozlu2, M. Timucin3; of VPA treatment efficiency respective of polymorphisms in SNPs in 1Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Canakkale Onsekiz Mart University, Canakkale, Turkey, 2Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, (430C>T and 1075A>C) (681G>A) and (3435C>T) was a Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey, 3Department of Gastroenterology, Faculty of main goal of the present study. PCR-RFLP analysis was carried out in 76 epi- Medicine, Cumhuriyet University, Sivas, Turkey. lepsy patients and in 210 individuals of the control group. The genotype and allele frequencies of thCeY rPe2leCv9a nt genes 2were differ3ent in the patient compa- red to the control groups (P>0.05, χ2<5.99). Chronic adverse complications The curing viral infection of chronic hepatitis C (CHC) is a main strategy to were associated with allele (* and/or * ), which correlates with prevent progression of liver disease and cancer. Some CHC patients are failed reduced activity of this enzyme (P=0,048 F=0,049). The multivariate logistic to respond to common antiviral theray in some populations. In the current regression analysis also supported that carriers of particular SNPs alleles study it was aimed to find the possible role of multidrug ressistance gene 1 have higher risk of chronic adverse events. Analysis of SNPs polymorphism polymorphism(MDR1) in nonresponder patients with CHC. Peripheral blood in cytochrome P450 genes allows more precise control of the necessary samples were used for total genomic DNA isolation. In a total of 55 HCV dosage of VPA medication, thus making epilepsy treatment more efficient, positive patients [31 male (56.4%), 24 female (53.6%) and mean age-min- personalized and less toxic. max; 56.9±9.66 (39-71)]; 19 responder (34.5%) 21 non-responder(38.2%) J13.14 and 15 recurrence (27.3%) were included, genotyped for functional MDR1 Chinese Hamster Ovarian (CHO) cell lines expressing mutant ATP7B gene polymorphism. Target gene were genotyped by multiplex PCR-based E. Scvortova1,2, T. Todorov3, V. Sacara2, A. Zibert3, H. H. J. Schmidt3; reverse-hybridization StripAssay method. The current results indicate that 1University of Academy of Sciences of Moldova, Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, 2National codon 3435 C>T polymorphism in exon 26 of MDR1 gene is associated with Center of Reproductive Health and Medical Genetics (NCRHMG), Chisinau, Republic of Moldova, 3Clinic for Transplantation Medicine, Muenster University Hospital, Muenster, colchicine resistance in nonresponder CHC patients. Germany. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgESHG Published Abstracts 415 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J14.02 Creation of the carriers containing gene encoding site of apolipoprotein B100 and green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene for is the treatment of choice for patients suffering from MPS1 with no or mini- transfection into eukaryotic cells. mal central nervous system manifestation. E. A. Vasileva, V. A. Zemkov, D. S. Polyakov, N. A. Grudinina, K. V. Solovyov, T. D. Case Report: We report 4 Iranian cases of MPS type 1, 3boys who are 60 Aleynikova, M. M. Shavlovsky; months-old, 34 months-old, & 30months -old; and 1 girl who is 41 months- Department of molecular genetics, Institute of Experimental Medicine Nord-West old .They have phenotype of MPS1, coarse facial features, prominent fore- Branch of Russian Academy of medical sciences, St.Petersburg State, Russian Federation. head, corneal cloudy, sleep disturbance, hepatosplenomegaly, inguinal hernia, joint stiffness, and dysostosis multiplex congenital. They diagnosed MPS1 on the basis of clinical findings, an elevated urinary glycosaminogly- The purpose of this work is creation of new carrier for transfection the ge- can level and low alpha- L- iduronidase activity in leukocytes. For 3 of the ca- netic information into eukaryotic cells. Apolipoprotein B100 (apoB) provi- ses mutation analysis revealed homozygous mutation in the IDUA gene, and des binding of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) particles to the receptor. Such for one of them reveals novel mutation . They have been started injection cells as hepatocytes, fibroblasts and lymphocytes have LDL-receptor. We of aldurozyme intravenously every week from 26 months - old, 18 months- have created fusion protein consisting GFP and high conservative receptor- old, 12 months-old, and 19months-old. To prevent neurological impairment binding region named site B (3359-3369) of apoB. Site B is strongly requied before bone marrow transplantation, they receive intrathecal enzyme re- for interaction between carrier and cells LDL-receptor, and its entering placement of aldurozyme monthly from 29 months-old, 21months-old, into the cells. Presence of GFP in the recombinant polypeptide will help to 21months-old, and 31 months-old. They tolerate intrathecal ERT with no determine the localization of the protein by fluorescence microscopy. We adverse events. One of them when he was 50 months - old, he received bone used plasmid pTRC99a-p7 with two unique restriction sites for SalI (after marrow transplantation, but others are now receiving aldurozyme intrave- sfGFP) and HindIII (downstream). We have created plasmid with GFP gene, nously and intrathecally. sequence encoding site of apoB, five histidine codons for chromatography J14.05 purification of recombinant and stop codon. The resulting plasmid was The Spinal Muscular Atrophy Therapeutics: Progress and Promise successfully sequenced. As a result we synthesized protein, which peaks of A. Ben Itto; excitation and emission were equal to the GFP peaks. It had high affinity to LGPM, Casablanca, Morocco. nickel agarose. This fusion protein is basis of new construction for transfec- tion the genetic information into eukaryotic cells. It contains GFP and site B of apoB. Amino-acid sequence of siteB could be used as an alternative way Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an inherited neuromuscular disorder that of delivery of different therapeutic substances into eukaryotic cells. Studies causes degeneration of α-motor neurons. Frequently, muscle weakness is on cell cultures are expected. very severe causing affected infants to die before reaching two years of age, J14.03 but mild forms of the disease can be characterized by relatively static muscle Complexity of rehabilitation treatment in a case with limb-girdle weakness for many years. SMA is caused by recessive mutations of the SMN1 muscular dystrophy gene, but all patients retain at least one copy of SMN2, a similar gene capable S. Mihalcea1, M. Cevei2, D. Stoicanescu3; of producing low levels of full-length SMN protein. No treatments currently 1Medical Rehabilitation Clinical Hospital, Baile Felix, Romania, 2University of Oradea, exist for SMA patients, but the identification of therapeutic targets as Hy- Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Oradea, Romania, 3University of Medicine and droxyurea ,Quinazoline derivatives, Salbutamol, Small molecules , Antisense Pharmacy „Victor Babes“, Timisoara, Romania. oligonucleotides, aminoglycosides and proteasome inhibition , Riluzole and Ceftriaxone, Olesoxime and Embryonic stem (ES) cells also the development of suitable animal models for preclinical testing have resulted in increased Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy comprises a heterogeneous group of disor- drug development efforts in the past ten years. Here, we review the current ders, with progressive evolution, affecting especially proximal limb muscu- status of many of these programs, including those designed to activate SMN2 lature. Here we report the case of a 39-year-old man with autosomal reces- gene expression, modulate splicing of SMN2 preRNAs, stabilize SMN prote- sive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy, with negative family history, diagnosed in, replace SMN1, provide neuroprotective support, and transplant neural 7 years ago. The clinical examination revealed major motor deficit, severe cells. The knowledge of SMA pathogenesis and the development of clinical muscle hypotrophy in the scapulohumeral girdle and arms, impossibility candidates have increased considerably since the discovery of the disease- to perform active movements of the scapulohumeral joint, regarding pas- causing gene. Drug development in SMA has been characterized by robust sive movements abduction and flexion limited to 90 degrees. Walking and collaborative efforts between academic, government, pharmaceutical, and standing were impossible, requiring wheelchair, person-assisted transfers non-profit organizations. As the promise of a treatment for this devastating from clinostatism to sitting position. He can maintain a sitting position wit- disease continues to grow, we are hopeful that progression over the next 15 hout hand support, but otherwise requires constant help of another person. years will be even more rapid than the last. Assessment with functional ambulation classification showed that the pati- J14.06 ent needed firm continuous support from one person, who helps carrying The effect of age and strain on screening, proliferation, and weight and with balance. Particularity of the case is represented by the rapid differentiation of chicken bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells evolution, with impaired self-care capacity and occurrence of osteoporosis F. Piryaei1, F. Piryaei2, M. Ramezani3; due to immobilization. In 2010 he fell when transferring from wheelchair 1Department of Biology, Payame Noor University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, Tehran, to bed, with the fracture of left body of tibia, right humeral head, resulting Islamic Republic of Iran, 2National Institute of Genetics Engineering and Biotechnology, into the complex regional pain syndrome. Rehabilitation program objectives Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran, 3Dept. of Biology, Faculty of Science, Islamic Azad were maintaining mobility, transfers re-education, gain maximum indepen- University, Ashtian Branch, Ashtian, Iran, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. dence. Methods were medication and physical-kinetic treatment for basic disorder and complications, with hydrokinetotherapy, massage, electrothe- rapy, laser. The patient should have done daily kinetic program, but plaster Background: Noticing the practical significance of stem cells, this study was immobilization forced him to interrupt exercises, with repercussions on the conducted to culture and screen bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells deri- achieved performances. Early diagnosis and improvements in management ved from Raf and Hilline chicken strains and investigate the effect of age and of patients with this disorder by a multidisciplinary team will improve their race on the morphology and differentiation of the generated cells. prognosis and quality of life. Materials and Methods: In this fundamental study, bone marrow cells from J14.04 3 to 25 day-old Raf and Hiline chicken strains were cultured in low glucose Intrathecal Enzyme Replacement Therapy for Neurological DMEM, 10% BFS. Then third passage bone marrow cells of the two strains Impairment in Mucopolysaccharidosis 1(4 Iranian cases) were compared in terms of morphology, differentiation to bone, cartilage, F. Hadipour, Y. Shafeghati, P. Sarkhail, Z. Hadipour; and adiposity. Data were analyzed through SPSS software. Medical genetics Department,Sarem Cell Research Center & Hospital, Tehran, Islamic Results: In culturing Raf chicken derived bone marrow cells, in contrast to Republic of Iran. Hiline chicken strain, colonization took place and they almost had a better fi- broblastic morphology. The results indicated higher yields of differentiation to bone, cartilage, and adipose tissues in Raf chicken derived bone marrow MPS1 is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficient activity of the cells than Hiline chicken. These differences were statistically significant. lysosomal enzyme alpha-L iduronidase, which leads to accumulation of he- Also, 15 days was the most suitable age for screening the mesenchymal stem paran sulfate and dermatan sulfate, resulting in a progressive multisystem cells of chicken. disease with respiratory, skeletal, and neurologic manifestations. Treatment Conclusion: Screening and proliferation of mesenchymal stem cells from 15- for MPS1 consists of supportive care, and enzyme - replacement therapy day old Raf chicken bone marrow cells are good resources for differentiation with Laronidase. Bone marrow and hematopoietic stem cell transplantation and purification of chicken bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org416 ESHG Published Abstracts Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 J14.07 Treatment with bisphosphonates in osteogenesis imperfecta S. Bucerzan1, C. Al-Khzouz2, M. Crisan3, C. Denes3, P. Grigorescu-Sido2; pression clone, a LR recombination reaction was carried out between the 1First Pediatric Clinic - UMF ‚Iuliu Hatieganu, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 2First Pediatric entry clone and destination vector, pAd/CMV/V5-DEST. The Recombinant Clinic - UMF „Iuliu Hatieganu“, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 3First Pediatric Clinic, Cluj- vRiersuusl wtsa: s produced in appropriate mammalian cell line. MSCs were infected Napoca, Romania. by the recombinant virus expressing Nrf2. The results showed that human recombinant Nrf2 was successfully cloned and the accuracy of the gene and its frame in the vector were con- Introduction. Osteogenesis imperfecta, a genetic disease of bone formation, firmed by DNA sequencing. Expression of Nrf2 in MSCs was confirmed by with autosomal recessive trait, is characterized by bone fragility and redu- RCoTn-PcCluRs aionnds w: estern blot analysis. The results indicated that the expression ced bone mass due to mutations in genes coding for type I collagen. Different of Nrf2 is transient. severity of clinical signs is due to imperfect genotype-phenotype correlati- The adenoviral expression system through Gateway techno- on. Because the treatment with bisphosphonates (antiresorptive agents that logy was successfully used to clone and over-express cytoprotective factor, inhibit osteoclast function and stimulates osteoblastic bone formation) was Nrf2, in MSCs. recently introduced, the authors have proposed to evaluate the effects of J15.02 pamidronate in patients with osteogenesis imperfecta. Italian National External Quality Assessment in molecular genetic Patients and method. The study group consisted of 11 patients (3 girls and testing - VII round (2010-2011) 8 boys), aged between 4 ys 1 mo - 18 ys 3 mo, who were registered in the F. Censi, M. Marra, F. Tosto, G. Floridia, V. Falbo, D. Taruscio; Centre of Genetic Disease of the First Pediatric Clinic Cluj with osteogenesis Centro Nazionale Malattie Rare - Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy. imperfecta. The method consisted in: clinical and bio-humoral assessment regarding the parameters of bone mineralization, radiological examinations, osteodensitometry; assessing occupational score. The Italian External Quality Assessment for molecular genetic testing, coor- Results. Treatment with bisphosphonates (commercial preparations Are- dinated by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità, started in 2001; it cover four pa- dia) was administered in 2 - 14 cycles, at a dose of 0.5 - 1 mg/kg/day IV in- thologies: Cystic Fibrosis (CF), Beta Thalassemia (BT), Fragile X-Syndrome fusion, 3 consecutive days at 4 months interval. The drug was well tolerated, (FX) and Familial Adenomatous Polyposis Coli (APC). A web utility dedica- the only side effect being fever recorded in the first cycle of treatment in 4 ted to this activity has been developed and, since 2010, participation is open patients. Bio-humoral parameters of phospho-calcic metabolism remained both to public and private Italian laboratories. within normal limits, except for reduced alkaline phosphatase values in a In 2010 the number of participants was 53; 43, 17, 15 and 5 laboratories girl who associated hipophosphatasia tarda. Bone pain has resolved, frac- participated for CF, BT, FX and APC schemes respectively. tures have not occurred (except in one patient), occupational score and Z In each scheme four DNA samples were validated and sent to participants score were improved. together with clinical and technical information. Laboratories were asked Conclusions. Under bisphosphonates treatment the clinical symptoms, oc- to use their routine procedures and protocols to analyse samples. A panel cupational score and Z score were improved. of assessors reviewed the final returns to assess the quality of genotyping, J14.08 interpretation and reporting. A cell model system to monitor the translocation of Ataxin-3 in SCA3 In 2010 assessors reviewed 320 genetic testing analyses. Genotyping re- Z. Wang, T. Schmidt; sults showed complete and correct data in 98.5%, 95.9%, 100%, 100% of Human Genetics Institute, Tuebingen, Germany. CF, BT, FX, APC samples analyzed respectively; satisfactory interpretation of data was recorded only in 9.9%, 32%, 20%, 40% of CF, BT, FX, APC reports respectively; lack of information/inaccuracy in reports was detected in all Spinocerebellar ataxia type 3 (SCA3), also known as Machado-Joseph disea- schemes.This work will show in detail all 2010 results comparing, when se (MJD), is an autosomal dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder possible, our data with those of other European schemes. caused by the expansion of a CAG repeat in the MJD1 gene encoding a ex- J15.03 panded polyglutamine repeat in the Ataxin-3 protein. Ataxin-3, the affected The Italian External Quality Assessment in classical cytogenetics: protein in SCA3, is mostly a cytoplasmatic protein, however, it distributes results of the 2010/2011 round to different subcellular regions i.e the cytoplasma and the nucleus in diffe- G. Floridia, F. Censi, F. Tosto, M. Marra, V. Falbo, D. Taruscio; rent cell types. The characteristic hallmark of this disease is the formation Centro Nazionale Malattie Rare, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy. of Neuronal intranuclear inclusions (NII) including expanded and misfol- ded causative protein. Whether NII are toxic or protective, their presence indicated that expanded ataxin-3 plays a role in the nucleus. In addition, The Italian External Quality Assessment in classical cytogenetics, coordina- transcriptional regulation of ataxin-3 occurs in the nucleus and nuclear lo- ted by the Istituto Superiore di Sanità, started in 2001 and covers prenatal, calization of ataxin-3 indeed aggravate the symptoms in SCA3 animal mo- postnatal and oncological diagnosis. The scheme is retrospective and each del. Therefore, if ataxin-3 localizes in the nucleus, this is a negative event. part of the scheme stands alone; a web-utility dedicated to the CEQ has been Prevention of ataxin-3 nuclear translocation maybe ameliorate this disease developed. progression. To gain insight into how to inhibit the translocation of Ataxin-3, Since 2010 the EQA has been recognised as istitutional activity; laboratories we will undertake a small molecular library screen to explore which small pay a fee for each scheme as published in an official document issued by molecules influence the location of this protein in a SCA3 cell model, analy- the Italian government (GU n.199-28th August 2009). Participation is open ze the mechanisms regulating Ataxin-3 transport and attempt to develop a either to public and private laboratories. therapeutic strategy for this disease. For this, a high-throughput screening Assessment takes into account technical, analytical and interpretative per- method is established in this project. formance; an assessment system with scores was developed. Assessors are selected in collaboration with the Italian Society of Human Genetics and, J15. Laboratory and quality management at the end of the round, participants receive a report with marks and com- ments to improve the analysis. The total number of laboratories participating in 2010-VII round was 69, J15.01 17 of them were private (i.e. 40%); in particular 55, 60 and 22 laboratories Cloning and transient expression of cytoprotective factor, Nrf2, in participated in the prenatal, postnatal and oncological scheme respectively. mesenchymal stem cells using the adenoviral expression system A banding quality not adequate for the analysis was observed in about 6% through Gateway technology and 10% of 108 prenatal and 120 postnatal cases respectively; an analytical M. Mohammadzadeh, M. Habibi Roudkenar; Transfusion Research Center, High Institute for Research and Education in Transfusion error was identified in one case, out of 44, in oncological diagnosis. An use Medicine, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran. of the nomenclature ISCN not appropriate was detected in about 15%, 13% and 75% of reports in prenatal, postnatal and oncological diagnosis respec- Background and Objectives: tively. Not completeness and/or inadequacy of information in reports was Nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2 the most frequent analytical inaccuracy recorded in all schemes. (NRF2) is one of the potent cytoprotective factor. The goal of this study was cMloanteinrgia aln adn tdra Mnseitehnot dosv:e r expression of the human Nrf2 gene in MSCs using the adenoviral expression system based on gateway technology. In order to induce expression of Nrf2, MSCs were exposed to UV for 1 hour. Full length cDNA of Nrf2 was isolated and cloned into pENTR TOPO/D vector by TOPO cloning reaction. To construct the ex- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Plenary Lectures 417 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EMPAG Plenary Lectures given about the symptoms of DS and the consequences for the child and the EPL1.1 family. This study examined what prospective parents know about medical, cognitive and social aspects of DS. A questionnaire was answered by 208 Priority setting in genetic testing: a pilot discrete choice experiment parents taking a CUB test (combined ultrasound and biochemistry) at Upp- F. Severin1, J. Schmidtke2, A. Mühlbacher3, W. Rogowski1; sala university hospital during 2011. 1Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for Environmental Health, Only 25% of the parents had received information about DS and more than Neuherberg, Germany, 2Hannover Medical School, Institute for Human Genetics, Hanover, Germany, 3Hochschule Neubrandenburg, University of Applied Science, 60% would like more information. The reason for taking a CUB test was, for Neubrandenburg, Germany. 70% of the parents to get a warranty of a healthy child. Half of the parents had not taken a position on what to do if the CUB test showed an increased risk of DS. Almost all knew that DS is caused by a chromosomal abnormality. Given the increasing number of genetic tests available for clinical practice, Still there was a vast lack of knowledge about medical and cognitive compli- decisions have to be made on how to allocate limited health care resources cations in children with DS, as well as social consequences for the children to them. Many criteria have been proposed to guide the process of priority and the families. setting. However, their relative importance is still unclear. This paper ex- This study shows that a high proportion of parents who undergo a CUB test plores the feasibility of discrete choice experiments to identify and weight have little knowledge of DS and might consider invasive PND procedures, various criteria in a form that allows prioritisation through a rank ordering and perhaps also pregnancy termination, without knowing what Downs of different testing options. Therefore a pilot discrete choice experiment syndrome implies. Improved information to expecting parents about medi- was carried out, using face-to-face interviews, among 22 genetic profes- cal, cognitive and social consequences of DS, could help the parents to make sionals. Respondents chose between two generic scenarios (dual choice informed decisions regarding PND. options) that described testing options, represented by medical and non- EPL1.4 medical attributes. Choice data was used to rank order a set of seven testing How do women make decisions about genetic carrier screening for options on the basis these attributes and their relative weights. A series of fragile X syndrome? A qualitative study follow up questions were asked to learn about participants’ understanding A. G. Ames1,2, A. D. Archibald1, R. Duncan1, J. Emery3, S. A. Metcalfe1,2; 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 2University of Melbourne, of the choice format and potential improvements in the discrete choice in- Parkville, Australia, 3The University of Western Australia, Crawley, Australia. strument. The criteria “Prevalence”, “Severity”, “Clinical Utility” and “Alter- natives available” were significant, all including “Infrastructure available” and “Urgency” had positive signs. A preliminary rank order of tests could Background: be established. Findings from this pilot demonstrate the discrete choice me- As population-based genetic carrier screening becomes more common the- thodology to be a feasible approach to use stated preference techniques in re is increasing need to evaluate decision-making, ensuring participants priority setting of genetic tests. We believe that the DCE framework is an make free and informed choices. Carrier screening for fragile X syndrome important step towards the development of a rational approach to priority (FXS), the leading cause of inherited intellectual disability, provides indivi- setting that meets the needs of decision makers. duals with information about their health and risk of having children with EPL1.2 FXS. It is important individuals participating understand the personal and First Trimester Screening, it’s not a routine test An education module familial implications of such screening. This study aimed to explore percep- for General Practitioners to help women to make an informed choice tions and decision-making styles of non-pregnant women from the general K. K. Barlow-Stewart1,2, K. Dunlop2; 1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Centre for Genetics Education, Sydney, population offered FXS carrier screening in Australia. Australia. Methods: Purposive sampling was used to select equal proportions of par- ticipants who declined and accepted screening. 37 qualitative, semi-struc- tured telephone interviews were conducted after women accepted or decli- In NSW, Australia, health care professionals should inform all pregnant ned screening, but prior to receiving test results (if tested). Interviews were women about first trimester screening (FTS) and give appropriate risk in- transcribed with data coded into themes. formation to enable an informed choice. This requirement usually applies Results: A range of decision-making styles emerged from the data, including: to general practitioners (GPs), with increased risk results usually referred relying on initial gut reaction, being influenced by previous experiences and to genetic counsellors (GCs) or obstetricians. Challenges for GPs include in-depth deliberation. Most participants felt they made an informed decisi- addressing patients’ different perceptions and interpretations of risk; pre- on, although there was substantial variation in perceptions of an informed senting the pros and cons of screening; the possible implications of an in- decision and a ‘good decision’. Preliminary analysis suggests differences in creased risk result; the potential for coercion in guiding decision making; how informed decisions are defined in the literature and perceived women and the inconsistencies in the availability of FTS and genetic counselling ser- considering screening. vices. To support GPs, and at the request of providers of professional deve- Implications: This research provides valuable insight into women’s decisi- lopment, an education module, First Trimester Screening- it’s not a routine on-making processes and how they view an ‘informed decision’. These data test, was developed to be used in group educational settings or stand alone. will be instrumental in informing the development of tools for evaluation of Content included a slide presentation of information and three video case informed decision-making in genetic screening programs and in determi- studies of GP consultations that addressed issues anecdotally reported to ning how best to support women through the testing process in the future. commonly occur. Process evaluation consisted of piloting the module in GP EPL1.5 education sessions (1 hr 52 GPs) and GCs (5). The module was rated highly Development and validation of a short family history screening tool relevant, useful and reflected questions that arise in GP practice (96%) and for chronic disease prevention in primary care comments included prompting future more thorough discussion of FTS, ha- F. M. Walter1,2, T. A. Prevost1,3, L. Birt1, N. Grehan1, K. Restarick1, H. C. Morris1, P. Rose4, S. Downing5, S. Sutton1, J. D. Emery2,1; ving discuss over more than one session, adopting ideas from the way the 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2University of Western Australia, GP in the videos phrased her comments and be more confident. 13% of GPs Perth, Australia, 3King’s College London, London, United Kingdom, 4Oxford University, requested a further video case discussing increased risk results be included. Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS The next process evaluation results following incorporation of recommen- Foundation Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom. dations will be presented. Introduction: EPL1.3 What do pregnant women and their partner know about Down Family history (FH) is an important risk factor for many com- Syndrome when they decide to undergo prenatal diagnosis? mon diseases, yet no simple, validated tools exist in primary care for accura- C. Ingvoldstad1, P. Lindgren2, G. Annerén3, E. Ternby2, O. Axelsson4; te FH management. We aimed to develop and validate a short FH screening 1Department of Public Health and Caring Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, tool for systematic FH assessment in primary care. Diabetes (DM), ischaemic Sweden, 2Department of women´s and children´s health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, heart disease (HD), breast (BC) and colon cancer (CC) were selected as mar- Sweden, 3Department of genetics and pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 4Department of women`s and children´s health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. kMeert choonddsi:t ions as they fulfil screening criteria, and effective interventions and lifestyle strategies exist for their primary and secondary prevention. Participants were identified via randomised electronic searches in 10 Eastern England general practices. During a practice-based consultation Information to expecting parents about prenatal diagnosis (PND) for chro- participants completed a FH Questionnaire (FHQ), then had a 3-generatio- mosomal aberrations focus on the risk of bearing children with chromoso- nal ‚gold standard‘ pedigree taken. In stage 1 the FHQ comprised 12 items; mal abnormalities, i.e. Down syndrome (DS), and the risks associated with in stage 2 the shorter FHQ was validated against the same ‘gold standard’ amniocentesis and chorionic villus sampling. Routinely, no information is www.eshg.org www.eshg.org418 EMPAG Plenary Lectures Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 pReedsiuglrtese: , and the psychological impact of FH screening was examined using BS), particularly in UK. Absolute risks were more frequently presented than questionnaires containing validated measures at baseline and 4 weeks. relative risks. Only 11% of GPs’ and 17% of BS would present risk communi- 1,147 participants were recruited (stage 1: 618; stage 2: 529). cation including absolute and relative risks with both negative and positive Among stage 1 participants, 32% were at increased risk of one or more framing and no verbal presentation. Preferences and declared behaviours marker conditions (DM 18%, HD 13%, BC 5%, CC 2%). Determination of the will be presented according to specialty and country after multivariate adju- sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of each item allowed the refine- stment on personal characteristics. ment of the FHQ to 6 items for identification of any of the four conditions In order to optimise cancer risk communication in medicine, initial and vo- (sensitivity 91%, specificity 61%). Results of stage 2 validation of the FHQ-6 cational training could be reinforced by published guidelines issued from will be presented, with psychological findings indicating that FH knowledge, multidisciplinary task forces. including awareness of being at increased risk, does not increase anxiety. EPL2.2 EPL1.6 International variation in physicians’ attitudes towards prophylactic Measuring patient benefits from interventions in clinical genetics and mastectomy - comparison between the UK, France, Germany, and the genetic counselling services: Are we finally able to do this? Netherlands M. McAllister1, A. M. Wood2, G. Dunn2, K. Payne2, L. Davies2, D. Donnai3, R. MacLeod2, C. M. den Heijer1, C. J. van Asperen2, H. Harris3, I. Nippert4, C. Julian-Reynier5, G. Evans6, A. Todd2; Tibben2; 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2University of Manchester, Manchester, 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department United Kingdom, 3St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, Netherlands, 3GenEd Coordinating Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 4Women‘s Health Research, Munster Medical School, Munster, Germany, 5U912, INSERM, IRD, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Aix-Marseille Universite, Marseille, France, 6Medical Genetics An enduring challenge in evaluating interventions in clinical genetics and Research Group and Regional Genetics Services, St. Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United genetic counselling is how best to measure patient benefit. Patient Repor- Kingdom. ted Outcome Measures (PROMs) offer a possible solution. PROMs are self- Introduction completion questionnaires used in research to evaluate patient benefits from new interventions e.g. in randomised controlled trials, and for service evaluation in routine clinical practice. PROMs differ from satisfaction que- Prophylactic mastectomy (PM) has proven to be the most effective method stionnaires because they measure change over time in outcomes valued by to reduce the risk of breast cancer in high-risk women. The present study patients, rather than simply reporting satisfaction with service received. aMimetehdo tdos present and compare the attitudes towards PM among physicians Current UK health policy encourages use of PROMs data. But in clinical in France, Germany, the Netherlands and the UK. genetics, there is no consensus about the best PROMs to use. A research programme involving ~450 patients and 130 clinicians tackled the issue ARnes iunlttesrnational sample of 1196 general practitioners (GP) and 927 breast of PROMs use in clinical genetics (Manchester 2003-2011). Mixed methods surgeons (BS) were surveyed using a mailed questionnaire. were used to identify patient benefits: (a) a systematic review of validated outcome measures used (b) a Delphi survey to identify consensus amongst Both GP’s as well as BS’s opinions towards PM significantly differed from clinicians and patients about appropriate outcome domains and (c) quali- one country to another. Only 30% of the French and 27% of the German tative interviews and focus groups. The next stage involved validating the GPs were of opinion that PM should be an option for an unaffected fema- Genetic Counselling Outcome Scale (GCOS-24), a new PROM developed from le BRCA1/2 mutation carrier, as compared to 85% and 92% of the GPs in the qualitative data, and the existing Perceived Personal Control (PPC) scale. the Netherlands and UK, respectively. Similarly, 78% of the French and 66% Both PROMs were proven to (i) have high internal consistency (PPC: Cron- of the German BS reported a positive attitude towards PM, as compared to bachs α=0.83, GCOS-24: α=0.87) (ii) have concurrent validity with health 100% and 97% of the BS in the Netherlands and UK, respectively. locus of control, satisfaction with life, depression, and authenticity and (iii) In the whole sample of GPs, a positive attitude towards PM was associated capture statistically significant patient benefit following clinic attendance with country of residence, being female, and having more knowledge of bre- (PPC: Cohens d=0.4, GCOS-24: d=0.7). These properties suggest that both ast/ovarian cancer genetics, while among BS there was a positive associati- GCOS-24 and PPC are appropriate validated PROMs to evaluate clinical ge- on with country of residence and having more knowledge of breast/ovarian netics services. cCaonnccelru gseionnetics as well, and, in addition, with a higher number of newly dia- EPL2.1 gnosed breast cancer patients last year. Breast cancer risk communication by health care providers’ in 4 European countries These results demonstrated the international variations in the attitude to- C. Julian-Reynier1,2,3, A. Bouhnik1,2, G. Evans4, H. Harris5, C. van Asperen6, A. Tibben7,8, I. wards PM among physicians. This might reflect that different policies are Nippert9; adopted to prevent breast cancer in women at-risk. 1INSERM, UMR912 „Health Economy, Social Sciences & Medical Information Processing“ (SESSTIM), Marseilles, France, 2Aix-Marseille Université, UMR-S912, Marseille, France, EPL2.3 3Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, 4Medical Genetics Research Group, Regional “Life at risk”: Negotiating identities on healthy carriers of a genetic Genetics Service and National Molecular Genetics Reference Laboratory, Central alteration predisposing to cancer. Manchester Foundation Trust, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5GenEd E. Sumalla1, V. Castejon1, C. Ochoa2, Y. Valverde1, A. Solanes3, G. Capella1, I. Blanco1,4; Coordinating Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6Center 1Genetic Counseling Unit. Hereditary Cancer Program., L‘Hospitalet, Spain, 2Psycho- for Human and Clinical Genetics, Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Oncology Unit, L‘Hospitalet, Spain, 3Genetic Counseling Unit. Hereditary Cancer Medical Center (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 7Centre of Human and Clinical Genetics, Program., Badalona, Spain, 4Genetic Counseling Unit, Hereditary Cancer Program, Leiden University Medical Centre (LUMC), Leiden, Netherlands, 8Department of Clinical Badalona, Spain. Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 9Women’s Health Research, Münster Medical School, Münster, Germany. Cancer survivorship often involves identity reconstruction and integrati- on of the experience into one’s self-concept, and may even lead to radical Cancer genetic clinics are focused on communication of familial/genetic transformations in one’s identity. The increasing availability of genetic te- risks but other factors intervene in breast cancer (BC). Our objective was to sting enables other family members who have not yet developed cancer to investigate the options chosen by European Breast Surgeons (BS) and Gene- determine if they have inherited the risk; those with a mutation are known ral Practitioners (GP) to present BC risk factors according to the « state of as previvors. Once a previvor is identified, they are faced with complicated the art » of a better risk communication. and often difficult decisions and this new situation may have important psy- Questionnaires were sent to 3999 GPs and 3293 BS in 4 countries (UK, chological and social impacts. To date, little is known about the formation France, the Netherlands, Germany). Assessment of family risks and com- of previvor identities and the extent to which genetic diagnosis is central to munication about risk factors including alcohol, obesity, oral contraception, one’s identity. The main objective of this study was to conduct a qualitative hormonal replacement therapy (HRT), physical exercise, early pregnancy, investigation based on a phenomenological framework in order to under- breast-feeding were investigated as well as the formats preferred to present stand the lived experience of cancer previvors and to examine the centrality risks (numbered, verbal, framing ⋯). of the genetic diagnosis and the associated life changes. Eighteen previvors The overall answer rates were 30% and 37% for GPs and BS, respectively. were studied using a qualitative semi-structured interview. All interviews Risk family history and HRT were the most frequently risk factors explained were subjected to interpretative phenomenological analysis. We have iden- by GP’s and BS. Countries and providers differed significantly (p<0.001) for tified at least four different basic strategies of identity negotiation in these the kind of factors discussed particularly for those other than family history. previvor individuals showing that adjustment to a pre-symptomatic genetic Event frequency was the most frequently used presentation (47% GPs; 52% diagnosis is an active psychosocial process of negotiating identity strategies www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Plenary Lectures 419 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 resulting in both positive and negative life changes. Genetic diagnosis cen- Introduction trality was fairly low in our studied population. According with our results, Whilst debate has focused on testing of minors for late onset genetic dis- adoption of a specific previvor identity may impact well-being and health orders, less is known about the impact on young people (<25years) who behavior changes and warrant further research. have had predictive testing often many years before the likely onset of sym- EPL2.4 ptoms. Women’s experiences of familial ovarian cancer screening: A Method qualitative study 36/61 individuals who had a predictive test for HBOC, HD or FCM, age 15- K. J. Lifford1, A. Clements2, L. Fraser3, D. Lancastle4, K. Brain1; 25, in our Centre, at least 3 months previously, agreed to participate. Tele- 1Institute of Primary Care and Public Health, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, phone interviews with the 36 participants (10 HD, 16 HBOC and 10 FCM) Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Department of Primary Health Care Sciences, University of were audiotaped, transcribed and analysed using Interpretative Phenome- Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 3Gynaecological Oncology, University College London nological Analysis. Institute for Women’s Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Department of Humanities and Results Social Sciences, University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, United Kingdom. None of the participants expressed regret at having the test at a young age. Participants saw the value of pre test counselling not in facilitating a deci- sion, but rather as a source of information and support. Several reflected Until recently, the main risk management options for women at increased it had been difficult to emotionally rehearse the potential outcomes prior risk of familial ovarian cancer have been risk-reducing surgery to remove to testing and thought this was related to their youth. Differences emerged the ovaries or ovarian cancer screening (OCS) as part of a research study. amongst the three groups in parent/family involvement in the decision to be The psychological evaluation of familial OCS (PsyFOCS) was conducted to tested. Parents in HBOC and FCM families were a strong influence in favour examine the psychological impact of taking part in OCS on women who are of testing, whereas in HD the decision was more autonomous and someti- at increased genetic risk. The aims of the qualitative component of PsyFOCS mes went against the opinions of parents/grandparents. Participants from were to understand 1) women’s experiences of OCS and 2) the catalysts all three groups proposed more tailoring of predictive test counselling to the for surgery to remove the ovaries and reactions to subsequent withdra- needs of young people. wal from OCS. Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 48 women Conclusion who were or had been taking part in OCS. Women were chosen on a num- Some individuals will benefit from knowing their genetic status in young ber of demographic and clinical criteria to endeavour to capture a range of adulthood. The challenge for professionals is adapting the counselling pro- OCS experiences. Interview topics included: family history, cancer risk, the cess to the needs of the young person, with possible emphasis on post test screening experience, risk management decisions and information provisi- support. on. Results suggested that OCS provides reassurance for women and they EPL3.1 feel privileged to take part in OCS. A number of catalysts, including OCS test The impact of NIPD on clinical practice: what do prenatal care results, and secondary considerations were found to prompt surgery. The providers need to know? emotional impact of discontinuing OCS following surgery varied between M. Bishop, J. Haydon, D. Latham, J. Tennant, P. Farndon; relief, acceptance and loss. In conclusion, OCS appears to be an acceptable NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, United risk management strategy for women at increased risk of ovarian cancer. Kingdom. However, OCS results may prompt women to reconsider their risk manage- ment options. These findings highlight the benefit women feel they receive from OCS as well as the importance of the timing of decision-making about New genetic technologies impact on the practice of a wide range of health risk management options. professionals who may be called upon to offer these tests to their patient EPL2.5 groups. One such development is non-invasive prenatal diagnoses (NIPD) What counts as successful in genetic counselling for presymptomatic which has the capacity to transform prenatal diagnosis. To understand how testing in late onset disorders? The consultands‘ perspective. health professionals in the UK see NIPD impacting on clinical care, inter- L. Guimarães1, J. Sequeiros2,1, H. Skirton3, M. Paneque Herrera2,1; views and focus groups with professionals from fetal medicine (n=7), clini- 1ICBAS-Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2CGPP-IBMC, Porto, Portugal, 3School of cal genetics (n=12) and midwifery (n=46) were conducted, audio taped and Nursing and Midwifery, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom. transcribed. Thematic analysis was employed to elicit common views regar- ding the integration of NIPD into clinical practice and the education needs of the workforce who will deliver this service. All three groups recognised Genetic counselling must be offered in the context of presymptomatic te- that NIPD will impact on the service they provide, however they believed sting (PST) for severe late-onset diseases; however, what is effective genetic this new technology should be viewed as supplementing current roles as counselling is not well-defined, and measurement tools that allow a syste- opposed to changing practice. As such, the identified educational needs fo- matic evaluation of genetic practice are still not available. The aims of this cused primarily on the procedural issues associated with NIPD, such as the qualitative study were to (1) recognize relevant aspects across the whole laboratory process and appreciating the implications of test results. Partici- process of genetic counselling in PST for late onset neurodegenerative dis- pants stated that any educational package developed needed to reflect the orders that might indicate effective practice from the consultand‘s service model for delivering NIPD to ensure education was relevant to the perspective; and (2) analyse aspects of current protocols of counselling that health professional’s role. These findings have informed the development might be relevant for a successful practice. We interviewed 24 consultands of a national competence framework outlining the clinical activities and un- undergoing PST for late-onset neurological disorders (Huntington disease, derpinning knowledge required by health professionals who offer NIPD to spinocerebellar ataxias and familial amyloid neuropathy ATTRV30M) in the women. This framework forms the basis of an online educational package three major counselling services for these diseases in Portugal. Main themes which has been developed by the National Genetics Education and Develop- emerging from the analysis of content were (1) consultand‘s general assess- ment Centre to support the implementation of NIPD into clinical practice. ment of the PST process in genetic services; (2) appropriateness and adap- EPL3.2 tation of the protocol to the consultand‘s personal expectations and needs; Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis for fetal sex determination - benefits and (3) consultand‘s experience of the decision-making process and the role and disadvantages from the service users’ perspective of engagement and counselling skills of the counsellor. Participants provi- C. Lewis1, M. Hill2, H. Skirton3, L. Chitty4,2; ded also a set of recommendations and constructive criticisms relating to 1Genetic Alliance UK, London, United Kingdom, 2Great Ormond Street Hospital for the length of the protocol, the time gap between consultations and the way Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Faculty of Health, University of Plymouth, results were delivered. These issues and the construction of the relationship Plymouth, United Kingdom, 4Clinical and Molecular Genetics, UCL Institute of Child between counsellor and counselee should be further investigated and used Health,, London, United Kingdom. for the improvement of current protocols. EPL2.6 Impact of predictive genetic testing for Huntington‘s disease (HD), Prenatal fetal sex determination is clinically indicated for women who are Familial Cardiomyopathy (FCM) and Hereditary Breast and Ovarian at risk of having a child with a serious genetic disorder affecting a parti- Cancer (HBOC) in young people cular sex. Ultrasound has been the traditional method used, but early fetal R. M. MacLeod1, A. Beach2, S. Henriques2, J. Knopp2, K. Nelson2, L. Kerzin-Storrar1; sex determination using non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) can now be 1Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Central Manchester performed using cell free fetal DNA in maternal plasma. The study aim was University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2University of to assess the views and experiences of service users who had used NIPD Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. for fetal sex determination. A qualitative approach using semi-structured interviews was used. Forty four participants (38 women and 6 partners of www.eshg.org www.eshg.org420 EMPAG Plenary Lectures Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 participating women) were recruited. Participants’ views and experiences three people, and that PNT and MST alter the germline of the child i.e. the of NIPD were overwhelmingly positive. Concerning benefits over traditio- alteration would in turn be passed on to future generations. An explanation nal methods, three themes emerged: (1) technical aspects of technology; of the techniques and a review of the ethical issues will be presented to help (2) timing; and (3) enhanced decision-making. Practical advantages of NIPD professionals providing clinical services and those involved in psychosocial included avoiding miscarriage, and there were a number of psychological and other research to engage with the debate about using PNT and MST in advantages associated with timing such as perceived control, early re-enga- treatment. gement with pregnancy, normalisation and peace of mind. NIPD facilitated EPL3.5 a stepwise approach to decision-making whereby women divided time into The impact of carrier results generated by newborn screening on the manageable ‘chunks’ and focused on the immediate future. This is likely to family have been a coping mechanism. A number of disadvantages were discussed F. Ulph1, T. Cullinan2, N. Qureshi3, J. Kai3; including concerns about social sexing and increased bonding at a time in 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2East Staffordshire Clinical pregnancy when miscarriage risk is high. However, participants felt these Commissioning Group, Burton upon Trent, United Kingdom, 3University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom. were minor in comparison to the advantages. Until definitive genetic dia- gnosis using NIPD is available, NIPD for fetal sex determination is perceived as a good interim measure with a number of notable advantages over tradi- Newborn screening for sickle cell disorders and cystic fibrosis identifies tional methods. carriers in addition to children with the diseases. Carrier results must be EPL3.3 conveyed to parents, yet there is a lack of evidence to inform best practice. Using discrete choice experiments to explore stakeholder preferences This study examined the impact on families of newborn screening carrier for non-invasive prenatal diagnosis compared to current invasive results, and subsequent familial communication through semi-structured testing M. Hill1,2, F. Forya2, J. Fisher3, S. Morris4,5, L. Chitty1,2; interviews with 67 purposively sampled family members with experience 1Clinical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street of receiving carrier results communicated by a range of different methods. Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Fetal Medicine Unit, Data were analysed thematically by constant comparison, and validated via University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, member checking. Parents valued carrier results and sought to share this 3Antenatal Results and Choices, London, United Kingdom, 4UCLH/UCL Comprehensive information with their extended families and to inform their children in the Biomedical Research Centre, London, United Kingdom, 5Research Department of future. Parental anxiety or distress was attributed to how information was Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, United Kingdom. communicated during the screening process rather than the result itself; ap- peared more common in those with less prior awareness of the disease or possibility of a carrier result, resulting in concerns their child had a serious Non-invasive prenatal diagnosis (NIPD) using cell-free fetal DNA has the po- problem, particularly while awaiting results, before seeing a professional, tential to bring many positive improvements for prenatal diagnosis. There or when left in an “information vacuum”; or could be triggered by family are, however, many challenges ahead for successful implementation and it is communication and responses to carrier results. However, family commu- critical that stakeholder preferences and opinions are considered. Discrete nication and support provided great benefits to some respondents. Practice choice experiments (DCE) have been widely utilised in healthcare research suggestions developed from respondent suggestions included: timely access to examine stakeholder preferences. Participants choose between a series to an informed health professional, improvement of community awareness of healthcare options and in doing so reveal their preferences and trade- and information, greater support after communication of results in conside- offs in a way that reflects the complex nature of real-life decisions. Here ring and accessing cascade testing, and negotiating further communication we describe the use of DCE’s to compare patient and health professional within their families. preferences for key attributes of NIPD relative to invasive testing for Down EPL3.6 syndrome and for single gene disorders such as sickle cell anaemia and Divergent views on newborn and infant genetic screening: beta-thalassemia. Participants include; 1. pregnant women and partners at- perspectives of parents of healthy children and relatives of children tending maternity services for routine procedures; 2. members of relevant with genetic conditions causing developmental delay patient support groups; and 3. health professionals involved in prenatal S. A. Metcalfe1, A. D. Archibald2,3, A. Atkinson1, C. Hickerton2, S. Lawton1, B. McClaren2, S. care. Women (n=335) and health professional’s (n=181) were found to have Wong1; differing preferences when considering diagnostic tests for Down syndro- 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, me. The key attribute for women’s decisions regarding testing was no risk of Parkville, Vic, Australia, 2Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Vic, Australia, miscarriage, while for health professional’s accuracy and timing were most 3Genetic Health Services Victoria, Parkville, Vic, Australia. important. Studies exploring preferences for diagnostic tests for single gene disorders are ongoing. Our results are important for the implementation of NIPD. In particular, women’s strong preference for tests with no risk of mis- Debate exists about introducing genetic conditions for which there are no carriage indicates that test safety has the potential to outweigh other factors curative treatments into newborn screening, although this information can in decision making and highlights the need for effective pre-test counselling be valuable for future reproductive decision-making and early interventions and informed consent processes. may improve quality of life. One important consideration for policy makers EPL3.4 is the views of consumers about acceptability of such programs. We con- Ethical issues in the use of pronuclear and maternal spindle transfer ducted semi-structured in-depth interviews with 14 parents of 26 healthy to prevent mitochondrial disorders children (10wks- 13yrs), as well as 15 parents of children with Duchenne T. Clancy; muscular dystrophy (DMD) and 10 relatives of individuals with spinal mus- Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. cular atrophy types 2 and 3 (SMA2/3). Interviews were digitally-recorded, transcribed and thematic analysis performed, with independent coding by at least 2 researchers. Mutations in mitochondrial DNA are passed from mother to child and can Almost all participants supported screening for such conditions provided cause diseases such as Leber hereditary optic neuropathy, MELAS (mito- it is voluntary. However, parents of healthy children generally thought that chondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like epi- newborn screening should be offered, perceiving this as a convenient time, sodes) and maternally-inherited Leigh syndrome. However, assessing the while parents of children with DMD or SMA2/3 were overall much more risk of a mother passing on mitochondrial mutations and whether, and how supportive of screening at a later stage (~1 year old), as they valued having severely, a child will be affected is complex. Prenatal diagnosis (PND) and a period of ‘normality’. They perceived that receiving a diagnosis from ne- preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) are possible but predicting the wborn screening would have impacted negatively on the relationship with outcome for a child who inherits the mutation is difficult. The new techni- their child. Those favouring infant screening suggested it could be targeted ques of pronuclear transfer (PNT) and maternal spindle transfer (MST) may to children whose parents are concerned about their child’s development, enable women to avoid transmitting mitochondrial disease to their child- while parents of healthy children often worried that targeted screening ren. PNT and MST are currently permitted in research in the UK; the Human might reduce equity of access. These divergent views probably reflect the Fertilisation and Embryology Authority is undertaking a consultation on contrasting experiences participants had with regard to their children’s whether it would be acceptable to use these techniques in treatment. Both development. These findings highlight the ethical complexities of offering PNT and MST involve the creation of embryos containing nuclear DNA from screening for conditions causing developmental delay. a man and a woman, plus mitochondrial DNA from another woman. There are therefore some ethical considerations additional to those raised by PND and PGD. These include that the child would have a genetic connection to www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Plenary Lectures 421 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EPL4.1 EPL4.3 Evaluation of the efficacy of two models of delivering information Are illness perceptions a useful predictor of emotional distress over about treatment-focused genetic testing among young women newly time in individuals undergoing cancer genetic risk assessment? diagnosed with breast cancer C. Phelps1, P. Bennett2, A. Murray3, K. Brain4; B. Rahman1,2, B. Meiser1,2, K. Watts1,2, M. Gleeson3,2, C. Saunders4, G. Mitchell5, K. Barlow- 1Swansea Metropolitan University, Swansea, United Kingdom, 2Swansea University, Stewart6, J. Kirk7, K. Tucker2; Swansea, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Genetics Service for Wales, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 1Psychosocial Research Group, Sydney, Australia, 2Department of Medical Oncology, 4Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 3Hunter Genetics, NSW, Australia, Background: 4Department of Surgery, University of Western Australia, WA, Australia, 5Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, VIC, Australia, 6Centre for Genetics Education, Sydney, It is well recognised that objective risk status rarely pre- Australia, 7Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, Sydney, Australia. dicts psychological responses to risk information. The predictive utility of LMeevtehnothdasl:’ s self-regulation model in explaining psychological responses to undergoing cancer genetic risk assessment was explored. Background: Increasingly, women newly diagnosed with breast cancer with Questionnaire data from 331 individuals undergoing cancer ge- a relevant cancer family history or other high risk features are being offered netic risk assessment was analysed to explore associations between baseli- genetic testing to guide their treatment (Treatment-Focused Genetic Testing ne psychological variables (taken upon referral) and psychological distress ‘TFGT’). In this randomised controlled trial, we evaluate two ways of offe- aFnindd eimngost:i onal outcomes one month later whilst waiting for risk assessment ring information about genetic testing to young women at diagnosis. results (Time 2) and following the provision of risk information (Time 3). Methods: Women (<50 years) at diagnosis before definitive breast cancer Illness perception variables (measured by the Illness Perceptions surgery, with either suggestive cancer family history or other high risk Questionnaire-Revised) explained 20.3% of the variance in cancer-specific features, are invited to participate by their surgeon. After completion of a distress at Time 2 and 11.8% of the variance at Time 3, with strong beliefs baseline questionnaire, participants are randomised to receive information about the consequences of being at risk of cancer uniquely contributing to about TFGT either: a) in educational materials (Intervention) or, b) at a ge- psychological distress. The same variables explained 7% of the variance in netics service (Control). Free rapid genetic testing is offered; results are dis- positive affect at Time 2 with beliefs about greater consequences of being at closed at a genetics service. Self-report questionnaires assess demographic risk (p=<0.01) and stronger beliefs in screening/surgery being able to con- information, decisional uncertainty about TFGT, surgical and psychosocial trol their chances of getting cancer (p=<0.01) making a unique contributi- outcomes. The second questionnaire is administered after the intervention; oDnis. cFuolslsoiwonin:g risk provision, those at high risk reported significantly greater the third and fourth questionnaires are completed 2 weeks after results dis- understanding of their risk than those at average risk (p=<0.01). closure, and at 12 months, respectively. Understanding cognitive representations of being at risk may Results: Preliminary results for change in decisional conflict are reported have some use in explaining psychological responses to cancer genetic risk for 62 women who completed the first and second questionnaires, all of assessment. Specifically, these findings suggest that those receiving a high whom opted for TFGT. Decisional conflict (DC) decreased following receipt risk result have a greater understanding of its implications: this may reflect of information about TFGT, with no difference in mean change between the differences in the mechanisms by which individuals at different levels of risk two groups (Intervention N=33, M = -13.8, SD = 20.7; Control N=29, M = are informed. -17.6, SD = 25.8), t60 = 0.642, p = .523. EPL4.4 Conclusions: These early data suggest that both modes of delivering infor- The underestimated impact of prophylactic mastectomy mation about genetic testing to women at breast cancer diagnosis are equal- J. P. Gopie1, R. Timman2, M. T. Hilhorst2, M. A. M. Mureau2, A. Tibben1,2; ly effective. 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Erasmus University Medical EPL4.2 Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. Psychological outcomes of familial ovarian cancer screening: No Purpose evidence of long-term harm K. E. Brain1, K. J. Lifford1, L. Fraser2, A. N. Rosenthal2,3, M. T. Rogers4, D. Lancastle5, C. The decision for bilateral prophylactic mastectomy with immedi- Phelps6, E. K. Watson7, A. Clements8, R. Iredale4, I. Jacobs9, U. Menon2; ate breast reconstruction (BPM) in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers is a radical 1Institute of Primary Care and Public Health, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, decision. The impact on cancer distress, general mental and physical health, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Gynaecological Oncology, University College London Institute for Women’s Health, London, United Kingdom, 3Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and the aMnedt hsaotdissf action with body image, sexuality and the partner relationship was London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University London, London, investigated. United Kingdom, 4School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, Fifty women opting for BPM completed psychological question- 5Department of Humanities and Social Sciences, University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd, nRaeisruelst sat baseline, 6 and 21 months after surgery. With repeated measures United Kingdom, 6School of Psychology & Counselling, Swansea Metropolitan University, ANOVA the quality of life in time was explored with a prospective design. Swansea, United Kingdom, 7School of Health and Social Care, Oxford Brookes University, Cancer distress significantly decreased after BPM. Physical health Oxford, United Kingdom, 8Department of Primary Health Care Sciences, University of and satisfaction with body image diminished shortly after BPM, but in- Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of creased on the long-term. General mental health improved on the short- Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. term, but decreased thereafter. Satisfaction with sexuality tended to decrea- Background: se up to 21 months. In the end, 30% was not satisfied with the aesthetic Ovarian cancer screening for women at increased genetic risk in rCeosnuclltu osfi otnhe ir breasts and 30% indicated they had less frequent sex with their partner than they used too. a large UK study involved 4-monthly CA125 tests and annual ultrasound, wMiteh- Although cancer distress significantly declined, the psychoso- ftuhrotdhse:r tests prompted by an abnormal result. The longer-term psychological cial impact of BPM including immediate breast reconstruction should not and behavioural effects of frequent ovarian cancer screening are unknown. be underestimated. Particularly, the intimate relationship can be adversely Prior to their first routine 4-monthly CA125 test, 1999 (62%) of N=3224 affected. Adaption to the new body image and the impact on femininity and women completed baseline psychological measures. One week follow-up que- identity may take a long time. Psychological consults should be provided stionnaires were completed by 1384 participants (86%): 1217 (89%) women preoperatively as well as postoperatively to catch the patients and partners who received a normal screening result and 167 (69%) women with abnormal in need of psychological counseling. results. Of these, 141 (86%) completed a further questionnaire one week after being returned to routine 4-monthly screening (primary end-point). A total EPL4.5 912 (78%) women completeRde nsuinltes :month follow-up questionnaires. Measures The impact of risk-reducing hysterectomy and/or oophorectomy included cancer distress, general anxiety/depression, reassurance, and rate of in premenopausal women at high risk of endometrial and ovarian withdrawal from screening. Compared to women with normal results, cancer due to Lynch syndrome R. Moldovan1,2, S. Keating1,3, T. Clancy1; women w2ith abnormal results reported moderate cancer distress (F=27.47, 1Genetic Medicine, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Department p≤.001,η=0.02) an2d were significantly more likely to withdraw from scree- of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, ning for surgery (χ(1)=18.92, p<.001) after their abnormal result. These effects Romania, 3Genetic Health Service, Auckland, New Zealand. were not apparent after return to routine screening or at longer-term follow- up. No differenCcoens cwluesrieo nfos:und in general anxiety or depression. Regardless of screening result, women reported high overall reassurance gained from scree- Lynch syndrome is an inherited predisposition to cancer caused by mu- ning (p=0.15). Women participating in frequent ovarian screening tations in mismatch repair genes. The lifetime risk of endometrial cancer who are recalled for an abnormal result may experience transient negative ef- for women who carry mutations is 40-60%, and the lifetime risk of ovarian fects, which can prompt reconsideration of risk management options. Health cancer is 7-12%. There is no proven efficacy of screening for the early de- professionals and policy makers may be reassured that familial ovarian scree- tection and treatment of either cancer. Another option for women is risk- ning does not cause sustained psychological harm. reducing hysterectomy and/or bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. We used a www.eshg.org www.eshg.org422 EMPAG Plenary Lectures Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 combined methods study to explore women’s experience of such surgery manifest uptake of the advice by the mothers (e.g. via confirmation check and the impact it had on their cancer worry, general health and menopause- questions; recycling of information). We examine how the nurses orient specific quality of life. We sent validated questionnaires to and conducted themselves to the mothers’ existing knowledge of the condition vis-à-vis semi-structured interviews with 15 of the 24 women invited to take part identifiable reassurance trajectories. In conclusion, we discuss the ways in (response rate 62.5%). The results suggest that risk reducing surgery does which the reassurance trajectories are a specific feature of the telephone not lead to significant psychological distress. Women tend not to think or mode of counselling. worry much about developing cancer. Women tend to be distressed about EPL5.2 the physical and somatic symptoms associated with menopause; their social Profile of genetic counsellor and genetic nurse practice in Europe well-being is somewhat affected, but sexual difficulties are minimal. The 5 H. Skirton1, C. Cordier2, D. Lambert3, U. Hosterey-Ugander4, M. Voelckel5; major themes identified from the interviews were: motivating factors; ta- 1Faculty of Health, Education and Society, Taunton, United Kingdom, 2University king control; benefits of surgery; physical and emotional costs of surgery; Hospital of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 3Our Lady‘s Children‘s Hospital, Crumlin, Ireland, 4Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg, Sweden, 5La Timone Hospital, and, experiences of HRT and the menopause. Recommendations from the Marseille, France. study include that professionals discuss the menopause, its side effects and HRT in detail prior to surgery. EPL4.6 The opportunities for genetic nurses and genetic counsellors to work pro- The use of an electronic genealogy database in cancer genetic fessionally in Europe have varied according to the country of practice, the counseling in Iceland health service structure and educational opportunities. The European So- V. Stefansdottir1, O. T. Johannsson2, H. Skirton3, L. Tryggvadottir4, H. Tulinius5, C. Chapman6, J. J. Jonsson7,8; ciety of Human Genetics is supporting development in these two professions 1Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Dept. through the promotion of a new European registration system. To inform of Medical Oncology, Landspitali - The National University Hospital, Reykjavik, the design of a European Master level curriculum and registration process, Iceland, 3Faculty of Health, Education and Society, Plymouth Univ., Plymouth, United we undertook an online survey of 216 practitioners working in 19 European Kingdom, 4Icelandic Cancer Registry, Reykjavik, Iceland, 5The Genetical Committee of countries to ascertain current areas of practice, legal regulation, collaborati- the University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 6West Midlands Regional Genetics Unit, ve working and clinical responsibilities. Of the respondents, 82.7% were ge- Birmingham Women Hospital NHS Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Landspitali netic counsellors and 9.9% were genetic nurses. It was a legal requirement - The National University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 8Department of Medicine, to work with a medical colleague for 40.8%, while another 32.1% always University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland. did so, however many of the remaining respondents were unsure about the legal obligation in this regard. The majority of respondents stated that they alone or with a medical colleague took responsibility for making the first Background: Pedigrees are key tools in cancer genetic counseling where contact with the family (87.9%) drawing the pedigree (85.2%), explaining accurate and comprehensive information is needed for risk assessment. a genetic test to the patient (79.5%) and providing psychological support Counselees often have imcomplete information. We have adopted the use through the testing process. Over 81% managed some cases without the of an electronic population-based genealogy database to generate a full 3 input of a medical doctor. These findings indicate that genetic nurses and generation pedigrees. counsellors in Europe are working autonomously and are making a substan- Materials and methods: From January 2007 to January 2012, over 600 coun- tial contribution to the care of patients. However, with a specific registrati- selees have been seen in the cancer genetic counseling clinic, for 3 or 4 visits on system operating in only four countries (United Kingdom, Netherlands, each. During the intake the counselee signs a consent for tracing her family France, Israel), a unified European registration system is required to ensure through the database of the Genetical Committee of the University of Iceland comparable standards of education and competent practice operate across (GCU) and the Icelandic Cancer Registry. The GCU holds accurate informati- countries. on on at least all Icelanders born after 1840. As cancer diagnosis recording is mandatory, the Cancer Registry provides very accurate information. EPL5.3 Families with pedigrees in the clinic are 265. Pedigrees made during intake, Rational and reasonable: requests for genetic testing of children I. Holme, G. Crawford, A. Fenwick, A. Lucassen; include10-25 individuals and the electronic pedigrees 40 - 2000 individu- Southampton University, Southampton, United Kingdom. als, most commonly 3-500. Families with the BRCA2 founder mutation are 42 and BRCA1 families 5. Tested individuals are 541 resulting in over 107 BRCA2 and 14 BRCA1 carriers. Professional guidelines state that predictive genetic testing of children for Conclusion: In our experience this method adds considerable information. adult onset conditions should generally be delayed unless the result would No disapprovement on the behalf of the families have been noticed. This is affect medical management of the child or until the child can make a deci- especially inportant in the light of the policy of many cancer registries to sion about testing for themselves. Based on 50 semi-structured interviews only release individual information based on informed consent. We argue, with UK genetic service professionals and families who have spoken with in part based on our experience, that persumed consent should suffice. Such genetic services about childhood predictive genetic testing, this paper will policy would be consistent with other sharing of individual´s genetic pedi- explore the reasons given by HCP and parents for testing against the guideli- grees, between health care facilities. nes. These include parental anxiety about the unknown status of their child; EPL5.1 the parent’s right to know and decide what and when to tell their children; Self- and Other-Oriented Reassurance in Telegenetic Counselling and the need to maintain a positive relationship with parents. In examining S. Sarangi1, O. Zayts2; 1Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, these accounts we explore how the ‘reasonable parent’ is constructed to ar- China. gue for or against testing outside of the guidance. The paper concludes by exploring the implications for genetic service current practices. EPL5.4 This paper focuses on telephone-mediated genetic counselling in Hong Kong Assessing the effects of genetic counseling for people with serious where nurses contact mothers whose newborns have been diagnosed with mental illness: findings of the first randomized controlled trial a mild hereditary disorder (G6PD deficiency, commonly known as favism). J. Austin1, C. Hippman1, A. Inglis1, A. Ringrose1, J. Cheek2, W. Honer1; 1University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 2Vancouver Island Health Since this condition is preventable through avoidance of certain food and Authority, Victoria, BC, Canada. medication, it becomes imperative that when mothers are given the ‘affec- ted’ status of their child, reassurance of the manageability of the condition ensues. Serious mental illnesses (schizophrenia, bipolar and schizoaffective disor- Our data is drawn from 50 transcripts of audio-recorded telephone counsel- der) cumulatively affect ≥3% of the population. They are complex disorders ling encounters as part of a funded study. We use thematic discourse ana- (typically arising as a result of the combined effects of genetic and environ- lysis (Roberts and Sarangi, 2005) to demonstrate that the ‘affected’ status mental factors) for which no genetic testing is clinically available. Previous of the child is always delivered first, which is immediately and briefly miti- work shows that people with serious mental illness want genetic counse- gated before explanations about causes and consequences of the condition ling but that few have had it, and no studies had examined its effects in this are offered. The delivery of ‘good news’ in the form of reassurance follows population. We conducted the first randomized controlled trial to test the a particular structural pattern: typically advice is offered about life-style effects of genetic counseling among people with serious mental illness. We practices that the mothers must adhere to as a way of avoiding the inherent hypothesized that as compared to a control intervention or a waitlist group, risks associated with the condition. We argue that this ‘positive’ framing of genetic counseling would: decrease internalized stigma, increase perceived advice allows nurses not only to reassure mothers that they are able to ma- control and knowledge about mental illness, and facilitate more accurate risk nage their child’s condition, but also to become self-reassured thawt thwerwe i.se shg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Plenary Lectures 423 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 perception when measured 4 weeks later. Between 2008 and 2011, psychia- economic, educational and/or public life”, is proposed to reflect the desired tric diagnosis (and therefore eligibility) was confirmed by Structured Clini- practical outcomes. Independence is a logical outcome for coping with a po- cal Interview for 120 individuals (44=male, 66=female, mean age=42) with tentially disabling condition. It may not apply to genetic conditions that are serious mental illness, who were then randomized to one of three groups, non-disabling, which could account for its absence in previous studies. This each of n=40: genetic counseling, a control intervention (involving an educa- data will be used to design and evaluate an optimal care model for genetic tional booklet about the causes of mental illness), or a waitlist group. Before, retinal services. immediately after, and one month after the interventions, participants com- EPL6.1 pleted validated measures of internalized stigma and perceived control, and Providing written information as an aid in Genetic Counseling - a purpose designed measure of knowledge and risk perception. The waitlist dispensable or helpful? group completed the same measures at baseline, and one month later. Tho- C. Walter1,2, H. Berth3, F. Kreuz3, K. Schenck-Kaiser4, H. Schindelhauer-Deutscher1; se randomized to the waitlist or control interventions were offered genetic 1Association Psychosocial Aspects of Human Genetics, Homburg/Saar, Germany, counseling at the end of the study period. Results will be presented. 2Institute of Human Genetics, Freiburg, Germany, 3Association Psychosocial Aspects of Human Genetics, Dresden, Germany, 4Association Psychosocial Aspects of Human EPL5.5 Genetics, Freiburg, Germany. Assessing wellbeing in women caring for children with Duchenne or Becker muscular dystrophy H. L. Peay1,2, K. Kinnett1,3, B. Meiser4, A. Tibben2; 1Parent Project Muscular Dystrophy, Richmond, VA, United States, 2Leiden University Providing written information as an aid in Genetic Counseling - Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Cincinnati Children‘s Hospital Medical Center, dispensable or helpful? Cincinnati, OH, United States, 4Prince of Wales Clinical School, University of New South Written information can complement and aid genetic counseling . This Wales, Sydney, Australia. information allows patients to re-read the information presented during counseling thus strenghtening and deepening it. An appendix with additio- nal addresses and consultation possibillities helps to increase the options Background: Caring for children with progressive disorders places signi- for becoming fully informed. This can be of great importance, in particular ficant demands on mothers. This study assesses perceived needs, motiva- when the genetic counseling entails difficult decisions , . tions, and wellbeing of mothers of offspring with Duchenne or Becker mus- Since 1996 the Association for Psychosocial Aspects of Human Genetics cular dystrophy (DBMD). We examine the effects of mothers’ carrier status, (VPAH eV) has been publishing the brochure „Bad news after prenatal self-concept, worry, caregiver burden, perceived control, and coping efficacy diagnosis - A companion brochure for women and couples who consider on adaptation. termination of pregnancy“. The brochure enjoys ever-increasing demand, Methods: Mothers were recruited through advocacy organizations, a DBMD and theVPAH has now published the 13th updated edition. In addition, the registry, and from clinic populations to complete one online survey each brochure has also been available online for several years. year for five years. This abstract includes data from the first 124 partici- The poster shows the positive reception history that the booklet has seen pants in the first survey. We anticipate reaching the target sample (over since its inception, and which has reached a preliminary high with the en- 200) by May 2012. actment of the Gene Diagnostics Law in Germany. In addition, the poster Results: Preliminary results are reported for 124 respondents. 55.6% of af- shows the recipients of the brochure by professional category, as well as the fected children were ambulatory. Mothers endorsed highest needs for ways regional distribution of purchasers in Germany. to deal with uncertainty about their child’s future (60% med/high); spe- Finally, an outlook is given on further patient brochures that the VPAH e.V. cific ways to cope with being a mother of a child with DBMD (57% med/ publishes orissues or plans to publish. These (will) treat the use of predicti- high); specific ways to manage fears (55% med/high); and better ways to ve tests in the context of HNPCC, breast cancer or neurological diseases. get needed support (55% med/high). The predictor variables dispositional EPL6.2 optimism (r=.427, p<.001), self concept (r=-.384, p<.001), coping effica- Communicating familial breast cancer risks: risk presentation cy (r=.531, p<.001), perceived control (r=.286, p<.001), perceived burden formats and women’s preferences (-.273, p<.001), and self-efficacy (r=.309, p<.001) were significantly corre- L. Henneman1,2, C. J. Van Asperen3, J. C. Oosterwijk4, F. H. Menko1, L. Claassen1,2, C. F. lated with mothers’ adaptation. Backwards elimination regression was used Ockhuysen-Vermey1,2, D. R. M. Timmermans1,2; to assess the ability of the variables to predict adaptation. The preliminary 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, model showed that dispositional optimism (β=.191, p=.041) and coping Netherlands, 4University Medical Center, Groningen University, Groningen, Netherlands. efficacy (β=.424, p<.001) explained 30.7% of the variance in adaptation (F=26.11, p<.001). Conclusions: These early data suggest that interventions targeting coping Background: Besides the effectiveness of risk communication formats, it is efficacy may improve the adaptation of mothers of individuals with DBMD. also important to consider patient preferences to improve patient-centred EPL5.6 care. This study assessed women’s preferences and satisfaction with diffe- Interventions and Outcomes for Inherited Retinal Dystrophy: A rent risk presentation formats. Qualitative Examination Methods: 279 unaffected women with a breast cancer family history were R. Combs1, G. Hall2, M. McAllister3, K. Payne1, S. Downes4, J. Lowndes4, A. Moore5, S. Devery5, G. Wright5, S. Ramsden2, G. Black1; allocated to receive one of five additional risk consultations after standard 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Central Manchester University genetic counseling, in which breast cancer risks were presented as: 1) per- Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Cardiff University, centages (X%); 2) frequencies (X out of 100); 3) frequencies and graphical Cardiff, United Kingdom, 4Oxford Eye Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 5Moorfields Eye format (10x10 human icons); 4) lifetime risk and age-related risk in nume- Hospital, London, United Kingdom. rical format; 5) lifetime risk and age-related in both numerical and graphical format. Preferences and satisfaction were assessed 2-weeks follow-up. Results: Both numbers and words (37%) and numbers only (26%) were The needs and outcomes of Inherited Retinal Dystrophy patients are not ful- preferred most. Of the numerical formats, 55% preferred percentages. Wo- ly understood. Furthermore, there is a disparity between the way genetic men who had received graphical displays favored graphical displays more ophthalmology services are delivered in the UK. This research used thematic than other women (p<.001). This preference was lower for women who qualitative analysis to identify and describe the needs and outcomes desired were lower educated compared to those higher educated (5%vs.41%). The by a set of UK patients and their families (n=20). Extensive prior qualitative majority (73%) preferred to hear both lifetime risk and 10 year age-related research has identified five outcome domains in clinical genetics: Behaviou- risk. This preference was not affected by experience with the format. Ho- ral Control, Cognitive Control, Decisional Control, Emotional Regulation and wever, women >40 years preferred the age-related format (without lifetime Hope, referred to as Empowerment. Yet, the relevance of these five domains risk) more than younger women (20%vs.2%). There was no difference in to inherited eye disease is unknown. The data were analysed through the satisfaction between groups. Empowerment theoretical framework to determine what attributes, if any, Conclusions: Lifetime cancer risk information in addition to age-related risk differentiate retinal dystrophy patients from other clinical genetics patients. in a numerical format (percentages) was most The research found that patients’ desired outcomes relate to medical, psy- preferred. The results suggest that in counseling, women’s preference for a chosocial and practical categories of need, most of which line up closely to risk communication format may be influence by previous experiences and the Empowerment domains. However, three themes discovered in the data women’s age and education. do not have a corresponding Empowerment outcome measure: Informati- on about benefits, Adaptations and Mobility. Thus, a new outcome domain, Independence, defined as “The ability to participate fully in social, family, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org424 EMPAG Plenary Lectures Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EPL6.3 Cancer Study Group4; The Signal-Trial: Evaluation of a Checklist to Improve Communication 1PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, about Psychosocial Problems in Cancer Genetics Melbourne, Australia, 3Hunter Genetics, Newcastle NSW, Australia, 4Westmead Institute W. Eijzenga1, N. K. A. Aaronson1, D. E. E. Hahn1, I. Kluijt1, G. N. Sidharta1, M. G. E. M. for Cancer Research, University of Sydney and Millennium Institute, and Departments Ausems2, E. M. A. Bleiker1; of Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital, NSW, Queensland Institute for Medical 1The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2University Medical Center Research,, Australia. Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands. Introduction The generation of clinically significant genetic data during research studies raises a number of ethical issues about the disclosure of this information Approximately 20% of individuals undergoing oncogenetic counseling to research participants and their family. Little is known about individuals’ with/without DNA-testing experience clinically relevant levels of distress. experiences of receiving research results . This qualitative interview study Within the counseling session, information provided is mostly biomedical investigated research participants’ (n=10) or their nominated next of kin’s and provider-driven. The use of a checklist, completed by counselees prior (n=15) experiences of receiving notification that (genetically) significant to the counseling session, might facilitate discussion of psychosocial issues. information is available following the proband’s participation in the Au- The aim of this trial is to evaluate the use of a checklist as an aid in 1) facilita- stralian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS). This paper describes the emotional tMinegt hcoomdsmunication, 2) increasing counselors’ awareness, and 3) improving impact of receiving a notification letter, interviewees’ views about the per- the management of psychosocial problems. sonal/familial relevance of receiving this type of feedback and their subse- quent/intended disclosure practices. In general, interviewees had a mixed In total, 260 individuals undergoing oncogenetic counseling at the family response to receiving feedback. AOCS participants’ tended to be more po- cancer clinics of the NKI-AVL (Amsterdam) or the UMCU (Utrecht) will be sitive, acknowledging that genetic information may be useful (primarily) randomised to either a group whereby the results of the checklist, comple- for their kin. Next of kin, in contrast, described themselves as distressed at ted prior to the counselling session, are shared with the genetic counselor receiving feedback, particularly those who were unaware of their mother’s (intervention), or a group where the results of the checklist are not used participation in AOCS and who were not expecting to be contacted about her wReitshuinlt sthe counseling (control). The counseling sessions are audiotaped for results. All interviewees described the different implications of receiving ge- purposes of content analysis. netic information for self and others. Both AOCS participants and next of kin expressed an intention to disseminate the information to relatives fol- Preliminary data on the first98 participants indicate that counselees expe- lowing confirmation of the result in an accredited laboratory. We discuss rience problems in the following psychosocial domains: living with cancer the practical and ethical issues raised by the adoption of different strategies (95% of the counselees), genetics (67%), children (51%), family and social to avoid causing distress in next of kin, for example, seeking next of kin’s issues (30%), emotions (24%), and practical problems (14%). Whether the- consent to feedback at the outset versus only disclosing research findings sDei siscsuusessio anre more frequently addressed in the intervention group as com- to the participant. pared to the control group will be evaluated when the study matures. EPL6.6 Enhancing family communication about genetics: ethical and If proven effective, the use of a oncogenetics-specific psychosocial problem professional challenges checklist can be recommended as an aid in facilitating communication, in- C. Gaff1,2, J. Hodgson3,4; 1Department of Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, creasing counselors’ awareness, and improving the management of psycho- 2Victorian Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 3Murdoch Childrens social problems within cancer genetics. Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 4Department of Paediatrics, The University of EPL6.4 Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia. Disclosure of information within french families with BRCA mutation C. Rambaud1, A. Birot1, A. Damette2, C. Populaire2, A. Cueff3, F. Coron1, C. Loustalot4, C. Cassini1, P. Fumoleau3, J. Sautière5, X. Pivot6, F. Debomy1, S. Gauthier1, M. Collonge-Rame2, Genetic counsellors describe a sense of responsibility towards the at-risk L. Faivre1; 1Centre de génétique, Hopital d‘Enfants, Dijon, France, 2Service d‘oncogénétique, family members of a person newly diagnosed with a genetic condition, wis- Besançon, France, 3Service d‘oncologie, Centre G.F. Leclerc, Dijon, France, 4Service hing to ensure that they are appropriately informed about their status and d‘oncogénétique, Centre G.F. Leclerc, Dijon, France, 5Service de gynécologie, Besançon, options. While a small number of probands directly state their intention not France, 6Service d‘oncologie, Hôpital Minjoz, Besançon, France. to inform their relatives, many who do intend to communicate this infor- mation appear to be unsuccessful for a wide range of reasons. Some evi- dence suggests that successful communication of genetic information may Disclosure of genetic information to first-degree relatives in families with a be enhanced by follow up support from a genetic counsellor. Nonetheless, genetic predisposition was studied in two French regions. Data for 64 wo- when we began to develop a genetic counselling intervention to optimise men were collected (24 index cases, 40 relatives with the BRCA mutation). the number of informed family members for evaluation in a funded rando- Concerning disclosure to children over 18, 98% of these had been informed mised control trial, we were faced with a number of ethical and professional (100% of daughters and 96% of sons) and 46% underwent genetic scree- challenges. We will share those challenges, drawing on the Reciprocal-Enga- ning. gement model of genetic counselling and concepts of autonomy, to describe For siblings, all of sisters and 98% of brothers had been informed and 44% a framework for their resolution. While the resulting intervention aims to underwent genetic screening. facilitate decision-making and is theoretically grounded in genetic counsel- 85% of parents had been informed; 59% of mothers and 44% of fathers had ling, little is known of practice in this area. Strategies used in practice by undergone genetic screening. genetic counsellors when addressing difficulties in family communication Concerning age of the communicant, incomplete information to first-degree with clients were identified while training genetic counsellors to deliver the relatives was observed in 14% of those above 60 years of age, 11% in the intervention. These strategies will be compared and contrasted with the in- 50/60 age group, 5.5% in the 40-50 years, and 0% in those between 30 and tervention. 40 years. . Complete information of the relatives was also more observed when the EPL7.1 communicant was index case (96% versus 92,5% for relatives), and was Intentions to receive individual results from whole-genome symptomatic (97% versus 85% for asymptomatic women) sequencing among participants in the ClinSeqTM study The reasons for non-disclosure of the information to relatives included fa- B. B. Biesecker1, F. M. Facio1, H. Eidem1, T. Fisher1, S. Brooks1, A. Linn1, K. A. Kaphingst2, mily dispute (33%), wish not to worry others (50%), or no particular reason L. G. Biesecker1; (17%). 1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Washington University, St. Louis, MO, United States. This study showed that disclosure of the information is well done for child- ren and siblings, whatever the sex, and less constant for parents. Disclosure of the information was better in young and/or symptomatic women. The re- asons for not providing the information were not related to poor understan- The volume of data generated for a single individual and the wide range of ding or difficulties reiterating the information to members of the family. findings from whole genome sequencing raise critical questions about the return of results and their potential value for end-users. We conducted a EPL6.5 mixed-methods study of 311 participants in the ClinSeqTM study to assess The impact on self and family of receiving genetic test results attitudes toward learning results, perceived opinions of valued others, and following participation in the Australian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS) N. Hallowell1, K. Alsop2, M. Gleeson3, D. Bowtell2, G. Mitchell2, .. The Australian Ovarian how these variables predict intentions to receive results within four catego- ries of findings ranging from medically actionable to variants of unknown www.eshsgig.noifircgance. 294 participants indicated a preference to learn their genome www.eshg.orgEMPAG Plenary Lectures 425 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EPL7.4 The impact of diagnostic developments in prenatal diagnosis; a sequencing results and six were unsure. Most often participants cited di- psychological challenge sease prevention as their reason, including intention to change their life- S. Riedijk, G. Oudesluijs, J. Hunfeld, S. le Sage, R. Galjaard, A. Tibben; style behaviors. A third expressed a general desire to know, reflecting those Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. who generally valued information and others who sought to understand the personal implications of findings. Participants had positive attitudes, strong perceived social norms and strong intentions to learn results overall, alt- The introduction of new techniques for screening of genetic anomalies such hough there were significant mean differences among categories of findings. as whole genome microarray analysis (WGA) into the clinic of prenatal dia- Attitudes and social norms for medically actionable and carrier results were gnosis ensues a number of psychological challenges for pregnant couples. most highly rated. Strong intentions were motivated by confidence to use WGA generates more information about the current and future health of the information to prevent future disease and belief in the value of infor- the unborn child than conventional karyotyping (CK), the gold standard for mation. It behooves investigators to facilitate participants’ desire to learn genetic chromosome analysis in prenatal diagnosis. One the one hand coup- a range of information from genomic sequencing, while promoting realistic les need to determine the extent of information they wish to receive about expectations for its clinical utility and perceived personal utility. the (future) health of their unborn child. On the other, professionals may EPL7.2 withhold or disclose information in the interest of the (health/future auto- Introducing high-throughput seqencing in the clinical setting - but nomy of the) unborn child. Our experience thus far is that WGA generates what will patients think ? more probabilistic results (e.g. increased risk of learning disabilities) than A. Soulier, S. Leonard, S. Julia, A. Cambon-Thomsen; CK. Probabilistic information is more difficult to grasp than information UMR 1027, Inserm, Université de Toulouse - Université Paul Sabatier -Toulouse III, about actual presence of an anomaly. Moreover, probabilities represent an Epidémiologie et analyses en santé publique : risques, maladies chroniques et handicaps, uncertainty that impedes decision-making. A best possible decision about Toulouse, France. the course of a desired pregnancy needs to reflect consistency with personal values and considerations in order to be processed adequately emotionally. Thus, the broadening of knowledge about the current and future health of Developments in genetics, in particular the advent of high-throughput se- the unborn child implies that pregnant couples will have to anticipate a va- quencing technologies, are expected to have a profound impact on health riety of outcomes, determine the extent of information they wish to receive, and healthcare, yet much remains to be learned about how people - present interpret the meaning of probabilistic results and assimilate the results with or potential recipients of such care- perceive and frame these expectations. personal values and considerations into their decision about the course of What do laypeople anticipate ? How are expected changes understood and their desired pregnancy. Health care professionals must attend each of these portrayed ? Are these expectations grounded in their previous experiences themes in the pre- and post test counselling. of clinical care or do they reflect principles and values attached to medici- EPL7.5 ne ? In order to explore these questions we carried out a series of 8 focus Close parental relatedness identified by SNP microarray - challenges groups (a total of 64 participants) in three categories : laypeople, research for genetic counselling participants and members of patient organisations. This work was done in R. Forbes1, T. Burgess2, D. Amor1,3,4, Z. Stark1; the context of the European Techgene project, which aimed to develop high- 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Royal Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, throughput tests for clinical use. The results of these focus groups gave in- Australia, 2Victorian Clinical Genetics Service Pathology, Cytogenetics,Royal Children‘s sights into the types of results that people are willing to receive ; the desire Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, Royal for a new kind of physician patient relationship and the differences between Children‘s Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4University of Melbourne, Department of the clinician’s and the layperson ‘s perspectives on the distinction between Paediatrics, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. clinic and research. This research provided an opportunity to confront ethi- Introduction cal theories about these new technologies with empirical data to test ethical reasoning in context and to allow it to be grounded in the values and con- cerns of service users. Such empirical ethical analysis is crucial for the deve- Molecular karyotyping by microarray is recommended as ‘first tier’ testing lopment of guidance that is applicable to the experiences and expectations in evaluation of individuals with intellectual disability, developmental de- of those who will use these emerging genetic technologies. lay, multiple congenital abnormalities, and autism spectrum disorders. SNP EPL7.3 microarrays extend diagnostic scope beyond detection of submicroscopic Rapid genetic testing for BRCA1/2 genes: How could oncogenetic pathogenic copy number changes by also revealing uniparental disomy, chi- counseling deal with an urgent choice? merism, chromosomal mosaicism and long continuous stretches of homo- E. Razzaboni1, L. Cortesi1, G. Tazzioli2, M. Pignatti3, A. Baccarani3, A. Andreotti2, E. De zygosity (LCSH) creating the potential to determine previously undisclosed Matteis1, V. Medici1, M. Federico1; iMnceethstoudosu s& r Releastuiolntsships, posing legal and ethical challenges for genetic ser- 1Department of Oncology, Haematology and Respiratory Disease, Modena, Italy, vices. 2Department of General Surgery and Surgical Specialities, Modena, Italy, 3Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Modena, Italy. SNP microarray was performed on 11000 consecutive samples. LCSH was detected in 1156 samples (10.5%). Close parental relatedness (greater than 6.25% LCSH) was detected in 322 samples (3%), with 4 samples showing The life-time risk to developing breast cancer in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers homozygosity levels >20%, consistent with a first-degree relationship bet- is 43% and 46%, respectively, and ten years risk of developing a contrala- wDiesecnu spsairoennts. Two known cases of first-degree unions were detected with teral breast cancer is 25%. Risk reducing bilateral mastectomy (RRBM) can homozygosity levels of 17.3% and 19%. reduce breast cancer risk in BRCA1/2 mutation carriers up to 95%. Rapid genetic testing is now available for newly diagnosed breast cancer before Identification of close parental relatedness poses unique ethical and legal having surgical treatment. To guarantee autonomous and informed decision challenges for genetic services. Can we reliably differentiate between exten- we elaborated a new model of oncogenetic counseling focused mostly on sive LCSH arising from incestuous relationships and consanguineous unions psychological aspects and surgical counseling. Since 2008, at the Modena over several generations? How these findings should be reported to avoid Centre for Hereditary Breast and Ovarian Cancer (Italy) has been performed inappropriate or insensitive disclosure whilst fulfilling legal and ethical ob- a rapid genetic testing for women with hereditary profile at the time of bre- ligations, protect the child’s right to privacy, whilst ensuring medically rele- ast cancer diagnosis. The entire oncogenetic counselling path is completed vant information is available is complex. We will present the approach our within three weeks. So BRCA1/2 carriers have the opportunity to choose for service has developed to deal with results indicating close parental related- RRBM. About 71 mutational analyses were performed and 25 (35%) patients ness. Next generation microarrays are likely to combine both the CGH and were mutated. Among the 25 patients with a positive result, 13 (52%) had SNP platforms. These issues will arise with greater frequency, necessitating a RRBM at the surgery time for the breast cancer. A psychological follow-up the development of specific guidelines. was performed in all patients undergone RRBM. After 12 months from the EPL7.6 intervention, patients showed an overall good emotional adjustment and Criteria for responsible introduction of genome-based-technologies satisfaction with their decision whereas only in a minor case sexual and psy- and information into public health care chological problems arose. Our study shows that a rapid genetic testing in H. C. Howard1, E. Swinnen2, K. Douw3, H. Vondeling3, J. Cassiman2, A. Cambon-Thomsen4, patients with a hereditary profile significantly improved the choice of RRBM P. Borry2; and that is it fundamental to guarantee both multidisciplinary counseling 1University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland, 2KULeuven, Leuven, Belgium, 3University of and psychological follow-up to these women. Twente, Enschede, Netherlands, 4INSERM, Université de Toulouse 3 Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France. www.eshg.org www.eshg.org426 EMPAG Workshops Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EMPAG Workshops With the incredible advances in genome sequencing over the last decade, there has been a shift towards studying more common complex disorders. The integration of this information into the health care setting has proved EW1 to be much more problematic than for monogenic disorders. Furthermore, Parents & Children in Families with Huntington’s Disease with the 1000$ genome just around the corner, there is a strong push for L. B. Van der Meer1, A. Blom2; the uptake of additional genomic testing. Although laudable, these advances 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 2Academic Medical Center, also bring with them a slew of ethical and social issues that challenge the Amsterdam, Netherlands. normative frameworks used in clinical genetics until now. With this in mind and considering a previous report from the Dutch Health Council, we out- line herein five principles that should be considered in order to introduce In families with Huntington’s Disease (HD), family dynamics are often un- genome-based-technologies and information (GBTI) into public health. favorable for the healthy psychological development of children. In a recent 1) Their introduction should be based on a solid scientific foundation. study, we found that persons who grew up with a parent with HD had been 2) GBTI introduced into the health care system and financed by public funds exposed to more adverse experiences in childhood than the general popu- should be focused on significant health problems. lation. This may have life-long negative consequences; we found that adults 3) The advantages of introducing and offering GBTI should outweigh the with a parent with HD have poorer mental health and more fear of intimacy disadvantages. and abandonment than the general population. 4) The autonomy of patients, and individuals in general, must be respected. Recently, in the Netherlands, a meeting with professionals (psychologists, 5) The offer of GBTI funded from public sources should be justified in the social workers) was held, to explore the nature and extent of problems that context of the overall healthcare budget. professionals encounter in their work with HD families. It was agreed that HD families present with specific difficulties concerning parents and child- ren. Adequate support can not always be given, because couples may not be open for support with child rearing, and because existing support is not tailored to the needs of HD families. Professionals working in Clinical Genetics, where persons apply for predicti- ve testing and receive counseling on reproductive options, may have an op- portunity to address parenting issues in an early stage, before neurological diagnosis of HD and before problems with parent-child interactions occur. In this workshop, we will exchange experiences with parent-child issues in HD families, and with existing forms of support. Hopefully, we can coopera- te in a search for more adequate, specialized programs for prevention and intervention, so that children who are growing up in HD families now and in the future have optimal chances of becoming stable adults. EW2 Methodological guidelines for empirical validation of genetic counselling interventions J. C. Rocha; UnIPSa, ISCS-N, Gandra, Portugal. Actual constraints and better awareness of critical factors underlying psy- chosocial based interventions had increased needs, and doubts, about ge- netic counselling efficacy and effectiveness. Further from the ethical foun- dations of genetic counseling importance and simple experience-based evi- dences, there is still a huge gap on empirical validation of genetic counseling interventions and still low number on meta-analytical results are conclusi- ve. We had advocated on several contexts the need for substantial evidences about efficacy and efficiency of genetic counseling interventions and about better understanding of interview skills and programs structure specific im- pacts. Based on this point of view, it is proposed a model for future research on genetic counseling clinical research based on known guidelines adapted to this context. Aspects related to frequent difficulties on randomized controlled trials as: 1. Manualization of interventions respecting broad literature reviews and clinical opinions; 2. Sampling aspects envisaging minimum bias; 3. Aspects concerned with proper control groups; 4. Sophistication of methodological design; 5. Problems with outcome measures; 6. Statistical aspects to quan- tify counselling effects; 7. Concerns will long term effects, acceptability and robustness of interventions, are addressed on this workshop and specific research contingencies are reflected. Guidelines are operationalized and explained on two levels of discussion: past relevant research examples and based on ongoing or future participant’s projects. Participants will be invited to share their clinical research dilem- mas in order to enable solutions for future research. www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Posters 427 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EP01.03 EMPAG Posters Genetic conditions: a challenge for couple/ family therapy A. Leonardo1,2; 1Hospital Santa Maria, Lisboa, Portugal, 2POIESIS - Portuguese Association of Couple and Family Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, Lisbon, Portugal. EP1 Psychosocial issues in Neurodegenerative diseases As a psychologist working and learning with genetics patients in a central hospital, I have become aware of the extreme importance of the family the- rapy in addition to the individual. During my clinical practice, I have realized EP01.01 that genetic conditions can put family dynamics at risk. The challenge of diagnosis and counseling for intermediate alleles in For instance, the termination of pregnancy after prenatal diagnosis. As Klass Huntington‘s disease: a clinical example (1988) pointed out, this experience can have an effect of estrangement bet- A. Van Tongerloo1, P. Santens2, K. Claes1, A. De Paepe1; ween the couple.We know by experience that women often complain about 1Dept.of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Gent, 9000 Gent, Belgium, 2Dept.of their partners who seem to have no grief feIenlcionnggs.r Pueepntp eGrrsi eafn.d Knaps (1980) Neurology, University Hospital Gent, 9000 Gent, Belgium. called out our attention to the tremendous differences between women and men mourning processes and named it If we take this knowledge to our practice we will be able to help the couple to recognize In presymptomatic testing for Huntington’s disease (HD), counselees expect these differences in a good instead of a scary way. to receive a clear cut result about their carrier status. However, we are in- What about the cons of a diagnosis/predictive testing kept in secret? We creasingly confronted with counseling dilemmas related to the presence of will discuss a case of a woman who decided not to confess her diagnosis of intermediate (IA) or reduced penetrance (RP)alleles, of which the individual Familial Amyloidotic Polyneuropathy to her husband, and how that decision clinical outcome is more difficult to predict than for full penetrance alleles. put the couple bonds at risk. We will compare this case with another woman Moreover, these alleles can expand into full penetrance alleles upon trans- who asked for family support the diagnosis of CADASIL. Accepting that the mission , which has specific disease risk implications for the offspring. secret was a bigger risk, than the disclosure, for her family’ bonds, she deci- We present a family in which the index patient, a 45-year old man, was clini- ded to share the diagnosis with her partner and son. cally diagnosed with HD and shown to carry a HD allele with 43 CAG repeats. We will discuss the pros of couple/family therapy in addition to the indi- Remarkably, he was the youngest in a sibship of nine, with no other affected vidual. Examples will illustrate the impact of genetic conditions over the individuals in the family. His father, who died at age 78, reportedly showed family dynamics. aggressive behavior throughout his life but the diagnosis of HD had never been suspected in him. His mother died at age 77 without signs of HD. EP2 Communicating Genetic information Subsequently, six siblings requested presymptomatic testing: three showed a normal molecular test result, although, in two of them, the pre-test neuro- logic evaluation was inconclusive regarding the possibility of early signs of EP02.01 HD; three other sibs had an IA of 34 CAG. The clinical history of the father The Process of parental disclosure in Duchenne Muscular dystrophy suggested that, most likely, he also a carried the 34 CAG allele and that ex- (DMD) pansion occurred in the index patient. P. Dasani; Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. This case illustrates the unusual segregation and counseling issues that may arise in families segregating an intermediate HD allele. EP01.02 The communication process between parents and their affected children Psychological effects of presymptomatic DNA testing for Huntington‘s regarding a genetic condition and its prognosis is rarely explored. The aim Disease. An Italian research. of this study was to investigate this complex communication process about S. Serpentini1, L. Dal Sasso1, E. Pasquin1, G. Dubsky de Wittenau2, F. Cesca2, S. Radovic3, M. Balestrieri4, F. Curcio2,5, G. Damante1,2, R. Lonigro2,6; the diagnosis and prognosis of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. To explore 1Istituto di Genetica, A.O.U., Udine, Italy, 2Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Biologiche, this the researcher conducted 1) 6 interviews with parents of affected indi- Università, Udine, Italy, 3Dipartimento di Scienze Agrarie, Università, Udine, Italy, viduals and 2) 4 interviews with Health professionals involved in the care of 4Clinica Psichiatrica, A.O.U., Udine, Italy, 5Dipartimento di Medicina di Laboratorio, the affected boys. This data was transcribed and coded for thematic analysis. A.O.U., Udine, Italy, 6Lab. Neurogenetica, SOC Pat. Clinica, Dip. di Med. di Laboratorio, We identified the appropriate method of communication, the role of fami- A.O.U., Udine, Italy. ly culture, key issues raised by such communication needs and appropri- Aim: ate source. The most appropriate method of communication was indicated as a ‘drip feed’ approach using language suited to the child’s development. The aim of the present study is to investigate the psychological well- The family culture towards communication played an enormous part is how bMeeinthgo odf sp:resymptomatic Huntington‘s disease (HD) gene carriers and non- comfortable they felt discussing difficult issues. The key issues raised during carriers 6-12 months after the genetic testing. this process were mutual protection, a tension between autonomy and pro- From May 2009 to October 2011 we evaluated 18 presymthoma- tection and parental responsibility. tRice ssuubltjse:cts resulted carriers of HD gene and 18 noncarriers. The instrument EP02.02 used is the Psychological General Well-being Index (PWBGI). Genetic counselor’s report to patients in clinical genetics: A survey to Both the 18 subjects resulted carriers (N:18, M:5, F:13; mean age: establish a quality management 47,35, range age: 26-75) and the 18 subjects noncarriers (N:18, M:7, F:11; F. R. Kreuz1, b. Leube2, M. Meins3, G. Schmidt4, D. Wand5, U. Beudt6, B. Prager7, B. Prager7, mean age: 45,93, range age: 26-69) don’t show any significant difference D. Schäfer8; from normative data, but the carriers mean scores are lower than the nor- 1Gemeinschaftspraxis für Humangenetik, Dresden, Germany, 2Institut für Humangenetik, mative scores; moreover the Global Index Score indicate a moderate level of Düsseldorf, Germany, 3Wagner Stibbe Laboratoriumsmedizin und Pathologie, distress (71,37). The Student T-test comparison between carriers and non- Göttingen, Germany, 4Kinderarztpraxis Frankfurt-Schwanheim, Frankfurt/M., Germany, carriers shows statistically significant differences in Vitality scale (11,78 5Institut für Humangenetik, Halle/S., Germany, 6Gemeinschaftspraxis, Frankfurt/M., Germany, 7Überörtliche Berufsausübungsgemeinschaft, Dresden, Germany, 8Institut für vCeornsculsu s1i4o,n56s:; p<.01) and in the Global Index Score (71,37 versus 82,33; Humangenetik, Frankfurt/M., Germany. p<.05). The results of the present study indicate that the presympto- matic HD gene carriers in comparison with noncarriers 6-12 months after Genetic counseling is defined as a communication process dealing with ge- genetic testing present a significant lower vitality and a significant worse le- netic diseases, (recurrence) risks, diagnostic possibilities, and choices in vel of the global index of well-being. The research, despite the limited samp- individual and family life. An important part is the report for counselees. le, highlights a psychological critical situation in presymptomatic HD gene It is supposed to enable them to reflect on the counseling session, receive carriers and suggests the importance of specific psychosocial interventions. help in decision making, and inform their physicians and family members Further studies are needed in order to explore in a longitudinal perspective adequately. how the communication of HD gene carrier condition impacts on the psy- In order to get an overview on the current practice and with regard to future chological well-being and the quality of life of the individuals involved in quality management of genetic counseling we asked genetic institutions in genetic counseling process. Germany to send us anonymously and via internet such reports concerning six common diagnostic conditions of genetic counseling, one typical letter for each condition. Between 17 and 40 institutions responded - 40 to the is- sue “recurrent abortion”, 37 to the issue “hereditary cancer”, 32 to the issue www.eshg.org www.eshg.org428 EMPAG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 “prenatal trisomy 21”, and 17 to the issues “fragile X syndrome”, “infertility sential elements of the consultation. pairs”, and “unknown syndrome”, respectively. We believe that this framework could be useful for both researchers and Reflecting the gathered reports with special regard to already existing gui- clinicians to enhance a client-centred model of care. delines we developed a catalogue of criteria, which adequate reports should EP02.05 fulfill. We classified the criteria in general, formal and technical criteria, ‘I realised it was coming, it was just a question of time’: living with the criteria of content and counseling specific criteria. Additionally, we esta- knowledge of increased familial risk blished a check list for writing a “successful” genetic report, well structured L. Birt1, J. Emery2,1, K. Restarick1, N. Grehan1, F. Walter1,2; according to topics like general requests, necessary information, anamnesis, 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2University of Western Australia, medical reports, results of investigations, contents of the counseling, con- Perth, Australia. clusion. Both, the check list and the catalogue of criteria, could be useful tools for writing adequate for-client reports. Moreover, they might be helpful in esta- Introduction blishing a reasonable quality management of genetic counseling. The use of family health screening tools is increasing in primary care set- EP02.03 tings. However, little is known about the psychosocial/behavioural impact Using conversation analysis to improve genetic counseling: An of familial risk assessment for common chronic diseases . This qualitative example regarding counseling of fellow healthcare personnel study explored people’s response to receiving information about their risk G. Overbeck1, B. R. Diness2; of developing one of four marker conditions: diabetes, heart disease, bre- 1Department of Scandinavian Studies and Linguistics, University of Copenhagen, ast and colon cancer. These conditions fulfil screening criteria, and effective Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, Rigshospitalet, interventions and lifestyle strategies exist for their primary and secondary Copenhagen, Denmark. prevention. Methods Thirty participants (aged 24-50, 22 females), recently informed of their Background and aim: Conversation Analysis (CA) is a qualitative method personal risk, were recruited via the FAST study, set in 10 East of England where recurring speech-patterns are noted and broken patterns identified. general practices. Purposeful sampling led to a cohort of population (N=12) For instance if the patient change turn-design from minimal responses to and increased (N=18) risk participants. Data were collected using semi- long responses, and thereby change the semi-preallocated turn-taking sy- structured interviews, transcribed verbatim and interpreted using frame- stem. The analysis of the transcription is data-driven, and therefore induc- work analysis. tive. CA of recorded consultation might improve provider awareness of me- Results chanisms of communication. Receiving information about increased personal risk did not appear to cause Method: In 4 of 10 recorded counseling sessions the patient had a profession psychological distress. Participants used mental models of health to assess or an education within the health sciences. In one of these sessions excerpts salience of risk to themselves and kin. Four personalising processes were were transcribed and sequentially analyzed. The CA examines how the ge- identified: 1) actively making lifestyle changes and seeking further health netic counselor and the patient linguistically cast the patient‘‘s identity. advice; 2) acknowledging risk but not enacting lifestyle changes or seeking Result: Analysis showed that there was an ongoing negotiation of the further screening;3) not presently perceiving personal risk as high but ack- patient’s identity as patient and health care professional respectively. The nowledging possible changes in the future; 4) being at population risk was role of the patient expected by the counselor may therefore be less evident generally perceived as a validation of current lifestyle. to the patient. This observation was then communicated to the counselor Discussion along with suggestions of how to deal with such negotiations. Participants were influenced by their knowledge of marker condition risk, Discussion: This analysis illustrates, that CA might be a useful tool to analyze but reported that being at higher risk did not always lead to preventive be- the interaction in genetic counseling, because of the data-driven approach. haviours. Concurrent interviews with the counselees might be a good supplement to Furthermore, being at population risk could lead to fewer preventive beha- the CA. Genetic counseling is best when provided form a multidisciplinary viours. team. Inclusion of professionals with knowledge of CA might further increa- EP02.06 se the capacity of the team. Non-syndromic neurossensorial prelingual deafness: the importance EP02.04 of genetic counseling in demystifying parents’ beliefs about the cause Communication in paediatric clinical genetics: a case study of their children’s deafness illustrating a useful analytic technique F. Rodrigues1, M. Paneque2, C. Reis1, M. Venâncio1, J. Sequeiros2, J. Saraiva1; J. Paul1,2,3, J. Hodgson1,2, L. Stirling3, S. Metcalfe1,2; 1Centro Hospitalar e Universitário de Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal, 2Instituto de Biologia 1Genetics Education and Health Research, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Molecular e Celular, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal. Parkville, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Introduction: Australia, 3School of Languages and Linguistics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. Recent advances in molecular genetics have allowed the de- termination of the genetic cause of some childhood non-syndromic hearing loss. Nevertheless, only a small proportion of families are referred to a cli- Various techniques have been employed to explore interactions in genetic nical genetics service for proper genetic counseling. In Portugal, there are consultations ranging from quantitative methods which have assessed over no published studies about the prior beliefs of parents about the causes of one hundred consultations, to in-depth qualitative analyses of single tran- hereditary hearing loss of their children and their genetic knowledge after scripts. Overwhelmingly research has demonstrated that dialogue is domi- the genetic counseling offered by professionals with specific training. The nated by the clinician, with content being mostly educational or scientific in aim of this study was to assess beliefs about possible causes of non-syndro- rather than psychosocial. mMiect hnoeudrso: ssensorial prelingual deafness in order to improve the quality of This presentation will illustrate how an interactional sociolinguistic frame- communication. work, in particular, one making use of Mishler’s ‘voices’ in medical consulta- Forty-four parents (24 mothers, 20 faGthJBe2rs) of twenty-four child- tions, can enable researchers and clinicians to gain a greater understanding ren with the diagnosis of non-syndromic neurossensorial prelingual deaf- of the apparent medical dominance illustrated in these studies (Mishler, nReesssu dltuse: to mutations in the connexin 26 gene ( ) answered a question- 1984). naire about genetic knowledge before and after the genetic counseling. Mishler describes two different ‘voices’ present during medical interactions. Before counseling 15.9% of the parents knew the cause of deaf- Talk relating to the knowledge and experience of the client is described as ness, while at a post-counseling setting this percentage was significantly the ‘voice of the lifeworld’. The ‘voice of medicine’ refers to the technical, higher. No differences were found between the answers of mothers and fa- scientific talk of the medical world. Mishler argues that the typical or ‘unre- thers before and after genetic counseling. Parents’ level of education was markable interview’ is dominated by the voice of medicine, while the voice a significant factor in pre-test knowledge. After genetic counseling 95.5% of the lifeworld remains mostly suppressed. Barry et al. support Mishler’s of the parents stated that the clinical genetics consultation had met their theory that allowing more space for the lifeworld can result in more efficient eCxopneccltuastiioonns:; 70.5% remembered the inherited pattern, 93.2% recalled the medical consultations (Barry et al. 2001). recurrence risk of deafness. In analysing two contrasting paediatric clinical genetic consultations we It is important genetic counselors to take into account parents’ track the voice of medicine and the voice of the lifeworld through the lens beliefs and assess their genetic knowledge, in order to increase the know- of interactional sociolinguistics. It will be demonstrated how clinicians can ledge and demystifying parents‘ beliefs. effectively engage with the voice of the lifeworld, while preserving other es- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Posters 429 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EP02.07 Young adults‘ attitudes towards newborn screening and carrier identification are faced with the choice to decide for screening or risk-reducing surgery. M. Noke, F. Ulph; Since BRCA carriers may develop breast cancer at an age before reproduc- University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom. tion, and the fact that they have 50% probability to pass the gene defect to offspring, this may influence their decisions as how to fulfill the wish to start or complete their family. There is a range of options in the context of repro- Research examining parents’ experiences of receiving carrier result in- ductive choices: to have children regardless the risk, to remain childless, or formation from newborn screening suggests that anxiety and distress are adoption, or sperm- or egg donation, or to consider assisted reproduction caused by unpreparedness for results and how these results are communi- techniques such as PND or PGD. The moral struggle and concerns that the- cated, rather than the results per se. Questions have been raised about how se couples have to face can be driven by various factors: their own desires, feasible it is to convey newborn screening information adequately during desires of the partner, the responsibility to future offspring, prevailing va- pregnancy, a time when parents often experience information overload. To lues with respect to the hereditary disorder in the family of origin, opinions understand how these newborn screening processes can be improved for in their wider social network and in society in general. future generations and to investigate the feasibility of providing newborn To prevent an unnecessary burden for the prospective parents, it is desirable screening prior to pregnancy, young adults’ understanding of and attitudes that themes regarding reproduction are scheduled in the pre- and posttest towards newborn screening were investigated. Thirty-four young adults, counseling. In a situation where the decision-making process of reproduc- with no experience of screening, took part in one of seven focus groups. The- tion stagnates, it can be beneficial to analyze the underlying reasons from matic analysis suggested that respondents recognised the benefits of carrier the perspective of an intergenerational approach. This will be illustrated on knowledge on altering future reproductive decisions, and despite concern the basis of several case reports. regarding the stigmatisation of carriers, typically expressed a desire to have EP4 Living with genetic disease access to personal carrier status. After viewing key information from Cystic Fibrosis and Sickle Cell Disease websites, adults became preoccupied by the personal threat of being a Cystic Fibrosis carrier, yet did not acknowledge EP04.01 the risk of being a Sickle Cell Disease carrier, despite re-evaluating its per- Psychological impact of diagnosis of thrombophilia on women with ceived severity. Some adults were unable to accurately interpret inheritance childbearing potential diagrams. Young adults were not interested in receiving screening informa- R. Mihaescu1, A. Stoian2, C. Gug1, S. Negru1, C. Serban1; tion prior to pregnancy; rationales varied from worry associated with scree- 1University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Timisoara, Romania, Timisoara, Romania, ning information (avoidance) to the inability to conceptualise its relevance 2Oncomed, Timisoara, Romania. (denial). Incremental impartation of information aimed at increasing adult’s interest in screening to enable them to appreciate the personal relevance is suggested. Background: Thrombophilia is a inappropriate tendency to thrombus for- EP3 Reproductive Decision making mation. In recent years numerous studies were conducted in the field of thrombophilia, in an attempt to prevent the consequences of thrombotic disease.However, there are few studies to evaluate impact of diagnosis on quality of life for patients with childbearing potential. EP03.01 Methods: Between 02.2010-01.2012 in Oncomed Timisoara we evaluated Impact of genetic counselling on reproductive planning of couples in 94 patients with thrombophilia, all women. A questionnaire was given to families with myotonic dystrophy type 1 R. Nunes1, M. Paneque2, J. Sequeiros2,3, A. Fortuna4; every women, to asses quality of life. 1Hospital Center of Porto, Porto, Portugal, 2Center for Predictive and Preventive Genetics, Results: Only 70 patiens accepted to answer the questionnaire. 70% were Institute for Molecular and Cell Biology, Porto, Portugal, 3ICBAS, University do Porto, hopeful about the future, hope generated by the fact that they found the Porto, Portugal, 4Center of Medical Genetics Dr. Jacinto Magalhães, National Institute of source of miscarriage, but they were frustrated 85% of the patients, stressed Health Dr. Ricardo Jorge, Porto, Portugal. about being unable to conceive. Only 27% of them were mentally exausted by the number of attemps to become pregnant and all of them were decided to try again. All patients answered that they where able to get organized Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) is a neuromuscular, multisystem, progres- and take care of daily activities; still, 25% had difficulties to resolve conflicts sive disease, with autosomal dominant inheritance. Genetic counselling is a and 40% were not able to provide emotional support for others. All patients delicate process in this disease, as reproductive decisions are difficult due to were able to mantain a normal sexual life. 90% of them experienced sudden the variable clinic presentation and the phenomenon of anticipation of age- mood changes, 75% felt overly sensitive to others comments, but only 37% at-onset. We planned (1) to assess the impact of genetic counselling in fami- felt at least once lost. lies with DM1, their reproductive choices and the factors that influenced it, Conclusion: The answers showed that despite the depression associated (2) to consider the results of prenatal diagnosis, and (3) to assess the influ- with the miscarriages, all of them were still hoping to become mothers. This ence of psychosocial elements in their reproductive planning. A retrospec- result shows that a close collaboration between hematologist and psycholo- tive study of 10 years used a questionnaire aimed at couples with a family gist is the key to a good quality of life for these patients. history of DM1, followed by genetic counselling for reproductive planning. EP04.02 The main reproductive choice was not to have children (55.6%), followed Quality of life and subjective health complaints in acute intermittent by pregnancy and prenatal diagnosis (33.3%). In 60% of those couples who porphyria had prenatal diagnosis, the foetus was a carrier and the option was for ter- J. Andersen1,2, S. Sandberg1,2, K. Nordin2,3; mination of pregnancy. The main factors that have influenced reproductive 1The Norwegian Porphyria Centre, Bergen, Norway, 2University of Bergen, Bergen, decisions were (1) the risk of having an affected child, and (2) the existence Norway, 3Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. of other children prior to genetic counselling; (3) the psychosocial impact of the disease also contributed to the reproductive choices. Genetic counselling has a strong impact on reproductive choices in families with DM1. A multi- Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) is a metabolic disease inherited in an au- disciplinary team should always be involved in the counselling process, to tosomal dominant way with reduced penetrance and variable expressivity. meet the expectations and the needs of counselees and their families, and to Symptoms presents as attacks of abdominal pain, vomiting, muscle aches, provide the support they need at all stages of their decision-making process muscle weakness, and in extreme cases, respiratory paralysis. Triggering about reproductive options. factors can be medications; hormones, alcohol, physical and psychological EP03.02 stress, hunger and fast. There exists little formal information about the sub- As the old cock crows, the young cock learns. An intergenerational jective experiences of persons suffering from this condition, but previous approach in the perspective of family planning in case of a gene research indicates that AIP can cause serious life style consequences and mutation carrier reduce quality of life in those affected. T. Brouwer; The aim of this study was to describe self-reported quality of life and sub- Department of Medical Genetics, Utrecht, Netherlands. jective health complaints in persons with latent, manifest and active AIP respectively, and to investigate the relationship between quality of life and disease related variables, demographic variables and coping strategies. A BRCA gene mutation carrier has an increased risk of 60-80 % to develop A written postal survey was distributed to all persons registered with AIP breast cancer and 5-60% to develop ovarian cancer. Its diagnosis may lead older than 18 years in Norway. Response rate was 55% (n= 140). The instru- to an increased psychosocial disturbance. Female gene mutation carriers ments WHOQOL-Bref, SHC, IES and MHLC were used, in addition to demo- www.eshg.org www.eshg.org430 EMPAG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 graphic data and information on disease severity in the family. validly assess counselee characteristics that might hamper sharing genetic Quality of life in AIP patients was significantly reduced in regards to phy- information with relatives. Such instrument will allow the evaluation of in- sical challenges. An overall trend in the material was that disease activity terventions aimed at enhancing counselees’ ability to be a competent, mo- increased subjective health complaints and decreased quality of life. Results tivated and confident informant of their at-risk relatives, which in turn may indicate that manifest and active AIP has an important impact on the lives lead to more relatives taking up genetic services. of those afflicted. EP05.02 EP04.03 Impact of genetic counselling in women with a family history of breast Features of hospital adolescent with hereditary disease cancer A. Y. Bozhanov, E. V. Zaklyazminskaya; L. Godino, M. Bianconi, E. Razzaboni, D. Turchetti; Petrovsky Russian Research centre of Surgery RAMS, Moscow, Russian Federation. Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy. We recently began offering specialized psychological help to patients with A semi-structured telephone interview was designed to assess the impact hereditary diseases. One of the first patients in this project is D - a twelve of genetic counselling in a series of asymptomatic women with a family years old boy with primary oxsalosis. D is waiting for the kidneys and liver history of breast cancer (BC). To date, 58 women who underwent genetic transplantation and has been carried daily hemodialysis for almost year and counselling for BC between 2003 and 2011 have been interviewed, and the a half. Also he has a tracheostomy which significantly reduced his ability to data of 42 were available for a preliminary analysis. Age ranged from 24-71 talk. He spent in a hospital two years. D has two younger healthy siblings. years. The majority of women considered the information received during His parents are both alive and also haven’t any genetic disorders. counselling as clear (quite clear: 31.0%; very clear: 33.3%; extremely clear: Metods used: 21.4%) and helpful (quite helpful: 33.3%; very helpful: 33.3%; extremely - observation helpful: 7.1%). Twenty-five (59.5%) stated that their perceived risk of BC - conversation had changed after the counselling: for 20 (80%) it had decreased, for 3 - Dembo-Rubinshtein’s method for self-esteem studying (12%) increased, while 2 did not specify. Twelve (28.6%) declared to have - Drawning of nonexistent animal (projective method for studying attitudes made useful decision for their health after the counselling: most appropri- and emotional states) ate breast surveillance (75.0%, n=9), healthier lifestyle (8.3%, n=1) or in- Also D’s mother was asked to make a test APE (analysis of family educati- tensification of surveillance for fear (8.3%, n=1). Nevertheless 27 women on). (64.3%) stated they had not followed the surveillance recommended by the D looks below his age. He doesn’t eager to communicate either with other counsellor. The majority of women (88.0%, n=37) had shared the informa- people. D‘s defensive strategy has been withdrawal from situation through tion received with their family: parents (37.8%, n=14), sisters and brothers games and movies. He refuses to work with psychologist because he “tired (32.4%, n=12), daughters (10.8%, n=4) or other relatives (10.8%, n=4). The of talking”. family reaction was reported as positive (i.e. listening, support) by 29 of the- D’s self-esteem is lowered, but level of claims is high. He praised his skills se women (78.4%). and intellect at low rate and self-confidence at high at the same time. These preliminary data suggest that genetic counselling has a significant im- D has increased anxiety and high level of verbal aggression, which has been pact on awareness, risk perception, and communication within the family, effectively suppressed. but not on surveillance. The reasons for such a low compliance to surveil- His mother is placing increased responsibilities on D, especially in social lance will be investigated. sphere. EP05.03 To help D to effectively cope his situation it is necessary to lower demands Counselling and clinical implications of an unclassified variant in which are applied to him and help him to express his aggression and grief. MLH1 in a family with a history suggestive of Lynch Syndrome. W. H. Beckett, D. G. R. Evans; EP5 Psychosocial issues in cancer genetics Genetic Medicine, St Mary‘s Hospital and Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom. EP05.01 Sharing genetic cancer information with relatives: development Unclassified variants (UVs or variants of unknown significance) are now a and validation of an instrument to assess counselees’ knowledge, relatively frequent occurrence in genetic tests. Differentiating between a motivation and self perceived competence. benign polymorphism and a pathogenic mutation can be technically diffi- E. de Geus1, C. M. Aalfs2, F. H. Menko3, R. H. Sijmons4, E. M. Smets1,2; cult, particularly for missense changes and intronic variants. A number of 1Academic Medical Center, department of Medical Psychology, Amsterdam, Netherlands, strategies exist to help this process, but it is not always possible to confirm/ 2Academic Medical Center, department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, exclude pathogenicity because of insufficient data, lack of resources and/or 3VU University Medical Center, department of Clinical Genetics, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4University Medical Center Groningen, department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands. samples from other affected and unaffected individuals within the family. In this case a clinical diagnosis may be tentative and/or predictive testing is Introduction unavailable. Genetic professionals face challenges when communicating this information to patients and families. The lack of certainty can cause confu- Despite the use of genetic services, counselees do not always share genetic sion and/or frustration. We present a case study that highlights some of the cancer information with their at-risk relatives. Reasons for not informing counselling implications. A 45 year old woman was referred because of a relatives may be categorized as a lack of: 1) knowledge, 2) motivation and/ family history of colon, endometrial and pancreatic cancer. This was sugge- or 3) self perceived competence. The aim of this cross-sectional study was stive of Lynch syndrome, and the patient was considered to be at 50% risk. to develop and assess the psychometric properties of an instrument that She was keen to pursue predictive genetic test to clarify the risk for her and mMeetahsoudrse s counselees’ knowledge, motivation and self perceived compe- her children. Immunohistochemistry in her cousin’s bIonw-seilli ccoancer and her tence. mother’s endometrial cancer showed loss of MLH1 protein, and molecular testing in the cousin identified a UV in the MLH1 gene. analysis sug- Consecutive counselees who visited the department of Genetics with que- gested the variant was pathogenic, but no confirmatory tests (e.g. functional stions regarding the possibility of hereditary breast and/or ovarian cancer studies) were available. Therefore, predictive genetic testing to refine the or colon cancer (including Lynch and FAP/MAP) were asked to complete patient’s risk was not possible. She found this frustrating, particularly given a home-sent questionnaire after receiving a summary letter from the de- the invasive nature of bowel and endometrial screening. partment of Genetics. This letter included information from the last coun- EP05.04 selling session. Knowledge, motivation and self perceived competence were New strategies needed to improve familial colorectal cancer assessed with a study-specific questionnaire. Analyses will address the ac- prevention ceptability of the instrument, its dimensionality (i.e. whether knowledge, N. Dekker1, R. P. M. G. Hermens1, G. Elwyn2, F. M. Nagengast1, H. de Wilt1, J. H. J. M. van Krieken1, M. J. Ligtenberg1, T. van der Weijden3, W. A. G. van Zelst-Stams1, N. mReostuilvtastion and self perceived competence items constitute separate scales), Hoogerbrugge1; the reliability of separate scales and the instruments validity. 1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands. Overall, 214 of 343 questionnaires were included in the analyses (response Background: rate 62%); 108 breast and/ovarian cancer and 106 colon cancer. We will report on the instruments’ acceptability and its properties to reliably and Currently, only 12-49% of individuals with an increased fa- www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Posters 431 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 BRCA milial colorectal cancer (CRC) risk are referred for highly effective cancer and satisfaction, just after inclusion and following face-to-face -result prevention. This study was performed to improve referral rates for genetic disclosure. counselling and surveillance colonoscopies for high-risk and moderate-risk Results: 59% pBreRfCerAred DNA-direct over DNA-intake (p=0.03). Median age fMametihlioeds,s r:e spectively. at inclusion was 51±11 [23-74] and age at first BC diagnosis 48±10 [23-74]. Indications for -testing included: positive family history (78%), age at Eighteen hospitals participated in a clustered RCT. Nine inter- BC diagnosis below 40 (25%) or both breast and ovarian cancer (4%). Com- vention hospitals received a website and brochures about familial CRC risk paring baseline characteristics, the DNA-direct group showed a lower age for patients and clinicians, and education and guideline pocket cards for of youngest BC-affected relative (p<0.03), higher use of BC-related websites clinicians. Patients in nine control hospitals received usual care. Data were (p<0.01) and more referring physicians having discussed personal conse- cRoelsleuclttesd: from patients and clinicians u sing questionnaires and medical re- quences of hereditary BC (pB<R0C.A01). At baseline the number of cases with cords. psychological distress did not diffeBr.R PCrAeliminary analysis of known (incom- Fifty-five percent of patients(n=478/862) and 34% of clinicians pBlReCteA) DNA-results showed -mutations in 11% of DNA-intake and 9% (n=47/137) participated. In the intervention group, 110/161 patients (68%) of DNA-direct (n.s.). All detected -mutation carriers fulfilled current and 7/20 clinicians (35%) visited the website; 34/161 patients (21%) read -testing criteria. Days between inclusion and result disclosure was the brochure. Patients valued clinicians’ information as most useful. 100±30 [22-140] versus 70±25 [23-202] in DNA-intake and DNA-direct, re- Clinicians rated the education and guideline pocket cards as mpost useful. spectively (p<0.001). In the intervention group, 1/10 high-risk patients (10%) was referred for Conclusion: More BC patients preferred the DNA-direct procedure, conside- genetic counselling, versus 5/34 (15%) in the control group ( =.705). In the ring it acceptable. Processing time in DNA-direct was reduced by one month. inptervention group, relatives of 6/21 (29%) moderate-risk patients had re- Whether DNA-direct entails more psychological distress in mutation carri- ceived surveillance colonoscopies, versus 23/43 (53%) in the control group ers will be evaluated later in the project. (Co=n.0cl6u5s)i.ons: EP05.07 Occurrence of endometrial cancer at young age in a Lynch syndrome Implementation of tailored digital and printed information family: implications for genetic counseling. did not improve referral rates for genetic counselling or surveillance colo- V. Cina1, C. Monnerat1, P. Hutter2, S. Unger1; noscopies of individuals at an increased familial CRC risk. Although patients 1Service of Medical Genetics, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, and clinicians appreciated the materials, patients preferred clinicians’ ad- Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine and Laboratory, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. vice regarding their familial risk; clinicians preferred more traditional ma- terials. Therefore, new strategies aimed both at patients and clinicians are needed to improve familial colorectal cancer prevention. Lynch syndrome is a genetic predisposition to colorectal, endometrial and EP05.05 other types of cancers. This case illustrates that, although endometrial can- Unclassified variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2; Assessment of in silico cer is a well-known component of Lynch syndrome, early referral for genetic analysis and proposal for communication in genetic counseling counseling based on family history of this tumor is still not systematic. We S. Moghadasi, N. Hofland, J. N. Wouts, J. T. Wijnen, M. P. G. Vreeswijk, C. J. van Asperen; Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands. report a family in which Lynch syndrome was indentified through a pati- ent who developed colorectal cancer at 46 years of age and one year later Background: BRCA1/2 two sebaceous skin tumors. He was referred for genetic counseling after his In nearly 15% of tests an unclassified variant (UV) is dermatologist suspected Muir-Torre syndrome. The family history revealed identified. In the Netherlands the four-group classification system of Bell is that his sister died of en dometrial cancer at 41, his mother died of a gyne- in use. In the current practice, class III UVs are coimn msiluicnoicated with the coun- cological cancer at 61 and a paternal cousin developed uterine cancer at 50. selees and class II are not. Aim was to investigate whether UVs in classes II ImmMuSnHo2histochemistryanalysis of the colorectal cancer showed extinction and III showed significant differences in their characteristics and of MSH-6 and MSH-2 proteins. Molecular analysis identified a mutation in wMoetuhldod tsh: i8s 8c lassification justifByR dCiAff1e/re2n ces in counselinIng spirlioctoo cols regar- the gene. By the time the result was available, his 27 year old niece ding communication. had been diagnosed with endometrial cancer. Genetic counseling was offe- missense UVs in were analyzed. analysis of red to the family including the patient’s 16 year old daughter. They did not UReVssu wltsa:s performed using SIFT-analysis, Grantham score and AGVGD for the follow up on this offer. We contacted the patient a year later and learned that predicted severity of amino acid substitutions. his niece had died of metastatic endometrial cancer. He was very concerned 60% (n=53) of the UVs were predicted to be tolerated by SIFT-ana- about his daughter’s cancer risk. The daughter and her parents received ge- lysis and scored as neutral (C0) by AGVGD. Of the remaining 35 UVs, sixteen netic counseling and requested genetic testing. Although rare, endometrial were scoinr esdil icaos C0, eight were scored C15-C25 (intermediate) and eleven cancer at young age may occur in Lynch syndrome. This case raised questi- were scored C35-C65 (likely to be deleterious). Class III UVs more frequent- ons about when uterine surveillance should begin and at what age predicti- ly show in psialricaometer outcomes suspicious for a deleterious effect. The ve genetic testing should be offered. oCobnseclruvseido nd:i fferences, however, are not absolutine. sFiloicuor UVs classified in class EP05.08 II had similar profiles to five UVs in class III. Consent to tissue testing: Other-orientation and responsibility in This study showed that in general analysis is consistent- cancer genetics ly applied and is able to discriminate between different classes of UVs. Ad- H. E. Shipman, A. J. Clarke, S. Sarangi; Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom. ditional analyses will be required to classify UVs with more certainty. To re- duce psychological distress in UV families we propose that communication of an UV should not primarily depend on its class, but on the possibility to perform additional research in the family. Although consent theory fundamentally focuses on the ‘autonomous’ choices of patients involved in clinical testing, in recent years there have been more EP05.06 novel conceptualisations. Within medical genetics there has been increasing Breast cancer patients prefer BRCA-testing without prior face-to-face recognition of the uncertainties and shifting responsibilities involved in pre- genetic counseling: Preliminary results A. S. Sie1, L. Spruijt1, W. A. van Zelst-Stams1, A. R. Mensenkamp1, M. J. Ligtenberg1, H. G. dictive genetic testing. Brunner1, J. B. Prins2, N. Hoogerbrugge1; In this study we take consent to tumour testing for evidence of mis-match 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, repair defects, indicative of Lynch Syndrome, as an example of the interplay Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Medical Psychology, Radboud University between individual autonomy, population health screening, familial involve- Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. ment and beneficence. This work is part of a broader PhD study exploring the complexities of consent in the context of novel genetic testing technolo- BRCA1/2 gy. We use data (transcripts of audio-recordings) from 11 semi-structured Background: Currently, all breast cancer (BC) patients receive face-to-face interviews with clinicians and 13 observations of clinic sessions in the UK genetic counseling prior to mutation testing (DNA-intake). We are and Australia where consent is sought. Adopting discourse analysis, we ex- evaluaBtRinCgA a different format for such an intake: telephone, written and di- plore the rhetoric of consent as manifest in these interviews and encoun- gital information sent to BC patients’ homes, and face-to-face contact follo- ters. We relate our findings to the concept of responsibility (in relation to wing -testing (DNBAR-CdAi-rect). self, relatives and unrelated others). Patients/Methods: From August 1st 2011 to February 1st 2012, 160 BC We demonstrate how testing is framed as beneficial, altruistic and of mi- patients referred for testing could choose between DNA-intake and nimal burden. Using observational data we demonstrate how clinicians re- DNA-direct. Participants received questionnaires on psychological distress assure and minimise the risk due to the preliminary nature of the testing, www.eshg.org www.eshg.org432 EMPAG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 which enables those attending clinic (or their relatives) to be available to Although AOCS participants were not primarily recruited to a familial can- consent. The familial dimensions of testing and consent, in terms of commu- cer study as such, uptake rates were similar to previously reported familial nication and burden, are played down in professional interviews and yet are cancer genetics studies. The results from AOCS provide a new insight into foregrounded in observations. This analysis provides an alternative frame to some of the barriers which prevent research participants, and their next of explore the dynamics of the consent process within cancer genetics. kin, accessing clinical genetic services and assist in understanding why the- EP05.09 re are low numbers of individuals who make contact with a clinical genetics A qualitative study of provider and patient experiences with decisions service following participation in a genetic research project. about risk-reducing surgery in women at increased familial risk of EP05.11 ovarian cancer New Model of Support and Information for Women and Men with a J. Witt1, G. Elwyn1, F. Wood1, M. T. Rogers2, U. Menon3, M. Johnson3, W. Jones4, K. Brain1; BRCA 1 / 2 gene fault 1Institute of Primary Care and Public Health, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, L. Taylor, D. Petrie; Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, Association of Genetic Support of Australasia (AGSA), Surry Hills, Australia. 3Gynaecological Oncology, University College London Institute for Women’s Health, London, United Kingdom, 4Cancer Genetics Department, Swansea Singleton Hospital, Swansea, United Kingdom. Introduction Individuals with BRCA 1 & 2 gene faults are a unique group. They may not have had cancer and are referred to by one support organization as “previ- Women at increased familial risk of ovarian/breast cancer are offered risk- vors” (FORCE). reducing bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy (RRBSO) to reduce their risk of In 2001, The Association of Genetic Support of Australasia (AGSA) was ap- ovarian cancer. As there is no evidence for effectiveness of ovarian scree- proached to provide support for BRCA 1 / 2 gene fault carriers describing ning, surgery is the only active management option available to these wo- anxiety around cancer risk, decision making related to risk management men. However, this decision is complex and depends on patient values and and grief due to lack of support. preferences. Aims We explored the views of healthcare professionals through semi-structured Emotional support, accurate information / management options and analy- interviews and the views of patients through focus groups to obtain a de- sis of participant evaluations ensuring applicability of format. tailed picture of the process of decision-making about RRBSO. Method Eleven interviews with professionals, including genetic counsellors and From 2001 - 2004 invitations were sent to past attendees and individuals gynae-oncologists, were conducted. They felt that women’s questions main- selected by Cancer Genetic Counsellors. In 2005, invitations were mailed to ly related to surgical menopause and hormone replacement therapy (HRT), all families within NSW with a known BRCA 1 / 2 gene fault. although a number of other factors, such as body-image and risks of surgery, The program is devised by AGSA and a committee of consumer advocates were also discussed. and genetic counselors. Presentations are determined by evaluations. Five focus groups with women at increased risk of ovarian/breast cancer Results were held. In agreement with professionals, women were especially concer- In 2001, 15 attended, in 2009, 102 attended; of these 70% were first time ned about surgical menopause and HRT. Additionally they felt it was impor- visitors. Evaluations reflect larger numbers did not affect access to informa- tant for them to understand their personal risk and the effects of surgery on tion and support. Participants attend after diagnosis, to assist with decision that risk. Many women felt that elective surgery was an extreme step and making and others come each year. Men and women attend and discussion said they needed a catalyst, such as a confirmed genetic mutation, to sway groups for men have focused on needs of men as partners, fathers, brothers them towards surgery. and carriers. Both professionals and women felt that standardised, evidence-based infor- This event is a non clinical approach providing emotional support. Presenta- mation to facilitate deliberation about RRBSO was currently not available tions by cancer specialists ensure validity of information. Evaluations com- and that this would be helpful to support women’s decision making. The pleted by 73 % of attendees show a positive response to attending. AGSA results of this study will be used to develop decision support for women seeks funding to run the program nationally. considering RRBSO. EP05.12 EP05.10 Teachable moments and missed opportunities in cancer genetic Factors which influence participants to follow up genetic test results counseling. as a result of taking part in a population based ovarian cancer V. Castejon1, C. Ochoa1, E. Sumalla1, S. Iglesias1, C. Lazaro2, I. Blanco1; research study? 1Genetic Counseling Unit, Hereditary Cancer Program, L‘Hospitalet, Spain, 2Molecular M. Young1, K. Alsop1, D. Bowtell1, G. Mitchell1, T. Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Diagnostic Unit, Hereditary Cancer Program, L‘Hospitalet, Spain. Group2,3, L. Plunkett4, A. Crook5, M. Gleeson6, N. Hallowell1; 1Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 2Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney, New South Wales, Australia, 3Departments of Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital,, Nsw, Australia, 4Department of The label ‘teachable moment’ (TM) has been used to describe naturally oc- Paediatrics, the University of Melbourne, Royal Children’s Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, curring life transitions or health events thought to motivate individuals to Australia, 5Department of Paediatrics, the University of Melbourne, Royal Children’s spontaneously adopt risk-reducing health behaviors. Three key constructs Hospital,, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 6Hunter Genetics, Newcastle, NSW, Australia. underlie whether a cueing event is significant enough to be a TM: the extent Background: to which the event (1) increases perceptions of personal risk and outcome expectancies, (2) prompts strong affective or emotional responses, and (3) The Australian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS), a population redefines self-concept or social role. Teachable moments have been used in based study, recruited women with invasive ovarian cancer between 2002 preventive care to promote changes in life styles (i.e. smoking cessation) and 2006. BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutation testing has been undertaken. Women and to improve cancer screening adherence. In cancer genetic counseling, in whom a mutation has been identified, or their next of kin in the case whe- teachable moments could be a form of opportunistic counseling that could re the women is deceased, have been told of a mutation in writing and the take advantages of health concerns and events in patients’ lives to increase availability of obtaining mutation results through a family cancer clinic. The willingness and commitment to change behavior and to improve adherence AAOimCSs oPfs yAcOhCoSso Pcsiaylc phroosjoeccita hl asst uindtye:r viewed individuals who received these to cancer screening and prophylactic measures. To do this effectively, ge- letters. netic counselors need to recognize and explore the salience of patient con- cerns and identify opportunities to link them with unhealthy behaviors. 1. explore individuals’ understanding of information contained in the letter The purpose of this study is to review and discuss the concept of TM and to they received from the researchers explore the discourse between genetic counselors and patients identifying 2R.e dseutletrsm: ine factors that inform individuals’ decisions about whether or not potential teachable moments for health behavior changes during the cancer to contact a Familial Cancer clinic and take up genetic testing information genetic counseling process. a total of 25 in depth interviews have been undertaken. Factors influencing follow up acted as both barriers and enablers. Personal Emotions, experience and readiness Social Familial obligations and genetic responsibility External Life demands and participation in psychosocial research study www.eshg.org www.eshg.orgEMPAG Posters 433 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EP06.03 EP6 Education and professional development Flexible online learning in genetics: meeting the needs of the medical specialty trainee J. Instone, M. Bishop, R. Newton, P. Farndon; EP06.01 NHS National Genetics Education and Development Centre, Birmingham, United The Manchester MSc Genetic Counselling Programme: 20 years Kingdom. experience D. Scotcher, T. Clancy, R. Macleod, L. Kerzin-Storrar; Genetic Medicine, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Central Manchester Widespread inclusion of genetics into medical specialty training in the UK University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom. is placing demands on genetics specialists to provide education. A review of the Royal College of Physicians’ (RCP) specialty curricula showed over 80% of the 27 medical specialties (excluding Clinical Genetics) include genetics We present 20 years experience of running the first master’s genetic coun- training. Training directors for these specialties have expressed concern selling programme in Europe. The course provides a vocational and acade- about how to provide equitable and appropriate training in genetics to their mic training for genetic counsellors, and the career and professional outco- trainees. One approach is to provide e-learning opportunities. The National mes provide evidence of its success. 115 students have graduated from 17 Genetics Education and Development Centre has collaborated with the car- intakes. After graduating, 103 (90%) went on to practice as genetic coun- diology curriculum committee of the RCP to develop a genetics e-learning sellors (mostly in the UK but also elsewhere in Europe and internationally), package for cardiology trainees. This online package covers the genetics and when and where eligible, have become registered or certified genetic learning outcomes within the curriculum using modules based on clinical counsellors. Graduates have also made a significant contribution to the aca- encounters that cover a range of conditions and contextualise the genetic demic field of genetic counselling through research and education. concepts. Modules can be accessed at any stage during training, allowing The programme’s curriculum and experience has helped to inform the esta- trainees to individualise their learning by completing them during relevant blishment of additional masters and other training programmes for genetic clinical rotations. The core genetic concepts are presented separately, allo- counsellors in Europe, as well as the professional competencies required for wing learners to access information as needed. The electronic format pro- UK genetic counsellor registration. vides a record of progress and completion for inclusion into the electronic Since its inception the programme has prioritised 3 key elements, academic training portfolios. These materials are currently being piloted to inform a modules, clinical placements and research; however the content has evolved wider evaluation strategy which will assess the acceptability of this mode to ensure students are prepared for current and future practice given chan- of delivery and the perceived ability of UK trainees to apply the knowledge ges in clinical genetics including referral patterns and professional roles. learnt to their clinical practice. E-learning provides a viable option to deliver This reflects a greater emphasis on autonomous practice, and a shift from genetics education to medical specialty trainees that complements face-to- primarily paediatric and reproductive genetics to encompass adult onset face teaching and clinic observation while offering flexibility in meeting the conditions including cancer, neuropsychiatric and cardiac genetics. A recent individual needs of specific training programmes. practical change has been to move from annual to biennial intake of a larger EP06.04 group which has been positive for both staff and students. Advantages have A collaborative evaluation of a dual model of consultative supervision included efficiencies of scale for the teaching team, and for students realistic combining individual and team supervision in genetic counselling job prospects within current NHS constraints. practice EP06.02 A. Phillips1, G. Mannion2, J. Birch2; Global engagement with an online genetics education resource: 1Alder Hey Children‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 2Liverpool using Google Analytics to evaluate visitor activity and behaviour in Women‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool, United Kingdom. countries developing genetics-genomics within nursing practice M. Kirk1, R. Morgan2, E. Tonkin1, K. McDonald2, H. Skirton3; 1NHS National Genetics Education & Development Centre, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, We outline key components of the design, delivery and evaluation of a model 2Genomics Policy Unit, Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 3Plymouth University, Taunton, of consultative clinical supervision for a team of genetic counsellors at Li- United Kingdom. verpool Women’s NHS Foundation Trust, England, incorporating the criteria and recommendations of the Association of Genetic Nurses and Counsellors (AGNC). This integrative, multitheoretical, dual model, combing individual The rapid increase in gene-disease discoveries offers real promise of clinical and team based supervision provided by consultative supervisors, contri- applications for people and families affected by genetic conditions but for buted to local awards for excellence in patient care, team working and part- which health professionals are unprepared because of lack of training. The nerships. The project was undertaken as a collaborative endeavour between availability of clinically relevant education resources is critical to enabling the team and the team supervisor, the Head of Psychosocial Services at Alder nurses and other health professionals to develop the appropriate genetics- Hey Children‘s NHS Foundation Trust, Liverpool. Normative, formative and genomics knowledge and skills to provide optimum care for individuals and summative evaluation was designed-in at the start of the programme by the families. Online education resources play an essential role in this but such supervisor. The Lead and Deputy Lead Genetic Counsellors, in their capacity resources can be personnel-intensive and developed over an extended pe- as supervisees and senior practitioners with leadership and management riod. Optimising such resources, particularly in economically challenging responsibilities for the team, contributed principles from real-world, action- times, is essential. research and summative evaluation. Whilst this is specific to a particular Telling Stories, understanding real life genetics (www.tellingstories.nhs.uk) team of UK NHS professionals, as a flexible and pragmatic model of reflective is a web-based education resource using real life stories to promote under- practice designed to support and develop healthcare professionals, the prin- standing of the impact of genetics-genomics in healthcare. Google Analy- ciples, framework and structural components which informed the model, tics provides time series data for analysing web usage to optimise website and the data it has produced, are likely to be of wider interest in the genetic effectiveness. We present data of visitor activity and behaviour from 123 counselling community and beyond. There is particular significance for the countries from 2009-2011 and consider how the application of the web wellbeing and continuing professional development of staff and the enhan- analytics: cement of the of quality patient care. • informs approaches to enhancing visibility of the website; EP06.05 • provides an indicator of engagement with genetics-genomics both natio- Challenges for cancer genetic counselling: findings from Portuguese nally and globally; oncogenetic services • informs future expansion of the site as a global resource. Á. Mendes1, L. Sousa1, M. Paneque2; Telling Stories is an accessible, broad-reaching resource that is of global 1University of Aveiro - Department of Health Sciences, Aveiro, Portugal, 2Centre for relevance for health professionals, attracting over 33,500 visitors between Predictive and Preventive Genetics, IBMC, University of Porto, Porto, Portugal. 2009-2011, with a steady increase in numbers of returning visitors. The ma- jority of visitors come from the UK, USA, Netherlands, Canada and Australia. More needs to be done now to enhance its accessibility for people of other Cancer risk counselling has grown rapidly in recent years to become a major languages and cultures. area of specialisation within genetic counselling. In some countries, onco- genetic services are still not provided by specifically trained professionals. Psychosocial support is only partially made available for individuals and fa- milies throughout genetic counselling protocols. We examined the current practice of oncogenetic counselling through the professionals’ views and ascertained the needs for the provision of psychosocial support in cancer genetics services. A qualitative study was designed; semi-structured focus www.eshg.org www.eshg.org434 EMPAG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 EP06.08 E-learning in Genetics - Multimedia Educational Training Program groups and individual interviews were performed involving 30 professio- C. Gug; nals from Portuguese healthcare institutions where oncogenetic counselling University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes”, Timisoara, Romania. is offered (geneticists, gynaecologists, oncologists, nurses, psychologists and genetic counsellor trainees). Current practice, unmet service needs and issues for improving practice were the major themes identified in par- Telemedicine is born with the Internet.Tele-education is one of its applicati- ticipants’ perceptions. Findings suggest: professionals’ practice is aligned on. An on-line learning infrastructure is considered essential for the delivery with the teaching model; the genetic counselling agenda is predominantly of educational programs in medical genetics.The use of a performing anima- informative-based with a nondirective focus; a scarce workforce of adequa- tion system allows the geneticists to explain the essence of the fundamental tely trained psychosocial professionals, aggravated by other structural and genetic phenomena. The flash technology was used to access animation on organizational constraints are serious drawbacks to consistent psychosocial the Internet, as it already represents a standard in creating animation that delivery; multidisciplinary teams working in genetics were stated as prio- has Internet impact. The navigation system of the FLASH animation allows rity, along with genetics education for healthcare professionals in primary each scene to be accessed separately using representative images of a scene care. Cancer genetics healthcare needs an adequate training and organiza- as buttons. Respecting the scientific truth by taking into account the limits tion towards collaborative standards of care and functional forms of access imposed by the technical possibilities may represent a true challenge for the for patients. Portuguese genetic counsellors have recently completed their people involved. For didactic purposes, the phenomena (mitosis, chromoso- training and may therefore ease some of the needs. This study may contribu- me and chromatin structure, DNA replication and DNA repair) were divided te for envisioning paths for the integration of a psychosocial-oriented stance into several stages. The number of the scenes is directly proportional with in oncogenetic services. the complexity of the phenomenon. As learning in the traditional manner EP06.06 involves transmitting the information under the form of a text simultaneous Knowledge and attitudes of Italian nurses toward Genetics with the scrolling image, a short explanation of the scene is inserted. The L. Godino1, D. Turchetti1, H. Skirton2; text is available in English and Romanian. The use of the multimedia (gra- 1Medical Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 2Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom. phics and 3D animation) programes enhances teaching process of any fun- damental genetic phenomenon and contributes to the computer supported training in the field of medical genetics. In order to explore the understanding and attitudes of Italian nurses and midwives toward genetic healthcare, a cross-sectional survey using a self- EP7 Access to genetic services administered questionnaire was carried out in Bologna, Italy, in 2010. In 2011 the survey was extended to a larger population of Italian nurses by using a questionnaire uploaded to the Survey MonkeyTM website. Specialist EP07.01 genetic nurses currently work in many countries; however there are very Systematic review of research related to barriers to access to genetic few genetic nurses in Italy and the knowledge of Italian nurses to provide services T. Delikurt1,2, G. R. Williamson1, V. Anastasiadou2, H. Skirton1; care for people with or at risk for genetic conditions in unclear. 1School of Nursing and Midwifery, Faculty of Health, Education and Society, Plymouth Out of 102 (85%) nurses and midwives responding to first study, 61% belie- University, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Genetics Clinic, The Cyprus Institute of ved genetic counselling was only an informative and advisory process, while Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus. 53.9% did not specify; 62% (n=63) did not identify nurses’ role in genetic healthcare, but 28% (n=26) believed nurses could provide information and support. The genetic components of disease are being identified through rapid pro- The second study was completed by 385 nurses, the majority (40.4%, gress in genomic research and new scientific knowledge is quickly being n=131) correctly answered four of five questions on knowledge of genetics. translated into clinical practice. Demands on genetic services are increasing Knowledge scores did not change by age, but was positively correlated with in parallel to these advances. There is a global challenge for healthcaresy- academic qualification. Only a minority (26.8%, n=103) of respondents be- stems in different countries to efficiently integrate genetic services into lieved genetics was very relevant to the nursing role. their healthcare infrastructure, to utilise scientific advances and, most im- The findings of these studies indicate that although nurses have the basic portantly, provide equitable access for citizens while minimising healthcare knowledge of genetics, they need more education not only on genetics to- costs. To achieve this, it is important to identify which factors can prevent pics, but also on the transferability of those into nursing care. or influence patients’ access to genetic services. As part of a doctoral study EP06.07 on the provision of genetic services for the Turkish Cypriot community in The Home Coming of Genetic Counsellors: The Cyprus Experience Cyprus, a systematic review of empirical evidence on barriers to accessing V. C. Anastasiadou1,2, T. Delikurt Tuncalp1, E. Spanou Aristidou1, A. Kotti2, G. Tanteles1; genetic services was conducted. Five electronic databases were searched for 1Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Archbishop Makarios III studies published in English in peer-reviewed journals between 2000 and Medical Centre, Nicosia, Cyprus. 2010; 27 articles were included in the review. The majority of studies were undertaken in the United States (n=17), focused on cancer genetic services/ counselling (n=17) and used quantitative methodology (n=19). Identified The impact of culture in genetic counselling and cultural competence of ge- barriers were related to individuals (n=17), to institutional/healthcare pro- netic counsellors are important topics masters level training programs and fessionals/systems (n=14) and to the community (n=5). There is diversity in academic research. They are also crucial in clinical settings. Genetic counsel- how access to genetic services is researched and the majority of barriers we lors are being taught to become self-aware of other ethnic/cultural groups, identified derived from studies that were not directly investigating barriers to acknowledge similarities and differences between their own and other to access. More specific research on this topic is urgently needed to inform cultures and to understand how such similarities/differences impact social- development of “targeted interventions” to enable equitable access to gene- ly and/or institutionally the care of diverse patients. tic services for individuals in a range of populations. Although, masters-level programs are steadily emerging in several coun- EP07.02 tries, most genetic counsellors are still or have been trained in countries Patient Expectations and Attitudes towards a Specialist Genetic Eye other than their own home-country, such as United States (US) and United Service Kingdom (UK), where these programs are well-established. These counsel- E. Clarke1, G. Hall2, R. Combs1, G. C. M. Black1,3; lors adopt a professional-culture that is shaped by the healthcare and social 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Genetic Medicine, Manchester culture of their host-country. It has been noted that not enough attention Academic Health Science Centre, CMFT, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Manchester has been given to how such genetic counsellors “readapt” to their own cultu- Academic Health Science Centre, CMFT, Manchester, United Kingdom. re, both socially and professionally, after returning to their home country. Our Clinical Genetics Clinic (CGC) gives emphasis to cultural competence, especially as our patient load culturally so diverse. Among the team are two BACKGROUND: Little research has explored the views of patients referred to masters-level genetic counsellors; a Greek-Cypriot and a Turkish-Cypriot specialist genetic eye clinics. Future service development must be informed genetic counsellor who have been trained in the US and UK. Both genetic by the perspectives of patients to ensure that services are accessible and counsellors have similar and different experiences about training overseas meet their needs. and returning to their own country. The poster addresses on these experi- METHOD: Semi-structured telephone interviews were undertaken with pa- ences and challenges faced in work-place and small community due to the tients referred to the Genetic Eye Clinic in Manchester, UK. Participants were clashes of their cultural identity specific to their own country/community interviewed before their first appointment. The interview transcripts were and professional culture they acquired through their overseas training. analysed using Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (IPA). www.eshRgE.SoULrTgS: Forty six people were invited to participate and 9 agreed to be www.eshg.orgEMPAG Posters 435 Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 interviewed (response rate 20%): 5 participants were patients with a visual important issues (including eating disorders, cigarette smoking, alcohol impairment; 4 were the parent/carer of a child patient. The major themes and illicit drug use, pregnancy, and problems with parents); not being in- identified were: lack of preparation and restricted expectations due to un- formed of the treatment plan, and concerns about their child possibly not familiarity with the service; psychological adjustment to the diagnosis of an understanding the issues or not remembering the treatment plan. Parental eye condition impacting on needs and expectations; concern about the futu- understanding of a confidential consultation with young people alone was re; hope for future treatments; and, positive attitudes towards genetics. remarkably similar to that in a general adolescent clinic (N=86), but they CONCLUSIONS: The participants had consistently positive attitudes towards were more likely to see the advantages of confidential discussions in pro- genetic eye services, genetic testing and genetic research. However lack of moting self management skills. However, they seemed more protective of preparation and knowledge of available services, particularly genetic coun- their children, as evidenced by their expectation that medical consultations selling, meant families may not get the most out of their appointment. A where their children are seen alone, should begin at a later age. leaflet, available in a range of formats, has been devised to improve patient EP08.02 experience. The results from this study improves our understanding of the When to tell? - Disclosing Genetic Information counselling needs, expectations and attitudes towards genetics, including D. M. Petrie OAM, D. Kouznetsova; hopes for treatment, in families with inherited eye conditions. Association of Genetic Support of Australasia (AGSA), Surry Hills NSW 2031, Australia. EP07.03 The role of the Cardiac Genetics Nurse in Inherited Cardiac Conditions Services: impact on the quality of the patient and family experience Little research exists on when and how parents should go about disclosing M. Kirk1, A. Simpson2, M. Llewellyn2, E. Tonkin3, M. Longley2, D. Cohen4; genetic information to their affected children and siblings, as well as its 1NHS National Genetics Education & Development Centre, University of Glamorgan, impact. This presentation will detail quantitative and qualitative research Pontypridd, United Kingdom, 2Welsh Institute for Health and Social Care, Pontypridd, amalgamated from reports sourced directly from the Association of Genetic United Kingdom, 3NHS National Genetics Education & Development Centre, Pontypridd, Support of Australasia (AGSA) - a peak umbrella organisation established in United Kingdom, 4Health Economics Policy Research Unit, University of Glamorgan, 1988 for rare genetic conditions, and its extensive Rare Disease Database Pontypridd, United Kingdom. representing over 950 genetic conditions in 2,200 families. This presentation will outline the dilemmas faced by parents upon receiving a genetic diagnosis for their child. Negative effects of withholding informa- In 2008 the British Heart Foundation launched an initiative to fund nine Car- tion from all family members will also be discussed. Recommendations for diac Genetic Nurse (CGN) posts across England (n=8) and Wales (n=1) for when to disclose genetic information, as well as strategies employed for three years, in order to improve the quality of service provision to patients information sharing will be discussed. Finally, implications for the health and families affected by inherited cardiac conditions. A single case study professional are diagnosis delivery, and the importance of securing access approach was taken to evaluate the initiative, collecting data from multip- to an appropriate support group will be explored. le sources. Themed semi-structured interviews were held with all CGNs, EP08.03 Cardiology and Genetics Clinical Leads from each of the nine sites, Genetic Sharing data from whole genome studies: empirical study of ethical Counsellors and a patient representative, at key points during the project. implications A patient focus group was also held. Detailed thematic analysis of the quali- A. Middleton1, M. Parker2, E. Bragin1, C. Wright1, H. Firth1, N. Carter1, M. Hurles1, On tative data was conducted using NVivo 8.0. Three broad categories emerge Behalf of the DDD Study1; from the data pertaining to the quality of patient/family experience: 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Ethox, University of 1. ‘Continuity’ relates to the CGN role in providing support and continuity Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. along the patient journey. Time, Giving clarity, and Managing anxiety and uncertainty, are important sub-themes. 2. ‘Coordinating care for the patient and family’ highlights the CGN role in Elements of a person’s past, present and future medical health can now be providing patient and family centred care, with sub-themes of Preparing; revealed in a matter weeks via whole exome sequencing of a saliva/ blood Having the bigger picture; and Knowing the patient and family. sample. Such technology is frequently used in research to understand the 3. ‘Coordinating care across the pathway’ concerns the CGN role in coordina- genomic basis of disease and will very soon be used within clinical health ting the multidisciplinary team across the two specialties and linking with services. primary and secondary care and others. It has been considered good practice for many years to conduct genomic The CGNs enhance the quality of the patient/family experience through an research anonymously and not share any individual results with research holistic approach to care, offering clarity and continuity along a potentially participants. However, there is mounting pressure to change this approach complex pathway, often at a time when patients and families will be feeling and begin to share individual results with research participants. There is, particularly vulnerable. however, no clear guidance or evidence to suggest what sort of data research participants want - should it only relate to clinically actionable conditions or EP8 Ethical issues would participants be interested in receiving results with broader implicati- ons or even their raw sequence data? There is an urgent need for large-scale empirical research to gather evidence on what is reasonable, responsible EP08.01 and indeed ethical to share. Parental views on confidentiality when adolescents are seen alone in As a contribution to this process we have designed a mixed-methods study the metabolic clinic and have launched an innovative questionnaire (see www.genomethics.org) F. Pearce1,2, R. Duncan3,4, A. Derks5,6, M. Jekel5,6, S. Sawyer6,7, A. Boneh8,2; 1Genetic Health, Parkville, Victoria, Australia, 2Murdoch Children‘s Research Institute, that uses film to explore the ethical implications of whole genome research. Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, 3Centre for Adolescent Health., Parkville, Victoria, The questionnaire is accessed online. We are inviting genetic counsellors, Australia, 4Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, genomic researchers, health professionals and lay members of the public 5Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Centre for Adolescent Health., Melbourne, worldwide to complete the questionnaire and are aiming for 20,000+ re- Victoria, Australia, 7Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, sponses. This poster will introduce the study design, explain why the re- Victoria, Australia, 8Metabolic Genetics, Victorian Genetic Health Services, Parkville, search into genome ethics is important and discuss the relevance of this to Victoria, Australia. both the research and clinical genetics community. EP08.04 A New Initiative for Genomics and Society Research Clinical guidelines for health practitioners suggest that adolescents should J. Kaye1, E. M. Meslin2, B. M. Knoppers3, E. T. Juengst4, M. Deschênes5, A. Cambon- be seen on their own for part of the clinic consultation. However, little is Thomsen6,7, D. Chalmers8, J. De Vries9, N. Hoppe10, A. Kent11, C. Adebamowo12,13, P. known of parental attitudes on this issue. We explored the views of parents Marshall14, K. Kato15; of adolescents in our Metabolic Clinic, in which this is standard practice. 1Department of Public Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2Indiana Of 40 eligible parents, 33 completed a questionnaire handed to them in University, Bloomington, IN, United States, 3McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, clinic, seeking parental understanding of confidentiality, their views about 4University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, United States, 5P3G, Montreal, QC, Canada, when information should be shared with them and their perception of bene- 6INSERM, Toulouse, France, 7Université de Toulouse, Toulouse, France, 8University of Tasmania, Tasmania, Australia, 9Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape Town, fits/concerns of consulting with young people alone. Cape Town, South Africa, 10Leibniz Universitaet, Hanover, Germany, 11Genetic Alliance The main advantages parents identified in adolescents seeing clinicians UK, London, United Kingdom, 12Institute of Human Virology, Garki, Nigeria, 13University alone were: practicing talking to the doctor alone; taking responsibility for of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, United States, 14Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, their own health; helping them become more mature. Concerns identified included the possibility of not being informed about www.eshg.org www.eshg.org436 EMPAG Posters Abstracts - European Human Genetics Conference 2012 OH, United States, 15Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. with the current political climate. Some midwives thought the ethnicity que- Genomic science is advancing rapidly and is increasingly international, stion might undermine the relationship with their clients. Despite this, both proactive and coordinated. In contrast, research into the ethical, legal and groups seemed positive and are familiar with identifying ethnicity and use social implications (ELSI) of genomic science, a lynchpin of appropriate po- this in individual patient care. Software programs prevent GPs from regi- licy development, so far remains largely regional, reactive and fragmented. stering ethnicity of patients at risk. Financial implications for patients were Given the achievements in terms of scholarship, policy information and pu- also a concern. blic engagement that have emerged from ELSI’s conventional research me- Conclusion: Although health professionals are generally positive, ethical, fi- thodology so far, important progress can legitimately be expected if ELSI nancial and practical issues surrounding ethnicity-based HbP carrier scree- research adopts strategic, large-scale and collaborative approaches analo- ning need to be clarified before introducing such a programme. Primary gous to those that have characterised genomic science. This presentation care professionals can be targeted through professional organisations but will present an international initiative, which is developing an infrastructu- need national policy support. re and a research culture aimed at making large-scale ELSI research more efficient, effective and economical. The aims of this initiative are to:- • facilitate new collaborations; • increase output; • provide tools to help coordinate endeavours; • reflect the international character of genomic science appropriately; and • avoid unnecessary research redundancy. This will facilitate networking, critical reflection and the development of proactive strategies for international ELSI research in genomics and derived fundamental or translational sciences. In doing so, it will not only provide maps of the international ELSI landscape to inform and coordinate future research, but will also foster a new way of thinking and doing international ELSI research and fuel the rapid advance of ELSI research in the short, me- dium and long term. EP08.05 Who’s to blame? A reflection work about identification of genetic potential in high-performance athletes D. Delani; Universidade Federal de Rondônia, Porto Velho, Brazil. The sport in general is an activity that is gaining more importance and more people around the world. In order, growing, developing high-performance athletes, many companies invest in the preparation of these athletes for in- ternational competitions like the Olympics Games. In this sense, innovative studies both in the field of sports as in studies of health, seek to identify and recognize these genetic patterns in athletes in the various methods for indicating potential physical abilities required for different sports or ge- netic predisposition to diseases that may likely to affect its performance. Although innovative, and hold large financial interest, the ethical issues in- volved in this process should be discussed. A key role has to be devoted for assessing quality of laboratories and delivering information regarding such tests. Many other aspects have been discussed in the preparatory debates to the revision, such as consent issues or biobanks and are absent from the proposal. However these issues are among the most problematic in research and practice. Thus these work alerts discuss the consequences of this lack of regulation. Unless the delineation of responsibilities is clarified result may no longer be acceptable. How to delimit this seemingly, open-ended avenue of potential professional responsibility and possibly, liability? What are the mechanisms available? Moreover these without these assignments the re- sults can cause irreversible damage to the candidates analyzed. EP08.06 “A morass of considerations”: Exploring attitudes towards primary care ethnicity-based haemoglobinopathy screening. S. M. Jans1, L. Henneman1, A. de Jonge1, C. G. van El1, L. M. C. van Tuyl2, M. C. Cornel1, A. L. M. Lagro-Janssen3; 1EMGO Institute for Health and Care research, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VU medical centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3Institute for Gender Studies, Radboud Medical centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands. Background: Although advised by the WHO, the Netherlands does not have a national haemoglobinopathy carrier screening program. HbP carrier testing for those at risk is at best offered on the basis of anaemia without facilitating reproductive choice. Registration of ethnicity has been shown to be contro- versial and may complicate the introduction of a screening programme. Ho- wever, other factors may also play a role. Aim: To explore perceived barriers and attitudes amongst general practi- tioners (GPs) and midwives regarding ethnicity-based haemoglobinopathy carrier screening. Method: Six focus groups with a total of 37 GPs and midwives were conduc- ted, transcribed and content analysed using Atlas-ti. Results: Both GPs and midwives struggled with correctly identifying ethni- cities at risk leading to several complex considerations. Ethical concerns re- garding privacy seem to originate from World War II memories when ethnic and religious registration facilitated deportation of Jewish citizensw, cowupwle.de shg.org