EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)26:3–112 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-018-0249-5 ABSTRACT Abstracts from the 50th European Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral Presentations Copenhagen,Denmark,May27–30,2017 Publishedonline:1October2018 ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2018 The ESHG 2017 marks the 50th Anniversary of the first ESHG Conference which took place in Copenhagen in 1967. Additional information about the event may be found on the conference website: https://2017.eshg.org/ Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement is sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All authors were asked to address any potential bias in their presentation and to declare any competing financial interests. These disclosures are listed at the end of each presentation. Contributions of up to EUR 10 000 (ten thousand euros, or equivalent value in kind)peryearpercompanyareconsidered"modest".ContributionsaboveEUR10000peryearareconsidered"significant". :,;)(0987654321 :,;)(0987654321 By 1988 it had become clear that something more was Plenary Sessions needed if the ESHG was to become a significant force in developing a European human genetics community. Revo- PL1 lutionary moves culminated at the meeting in Leuven in 50 years of ESHG 1991 where a rotating president and officers were elected, and statutes adopted formally incorporating the society PL1.1 under Belgian law. The society’s journal, the European A brief history of how we got here Journal of Human Genetics, was established shortly after- wards and the modern ESHG was born. We now have an A. Read annual turnover of over 2 million euros, professional administration through Jerome del Picchia and his team at Manchester, United Kingdom the Vienna Medical Academy, and an important voice in European and international developments in human genet- This year the European Society of Human Genetics ics.JanMohr(whodiedin2009)mighthavemixedfeelings celebratesthe50thanniversaryofitsfirstmeeting,heldhere about some of these developments but surely he would inCopenhagenin1967.Ihavebeenasked,onbehalfofthe agree that this 2017 meeting is the best human genetics Board and Executive of the Society, to start off this year’s conference ever. conference with a brief look back at how we came to be here. In doing this I have drawn heavily on the historical A. Read: None. material assembled by Professor Peter Harper, whose arti- cles should be consulted for more detail. PL1.2 ThestoryoftheESHGisastoryoftwohalves.Thefirst How will the present time in genetics be 24years,upto1991,weredominatedbyoneman,Professor remembered? Jan Mohr of Copenhagen. When he agreed with a small group of colleagues to start a European Society of Human H. Brunner1,2 Geneticshisvisionwasofastripped-downorganisationwith minimaladministrativetasks.Therewerenoelectedofficers, 1DepartmentofHumanGeneticsRadboudUMC,Nijmegen, just a permanent secretary (himself for all those years) and Netherlands, 2Dept of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht UMC, an unchanging 20-member Board. Virtually their only Maastricht, Netherlands functionwastonominatesomebodyeachyeartoorganisea symposium on some aspect of human genetics. The society At 50 years, the Society of Human Genetics has con- gavenofinancialsupportforthis-ithardlycould,withonly fidently assumed its currentposition as a pillar of modern around 200 members whose subscription was $7. medicine. Is ours a special time? Have we reached the4 high-point of Human Genetics? I don’t think that the techniquesformosaicsituations,longreadsequencingfor history of human genetics ends here at all. Rather, it repetitive elements and other genomic dark matter, and seems that fundamental change is still very much in the whole genome sequencing to capture smaller genomic air.First,let’scelebratethataftermorethan100years,the rearrangements. All of these will come. Still, reading the battle between the Mendelians and Biometricians has genome does not equal understanding it. Fortunately, finallyended.Anditisadraw.Mendelianrareconditions Functional Genomics is about to come of age, now that mainly reflect gene disruptions subject to strong selective the groundwork has been done with the Hapmap, forces, whereas common complex disease largely reflects ENCODE and Blueprint projects. The future of Human common polygenic regulatory variation of gene activity. Genomics will be radically different as we start to study Sometimes these mix, as for the major neurodevelop- Traits rather than States, and this at the single cell level mental disorders: Intellectual disability, Autism, and andinrealtime.Multi-omicsapproacheswillarrivesoon, Schizophrenia are mostly due to a mix of polygenic and as will innovative gene therapy approaches. The future de novo single gene variants. The Mendelian forms being may turn out much more surprising and informative than associated with lower IQ. As Galton predicted in the 19th any of us can now predict. century, height is generally polygenic and Peter Vis- scher’s work has used this data to show that most of the H. Brunner: None. heritability is not missing but undetected, because the effects of individual loci are too small to pass stringent PL1.3 significancetests.WorkfromSardiniashowsthatsomeof The Future: Solved Problems and Persisting the alleles that confer short stature affect known Mende- Challenges lian genes, which have drifted up to appreciable fre- quencies in this population to create the well-known A. Visel1,2,3 island effect on height. After a period of frenzied activity followingtheinventionofnextgenerationsequencing,the 1Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, era of monogenic disease gene discovery has passed its UnitedStates,2DOEJointGenomeInstitute,WalnutCreek, peak. At the same time, our ability to see pathogenic CA, United States, 3University of California, Merced, CA, variation rather than infer it, is fundamentally changing United States medicine and our societies. Rare diseases have become a recognizedpartofmedicine,notjustcuriosities.Onesuch Groundbreaking discoveries by individual researchers, area wheregene-based discoveriesare changingmedicine disruptive technological advancements, and massive-scale fast is cancer therapy. The understanding of the gene data collection efforts by large research consortia have composition of the Philadelphia chromosome led to the fundamentallytransformedthefieldofhumangenetics.The first targeted cancer drug, Imatinib. Other examples fol- introduction of powerful data generation and analysis lowed such as EGFR mutations in lung cancer. Soon, all techniques fueled the emergence and rapid growth of the women with breast and ovarian cancer will be tested for fieldofgenomicsasadata-drivenscience.Researchersnow BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations, to guide their therapy. routinely apply genomic approaches to resolve the genetic Similar testing could happen for male patients with basis of human diseases in ways that were unimaginable prostatecancer.Allthiswillleadtoanenormousincrease just a few decades ago. Extrapolating from the mind- in the detection of people with genetic predisposition for bogglingpaceofprogresstodate,Iwillattempttospeculate cancers, which constitutes an interesting example of how about the future of human genetics and genomics in the Molecular Pathology and Mendelian predisposition decades ahead. Specifically, I will discuss ways in which genetics come together. Work by Ségolene Ayme and many current challenges will likely become resolved others has led to the recent launch of the European through foreseeable technological improvements. More Reference Networks whose purpose is to improve diag- importantly, I will describe problems that are expected to nosis and care for rare diseases patients across Europe. presentpersistentconceptualchallenges.Inparticular,Iwill NIPT represents another major triumph for the power of discuss the continued conquest to decipher the vast non- next generation sequencing technology. It is almost coding portion of the human genome, our current difficul- incomprehensible how NIPT seemed such a distant goal tiesinunderstandingitsfunction,andbarrierstoidentifying for so many years. The diagnostic rate of exome connections between non-coding sequence changes and sequencing and microarrays is between 20 and 60% for human disease. most diagnostic situations where Mendelian disease is sought. This experience underlines that the genome is not A. Visel: None. entirely readable yet. Progress requires single cellAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 5 PL2 E. Klopocki: None. D.G. Lupiáñez: None. S. Mundlos: What’s New? Highlights Session None. PL2.1 PL2.2 Enhancer composition and dosage control Quantifying the impact of rare coding variation developmental gene expression across the phenotypic spectrum A. J. Will1,2, G. Cova1,2, M. Osterwalder3, W. Chan1,2, N. Brieske1, A. Ganna1, F. K. Satterstrom1, S. Zekavat1, I. Das2, J. Alfoldi1, M. I. A. Visel3, E. Klopocki4, D. G. Lupiáñez1,2, S. Mundlos1,2 Kurki1, W. K. Thompson3, A. Byrnes1, K. J. Karczewski1, M. A. Rivas4, C. Churchhouse1, J. Flannick1, D. MacArthur1, M. J. Daly1, P. F. 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Devel- Sullivan5, J. C. Florez1, A. Palotie6, A. E. Locke7, A. Børglum8, opment and Disease, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute for Med- S. Kathiresan1, B. M. Neale1 ical and Human Genetics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Genomics Division, MS 84–171, 1Broad institute, Cambrdige, MA, United States, 2The Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, McDonnell Genome Institute at Washington University, St. United States, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Julius Max- Louis, MO, United States, 3The Institute of Biological imilian University Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany PsychiatryandtheUniversityofCalifornia,SanDiego,CA, United States, 4Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United Gene expression is controlled by enhancers, cis- States, 5Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 6FIMM, regulatory elements that are often located in clusters dis- university of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 7The McDonnell playing redundancy in reporter assays and similarities in GenomeInstituteatWashingtonUniversity,St.Louise,MO, transcription factor occupancy. Copy number variations United States, 8Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark (CNVs) of such elements can be associated with disease, induced by yet unclear pathomechanisms. At the Indian Whole exome sequencing (WES) studies enable us to Hedgehog (Ihh) locus, for example, duplications result in determine the impact of rare coding variation on complex craniosynostosis, syndactyly, and polydactyly, phenotypes traits. Here we assemble WES data on 100,289 individuals not previously associated with Ihh function. Here, we dis- from acombinationofcohortstudieswith electronic health secttheregulationofIhhinvivoandshowthataclusterof records (EHR) and case/control disease studies to evaluate at least 8 enhancers with individual tissue-specificity reg- therole that aburden of rare (<0.1% allelefrequency) loss ulates Ihh expression in the digit anlagen, growth plates, of function (LoF) variants in 3,172 highly evolutionarily skull sutures and digit tips. To investigate how gene constrained genes (HC) plays in conferring risk for 13 expression responds to systematic variations in the number quantitative traits and 10 diseases. Carriers of at least one of regulatory elements, we generated mutants using HC-LoFvarianthadincreasedriskofautism,schizophrenia, CRISPR/Cas9 and investigated their phenotypes. Con- bipolardisorder,intellectualdisabilityandADHD(P-values 8×10−4–1×10−14). secutive deletions of enhancer elements show that they (p) range: The effect was stronger for function in an additive manner resulting in growth defects individualsdiagnosedwith>1disorder,butalsosignificant oftheskullandlongbones.Duplications,incontrast,cause in those without comorbidities. In controls without any tissue-specific upregulation of Ihh leading to fusion of aforementioned disorder, we observed a significant asso- sutures in the skull and misexpression in the distal inter- ciation with the broader ICD-10 category of mental/beha- digital space causing syndactyly, polydactyly and abnor- vioral disorders. Furthermore, carriers of HC-LoF variants (p=2×10−4), mally shaped phalanges. Chromosome conformation tended to be shorter have fewer years of education(p=3×10−4)andtendedtobeyounger(p=5× capture(4C)oftheregionshowsthattheduplicationsresult in specific regulatory configurations that explain the 10−7); the latter observation possibly reflecting reduced appearance of the pathogenic phenotypes. survival or study participation. Other gene-sets (ClinVar In summary, this study shows that CNVs of non-coding genes, mice or cell lethal genes) did not show any LoF- regulatory elements can result in specific regulatory burden associations, however GWAS-derived gene-sets abnormalities including gene over- and misexpression. The implicated in lipids and myocardial infraction showed a composition of individual enhancer elements and their significant LoF-burden with the corresponding traits. relative dosage within a cluster confer precision of spatio- Finally,usingEHRsof14,709individuals,weperformeda temporal gene expression. phenome-wide scan and identified a significant association (p=2×10−6) A.J. Will: None. G. Cova: None. M. Osterwalder: between HC-LoF and chronic kidney failure None.W.Chan:None.N.Brieske:None.A.Visel:None. and with number of hospital visits (p=0.0014). In6 conclusion, we describe the signature of rare deleterious as gain-of-function alleles. This is in contrast to loss-of- coding variants on multiple complex traits. function mutations in SMCHD1 that have been associated A.Ganna:None.F.K.Satterstrom:None.S.Zekavat: withfacioscapulohumeralmusculardystrophy(FSHD)type None. I. Das: None. J. Alfoldi: None. M.I. Kurki: None. 2, a disorder with no phenotypic overlap with BAMS. In W.K. Thompson: None. A. Byrnes: None. K.J. FSHD type 2, loss of the epigenetic silencing activity of Karczewski: None. M.A. Rivas: None. C. Churchhouse: SMCHD1 results in pathogenic misexpression of the tran- None. J. Flannick: None. D. MacArthur: None. M.J. scription factor DUX4 in skeletal muscles. Our results Daly: None. P.F. Sullivan: None. J.C. Florez: None. establish SMCHD1 as a key player in nasal development A. Palotie: None. A.E. Locke: None. A. Børglum: None. andprovidebiochemicalinsightintoitsenzymaticfunction S. Kathiresan: None. B.M. Neale: None. that may be exploited for development of therapeutics for FSHD. PL2.3 C.T. Gordon: None. S. Xue: None. G. Yigit: None. De novo gain-of-function mutations in the H. Filali: None. K. Chen: None. N. Rosin: None. epigenetic regulator SMCHD1 cause Bosma arhinia K. Yoshiura: None. M. Oufadem: None. T. Beck: microphthalmia syndrome None. C. Dion: None. A. Sefiani: None. H. Kayserili: None. J. Murphy: None. C. Chatdokmaiprai: None. C. T. Gordon1, S. Xue2, G. Yigit3, H. Filali1, K. Chen4, N. Rosin3, A. Hillmer: None. D. Wattanasirichaigoon: None. K.Yoshiura5,M.Oufadem1,T.Beck4,C.Dion6,A.Sefiani7,H.Kayserili8, S. Lyonnet: None. F. Magdinier: None. A. Javed: J.Murphy4,C.Chatdokmaiprai9,A.Hillmer10,D.Wattanasirichaigoon9, None. M. Blewitt: None. J. Amiel: None. B. Wollnik: S. Lyonnet1, F. Magdinier6, A. Javed10, M. Blewitt4, J. Amiel1, None. B. Reversade: None. B. Wollnik3, B. Reversade2 PL2.4 1InstitutImagine,INSERMU1163,Paris,France,2Institute Genetic variation in the Estonian population: a of Medical Biology, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore, pharmacogenomic study of adverse drug reactions 3Institute of Human Genetics, Göttingen, Germany, 4The using electronic health records Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia, 5Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, K.Krebs1,T.Tasa1,2,M.Kals1,R.Mägi1,T.Esko1,A.Metspalu1,J.Vilo2, Japan, 6Aix Marseille Université, INSERM UMRS 910, L. Milani1 Marseille, France, 7Institut National d’Hygiène, Rabat, Morocco, 8Koç University School of Medicine, Istanbul, 1Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia, 2Institute of Turkey, 9Faculty of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital, Computer Science, Tartu, Estonia MahidolUniversity,Bangkok,Thailand,10GenomeInstitute of Singapore, A*STAR, Singapore, Singapore Introduction: Advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies coupled with electronic health records Bosma arhinia microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS) is an (EHR) have provided new opportunities for the interpreta- extremely rare and striking condition characterized by tionoftheroleofgeneticvariationindifferentdiseasesand complete absence of the nose (arhinia) with or without traits. Pharmacogenomics applies NGS methods to docu- oculardefects.Arhiniaispresumedtoresultfromaspecific ment genetic variants important in drug response with the defect of the nasal placodes or surrounding neural crest- ultimate goal of reducing the negative effects of variability derived tissues during embryonic development. By exome in drug response including adverse drug reactions (ADR). sequencing we identified missense mutations in the exten- Hereweperformedalargescalestudyofgenesimportantin ded ATPase domain of the epigenetic regulator Structural drug response of Estonian biobank participants by using Maintenance of Chromosomes Flexible Hinge Domain comprehensive information from Estonian e-health Containing 1 (SMCHD1) as the cause of BAMS in all 14 databases. cases studied. All mutations were de novo where parental Materials and Methods: We sequenced the whole gen- DNA was available. ATPase assays using wildtype or omes of 2,240 participants of the Estonian biobank using mutantversionsofpurifiedSMCHD1proteinindicatedthat PCR-freesamplepreparationand30xcoverageattheBroad the BAMS mutations increase the catalytic activity of the Institute, and further included all variants imputed for protein. In overexpression assays in Xenopus embryos we 14,219 genotyped subjects in the Estonian biobank. We observedthatinjectionofSMCHD1RNAharboringBAMS identified ADR diagnoses using ICD10 codes, and pre- mutations resulted in more severe frontonasal and eye scribed drugs by searching the participants’ records from hypoplasia than injection of wildtype SMCHD1. These the Estonian Health Insurance Fund. functional assays suggestthat the BAMS mutations behaveAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 7 Results: When focusing on 64 genes important in drug 0.05). At 12 months, we identified a reduction in the response we observed 622 variants in the coding regions thicknessofthethirdcerebellarlobulemolecularlayer(P< and 388 variants in the regulatory regions of these genes. 0.05). Overall, a dual gain-/loss-of-function mechanism is By linking with the EHRs we were able to validate several likely in this disorder. previously documented genetic variants associated drug Basedonthisassumptionandconsideringthatfattyacids induced ADRs. By genome wide analysis we identified a produced by ELOVL5 have a feedback negative loop, novel gene, CTNNA3, to associate with ADRs among reducing ELOVL5 gene expression, we designed double- individuals treated with oxicams. The finding replicated in blindplacebo-controlledstudyinvolving10SCA38patients an extended cohort from the biobank. using PUFAs. We conducted an initial 16-week trial (600 Conclusion:EHRstogetherwithgenotypeinformationand mg/day DHA vs. placebo, 1:1), followed by 24-week sin- additional thorough validation of ADRs are a way to find gle-blind open-label study. We observed a significant clin- individualspotentiallyatriskforunexpecteddrugresponse. ical improvement of neurological symptoms in treated K. Krebs: None. T. Tasa: None. M. Kals: None. subjects as compared to patients under placebo (P=0.02). R. Mägi: None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None. The effect of DHA treatment was enhanced in the open- J. Vilo: None. L. Milani: None. label phase, where a significant improvement of both clin- ical symptoms and cerebellar metabolism was observed. PL2.5 These findings suggest DHA supplementation is an From pathogenic mechanism to a therapeutic effective treatment for SCA38. approach in Spinocerebellar Ataxia 38 (SCA38) E. Di Gregorio: None. M. Ferrero: None. M. Manes: None.E.Hoxha:None.L.Boccone:None.L.Orsi:None. E. Di Gregorio1, M. Ferrero2, M. Manes3, E. Hoxha4, L. Boccone5, N. Mitro: None. D. Caruso: None. A. Alberici: None. L.Orsi6,N.Mitro7,D.Caruso7,A.Alberici3,A.Padovani3,S.Cavalieri2, A. Padovani: None. S. Cavalieri: None. E. Giorgio: E. Giorgio2, C. Mancini2, E. Pozzi2, E. Riberi8, R. Gabriele4, I. Balbo4, None. C. Mancini: None. E. Pozzi: None. E. Riberi: L. Masante4, V. Zambelli7, M. Maldini7, M. Sallese9, F. Tempia4, None. R. Gabriele: None. I. Balbo: None. L. Masante: B. Borroni3, A. Brusco2 None.V.Zambelli:None.M.Maldini:None.M.Sallese: None. F. Tempia: None. B. Borroni: None. A. Brusco: 1Azienda Ospedaliera Università Città della Salute e della None. Scienza, Torino, Italy, 2Department of Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, 3Department of Clinical and Experimental PL2.6 Sciences, Brescia, Italy, 4Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Analysis of de novo mutation clustering identifies Ottolenghi, Orbassano, Italy, 5Ospedale Regionale Micro- candidate disease genes in neurodevelopmental citemie, Cagliari, Italy, 6Department of Neuroscience and disorders due to likely gain-of-function and Mental Health, Torino, Italy, 7Department of Pharmaco- dominant-negative mechanisms logical and Biomolecular Sciences, Milano, Italy, 8DepartmentofPublicHealthandPediatrics,Torino,Italy, S. H. Lelieveld1, L. Wiel1, H. Venselaar1, R. Pfundt1, G. Vriend1, J. A. 9Department of Medical, Oral and Biotechnological Sci- Veltman1,2, H. G. Brunner1,3, L. E. L. M. Vissers1, C. Gilissen1 ences, Chieti, Italy 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2International Cen- ELOVL5 gene is associated with autosomal dominant tre for Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, Spinocerebellar Ataxia 38 (SCA38, MIM#611805), a rare 3Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, adult-onset cerebellar neurodegeneration. ELOVL5 encodes Netherlands foranelongase,anenzymewithacriticalroleinregulating the amount of a subset of polyunsaturated fatty acids Haploinsufficiency(HI)isthemostcommonmechanism (PUFAs). We explored pathogenic mechanism of SCA38, through which mutations exert their effect and cause dis- studying aberrant ELOVL5-p.Gly230Val protein. In COS7 ease. Typically, these pathogenic mutations are spread cells, expressing ELOVL5-p.Gly230Val, we demonstrated throughout the gene, and result in absence of protein pro- mutant protein alters Golgi-ER transport, and accumulates duct. In contrast, non-haploinsufficiency (NHI) mechan- into Golgi apparatus. We also showed unfolded protein isms, caused by gain-of-function/dominant-negative response (UPR) activation by a significant increase of missense mutations, are often characterized by the spatial CHOP, ATF-4 and XBP1 markers. clustering of mutations within a gene. Here we exploited Nevertheless,inElovl5-komice,weshowedasignificant this property and developed a method to specifically iden- motor impairment at 3 months using the balance beam test tify genes with significant spatial clustering patterns for (P<0.001), and at 6 months using the rotarod test (P< de novo mutations. We applied our method to a dataset of8 4,043 de novo missense mutations from published exome PL3.2 studies of patient-parent trios with (neuro)developmental Going from perceptions of genetic risk to the disorders (NDDs). Among the 15 genes that we identified balancing of benefits and risks there was a strong enrichment for known NDD genes (12 out of 15, p=1.65e-04) thereby validating our approach. M. Hansson Strikingly, 11 out of these 12 genes are known to act through a disease mechanisms other than HI. Interestingly, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden identified genes are significantly less tolerant to population variationthanknownHIgenes(p=8.59e-03).The3genes Perceptions of genetic risk information and how that were not previously linked to NDDs are involved this kind of information may affect the individual as processesthatareknowntobedisruptedinNDDs.Finally, well as relatives to the index patient have been we performed 3D-modeling of protein structures to show studied thoroughly since many years in many patient that, unlike known HI genes, clustering mutations are populations. Examples of issues that have been exten- unlikelyto affect protein folding and more likelyto disturb sively researched are: i) how at risk individuals and protein interactions/complex formation. In summary, we patients understand their risk of disease after testing and show that our method successfully identifies known NDD genetic counselling; ii) their emotional responses to the disease genes and that these are strongly enriched for dis- information; iii) the effects of the information on aspects easemechanismsotherthanHI.Weidentifyfurther3genes related to quality of life; iv) the influence of testing on with similar patterns and propose these as novel NDD family dynamics and, v) their uptake of recommended candidate genes. risk-reducing strategies. Apart from the last item con- S.H. Lelieveld: None. L. Wiel: None. H. Venselaar: cerning the relationship between genetic risk information None. R. Pfundt: None. G. Vriend: None. J.A. Veltman: and changes of behaviour, this research field is mature. None. H.G. Brunner: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. New technological tools challenges, however, established C. Gilissen: None. genetic risk information strategies. WGS will reveal informationthatisnotrelatedtothemainconditionbeing investigated, leading to questions on how to best inform PL3 about incidental/unsolicited findings. Complex diseases ESHG-ASHG Building Bridges Debate: Ethical come with both genetic risk and risks related to environ- and Legal Discussions - Past, Present & mental and life style factors where the individual may Future play a significant role in modifying the total risk. From a historical perspective we see now a methodological PL3.1 development in genetic risk information where the Reflecting on ethics in genetics: The past, present focus is not only on what matters to the patient or how and future much it matters but how he/she prefers the trade off between benefits and risk. Methods like Discrete Choice R. Chadwick Experiments and Best Worst Scaling may help us to get our hands on not only perceptions of risk but how the University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom patient wants to balance these risks against expected benefits. I will in this presentation briefly describe this What is sometimes called ‘gen-ethics’ has gradually development. expandeditsscopeasithasmovedoutofthegeneticsclinic M. Hansson: None. tohaveapplicationinhealthcareingeneralandinmultiple otheraspectsoflife.Asthefocusofdebatehasmovedfrom PL3.3 genetic counselling and eugenics to the promises of thera- The Evolution of Genetic Counseling: Effectively piesandenhancements;genomicresearchanddatasharing; Meeting Our Clients’ Needs predictionandpersonalisation;theethicalframeworkshave also been tested. Traditional thinking on informed consent B. B. Biesecker and privacy has been challenged. A more ‘personalised’ future may require new thinking about the concept of National Human Genome Resaerch Institute/National ‘person’ itself. Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States R. Chadwick: None. Overthepastfortyyearstheclinicalpracticeofgenetic counseling has expanded from prenatal and pediatricAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 9 patients to include adults at risk for common disease beliefs, values, and goals, even if their choices (oncology,cardiology,neurology,psychiatry)andhealthy carried risks for themselves, their families or the wider adults pursuing predictive testing. Across all settings we society. When translational genomic research began to have responsibilities to help clients make informed choi- make genetic risk assessment relevant across multiple ces about use of genetic testing and cope effectively with medical specialties, geneticists took their client-centered increased risk or genetic conditions in their families. Our ethos along, through the vision of a “personalized geno- psycho-educational practice comprises teaching genetic mic medicine” that would both tailor care to patient’s conceptsalongsideprovidingpsychologicalcounselingto molecular profiles and also empower them to take a more enhance decision making and adaptation to genetic risk active role in their health care. The theoretical goal of and conditions. A systematic review of 25 years of ran- “precision medicine” is to take the next step, by inte- domized controlled trials involving genetic counseling grating genetic risk data with information about patients’ outcomesrevealsthattelephonecounselingisaseffective specific social histories and environmental exposures, to as in-person counseling for patients at increased risk of reveal actionable “epigenetic” factors that influence their inheritedcancer.Aninterventionstudypromptinggenetic risks. Along this route, however, evidence from the counselors to attend to topics of interest to their clients human genetics literature suggests that odd things are led to more targeted and valued sessions within a similar happening. The genomic variation studies that are timeframe. These outcomes illustrate ways to streamline necessary to achieve human genetics’molecular goals are services and improve its effectiveness. Yet studies of reorienting the field from individuals to populations, by communication in genetic counseling demonstrate domi- suggestingpublichealthapplicationsthatdependfortheir nant speech by genetic counselors and use of technical success on individual decisional conformity, not auton- language at a high literacy level. This pattern limits cli- omy. As genomic sequencing tools becomes integrated ents’ understanding in failing to engage them in a pro- into mainstream medicine, more traditional forms of ductive dialogue. The use of therapeutic counseling medical paternalism seem to be influencing genetics, interventions is minimal compared to information limiting rather than expanding, the patient’s role in provision, suggesting a lack of opportunity for shared decision-making about medical information. And as decisionmakingandenhancedpsychologicalwellbeing— genomic applications move further into anthropology, the predominant outcome of randomized trials in genetic forensics, national security, international sports, and counseling. With the onslaught of additional information the marketplace, the field moves further from a health and uncertainties emanating from genome sequencing focus, making “Applied Genomics” an apt label for we face a challenge that genetic counseling may even its human uses. For precision medicine to move become further dominated by technical information with from being a scientific dream to a clinical reality, less time spent on processing the potential value of geneticists will have to decide whether these trends the information for the client. New evidence-based reflect healthy ethical evolution or moral compromise. practice models are greatly needed to maximize the opportunities of genetic counseling to meet our clients’ needs. PL4 B.B. Biesecker: None. Mendel Lecture PL3.4 PL4.1 From Medical Genetics to Applied Genomics: Mendel Lecture: Reading and Writing Genomes Implications for Human Geneticists’ Core Goals and Values G. Church E. Juengst Boston, MA, United States Chapel Hill, NC, United States By1863GregorMendelcould“read”thestateofseven sites in the pea genome by their impact on visible traits As a biomedical field, human genetics since c. 1960 and could “write” genomes by mating randomly muta- has subscribed to a very distinctive ethos when dealing genizedplants.Today,wecanroutinelyread95%ofthe6 with genetic health problems. Long before “patient self- billion basepairs of the human genome using and fluor- determination” and “shared decision-making” became escent or nanopore sequencing and many other “omes” everyday words in other health care fields, clinical and traits at sub-cellular resolution using in situ sequen- geneticists have made a point of respecting their clients’ cing (FISSEQ). Today, we can “write” billions of10 basepairsofgenomicDNAon chipsandchange320sites Concurrent Symposia inacellatoncetoradicallychangethefundamentaltriplet genetic code that connects genotypes to phenotypes. We S01 can engineer multi-virus resistant cells, humanized pigs Single cell studies: From technology to biology for transplantable organs, and wild animal populations to eliminateMalaria,Lymediseaseandinvasivespecies.We already have many genetically modified humans. These S01.1 technologies are changing exponentially, increasing the Single cell RNAseq-based characterisation of adult needforthoughtfulandthoroughdiscussionofthedesired stem cells trajectories without prematurely dismissing alternative paths as impractical. B. Deplancke Lausanne, Switzerland PL5 ESHG Award Lecture This presentation will consist of three mostly unpub- lished parts. First, I will describe our recent efforts char- PL5.1 acterizing the heterogeneity of adipose stem cells. Using ESHG Award Lecture: X-chromosome structure and single cell transcriptomics, we were able to identify three epigenetic dynamics during X inactivation distinct and novel subpopulations. One population is thereby of particular interest since these cells are refrac- E. Heard tory to fat cell differentiation despite their stem cell-like characteristics and also appear to have repressive capa- Institut Curie, Unité de Génétique et Biologie du Devél- city. This raises the hypothesis whether a dysbalance in oppement, Paris, France thispopulationmayleadtofatcellaccumulationandthus obesity.Moregenerally,itrevealsthepowerofsinglecell X-chromosome inactivation during early female genomics in uncovering new, biomedically relevant cell development is an essential epigenetic process that is populations. In a second part, I will briefly describe our required to achieve appropriate dosage for X-linked gene efforts to generate a novel web tool supporting the auto- products. We are interested in understanding how the mated analysis of single-cell RNA-seq data. This Auto- differential treatment of the two X chromosomes in the mated Single-cell Analysis Pipeline (ASAP) can be same nucleus is set up during development and how this accessed at https://asap.epfl.ch/ and should greatly facil- differential expression is then maintained, or reversed in itate the implementation of single cell genomics in non- certain circumstances such as the inner cell mass of the expert labs. I will end by presenting our recently devel- mouseembryoorinthegermline.TheestablishmentofX oped single cell-based classifier to identify somatic stem inactivation involves the non-coding Xist RNA that and progenitor cells in heterogeneous populations. I will triggers chromosome-wide chromatin re-organisation showhowthisclassifierenablestheidentificationofstem- and gene silencing. Recent insights have been made like cells in still ambiguous systems such as the pancreas into the nature of these chromosome-wide changes and andtheepidermis.Inaddition,itaidsintheexplorationof the factors that mediate them. The inactive X is folded lineage commitment hierarchies, thus facilitating the into a unique bipartite, heterochromatic structure that study of biological processes such as cellular differentia- tends to lack topologically associated domains (TADs), tion, tissue regeneration, and cancer. except at regions of escape. However little is known about the molecular mechanisms underlying X inactiva- S01.2 tion and in particular, the degree to which 3D X- Towards single-cell proteomics: Unraveling cell chromosome structure is a cause or a consequence of populations in health and disease by single-cell gene expression. Our recent studies have focused on the mass cytometry degree to which organization into TADs (i) influences monoallelic Xist regulation and (ii) participates in S. Chevrier regional escape from X inactivation on the inactive X chromosome. Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, Zurich, Switzerland E. Heard: None. No abstract received. S. Chevrier: None.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 11 S01.3 S02.2 SinglecellRNA-sequnveilsthemoleculardiversityof Laminopathies midbrain development in human,mouse and stem cells N. Levy G. La Manno Marseille, France Karolinska Institutet, Unit of Molecular Neurobiology, No abstract received. Stockholm, Sweden S02.3 + + + Understanding the embryonic development of human Disruption of Na binding in alpha-3 Na ,K - ventralmidbrainisofmajorinterestforParkinson’sdisease. ATPaseby neurological disease mutations and However, the heterogeneity of cell types developing in this rescue by second-site mutation areaandthelevelofsimilaritybetweenhumanembryoand rodent models remains unclear. We transcriptomically B. Vilsen1, R. Holm2, C. P. Rønn2, M. S. Toustrup-Jensen2, A. P. profiled ventral midbrain development in human, mouse Einholm2, V. R. Schack2 andstemcellcultures,atthesinglecelllevel.Bythemeans of unbiased cell type discovery, species comparison and 1Aarhus, Denmark, 2Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark time course analysis we gained quantitative insights into + + progenitors heterogeneity, cell type conservation and The Na ,K -ATPase is an ion pump that uses energy dopaminergic neuron specification. Finally, we used the liberated by hydrolysis of ATP to exchange intracellular + + single-cell data to train a machine-learning algorithm to Na for extracellular K , thus creating essential gradients + + assess the composition and quality of stem-cell-derived for Na and K across the cell membrane. High resolution + + preparations for cell replacement therapy. crystal structuresofNa -andK -bound states haveshown G. La Manno: None. where in the protein structure the ions bind. Of the three Na+ sites (I, II, and III), site III is most specific for Na+ . Missense mutations in the genes encoding the α2- and α3- S02 isoforms of the Na+ ,K+ -ATPase, expressed in glia and One gene, many phenotypes neurons, respectively, cause neurologic disorders. A high proportion of the α3 disease mutations occur in the trans- S02.1 membranesectorandseveralseemtoaffect Na+ bindingat Filaminopathies site III. Hence, we have shown that rapid-onset dystonia parkinsonism (RDP) and alternating hemiplegia of child- S. P. Robertson hood (AHC) mutations F780L, D923N, and Y1013dup + + disturb Na binding selectively without effect on K University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand binding. The CAPOS (Cerebellar ataxia, areflexia, pes cavus, optic atrophy, and sensorineural hearing loss) Mutations affecting any one of the three filamin genes mutation E818K is likely to disturb Na+ site III by pertur- (FLNA, FLNB and FLNC) give rise to a heterogeneous bation of a crucial hydrogen bonding network apparent in group of no less that 16 different clinical disorders. Since the crystal structure. Recently, we found that a secondary their first description beginning in 2003, a deeper under- mutationrescuesthedefectiveNa+ bindingatsiteIIIcaused standing of their clinical presentation has emerged, linking by RDP/AHC mutation D923N. Here I also present data phenotypes with the location of causative mutations and/or showing rescue of the compromised function of additional their effect on gene function. These linkages assist in plan- neurologicaldiseasemutants.Aperspectiveisthatitmaybe ning the clinical evaluation of individuals with potential feasible to develop an efficient pharmaceutical mimicking filaminopathy phenotypes and assigning a likelihood of the rescuing effect, which optimally would rescue the pathogenicity for some variants of uncertain significance in compromised function of a variety of α3-disease mutants these genes.Assisting an understandingof thepathogenesis with reduced affinity of Na+ site III. of these disorders has been the discovery of mutations in R. Holm: None. C.P. Rønn: None. M.S. Toustrup- additional loci resulting in close phenocopies of these con- Jensen: None. A.P. Einholm: None. V.R. Schack: None. ditions, leading to a deepening understanding of how these actin binding cytoskeletal proteins regulate morphogenesis. S.P. Robertson: None.12 S03 and dog models of the disease, leading to long-term cor- Novel Treatment Options rection of the muscle phenotype. Results from a dose escalation study aiming at defining the therapeutic dose in S03.1 XLMTM dogs will also be presented. These preclinical Emerging targeted drug therapies in skeletal results support the development of a gene therapy clinical dysplasias trial in patients with myotubular myopathy. A.BujBello:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Significant; R. Savarirayan Audentes Therapeutics. Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, S03.3 Australia Pronuclear transfer to prevent mitochondrial DNA disease (Mito therapy) Quantum advances have occurred in the field of human geneticsinthesixdecadessinceWatsonandCrickfulfilled M. Herbert their“wishtosuggestastructureforthesaltofdeoxyribose nucleic acid.” These culminated with the human genome Newcastle, United Kingdom project, and the ability to deliver medical advice, manage- ment, and therapy tailored to a specific genetic blueprint No abstract received. (individualised medicine). Advances in molecular diag- nostic capabilities have been rapid, to the point where the genome can be sequenced for several thousand dollars S04 within a week. Crucially, this genomic revolution has From Association to Causality in complex facilitated the identification of targets for “precision” treat- diseases mentstocombatgeneticdiseasesattheirsource.Disruptive, pathogenesis-based therapies are now revolutionising the S04.2 management of inherited disorders of cartilage and bone Efficient fine-mapping of genome-wide association (skeletal dysplasias), changing their natural history, and study results giving patients and families new options and outcomes. These include the use of C-natriuretic peptide in achon- M. Pirinen, C. Benner droplasia and recombinant tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase in hypophosphatasia. This presentation will Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Uni- review the current status of these emerging therapies in versity of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland clinical trials and practice, and future potential targeted therapeutic options for skeletal dysplasias. TypicallygenomicregionspinpointedbyGWAScontain R. Savarirayan: None. hundreds of correlated variants and a key step in trans- formingGWASinformationintobiologicalinsightsisfine- S03.2 mapping, narrowing down the set of all variants to a much Gene therapy of myotubular myopathy smaller set of most probable causal variants. This talk outlines recent ideas that have made computational fine- A. Buj Bello mapping practical in human genomics and demonstrates themthroughourexperiencewiththeFINEMAPalgorithm. Genethon / INSERM UMR 951, Evry, France Key components include: (1) Compressing data to light- weight summaries to avoid logistics and privacy concerns Mutationsinthemyotubularingene(MTM1)resultinX- related to complete data sharing and to minimize the com- linkedmyotubularmyopathy(XLMTM),apediatricdisease putational overhead, (2) Efficient implementation of spar- of skeletal muscle characterized by small centrally nucle- sity assumptions and (3) Efficient search algorithms. An ated myofibers containing abnormal mitochondrial accu- important practical question is to what degree we can rely mulations. Patients typically present with severe hypotonia onlinkagedisequilibriumestimates fromexternalreference and respiratory failure, and most of them die during early data when fine-mapping large GWAS meta-analyses of infancy. We have developed a gene therapy approach to traits and diseases using summary statistics. treat this disease and shown the efficacy of intravenous M. Pirinen: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; injection of a unique dose of a recombinant adeno- Genomics plc. C. Benner: None. associated viral vector expressing myotubularin in mouseAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 13 S04.3 discussthebiophysicalmechanismthatunderlieschromatin Integration of eqtl and gwas to find susceptibility looping. Specifically, our data is consistent with the for- genes for complex traits mationofloopsbyextrusion(Sanborn&Raoetal.,PNAS, 2015). In fact, in many cases, the local structure of Hi-C B. Pasaniuc mapsmaybepredictedinsilicobasedonpatternsofCTCF binding and an extrusion-based model. Finally, I will show Los Angeles, CA, United States that by modifying CTCF motifs using CRISPR, we can reliably add, move, and delete loops and domains. Thus, it No abstract received. possible not only to “read” the genome’s 3D architecture, but also to write it. S05 S05.2 3D genome architecture: non-coding Long Range regulation of mammalian gene variants and human disease expression S05.1 D. Higgs A 3D Code in the Human Genome WeatherallInstituteofMolecularMedicine,Oxford,United E. Lieberman Aiden Kingdom Houston, TX, United States Ourlaboratorystudieshowtranscriptionalandepigenetic programmes are played out in chromatin spanning the Stretched out from end-to-end, the human genome - a human and mouse globin loci as haematopoietic cells sequence of 3 billion chemical letters inscribed in a mole- undergo lineage fate decisions and differentiation. Our aim cule called DNA - is over 2 meters long. Famously, short is to understand the principles by which all mammalian stretches of DNA fold into a double helix, which wind genes are switched on and off during cell fate decisions. around histone proteins to form the 10nm fiber. But what Globin gene expression is controlled by a group of con- about longer pieces? Does the genome’s fold influence served regulatory elements some of which lie within the function? How does the information contained in such an introns of an adjacent widely expressed gene (Nprl3) and ultra-dense packing even remain accessible? In this talk, I another lies in intergenic DNA. All of these elements have describe our work developing ‘Hi-C’ (Lieberman-Aiden the chromatin signature of enhancer elements. Using et al., Science, 2009; Aiden, Science, 2011) and more Chromosome Conformation Capture, we have shown that recently ‘in-situ Hi-C’ (Rao & Huntley et al., Cell, 2014), theyphysicallyinteractwitheachotherandwiththeglobin which use proximity ligation to transform pairs of physi- genepromoters,andtogetherareessentialfornormalglobin cally adjacent DNA loci into chimeric DNA sequences. gene expression. From genome-wide studies, this config- Sequencing a library of such chimeras makes it possible to urationappearstobeacommonfeatureofhighlyexpressed, create genome-wide maps of physical contacts between lineage-specific genes and such groups of regulatory ele- pairs of loci, revealing features of genome folding in 3D. ments have more recently been called “super-enhancers”. Next, I will describe recent work using in situ Hi-C to Using homologous recombination we have deleted indivi- construct haploid and diploid maps of nine cell types. The dual elements and combinations of elements to investigate densest,inhumanlymphoblastoidcells,contains4.9billion how they may work inconcert toregulate gene expression. contacts, achieving 1 kb resolution. We find that genomes We find that no element on its own is indispensible for are partitioned into contact domains (median length, 185 globin gene expression and despite their superficially kb), which are associated with distinct patterns of histone common features they have radically different effects on marksandsegregateintosixsubcompartments.Weidentify nascent transcription. However, removal of two critical ∼10,000 loops. These loops frequently link promoters and elements virtually abolishes globin expression raising the enhancers, correlate with gene activation, and show con- question of what is the role of the other elements in and servation across cell types and species. Loop anchors around the superenhancer? One possibility is that the con- typically occur at domain boundaries and bind the protein figurationofthefiveenhancer-like elements providessome CTCF. The CTCF motifs at loop anchors occur pre- polarity to the enhancer complex. We have tested this by dominantly (>90%) in a convergent orientation, with the inverting the entire enhancer structure within its natural asymmetric motifs “facing” one another. Next, I will locus and observing the effect of this on globin expression14 in vivo with dramatic effects. In the proposed project we (hybridization based capturing and amplicon-based enrich- plan to investigate in further detail how these cis-acting ment) and untargeted approaches (plasma-Seq, mFAST- elements work together within the broader context of the SeqS) we have shown that changing levels of ctDNA cor- chromosomal environment. We have recently performed relate with the response to certain treatments. Furthermore, Hi-C experiments and have defined the Topologically ctDNA analyses can be used to identify resistance Associated Domain (TAD) containing the globin gene mechanisms, e.g. in men with prostate cancer under cluster in erythroid and non-erythroid cells. We will next androgen-deprivation therapy or in individuals with color- investigatehowactivation,deletionandre-orientationofthe ectal cancer under anti-EGFR therapy, or to detect novel globin regulatory elements affect expression of other genes emerging actionable targets such as ERBB2. Moreover, we within the same TAD and in neighbouring TADs. Impor- were able to characterize the dynamics of clonal evolution tantly, using globin as our model, we will address the of tumor genomes derived from plasma DNA. To facilitate general question of the relationship between higher order, the biological and clinical interpretability, we have devel- long-range chromosomal structure and function. oped innovative bioinformatics tools for pathway analyses D. Higgs: None. and tumor genome stratification. In this presentation selec- ted cases will demonstrate the potential clinical utility of S05.3 ctDNAanalyses.Inaddition,thispresentationwillfocuson Structural variantscause 3D confirmationalchanges latest developments in ctDNA analyses. We have recently shown that also functional information can be retrieved S. Mundlos from whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data. As plasma DNA is nucleosome protected DNA, the genomic sequen- Max-Planck-Institut für Molekulare Genetik, Charité, cing coverage around transcription start sites (TSSs) shows Berlin, Germany distinct coverage patterns for expressed genes compared to unexpressed genes. Here examples how expressed onco- S. Mundlos: None. genes can be directly inferred from whole-genome sequencing of plasma DNA from breast cancer patients will be presented. S06 E.Heitzer:None.P.Ulz:None.J.B.Geigl:None.M.R. Treatment-Focused Genetic Testing in Speicher: None. Cancer S06.2 S06.1 CANCELLED-Next-generationsequencing:achange Circulating tumor DNA in cancer monitoring of paradigm in molecular diagnostics of cancer E. Heitzer, P. Ulz, J. B. Geigl, M. R. Speicher D. González de Castro Medical University of Graz, Institute of Human Genetics, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, QUB, Graz, Austria Belfast, United Kingdom Due to the continuous development of targeted cancer Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) is playing an ever- therapiesacomprehensiveandlongitudinalcharacterization increasingroleinthediagnosisandpatientstratificationfor of cancer genomes becomes increasingly important. How- precision medicine. Implementation of NGS strategies for ever,repeatedtumorsamplingischallengingandtherefore, the characterisation of cancer specimens in clinical practice the dynamics of tumor evolution, especially in metastatic requires particular approaches to overcome some of the cancers, remains incompletely characterized. One possibi- inherent limitations of the process, including DNA degra- lity to overcome this issue is the analysis of circulating dation, pathological review of tumour content, tumour tumor DNA (ctDNA), which is shed into the circulation heterogeneity, reliable detection of different types of from primary tumors and metastases. In addition to circu- sequence variants and a robust bioinformatics pipeline to lating tumor cells (CTCs), and tumor-derived exosomes, identifylowlevelsomaticmutations.Differenttechnologies ctDNA enables a serial, non-invasive assessment of the provide benefits and limitations, without a clear single genetic architecture of tumors. We have analyzed several approach that can be applied to all instances. Structural hundred plasma DNA samples from patients with breast, variation and copy number alterations are key genomic prostate,colon,andlungcancer.Usingavarietyoftargeted aberrations in oncology and pose significant challenges forAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 15 some NGS technologies, normally requiring alternative infiltrates has been lagging behind precluding a more preparationstosinglenucleotidevariationandsmallindels. widespread use of these technologies in the routine setting. Alternative sampling strategies using body fluids can par- Among thechallenges to face inthis implementationinthe tially overcome some of the limitations, and provide addi- yearstocomeincludetoacceleratethetransition,tomodify tional information for patient management. Finally, study design based on the lessons learnt and to promote integrationofNGSwithothermethodologicalapproachesis structural changes favoring a biomarker-based drug devel- requiredforaccuratepatientdiagnosisandstratificationand, opment and a reimbursement of cost of biomarker analysis therefore,amultidisciplinaryapproachwithcomplementary once its usefulness is shown. technologies is the key to provide a viable precision med- G. Capella: None. icine solution to cancer. D. González de Castro: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants S07 as well as grants already received); Modest; AstraZeneca, Still the golden age of chromosomes Roche Molecular Systems. D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; S07.1 AstraZeneca, Roche Molecular Systems, GSK/Novartis. F. The molecular pathogenesis of trisomy 21 Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; AstraZeneca, Philips. S. E. Antonarakis S06.3 Precision cancer medicine: translating laboratory University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland studies into improvements in patient care Trisomy 21 is the model human phenotype for all G. Capella genomic gain dosage imbalances including microduplica- tions. The functional genomic exploration of the post- Catalan Institute of Oncology-IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain sequencing years of chromosome 21 and the generation of numerous cellular and mouse models have provided an There are a number of prospective and predictive bio- unprecedented opportunity to decipher the molecular con- markers routinely used in clinical practice for solid tumors sequences of the genome dosage imbalance. Transcriptome that have an impact on patient care. Predictive biomarkers analyses of cellular models has revealed that the gene currently validated include: (i) levels of expression of hor- expression dysregulation caused by the trisomy 21 affects mone receptors for the prediction of response to hormone theentiregenome,itisorganizedinlargedomains,andmay blockade in breast cancer; (ii) HER2 expression levels for be mediated by chromatin modifications. HiC experiments trastuzumab; (iii) C-KIT mutation in the prediction of reveal altered long-range trans chromatin interactions that response to imatinib in Gastrointestinal Stromal Tumors; may be related to the dysregultion of gene expression. (iv) EGFR mutations in the response to TKI inhibitors in Single-cell fibroblast analyses has contributed to the non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); (v) EML4/ALK dynamics of allelic expression of chromosome 21 genes, translocation in the response to crizotinib in NSCLC; (vi) and provided new insights into the gene dosage mechan- KRASandNRASmutationsasnegativemarkersofresponse isms. The understanding of the molecular pathophysiology to EGFR blockade by cetuximab or panitumumab; (vii) of Down syndrome may provide innovative treatment BRAF mutations in the response to vemurafenib in opportunities. advanced melanoma; (vii) BRCA germline mutation as S.E. Antonarakis: None. predictor to response to PARP inhibitors in breast cancer. Criticalissuesinthetranslationofthepreclinicalfindingsto S07.2 the clinical setting include the use of robust methodologies Mosaic loss of chromosome Y (LOY) - not that valid in suboptimal samples with clearly defined cut-off normal benign phenomenon after all values. Regarding the design of the clinical studies a numberofcharacteristicsmustbehIghlighted:(i)theuseof L. A. Forsberg1,2,3 response rate as a preferred endpoint; (ii) the focus in advanced diseases; (iii) preferably based in single-agent 1Dept. Immunology Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala studies;(iv)anadequatepower(v)awell-definedtimingof University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Beijer Laboratory of sample acquisition; and (vi) an independent validation Genome Research, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Science for Life preferably in randomized trials. So far validation of gene Laboratory, Uppsala, Sweden signatures or other complex markers such as immune16 The life expectancy of men in developed countries is could help explain why men on average live shorter lives about 6 years shorter compared with women, but the compared to women. underlying mechanism(s) are not well understood. Men L.A. Forsberg: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock with LOY in the peripheral blood harbor a mixture of cells options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; withandwithoutchromosomeY,asaconsequenceofpost- CRAY Innovation AB. zygoticmutations.OurfindingsindicatethatLOYmightbe a key for understanding the sex difference in longevity. S07.3 We have investigated LOY in blood cells and its Introducing the emerging era of “Cytogenomics” pathologicalconsequencesinseveralprospectiveaswellas case-control studies, through collaborations and data shar- M. Talkowski ing. Associations between LOY in blood cells and various outcomes were evaluated using a set of statistical techni- Boston, MA, United States ques.MethodstoestimatethedegreeofLOYmosaicismin a sample are based on quantifying a lower than expected A new era of ‘cytogenomics’ is emerging in which abundance of DNA derived from the Y chromosome, in technological advancements are being leveraged for new relation to reference loci from other parts of the genome. insights into chromosomal abnormalities at the level of the For example, data-tracks measuring DNA copy number in individual nucleotide. Dr. Talkowski’s lab has integrated SNP-array experiments, read-depth in NGS-data and qPCR various molecular and computational genomics methods to can be used. evaluate the genomic landscape of balanced chromosomal Frequent LOY in hematopoietic cells was first described abnormalities (BCAs). These analyses have revealed the morethan50yearsagoandwaslongconsideredneutral.In remarkable complexity that can underlie their formation, contrast, our results show that LOY in blood cells is asso- often mediated by small inversions at the breakpoints, and ciated with increasedrisk for all-cause mortality, aswell as the extreme examples of chromosome shattering, now riskforvariousnon-hematologicaldiseases.Forexample,in recognized as ‘chromoanagenesis’ and ‘chromothripsis’, a cohort called ULSAM, encompassing men between 70 that can occur in the viable human germline and often and 93 years of age at blood sampling, we found that men resolve to a massive yet balanced reorganization of the withLOYinmorethan1/3ofthenucleatedbloodcellshad chromosomes. These studies have also surveyed the con- about two-fold risk for all-cause mortality during 20 years tribution of de novo BCAs (translocations, inversions, follow-up time. Furthermore, LOY in blood cells was insertions, and balanced chromoanagenesis) to human associated with increased risk for mortality in non- congenital anomalies and the remarkable reservoir of novel hematological cancers as well as risk for diagnosis of Alz- gene discovery possible from the delineation of BCAs in heimer’s disease in this cohort. Analyses performed by us such individuals, as well as their diagnostics yields. These and others in independent cohorts have successfully repro- analyses also observed apparent ‘hotspots’ of BCA forma- duced these findings. tion and the consequences of apparent alterations of higher ThecausalitybehindassociationsbetweenLOYinblood order nuclear organization of the chromosomes, such as cellsandincreasedriskfor variousdiseases inotherorgans disruption of a topologically associating domains (TAD) remains an open question. One hypothesis is that disrupted harboring known driver loci of microdeletion syndromes, immune system function(s) in blood cells with LOY could suggesting alternative regulatory mechanisms of genomic play a role, leading to reduced protection from disease disorders. Ongoing studies have also begun to characterize processes in different tissues of the body. Regardless of the diversity of structural variation, including recurrent yet underlying mechanism(s), however, we envision that LOY complex forms of inversion variation in the human germ- in blood could become a predictive biomarker in future line, as well as the contribution of all classes of structural medicine. variation to the genetic architecture of autism and other LOY is the most common post-zygotic mutation and it neurodevelopmental disorders in thecoding and noncoding accumulates with age. At least 20% of men older than 80 regulatory genome. These studies collectively suggest that years are affected. Smoking mediates a four-fold increased structural variation represents a major component of the risk in a dose-dependent and transient manner. Genome- genetic etiology of human developmental anomalies, and wide analyses identified 19 DNA regions associated with that emerging genomics technologies and large scale acquiredLOYinblood cells, including genes implicatedin reference maps will be critical to define, interpret, and aneuploidy,genomeinstabilityandcancersusceptibility.As accuratelyquantifytheroleofthisunique classofgenomic a male-specific genetic risk factor, an increased risk for variation to human disease, both in basic research and pathologyandmortalityassociatedwithLOYinbloodcells, clinical interpretation.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 17 S08 With more and more common genetic variants for New technologies in Neurogenetics neurodevelopmentaldisorderslikeADHD,schizophrenia, and autism being identified, we find ourselves facing a S08.1 new bottleneck in understanding the etiology of those 3D analysisof commissural systems with light sheet disorders: the functions of a variant/gene/locus identified microscopy and the way by which it increases disease risk, are often unknown. Brain imaging genetics - or neuroimaging A. Chédotal genetics - offers an attractive human in vivo model to investigatetheeffectsof(commongenetic)riskfactorson Institut de la Vision, Paris, France the brain. However, after an initial hype, the field of imaging genetics research has gone through a phase of Inmostanimalspeciesincludinghumans,commissural disillusionment in recent years. Too many underpowered axons connect neurons on the left and right side of the candidate gene studies without replication investigating nervous system. This communication between the two singleregionsofinteresthaveunderminedthetrustinthis sides of the brain and spinal cord is necessary for a series model.Iwillshowthatneuroimaginggeneticsiscurrently of complex function, including binocular vision, coordi- making a convincing come-back. Within the worldwide nated locomotor movements, and sound direction locali- ENIGMA Consortium, we have performed GWAS to zation. In humans, the balance of commissural and non- identify the genetic factors that contribute to the regional/ commissural axons is essential to CNS physiology and to global structures of our brain using well-powered sam- the integration of sensory stimuli/inputs. Abnormal axon ples. Based on those data, combined with the knowledge midline crossing during development causes a whole of the brain regions affected by neurodevelopmental dis- range of neurological disorders ranging from congenital orders, we investigated the genetic overlap between the mirror movements, horizontal gaze palsy, scoliosis or variants determining brain structure from the ENIGMA binocular vision deficits. Partial or complete corpus cal- studiesandthoseinfluencingdiseaseriskfromthestudies losum agenesis are some of the most common brain of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium and iPSYCH. malformations in children with variable neurological Such studies are performed at the level of the global outcomes. I will discuss some of the genetic mechanisms geneticarchitectureaswellasatthelevelofsinglegenetic underlying anomalies of midline crossing and present variants. I will show data on both approaches for schi- someof ourmostrecentworkthatchallengesthe existing zophrenia and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder. dogmas and suggest that commissural axon guidance Based on those recent studies we can conclude that neu- mechanisms are more diverse across species than pre- roimaging genetics offers a promising model system to viously appreciated. To facilitate the analysis of the understandtheeffectsleadingfromageneticvarianttoan organization and evolution of commissural systems in increased risk for the neurodevelopmental disorder. vertebrates, we have developed a new imaging method Havinggonethrougharoughstart, morerecentstudiesin which combines whole-mount immunostaining or com- this field in well-powered samples and employing brain missural axon tracing, tissue clearing with organic sol- wide/genome-wide approaches offer a glimpse of the vents and 3D light-sheet microscopy. I will present new actual power of this human in vivo model. applications of this method in the field of human embry- B. Franke: None. ology and our ongoing effort to generate a database and cell atlas of the developing human embryo, normal or pathologic. S09 A. Chédotal: None. Explaining phenotypic variability S08.2 S09.1 Brain imaging genetics in neurodevelopmental Oligogenic inheritance and mutational load disorders N. Katsanis B. Franke Durham, NC, United States Radboud University Medical Center and Donders Institute forBrain,CognitionandBehaviour,Nijmegen,Netherlands No abstract received.18 S09.2 S09.3 Geneticand epigeneticregulationof repetitiveDNA Multiple molecular diagnoses underlie some cases in relation to disease of apparent phenotypic expansion S. M. van der Maarel J. E. Posey1, E. Karaca1, Z. H. Coban Akdemir1, X. Song1, T. Harel2, S. Jhangiani1, Y. Bayram1, V. Bahrambeigi1, D. Muzny1, R. A. Gibbs1, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands J. R. Lupski1,3 A major constituent of the human genome is repetitive 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, DNA, including tandem and interspersed repeats. Of the 2Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, tandemrepeats,macrosatelliterepeats(MSRs)belongtothe Israel,3TexasChildren’sHospital,Houston,TX,UnitedStates largest repeat structures in the human genome typically spanning hundreds of kilobases of genomic DNA. Because Multiple molecular diagnoses, characterized by the of their polymorphic nature, MSRs represent an extreme observationoftwo(dual)ormoreuniquediseaseconditions example of copy number variation. Their structure and eachresultingfromvariationataseparatelocus,representa function however, is poorly understood, but their associa- particular challenge to ascertain clinically and molecularly. tion with human disease suggests that tandem repeats such Whole exome sequencing (WES) and the development of as MSRs are under strict genetic and epigenetic constraint. bioinformatic tools to identify de novo single nucleotide Two disorders of epigenetic dysregulation of tandem and small indel variants, as well as copy number variants, repeats are Immunodeficiency, Centromere instability and has made WES a truly comprehensive genomics assay that Facial anomalies (ICF) syndrome and FacioScapulo- does not require pre-supposition of the correct gene-based Humeral Dystrophy (FSHD). ICF syndrome is a primary molecular diagnoses. As such, WES has enabled the iden- immunodeficiency caused by mutations in at least four tification of multi-locus molecular diagnoses in ~5% of genes, some of them encoding known chromatin modifiers WES-informative cases, resulting in blended phenotypes. such as DNMT3B and HELLS, while for the remaining We hypothesized that multiple molecular diagnoses might genestheirroleintheepigeneticregulationofthegenomeis underlie some cases of apparent ‘phenotypic expansion’. lessestablished.ICFpatientsshowgenomewidechangesin From a WES-studied cohort of 128 Turkish families with the epigenetic regulation of pericentromeric and sub- neurodevelopmental phenotypes, we performed a re- telomeric tandem repeats. How this epigenetic dysregula- analysis of 19 cases with molecular diagnoses initially tion relates to the clinical symptoms is, however, largely characterized as having a phenotype that extended beyond unknown. Conversely, how loss of control over the epige- that previously described for the reported etiologic disease netic regulation of the subtelomeric D4Z4 MSR causes the gene. Of these 19 cases, 12 additional potentially patho- muscular dystrophy FSHD is much better defined with genic variants were newly identified in 9 (47.4%) cases, documentationofincompleterepressionofthegermlineand resultingin6dualand3multiplemoleculardiagnoses.Two early stem cell transcription factor DUX4 in skeletal mus- novel candidate disease genes (SRR, MAGI3) and one cle. Interestingly, there is considerable genetic and epige- intragenic deletion (MPDZ, exons 3–27) were identified. netic overlap between these clinically discordant disorders, Two families each with two affected siblings demonstrated and with the recently genetically elucidated Bosma ahrinia intrafamilial phenotypic variability explained by the iden- microphthalmia syndrome (BAMS). tification of 3 molecular diagnoses in the more severely Identifying the commonalities and differences between affected proband, and one molecular diagnosis in the less thesechromatindisordersofrepetitiveDNAwillprovideus severelyaffectedsibling.Absenceofheterozygosity(AOH) a better understanding of the function and regulation of contributedtomoleculardiagnosesin6cases,includingone repetitive DNA. proband for whom 3 independent molecular diagnoses S.M. van der Maarel: None. resultedfrom3homozygouspotentiallypathogenicvariants in the same region of AOH. These findings highlight theAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 19 roles of clinical phenotyping and AOH-mediated reduction population which forms part of the ancestry of present-day to homozygosity in enumerating mutational burden. Eluci- Europeans. A ~35,000-year-old individual from northwest dation of additional highly penetrant alleles in cases with Europe represents an early branch of this founder popula- apparent phenotypic expansion may provide a general tionwhichwasthendisplacedacrossabroadregion,before explanation for a large class of phenotypic variation. reappearing in southwest Europe during the last ice age J.E. Posey: Other; Modest; Baylor College of Medicine ~19,000 years ago. During the major warming period after andMiracaHoldings,Inc.haveformedajointventurewith ~14,000 years ago, a new genetic component related to shared ownership of the Baylor Genetics (BG) laboratory. present-day Near Easterners appears in Europe. These JEP is an employee of BCM. E. Karaca: None. Z.H. results document how population turnover and migration Coban Akdemir: None. X. Song: None. T. Harel: None. have been recurring themes of European prehistory. S. Jhangiani: None. Y. Bayram: None. V. Bahrambeigi: None. D. Muzny: None. R.A. Gibbs: Other; Modest; S10.2 BaylorCollegeofMedicineandMiracaHoldings,Inc.have Peopling of the world formedajointventurewithsharedownershipoftheBaylor Genetics (BG) laboratory. RAG is an employee of BCM. E. Willerslev J.R. Lupski: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest;JRLhasstock Copenhagen, Denmark ownershipin23andMe,andstockoptionsinLasergen,Inc., JRL isaco-inventor ofUSandEuropean patentsrelated to No abstract received. molecular diagnostics for inherited neuropathies, eye dis- eases, and bacterial genomic fingerprinting. F. Consultant/ S10.3 Advisory Board; Modest; JRL is a paid consultant for The origins of Farming RegeneronPharmaceuticals.Other;Modest;BaylorCollege ofMedicine and Miraca Holdings, Inc.have formed a joint M. Thomas venturewithsharedownershipoftheBaylorGenetics(BG) laboratory. JRL is an employee of BCM. University College London, London, United Kingdom Farming and sedentism first become established in S10 southwest Asia during the early Holocene and later spread Population and evolutionary genetics to neighbouring regions, including Europe and southern Asia, along multiple dispersal routes. The extent to which S10.1 its spread was mediated by demic expansion of farmers, or Genetic time travel bythetransmissionoffarmingtechnologiesandlifewaysto indigenous hunter-gatherers without a major concomitant J. Krause1,2 migration of people, has been the subject of considerable debate for more than 100. Recent ancient DNA studies 1Jena, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute for the Science of indicate a dominant role of migration in the transition to Human History, Jena, Germany farming in central and northern Europe, with evidence of only limited hunter-gatherer admixture into early Neolithic Genomic History of Ice Age Europe populations.ByanalysingDNAfromearlyAegeanfarmers Little is currently known about the genetic history of we extend the European Neolithic migratory chain all the ancient Europeans before the advent of agriculture ~8,500 way back to southwestern Asia. However, Early Neolithic years ago. We have analysed genome-wide data from 51 genomesfromtheZagrosregionofIranrevealapreviously modern humans remains that span around 40,000 years of uncharacterised population that is neither ancestral to the Eurasian prehistory. Over this time, the proportion of first European farmers nor has contributed significantly to Neanderthal DNA decreased from 3–6% to around 2%, the ancestry of modern Europeans. They are genetically consistent with natural selection against Neanderthal var- distinct from all other available prehistoric genomes, but iants in modern humans. Whereas the earliest modern show strong affinities to modern day Iranian, Pakistani and humans in Europe did not contribute substantially to Afghan peoples. These data suggest that multiple hunter- present-day Europeans, all individuals between ~37,000 gatherer populations adopted farming in SW-Asia, that and ~14,000 years ago descended from a single founder early farming technologies and domesticates were20 exchanged in a ‘federal’ Neolithic core zone, and that phenotyping this immune cell population so that their components of pre-Neolithic population structure were functional characterization is possible. They could con- preserved as farming spread into neighbouring regions. stituteanovelimmunotherapeuticagentforthetreatmentof M. Thomas: None. cancersthathaveescapedT-cellrecognitionthroughlossof HLA class I expression. N. de Miranda: None. S11 Cancer immunogenetics S11.2 Dissecting tumor-immune cell interactions using S11.1 genomics tools Next-generation immunotherapies for colorectal cancer Z. Trajanoski N. de Miranda Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands Recent breakthroughs in cancer immunotherapy and decreasing costs of high-throughput technologies sparked Followingtheencouragingclinicalresponsesobservedin intensive research into tumour-immune cell interactions cancer patients treated with immune checkpoint blockers, using genomic tools. The wealth of the generated data and immunotherapy shows great promise for the treatment of the added complexity pose considerable challenges and cancer. The blockade of co-inhibitory pathways in T-cells require computational tools to process, analyse and visua- promotes their activation and triggers anti-tumour immu- lise the data. Recently, a number of tools have been nity. The latter was shown to be driven against tumour- developed and used to effectively mine tumour immuno- mutatedantigens(neo-antigens)andtobedependentonthe logic and genomic data and provide novel mechanistic existence of neo-antigen-specific, activated T-cells, prior to insights. therapeutic intervention. This observation suggests the It this presentation I will show results generated using complementary enhancement of T-cell responses by means state-of-the-art computational tools addressing several pre- of neo-antigen vaccination and/or adoptive transfer of neo- vailing questions in cancer immunology including: quanti- antigen-specificT-cellclones.Theaccumulatedevidenceon fication of tumor-infiltrating immune cells from RNA- an association between the occurrence of natural anti- sequencing data, identification of determinants of tumor tumourimmuneresponsesincolorectalcancers(CRCs)and immunogenicity, and immunoediting that tumors undergo improved clinical prognosis makes CRC patients excellent duringprogressionorasaconsequenceoftargetingthePD- candidates to benefit from immunotherapy. We are screen- 1/PD-L1 axis. ing the coding genomes of CRCs by whole-exome and Z. Trajanoski: None. RNAnext-generationsequencing(NGS).Somaticmutation profiles (mutanomes) are annotated and neo-antigens cor- S11.3 responding to the transcribed mutations are tested for their Adoptive T cell therapy ability to induce activation of autologous T-cells derived from tumour infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) and peripheral T. Blankenstein1,2 blood. The discovery of neo-antigen-specific T-cell clones in CRC patients would support the development of anti- 1Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, cancer therapies consisting of neo-antigen-based vaccines Germany, 2Charité Centrum für Tumormedizin, Institut für and/or adoptive transfer of neo-antigen-specific T-cell Immunologie, Berlin, Germany clones. Recently, we have also reported on an elusive immune AdoptivelytransferredTcellshavebeenshowntoreject cell population that was specifically associated with CRCs large established tumors. In such models, T cells recognize that had escaped T-cell recognition through loss of Human thetumorantigenasforeign.Thetaskistogeneratehuman Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) class I. Strikingly, the presence T cell receptors (TCR) that recognize human tumor- ofthesecellsalsoimpliedagoodclinicalprognosisasthey associated (self) antigens as foreign and use these TCRs were found in patients without metastatic disease. Never- for gene therapy. We use mice with a humanized TCR theless,thesecellshavenotyetbeenfullycharacterizedand repertoire to isolate therapeutic TCRs. are only recognized for being CD45/granzyme B+while T. Blankenstein: None. lacking typical T- and NK-cell markers. We areAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 21 S12 S13 Genetics and Microbiome Next generation clinical genetics S12.1 S13.1 Microbiome host-pathogen interactions Integrating the Phenomic and Genomic Architectures of Developmental Disorders R. Xavier D. R. FitzPatrick Boston, MA, United States MRC Human Genetics Unit, University of Edinburgh, No abstract received. Edinburgh, United Kingdom S12.2 Clinically-definedsyndromediagnoseshaveanexcellent Host-microbe interaction record in predicting defined sets of causative genotypes. The Deciphering Developmental Disorders (DDD) project J. Raes is a UK- and Ireland-wide study that aims to develop and usenewgenetictechnologyandstatisticalanalysestomake Leuven, Belgium a definitive diagnosis in individuals with severe or extreme developmental disorders. DNA samples are available from No abstract received. ~13,500 affected individuals have been recruited with 10,000 of these also having samples available from both S12.3 parents.We have recently reported a significant excess of Genetics of the microbiome damagingdenovovariantsin94differentgenesinacohort of 4294 probands with previously undiagnosed develop- A. Zhernakova, A. Kurilshikov, M. Bonder, C. Wijmenga, J. Fu mental disorders. Genome wide significance in this study was based on human genetic data alone. The overall diag- University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, nostic rate for all modes of inheritance within DDD is Netherlands ~41%. This diagnostic rate involved some element of individual clinicians assessing whether the phenotype mat- Gut microbiome plays an important role in human ches the genotype. It would be useful to develop compu- metabolism, immunity, and health. Various factors includ- tationalapproachestothismatchingasitshouldallowmore ing diet, medication, and environment have been shown to rationalvariantfilteringoptionswhendealingwithgenome- influence the gut microbiome composition. Recently the wide sequence data. However, the extent to which cluster- roleofhostgeneticsinshapingthegutecosystemhasbeen ing in phenotypic space can be used to predict specific described in human studies and animal models. In this diagnosticgenotypesisnotclear.HereIwillexploretheuse presentation I will summarize the current state of micro- of facial imaging, growth z scores, developmental mile- biome research with an emphasis on the effect of host stones and HPO terms for diagnostic filtering. The pheno- geneticsonthegutmicrobiomecomposition.Inparticular,I type is likely to become an important component of the will focus on results of recent genome-wide association computational approach to the analysis of genome wide studiesofmicrobiomecompositionandfunction,andonthe sequencingdata1andaconsistentapproachtothecollection genetic determinants of the host immune system that help and utilitation of such information is a vital part of study shape the gut microbiome. design References: PMID: 28358133; PMID: 28135719; A. Zhernakova: None. A. Kurilshikov: None. PMID: 25533962; PMID: 24963138 M. Bonder: None. C. Wijmenga: None. J. Fu: None. D.R. FitzPatrick: None.22 S13.2 were considered, or when the patient’s condition was The clinical geneticists’ perspective on exome deteriorating unexpectedly. sequencing To our great surprise, we found that fast-WES was only requested four times in the course of this study. Surpris- A. Rauch ingly,thediagnosticyieldofWES(23regularWESandthe 4 fast-WES, mostly trio) was very low (<5%). Part of the Zurich, Switzerland explanation of this low yield lies in a high rate of early clinical diagnoses by SNP-array and clinical consultations, Finding an etiological diagnosis is a major challenge in thus filtering out many known diagnoses before requesting most rare and/ or genetically heterogeneous conditions. (fast-)WES. Exomesequencingiscapableofsignificantlyincreasingthe Inourexperiencefast-WEScanbeaveryusefultoolbut diagnosticyield,butstillleavesmanypatientsundiagnosed it is not often indicated in our NICU/PICU population, and may impose concerns about variants of unknown sig- where pre-screening by a genetic consultation and SNP- nificance. Data analysis guided by clinical considerations arrayhasahighdiagnosticyield.Wehavefoundfast-WES can well improve the interpretation of exome sequencing extremely useful in other cases outside the scope of this results and should stimulate the development of better study, such as in slightly older children and during preg- algorithms. nancy.Ascostswillcontinuetodecreasewehopetobeable tobelessrestrictiveinofferingfast-WEStopatients,further S13.3 reducing the time to diagnosis for a subset of patients. Fast-WES for neonates, how useful is it really? G.W.E. Santen: None. G. W. E. Santen S14 Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medi- Organoid models: The Maxi Impact Of Mini cal Center, Leiden, Netherlands Organs Whole exome and genome sequencing (WES/WGS) are S14.1 currently reshaping clinical genetic practice. Current turn- Dissecting human and chimpanzee cerebral around times are too slow for widespread implementation, organoids using single-cell RNA-seq but shorter turnaround times will no doubt stimulate application of WES beyond classical clinical genetics. J. Camp1, S. Kanton1, F. Badsha2, F. Mora-Bermudez2, S. Pääbo1, There have been several studies showing high diagnostic W. Huttner2, B. Treutlein1,2,3,3 yields (40–60%) of fast WES/WGS in neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) patients. However, many of the syn- 1Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, dromesdetectedinthesepapersareconsideredrecognizable Leipzig, Germany, 2Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell syndromes (such as CHARGE, Noonan and Kabuki syn- Biology and Genetics, Dresden, Germany, 3Technical dromes). In our hospital, as in all larger hospitals in the University Munich, Munich, Germany Netherlands and many in Europe, clinical geneticists rou- tinely perform consultations before genetic investigations Cerebral organoidshaveemerged aspowerfulmodelsof are requested. In the case of a high confidence clinical human brain development, and offer the potential to study diagnosis management is already influenced and fast WES/ uniquely human brain evolution. However, the extent to WGS has only limited added value. As the costs of fast which cerebral organoid systems recapitulate fetal gene WES/WGS are currently significantly higher (up to 50%) expression networks remains unclear. Here we use single- than for standard protocols, the question of whether fast cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) to dissect and compare WES/WGSshouldbethestandard toolintheevaluationof cell composition and progenitor-to-neuron lineage rela- neonates in the NICU/PICU becomes relevant. tionships inhuman and chimpanzee cerebralorganoids and Therefore, we evaluated the potential usefulness of fast- fetalhumanneocortex.Wefindthathumanandchimpanzee WES (a 1–2 week full WES protocol) in our clinical organoid cortical cells use gene expression programs practice. We retrospectively evaluated two years of NICU remarkably similar to those of the fetal tissue in order to consultations in children<4 months old. In part of this organize into cerebral cortex-like regions. We identify period fast-WES was available and considered in the genesthataredifferentiallyexpressedinhumanprogenitors absenceofaclinicaldiagnosis,whensignificantprocedures and neurons relative to chimpanzee, and highlight modern human genetic changes that can be studied in organoidAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 23 cultures. More broadly, this strategy can be extended to diseasemodeling,toxicologystudies,regenerativemedicine other organoid systems modeling human and chimpanzee and gene therapy. development and disease. M. Huch: None. J. Camp: None. S. Kanton: None. F. Badsha: None. F. Mora-Bermudez:None.S. Pääbo:None.W.Huttner: None. B. Treutlein: None. S15 ESHG / ESC JOINT Symposium: Polygenic S14.2 Cardiovascular traits Common mechanisms between Zika virus-induced and inherited microcephaly in human brain S15.1 organoids Implications of understanding the genetic basis of coronary artery disease J. Gopalakrishnan N. J. Samani Cologne, Germany University of Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom No abstract received. Over the last decade, large-scale GWAS meta-analyses S14.3 have identified several dozens of genetic loci associated Liver organoids for the study of liver biology and with risk of coronary artery disease (CAD). This presenta- disease tionwilldescribethecurrentstateofthediscoveryprocess, discusswhatwehavelearntandhowthefindingsarebeing M. Huch clinically translated. N.J. Samani: None. Gurdon Institute-Wellcome Trust, Cambridge, United Kingdom S15.2 Geneticsofarterialbloodpressure:fromcommonto Despite the enormous replication potential of the liver, rare variants in the general population there are currently no culture systems available that sustain hepatocyte replication in vitro. Hepatocytes can be main- P. Munroe tained in culture for a few days. However, they lose their hepatocyte phenotype and function almost immediately, London, United Kingdom thus precluding its application for cell therapy treatments. Liver stem cells have the potential to selfrenew and dif- Over the past 10 years’ substantial progress has been ferentiateintofunctionalhepaticlineages.Mouseliverstem made mapping blood pressure loci using genome-wide cells can be indefinitely expanded in vitro (for>1 year), association studies and deploying bespoke microarrays into“liverorganoids”,inourliverstemcellculturesystem, (most recently the Cardio-Metabochip and Exome chip in the absence of a mesenchymal niche. The cultured cells arrays) in very large sample sizes. There are now over 400 express ductal markers and differentiate into functional bloodpressureloci,providinghundredsofcandidategenes, hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo. We have now further and new insights into pathways that are key in blood developed our culture system to study human liver stem pressure regulation. My presentation will discuss some of cellsandhumanliverdisease.Wedescribeaculturesystem the results of the most recent analyses and highlighting the that allows the long-term expansion of adult human liver key findings. stem cells (>3 months) from donor biopsies while main- taining their differentiation potential towards functional S15.3 hepatocytesinvitro.Theexpandedcellsarehighlystableat The genetic architecture of type 2 diabetes the chromosome and structural level, while single base changes occur at very low rates. The cells can readily be P. Froguel converted into functional hepatocytes in vitro and upon transplantation in vivo. Organoids from α1-antitrypsin Lille, France deficiency and Alagille Syndrome patients mirror the in vivo pathology. Clonal long-term expansion of primary No abstract received. adult liver stem cells opens up experimental avenues for24 S16 catabolites maintain cells metabolically active ensuring cell Autophagy in health and disease survival. We recently were able to demonstrate that, in contrasttoothermammaliancells,autophagyinßcellswas S16.1 not a predominant response upon nutrient deprivation. Autophagy gets to the bone Instead of autophagy, starved ß cells induced lysosomal degradation of newly generated (nascent) secretory insulin C. Settembre1,2 granules in the vicinity of the Golgi, a process we termed starvation-induced insulin granule degradation (SINGD). 1Naples,Italy,2TelethonInstituteofGeneticsandMedicine Keeping autophagy high during starvation and as a con- (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy sequence generation of intracellular nutrients led to uncontrolledinsulinrelease.Asthenascentinsulingranules Autophagy is a lysosomal pathway deputed to the recy- were shown to be preferentially secreted, suppresion of clingofcellularcomponents.Theregulationofautophagyis autophagy through SINGD is thus an optimal strategy to essential for tissue homeostasis and is controlled by the counteract insulin secretion, at the same time providing mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) sufficient nutrients for ß cells to survive. The observed kinase in response to nutrients. My lab has recently positive correlation between autophagy and insulin secre- demonstrated that autophagy, by regulating collagen levels tion may suggest an involvement of autophagy in post- in cartilages, is necessary during bone growth. However, prandial insulin release probably going beyond the widely whether an impairment of autophagy plays a role in the established housekeeping role of autophagy. Importantly, pathogenesis of genetic disorders affecting the skeleton is we have now evidence that degradation of insulin granules still unknown. During my talk I will present new data in lysosomes is dramatically enhanced in ß cells of murine showing that autophagy dysfunction accounts for bone and human diabetic islets. We also have preliminary data growth retardation in lysosomal storage disorder (LSD) by supportingthatlysosomaldegradationofinsulincontributes inhibiting collagen secretion by growth plate chondrocytes, to loss of insulin and chronic suppression of autophagy. the main regulators of longitudinal bone growth. Genetic Autophagy is indeed important to maintain ß cell function, inhibition of mTORC1 activity or pharmacological stimu- in particular in a situation of high insulin demands such as lation of the pro-autophagy protein Beclin1 rescued chon- in type 2 diabetes (T2D). Overall, our mechanism thus drocyte autophagy, collagen levels in cartilages and bone represents an important evolutionary adaption for nutrient- growth retardation in two different LSD mouse models. deprived ß cells. However, its deregulation may actually Taken together, these data unveil a role for mTORC1 and contribute to ß cell failure in T2D. Our findings may thus autophagy in the pathogenesis of skeletal disorders and change the current paradigm in which decreased ß cell suggesttheirmodulationasnewtherapyforthetreatmentof survival and/or dedifferentiation mainly accounted for LSDs. insulin loss in T2D. R. Ricci: None. S16.2 Autophagy in metabolic processes S16.3 Autophagy in neurodegeneration and ageing R. Ricci N. Tavernarakis IGBMC, Illkirch, France Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Crete, Proper nutrient sensing is crucial in multicellular Greece organisms. In mammals upon feeding, the pancreatic ß cell mainlysensesincreasingglucoselevelsandsecretesinsulin Mitochondria,themainenergyhubofthecell,arehighly that acts to induce anabolic pathways in different organs. dynamic organelles, playing essential roles in fundamental Inversely, the ß cell decreases insulin secretion to suppress cellular processes. Mitochondrial function impinges on these anabolic reactions upon low glucose levels during several signalling pathways modulating cellular metabo- fasting. As known for many eukaryotic cells, nutrient lism, cell survival and healthspan. Maintenance of mito- deprivation is also expected to induce macroautophagy chondrial function and energy homeostasis requires both (hereafter referred to as “autophagy”). During autophagy, generation of newly synthesized and elimination of dys- cellular components are sequestered into double-membrane functional mitochondria. Impaired mitochondrial function autophagosomes, which subsequently fuse with lysosomes and excessive mitochondrial content are major character- (autolysosomes), where degradation occurs. Resulting istics of ageing and several human pathophysiologicalAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 25 conditions, highlighting thepivotal role of thecoordination E01.2 between mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy. How- Deep Sequencing of 10,000 Human Genomes ever, the cellular and molecular underpinnings of mito- chondrialmasshomeostasisremain obscure.Wefound that A. Telenti DCT-1,theCaenorhabditiseleganshomologofmammalian BNIP3 and BNIP3L/NIX, is a key mediator of mitophagy Human Longevity, Inc., San Diego, CA, United States promoting longevity under stress. DCT-1 acts downstream of the PINK-1-PDR-1/Parkin pathway and is ubiquitinated The ability to sequence human genomes at high scale upon mitophagy-inducing conditions to mediate the allows the investigation of the landscape of human diver- removal of damaged mitochondria. Accumulation of sity: the rates of discovery, the characteristics of the non- damaged mitochondria triggers SKN-1 activation, which protein-coding genome, and the hallmarks of conservation initiatesabipartiteretrogradesignalingpathwaystimulating and essentiality. Analysis of 10,000 deep sequenced gen- the coordinated induction of both mitochondrial biogenesis omes (30X coverage) identifies variation in 1 every 13 and mitophagygenes.Taken together, ourresultsunravel a nucleotides in the genome. Most of the variations are sin- homeostatic feedback loop that allows cells to adjust their gletons, and each additional sequenced genome adds over mitochondrial population in response to environmental and 8000 additional new variants to the database. This density intracellular cues. Age-dependent decline of mitophagy of variation allows the creation of a map of human genetic both inhibits removal of dysfunctional or superfluous constraint in the non-coding genome that differs from the mitochondria and impairs mitochondrial biogenesis result- conservation map defined by interspecies alignment. There ing in progressive mitochondrial accretion and conse- is a strong pattern of coordination of genetic constraint quently, deterioration of cell function. between genes and their regulatory regions up to 2MB. N. Tavernarakis: None. Essential genes, as defined by a number of metrics (Phi, pLI, RVIS, Missense z-score, EvoTol, LoFtool), use con- served regulatory elements. It is estimated that, with Educational Session sequencing of 1 million genomes, one every third nucleo- tide will be observed variant if tolerated. E01 A. Telenti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Sequencing, Sponsored by Illumina nificant; Human Longevity, Inc. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Human Longevity, Inc. E01.1 The Future of Genomic Medicine E01.3 Increasing the diagnostic yield of genome-wide E. Mardis sequencing for rare diseases Nationwide Children’s Hospital, Columbus, OH, United K. M. Boycott States University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada Large-scale biomedicaldiscoveryhasbeentremendously facilitated by the application of next-generation sequencing An accurate diagnosis is an integral component of clin- (NGS) and advanced computational analyses over the past ical care for patients with rare genetic diseases. Recent ten years. As a result of these studies, a greatly enhanced advances in sequencing, in particular whole-exome understanding of the genomic underpinnings of human sequencing (WES), are identifying the genetic basis of diseasehasbeenobtained.Thereisincreasingevidencethat disease for 25–40% of patients. There are a variety of rea- applying this newknowledge toaidindiagnosisofpatients sons why up to 75% of patients might be unsolved after with genetic diseases and cancers can provide additional WES, including incomplete coverage of the exome and precision through NGS-based diagnostic assays. My talk genetic mutations elusive to the technology itself; some of will highlight these translational efforts in cancers and these challenges can be addressed by pursuing additional constitutionaldisorders,focusingoncasestudiestoillustrate genomic technologies. However, there are a proportion of theprecisionobtained,andontheremainingchallengesthat theseunsolvedcasesinwhichthedisease-causingvariantis must be overcome to achieve routine use of genomics in in fact within the WES data but for a variety of reasons clinicaldiagnosis,prognosisandtreatmentdecision-making. there is insufficient evidence to support a definitive diag- E. Mardis: None. nosis.Thisisnotsurprisinggiventhatapproximatelyhalfof26 the genes for the estimated 7000 rare diseases remain to be E02 discovered. The wealth of genome sequence data being CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to model generated in diagnostic laboratories should accelerate pro- disease gress in biomedicine - making it possible to integrate genomicandclinicalinformationtorevealthegeneticbasis E02.1 of inherited diseases, amongst many other applications. Functionally assaying thousands of BRCA1 variants However, we are not organized to seize this extraordinary with saturation genome editing opportunity — nor are we on a path to do so, highlighting the need for critical large-scale data sharing. Two interna- G. M. Findlay, R. Daza, B. K. Martin, A. Leith, M. D. Zhang, L. M. tional consortia, the International Rare Diseases Research Starita, J. Shendure Consortium (IRDiRC) and the Global Alliance for Geno- mics and Health (GA4GH), have recognized rare diseases University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States as a remarkable opportunity for advancement in this realm on a world-wide scale and support initiatives such as the CRISPR technologies are transforming the way Matchmaker Exchange (www.matchmakerexchange.org) to researchers study genome function. The ability to engineer facilitate case-based matching for discovery. As we come DNA sequence variants in their endogenous genomic con- closer to understanding the genetic etiology of all rare text offers great potential for accurately characterizing the diseases, it is likely that we will increasingly rediscover effects of variants on both basic biological processes and known genes and that the approach to completion of the human disease. However, given the extensive genetic var- disease compendium will be asymptotic and much more iation observed in clinical sequencing, methods for deter- challenging than predicted. mining functional consequences of variants should be K.M. Boycott: None. highly scalable. To address this challenge, we recently developedagenomeeditingmethodtointerrogatehundreds E01.4 to thousands of variants at a single locus in a single Medical genome sequencing in the 100,000 experiment. This approach, called saturation genome edit- Genomes Project Rare Disease Programme ing, leverages multiplex homology-directed repair of CRISPR/Cas9-derived DNA breaks to introduce a highly R. H. Scott diverse set of variants across approximately 100 bp of genomic sequence. With next-generation sequencing, we Genomics England, London, United Kingdom can measure each allele’s effect on phenotypes such as cell growth and transcript abundance. Currently, we are apply- To bring the predicted benefits of genomics to NHS ingsaturationgenomeeditingtosystematicallycharacterize patients is why the Prime Minister launched the 100,000 approximately 4,000 single nucleotide variants within the Genomes Project in late 2012. The project will sequence BRCA1 gene in human cells. We read out BRCA1 function 100,000 genomes from around 70,000 people. Participants in a cell line in which the homologous recombination areNHSpatientswithararedisease,plustheirfamilies,and pathway is essential for viability. Our preliminary results patients with cancer. constituteacatalogoffunctionalscoresfornearlyallsingle The Rare Disease Programme has recruited over 20,000 nucleotide variants spanning thirteen high-priority exonic participants and returned interpreted genome results in regions that code for the protein’s RING and BRCT 3,000 (from 1,500 families) to the recruiting centres. To domains. We show that in addition to nearly all nonsense deliver the programme a novel framework has been estab- and canonical splicing variants, a substantial fraction of lished to enable large-scale recruitment, clinical data col- missense and intronic variants near splice junctions also lection and the development of a semi-automated compromise BRCA1 function. Furthermore, a small but interpretation pipeline that benefits from the centralisation appreciable fraction of synonymous variants abrogate of sequencing and bioinformatic infrastructure while BRCA1 function, presumably through effects on splicing enabling recruiting clinical and laboratory control over efficiency or transcript stability. Ongoing efforts to refine validation and reporting of results and forming a platform our functional scores and substantiate their clinical utility for research and innovation. This talk will describe the may be useful for overcoming the challenge of BRCA1 development of this infrastructure and share insights from variants of uncertain significance in genetic testing for our analyses to date. hereditary breast and ovarian cancer disease risk. More R.H. Scott: None. broadly, by expanding this experimental paradigm for CRISPR/Cas9-mediated variant testing to other clinicallyAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 27 actionable genes we aim to substantially improve the cancers and include multiplex sequencing panels of several interpretability of genetic testing. genes and panels of common single nucleotide poly- G.M. Findlay: None. R. Daza: None. B.K. Martin: morphisms (SNPs). However, the clinical utility of such None. A. Leith: None. M.D. Zhang: None. L.M. Starita: multiplexgeneandSNPpanelsdependsonhavingaccurate None. J. Shendure: None. estimatesofcancerrisksformutationsinthegenesincluded insuch panels aswell ascancer risk prediction models that E02.2 consider the multifactorial aetiology to cancer suscept- The CRISPR revolution: engineering structural ibility. Over the past two decades international consortia, variants to study disease such as the Breast Cancer Linkage Consortium, the Breast andOvarianCancerAssociationConsortia, theConsortium D. Lupiáñez1,2,3, G. Andrey1 of Investigators of Modifiers of BRCA1/2 and the Interna- tional BRCA1/2 Carrier Cohort Study have enabled us to 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Devel- accuratelycharacterisethecancerrisksforrareandcommon opment and Disease, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute for Med- cancersusceptibilitygeneticvariants;tounderstandhowthe ical and Human Genetics, Charité – Universitätsmedizin, geneticvariantsinteractwitheachotheroncancerrisks;and Berlin, Germany, 3Berlin-Brandenburg Center for how genetic variants interact with other lifestyle/hormonal Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité – risk factors for the disease. Using breast, ovarian and Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany prostate cancers as examples the presentation will review thekeyresearchachievementsbytheinternationalconsortia Structural variations contribute extensively to the varia- andhowthesearehelpingustorealiseamorepersonalised bility of the human genome and are often associated with risk-based cancer prevention and cancer control. disease.Theirstudyinmurinemodelsystems,however,has A.C. Antoniou: None. been classically burdened by laborious genetic targeting procedures and time-consuming mouse crossing steps. E03.2 Recently, the CRISPR/Cas technology emerged as a pow- Two decades after BRCA: setting paradigms in erful tool to edit genomes in a fast, cost-effective and pre- personalized cancer care and prevention cise manner. Using this system, chromosomal rearrangementssuchasdeletions,duplication,inversionsor K. Offit translocations can be easily generated, thus facilitating the creation of models of human disease. In this talk, I will New York, NY, United States discuss the fundaments of this technology, providing exemplary cases that highlight how CRISPR/Cas has No abstract received. revolutionizedourcurrentlabmethodologyandallowedthe identification of novel pathomechanisms. D. Lupiáñez: None. G. Andrey: None. E04 Channelopathies E03 50 E04.1 Shades of Cancer Genetics Brain channelopathies E03.1 R. Guerrini Genetic susceptibility to common cancers: what havewelearnedfromlargecancergeneticconsortia Children’s Hospital Anna Meyer, University of Florence, Florence, Italy A. C. Antoniou In the human genome there are more than 400 genes DepartmentofPublicHealthandPrimaryCare,University encoding ion channels, i.e. transmembrane proteins reg- of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom ulating ion fluxes across membranes. Dysfunction in ion channels leads to altered membrane excitability most often Advances in genomic technologies have enabled more manifestedbyparoxysmaldisorders.Theresultingdiseases, rapid,lessexpensivegeneticsequencingthanwaspossiblea cumulatively defined as channelopathies, are manifested as few years ago. These technologies allow for the compre- phenotypes ranging from common to very rare disorders, hensive genetic profiling for assessing risks to common whose severity can be mild, disabling, or life-threatening.28 Geneticneurologicalchannelopathiesaretypicallyinherited magnetic resonance spectroscopy studies applied to in an autosomal dominant fashion. The resulting parox- HypoPP patients suggest that this technique can demon- ysmal disturbances of neurological function can either be strate both disease-related and treatment-related changes. the only clinical manifestation or be associated with Here the clinical syndromes and genetic causes are dis- developmentalandintellectualdisabilities,withconsequent cussed as well as some of the more recently identified pronounced reproductive disadvantage. Mutations affecting neuromuscular channelopathies. central nervous system expressed sodium and potassium H. Houlden: None. channels most often result in severe epileptic encephalo- pathies, but may also cause self-limiting benign epilepsies. In spite of the high number of patients and mutations E05 Imprinting-related disorders describedforsomeoftheseconditions,genotype/phenotype correlations are only marginally understood. The study of E05.1 these disorders has improved our understanding of patho- Overview on imprinting related disease physiology of several neurological disorders, particularly epilepsy, but also episodic ataxia and hemiplegic migraine. D. J. G. Mackay Neuronal channelopathies are individually rare but cumu- latively represent a considerable proportion of the practice University of Southampton, Faculty of Medicine, South- of pediatric neurology and pose serious challenges for ampton, United Kingdom treatment and genetic counselling. Even after a specific ion channel disorder has been diagnosed the therapy remains Genomic imprints in humans are written upon our gen- empirical and symptomatic, often with limited efficacy in omes from the earliest stages of our development, as a most patients. Developing new and more specific ther- permanent memory of our parental origin. The human apeutic approaches is a high priority and is proving more genome contains approximately 150 imprinted genes, and difficult that initial discoveries had led to hope for. their expression is distinctively mono-allelic - i.e., from R. Guerrini: None. either the paternal or the maternal DNA. Many imprinted gene products regulate growth, from the cellular to the E04.2 organismal level, and disturbing their exquisite balance of Muscle channelopathies mono-allelicexpressionleadstoimprintingdisorders(IDs), with distinctive effects on growth, development, metabo- H. Houlden lism and behaviour. In this educational session, I will summariseknownIDs,theirrangeofgeneticandepigenetic UCLInstituteofNeurology,QueenSquare,London,United causes,andtheinsightstheygiveusintonormalimprinting Kingdom control. I will explore the challenges of ID diagnosis on both the clinical and epigenetic level, highlighting both the Muscle and Neuromuscular Channelopathies clinical heterogeneity of individual IDs, and the clinical The number of pathogenic mutations causing non- overlapbetweenthem.Iwilldescribetherecentadvancesin dystrophic myotonias (NDMs) and periodic paralyses in diagnosisandmanagementofIDsthathavebeendrivenby known genes continues to expand. Mutations have also theEUCOSTnetworkonimprintingdisorders,EUCID.net. been identified CLCN1, SCN4A, in the ryanodine receptor As examples of this work, both this talk and its companion gene manifesting as an atypical periodic paralysis pheno- lecturewilldescriberecentInternationalClinicalConsensus type and thyrotoxic hypokalaemic periodic paralysis in a activities in three IDs: Silver-Russell syndrome, Beckwith- novel gene encoding an inwardly rectifying potassium Wiedemann syndrome, and Pseudohypoparathyroidism. channel, Kir2.6. Work studying molecular mechanisms D.J.G. Mackay: None. indicates that 90% of the known mutations causing hypo- kalaemic periodic paralysis (HypoPP) result in loss of E05.2 positively charged arginine residues in the S4 segments of Clinical and molecular overview of Beckwith- either SCN4A or CACNA1S, possibly creating a gating- Wiedemann and Silver-Russel syndromes pore current that may be important in the pathogenesis of HypoPP. Recent studies evaluating clinical features and F. Brioude, E. Giabicani, W. Abi Habib, I. Netchine health status in NDM patients have provided more detailed insights into the significant morbidity associated with these Universite Pierre et Marie Curie, Assistance Publique diseases. Ultrasound has been successfully used to Hopitaux de Paris (Hopital Trousseau) and Inserm demonstrate muscle abnormalities in NDM patients and UMR_S938, Paris, France, Paris, FranceAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 29 Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) and Silver- support, growth hormone treatment and surveillance of Russell syndrome (SRS) are two imprinting disorders (ID) puberty/adrenarche. with foetal growth disturbance. Epigenetic (abnormal F. Brioude: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers methylation at imprinting center regions) or genetic bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; IPSEN, (mutations, duplications, uniparental disomy (UPD)) SANDOZ. E. Giabicani: None. W. Abi Habib: None. defects of imprinted genes on chromosome 11 (BWS and I. Netchine: None. SRS), 7 (SRS) and more recently 14 (SRS) have been identified in these two syndromes. In humans, the 11p15 regioncontainsgeneswhichareimportantforregulationof E06 Bioethics for ‘dummies’ foetal and postnatal growth. This region includes two imprinted domains: the IGF2/H19 domain regulated by E06.1 imprinting center region 1 (ICR1, or H19/IGF2:IG-DMR) Gene editing, NIPT and the CDKN1C/KCNQ1OT1 domain regulated by ICR2 (or KCNQ1OT1:TSS DMR). M. C. Cornel BWS has been described in the 1970s. BWS is an overgrowth syndrome with additional features as macro- VU University Medical Center, dept Clinical Genetics and glossia, abdominal wall defects, hemihyperplasia, organo- Amsterdam Public Health research Institute, Amsterdam, megaly, neonatal transient neonatal hypoglycemia/ Netherlands hyperinsulinism. Furthermore, BWS is associated with an increasedriskofembryonictumourduringearlychildhood, Bioethics for ‘dummies’: Gene editing, NIPT especially nephroblastomas or hepatoblastomas. ICR1 gain Ethics has many definitions. (1) Research ethics. Scientist of methylation (GOM), ICR2 loss of methylation (LOM), may think of ethical committees or institutional review 11p15 paternal UPD or CDKN1C loss-of-function muta- boards-longandbothersomeproceduresneededbeforethe tions represent the most frequent molecular mechanisms in start of a research project. Does the experiment follow BWS. A strong correlation between the risk of embryonic research ethics principles as specified in the Declaration of tumor and the molecular mechanism has been described, Helsinki?(2) Clarifying the debate. Bioethicist help to withthemostimportantriskforpatientswithICR1GOMor understand relationships among life sciences, biotechnol- 11p15paternalUPD.Tumourscreeningismostlybasedon ogy, medicine, politics, law and philosophy. Why do we abdominal ultrasound for children with BWS. However, argue the way we argue. What values are behind con- manytumourscreeningprogramshavebeenproposed,with troversial issues. For a decision to be made, what are the some of them suggesting different schemes based on the arguments in favor and against. (3) Ethical practice in molecular mechanism. Furthermore, some of them add profession-led health care. For physicians ethics is an ele- screening of hepatoblastoma with serum alpha fetoprotein. ment of professionalism. The CANMEDS competency SRSisaclinicalmirrorofBWS,andhasbeendescribed “professionalism” encompasses ethical practice. For the in the 1950s. In 2016, a first international consensus questions at the beginning of life, gene editing and non- regarding diagnosis and management of SRS has been invasive prenatal testing (NIPT), I will focus on the con- established.SRSisaclinicaldiagnosis,forwhichaclinical tributions of the Public and Professional Policy Committee scoring system (Netchine-Harbison, NH-CSS) has been (PPPC) of ESHG, to illustrate how recommendations for validated.NH-CSSincludesbeingshortforgestationalage, responsible health care practice were developed, and how postnatalgrowthretardation,relativemacrocephalyatbirth, the ethical debate was clarified as in the second and third feedingdifficulties/lowBMI,protrudingforeheadandbody definition of ethics. Ethics for beginners could start with asymmetry/hemihypoplasia. Later in life, SRS patients are principles of ethics. Knoppers and Chadwick in 2005 more likely to develop early puberty, overweight and/or described emerging trends in ethics, especially in human metabolicdisturbances.About50%ofSRSpatientspresent genetic research, starting from the principles of autonomy, an ICR1 LOM, and 5–10% present a maternal UPD at privacy, justice, quality and equity and moving to recipro- chromosome 7. More recently, molecular defects of chro- city, mutuality, solidarity, citizenry and universality. mosome 14 (usually linked to Temple syndrome, another Autonomy has been a very important element in genetics ID with growth retardation) have been identified in cohorts health care. Especially if reproductive choices are to be of SRS patients (including maternal UPD, deletions or made, the women or the couple involved have to decide. abnormal methylation). Finally mutations of CDKN1C Coercion is to be avoided. The PPPC recommendations on (gain-of-function) or IGF2 (loss-of-function) have been NIPT state that it has the potential of helping the practice described in rare familial cases of SRS. Management of better achieve its aim of facilitating autonomous reproduc- SRS patients includes (among others) early nutritional tive choices. To evaluate this aim, it is not sufficient to30 report on the number of participants, the uptake or the research, public health surveillance, and sometimes for prevalence of aneuploidies. Crucial elements for the health identifying disaster victims or in law enforcement. care system include information and counseling, education (3)Finally,thereisgrowingdiscussionofthepotentialto ofprofessionals,accountabilitytoallstakeholdersincluding use genome sequencing (GS) technologies within NBS childrenbornfromscreenedpregnanciesandpersonsliving programs.However,thepossibilityofincorporatingGSinto with the conditions targeted in prenatal screening and pro- population-wideNBSprogramswouldleadtoamajorshift motion of equity of access. The ethical principles are often in the scope and scale of information generation, which connected. Equity for instance comes in. If women are to raises questionsabout thelimitsofscreeningandthemoral makeanautonomouschoice,thiscanonlybeachievedifall authority of NBS to continue to operate as a mandatory or womenhaveaccess,andif,whatevertheirchoice,theyand as an implied consent program. their children will be taken care of. For gene editing the Combined, these developments might alter public public debate and legislation seems to draw a line when it expectations to participate in universal NBS programs and comes to germline gene editing. The PPPC of ESHG col- underscore the need to engage the public on these issues. laborates with The European Society of Human Repro- This presentation will review these three issues and duction and Embryology (ESHRE). Together we are in the ethical principles as well as describe research from a process of developing recommendations especially for national public engagement study on Canadian citizens’ reproductive gene editing. In many countries germline views and values on these emerging issues. Results will interventions have been prohibited. What were the argu- describe public expectations of expanded NBS panels and ments behind this legislation, and do these still apply and theirvaluesregardingresearchwithstoredsamples.Results aretheystillconsideredconvincing?Ifatechniquecanhelp will also present citizens’ personal inclinations, and per- to avoid serious genetic disorders, in a safe and effective ceived obligations of others, to participate in NBS using way, would this be a reason to reconsider earlier stand- GS. In light of these findings, key ethical and policy con- points?Afterendorsementoftheserecommendations,more siderations as well as future research questions will be debate will be needed with stakeholders outside of the discussed. genetics/human reproduction community. Y. Bombard: None. M.C. Cornel: None. E06.2 E07 Pharmacogenomics in the clinic Balancing public health & biomedical ethics: The case of newborn screening E07.1 Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for Personalized Y. Bombard1,2 Medicine 1University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, T. Klein1, M. Ritchie2 2St Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada 1Department of Biomedical Data Science, Stanford, CA, Newborn screening (NBS) is considered a public health UnitedStates,2PennStateUniversity,Danville,PA,United genomics success story. NBS programs identify serious States conditions where early detection and urgent pre- symptomatic treatment were necessary to avert serious Pharmacogenomics(PGx)focusesontheuseofgenomic clinical harm. However, three challenges are raising old information to guide drug therapy and is a central compo- ethical issues of consent and public health benefits with nent of precision medicine. Despite substantial progress in renewed urgency: understanding how genetic variations impact drug efficacy (1) The scope of NBS panels is expanding - around the and toxicity, the adoption of pharmacogenomics in clinical world - allowing the early detection of dozens of genetic practice has been relatively slow. Major challenges in the conditions, including conditions without treatment, where implementation of pharmacogenomics knowledge include treatmentdoesnotimprovemortalityandwhereevidenceof lack of awareness of the available evidence, unsure of how benefit is equivocal. to interpret and use the genetic information, and lack of (2) Further, controversy has emerged concerning the clear guidance on how to deliver information to the prac- storage of NBS samples and their secondary uses. NBS titioners and patients. A central repository of pharmacog- samples are typically stored for QA purposes, but these neomic knowledge is critical in addressing all of these dried spots may also be used for other purposes including: challenges. The Pharmacogenomics Knowledgebase (PharmGKB) is a publically available premiere repositoryAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 31 that collects, curates, and disseminates information about undertaking a conventional RCT - apart from the usual the impact of human genetic variation on drug responses. factors such as design, sample size, clinical outcome mea- Through our research efforts and collaborations with phar- sures,andfollow-up,additionalfactorssuchashowpatients macogenomics research and clinical communities, we pro- will be genotyped, how genotype will affect drug dose/ vide a comprehensive catalogue of genes and genetic choice, whether it will be cost-effective, and how many variations that are most important for drug response phe- patients will need to be screened to identify those that fit notypes. I will describe the core content of our knowl- with the inclusion criteria, all need to be considered. These edgebaseanddiscusshowweusetheknowledgetosupport additional factors inevitably also make it much more clinicalimplementationofPGx.Inaddition,Iwillhighlight expensive to undertake pharmacogenomics-based RCTs - our collaboration with the Clinical Pharmacogenetics given that many of the drugs being studied for pharmaco- Implementation Consortium (CPIC) to develop freely genomicsareoff-patent,itcanbedifficulttoobtainfunding available, peer-reviewed gene/drug practice guidelines for toundertakethese trials. Therefore,inorder toimprove the physicians that aids implementation of pharmacogenetic translationoflaboratoryfindingsintotheclinic,weneedto testing and improves the precision of drug selection and consider different forms of evidence in a more intelligent, dosing. Lastly, I will present the development of The rather than purely relying on a hierarchy of evidence. The PharmacogenomicsClinicalAnnotationTool(PharmCAT), talk will be illustrated by several case studies to show how asoftwaretoolthatextractallCPIClevel-Avariantsfroma different implementation approaches are now being genetic dataset (represented as a vcf), interpret the variant investigated. alleles,andgenerateareportthatcanthenbeusedtoinform M. Pirmohamed: B. Research Grant (principal investi- prescribing decisions. PharmCAT is currently being devel- gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell oped in a collaboration between the PGRN Statistical as grants already received); Modest; EU-PACT Trial Eur- Analysis Resource (P-STAR), PharmGKB, the Clinical opean Commission, UK National Institute of Health Genome Resource (ClinGen), and CPIC. References: M. Research. C.OtherResearch Support(supplies, equipment, Whirl-Carrillo,E.M.McDonagh,J.M.Hebert,L.Gong,K. receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Modest; LGC, Sangkuhl, C.F. Thorn, R.B. Altman and T.E. Klein. MC Diagnostics. “Pharmacogenomics Knowledge for Personalized Medi- cine”.ClinicalPharmacology&Therapeutics(2012)92(4): 414–417.; M.V. Relling, T.E. Klein. “CPIC: Clinical E08 Pharmacogenetics Implementation Consortium of the Multi-omics data integration Pharmacogenomics Research Network.” Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2011 Mar;89(3):464–7 E08.1 T. Klein: None. M. Ritchie: None. Functional Genomics E07.2 P. Beales Implementation of pharmacogenomics in the clinic London, United Kingdom M. Pirmohamed No abstract received. University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom E08.2 Pharmacogenetics/genomics has been around for a long Methods of integrating genomics data time: although this has led to many discoveries, i.e. asso- ciations between phenotypes (drug efficacy and safety) and M. D. Ritchie genotypes, translation of these discoveries into clinical practice has generally been poor. Worldwide, there is now Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United States greater emphasis on implementation, with many different approaches and areas being investigated including pre- Moderntechnologyhasenabledmassivedatageneration emptivegenotyping.Lackofrobustevidenceiscitedasthe ofmoleculardatatypesincludingDNAsequencevariation, mainreasonforlackofimplementation.Conventionally,the RNAgeneexpression,methylation,andproteinexpression, randomised controlled trial is regarded as the top of the among others. However, tools and software to work with evidence hierarchy, but very few trials have been under- thesedataineffectivewaysarelimited.Genomescience,in taken in pharmacogenomics. Undertaking a RCT for a particular,hasadvancedatatremendouspaceduringrecent pharmacogenomics phenotype is more complicated than years with dramatic innovations in highthroughput32 moleculardatagenerationtechnology,datacollection,anda efficacy on rapidly growing schwannomas throughout the paradigm shift from single lab science to large, collabora- nervous system. Just this year MEK inhibitors were shown tive network/consortia science. These massive datasets in a paediatric phase 1 trial to be effective in treating provide a rich resource for sophisticated data analysis to plexiform tumours in NF1 and may have efficacy in other identify the underlying patterns that explain or predict tumour types. Other targets include nilotinib and sorafenib complextraitarchitecture.Ourgroup,andothers,havebeen which are in phase 0 studies in Plymouth/Manchester. exploring the use of machine learning strategies to analyze these multiomics datasets. We have specifically focused on E09.2 meta-dimensionalanalysiswhereweintegratemultipledata Tuberous Sclerosis Complex Update types to identify multivariate models that predict disease states. The goal of this technology is to integrate across S. Jozwiak1,2 multipledatasetsaswell.Inthispresentation,Iwilldescribe the strategies in the field for integrating genomics data and 1Department of Child Neurology, Warsaw Medical Uni- provide some examples of where these techniques have versity,Warsaw,Poland,2TheChildren’sMemorialHealth identified novel association signals. Institute, Warsaw, Poland M.D. Ritchie: None. Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC) is one of the most frequent neurocutaneous disorders. It affects 1 in 6,000 in E09 pediatricpopulation.Familialcasescomprise about30%of Phakomatosis Update allTSCpatients.Upto90%ofpatientssufferfromepilepsy and about 50% present with different forms of mental E09.1 retardation. Diagnosis of TSC may be difficult due to the Neurofibromatosis Update fact that majority of clinical presentations of the disease developovertimeinolderchildren,adolescentsandadults. D. Evans According to the recent recommendations, TSC diagnosis maybeestablishedifpathogenicmutationisfoundineither Manchester, United Kingdom of TSC1 or TSC2 genes, or when two major diagnostic clinical criteria are present in the patient. Recent update on SincethediscoveryoftheNF1genein1990andNF2in newest diagnostic criteria of TSC will be presented. 1993 there has been the promise of gene based therapies. Usually, cardiac tumors, especially multiple, present a first InitialworkinNF1usingfarnesyltransferaseinhibitorswas clinical symptom of TSC and may be disclosed on routine disappointing. However work on NF1 mice suggested that fetal echocardiography performed at about 30th week of statins may have a role in helping the neuro-cognitive pregnancy.EarlydiagnosisofTSCinyounginfantsmaybe deficitinNF1.Againinitialstudieswerenotconvincingbut particularly important as currently available early inter- larger scale international initiatives are still awaited. More ventions may change the natural course of this devastating latterly many more target both in NF1 and NF2 have been disease. Identification of infants with high risk of epilepsy suggested and early evidence suggested that imatinib was allows implementation of preventative treatment, which likely to have efficacy in at least a minority of growing significantly improves their neurodevelopmental outcome. plexiform tumours in NF1. This was shown to have only a Recent results of preventative studies and the EPISTOP 17% response rate in a clinical trial. The big breakthrough project (www.EPISTOP.eu) will be discussed. Treatment came nonetheless in NF2 with Bevacizumab. Bevacizumab with mTOR inhibitors of TSC-associated renal (angio- is a vascular endothelial growth factor inhibitor that has myolipomas; AMLs) and brain (subependymal giant cell recently been used in the treatment of schwannoma growth astrocytomas;SEGAs)tumors,significantlyimprovedlong- associated with NF2 and appears to work in short to med- term prognosis of affected persons. New recommendations iumtermtumourshrinkageorcontrolinabout70%ofcases for SEGAs treatment will be presented. mTOR inhibitors with rapidly growing tumours. Bevacizumab was approved have been found to be effective also in drug-resistant epi- for such treatment through the National NF2 service in lepsy associated with TSC. Also these aspects of manage- England in September 2010. Seventy patients have so far mentwillbecoveredinthelecture.Acknowledgements.SJ been treated through 4 NF2 centres. This includes 10 was partly financed by the European Community’s 7th FP patients with extracranial schwannomas that have respon- (FP7/2007–2013; EPISTOP, grant agreement no. 602391) ded to treatment with bevacizumab and 8 ependymomas and the Polish Ministerial funds for science (years 2014– with both symptomatic improvement, and decrease in 2018) for the implementation of international co-financed tumour size. Bevacizumab treatment appears to have project.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 33 S. Jozwiak: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers content and mutational load of the embryos, will also be bureau,symposia,andexpertwitness);Modest;Novartis.F. discussed. Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;Novartis, Eisai,UCB. J.R. Vermeesch: B. Research Grant (principal investi- gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell as grants already received); Significant; Agilent. E. Own- E10 ership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intel- Whole-genome haplotyping methods for lectual property); Significant; patents licensed to Agilent. human embryo selection E10.1 E11 Karyo- and Meio-mapping for human embryo Strategies to avoid sudden cardiac death selection E11.1 D. Wells Sudden Cardiac Death in the Young Nuffield, United Kingdom C. Semsarian No abstract received. Sydney, Australia E10.2 Sudden cardiac death (SCD) is a tragic and devastating Haplarithmisis for human embryo selection complication of a number of cardiovascular diseases. The death is most often unexpected and has major implications J. R. Vermeesch for the surviving family and the community. While in the older populations, SCD is most frequently caused by KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium underlying coronary artery disease and heart failure, in those aged under 35 years, the causes of SCD commonly Large scale whole genome and exome sequencing is include genetic disorders, such as inherited cardiomyo- uncovering a plethora of novel mutations that cause highly pathies and primary arrhythmogenic diseases. 1In the eva- penetrant,early-onset,severe,orlater-onset life-threatening luation of families in which SCD has occurred, the key dominant and recessive disorders. For couples who are combinationofbothclinicalscreeningandtargettedgenetic known carriers of mutant alleles, preimplantation genetic testingisthecornerstoneofbothestablishinganunderlying diagnosis enables the detection of genetic disorders in diagnosis and in screening at-risk family relatives. Specifi- embryosthathavebeenfertilized invitro,therebyavoiding cally, in cases where no definitive cause is identified at their transmission to offspring. Traditional PGD methods postmortem, i.e. Sudden Unexpected Death (SUD), the require a mutation and family specific work-up. We and “molecular autopsy” has emerged as a key process in the others have developed generic methods that can be readily investigation of the cause of death. The combination of applied for all transmitted genetic disorders. The method clinical and genetic evaluation of families with SCD in the reconstructs genome-wide haplotype architectures as well setting of a specialized multidisciplinary clinic provides a as the copy-number and segregational origin of those hap- platform for early initiation of therapeutic and prevention lotypes by employing phased parental genotypes and deci- strategies, with the ultimate goal to reduce sudden death phering WGA-distorted SNP B-allele fractions using a among the young in our communities. 1Bagnall et al. A processwecoinhaplarithmisis.Wedemonstratethemethod Prospective Study of Sudden Cardiac Death among Chil- can be applied as a generic method for preimplantation dren and Young Adults. N Engl J Med 2016;374:2441– genetic diagnosis on single cells biopsied from human 2452. embryos enabling to diagnose both disease alleles genome wide, as well as numerical and structural chromosomal E11.2 anomalies. Moreover, meiotic segregation errors can be Recommendations for the management of sudden distinguished from mitotic ones. In addition to the princi- cardiac death ples, I will present the results following the first year of clinical implementation. The introduction of genome wide F. Fellmann screening of embryo’s raised novel ethical questions. The principles guiding embryo selection and prioritization that Lausanne, Switzerland are applied at our centre according to the chromosomal34 In November 2016 the Brocher Foundation hosted an France; C. van El, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; F. Fell- interdisciplinary workshop on Ethical, legal and practical mann, Switzerland; F. Forzano, London, UK; H. Howard, aspectsofpost-mortem geneticanalysisforsuddencardiac Uppsala, Sweden; S. Kauferstein, Frankfurt, Germany; death in young adults. The workshop was organised in K.Michaud,Lausanne, Switzerland; H.Kayserili, Istanbul, collaboration with the Public and Professional Policy Turkey;A.Lucassen,Southampton,UK;A.Mendes,Porto, Committee of the ESHG. Twelve experts in (forensic) Portugal; C. Patch, London, UK; D. Radojkovic, Belgrade, pathology, cardiology, genetics and law from Europe and Serbia; E. Rial-Sebbag, Toulouse, France; A. Sajantila, Canada presented their views. Together with PPPC mem- Helsinki,Finland;M.Sheppard,London,UK;A.M.Tassé, bers and invited experts they participated in group work to Canada; S. Temel, Turkey; A. Wilde, Amsterdam, the identifycommonchallengesandlistrecommendations.The Netherlands; C. Yakicier, Istanbul,Turkey workshopfocussedoncasesofsuddenunexpecteddeathin adults below the age of 40, potentially indicative of underlying hereditary cardiac disorders. In such cases post- E12 mortem genetic testing can be relevant for medical reasons The evolution of genetic counseling: Lessons as well as for public health purposes. Though (forensic) learned from psychotherapy autopsy procedures are available, these poorly integrate post-mortem genetic testing. Aim of the workshop was to E12.1 address the lack of coordination between the forensic and The added value of psychotherapy in the genetic medical domain and the various professions and respective counselling process regulations by drafting recommendations to improve Eur- opean guidance. R. Moldovan This presentation will address the ethical, legal, and practical(including economical) challenges ofpost mortem Babes-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania genetic testing and the use of the results for medical pur- poses. Autopsy procedures in cases of sudden unexpected Genetic counselling is rooted in many different psycho- death vary per European country or region; the procedures logical traditions, ranging from theory-based approaches to for selecting cases suspected of sudden cardiac death, the evidence-based interventions. However, overarching fra- numberofautopsiesperformed,andtheextenttowhichthe meworks that bring together the range of models and per- heart is thoroughly examined as part of these autopsies, spectivesarelacking,andthebreadthofresearchisdifficult vary.Itneedstobeclarifiedatwhatstageandbywhomthe totranslateintoeffectivepractice.Researchhasconsistently familymembersareinformedandaskedforconsenttostore demonstrated that genetic counselling improves patient samplesorDNA.Itneedstobeclarifiedwhoisresponsible knowledge, risk perception and autonomy in decision- for storing the sample, for what purpose and by whom a making, decreases stigma, emotional distress and generates genetictestmaybeperformed.Forensicpathologistsand/or high satisfaction. Nevertheless, genetic counselling inter- medical examiners) may not have sufficient training and/or ventions are not traditionally evidence-based while a num- resources (including time) to properly interpret genetic ber of evidence-based psychological interventions are testing results. Further challenges include the transfer of already available. The presentation will focus on how information and samples from the forensic or medico-legal research, practice and training in genetic counselling could tothemedicaldomain.Insufficientcommunicationbetween take account of the efficacy of evidence-based psy- different medical specialties (i.e. pathology, cardiology and chotherapies such as cognitive and behavioural genetics), further hinders an adequate information of the psychotherapy. relatives of the deceased person.A list of recommendations R. Moldovan: None. will be presented to improve communication and attune- ment between professionals involved in post mortem ana- E12.2 lysis and genetics at a regional level as well as between Genetics and Family Dynamics: Navigating the differentrepresentingbodiesanddedicatedpolicymakersto Sometimes Bumpy Road to Effective improve adherence to existing guidelines whenever avail- Communication able, while suggesting further guidance in the absence of procedures. S. H. McDaniel Contributors: C. Basso, Padua, Italy; S. Boers, Utrecht, The Netherlands; P. Charron, Paris, France; A. Clarke, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, Cardiff, UK; M. Cornel, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; United States E. Delmarre, Angers, France; A. M. Duguet, Toulouse,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 35 Communicating genetic information is challenging Introduction: Adolescents and young adults(AYAs) aged because of the complexity and ambiguity of the scientific 15–39years at cancer diagnosis are uncommon. Hereditary information that must be transmitted by the clinician, and cancer predisposition syndromes confer significantly because the patient hears that information through filters increased risks of cancer at unusually young ages. Genetic that often include anxiety, idiosyncratic health beliefs, and mutations (somatic and/or germline) represent putative longstanding family dynamics. This talk will provide spe- therapeutic targets. The aim of this study is to investigate cific evidence-based, communication techniques for the the clinical and genomic assessment of AYAs with clinician to improve patient understanding of complex advanced solid tumours managed in a specialist drug information. It will also describe tools based on family development unit (DDU). systems theory to understand and plan for communication Methods:AYAstreatedintheDDUattheRoyalMarsden with patients and their families in ways that support the Hospital between 2002 and 2016, were identified from genetic information being heard, understood, and acted departmental databases. Data regarding clinicopathological upon. features, clinical assessments, and germline and tumour S.H. McDaniel: None. genetic testing were retrieved by electronic chart review. Results: 219 AYA patients were identified. The most common cancer types included sarcoma (42,18%); cervical E13 (27,12%); breast (25; 11%); ovarian (21,10%) and color- Network Medicine ectal(21,10%)cancers.TumourMolecularCharacterisation (MC) was performed by next generation sequencing in 45 E13.1 cases. Mutations were detected most commonly in TP53 Mining biological networks (14,31%); PIK3CA (8,18%); KRAS (4,9%) and MET (4,9%). Twenty-one patients were known to have a cancer N. Pržulj predisposition syndrome. Six others were referred to genetics or underwent mainstreamed genetic testing. Using London, United Kingdom current guidelines, a further 33 would now be eligible for mainstream BRCA1/2 testing and 5 for TP53 testing based No abstract received. on their personal history alone. In 108 cases, no family history was taken. E13.2 Discussion: A significant proportion of AYAs presenting Cellular Networks and Human diseases withadvancedtumourswillhavetargetablemutationsinthe somaorthegermline.Thoroughassessmentoffamilialrisk A. Sharma factors, and inclusion of germline testing in appropriate circumstances can complement tumour testing to help Boston, MA, United States optimize patient management. T.P.McVeigh:None.R.Sundar:None.N.Diamantis: No abstract received. None. S. Kaye: None. U. Banerji: None. J. Lopez: None. J.deBono:None.W.vanderGraaf:None.A.J.George: None. Concurrent Sessions C01.2 C01 Personalized Medicine and Pharmacogenomics Less is More: knockdown of the aberrant HBB IVSI-110(G>A) mRNA restores HBB expression and enhances gene therapy by gene addition in C01.1 primary erythroid cells The role of Next-generation sequencing in tumours in Adolescents and young adults (AYA) with P. Patsali1,2, P. Papasavva1,3, C. Stephanou1,2, S. Christou4, advancedsolidtumorsparticipatinginphase Itrials M. Sitarou4, M. Antoniou2, C. W. Lederer1, M. Kleanthous1 T. P. McVeigh, R. Sundar, N. Diamantis, S. Kaye, U. Banerji, J. Lopez, 1Department of Molecular Genetics Thalassaemia, The J. de Bono, W. van der Graaf, A. J. George Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics and Cyprus School of Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Depart- Royal Marsden NHS foundation trust, Sutton, United ment of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King’s College Kingdom London, London, United Kingdom, 3Cyprus School of36 Molecular Medicine, Nicosia, Cyprus, 4Thalassaemia Medicine, Radbound University Nijmegen Medical Center, Centre, Ministry of Health, Cyprus, Nicosia, Cyprus Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3K.G. Jebsen Coeliac Disease ResearchCentre,DepartmentofImmunology,Universityof Mutationsreducingβ-globinproductionandthuscausing Oslo, Oslo, Norway β-thalassemia are of global clinical importance. β-Tha- lassemia caused by the HBBIVSI-110(G>A) mutation (HGVS Introduction: Candida albicans (C. albicans) is the most name: HBB:c.93-21G>A), which produces an abnormal common opportunistic fungal pathogen, causing a blood- splice acceptor site, is particularly frequent in many Wes- stream infection (candidaemia). However, not all at-risk tern countries and causes severe thalassemia major in patients develop candidaemia, indicating that genetics homozygotes. influences their susceptibility to the infection. Preclinical and clinical studies have highlighted patients Materials and Methods: To identify novel susceptibility with HBBIVSI-110(G>A) as difficult to treat with gene therapy genes,wehaveperformedthefirstgenome-wideassociation by gene addition, suggesting an effect of the mutant locus analysis (GWAS) by using the largest candidaemia cohort onnormal,endogenousorvector-encoded,β-globinalleles. to date of European ancestry. Due to the cohort size lim- Towards improved gene-addition treatment of affected itations,wefollowedasystemsgeneticsapproachtoprofile patientsandsupposingthatthemutantlocusactsintransby genetic variants that showed association with known risk aberrant HBBIVSI-110(G>A)-derived mRNA, we therefore set factorsforcandidaemia,suchasneutrophilcounts,cytokine out to reduce the latter by RNA interference. We recog- production and transcriptome. Therefore, we profiled tran- nised, first in a novel humanised murine erythroleukemia scriptome response to C. albicans in peripheral blood + model and then in primary CD34 -derived erythroid cells mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of 75 healthy individuals and from HBBIVSI-110(G>A)-homozygous patients, that specific identified the Candida-response expression QTLs (eQTs). knock-down of the aberrant HBBIVSI-110(G>A) mRNA alone Candida-induced cytokine profiling in PBMCs from heal- results in extremely significant induction of β-globin pro- thy volunteers was also assessed and we mapped cytokine ductionfromthemutantlocus.Inprimarycellstheresulting QTLs (cQTLs). β-globinexpressionandphenotypiccorrectionoferythroid- Results: We identified EHD4 locus as the genome-wide lineage differentiation is equal to or exceeds that achieved significant region to be associated with candidaemia. We by same-sample control treatment with the clinically suc- further validated the role of EHD4 in regulation of IFNγ, a cessful GLOBE gene-therapy vector. Furthermore, combi- well-known pathway involved in anti-Candida host nation of HBBIVSI-110(G>A) knockdown with GLOBE results immune defense, using co-expression data upon Candida in significant improvement of both disease parameters stimulation. Three genome-wide significant QTLs influen- compared to either treatment alone. cingCandida-inducedcytokineproduction(IL6,TNF-aand This study establishes aberrant HBBIVSI-110(G>A) mRNA IL22), and one locus influencing IL17 production induced as the main causative agent of disease severity in - by Candida were identified. In addition, variants with HBBIVSI-110(G>A) thalassaemia and as a potent target for suggestive association (P<9.99×10−5) with candidaemia mutation-specific gene therapy for β-thalassaemia. It susceptibility identified to be associated with either neu- moreover puts forward HBBIVSI-110(G>A) thalassaemia as a tropenia or cytokine-QTLs. paradigm for the importance of allelic heterogeneity when Conclusions:Integrationoftranscriptionalresponses,cQTs applying gene therapy by gene addition. and genetic studiesincandidaemia patient cohort identified P. Patsali: None. P. Papasavva: None. C. Stephanou: several new susceptibility genes that may represent diag- None. S. Christou: None. M. Sitarou: None. M. Anto- nostic and therapeutic targets in candidaemia. niou: None. C.W. Lederer: None. M. Kleanthous: None. V. Matzaraki: None. M. Jaeger: None. R.A. Gamboa: None. S. Smeekens: None. M. Oosting: None. F. van de C01.3 Veerdonk:None.L.A.B.Joosten:None.Y.Li:None.M.G. A first genome-wide systems genetics approach Netea: None. C. Wijmenga: None. V. Kumar: None. identifies risk loci and pathways for candidaemia susceptibility C01.4 Whole genome sequencing yields medically V.Matzaraki1,M.Jaeger2,R.A.Gamboa1,S.Smeekens2,M.Oosting2, significant secondary variants in ~25% of a F. van de Veerdonk2, L. A. B. Joosten2, Y. Li1, M. G. Netea2, paediatric cohort C. Wijmenga1,3, V. Kumar1 M. Meyn1,2, S. C. Bowdin1,2, C. Marshall1,2, D. J. Stavropoulos1,2, 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Gro- R. Basran1, M. Reuter1, D. Merico1,3, R. Z. Hayeems1,2, M. Szego1,4,2, ningen (UMCG), Groningen, Netherlands, 2Department of R.ZlotnikShaul1,2,C.Shuman1,2,T.Nalpathamkalam1,G.Pellecchia1,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 37 B. Thiruvahindrapuram1, M. Girdea1,2, M. Brudno1,2, R. D. Cohn1,2, Significant; Gene42. R.D. Cohn: None. S.W. Scherer: S. W. Scherer1,2, P. N. Ray1,2, N. Monfared1 None. P.N. Ray: None. N. Monfared: None. 1Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2Uni- C01.5 versityofToronto,Toronto,ON,Canada,3DeepGenomics, Secondary actionable findings identified by whole- Inc., Toronto, ON, Canada, 4St. Joseph’s Health Centre exome sequencing from 693 consecutive tests: and St. Michael’s Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada implications for organization of care and patients? To pilot paediatric genomic medicine we developed the C. Thauvin-Robinet1, J. Thévenon1, S. Nambot1, P. Kuentz1, A. Bruel1, SickKids Genome Clinic, a research project centered on A. Chassagne1, E. Cretin1, O. Putois1, A. Pélissier1, C. Peyron1, diagnostic whole genome sequencing (WGS) of children E. Gautier1, J. Skrzypski2, D. Lehalle1, N. Jean-Marçais1, P. Callier1, undergoing genetic evaluation. With parents’ consent, we A. Mosca-Boidron1, C. Poe1, T. Jouan1, M. Chevarin1, M. Lefebvre1, also search for predictive secondary variants (PSVs) asso- E. Tisserant1, C. Binquet1,3, J. Deleuze4, Y. Duffourd1, L. Faivre1 ciated with occult or future disease. A search of 100 patients’ WGS data for candidate PSVs 1FHUTRANSLAD,CentreHospitalierUniversitaire,Dijon, affecting 3000+disease genes yielded 26 SNVs that met France, 2Centre Georges François Leclerc, Dijon, France, 2015 ACMGG criteria for pathogenic/likely pathogenic 3Inserm Centre d’investigation Clinique (CIC) 1432 Mod- classifications. An additional 10 SNVs were deemed ule Epidémiologie Clinique (EC) - CHU Dijon Bourgogne, returnable PSVs based on more limited evidence of patho- Dijon, France,4Centre national de génotypage, Evry, genicity. None of 610 CNVs that overlapped OMIM genes France were classified as PSVs. All PSVs were inherited and 9/36 predictedadultonsetdisease.Themajoritywererare(MAF Background: With the integration of whole exome <0.0001) variants that cause dominant Mendelian dis- sequencing (WES) in medicine practice, there is potential orders.Theremainderincludedvariantslinkedtoattenuated for the reporting of secondary findings unrelated to the Mendelianphenotypes,commondiseaseriskvariants,anX- indication for prescribing WES but of medical value for linked variant, and a protective variant. patient care. In 2013, the American College of Medical 25 children had one PSV, four children had two PSVs Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) examined the issue of and one child had three. Structured family histories per- secondary findings in WES/WGS, and introduced recom- formed before result disclosure were negative for disease mendations to report medically actionable variants in a states predicted by the secondary PSVs. However, follow- minimal set of 56 genes, recently updated to 59. ing disclosure, positive family histories related to thePSVs Methods: In order to evaluate the implications of these were obtained by targeted questioning in more than a third recommendationsintheorganizationofcare,weconducted of cases. Reverse phenotyping of children with PSVs and aretrospectivestudytoevaluatethefrequencyofvariantsin their first-degree relatives uncovered unsuspected disease a list of actionable genes in a cohort of 693 probands with and demonstrated incomplete penetrance. multiplecongenitalanomaliesexploredbyWES,aswellas Comprehensive genomic searching can yield PSVs in the extra work generated. ~25%ofchildren,mostlyrarefamilialmutationsassociated Results:Weidentified2.4%ofpatientswithpathogenicor with childhood disorders. While predictive WGS yields likely pathogenic variants in the 59 ACMG actionable false positives, it uncovers occult disease states and is genes (3.6% when extended to the Dorschner list). 10% of substantially more sensitive than family history for identi- patientswere heretozygous for a variant responsible for the fying familial genetic disorders. four most frequent autosomal recessive diseases in France. M. Meyn: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; If returned to patients, these results should induce 693 pre- Gene42. S.C. Bowdin: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; test and 96 post-test genetic consultations, and 31 specia- Modest; Gene42. C. Marshall: None. D.J. Stavropoulos: lised follow-up and additional family evaluations. Variant None.R.Basran:None.M.Reuter:None.D.Merico:A. interpretation took about 15min. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Deep Geno- Conclusions: This study evaluated consequences in terms mics, Inc.. R.Z. Hayeems: None. M. Szego: None. R. of organization of care. Although multiple surveys in var- Zlotnik Shaul: None. C. Shuman: None. T. Nalpatham- iouspopulationshavebeenmassivelyinfavourofreturning kalam: None. G. Pellecchia: None. B. Thiruvahin- suchresults,thisopportunityshouldbediscussedgiventhe drapuram: None. M. Girdea: E. Ownership Interest work overload generated, and the absence of large studies (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); evaluatingtheimpactoftransmittingsuchresultstoaffected Modest;Gene42.M.Brudno:E.OwnershipInterest(stock, patients/families. stock options, patent or other intellectual property);38 C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. J. Thévenon: None. cliniciansforaproperfollow-up.Givingfeedbackonhigh- S. Nambot: None. P. Kuentz: None. A. Bruel: None. risk genetic variants to currently healthy individuals may A. Chassagne: None. E. Cretin: None. O. Putois: have a large psychosocial impact. This needs to be further None. A. Pélissier: None. C. Peyron: None. E. Gautier: studied, together with the individual’s compliance to man- None. J. Skrzypski: None. D. Lehalle: None. N. Jean- agementrecommendations.Thisresearchwassupportedby Marçais: None. P. Callier: None. A. Mosca-Boidron: the EU project 2014–2020.4.01.15–0012 and PUT736 None. C. Poe: None. T. Jouan: None. M. Chevarin: personal grant. None. M. Lefebvre: None. E. Tisserant: None. C. Bin- M.Palover:None. L.Leitsalu: None.A.Reigo: None. quet: None. J. Deleuze: None. Y. Duffourd: None. T.Nikopensius:None.K.Vaiküll:None.M.Kals:None. L. Faivre: None. P. Padrik: None. T. Esko: None. A. Metspalu: None. N. Tonisson: None. C01.6 Genetics-first analysis of high-risk variants for breast, ovarian and prostate cancer in participants C02 of Estonian Genome Center Neurogenetics 1 M. Palover1, L. Leitsalu1, A. Reigo1, T. Nikopensius1, K. Vaiküll1, C02.1 M. Kals1, P. Padrik2,3,4, T. Esko1,5, A. Metspalu1,6, N. Tonisson1,7 Allele-specific silencing as therapeutic strategy for disorders due to gene duplication: a proof-of- 1Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, principle in Autosomal Dominant LeukoDystrophy Estonia, 2Haematology-Oncology Clinic, Tartu University (ADLD) Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 3Cancer Center, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 4Institute of Clinical Medicine, E. Giorgio1, A. Bartoletti-Stella2, A. Brussino1, C. Mancini1, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 5Broad Institute, S. Cavalieri3, M. Ferrero1, E. Di Gregorio3, E. Pozzi1, E. Riberi4, Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Institute of Molecular L. Gasparini5, P. Cortelli2, S. Capellari2, A. Brusco1 and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 7Dept. of Clinical Genetics in Tallinn, Tartu University 1UniversityofTorino-Dept.MedicalSciences,Torino,Italy, Hospital, Tallinn, Estonia 2University of Bologna-Dept. of Biomedical and Neuro- motor Sciences,Bologna, Italy, 3“Città della Salute e della The American College of Medical Genetics and Geno- Scienza” University Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Tor- mics has published a minimum list of 59 genes that should ino, Italy, 4University of Torino, Dept. Public Health and be reported back if found mutated in clinical sequencing. Pediatrics, Torino, Italy, 5Dept. Neuroscience and Brain We are adapting these recommendations for genomic ana- Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Torino, Italy lyses in Estonian Genome Center to favour personalized management and early detection. Hereditary breast and Allele-SPecific silencing by RNA Interference (ASP- ovarian cancer (HBOC) was selected as one of primary iRNA) allows to specifically inhibiting the expression of candidates for the participant feedback as it has the highest disease-causing alleles with minimal suppression of the frequency in our dataset, together with familial hypercho- corresponding wild-type alleles. This therapeutic strategy lesterolemia. By Estonian Gene Research Act, the biobank has been effectively used to target dominant activating participants have a right to know about their genetic data. mutations or SNPs in cis with aberrantly expanded trinu- To date, we have identified 34 individuals with 9 known cleotide repeats. We reasoned that ASP-iRNA could be and expected pathogenic variants (3 recurrent variants, exploited also in genetic diseases due to gene duplication. 6 singletons) in BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. 18 individuals Here, we demonstrate its efficacy in Autosomal Dominant wereidentifiedfromwholegenomesequencingdata(WGS; LeukoDystrophy (ADLD), a fatal disorder associated with n=2240) and additional 16 individuals by using long- CNS demyelination. As ADLD is caused by LMNB1 gene range haplotyping. So far, 9 participants have visited duplication-mediatedoverexpression,theparamountchoice Estonian Genome Center for additional validation. 3 of 9 for ADLD treatment would be a drug capable of restoring had been diagnosed with breast and prostate cancer; 8 of 9 physiological levels of LMNB1 expression without the had a positive family history of HBOC-related malig- deleterious side effects of an excessive gene knock-down. nancies. Based on WGS data from 2240 individuals, the ADLD patients have three, equally expressed, LMNB1 prevalence of BRCA1 and BRCA2 high-risk variants in alleles. Hence, we chose to target the non-duplicated allele Estonia is approximately 1/125. Therefore, it will be by ASP-siRNA, exploiting a frequent coding SNP. We extremely important to establish a close collaboration with designedandscreenedasiRNAlibrary centredontheSNPAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 39 and evaluated siRNAs efficacy and specificity by using a Surprisingly, both CHRNA7 gains and losses result in customized dual reporter system. We identified four siR- decreasedα7-specificcalciumfluxinpatient-derivedNPCs. NAs with a high efficacy (p<0.0001) and allele-specificity While this is puzzling considering the genomic and (p<0.001). These were further tested in four ADLD expressiondata,itdoesmirrorclinicalphenotypesobserved patient-derived fibroblast lines. Three siRNAs selectively in patients. Deletions likely have decreased calcium flux silenced the target allele (p<0.0005) and restored LMNB1 due to haploinsufficiency of CHRNA7. Overexpression of mRNA level to the wild type. Notably, siRNA treatments α7 subunits from duplications, on the other hand, result in restored LMNB1 protein to physiological levels and ERstress,likelyduetoinsufficientchaperonesrequiredfor improved ADLD-specific cellular alterations, corroborating folding, assembly, and trafficking of nAChRs. Subse- ASP-iRNA therapeutic potential in ADLD. Our work quently, fewer functional receptors reach the cell mem- represents a proof-of-principle in the use of ASP-RNAi in brane. For both deletions and duplications, the decreased genetic disorders with gene overexpression, opening new calciumfluxresultsindown-regulationofcalciumsignaling therapeutic possibilities for all Mendelian and syndromic cascades, which may explain the neurobehavioral pheno- disorders associated with gene(s) duplication. types observed in patients. E. Giorgio: None. A. Bartoletti-Stella: None. M.A. Gillentine: None. J. Yin: None. S. Cummock: A. Brussino: None. C. Mancini: None. S. Cavalieri: None. J.J. Kim: None. A. Bajic: None. C.P. Schaaf: None.M.Ferrero:None.E.DiGregorio:None.E.Pozzi: None. None. E. Riberi: None. L. Gasparini: None. P. Cortelli: None. S. Capellari: None. A. Brusco: None. C02.3 17q21.31 duplication causes prominent Tau-related C02.2 Dementia with Increased MAPT expression CHRNA7 CNVs: shared clinical phenotypes mediated by differing molecular mechanisms K. Le Guennec1, O. Quenez1, G. Nicolas1, D. Wallon2, S. Rousseau1, A. Richard1, J. Alexander3, P. Paschou3, C. Charbonnier1, M. A. Gillentine1, J. Yin1, S. Cummock2, J. J. Kim3, A. Bajic1, C. P. C. Bellenguez4,5,6, B. Grenier-Boley4,5,6, D. Lechner7, M. Bihoreau7, Schaaf1 R. Olaso7, A. Boland7, V. Meyer7, J. Deleuze7,8, P. Amouyel4,5,6, H. Munter9, G. Bourque9, M. Lathrop9, T. Frébourg10, R. Redon11,12, 1Baylor College of Medicine/Jan and Dan Neurological L. Letenneur13,14, J. Dartigues13,14, O. Martinaud15, O. Kalev16, Research Institute, Houston, TX, United States, 2Jan and S. Mehrabian17, L. Traykov17, T. Ströbel18, I. Le Ber19, P. Caroppo19, Dan Neurological Research Institute, Houston, TX, United S. Epelbaum19, T. Jonveaux20, F. Pasquier21, A. Rollin-Sillaire21, States,3BaylorCollegeofMedicineHumanStemCellCore, E. Génin22, L. Guyant-Maréchal23, G. Kovacs18, J. Lambert4,5,6, Houston, TX, United States D. Hannequin24, D. Campion1,25, A. Rovelet-Lecrux1, CNR-MAJ collaborators Chromosome15q13.3isanextremelyunstableregionin the genome with multiple pathogenic recurrent copy num- 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen ber variants (CNVs) observed. Probands with 15q13.3 University Hospital, Department of Genetics and CNR- deletions present with cognitive deficits, epilepsy, and aut- MAJ, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and Per- ism spectrum disorder (ASD), while duplication probands sonalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 2Normandie Univ, have a milder phenotype including borderline cognitive UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospi- deficits, ASD, and ADHD. Encoding for the α7 nicotinic tal, Department of Neurology and CNR-MAJ, F 76000, acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) highly expressed in the NormandyCenterforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, brain,CHRNA7hasbeensuggestedasacandidategenefor Rouen, France, 3Department of Molecular Biology and these CNVs. Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexan- We have utilized patient-derived induced pluripotent dropouli,Greece, 4Inserm, U1167, RID-AGE -Risk factors stem cellsand differentiated neural progenitor cells(NPCs) and molecular determinants of aging-related diseases, F- to determine the molecular phenotypes of 15q13.3 CNVs. 59000, Lille, France, 5Institut Pasteur de Lille, F-59000, Inthesecells,mRNAlevelsofgeneswithin15q13.3CNVs Lille, France, 6University Lille, U1167 - Excellence correlate to their genomic copy number. For CHRNA7 Laboratory LabEx DISTALZ, F-59000, Lille, France, duplications, we are able to show that the entire CHRNA7 7Centre National de Génotypage, Institut de Génomique, gene is duplicated, resulting in mRNA overexpression. CEA, Evry, France, 8Fondation Jean Dausset, Centre Importantly,smallduplicationsthatincludethefirstexonof d’études du Polymorphisme Humain, Paris, France, OTUD7A do not appear to disrupt its expression. 9McGillUniversityandGénomeQuébecInnovationCentre, Montréal, QC, Canada, 10Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN,40 Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department O. Martinaud: None. O. Kalev: None. S. Mehrabian: of Genetics, F 76000, Normandy Center for Genomic and None. L. Traykov: None. T. Ströbel: None. I. Le Ber: Personalized Medicine, Rouen, France, 11Inserm, UMR None. P. Caroppo: None. S. Epelbaum: None. T. Jon- 1087, l’institut du thorax, CHU Nantes, Nantes, France, veaux:None.F.Pasquier:None.A.Rollin-Sillaire:None. 12CNRS,UMR6291,UniversitédeNantes,Nantes,France, E.Génin:None.L.Guyant-Maréchal:None.G.Kovacs: 13INSERM, U1219, Bordeaux, France, 14Université de None. J. Lambert: None. D. Hannequin: None. Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France, 15Rouen UniversityHospital, D. Campion: None. A. Rovelet-Lecrux: None. Department of Neurology and CNR-MAJ, F 76000, Nor- mandy Center for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, C02.4 Rouen, France, 16Institute of Pathology and Neu MCM3AP in recessive axonal neuropathy and mild intellectual disability Introduction:Associationanalysesbasedonwhole-exome sequencing (WES) data have highlighted the genetic con- E.Ylikallio1,R.Woldegebriel1,M.Tumiati1,P.Isohanni1,M.M.Ryan2, tribution of rare single nucleotide variants and indels in Z. Stark2, W. Maie2, S. L. Sawyer3, K. M. Bell2, A. Oshlack2, P. L. Alzheimer Disease (AD). The study of copy-number var- Lockhart2, M. Shcherbii1, A. Estrada-Cuzcano4, D. Atkinson4, iations (CNVs) in large case-control series was initially T. Hartley3, M. Tetreault5, I. Cuppen6, W. L. van der Pol6, restricted to chip-based analysis focusing on large and fre- A. Candayan7, E. Battaloglu7, Y. Parman8, K.L. I. van Gassen6, M.H. quentCNVs.Thedevelopmentofnewalgorithmsdedicated van den Boogaard6, K. M. Boycott3, L. Kauppi1, A. Jordanova4, toCNVsallowsthedetectionfromWESdataofrare,exon- T. Lönnqvist1, H. Tyynismaa1 scale rearrangements. Methods: To assess the role of rare CNVs in AD, we 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Murdoch Chil- conducted a case-control study using WES data from 522 drensResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia,3Children’s early-onset AD cases (onset before 65 years) and 584 Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Ottawa, controls using CANOES, a software based on read depth ON, Canada, 4University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium, comparison. 5McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada, 6University Results: The most recurrent rearrangement, found in 4 Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Bogazici unrelated cases and absent in controls, was a 17q21.31 University, Istanbul, Turkey, 8Istanbul University, Istanbul, microduplication, reciprocal to the Koolen-De Vries syn- Turkey dromemicrodeletion,overlappingCRHR1,MAPT,STHand KANSL1. Interestingly, one was de novo, and one was Defects in mRNA export from the nucleus have been cosegregating in a large pedigree. Duplication carriers linked to various neurodegenerative disorders. We report exhibited increased expression of the MAPT mRNA; clin- mutations in the gene MCM3AP, encoding the germinal ical signs, neuroimaging and CSF biomarker profiles were center associated nuclear protein (GANP), in nine affected consistentwithanADdiagnosis,butamyloidPETimaging individuals from five unrelated families. The variants were was negative. Neuropathological examination confirmed associated with severe childhood onset axonal (four famil- that the MAPT duplication causes a complex tauopathy ies) or demyelinating (one family) Charcot-Marie-Tooth including prominent neurofibrillary tangle pathology, but neuropathy (CMT). Mild to moderate intellectual disability without Aβ deposits, yet a hallmark of AD. (ID)waspresentinsixoutofnineaffectedindividuals.The Conclusion: 17q21.31 duplication is therefore the genetic affectedindividuals wereeither compound heterozygous or basis of a novel entity characterized by prominent tauo- homozygous for different MCM3AP variants, which were pathy, leading to early-onset dementia with an AD clinical predicted to cause depletion of GANP or affect conserved phenotype. This entity could account for a proportion of amino acids with likely importance for its function. probable AD cases with negative amyloid PET imaging Accordingly, fibroblasts of affected individuals from one recently identified in large clinical series. familydemonstratedseveredepletionofGANP.GANPhas K. Le Guennec: None. O. Quenez: None. G. Nicolas: been described to function as an mRNA export factor, and None.D.Wallon:None.S.Rousseau:None.A.Richard: tosuppressTDP-43-mediatedmotorneurondegenerationin None. J. Alexander: None. P. Paschou: None. C. Char- flies.ThusourresultssuggestdefectivemRNAexportfrom bonnier: None. C. Bellenguez: None. B. Grenier-Boley: nucleus as a potential pathogenic mechanism of axonal None. D. Lechner: None. M. Bihoreau: None. R. Olaso: degeneration in these patients. The identification of None. A. Boland: None. V. Meyer: None. J. Deleuze: MCM3AP variants in affected individuals from multiple None.P.Amouyel:None.H.Munter:None.G.Bourque: centers establishes it as a disease gene for childhood-onset None.M.Lathrop:None.T.Frébourg:None.R.Redon: recessively inherited CMT with ID. None. L. Letenneur: None. J. Dartigues: None.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 41 This work was supported by Academy of Finland, channels at the active zones, thereby impairing the fidelity Melbourne Genomic Health Alliance, Care4Rare Canada, of synaptic transmission. In humans, BZRAP1 (TSPOAP1) BogaziciUniversity,FundforScientificResearch-Flanders. encoding RIMBP1 has not been associated with any Men- E. Ylikallio: None. R. Woldegebriel: None. delian disorders. M.Tumiati:None.P.Isohanni:None.M.M.Ryan:None. We performed exome sequencing in an Estonian Z. Stark: None. W. Maie: None. S.L. Sawyer: None. patient with progressive generalized dystonia with onset at K.M. Bell: None. A. Oshlack: None. P.L. Lockhart: 12 years of age. A homozygous stop-gain mutation None. M. Shcherbii: None. A. Estrada-Cuzcano: None. c.2449_2450delinsTG p.(Gln817*) (RefSeq NM_004758.3) D. Atkinson: None. T. Hartley: None. M. Tetreault: in a BZRAP1 was identified. Using GeneMatcher, another None. I. Cuppen: None. W.L. van der Pol: None. family originating from India was found with three sibs A. Candayan: None. E. Battaloglu: None. Y. Parman: affected by generalized dystonia that carried a segregating None. K.L.I. van Gassen: None. M.H. van den Boo- homozygous frameshift mutation in BZRAP1 (c.538delG p. gaard: None. K.M. Boycott: None. L. Kauppi: None. (Ala180Profs*9)). Importantly, there are no homozygous A. Jordanova: None. T. Lönnqvist: None. H. Tyy- loss-of-function (LoF) mutations in gnomAD database of nismaa: None. 141,352 individuals, supporting the pathogenicity of these mutations. C02.5 The shared features between homozygous LoF mutation BZRAP1 (RIM-BP1) mutations cause a novel carriers were onset of dystonia in the second decade, pro- autosomal recessive dystonia syndrome gressive decline in cognitive performance, progressive cerebellar atrophy, and marginally low 5- S. Pajusalu1,2, N. E. Mencacci3,4, B. Atasu5,6, R. Rein7, S. Puusepp1,2, methyltetrahydrofolate in cerebrospinal fluid. A muscle K. Reinson1,2, T. Tomberg8, S. Wiethoff3, A. Papandreou9, T. T. biopsyindicatedasynapticdefectintheEstonianpatient.In Warner3, B. Balint10,11, K. P. Bhatia10, T. Gasser5,6, J. Simon- addition, a patient from Turkey carrying homozygous Sanchez5,6, M. A. Kurian9, C. Acuna12, M. Pak13, E. Lohmann5,6,13, missense mutation (c.5422G>A p.(Gly1808Ser)) was N. Wood3, K. Õunap1,2 identified with a significantly milder phenotype, consisting of adult-onset cervical and upper-limb dystonia, without 1Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, any evidence of cerebellar atrophy. Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 2Department of In conclusion, we describe the novel gene-phenotype ClinicalGenetics,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,University association of biallelic mutations in BZRAP1 gene causing of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Department of Molecular Neu- autosomal recessive dystonia syndrome. Functional studies roscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United areinprogresstocharacterizethepathogenesisofBZRAP1- Kingdom, 4Department of Neurology, Northwestern Uni- related disorder. versity, Chicago, IL, United States, 5Hertie Institute for Funding: Estonian Science Foundation PUT355; German ClinicalBrainResearch,UniversityofTübingen,Tübingen, Research Foundation GA402/23-1, LO2046/2-1; Depart- Germany,6GermanCenterforNeurodegenerativeDiseases ment of Health’s NIHR Biomedical Research Centers (DZNE)-Tübingen,Tübingen,Germany,7Children’sClinic, S. Pajusalu: None. N.E. Mencacci: None. B. Atasu: Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 8Radiology None. R. Rein: None. S. Puusepp: None. K. Reinson: Clinic, Tartu University Hospital, Tartu, Estonia, 9Mole- None. T. Tomberg: None. S. Wiethoff: None. cular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences Pro- A. Papandreou: None. T.T. Warner: None. B. Balint: gramme, UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United None. K.P. Bhatia: None. T. Gasser: None. J. Simon- Kingdom, 10Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience, Sanchez: None. M.A. Kurian: None. C. Acuna: None. UCL Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom, M. Pak: None. E. Lohmann: None. N. Wood: None. 11Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, K. Õunap: None. Heidelberg, Germany, 12Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology and Howard Hughes Medical Insti- C02.6 tute,StanfordUniversitySchoolofMedicine,Stanford,CA, De novo mutations in regulatory elements cause United States, 13Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department neurodevelopmental disorders of Neurology, Behavioral Neurology and Movement Dis- orders Unit, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey P. Short1, J. McRae1, G. Gallone1, S. Gerety1, C. Wright1, H. Firth1,2, D. FitzPatrick1,3, J. Barrett1, M. Hurles1, on behalf of the DDD study RIM-binding proteins (RIMBPs) are large multidomain activezoneproteinsthatbindtocalciumchannels.Inmice, 1Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United King- deletion of RIM-BPs disrupts localization of calcium dom, 2East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge,42 United Kingdom, 3MRC Human Genetics Unit, University Germany, 4Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Napoli of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Federico II, and INFN Napoli, CNR-SPIN, Complesso Universitario di Monte Sant’Angelo, Naples, Italy, De novo mutations in hundreds of different genes col- 5Department of Computational Molecular Biology, Max lectively cause 25–42% of severe developmental disorders Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, (DD).Thecauseintheremainingcasesislargelyunknown. 6Department Developmental Genetics, Max Planck Institute The role of de novo mutations in regulatory elements in for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 7Epigenetic severe developmental disorders is largely unexplored. We Regulation and Chromatin Architecture Group, Berlin identified de novo mutations in three classes of putative Institute for Medical Systems Biology, Max-Delbrück Center regulatory elements in almost 8,000 DD patients and find for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany that de novo mutations in highly evolutionarily conserved elements active in the fetal brain are significantly and spe- The 3D folding of the genome and especially the orga- cifically enriched in neurodevelopmental disorders. We nization of topologically associating domains (TADs) can identified a significant two-fold enrichment of recurrently bedisruptedbygenomicrearrangements,suchasdeletions, mutatedelements.Weestimatethat,genome-wide,denovo duplications or inversions, collectively called structural mutations in fetal-brain active elements are likely to be variants (SVs). SVs can originate a re-wiring of enhancer- diagnosticfor1–3%ofpatientswithoutapathogeniccoding promoter contacts, gene misexpression and disease. How- variant and that only a small fraction (<1%) of de novo ever,thepredictionofsucheffectsremainsachallenge.We mutations in these elements are pathogenic with high present a polymer physics based approach (PRISMR) to penetrance. Using sequence data from 13,000 unaffected model chromatin folding and predict enhancer-promoter parents, we show that identifying strongly deleterious var- contacts. Our PRISMR algorithm aims to find the minimal iants in regulatory elements is not possible using current number, types and position of binding sites in a String&- tools,highlightingtheneedforimprovedmethodstostratify Binders (SBS) polymer chain, that best reproduce an input moreorlessdamagingvariationinregulatoryelements.Our contact matrix of a given chromosomal locus. Using the findingsrepresentarobustestimateofthecontributionofde EPHA4 locus as a model, the effects of pathogenic SVs novo mutations in regulatory elements to this genetically were predicted in-silico and compared tocaptureHi-Cdata heterogeneous set of disorders, and emphasise the impor- from mouse limb buds and patient-derived fibroblasts. tanceofcombiningfunctionalandevolutionaryevidenceto PRISMRdeconvolvesthefoldingcomplexityoftheEPHA4 delineate regulatory causes of genetic disorders. locus, and identifies SV-induced alterations of 3D genome P. Short: None. J. McRae: None. G. Gallone: None. organization in homozygous and heterozygous states. S. Gerety: None. C. Wright: None. H. Firth: None. PRISMR accuratelypredicts the specific genomic positions D.FitzPatrick:None.J.Barrett:None.M.Hurles:None. with ectopic contacts that produce extensive rewiring of regulatory interactions, causing disease by gene mis- expression. PRISMR canbe usedtopredictinteractions in- C04 silico thereby providing a tool for analyzing the disease Epigenetics and Gene Regulation causingpotentialofSVs.Furthermore,PRISMRcanalsobe used when affected tissues or equivalent cell types are not C04.1 available.Thus,polymermodellingbyPRISMRemergesas Polymer physics predicts the effects of structural a valid method to facilitate the interpretation and diagnosis variants on chromatin architecture of this type of genomic rearrangements. Funding: DFG, MPF, BIH, CINECA ISCRA, INFN, D. G. Lupiáñez1,2,3, S. Bianco4, A. M. Chiariello4, C. Annunziatella4, Scope atthe University ofNaples andEinstein BIHgrants/ K. Kraft1,2, R. Schöpflin5, L. Wittler6, G. Andrey1, M. Vingron5, fellowships. A. Pombo7, S. Mundlos1,2,3, M. Nicodemi4 D.G. Lupiáñez: None. S. Bianco: None. A.M. Chiar- iello: None. C. Annunziatella: None. K. Kraft: None. 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, RG Develop- R. Schöpflin: None. L. Wittler: None. G. Andrey: None. ment and Disease, Berlin, Germany, 2Institute for Medical M. Vingron: None. A. Pombo: None. S. Mundlos: None. and Human Genetics, Charité – Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, M. Nicodemi: None. Germany, 3Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité – Universitätsmedizin, Berlin,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 43 C04.2 C04.3 Changes in chromatin interaction dynamics at the Generating large-scale datasets of mutational PITX1 locus cause congenital limb malformations effects for interpreting regulatory variants M. Spielmann1,2, B. Kragesteen1, C. Paliou1, R. Schoepflin1, M.Kircher1,2,F.Inoue3,C.Xiong3,B.Martin2,N.Ahituv3,J.Shendure2 V. Heinrich1, I. Harabula1, D. Lupianez1, M. Franke1, M. Hochradel1, K. Kraft1, I. Jerkovic1, L. Wittler1, S. Mundlos1, G. Andrey1 1Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, 2Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 1Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, WA, United States, 3Department of Bioengineering and Germany, 2University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United Therapeutic Sciences, Institute for Human Genetics, Uni- States versity of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States Non-coding genomic diversity critically impacts funda- mental biological processes (e.g. gene regulation, 3D The use of sequencing approaches for the identification chromatinfolding),andcancontributetohumandisease.In of disease causal mutations is rapidly gaining traction. thisstudy,wesystematicallyinvestigatedthecis-regulatory However, interpretation of the identified variants remains a landscapeofPITX1,ahindlimbspecifictranscriptionfactor. major challenge. When scaling from exome to genome Mutationsandnon-codingstructuralvariationsatthePITX1 sequencing, the vast majority of variants fall in non-coding locus have been shown to associate with a variety of con- regions. However, we currently have a very limited toolset genital limb defects, including clubfeet, polydactyly, and for their interpretation and almost no training data that can arm-to-leg transformation. We performed in vivo enhancer be applied for machine learning strategies. reporter assays in transgenic mice and identified several Recently, we enhanced our massively parallel reporter limbenhancerelementsatthePitx1locus;surprisinglythey assays(MPRAs)todirectlyquantifyeffectsfromRNAtag- all showed both forelimb and hindlimb activity, although sequencing read-outs and developed a lentiviral integration Pitx1 is never expressed in the forelimb. We termed this system for MPRA (lentiMPRA), achieving replicate corre- regulatory region the “pan-limb enhancer.” Chromosome lations of 0.92–0.98 depending on the type of assay (Inoue confirmation capture experiments (Capture Hi-C) in mouse & Kircher et al. 2016). We believe that the broad cell-type limb buds revealed a tissue-specific chromatin organization range of lentivirus transduction will permit MPRAs to be atthePitx1locus,whichuniquelyenableshindlimb-specific conducted in neurons, primary cells or organoids. contact between the Pitx1 promoter and the pan-limb In a second effort, we scaled saturation mutagenesis enhancer. To investigate whether this tissue-specific chro- MPRAs to empirically measure effects of>20,000 point matinfoldingplaysacausalrole,weusedCRISPR/Cas9to mutations in human disease associated cis-regulatory ele- generate a set of deletions and inversions in the Pitx1 cis- ments. More specifically, we aimed to generate variant- regulatory region in mice. Genetic perturbations of this specific activity maps for more than 20 clinically relevant regulated chromosomal conformation led to ectopic fore- promoter (F9, HBB, TERT and others) and enhancer limb expression of Pitx1 and an arm-to-leg transformation sequences (SORT1, RET and others). For example, using inmiceandinhumanpatients.Ourdatahighlighthownon- our map of the TERT core promoter, we rediscovered pre- codingmutationsaffectingchromatinfoldingcancontribute viously identified activating mutations and were able to to congenital disease, and give new insights into PITX1- assign activating effects to variants of unknown sig- associated limb defects. nificance; comparing across cell-types we further mapped M.Spielmann:None.B.Kragesteen:None.C.Paliou: the effects of mutations to an E2F-repressor site. Our None. R. Schoepflin: None. V. Heinrich: None. I. experiments provide a rich dataset for benchmarking pre- Harabula: None. D. Lupianez: None. M. Franke: None. dictive models of variant effects and an unprecedented M.Hochradel:None.K.Kraft:None.I.Jerkovic:None. databasefortheinterpretationofpotentiallydisease-causing L. Wittler: None. S. Mundlos: None. G. Andrey: None. regulatory mutations. M. Kircher: None. F. Inoue: None. C. Xiong: None. B. Martin: None. N. Ahituv: None. J. Shendure: None.44 C04.4 None. C. Borel: None. D. Marbach: None. D. Lampar- Local regulatory networks across two tissues and ter: None. M. Wiederkehr: None. S. Bergmann: None. applications to analyze rare non-coding variants P. Bucher: None. S.E. Antonarakis: None. E.T. Dermitzakis: None. A. Reymond1, O. Delaneau2, M. Zazhytska1, K. Popadin1, S. Kumar3, G. Ambrosini4, A. Gschwind1, C. Borel2, D. Marbach5, D. Lamparter5, C04.5 M. Wiederkehr1, S. Bergmann5, P. Bucher3, S. E. Antonarakis2, E. T. Cis-Regulatory Noncoding Elements, the hidden Dermitzakis2 master weavers of CDH1 expression: lessons from HDGC patients 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Dpt of Genetic Medicine, Uni- A. S. Valente1, H. Pinheiro1, P. Oliveira1, J. Carvalho1, R. Bordeira- versity of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Ecole Poly- Cariço2, S. Sousa1, G. Almeida1, J. Bessa2, D. Huntsman3,4,5, technique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, C. Oliveira1,6 4EcolePolytechniquedeLausanne,Lausanne,Switzerland, 5Dpt of Computational Biology, University of Lausanne, 1Ipatimup/i3S, Porto, Portugal, 2IBMC/i3S, Porto, Portu- Lausanne, Switzerland gal, 3Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Populationmeasurementsofgeneexpressionandgenetic 4Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics (CTAG), variation enable the discovery of thousands of expression BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 5Genetic Quantitative Trait Loci (eQTL), an extensive resource to Pathology Evaluation Centre, University of British determine the function of non-coding variants. To describe Columbia and Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, the effects of eQTL on regulatory elements such as BC, Canada, 6Faculty of Medicine of the University of enhancers and promoters, we quantified gene expression Porto, Porto, Portugal (mRNA) and three key histone modifications (H3K4me1, H3K4me3 and H3K27ac) across two cell types, 320 Lym- Introduction: Half of Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer phoblastoid Cell Lines and 80 Fibroblasts densely geno- (HDGC) families lack genetic diagnosis. We hypothesize typed European samples. We find that nearby regulatory that this rare monogenic cancer-syndrome is caused by elements form local chromatin modules (LCM) often intronic cis-regulatory variants in the major disease- comprising multiple sub-compartments and overlapping causative gene, CDH1/E-cadherin. Supporting our hypoth- topologically associating domains (TADs). These modules esis, we demonstrated that most CDH1 coding mutation- bringmultipledistalregulatoryelementsincloseproximity, negativeHDGCfamilies,lackingcodingmutationsinother vary substantially across cell types and drive co-expression genes,displaygermlineCDH1-monoallelicdownregulation of multiple genes. This regulation is under strong genetic and aberrant E-cadherin expression in tumours. Herein, we control as ~34,000 chromatin QTLs (cQTLs) affect ~30% aim at disclosing the functional role of CDH1 intronic cis- of the histone marks and as ~70% of LCMs are associated regulatory elements (iCREs) and the impact of their dis- with QTLs. These LCMs empower association studies of ruption in CDH1/E-cadherin expression. rare variants when whole genome sequencing is available. Methods: We sequenced (NGS) the full CDH1 locus of Using the Geuvadis transcriptomic data we unravel that >200bonafideHDGCCDH1-negativefamilies.Noncoding expression of ~20% of genes is associated with rare non- variants (NCVs) were bioinformatically prioritized accord- coding variants in modules, for example. Coordination ing to their absence from public genome databases and between regulatory elements located on different chromo- rareness within this cohort. NCVs were integrated with somes (i.e. in trans) is well supported by Hi-C sequencing regulatory functional annotation to select iCREs, whose data and seem to drive in some cases trans eQTL effects. function was evaluated through in vitro and in vivo (zeb- Wereplicatedupto80%ofthestrongestinter-chromosomal rafish) reporter assays and CRISPR-Cas9-mediated iCRE Hi-C contacts. Overall, this large-scale study integrating deletion. gene expression, chromatin activity and genetic variation Results: Twelve potential iCREs were defined within acrosstwocelltypesandhundredsofsamplesprovideskey CDH1. We found that 2/12 act as enhancers in vitro and insights into the biology underlying gene regulation and invivo,butitsenhancerfunctionwasabrogatedbyrandom eQTLs. point mutations. Homozygous deletion of iCREs in cell A. Reymond: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; lines led to massive CDH1 mRNA downregulation and E- Gene Predictis, Lausanne, Saphetor, Lausanne. O. Dela- cadherin loss of expression, while heterozygous deleted neau: None. M. Zazhytska: None. K. Popadin: None. clones showed a strong monoallelic downregulation, reca- S. Kumar: None. G. Ambrosini: None. A. Gschwind: pitulatingthephenotypeobservedinHDGCpatients.TheseAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 45 resultssupportourassumptionthatidentifiediCREsaretrue separating excitatory and inhibitory populations and also regulatory elements modulating CDH1/E-cadherin identified distinct inhibitory cells. The data further allowed expression. an accurate classification of pyramidal neurons in super- Conclusion: High numbers of clinically homogeneous ficialversusinnerlayersofmousefrontalcortex.Thesingle HDGC families and a locus-targeted approach allowed cell Methyl-Seq method will enable unbiased characteriza- identifying new CDH1 inactivating mechanisms likely tion of brain epigenomic diversity without the need for causative in HDGC. Support: Portuguese FCT and Amer- isolation of specific cell populations. ican NSFC Foundation. L. Kurihara: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- A.S. Valente: None. H. Pinheiro: None. P. Oliveira: nificant; Swift Biosciences. C. Luo: None. E. Mukamel: None. J. Carvalho: None. R. Bordeira-Cariço: None. None. R. Castanon: None. J. Lucero: None. J. Nery: S. Sousa: None. G. Almeida: None. J. Bessa: None. None.C.Keown:None.T.Harkins:A.Employment(full D. Huntsman: None. C. Oliveira: None. or part-time); Significant; Swift Biosciences. M. Behrens: None. J. Ecker: None. C04.6 Single Cell Methyl-Seq for Analysis of Epigenomic Diversity in Mammalian Brain C05 Skin and Bones L. Kurihara1,C.Luo2, E. Mukamel3,R. Castanon4,J.Lucero5,J.Nery4, C. Keown3, T. Harkins1, M. Behrens5, J. Ecker2 C05.1 Mutations in three genes encoding proteins 1SwiftBiosciences, AnnArbor,MI,United States, 2Howard involved in hair shaft formation cause uncombable Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk Institute for Biological hair syndrome Studies, La Jolla, CA, United States, 3Department of Cog- nitive Science, University of California, San Diego, La F. Ü. Basmanav1, L. Cau2, A. Tafazzoli1, M. Méchin2, S. Wolf1, Jolla, CA, United States, 4Genomic Analysis Laboratory, M. Romano1, F. Valentin3, H. Wiegmann3, A. Huchenq2, N. Garcia The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, Bartels4,A.Kilic5,S.George6,D.J.Ralser1,D.J.Ferguson7,H.Thiele8, United States, 5Computational Neurobiology Laboratory, J. Altmüller8, P. Nürnberg8, A. Büchner9, L. Weibel9, N. Wagner10, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, R. Grimalt11, A. Bygum12, G. Serre2, U. Blume-Peytavi4, E. Sprecher13, United States V. Oji3, H. Hamm14, P. Farrant6, M. Simon2, R. C. Betz1 Epigenomic marks such as cytosine DNA methylation 1Institute of Human Genetics, Bonn, Germany, 2CNRS (mC) have highly diverse patterns across brain cell types. UMR5165andINSERMU1056andUniversityofToulouse, Humanandmousebrainsaccumulatehighlevelsofnon-CG Toulouse,France,3DepartmentofDermatology,University methylation (mCH) throughout the genome, where> of Münster, Münster, Germany, 4Clinical Research Center 200,000 regions showing differential CG methylation were forHairandSkinScience,DepartmentofDermatologyand identified between three cortical excitatory and inhibitory Allergy, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, neuron types. In addition, ~16% of the mouse genome Germany, 5Balikesir University School of Medicine, containsdifferentialmCsignaturesthatdistinguishneuronal Dermatology Department, Balikesir, Turkey, 6Dermatology cell types by low coverage single cell WGBS (whole-gen- Department, Brighton and Sussex University Hospitals ome bisulfite sequencing). Extending cell type specific mC NHS Trust, Brighton General Hospital, Brighton, United analysis to all brain cell types requires unbiased single cell Kingdom, 7Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory mC profiling, and also enables the study of mC hetero- Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, geneity across cells of the same type. To meet the need of 8Cologne Center for Genomics, University of Cologne, large-scalesinglecellmethylomeprofiling,wedevelopeda Cologne, Germany, 9Pediatric Dermatology Department, single cell methylome workflow using AdaptaseTM, the University Children’s Hospital Zurich, University Hospital technology underlying the Accel-NGS Methyl-Seq Library of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland, 10Clinical Center Darm- Preparation Kit. Through more efficient adapter attachment stadt, Darmstadt, Germany, 11Universitat Internacional de to bisulfite converted ssDNA, libraries with greater com- Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, 12Department of Dermatol- plexity are generated and single cell pooling enables high- ogy and Allergy Centre, Odense University Hospital, throughputlibrarypreparation.Singlecellmethylomeswere Odense, Denmark, 13Department of Dermatology, Tel Aviv generated from over 4,000 single neuronal nuclei isolated Sourasky Medical Center, Tel Aviv, Israel, 141Department from human and mouse frontal cortex using FACS. We of Dermatology, Venereology, and Allergology, University demonstrated robust cell type classification, readily Hospital, Würzburg, Germany46 Uncombablehairsyndrome(UHS),alsoknownas“spun M. Port-Lis31, M. Rossi11, S. Sigaudy32, M. Simon33, P. Simsek-Kiper34, glass hair syndrome”, “pili trianguli et canaliculi”, or Y. Sznajer35, S. Tomkins36, V. Tasic37, A. Toutain38, P. Turnpenny39, “cheveux incoiffables” is a rare anomaly of the hair shaft I.Vogel40,S.Whalen6,M.Wright41,A.Yeung42,G.Baujat1,V.Cormier- which occurs in children and improves with age. UHS is Daire1 characterizedbydry,frizzy,spanglyandoftenfairhairthat is resistant to being combed flat. Up to date both simplex 1INSERM 1163, IMAGINE, Necker Hosp, Paris, France, andfamilialUHScaseswithautosomaldominantaswellas 2IMAGINE, Paris, France, 3Paris V Univ, Paris, France, recessiveinheritancehavebeenreported.However,noneof 4MRI, Alexandria, Egypt, 5CHU, St-Denis, France, 6AP- these cases were linked to a molecular genetic cause. Here, HP, Paris-IdF, France, 7Policlinico, Milano, Italy, 8CHU, we report the identification of UHS causative mutations Toulouse, France, 9D’Annunzio Univ, Chieti, Italy, 10St located in the three genes PADI3 (peptidylarginine deimi- Mary’s Hosp, Manchester, United Kingdom, 11HFME, nase 3), TGM3 (transglutaminase 3) and TCHH (tricho- Bron, France, 12Univ Hosp, Leuven, Belgium, 13CHRU, hyalin)inatotalofelevenchildren.Alloftheseindividuals Lille, France, 14CHU, Strasbourg, France, 15CHU, Dijon, carryhomozygousorcompoundheterozygousmutationsin France, 16CHU, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 17CHU, one of these three genes, indicating an autosomal recessive Reims, France, 18CHRU, Montpellier, France, 19CHU, inheritance pattern in the majority of UHS cases. The two Caen, France, 20CHU, Poitiers, France, 21CHU, Nice, enzymes PADI3 and TGM3, responsible for posttransla- France, 22CHU, Rouen, France, 23CHU, Nantes, France, tional protein modifications, and their target structural 24Guy’sHosp,London,UnitedKingdom,25CHU,Grenoble, protein TCHH, are all involved in hair shaft formation. France, 26CHRU, Amiens, France, 27St Joseph Univ, Elucidation of the molecular outcomes of the disease Beyrouth, Lebanon, 28Univ Hosp, Antwerpen-Edegem, causing mutations by cell culture experiments and tridi- Belgium, 29CHU, Rennes, France, 30CHU, Besançon, mensionalproteinmodelsdemonstratedcleardifferencesin France, 31CHU, Pointe à Pitre, France, 32AP-HM, Mar- the structural organization and activity of mutant and wild seille, France, 33Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, Netherlands, type proteins. Scanning electron microscopy observations 34Hacettepe Univ, Ankara, Turkey, 35UCL, Bruxelles, Bel- revealed morphological alterations in hair coat of Padi3 gium, 36St Michael’s Hosp, Bristol, United Kingdom, knockout mice. All together, these findings elucidate the 37Univ Children’s Hosp, Skopje, Macedonia, The Former molecular genetic causes of UHS and shed light on its Yugoslav Republic of, 38CHRU, Tours, France, 39RD&E, pathophysiology, and hair physiology in general. Exeter, United Kingdom, 40Univ Hosp, Aarhus, Denmark, F. Ü. Basmanav: None. L. Cau: None. A. Tafazzoli: 41IGM, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 42MCRI, Parkville, None. M. Méchin: None. S. Wolf: None. M. Romano: Australia None. F. Valentin: None. H. Wiegmann: None. A. Huchenq: None. N. Garcia Bartels: None. A. Kilic: Short rib-polydactyly type III (SRPIII) and asphyxiating None. S. George: None. D.J. Ralser: None. D.J. Fergu- thoracic dysplasia (ATD) are ciliopathies ranging from son: None. H. Thiele: None. J. Altmüller: None. severe fetal form to life-compatible ATD, characterized by P. Nürnberg: Other; Modest; Cologne Center for Geno- narrow thorax and shortened limbs. ATD symptoms may mics. A. Büchner: None. L. Weibel: None. N. Wagner: involve respiratory, hepatic and renal dysfunctions and None. R. Grimalt: None. A. Bygum: None. G. Serre: retinal degeneration. To date, mutations in 12 ciliary genes None. U. Blume-Peytavi: None. E. Sprecher: None. are reported in ATD/SRPIII. To establish genotype- V. Oji: None. H. Hamm: None. P. Farrant: None. phenotype correlations and delineate long-term evolution M. Simon: None. R.C. Betz: None. of ATD, we recruited 75 fetuses and 55 ATD patients (age range 1–43 years). We performed targeted sequencing of C05.2 1221 ciliary genes and further exome if negative. We Genotype-phenotype correlation in Jeune thoracic identified mutations in 84% cases, including 60% in dysplasia/short rib-polydactyly type III: review of DYNC2H1 (79/130). Other mutations involved IFT140 130 cases (4.5%),WDR60(3%),WDR34 (3%), IFT80 (2%), TTC21B (2%), DYNC2LI1 (1%), WDR19 (1%), WDR35 (1%), C. Michot1, C. Huber1, K. Le Quan Sang1, C. Bole2, P. Nitschke3, TCTEX1D2(1%).WealsoidentifiedmutationinKIAA0753 E. Abdalla4, J. Alessandri5, C. Baumann6, M. Bedeschi7, E. Bieth8, inoneATDlivingcaseandinKIF24,anewciliarygene,in F. Brancati9, K. Chandler10, M. Cordier11, K. Devriendt12, A. Dieux13, one fetal ATD. Fetus cases linked to DYNC2H1 (50/75) C. Do Ngoc Thanh6, S. El Chehadeh14, L. Faivre15, C. Francannet16, mostly presented only skeletal signs. 8/50 (16%) presented D. Gaillard17, D. Geneviève18, M. Gérard19, B. Gilbert20, F. Giuliano21, few dilated renal tubules and 3/50 (6%) abnormal liver A. Goldenberg22, B. Isidor23, M. Irving24, P. Jouk25, J. Martinovic6, portal spaces. Comparatively, 50% of fetus linked to other M. Mathieu26, A. Mégarbané27, G. Mortier28, S. Odent29, J. Piard30, genesdisplayedrenalcystsand/orglomerulardysplasiaandAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 47 33% abnormal liver. Among the 55 alive ATD, 31 had ofzebrafishasatooltobetterunderstandanddefinegenotype DYNC2H1 mutations. 9 (16%) patients died of respiratory - phenotype correlations in OI. distress, including 5 with DYNC2H1 mutations (17%). Materials and Methods: We conducted a phenomics Abnormalelectroretinogenesisequallyaffectedbothgroups analysis on a large set of zebrafish mutants representing (10%). No case with DYNC2H1 mutations displayed renal different forms of OI by mapping and quantifying skeletal or liver dysfunctions. Conversely 35% patients with muta- parameters. tions in other genes had renal insufficiency and 10% liver Results: Our study revealed a remarkably high phenotypic fibrosis. Our results suggest that medical follow-up can be reproducibility of the human disease features between our modulated depending on the molecular basis. set of zebrafish mutants and patients with comparable C.Michot:None.C.Huber:None.K.LeQuanSang: genetic forms of OI. These findings, along with advanced None. C. Bole: None. P. Nitschke: None. E. Abdalla: computational analysis of quantitative parameters argued None. J. Alessandri: None. C. Baumann: None. forthepresenceofsimilargeneticmechanisms,responsible M. Bedeschi: None. E. Bieth: None. F. Brancati: None. for influencing the presence and penetrance of disease K. Chandler: None. M. Cordier: None. K. Devriendt: features, both in zebrafish models and human OI patients. None. A. Dieux: None. C. Do Ngoc Thanh: None. S. El Conclusions: Bone phenotypes in mice often cause peri- Chehadeh:None.L.Faivre:None.C.Francannet:None. natal lethality, making many bone mutants unavailable for D. Gaillard: None. D. Geneviève: None. M. Gérard: the study of later stages. Zebrafish overcomes this chal- None. B. Gilbert: None. F. Giuliano: None. A. Gold- lenges. With our study, we demonstrate that zebrafish is enberg:None.B.Isidor:None.M.Irving:None.P.Jouk: able to both genocopy and phenocopy different forms of None. J. Martinovic: None. M. Mathieu: None. human OI. We therefore propose zebrafish asanew tool to A.Mégarbané:None.G.Mortier:None.S.Odent:None. investigate unknown genetic modifiers and mechanism J. Piard: None. M. Port-Lis: None. M. Rossi: None. underlying human OI. S. Sigaudy: None. M. Simon: None. P. Simsek-Kiper: C. Gistelinck: None. R.Y. Kwon: None. F. Malfait: None. Y. Sznajer: None. S. Tomkins: None. V. Tasic: None. P. Vermassen: None. H. De Saffel: None. None. A. Toutain: None. P. Turnpenny: None. I. Vogel: K.Henke:None.M.P.Harris:None.A.DePaepe:None. None. S. Whalen: None. M. Wright: None. A. Yeung: M.Weis:None.D.R.Eyre:None.A.Willaert:None.P.J. None. G. Baujat: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. Coucke: None. C05.3 C05.4 Phenomics analysis of zebrafish type I collagen A 10q24.32 duplication causes bilateral femoral mutants reveals a spectrum of skeletal phenotypes hypoplasia through formation of a novel sub-TAD mimicking the clinical variability in human brittle bone M. Socha1, A. Sowińska-Seidler1, S. Mundlos2,3,4, M. Spielmann2,3,4, A. Jamsheer1,5 C.Gistelinck1,R.Y.Kwon2,F.Malfait1,P.Vermassen1,H.DeSaffel1,K. Henke3,M.P.Harris3,A.DePaepe1,M.Weis2,D.R.Eyre2,A.Willaert1, 1Department of Medical Genetics, Poznan University of P. J. Coucke1 Medical Sciences, Poznań, Poland, 2Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (MPIMG), Berlin, Germany, 1Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium, 2Department 3Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, of Orthopaedics and Sports Medicine, University of Charité-Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 4Berlin- Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 3Department of Brandenburg Center for Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United Berlin, Germany, 5Centers for Medical Genetics Genesis, States Poznan, Poland Introduction: The brittle bone disease (or osteogenesis Bilateralhypoplasiaofthefemoralbonesisanextremely imperfecta,OI)isararecongenitaldisorder,causedbydefects rarelimbmalformationwithunknowngeneticorigin.Inour mainly related to type I collagen, which forms the structural study we investigated a sporadic female patient with iso- scaffold of the bone extracellular matrix. Clinically, OI is lated severe bilateral femoral hypoplasia, in whom characterizedbyabroaddiseasespectrum,rangingfrommild arrayCGH revealed a 533 kb duplication at chromosome forms with minimal fractures, to severely deforming or even 10q24.32, which occurred de novo. The rearrangement lethalforms.Theunderlyingpathogenicmechanismsbetween demonstrated a significant overlap with the split hand/foot the different types of OI, remains one of the most puzzling malformationtype3(SHFM3)locus,yetincludedaknown questions in thefield. In this study we illustrate thepotential48 developmentalgene,FGF8,absentintheSHFM3causative France, 12INSERM U1149, Paris, France, 13INSERM aberrations. U1078, CHRU Brest, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, CRISPR/Cas9 approach was utilized to recapitulate the Brest, France patient’s phenotype in mice. The Fgf8+/dup mutant mani- fested multiple skeletal abnormalities, including a severe Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a connective tissue disorder shorteningofthehumeriandthefemoralbones.Thesecond with an autosomal dominant inheritance, mainly due to mutant,Fgf8del/dupcarriedthesameduplicationononeallele mutation within FBN1 gene. Several systems are affected, and a corresponding deletion on the other allele, yet man- such as ocular (ectopia lentis), skeletal (scoliosis) and car- ifested the same skeletal defects. Based on the mouse stu- diovascular system (thoracic aortic aneurysm). MFS dis- dies we hypothesize that the patient’s phenotype resulted playsgreatvariability,forageofonsetaswellasseverityof specifically from the duplication, which restructured the clinical manifestations. Absence of strong genotype- genes and cis-regulatory elements (REs) in the locus, and phenotype correlation, extra- and intra-familial variability not from the gene dosage effect. and the use of quantitative models to estimate heritability Next, we performed circular chromosome conformation suggest the existence of genetic factors underlying pheno- capture (4C) assay to investigate the interactions between typic variability. relocated genes and REs in patient’s fibroblasts. 4C-seq We combined various genome-wide approaches and revealed ectopic interaction within the altered region and performed a cross-mapping of significant resultsto identify indicated to the formation of a novel sub-TAD (Topologi- these genetic modifiers. Within a collection of 1070 clini- cally Associated Domain) as the underlying pathomechan- cally well-characterized FBN1 mutation carriers, we com- ism of the femoral hypoplasia phenotype. bined1)anFBN1eQTLanalysisin80fibroblastsofFBN1 This research was supported by the Polish National mutation-carriers, 2) a linkage analysis and 3) a kinship Science Centre grant UMO-2011/03/D/NZ2/06136, the matrix association study in 14 clinically concordant and National Centre for Research and Development grant discordant sib-pairs, 4) a genome-wide association study LIDER/008/431/L-4/12/NCBR/2013, German Research and 5) a whole exome sequencing analysis in 98 extreme Foundation(DFG),theBerlinInstituteforHealth,andMax phenotype samples. Planck Foundation. We found 3 genetic factors underlying phenotype M. Socha: None. A. Sowińska-Seidler: None. S. variability: 1) new phenotype-genotype correlations, 2) co- Mundlos: None. M. Spielmann: None. A. Jamsheer: occurrence in 5 patients of the FBN1 disease-initiating None. mutation with an additional mutation in another vascular disorder gene, and 3) combined effects of frequent alleles C05.5 with identification of 9 modifier loci (common to at least Cross-mapping analysis identifies 9 modifier loci in twodifferentanalysis)containingexcellentcandidategenes, Marfan syndrome includingoneinwhichmutationsareknowntobeinvolved in familial thoracic aortic aneurysm. M. Aubart1,2, L. Benarroch1,3, P. Arnaud1,4, S. Gazal5,6, M. Gross1, These results confirm that combination of various stra- J. Burrati7,8, A. Boland9, V. Meyer9, N. Hanna4, O. Milleron10, tegies is efficient to overcome obstacles to identify genetic C. Stheneur10, T. Bourgeron7,8,3, I. Desguerre2,11, M. Jacob1, architectures of clinical variability in rare diseases L. Gouya12,3, E. Génin13, J. Deleuze9, G. Jondeau1,10,3, C. Boileau1,4,3 M. Aubart: None. L. Benarroch: None. P. Arnaud: None.S.Gazal:None.M.Gross:None.J.Burrati:None. 1INSERM U1148, Paris, France, 2Service de Neuropédia- A. Boland: None. V. Meyer: None. N. Hanna: None. trie, Hôpital Necker-Enfants malades, Paris, France, O. Milleron: None. C. Stheneur: None. T. Bourgeron: 3Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Paris, France, None. I. Desguerre: None. M. Jacob: None. L. Gouya: 4Département deGénétique,AP-HPCHUX.Bichat,Paris, None. E. Génin: None. J. Deleuze: None. G. Jondeau: France, 5INSERM U1137, IAME, Paris, France, 6Plate- None. C. Boileau: None. forme de génomique constitutionnelle du GHU Nord, AP- HP CHU X. Bichat, Paris, France, 7Institut Pasteur, C05.6 Human genetics and coginitive functions unit, Paris, Can we predict PIK3CAmosaicism genotype from France,8CNRSUMR3571:Genes,synapsesandcognition, deep phenotyping variables in overgrowth? Institut Pasteur, Paris, France, 9Centre National de Gén- otypage, Institut de Génomique, CEA, Evry, France, S. Polubothu1,2, R. Knox3, K. Andrews3, L. Al-Olabi1, D. Eastwood2, 10Centre de Référence National syndrome de Marfan et K. Gholam2, M. Glover2, D. Lomas2, C. Mahon2, A. Martinez2, J. Ong2, syndromes apparentés, AP-HP CHU X. Bichat, Paris, France, 11Université Paris 5 René Descartes, Paris,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 49 V. Parker3,4, R. Shah2, L. Shaw2, B. Sivakumar2, G. Smith2, S. Syed2, C06 R. Semple3,4, V. A. Kinsler1,2 ELSI genomics 1Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child C06.1 Health, London, United Kingdom, 22. Paediatric Derma- Uncertainty about carrier results from exome tology, Great Ormond St Hospital for Children, London, sequencing: A randomized controlled trial of United Kingdom, 3Metabolic Research Laboratories, disclosure Wellcome Trust-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Uni- versityofCambridge,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom,44.The B. B. Biesecker, K. Lewis, K. L. Umstead, J. Johnston, L. G. Biesecker National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biome- dical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States IndividualswithPIK3CAmutationsarecurrentlyeligible for international trials of mTOR inhibitors, however many Exome sequencing often generates uncertain results. affected individuals present with overlapping features of How individuals perceive the uncertainty can affect the syndromes previously thought to be clinically distinct, utility of the results. Adult participants (N=462) from an making selection for genotyping difficult. We undertook NIH clinicalcohort study who chose tolearn carrier results targeted deep next generation sequencing of 60 known generated from sequencing were randomized to disclosure overgrowth genes on tissue samples from a cohort of 110 by aweb-based platform or bya genetic counselor.Halfof children with a diagnosis of vascular malformation and/or each group was further randomized to a follow-up coun- overgrowth.Multiple logistic regressionwasusedtomodel seling session. Participants were on average 63 years old, PIK3CA mutation status on the basis of deep phenotyping white, and highly educated. They received a median of 3 variables (clinical, radiological, histopathological and hae- heterozygous variants and a median of 0.7 VUS results. A matological) andclinicaloutcomemeasures (pain requiring two-way ANOVA was used to evaluate the influence of regular analgesia, thrombotic complications, sclerotherapy, education mode and counseling on perceptions of practical surgery and death). Median age at presentation was 1.2yrs, uncertaintyaboutresultsatsix-monthsfollow-up.Themain median follow up 5.5yrs. 42% of patients had truncal/limb effect of education mode indicated significantly greater overgrowth,7%macrocephaly,49%abnormalclotting,and practical uncertainty among participants in the web arm (p 95% positive mTOR immunohistochemistry. 59% required =0.018). The interaction effect was also significant, surgery, 41% sclerotherapy, 21% suffered superficial yielding a ratio of F(1,363)=4.01 (p=0.046). Practical thrombophlebitisand 2.5%deepvein thrombosis, 30%had uncertainty was significantly correlated with tolerance of significant pain and there were no deaths. 41% had uncertainty(r=0.169,p=.001)andambiguityaversion(r detectablePIK3CAmutations,withmutantallelefrequency =0.213, p<.001), demonstrating perceptions consistent 1.2–28%. No phenotypic variables were statistically pre- with personality characteristics. Our findings demonstrate dictive of all-genotype PIK3CA mosaicism, however, that receiving results from an online platform can generate PIK3CA hotspot mutations were significantly associated higher perceptions of practical uncertainty than receiving with mixed vascular malformations (OR 15.5, p=0.01), resultsfromacounselor,andthatfollow-upcounselingcan andarequirementforsurgery(OR3.4,p=0.039)whichis mitigate the elevated uncertainty. Uncertainty may lead to a proxy measure for severity of overgrowth. Our findings reduced utility of the results, and may be a limitation of confirm the broad phenotypic spectrum reported with post- receivingcarrierresultsfromaweb-basedplatformwithout zygotic mutations in PIK3CA. Thus far we have not iden- geneticcounseling.Thisstudywasfundedbytheintramural tifiedany phenotypic predictors of genotype.However,our researchprogramoftheNationalHumanGenomeResearch preliminaryresultssuggestexactgenotypemayhelppredict Institute, National Institutes of Health. clinical outcome. B.B.Biesecker:None.K.Lewis:None.K.L.Umstead: S. Polubothu: None. R. Knox: None. K. Andrews: None. J. Johnston: None. L.G. Biesecker: F. Consultant/ None. L. Al-Olabi: None. D. Eastwood: None. K. Advisory Board; Modest; uncompensated advisor to Gholam: None. M. Glover: None. D. Lomas: None. Illumina. C. Mahon: None. A. Martinez: None. J. Ong: None. V. Parker: None. R. Shah: None. L. Shaw: None. B. Sivakumar: None. G. Smith: None. S. Syed: None. R. Semple: None. V.A. Kinsler: None.50 C06.2 actionable, should be reported, even without the consent Recommendations for the reporting of results from of the parents diagnostic next generation sequencing Conclusions: These recommendations will help guide laboratory practices in Europe and internationally. D. F. Vears1, K. Sénécal2, A. J. Clarke3, H. G. Yntema4, L. Jackson5, D.F. Vears: None. K. Sénécal: None. A.J. Clarke: L.Lovrecic6,A.Piton7,K.L.I.VanGassen8,B.M.Knoppers2,P.Borry1 None. H.G. Yntema: None. L. Jackson: None. L. Lovrecic: None. A. Piton: None. K.L.I. Van Gassen: 1Centre for Biomedical Ethics and Law, Department of None. B.M. Knoppers: None. P. Borry: None. Public Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Centre of Genomics and Policy, McGill Uni- C06.3 versity, Montreal, QC, Canada, 3Division of Cancer & Legal framework for genomic data sharing in view Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, of the new EU General Data Protection Regulation United Kingdom, 4Department of Human Genetics, Rad- boud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, M. Shabani, P. Borry 5Genomic Medicine Centre, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 6Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium University Medical Center Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 7Molecular diagnostic laboratory, Strasbourg University Genomic data contain sensitive health and non-health Hospitals, Strasbourg, France, 8Department of Genetics, related information about the individuals and their family University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands members. Therefore, adopting adequate privacy safe- guards is paramount when processing genomic data for Introduction: Although next generation sequencing tech- research or clinical purposes. One of the major legal nologies(NGS)arewell-embeddedintheclinicalsettingfor instruments for personal data protection in the EU is the identification of genetic causes of disease, most current new General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), which recommendations by professional bodies do not provide has entered into force in May 2016 and repealed the detailed guidance about whether variants of uncertain sig- Directive 95/46/EC, with an ultimate goal of enhancing nificance(VUS)andunsolicitedfindingsshouldbereported effectiveness and harmonization of personal data protec- by laboratory personnel to clinicians. tion in the EU. This paper explores the major provisions Methods:Aworkinggroupwasformedcomprisingapanel of the new Regulation with regard to processing genetic of experts (clinical geneticists, laboratory specialists, ethi- data, and assesses the influence of such provisions on cists, researchers and lawyers) from Europe, Canada and reinforcing the legal safeguards when sharing genomic Australia. The working group considered the current data for research purposes. The new Regulation attempts guidelines, their own experiences and data from a recent to elucidate the scope of personal data, by recognizing qualitative study exploring laboratories’ reporting practices pseudonymised data as personal (identifiable) data, and in these countries, to develop recommendations for clinical including genetic data in the catalogue of special cate- laboratory scientists and policy makers regarding the gories of data (sensitive data). Moreover, a set of new reporting of VUS and USF from diagnostic NGS. rules is laid out in the Regulation for processing personal Results: The working group recommends that in general, dataunderthescientificresearchexemption.Forinstance, a targeted approach to analysis of data from NGS should further use of personal data for scientific research pur- be considered. VUS that are identified in known genes, poses, without obtaining additional consent will be which are related to the clinical question but with insuf- allowed, if the specific conditions are met. The new ficient evidence of pathogenicity, and also variants iden- Regulation has already fueled concerns among various tified in candidate genes, shouldbe reported to clinicians. stakeholders, owing to the challenges that may emerge Unsolicitedfindingsthatarerelevanttothehealthofadult when implementing the Regulation across the countries. patients should be reported, provided that informed con- Notably, the provided definition for pseudonymised data sent has been obtained for such reporting from patients has been criticized, because it leaves too much room for prior to sequencing. A patient’s choice not to know interpretations,andit mightundermine theharmonization unsolicited findings should be respected. In children, of the data protection across the countries. unsolicited findings that are a) relevant to their health M. Shabani: None. P. Borry: None. during childhood or adolescence, and b) medicallyAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 51 C06.4 C06.5 Recontact about clinically significant variant Evaluationof the100,000GenomesProjectConsent reclassifications in cardiogenetics; patient Process and Participant Materials experiences C. M. Benjamin1,2, M. Boudioni3,4, H. Ward3, E. Marston5, T. F. Halbersma-Konings, J. el Mecky, A. V. Ranchor, M. Plantinga, A.Lindenmeyer5,M.Bangee1,J.CookLucas1,R.Leavey1,M.Caulfield6, E. Birnie, I. M. van Langen T.Fowler6,A.Lucassen7,8,F.Rennie6,L.Riley6,M.Parker7,9,V.Parry6, E. Thomas6, C. Patch6,10, A. Cranage6, L. Dinh6 UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands 1College of Health & Wellbeing, University of Central Research question: What are patient perceptions on and Lancashire, Preston, United Kingdom, 2North West Coast experiences with our current recontacting practice? Genomic Medicine Centre, Liverpool, United Kingdom, Introduction:Technicaladvancesandincreasinglybroader 3Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 4PPI diagnostic genetic testing have highlighted the importance Lead West London Genomic Medicine Centre, London, of recontact for variant reclassifications. It is ethically United Kingdom, 5University of Birmingham, Birmingham, desirable to inform patients about reclassifications, espe- United Kingdom, 6Genomics England, London, United cially those of clinical significance. Information on best Kingdom, 7Genomics England (Ethics Advisory Commit- practices regarding recontacting is limited. Due to an tee),London,UnitedKingdom,8UniversityofSouthampton, adaptation of the diagnostic guidelines in our centre, 62 Southampton, United Kingdom, 9Chair ETHOX Centre, patients who previously underwent genetic testing for car- University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Florence diomyopathy were recontacted by an extensive letter from NightingaleFacultyofNursing&Midwifery,KingsCollege their counselor about the reclassification of ‘their’ variant. London, London, United Kingdom We explored how patients experienced recontact, their understanding of the information, and what actions they Introduction: The 100,000 Genomes Project is an English took. National Health Service Transformational Project focusing Method: Semi-structured interviews in 8/25 eligible car- on patients with rare diseases (RD) and cancer. The eva- diomyopathy patients who were recontacted about a Likely luation included 10 pre-defined topic areas, selected from Pathogenic to VUS or Pathogenic reclassification. feedback raised during initial recruitment. Results: Patients were positive and felt reassured about Methods: We undertook a cross-sectional, formative pro- beinginformedaboutthereclassificationandtheadvancing cess evaluation using mixed methods (exit postcards, focus knowledge. Understanding of the information about the groupsandon-linesurvey).Workingwiththreestakeholder reclassification was incomplete and led to misinterpreta- groups, consented participants (exit postcards), patient & tions, e.g. on perceived changed risks for family members, public (focus groups) and active recruiting staff (on-line hampering family communication. None of the patients survey), we evaluated the consent experience in multiple took initiative to discuss the reclassification with medical geographical sites and from contrasting perspectives. professionals, although encouraged to do so. Trust in Results: All 13 Genomic Medicine Centres participated. genetics/their counselor was not affected negatively. Respondents included 174/1,196 participants (14.6%), 58/ Recontactledtoexpectationsaboutupdatesoftestresultsin 161 recruiters (36%), and five focus groups (34 members). the future. Forparticipants, 98%describedtheirconsent experienceas Conclusions:Preliminaryfindings suggestthat patients are good or excellent, only 66% read in detail the participant positive about recontacting. Information on reclassification information sheet (PIS), and 81% of consents took more does not impair trust in genetics/their counselor. To ensure than 30min (RD). Fifty percent of recruiters said partici- better understanding though, information must be adapted pants often or very often presented with specific needs e.g. to patient’s needs and patients should feel encouraged to needing extra explanation, low levels of literacy, high contact their counselor. anxiety levels or visual impairment. Views differed on the T.F.Halbersma-Konings:None.J.elMecky:None.A. amount of information and length of the PIS, with most V.Ranchor:None.M.Plantinga:None.E.Birnie:None. participants stating it was ‘about right’, but focus group I.M. van Langen: None. members and recruiting staff felt it would benefit from revision. Conclusions: Recommendations made, 8 ‘things to main- tain’and15‘changestoconsider’.Thesewereadoptedand following research ethics committee approval went live in February 2017.52 Funding: Genomics England, The Innovation Agency. We make several recommendations to guide future pol- C.M.Benjamin: None.M. Boudioni: None.H. Ward: icy and professional debate. These include clarifying: dif- None. E. Marston: None. A. Lindenmeyer: None. ferences between recontact and follow- up; which M. Bangee: None. J. Cook Lucas: None. R. Leavey: methodologies and infrastructures might be required and None. M. Caulfield: None. T. Fowler: None. A. Lucas- withwhomresponsibilitieslie;howgenomedatashouldbe sen: None. F. Rennie: None. L. Riley: None. M. Parker: shared; any differences between professional, legal, or None. V. Parry: None. E. Thomas: None. C. Patch: ethical duties/responsibilities to recontact, and the implica- None. A. Cranage: None. L. Dinh: None. tions of these differences. Funder: ESRC(UK) C06.6 Webpage:http://ex.ac.uk/mgc Recontacting in clinical practice: results from an D. Carrieri: None. S. Dheensa: None. S. Doheny: investigation of the perspectives of patients and None. P.D. Turnpenny: None. A.J. Clarke: None. A.M. healthcare professionals in the United Kingdom Lucassen: None. N. Hawkins: None. S.E. Kelly: None. D. Carrieri1, S. Dheensa2, S. Doheny3, P. D. Turnpenny4, A. J. Clarke3, A. M. Lucassen2,5, N. Hawkins6, S. E. Kelly1 C07 Novel genomics technologies 1Egenis, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2Clinical Ethics and Law, Faculty of Medicine, University C07.1 ofSouthampton,Southampton,UnitedKingdom,3Schoolof Mosaic mutation detection using single molecule Medicine, Cardiff University, United Kingdom, Cardiff, molecular inversion probes (smMIPs) for UnitedKingdom,4Royal,Devon&ExeterHospital,United autoinflammatory disorders Kingdom, Exeter, United Kingdom, 5Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, University Hospitals Southampton NHS E.C.Carbo1,M.J.Koudijs1,S.M.C.Savelberg1,F.Mulder1,J.Frenkel2, Foundation Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom, 6Law M. A. Swertz3, H. PloosvanAmstel1, M. E. van Gijn1 School, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center As the interpretation of genomic data evolves, the Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 22Dept. of Pediatrics, Uni- question of whether former patients should be recontacted versity Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, when updated information is available becomes more 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Gro- pressing.There isnoprofessional consensus about whether ningen, Groningen, Netherlands and how recontacting should happen. There is also limited empirical evidence concerning the perspectives of health- Systemic autoinflammatory diseases (SAID) affect care professionals (HCPs) in genetic and ‘mainstream’ patients that suffer from an uncontrolled innate immune specialties, and patients. systemleadingtorecurrentinflammation.Duetothevariety Wediscussthefindingsofamulti-siteprojectconducted of symptoms, diagnosis of patients is difficult. This can in the UK and with international collaborators. The project result ina delayed treatmentand irreversible organ damage investigated socio-ethical and legal issues related to recon- as a consequence. In several patients with a phenotype tacting and gathered empirical evidence on: current clinical consistent with an autosomal dominant form of SAID, practices in the UK via a survey of 20/24 genetics centres; mosaicismforasomaticmutationhasbeendetected.Onlya expectations of patients and HCPs via interviews (n=71) smallpercentageofmosaicismisnecessarytogenerateeven and questionnaires (n=130). Our data show that HCPs severe forms of SAID. Currently many laboratories use sometimes recontact, however there is no uniform system Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) to detect mutations in for how and when. HCPs and patients tended to view SAIDgenes.However,withthestandardcoverage,filtering recontacting as desirable, but were unsure about whether and analysis settings many patients with low frequency formalized recontacting systems should be implemented. somatic mosaics will be missed. NGS deep sequencing Both groups expressed concerns about the feasibility of could solve this, although it is not able to discriminate recontacting within the current constraints of the National mosaic mutations with a low allele frequency from PCR or Health Service, and a lack of clarity about roles and sequencingartefacts.Wedesignedandvalidatedasensitive responsibilities. Some patients’ preferences (e.g. to receive deep sequencing assay using single molecule molecular regular updates from HCPs) corresponded to a model of inversion probes (smMIPs) for SAID gene mutation follow-up rather than recontacting. detection.Ourresultsshowtheaccuratedetectionofvariant allele frequencies as low as 1%. Moreover, we canAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 53 distinguish heterozygous mutations from higher levels of R. Acuna Hidalgo: None. H. Sengül: None. M. Stee- mutational mosaicism. Additionally, we detect differences houwer: None. M. van der Vorst: None. J.A. Veltman: in variant allele frequencies of a patient when investigating None. C. Gilissen: None. A. Hoischen: None. mutational allele frequencies atdifferent timepoints.These findings make smMIPsa very promising assay to study the C07.3 developmentandprogressofmutationalmosaicismintime. Quantifying the role of paralogous genes in tissue Moreover it is a flexible, time- and cost effective assay to selective hereditary diseases use in a diagnostic setting to prevent misdiagnosing of SAID patients with somatic mosaic mutations. R. Barshir, N. Shemesh, I. Hekselman, O. Basha, M. Sharon, E.C. Carbo: None. M.J. Koudijs: None. S.M.C. L. Alfandri, L. Novack, E. Yeger-Lotem Savelberg:None.F.Mulder:None.J.Frenkel:None.M. A. Swertz: None. H. PloosvanAmstel: None. M.E. van Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel Gijn: None. We aim to tackle a long standing enigma in human C07.2 genetics:whatlimitstheclinicalmanifestationofhereditary Ultra-sensitive detection of mosaic mutations in diseases to certain tissues or cell types, while their causal blood DNA of healthy individuals provides new genesareexpressedacrossthehumanbody?Previously,we insights into age-related clonal hematopoiesis developed a novel interactome analysis to tackle this question for over 300 hereditary diseases. We showed that R. Acuna Hidalgo1, H. Sengül1, M. Steehouwer1, M. van der Vorst1, causal genes tend to have elevated transcript levels in their J. A. Veltman1,2, C. Gilissen1, A. Hoischen1 disease-manifesting tissue. Moreover, causal genes were significantlymoreinvolvedinproteininteractionsthatwere 1Radboud UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Institute of unique to the disease-manifesting tissue, thus pointing to Genetic Medicine, Newcastle, United Kingdom potential disease mechanisms. Here we investigate the role of causal genes paralogs. It has been shown across organ- Clonal hematopoiesis (CH) results from somatic muta- ismsthatparalogscancompensateforthelossofeachother. tionsinhematopoieticstemcells,whichgrantanadvantage Here we hypothesize that, specifically in the disease- to mutant cells and drive their clonal expansion. The manifesting tissue, this compensation may become insuffi- acquisition of CH-driver mutations (CHDMs) occurs with cient, and thus disease phenotypes emerge. Notably, this normal aging and these mutations are reportedly detectable hypothesishasbeendemonstratedpreviouslyinthecontext in blood in over 10% of individuals over 65. We present a of few specific diseases, but was never assessed at large- targeted re-sequencing assay combining high throughput scale. We analyzed 152 tissue-specific hereditary diseases with ultra-high sensitivity based on single-molecule mole- that manifest specifically in one of seven tissues. To test cular inversion probes (smMIPs). Using smMIPs, we whetherinsufficientcompensationoccursspecificallyinthe screenedforCHDMsinover100lociin2,007bloodDNA disease tissue, we used hundreds of RNA sequencing data samples from healthy donors between 20 and 69 years of covering over 40 different human tissues. We found strong ageandwithnopreviousdiagnosisofcancer.Lociscreened evidenceforinsufficientcompensationinthediseasetissues included 40 known drivers of CH and 64 novel candidate for most hereditary diseases. Moreover, in 20% of the dis- loci. We identified a total of 225 somatic mutations eases, insufficient compensation arose only due to the throughout our cohort, of which 217 were in known CH- paralog being significantly under-expressed in the disease driver genes, such as DNMT3A, JAK2, GNAS, TET2 and tissue. Our results shed a new light on this long-standing ASXL1, including 196 substitutions and 21 indels. Our enigma, and may point to new directions in treating tissue- assay allowed for the detection of mutations with variant specific hereditary diseases. allele frequencies<0.1%. This improved sensitivity led to R. Barshir: None. N. Shemesh: None. I. Hekselman: the identification of CHDMs in over 20% of individuals None. O. Basha: None. M. Sharon: None. L. Alfandri: between the age of 60 and 69 and in close to 3% of indi- None. L. Novack: None. E. Yeger-Lotem: None. viduals between 20 and 29 years of age, suggesting that CHDMs are more prevalent in all age groups than pre- C07.4 viouslyreported.OurfindingssupporttheoccurrenceofCH Mapping and phasing of structural variation in due to CHDMs as a widespread phenomenon associated patient genomes using nanopore sequencing with ageing, suggesting that clonal evolution of cells har- boring somatic mutations is a universal mechanism which M. Cretu-Stancu1, M. van Roosmalen1, I. Renkens1, M. Nieboer1, occurs at all ages in healthy humans. S. Middelkamp1, J. de Ligt1, G. Pregno2, D. Giachino2, G. Mandrile2,54 J. Espejo Valle-Inclan1, J. Korzelius1, E. de Bruijn1, E. Cuppen1, the nature of these genomic regions makes characterizing M. Talkowski3, T. Marschall4, J. de Ridder1, W. Kloosterman1 them extremely challenging. Accurate DNA sequencing of repeatexpansionsusingshort-readsequencingtechnologies 1University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, is difficult, as short-read technologies often cannot read 2University of Torino, Turin, Italy, 3Harvard Medical through regions of low sequence complexity. Additionally, School, Boston, MA, United States, 4Saarland University, these short reads do not span the entire region of interest Saarbrücken, Germany and therefore sequence assembly is required. Lastly, most target enrichment methods are reliant upon amplification Large capital investments are needed for second gen- which adds the additional caveat of PCR bias. eration sequencing equipment, which has led to the con- We have developed a novel, amplification-free enrich- centration of human genome sequencing efforts in ment technique that employs the CRISPR/Cas9 system for specialized sequencing centers. An interesting alternative specific targeting of individual human genes. This method, for human genome sequencing is the MinION nanopore in conjunction with PacBio’s long reads and uniform cov- sequencer, a small and low-cost device that can generate erage,enablessequencingofcomplexgenomicregionsthat long sequence reads in real-time. Here, we demonstrate cannot be investigated with other technologies. Using sequencing of the genomes of two patients with congenital human genomic DNA samples and this strategy, we have abnormalities using the MinION at 11x and 16x mean successfully targeted the loci of Huntington’s Disease coverage, respectively. We developed a bioinformatic (HTT; CAG repeat), Fragile X (FMR1; CGG repeat), ALS pipeline - NanoSV - to efficiently map genomic structural (C9orf72; GGGGCC repeat), and Spinocerebellar ataxia variants (SVs) from the nanopore data. Using NanoSV, we type 10 (SCA10; variable ATTCT repeat) for examination. readily detected all de novo rearrangements involving With this data, we demonstrate the ability to isolate hun- multiple chromosomes and comprising complex chromo- dreds of individual on-target molecules in a single SMRT thripsisevents.Genome-widesurveillanceofSVs,revealed Cell and accurately sequence through long repeat stretches, 1,090(27,4%)novelvariantsthatweremissedinshort-read regardless of the extreme GC-content. The method is data of the same sample, the majority of which are short compatible with multiplexing of multiple targets and mul- variations<200bp in size. Nanopore reads enabled efficient tiple samples in a single reaction. This technique also cap- phasing of genetic variations, allowing the construction of tures native DNA molecules for sequencing, allowing for genome-widemapsofphasedSVs.Finally,weshowthatall the possibility of direct detection and characterization of de novo chromothripsis breakpoints occurred on paternal epigenetic signatures. chromosomes and we used this information to resolve the C.J. Koenig: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- long-range structure of the chromothripsis. This work nificant; Pacific Biosciences. E. Ownership Interest (stock, demonstratesthevalueofportableandlow-costsequencing stock options, patent or other intellectual property); devices for human genome sequencing in future life sci- Significant; Pacific Biosciences. Y. Tsai: A. Employment ences research and clinical diagnostics. (full or part-time); Significant; Pacific Biosciences. M. Cretu-Stancu: None. M. van Roosmalen: None. I. D. Greenberg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Renkens: None. M. Nieboer: None. S. Middelkamp: nificant; Pacific Biosciences. T.A. Clark: A. Employment None. J. de Ligt: None. G. Pregno: None. D. Giachino: (full or part-time); Significant; Pacific Biosciences. None. G. Mandrile: None. J. Espejo Valle-Inclan: None. J. Korzelius: None. E. de Bruijn: None. E. Cuppen: C07.6 None. M. Talkowski: None. T. Marschall: None. J. de CLIP-Cap: Combined Long-Insert Paired-End and Ridder: None. W. Kloosterman: None. Capture sequencing, a novel method for the analysis of complex genomic aberrations C07.5 Enrichment of unamplified DNA and long-read C.Purmann1,X.Zhu1,D.Palejev2,J.Bernstein1,J.F.Hallmayer1,A.E. SMRT Sequencing to unlock repeat expansion Urban1 disorders 1Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 2Bul- C. J. Koenig, Y. Tsai, D. Greenberg, T. A. Clark garian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States CLIP-Cap is a method that allows to completely resolve complex chromosome rearrangements in the human gen- Nucleotide repeat expansions are a major cause of neu- ome using standard laboratory equipment and an efficient rological and neuromuscular disease in humans, however, and multiplexable workflow.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 55 CLIP-Cap is based on creating a paired-end sequencing phenotype.Althoughtenmutantgenesarecurrentlyknown library where the inserts of genomic DNA are of variable to be associated with NM, only ACTA1 is associated with lengthinthekbp-range(i.e.2–8kbpasopposedto400–800 intranuclear rod myopathy. In addition, the genetic cause bpinstandardpaired-endsequencing),alsoknownasmate- remains unclear in approximately 25–30% of individuals pairs, and then to carry out semi-targeted capture from that with NM. We performed whole exome sequencing on paired-end library with oligomers representing one of the individuals with histologically confirmed but genetically chromosomes involved in the structural genome aberration unsolvedNM.OurstudyincludedindividualsofmilderNM at hand. This is then followed by limited (i.e. benchtop or withlateronsetage,andidentifiedbiallelicloss-of-function multiplexed) ‘next-generation’ DNA sequencing and data mutationsinthemyopalladingene(MYPN)infourfamilies. analysis with standard software tools (for paired-end map- Encoded MYPN is a sarcomeric protein exclusively loca- ping, split-read analysis and read-depth analysis, lizedinstriatedmuscleinhumans.Individualsinallfourof respectively). these families with identified MYPN mutations had rela- We resolved the three main Philadelphia Chromosome tively mild NM with childhood- to adult-onset, slowly aberrations, in three different cancer cell lines (Kasumi-4, progressive muscle weakness. Walking difficulties were which contains a three-way translocation, SUP-B15 and recognized around their forties. Decreased respiratory K562). And we furthermore resolved the complex rearran- function, cardiac involvement, and intranuclear rods in gements in four cases of developmental disorder that all biopsied muscle were observed in two individuals. MYPN involved chromosome 22, but also other chromosomes (9, was localized at the Z-line in control skeletal muscles, but 10 or 11) or multiple different aberrations (e.g. deletions was absent from affected individuals. Homozygous knock- andisodicentrictranslocations)presentinamosaicfashion. in mice with a nonsense mutation in Mypn showed Z- Currently there is no single approach to resolve typical streaming and nemaline-like bodies adjacent to a dis- complex chromosomal rearrangements that are a common organized Z-line on electron microscopy, recapitulating the hallmarkofcancerandalsoofdevelopmentaldisorders.We disease. MYPN screening should be considered in indivi- have tested CLIP-Cap on seven different cases of genomic duals with mild NM, especially when cardiac problems or rearrangementstodemonstratethatitissufficienttoresolve intranuclear rods are present. awiderangeofscenarios,theonlyrequirementattheoutset N. Matsumoto: None. S. Miyatake: None. being knowledge of one of the chromosomes involved in the aberration. C08.2 Funding: Stanford/Freidenreich Foundation Neurocalcin delta as a novel protective modifier for C. Purmann: None. X. Zhu: None. D. Palejev: None. spinal muscular atrophy: A full story from gene J. Bernstein: None. J.F. Hallmayer: None. A.E. Urban: identification to therapy None. S. Schneider1,2,3, M. Riessland1,2,4, A. Kaczmarek1,2,3, K. J. Swoboda5, H. Loehr6,7, C. Bradler8,7, V. Grysko1,2,3, M. Dimitriadi9,10, C08 Neuromuscular Disorders S. Hosseinibarkooie1,2,3, L. Torres-Benito1,2,3, M. Peters1,2,3, A. Upadhyay1,2,3, N. Biglari1,2,3, S. Kroeber1,2,3, I. Hoelker1,2,3, C08.1 L. Garbes1,2,3, C. Gilissen11, A. Hoischen11, G. Nuernberg7,12, Biallelic mutations in the myopalladin gene, MYPN P.Nuernberg7,12,M.Walter13,F.Rigo14,C.F.Bennett14,M.J.Kye1,2,3, are associated with childhood-onset, slowly A. C. Hart9, M. Hammerschmidt6,7, P. Kloppenburg8,7, B. Wirth1,2,3 progressive nemaline myopathy 1Institute of Human Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 2Center N. Matsumoto, S. Miyatake for Molecular Medicine, Cologne, Germany, 3Institute for Genetics, Cologne, Germany, 4Laboratory of Molecular Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, and Cellular Neuroscience, The Rockefeller University, Yokohama, Japan New York, NY, United States, 5MassGeneral Hospital for Children,Boston, MA,United States,6Institute for Zoology Nemaline myopathy (NM) is a common form of con- - Developmental Biology, Cologne, Germany, 7Excellence genital nondystrophic skeletal muscle disease characterized Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging Associated by muscular weakness of proximal dominance, hypotonia, Diseases (CECAD), Cologne, Germany, 8Institute for and respiratory insufficiency, but typically without cardiac Zoology - Neurophysiology, Cologne, Germany, 9Depart- dysfunction. Wide variation in severity has been reported. ment of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI, IntranuclearrodmyopathyisasubtypeofNMinwhichrod- United States, 10Department of Biological and Environ- likebodiesareseeninthenucleus,oftenexpressingasevere mental Sciences, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield,56 United Kingdom, 11Department of Human Genetics, Don- C08.3 ders Centre for Neuroscience, Nijmegen, Netherlands, Dissecting the causal mechanism of X-linked 12Center for Genomics Cologne, Cologne, Germany, dystonia-parkinsonism by integrating genome and 13Institute of Medical Genetics, Tuebingen, Germany, transcriptome assembly 14IONIS Pharmaceuticals, Carlsbad, CA, United States T.Aneichyk1,2,W. T.Hendricks3,R. Yadav1,2,D.Shin3,D.Gao1,2,C.A. Autosomal recessive spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) Vaine3, R. L. Collins1, B. Currall1, M. E. Dy3, J. Dhakal3, N. Ito3, with an incidence of 1 in 6,000 people and a carrier fre- N. Sharma3, X. O. Breakefield4, L. J. Ozelius4,2, C. D. Bragg3, quencyof1:35isthemostfrequentcauseofinfantlethality. M. Talkowski1,2 Recently, the first SMA therapy based on antisense oligo- nucleotides (ASOs) elevating SMN protein levels, namely 1Center for Genomic Medicine, Massachusetts General SPINRAZA, has been FDA-approved. SMN is crucial for Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 2Department of Neu- all cells but particularly for motoneurons (MN) and neu- rology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United romuscular junctions (NMJ). In the most severe type I - States, 3The Collaborative Center for X-linked Dystonia accounting for 60% of SMA-affected individuals - the Parkinsonism, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, elevated SMN level may be still insufficient to restore MN MA, United States, 4Department of Neurology, Massachu- function lifelong. setts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States Using a combined strategy of linkage and transcriptome analysis, we identified neurocalcin delta (NCALD) as a Introduction: X-linked Dystonia Parkinsonism (XDP) is a novel SMA protective modifier. Low NCALD expression neurodegenerative disorder endemic to the Philippines that was found in five asymptomatic SMN1-deleted individuals was linked to a founder haplotype over two decades ago. in comparison to type III SMA affected individuals, all MaterialsandMethods:Weconstructedahigh-resolution carrying four SMN2 copies. We demonstrate that low population-specific genetic map of XDP from de novo SMN level reduces Ca2+ -influx and impairs endocytosis. genome and transcriptome assembly using short-read and Ca2+ NCALD binds clathrin -dependently and acts as a multiple long-read and linked-read technologies. We char- Ca2+ -dependent negative regulator of endocytosis. acterizedtranscriptomesfromfibroblastsamong46subjects Indeed,NCALDinhibitionrestoresimpairedendocytosisin (probands,carriers,andunaffectedfamilymembers)aswell SMA. as induced pluripotent stem cell derived neural stem cells UsingthreedifferentSMAmodels,C.elegans,zebrafish, (NSCs), and induced neurons from a subset of individuals. and mouse, we prove that NCALD downregulation ame- Results: These analyses identified 17 alleles shared among lioratesSMAdiseasepathologiesatMNandNMJleveland all XDP probands, as well as three independent recombi- improves motoric abilities. Most importantly, a combina- nation events that narrowed the putative causal region to a torial therapy using low dose of SMN-ASOs and 50% genomic segment including TAF1. Differential gene NCALDreductionrestoredsurvival,MNandNMJfunction expression and de novo transcriptome assembly in NSCs and motoric abilities in a severe SMA mouse model. A revealed novel alternative splicing and partial transcription similar strategy may cure and not only ameliorate SMA in of intronic sequence as a consequence of retrotransposition the future. of a disease-specific sine-VNTR-Alu (SVA) into the XDP DFG Wi-945/13-1, Wi-945/14-1, RTG 1970, SMA founder haplotype; remarkably, both the aberrant splicing Europe, EU FP7 NEUROMICS, CMMC, IGSDHD, AFM- and reduced TAF1 expression signatures in XDP probands Telethon and NIH PO1NS066888. wererescuedfollowingCRISPR/Cas9excisionoftheSVA. S. Schneider: None. M. Riessland: None. A. Kacz- We also identified a highly interconnected co-expression marek: None. K.J. Swoboda: None. H. Loehr: None. network that have been previously implicated in neurode- C. Bradler: None. V. Grysko: None. M. Dimitriadi: velopmental disorders. None. S. Hosseinibarkooie: None. L. Torres-Benito: Conclusions: Collectively, the integration of XDP genome None. M. Peters: None. A. Upadhyay: None. N. Biglari: and transcriptome assembly suggest a unique pathogenic None. S. Kroeber: None. I. Hoelker: None. L. Garbes: mechanism of XDP involving aberrant splicing and tran- None. C. Gilissen: None. A. Hoischen: None. G. Nuern- scription as a consequence of SVA retrotransposition, as berg: None. P. Nuernberg: None. M. Walter: None. well as perturbations of pathways of relevance to dystonia, F.Rigo:None.C.F.Bennett:None.M.J.Kye:None.A.C. parkinsonism,andneurodevelopment.Thesestudiesfurther Hart: None. M. Hammerschmidt: None. P. Kloppen- suggest a potential role for emerging technologies in burg: None. B. Wirth: None. reference-freediscoveryofnovelsequencesandpathogenic mechanisms.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 57 T.Aneichyk:None.W.T.Hendricks:None.R.Yadav: Conclusions: We have facilitated the integration of next- None. D. Shin: None. D. Gao: None. C.A. Vaine: None. generation sequencing technologies into healthcare. This R.L. Collins: None. B. Currall: None. M.E. Dy: None. study has significantly enhanced the capacity of standard J. Dhakal: None. N. Ito: None. N. Sharma: None. X.O. clinical work-ups and has pioneered an accessible pathway Breakefield: None. L.J. Ozelius: None. C.D. Bragg: to expedite future diagnoses. None. M. Talkowski: None. K. Johnson: None. A. Töpf: None. M. Bertoli: None. L. Phillips: None. A. Blain: None. M. Ensini: None. C08.4 M. Lek: None. L. Xu: None. T. Mullen: None. Application of exome sequencing technologies to E. Valkanas: None. D.G. MacArthur: None. V. Straub: 1,000 patients affected by limb-girdle weakness of B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or unknown origin consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Sanofi Genzyme, GSK, Prosensa/Bio- K. Johnson1, A. Töpf1, M. Bertoli1, L. Phillips1, A. Blain1, M. Ensini1, marin, Ionis Pharmceuticals, Sarepta, Ultragenyx. D. M. Lek2,3, L. Xu2,3, T. Mullen2,3, E. Valkanas2,3, D. G. MacArthur2,3, Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, V. Straub1 and expert witness); Modest; Sanofi Genzyme. F. Con- sultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Acceleron Pharma, 1Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Audentes Therapeutics, Biomarin, Bristol-Myer Squibb, Kingdom, 2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Italfarmaco S.p.A., Nicox, Pfizer, Sanofi Genzyme, San- Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United thera, Sarepta Therapeutics, Summit Therapeutics, Tivor- States, 3Program in Medical and Population Genetics, san, TrophyNOD. Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Boston, MA, United States C08.5 Autosomal recessive myopathy associated with Introduction: Rare diseases collectively affect 8% of the cataracts caused by mutations in the gene INPP5K, general population, eliciting a significant global health and in inositol phosphatase economic burden. Muscular dystrophies are a hetero- geneous group of rare genetic disorders that are char- A. Roos1,2, M. Wiessner3, D. Cox1, R. Barresi1, D. Hathazi2, L. Swan4, acterised by progressive skeletal muscle wasting and H. Lochmüller1, J. Senderek3 weakness, and can directly precipitate premature mortality. Here,weapplytargetedwholeexomesequencing(WES)to 1Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, United the largest ever cohort of patients with unexplained prox- Kingdom, 2Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften imal muscle weakness. We aim to decipher disease aetiol- -ISAS- e.V., Dortmund, Germany, 3Friedrich-Baur-Institut, ogy, enhance diagnostic pathways and heighten the München, Germany, 4University of Liverpool, Liverpool, awareness of neuromuscular disorders - particularly limb- United Kingdom girdle muscular dystrophies (LGMDs). Materials and Methods: 1,000 European participants INPP5K encodes the type II inositol phosphatate 5- presented with limb-girdle weakness and/or elevated crea- phoaphatase K, a muscle enriched inositol phosphatase tine kinase activity. WES was performed using Illumina interacting with the BiP chaperone and negatively regulat- exome capture (38 Mb target) and a Picard-based pipeline. ing assembly of the actin cytoskeleton. Here, we report on The variant call set was uploaded onto seqr and 169 can- recessive missense mutations and one in-frame deletion didate genes examined. affecting the functionality of the INPP5K protein in six Results: Suspected pathogenic variants were identified in families with congenital muscular dystrophy further com- 49% of participants across 73 genes. LGMD2A (CAPN3) plicated by bilateral early childhood cataracts and intellec- wasthemostcommondiseaseaccountingfor15%ofsolved tualdisabilityorlearningdifficulties.Notably,mutationsof cases. Patients with extremely rare diseases including anotherbindingpartnerofBiPcalledSIL1havebeenlinked LGMD2Z (POGLUT1)were identifiedin ourcohort,while to a similar phenotype. Muscle biopsy specimen of a LGMD2J (TTN) founder mutation was detected in a INPP5K-patients reveal clear features of muscle dystrophy Serbian sub-population. Genotype-phenotype correlations and moreover indicate that the mutant protein is still and inheritance patterns were expanded for many diseases. expressed in the diseased tissue. Pathogenicity of loss of Crucially, we diagnosed nineteen patients with treatable functionalINPP5Kwasconfirmedinzebrafishviainjection conditions including CMS5 (COLQ), CMS10 (DOK7), of respective morpholinos. Knock-down of protein expres- glutaric acidemia IIC (ETFDH), Pompe (GAA), CMS12 sion resulted in disturbed architecture of skeletal muscle, (GFPT1) and CMS11 (RAPSN). narrowed eyes and cranial nerve abnormalities 48h post58 injection. Moreover, label-free global proteome profiling Results:Homozygousvariantsintwodifferentgeneswhere utilizing patient-derived fibroblasts was carried out. The identified in the four patients analyzed. In one family a obtained results are in line with the known cellular func- nonsense variant in the Leimodin-1 gene (LMOD1) was tions of INPP5K and provide further insights into the found, while the other two families carried two different molecular basis of the phenotype by showing vulnerability homozygousvariantsintheMyosinlightchainkinasegene ofproteinsaffectedinphenotypicallysimilardisorders,thus (MYLK). Expression studies showed that the variants in biochemicallylinkingagroupofraredisease.Identification LMOD1andMYLKaffectedproteinexpression,andinvitro ofINPP5Kmutationsalongwiththeresultsofourzebrafish data confirmed pathogenicity of these variants due to studiesandproteomicfindingsputINPP5Konthegrowing impairment of smooth muscle contractility. Moreover, list of complicated myopathic phenotypes und in addition Lmod1 knock out mice generated using CRISPR-Cas9 build a molecular bridge between some subtypes of those. genome editing, and homozygous mutant mice for Mylk A. Roos: None. M. Wiessner: None. D.Cox: None. R. previously described1, showed pathology consistent with Barresi: None. D. Hathazi: None. L. Swan: None. H. MMIHS. Lochmüller: None. J. Senderek: None. Conclusions: Our results present LMOD1 and MYLK as two new disease causing genes for the recessive form of C08.6 MMIHS, confirming that MMIHS is a myopathy with Homozygous variants in LMOD1 and MYLK cause multiple patterns of inheritance caused by disruption of the Megacystis Microcolon Intestinal Hypoperistalsis smooth muscle contractile apparatus. Syndrome by disruption of smooth muscle 1He et al., 2008;135(2):610-20. contractility M.M.Alves:None.D.Halim:None.E.Brosens:None. M.P. Wilson: None. J.B.J.M. Verheij: None. F. Muller: M.M.Alves1,D.Halim1,E.Brosens1,M.P.Wilson2,J.B.J.M.Verheij3, None. M.F. Wangler: None. A. Beaudet: None. M. F. Muller4, M. F. Wangler5, A. Beaudet5, M. Doukas1, H. J. Stoop1, Doukas: None. H.J. Stoop: None. B. de Graaf: None. B. de Graaf1, R. W. W. Brouwer1, W. F. J. van Ijcken1, Y. Han2, R.W.W. Brouwer: None. W.F.J. van Ijcken: None. V.Nanda2,O.J.Slivano2,C.K.Christie2,K.L.deMesyBentley2,S.Xu2, Y.Han:None.V.Nanda:None.O.J.Slivano:None.C.K. G.Jin2,D.Oliver6,T.Djuwantono7,W.Yan6,R.Kapur8,A.J.Burns9,1, Christie: None. K.L. de Mesy Bentley: None. S. Xu: D. Tibboel1, J. M. Miano2, R. M. W. Hofstra1,9 None. G. Jin: None. D. Oliver: None. T. Djuwantono: None.W.Yan:None.R.Kapur:None.A.J.Burns:None. 1Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Nether- D. Tibboel: None. J.M. Miano: None. R.M.W. Hofstra: lands, 2University of Rochester School of Medicine and None. Dentistry, New York, NY, United States, 3Univeristy Medi- cal Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Hôpital UniversitaireRobertDebré,Paris,France,5BaylorCollege C09 Molecular Mechanisms of Disease of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 6University of Nevada School of Medicine, Reno, NV, United States, C09.1 7Faculty of Medicine, Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung, X chromosome inactivation in human single cells Indonesia,8SeattleChildren’sHospital,Seattle,WA,United States, 9Birth Defects Research Centre, UCL Institute of F.A.Santoni1,2,C.Borel2,M.Garieri2,M.Garieri2,G.Stamoulis2,S.E. Child Health, London, United Kingdom Antonarakis2,1,3 Introduction: Megacystis Microcolon Intestinal Hypoper- 1University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, istalsis Syndrome (MMIHS) is a rare congenital disorder 2University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 3iGE3, Gen- characterizedbyseveredilationofthebladderandintestinal eva, Switzerland obstruction.Todate,twogenesareknowntobeinvolvedin MMIHS pathogenesis, ACTG2 and MYH11, but in some One X chromosome is randomly inactivated in each patientsthegeneticetiologyofthisdiseaseisstillunknown. female cell (XCI). However, some genes on the silenced X Material and Methods: Homozygosity mapping and chromosomeescapefromXCIandareexpressedfromboth whole exome sequencing were performed in four MMIHS X chromosome alleles. To date, the majority of X inacti- patients derived from three consanguineous families for vationstudieswereperformedinpopulationsofcells(bulk) which no variant in ACTG2 and MYH11 was identified. from organs andtissues. The ability tostudy the single cell Pathogenicityofthevariantsidentifiedwasdeterminedbya transcriptome(scRNA-seq)nowprovidesanunprecedented series of expression studies, in vitro and in vivo assays. opportunity to revisit X-inactivation. We have studied 902 single cell fibroblasts from five female individuals andAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 59 performed scRNA-seq in order to investigate XCI at single 19MPI Mol.Genet, Berlin, Germany, 20Charité, Berlin, cell resolution. To this aim we developed a computational Germany, 21Pränat-Med, München, Germany, 22UniHosp, and statistical framework integrating single cell tran- Rio, Greece, 23Uni, Pécs, Hungary, 24FRIGE, Ahmedabad, scriptome and whole genome sequencing to robustly elim- India, 25EugenioMedea, BosisioParini, Italy, 26CSS Men- inateconfoundingartifactsandidentifygeneswhichescape del, Roma, Italy, 27UniHosp, Oslo, Norway, 28Uni, Maas- X inactivation. We identified 19 genes as escapees (14 tricht, Netherlands, 29Uni, Lisboa, Portugal, 30UniMedCtr, known and 5 novel genes significantly escaping X inacti- Maribor, Slovenia, 31Comp.Hosp.Navarra, Pamplona, vation). Unexpectedly, among cells coming from the same Spain, 32AbaCid-Genética, Madrid, Spain, 33UniHosp individual,we observedthat eachgene exhibited a variable ParcTauli, Sabadell, Spain, 34Uni, Zürich, Switzerland, propensity to escape XCI. Through the calculation of an 35Uni, Canakkale, Turkey, 36UniRepub, Montevideo, Uru- Inactivation Score as the mean of the allelic expression guay, 37Legacy Health Syst, Portland, OR, United States, profiles of the escapees per cell, we discovered some cells 38Uni.Sch.Med, St.Louis, MO, United States, 39Uni, being “inactive”, i.e. exclusively expressing the escaping Augusta, GA, United States, 40NWPermanente, Portland, genesfromtheactivealleleandothersbeing“escapers”,i.e. OR, United States expressing the escapee from both alleles. A possible mechanism to explain this cellular heterogeneity is the Introduction: The human genome is organised into reg- single cell variability of XIST transcription in concert with ulatory regions termed topological associating domains LINEsexpression,whichwerevealedbeingbothpositively (TADs). Disruption of TADs by balanced chromosomal correlatedwiththeInactivationScore.Theseresultsprovide rearrangements (BCRs) e.g. translocations and inversions, evidence of an unexpected cellular heterogeneity of the canbedeleteriousduetolongrangepositioneffect(LRPE) mechanism of X-inactivation. causedbydisplacementofregulatoryelements.MostBCRs F.A.Santoni:None.C.Borel:None.M.Garieri:None. rearrange TADs without phenotypic consequences, so M. Garieri: None. G. Stamoulis: None. S.E. definitionofTADsathighriskforLRPEisneeded.Several Antonarakis: None. known LRPE loci overlap with clusters of evolutionarily conserved non-exonic elements (CNEs). Here we identify C09.2 the most CNE-enriched TADs (CNE-TADs) and examine Morbidity risk of chromosomal breakpoints in the effects of chromosomal breakpoints within these in topological domains enriched in non-exonic affected and unaffected BCR carriers. conserved elements MaterialsandMethods:AllhumanTADswererankedby enrichment of CNEs to define CNE-TADs. We mate-pair M. Bak1, A. Fonseca2, M. Mehrjouy1, M. Rasmussen1, C. Halgren1, sequencedtwo-wayBCRsfrom87affectedand117healthy I.Bache1,P.Kroisel3,S.Midyan4,J.Vermeesch5,A.Vienna-Morgante2, carriers. Together with breakpoints from ~200 published K. Abe6, D. Moretti-Ferreira7, L. Angelova8, E. Rajcan-Separovic9, BCRs, and 120 known BCRs associated with LRPE, we C.Sismani10,C.Aristidou10,Z.Sedlacek11,C.Fagerberg12,K.Brøndum- analysedatotalof~900breakpointsinthecontextofCNE- Nielsen13, I. Vogel14, A. Bojesen15, K. Õunap16, L. Roht 16, TADs. J.Lespinasse17,C.Beneteau18,V.Kalscheuer19,N.Ehmke20,C.Daumer- Results:Wedefine~400CNE-TADscovering~16%ofthe Haas21, E. Stefanou22, M. Czako23, F. Sheth24, C. Bonaglia25, genome.Notably,boundariesofCNEclusterscorrelatewith A. Novelli26, M. Fannemel27, J. Engelen28, A. Travessa29, N. Kokalj- TAD boundaries, highlighting the conservation of CNE- Vokac30, M. Ramos-Arroyo31, L. R. Martínez32, M. Guitart33, TADs as regulatory units. CNE-TADs are enriched for key A. Schinzel34, F. Silan35, C. de Almeida36, Y. Akkari37, J. Batanian38, developmental genes and they overlap with 23 out of 32 H. Kim39, P. Jacky40, N. Tommerup1, International Breakpoint (70%)knownLRPE-associatedloci.Breakpointstruncating Mapping Consortium CNE-TADs are more frequent among affected versus healthy BCR carriers (p=0.003), and even more so are 1Uni, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Uni, São Paulo, Brazil, intergenic breakpoints within CNE-TADs (p=0.0015). 3Med.Uni, Graz, Austria, 4Med.Genet, Yerevan, Armenia, Conclusions: CNE-TADs are high risk regions for LRPE, 5UZLeuven,Leuven,Belgium,6RedeSarah,Brasilia,Brazil, and their disruption by balanced genomic rearrangements 7St.Uni, Botucatu, Brazil, 8UniHosp, Varna, Bulgaria, are associated with an increased morbidity risk. 9ChildFamRes.Inst,Vancouver,BC,Canada,10Inst.Neurol. Supported by the Danish Council for Independent Genet, Nicosia, Cyprus, 11Motol UniHosp, Prague, Czech Research [4183-00482B] Republic, 12UniHosp, Odense, Denmark, 13KennedyRH, M. Bak: None. A. Fonseca: None. M. Mehrjouy: Glostrup,Denmark,14UniHosp, Aarhus,Denmark,15Hosp, None.M.Rasmussen:None.C.Halgren:None.I.Bache: Vejle, Denmark, 16UniHosp, Tartu, Estonia, 17CentreHosp, None.P.Kroisel:None.S.Midyan:None.J.Vermeesch: Chambéry, France, 18ServGénétMéd, Nantes, France, None. A. Vienna-Morgante: None. K. Abe: None.60 D. Moretti-Ferreira: None. L. Angelova: None. E. Raj- developmental disorders, were sequenced using either can-Separovic: None. C. Sismani: None. C. Aristidou: Paired-End or Mate Pair libraries. To utilize the WGS data None. Z. Sedlacek: None. C. Fagerberg: None. for structural variant analysis, a WGS caller (TIDDIT), a K. Brøndum-Nielsen: None. I. Vogel: None. A. Bojesen: pipeline (FindSV) and a program to visualize the rearran- None. K. Õunap: None. L. Roht: None. J. Lespinasse: gement end-products were developed. None. C. Beneteau: None. V. Kalscheuer: None. Results:Bycombiningreaddepthanddiscordantreadpair N. Ehmke: None. C. Daumer-Haas: None. E. Stefanou: analysis 154 junctions were characterized (range 4–26; None. M. Czako: None. F. Sheth: None. C. Bonaglia: median=5) and an overall connectivity picture is given in None.A.Novelli:None.M.Fannemel:None.J.Engelen: 21 cases. These rearrangements were sub-classified None. A. Travessa: None. N. Kokalj-Vokac: None. depending on the patterns observed: M. Ramos-Arroyo: None. L.R. Martínez: None. (1)Caseswithclustereddeletionsonly(e.g.del-nml-del- M. Guitart: None. A. Schinzel: None. F. Silan: None. nml-del) often had additional hidden structural rearrange- C. de Almeida: None. Y. Akkari: None. J. Batanian: ments, such as insertions and inversions, that may be the None. H. Kim: None. P. Jacky: None. N. Tommerup: result of multiple simultaneous double-strand DNA breaks None. followed by non-homologous repair typical to chromothripsis. C09.3 (2) Cases with only duplications (e.g. dup-nml-dup) or Whole genome characterization of array defined combinations of deletions and duplications (e.g. del-nml- clustered CNVs reveals two distinct complex dup-del-nml-dup-nml-del), demonstrated a pattern of rearrangementsubclassesgeneratedthrougheither inversions, deletions and duplications more consistent with non-homologous repair or template switching serial template switching during DNA replication suggest- ing chromoanasynthesis. L. Nazaryan-Petersen1, J. Eisfeldt2,3, J. Lundin2,4, M. Pettersson2, D. Conclusion: Multiple copy number changes clustered on a Nilsson2,3,4, J. Wincent2, A. Lieden2,4, F. Vezzi5, V. Wirta6, M. Käller6, single chromosome may arise through both chromothripsis T. Duelund7, R. Houssari7, L. Pignata7, M. Bak1, N. Tommerup1, E. S. and chromoanasynthesis. Lundberg2,4, Z. Tümer7, A. Lindstrand2,4 Grants:SciLifeLabNationalProjects;TheDanishCouncil for Independent Research [4183-00482B]. 1Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome L. Nazaryan-Petersen: None. J. Eisfeldt: None. Research, Institute of Cellular and Molecular Medicin, J.Lundin:None.M.Pettersson:None.D.Nilsson:None. University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, J. Wincent: None. A. Lieden: None. F. Vezzi: None. 2Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Kar- V. Wirta: None. M. Käller: None. T. Duelund: None. olinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 3Science for Life R. Houssari: None. L. Pignata: None. M. Bak: None. Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet Science Park, Solna, N. Tommerup: None. E.S. Lundberg: None. Z. Tümer: Sweden, 4Department of Clinical Genetics, Karolinska None. A. Lindstrand: None. University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 5SciLifeLab, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Stockholm C09.4 University, Stockholm, Sweden, 6SciLifeLab, School of BiallelicmutationsofPrune-1arecausingPEHO-like Biotechnology, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stock- syndrome with microcephaly and holm, Sweden, 7Kennedy Center, Department of Clinical neurodevelopmental impairment Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark V. Ferrucci1,2,3, V. Salpietro4, F. Asadzadeh2, J. Jemielity5, F. Pennino3,2, M. Ahmed6,7, I. Scognamiglio3, L. Musella2, A. Di Introduction: Clustered copy number variants (CNVs) as Somma8, F. Cozzolino2, A. Duilio8, P. Pucci2,8, E. Karaca9, A. H. detected by chromosomal microarray are often reported as Crosby6,7, E. L. Baple7,10, H. Houlden4, J. R. Lupsky9, M. Zollo3,2,1 germline chromothripsis. However, such cases might need further investigations by massive parallel whole genome 1SEMMEuropeanschoolofmolecularMedicine,University sequencing (WGS) in order to properly define the under- of Milan, Milan, Italy, 2CEINGE Biotecnologie Avanzate, lying complex rearrangement. Naples, Italy, 3DMMBM Dipartimento di Medicina Mole- Material and Methods: 22 carriers of clustered CNVs, colare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli studi di previously referred to the Departments of Clinical Genetics Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy, 4Department of Mole- attheKarolinskaUniversityHospital(Stockholm,Sweden) cular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, orKennedyCenter,Rigshospitalet(Copenhagen,Denmark) United Kingdom, 5Division of Biophysics, Institute of for a clinical chromosome microarray due to congenital Experimental Physics, University of Warsaw, Warsaw,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 61 Réunion, 6Genetics Research Centre, St. George’s Uni- molecules impairing PPase/PPX activity. Our results versityLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,7RILDWellcome in-vitro are encouraging. Wolfson Centre, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation, Grant-references: AIRC(11963)- PRIN(E5AZ5F)- Exeter, United Kingdom, 8Dipartimento di Scienze Chi- FP7TUMIC(HEALTH-F2-2008-201662)- POR MOVIE miche,UniversitàdegliStudidiNapoliFedericoII,Naples, (ReteDelleBiotecnologieInCampania)- RegioneCampania Italy, 9Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, (leg,5). Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, V.Ferrucci:None.V.Salpietro: None.F.Asadzadeh: 10University HospitalSouthampton NHS FoundationTrust, None. J. Jemielity: None. F. Pennino: None. M. Ahmed: Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United None. I. Scognamiglio: None. L. Musella: None. A. Di Kingdom Somma: None. F. Cozzolino: None. A. Duilio: None. P. Pucci: None. E. Karaca: None. A.H. Crosby: None. Introduction: The correct development of the brain is E.L. Baple: None. H. Houlden: None. J.R. Lupsky: strictlyregulatedbythecorrectbalancebetweensymmetric None. M. Zollo: None. and asymmetric division of neuronal progenitor cells (NPGs). Alterations in NPGs proliferation, migration and C09.5 differentiation result in neurodevelopmental disorders with A human developmental syndrome caused by intellectual disabilities and brain malformations, including germline mutation to a histone H4 gene highlights tubulinopathies. the importance of H4K91 in DNA damage response Material and Methods: Using cell-proliferation/migration and cell cycle control (XCELLinge),biochemical-assays, immunofluorescence, microtubules(MT)spin-down/polymerization, we examined F. Tessadori1,2, J. Giltay1, J. Hurst3, M. Massink1, K. Duran1, K. van the functional consequences of Prune1 mutations. Gassen1, R. Scott3, J. Bakkers2,1, G. van Haaften1 Results: Prune1 biallelic-mutations were found in several individuals in extended families with tubulinopathies: 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute, Microcephaly(MIM#251200) and PEHO-syndrome Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Great Ormond Street Hospital, (MIM#260565) (Zollo et al, Brain.2017.https://doi.org/10. London, United Kingdom 1093/brain/awx014). The mutations identified in Prune1 (D30N-R297W-D106N) show enhancement of its enzy- Chromatin is a repeat of nucleosomes, consisting of the matic exopolyphosphatase (PPase/PPX) activity. These DNA fiber wrapped around histone octamers. Its covalent “neomorphic-mutations” enhance the catalytic ability of modifications, whether affecting DNA or histone N- Prune1 to hydrolyze tetrapolyphosphates(P4) producing terminal tails, govern cellular processes such as DNA inorganic-polyphosphates(PPi-Pi), that mediate signal replication, transcription and repair. Mutations on genes transmission in mammalian brain. We further found wild- belonging to histone tail-modifying complexes have been typeandmutatedPrune1colocalizewithMicrotubules(MT) reported to cause developmental disorders or carry an tomitotic-spindleviabindingtoa/b-Tubulin.Ourgenotype/ oncogenic effect. Recently, mutations directly affecting the phenotype correlation studies demonstrate that these histone tail were shown to play a role in tumorigenesis. Prune1-mutants caused a delay in MT-polymerization in- Verylittleisknown,however,aboutmodificationsaffecting vitro, affecting nucleation-phase in patients-derived- the histone core. fibroblasts. These alterations result in mitotic-defects Here we show that mono-allelic missense mutations (micronuclei/lagging-chromosomes) and impaired cell-pro- affectingLysine91inthehistoneH4core(H4K91)causea liferation/migration. Moreover, we found NDPK-A/-B human syndrome of growth delay, microcephaly, intellec- (D’Angelo et al,2004) colocalize with mitotic-spindle and tual disability, characteristic facial features and foot ray negatively affect in-vitro MT-polymerization. These find- anomalies. We report three patients with a missense muta- ings suggest a role for Prune1/NDPK-protein-complex in tion at H4K91 and overlapping phenotypes. MT-dynamics during cell division. Furthermore,two small ThehumangenomecontainsfifteenhistoneH4genes,all molecules are indicating action on impairment of Prune1 differing at the nucleotide level but coding for an invariant augmented PPase/PPX-activity in-vitro. H4 protein. RNA sequencing analysis of patient cells Conclusions: We link the clinical feature of these showed that±8% of H4 cDNA molecules carried the neurodevelopmental-disorders to PPX-iperactivity of mutatedallele.Weobserveddifferentiallyexpressedhistone Prune1 mutants. Our data establish biochemical-activity of genes and cell-cycle related genes compared to controls, Prune1 is necessary to assure a correct cell division, espe- suggesting an effect on processes such as DNA replication cially during brain/cerebellum development. These results or cell cycle progression. would benefit future therapeutic applications with small62 Expression of the H4 variants in zebrafish embryos the OS formation defect but not the subsequent cell shape recapitulated theanomalies seenin individuals carrying the defect. Together, our results indicate that Ta3 plays a role H4 mutations. We link the H4 mutations to genomic upstream of Rab8a activation in the initial steps of cilio- instability, resulting in increased apoptosis and cell cycle genesis and additional roles in ciliary function and cell progression anomalies during early development. Our shape maintenance which are independent of Rab8. findings imply an important role for ubiquitination of SNSF Ambizione-SCORE:PZ00P3_163979/PZ00P3_ H4K91 in genomic stability during embryonic 142404. development. I. Ojeda Naharros:None. F. Cristian: None. J. Zang: F. Tessadori: None. J. Giltay: None. J. Hurst: None. None. M. Gesemann: None. S.C.F. Neuhauss: None. M. Massink: None. K. Duran: None. K. van Gassen: R. Bachmann-Gagescu: None. None.R.Scott:None.J.Bakkers:None.G.vanHaaften: None. C10 C09.6 GWAS: Resolving Missing Causality TheciliopathyproteinTalpid3/KIAA0586playsarole upstream of Rab8 activation in outer segment C10.1 formation and maintenance in zebrafish retinal Systems Genetics and Transcriptome analysis on photoreceptors Circulating Proteins I. Ojeda Naharros1, F. Cristian1,2, J. Zang1, M. Gesemann1, S. C. F. D. V. Zhernakova1,2, U. Vosa1, A. Claringbould1, M. J. Bonder1, Neuhauss1, R. Bachmann-Gagescu3,1 A. Kurilshikov1, S. Sanna1, B. Atanasovska1, R. A. Boer3, F. Kuipers4, L. Franke1, C. Wijmenga1, A. Zhernakova1, J. Fu1,4 1University of Zurich- Molecular Life Sciences, Zürich, Switzerland, 2Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Gro- Germany, 3University of Zurich- Medical Genetics, Zürich, ningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Netherlands, Switzerland 2Theodosius Dobzhansky Center for Genome Bioinfor- matics, St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Ciliopathies are a group of human disorders caused by Russian Federation, 3University of Groningen, University dysfunction of primary cilia, ubiquitous microtubule-based Medical Center Groningen, Department of Cardiology, organelles involved in signal transduction. Cilia are Groningen, Netherlands, 4University of Groningen, Uni- anchored inside the cell through basal bodies, modified versity Medical Center Groningen, Department of Pedia- centrioles also acting as microtubule organization centers. trics, Groningen, Netherlands Photoreceptors (PR) are sensory neurons, whose primary cilium has evolved into a highly specialized compartment Proteins circulating in blood are often measured as bio- called the outer segment (OS) responsible for sensing markers for various diseases, including immune diseases, incoming light. Thus, retinal degeneration is frequent in cancers and cardiovascular diseases (CVD). There is con- ciliopathies. siderable evidence that human genetic variation influences Mutations in the novel ciliopathy gene KIAA0586/Tal- gene expression. The effect of genetic variants on serum pid3, cause Joubert syndrome and lethal ciliopathies. To level of circulating proteins is still largely unknown. We elucidate the function of Talpid3 in photoreceptors, we performedasystemsgeneticsanalysistointegrategenetics, studied zebrafish ta3 mutants which undergo progressive transcriptome and circulating proteins in 1,294 individuals retinal degeneration. The majorityofta3-/- PR donot form from a Dutch population cohort (LifeLines-DEEP), for OS due to a defect in the initial basal body docking steps whom we had data on genome-wide genotype, tran- required for ciliogenesis. These PRs also display intracel- scriptomebyRNAseqandserumlevelsof92CVD-relevant lular accumulation of the photopigment opsin and pro- proteins, as well as over 200 various clinic parameters. At gressive loss of cell polarity. In a small subset of PRs, FDR 0.05, we identified 125 novel cis-pQTLs. The stron- persistence of maternally deposited Ta3 rescues this phe- gest cis-effects were observed for IL-6R (P=3.3×10– notypeandallowsformationofinitiallynormal-lookingOS. 310), SHPS1 (P=2.2×10–307) and IL-17RA (P=3.1× However, progressive abnormalities in cell shape and OS 10–184). Thirty novel trans-pQTLs have suggested pleio- maintenanceinthesePRsindicatethatTa3playsadditional tropic effectsofKLKB1,ABO andPLAURlocithat trans- roles beyond basal body docking in ciliary-directed traf- affected 10, 7 and 3 proteins respectively. Over 70% of fickingorcytoskeletalmaintenance.Wefurthershowthata pQTLs effects cannot be explained by expression level in constitutivelyactiveformofthesmallGTPaseRab8rescues blood. These proteins were enriched for “leakage proteins”Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 63 from other tissues. These proteins have shown associations rational in choosing genome wide significance thresholds not only to metabolic traits but also to electrocardiography drastically affects replication outcomes. Finally, scrutiniz- parameters of heart function, suggesting their promise in ing association studies for Alzheimer’s disease for the full disease diagnosis. It was further confirmed by mendelian spectrum of allele frequencies we demonstrate the useful- randomization approach that 48 proteins were associated ness of independentreplication in investigating rare variant with genetic risk scores (GRS) of blood lipids, coronary effects. artery disease, metabolites and blood cell counts. Most Conclusions: This resource provides a powerful tool for associationsremainedsignificantaftercontrollingcis-pQTL assessingpublishedGWASassociationsandtoexaminethe effect.Ourstudyhighlightsthatplasmaproteomicsisunder proposedroleofcommonaswellasrarevariantsondisease strong genetic control, which should be taken into account risk identified by GWAS or other approaches. when using them as potential biomarkers for complex A. Oddsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- diseases. nificant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. P. Sulem: D.V. Zhernakova: None. U. Vosa: None. A. Clar- A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; decode ingbould: None. M.J. Bonder: None. A. Kurilshikov: genetics/AMGEN inc. G. Thorisson: A. Employment (full None.S.Sanna:None.B.Atanasovska:None.R.A.Boer: or part-time); Significant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. None.F.Kuipers:None.L.Franke:None.C.Wijmenga: S.A. Gudjonsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. A. Zhernakova: None. J. Fu: None. Significant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. S. Beno- nisdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; C10.2 decode genetics/AMGEN inc. G. Arnadottir: A. Employ- The deCODE replication server, a resource for the ment (full or part-time); Significant; decode genetics/ replication of published genotype-phenotype AMGEN inc. B.O. Jensson: A. Employment (full or part- associations time); Significant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. R.P. Kristjansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- A. Oddsson1, P. Sulem1, G. Thorisson1, S. A. Gudjonsson1, nificant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. G. Sulem: S. Benonisdottir1, G. Arnadottir1, B. O. Jensson1, R. P. Kristjansson1, A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; decode G. Sulem1, U. Thorsteinsdottir1,2, G. Masson1, D. F. Gudbjartsson1,3, genetics/AMGEN inc. U. Thorsteinsdottir: A. Employ- K. Stefansson1,2 ment (full or part-time); Significant; decode genetics/ AMGEN inc. G. Masson: A. Employment (full or part- 1DeCODE genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2Faculty of Medi- time); Significant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. D.F. cine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3School of Gudbjartsson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland, nificant; decode genetics/AMGEN inc. K. Stefansson: A. Reykjavik, Iceland Employment (full or part-time); Significant; decode genet- ics/AMGEN inc. Introduction: Since 2005, the number of genome-wide association (GWAS) studies reporting associations of C10.3 sequence variants with disease and quantitative traits has Assessing the causal role of body mass index on grown fast. Publications of validation of finding have not cardiovascular health in young adults: a Mendelian always kept pace. By focusing on the Icelandic population randomization and recall-by-genotype analysis deCODEgeneticscontributedearlyandoftentothefieldof GWASandafter20yearsofdatacollection,informationon K. H. Wade1, S. T. Chiesa2, A. D. Hughes3, N. Chaturvedi3, M. the most common disease and traits is available for a large Charakida2, A. Rapala2, V. Muthurangu2, T. Khan2, A. Fraser1, fraction of the population. D. Lawlor1, G. Davey Smith1, J. E. Deanfield2, N. J. Timpson1 Materials and Methods: We have created a resource that access matching genotype-phenotype associations of pub- 1IntegrativeEpidemiology Unitat theUniversity of Bristol, lishedGWASsandrarevariantassociationsintheIcelandic Bristol, United Kingdom, 2Vascular Physiology Unit, population using sequence variants identified through Institute of Cardiovascular Science, University College whole-genome sequencing of over 30 thousand Icelanders London, London, United Kingdom, 3Cardiometabolic Phe- and imputed into 300 thousand chip-typed individuals and notyping Group, Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Uni- their close relatives. versity College London, London, United Kingdom Results: Using sequence variants for which statistical power can be estimated, we quantify the extent to which Introduction: The association between body mass index published GWAS associations replicate across and within (BMI) and cardiovascular health may be explained by differentphenotypesandancestrygroups.Weshowthatthe reverse causation, confounding or bias, rather than64 causality.Mendelianrandomization(MR)studiesinmid-to- Laval University, Quebec, QC, Canada, 6Department of latelifeimplycausalitybutwhetherthisappliestoyounger Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, ages is unclear. Using complementary Mendelian rando- MA, United States mization (MR) and recall-by-genotype (RbG) methodolo- gies, we estimated the causal effect of BMI on Introduction: One hundred and fifty-eight breast cancer cardiovascular health in European individuals aged 17–21 risk loci have been discovered through genome-wide asso- from the Avon Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children ciation studies (GWAS). For most, the mechanisms under- Methods: For MR analyses, a genetic risk score (GRS) lying these associations remain unknown. To explore them comprising97geneticvariantswasusedasaninstrumentto in more detail, we combined association data for all 158 test the causal effect of BMI on cardiovascular phenotypes known susceptibility regions with in-silico genomic feature measured at 17 (N=7924). An independent sample of annotation. participants from the same cohort participated in a RbG Material and Methods: Genotypes for 660,053 variants study at 21, which allowed additional detailed cardiovas- across these regions were determined using the custom cular phenotyping (N=418; 191/227 from the tails of a arrays iCOGS and Oncoarray, or estimated by imputation, GRS predicting variation in BMI). in88,937Controlsand84,642CasesofEuropeanancestry. Results:InbothMRandRbGanalyses,resultssuggestthat We determined, using stepwise multinomial logistic increased BMI causes higher blood pressure and left ven- regression, the signals associated with ER-positive (ER+) tricular mass (indexed to height2.7, LVMI) (e.g. change in or ER-negative breast cancer risk, and the credible sets of LVMI per kg/m2 using MR: 1.09g/m2.7; 95% CI: 0.63, candidate variants driving each signal. We also determined 1.54; P=3.32×10-06), plus increasing stroke volume whether these variants overlapped with transcription factor (estimate per 3.55kg/m2: 1.49ml/m2.04; 95% CI: 0.62, (TF)bindingsites,histonemarksorDNasehypersensitivity 2.35; P=0.001) and cardiac output (estimate per 3.55kg/ sites, specifically in breast tissue. m2:0.11l/min/m1.83;95%CI:0.03,0.19;P=0.01)inRbG Results: Across the 158 confirmed loci, we identified 202 analyses. Neither analysis suggested a causal role for BMI independent association signals and the credible candidate on heart rate. variants within each one. For ER+disease, we found sig- Conclusions: Complementary causal methodologies nificant enrichment of binding sites for 21 different TFs, showed greater BMI causing poorer cardiovascular health, including FOXA1, GATA3, and ESR1; as well as histone even in young adults.Grants: BHF (RG/10/004/28240, PG/ marks H3K27ac and H3K4me1 coincident with the posi- 06/145andCS/15/6/31468);UKMRC,UoBandWellcome tions of the candidate variants. Trust(MC_UU_12013/1–9,102215/2/13/2,096989/Z11/Z, Conclusions: Our results suggest significant overlap of 086676/7/08/Z and MR/M009351/1). credible causal variants with active gene regulatory ele- K.H. Wade: None. S.T. Chiesa: None. A.D. Hughes: ments and binding sites for specific TFs. Further analysis None. N. Chaturvedi: None. M. Charakida: None. will elucidate the roles of these TFs in breast cancer A.Rapala:None.V.Muthurangu:None.T.Khan:None. development. Funding: EC [MSCA-IF-2014-EF-656144], A. Fraser: None. D. Lawlor: None. G. Davey Smith: CR-UK [C1287/A10118, C1287/A16563], Genome None. J.E. Deanfield: None. N.J. Timpson: None. Canada, NCI [U19 CA148065, X01HG007492]. L. Fachal: None. J. Allen: None. M. Ghoussaini: C10.4 None.J.Beesley:None.J.S.Carroll:None.G.Chenevix- Fine-mapping analysis of 158 breast cancer risk loci Trench: None. J. Simard: None. P. Kraft: None. D.F. from OncoArray data Easton: None. A. Dunning: None. L. Fachal1, J. Allen2, M. Ghoussaini1, J. Beesley3, J. S. Carroll4, C10.5 G.Chenevix-Trench3,J.Simard5,P.Kraft6,D.F.Easton2,1,A.Dunning1 Prospects of fine-mapping causal genetic variants using summary statistics from genome-wide 1Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department of association studies Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 2Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, C. Benner1, A. Havulinna2, M. Järvelin3, V. Salomaa2, S. Ripatti1, DepartmentofPublicHealthandPrimaryCare,University M. Pirinen1 of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Cancer Division, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), Hel- Brisbane, Australia, 4Cancer Research UK, Cambridge sinki, Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare Institute, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United (THL), Helsinki, Finland, 3Imperial College London, Kingdom,5CentreHospitalierUniversitairedeQuébecand London, United KingdomAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 65 Identifying the causal genetic variants from a much lar- Introduction: Genome wide association studies (GWAS) ger set of highly correlated ones is an important next step of Homeostatic Model Assessment of β-cell function and towards translating results from Genome-Wide Association Insulin Resistance (HOMA-B/-IR) require Fasting Glucose Studies(GWAS)intotherapeutictargets.Publicavailability (FG) and Fasting Insulin (FI) to be measured in the same of GWAS summary statistics from large international con- individual. sortia hasgeneratedexciting new opportunities tocarry out Materials and Methods: We implemented the Genome such fine-mapping studies without access to the original Wide Inferred Statistics (Nieuwboer et al. 2016. GWIS for data. This is a promising approach to utilize the increasing Functions of Multiple Phenotypes. AJHG) approach to GWAS sample sizes while avoiding privacy concerns and carryoutaGWASofHOMA-B/-IRbasedonthesummary logistics of sharing individual-level genotype data. statistics for both traits, thereby increasing power over tra- Although all fine-mapping methods using summary statis- ditional HOMA-B/-IR GWAS. We used partially over- tics require information about the Linkage Disequilibrium lapping GWASs of FI (N=64,090) and FG (N=88,320) (LD) between variants, so far, it has not been verified from recent MAGIC meta-analyses and did GWIS tests for whether LD information from publicly available reference HOMA-B/-IR in up to 75,240 non-diabetic individuals of genotypepanelscouldreplacetheoriginalgenotypedatain European descent. Next, we used LD Score regression to these analyses. We show that one should not rely only on evaluate genetic relations with related traits. the reference genotypes from the 1000 Genomes Project Results: We detected one novel HOMA-B (FOXA2) and duetoitssmallsamplesizeforanyonepopulation,whereas three novel HOMA-IR (LYPLAL1, PER4, PPP1R3B) loci, a reference panel of 1,000 individuals from the study andconfirmedoneHOMA-IR(GCKR)andeightHOMA-B population is typically enough for cohort size of up until (ADCY5, DGKB, GCK, SLC30A8, GLIS3, TCF7L2, 10,000 individuals. More generally we show, both theore- ARAP1, MTNR1B) loci previously associated with type 2 tically and empirically, that the size of the reference panel diabetes (T2D). Blood triglycerides, body mass index, needs to scale with the GWAS sample size, which has waist-to-hip ratio, waist and hip circumferences show importantconsequencesforlargeGWASmeta-analysesand positive genetic correlation ranging from r =0.35 to r = g g 0.70(p<10−4)withbothHOMAs.Geneticcorrelationwith biobank studies. We conclude by providing software tools and practices for sharing LD information to efficiently high-density lipoprotein cholesterol is inverse (r =-0.36 g exploit summary statistics in biomedical research. Our and r =−0.53, respectively for HOMA-B/-IR, p<10−4). g results are based on Finnish population cohorts, UK Bio- Additionally, HOMA-IR correlates with T2D (r =0.56, g bank data and detailed fine-mapping of the APOE region p<10−9). discovering a novel variant associated with LDL-C. Conclusions: GWIS can aid GWAS of traits calculated C. Benner: None. A. Havulinna: None. M. Järvelin: from other phenotypes using mathematical formulae, espe- None. V. Salomaa: None. S. Ripatti: None. M. Pirinen: cially if some subjects or cohorts have incomplete mea- F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Genomics plc. sures.Characterizationofgenetic lociwithinHOMA-B/-IR GWIS provides mechanistic clues about heterogeneous C10.6 processes contributing to T2D pathophysiology and gly- Genome-Wide Inferred Statistics (GWIS) for caemic traits variability in non-diabetics. Homeostatic Model Assessment of β-cell function I.O.Fedko:None.M.G.Nivard:None.J.J.Hottenga: and Insulin Resistance None. R. Mägi: None. I. Prokopenko: None. D.I. Boomsma: None. I. O. Fedko1, M. G. Nivard1, J. J. Hottenga1,2, Cross Consortia Pleiotropy (XC-Pleiotropy) Group, Meta-Analyses of Glucose and Insulin-related traits Consortium (MAGIC) Investigators, R. Mägi3, I. C11 Prokopenko4, D. I. Boomsma1,2,5 Sensory disorders 1Department of Biological Psychology, Vrije Universiteit, C11.1 Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2EMGO+institute for Health FDXR mutations cause sensorial neuropathies, a and Care Research, VU Medical Center, Amsterdam, new mitochondrial Fe-S disease Netherlands, 3Estonian Genome Center, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Genomics of Com- A. Paul1, A. Drecourt1, D. Dupin Deguine2, C. Vasnier3, M. Oufadem1, mon Disease, Imperial College London, London, United F. Petit1, C. Masson1, C. Bonnet4, S. Masmoudi5, I. Mosnier6, Kingdom, 5Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, Amsterdam, L. Mahieu7, D. Bouccara6, J. Kaplan1, G. Challe8, C. Domange9, Netherlands F. Mochel10, O. Sterkers6, S. Gerber1, P. Nitschke1, C. Bole-Feysot1,66 L. Jonard11, G. Souad12, I. Ben Aissa12, S. Lyonnet1,13, A. Rotig1, C11.2 A. Delahodde3, S. Marlin1,12,13 A homozygous variant in mitochondrial RNase P subunit PRORP is associated with Perrault 1Institut Imagine, Paris, France, 2Service de Génétique Syndrome characterised by hearing loss and Médicale,HôpitalPurpan.,Toulouse,France,3Institutefor primary ovarian insufficiency Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud,UniversitéParis-Saclay.,Gif-sur-Yvette,France, L.A.M.Demain1,2,I.Hochberg3,J.E.Urquhart1,2,A.Amberger4,A.J. 4Institut de la Vision, UMRS 1120., Paris, France, Deutschmann4, K. Thompson5, J. O’Sullivan1,2, I. A. Belyantseva6, 5Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Screening Pro- M. Barzik6, S. G. Williams1,2, S. S. Bhaskar1,2, E. M. Jenkinson1, cesses, Center of Biotechnology of Sfax., Sfax, Tunisia, N. AlSheqaih1, Z. Blumenfeld7, S. Yalonetsky8, S. Oerum9, W. 6Service d’ORL, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP., Paris, Rossmanith10,W.W.Yue9,J.Zschocke4,R.W.Taylor5,T.B.Friedman6, France, 7Service d’ophtalmologie, Hôpital Rangueil., Tou- K. J. Munro11,12, R. T. O’ Keefe13, W. G. Newman1,2 louse, France, 8Service d’ophtalmologie, Hôpital Pitié- Salpêtrière,APHP.,Paris,France,9Serviced’ORL,Hôpital 1Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Bio- Lariboisière., Paris, France, 10Département de Génétique, logical Sciences, Division of Evolution and Genomic Sci- Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, APHP., Paris, France, 11Service ences, University of Manchester, Manchester, United de Génétique, Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Kingdom, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, APHP., Paris, France, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation 12Centre de Référence des Surdités Génétiques, Service de Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Endocri- Génétique,HôpitalNecker-EnfantsMalades,APHP.,Paris, nology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Rambam Health Care France, 13Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Campus, Haifa, Israel, 4Division of Human Genetics, Malades, APHP., Paris, France Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria, 5Well- Hearing loss and retinis pigmentosa have mostly come Trust Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of genetic origins, some of them being related to sensorial Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Medical School, neuronaldefects.Here,wereporteightsubjectsfromfour Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 6Laboratory of independent families presenting with auditoryneuropathy Molecular Genetics, National Institute on Deafness and and optic atrophy. Whole-exome sequencing revealed Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of biallelic mutations in the FDXR gene in affected subjects Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 7Department of of each family. FDRX encodes the mitochondrial ferre- Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Endocrinology, doxin reductase, the sole human ferredoxin reductase Rambam Health Care Campus, The Rappaport Faculty of which is implicated in the biosynthesis of iron-sulfur Medicine, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, clusters(ISC)andinthehemeformation.ISCproteinsare Israel, 8Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Rambam involved in enzymatic catalysis and gene expression, Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 9Structural Genomics DNA replication and repair. We observed deregulated Consortium,NuffieldDepartmentofMedicine,Universityof iron homeostasisinFDXR mutant fibroblastsand indirect Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 10Center for Anatomy evidence of mitochondrial iron overload. Functional and Cell Biology, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, complementation in a yeast strain deleted for ARH1, the Austria, 11School of Health Sciences, University of Man- human FDXR counterpart, established the pathogenicity chester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 12Central Manche- ofthesemutations.Thesedataemphasizethewideclinical ster University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, heterogeneity of mitochondrial disorders related to ISC Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, synthesis. United Kingdom, 13Division of Cellular & Molecular A.Paul:None.A.Drecourt:None.D.DupinDeguine: Function, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, Uni- None. C. Vasnier: None. M. Oufadem: None. F. Petit: versity of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom None.C.Masson:None.C.Bonnet:None.S.Masmoudi: Perraultsyndromeisarareautosomalrecessivecondition None.I.Mosnier:None.L.Mahieu:None.D.Bouccara: characterised by sensorineural hearing loss in both sexes None. J. Kaplan: None. G. Challe: None. C. Domange: and primary ovarian insufficiency in 46 XX, females. It is None. F. Mochel: None. O. Sterkers: None. S. Gerber: genetically heterogeneous with biallelic variants in five None. P. Nitschke: None. C. Bole-Feysot: None. genes identified to date (HSD17B4, HARS2, LARS2, CLPP L. Jonard: None. G. Souad: None. I. Ben Aissa: None. and C10orf2). We describe a consanguineous family with S. Lyonnet: None. A. Rotig: None. A. Delahodde: None. threeaffectedindividualshomozygousforanovelmissense S. Marlin: None. variant c.1454C>T; p.(Ala485Val) in KIAA0391 encoding proteinaceous RNase P (PRORP). PRORP is the metallo- nuclease subunit of the mitochondrial RNase P complex,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 67 responsible for the 5’-end processing of mitochondrial Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Medical Genetics Department, precursor tRNAs. In enzyme activity assays, RNase P Istanbul Medical Faculty, Istanbul University, Istanbul, complexescontaining thePRORPdiseasevariant produced Turkey, 6Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Hearing & ~35–45% less 5’-processed tRNA than wild type PRORP. Genes, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Consistently,theaccumulationofunprocessedpolycistronic Netherlands,7RadboudInstituteofMolecularLifeSciences, mitochondrial transcripts was observed in patient fibro- Radbouduniversitymedicalcenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands, blasts,leadingtoanobservablelossofsteady-statelevelsof 8University Department of Otolaryngology, St-Augustinus mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation components. Hospital Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium, 9Department of Rescue experiments demonstrated that expression of wild Otolaryngology, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Bel- type PRORP in patient cells partially recovered tRNA gium, 10Causse Ear Clinic, Colombiers, France, 11Uni- processing. Immunocytochemistry analyses of mouse inner versity Hospital Zurich, Department of earsensoryepitheliumshowedhighlevelsofPRORPinthe Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, Zurich, efferent synapses and nerve fibres of the auditory hair cells Switzerland, 12Department of ORL, University Hospital of which highlights a possible pathology for the sensorineural Antwerp, Edegem, Belgium, 13Dept. of Clinical Sciences hearing loss observed in affected individuals. We have and Community Health, Audiology Unit, University of identified a novel Perrault syndrome gene and with the Milan, I.R.C.C.S. Fondazione “Cà Granda”, Osp.le Mag- identification of this variant, defects in all three subunits of giorePoliclinico,Milano,Italy,14DepartmentofRadiology, mitochondrial RNase P have now been found to cause Radbouduniversitymedicalcenter,Nijmegen,Netherlands, mitochondrial dysfunction, each with distinct clinical 15Department of Radiology, Leiden University Medical presentations. Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 16Medical Genetics Depart- L.A.M. Demain: None. I. Hochberg: None. J.E. ment, Koç University School of Medicine (KUSOM), Urquhart: None. A. Amberger: None. A.J. Deutsch- Istanbul, Turkey mann: None. K. Thompson: None. J. O’Sullivan: None. I.A.Belyantseva:None.M.Barzik:None.S.G.Williams: Whole exome sequencing in a family with Hereditary None. S.S. Bhaskar: None. E.M. Jenkinson: None. N. Congenital Facial Paresis (HCFP) associated with mixed AlSheqaih: None. Z. Blumenfeld: None. S. Yalonetsky: hearinglossandstapesfixationresultedintheidentification None. S. Oerum: None. W. Rossmanith: None. W.W. ofapathogenicheterozygousframeshiftvariantc.1273delC Yue:None.J.Zschocke:None.R.W.Taylor:None.T.B. (p.Gln425Lysfs*38) in MEPE. MEPE encodes a matrix Friedman: None. K.J. Munro: None. R.T. O’ Keefe: extracellular phosphoglycoprotein and plays an inhibitory None. W.G. Newman: None. roleinbonemineralization.Becauseofthestapesfixationit was hypothesized that MEPE might be important in the C11.3 pathophysiology of otosclerosis. MEPE was screened for Rare genetic variants in MEPE cause congenital variationsin91patientswithfamilialotosclerosis,resulting facial paresis with stapes fixation, and are in the identification of an additional heterozygous frame- associated with otosclerosis shiftvariant,c.199_202delGAAA (p.Lys70Ilefs*26) intwo unrelated families. Subsequently, MEPE was screened in H. Valgaeren1, I. Schrauwen1,2, L. Tomas-Roca3,4, U. Altunoglu5, M. 336otosclerosispatients,whichleadtoidentificationofthe Wesdorp4,6,7, M. Sommen1, M. Rahmouni3,4, E. van Beusekom3, M. J. p.Lys70Ilefs*26 variant in three additional patients and p. Huentelman2, E. Offeciers8, I. dHooghe9, R. Vincent10, A. Huber11, Ser206Ilefs*3inonepatient. Analysisofasingle amplicon P.VandeHeyning12,D.Zanetti13,E.M.R.DeLeenheer6,9,C.Gilissen3, including the p.Lys70Ilefs*26 variant was performed in C. W. Cremers6, B. Verbist14,15, A. P. M. de Brouwer3,4, G. W. 1065unrelatedotosclerosispatientsand1308controls.The Padberg4,16, H. Kremer3,4,6, G. Van Camp1, H. van Bokhoven3,4 p.Lys70Ilefs*26frameshiftvariantwaspresentin5patients andnoneofthecontrols,resultinginanoverallpresenceof 1Center of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp & the variant in 8 patients (p=0.003, Fisher’s exact test). Antwerp University Hospital, Edegem, Belgium, 2Neuro- Two additional rare variants (c.184G>T; p.Glu62* and genomics Division, Translational Genomics Research c.229G>A;p.Ala77Thr)wereidentifiedincasesandnotin Institute, Phoenix, AZ, United States, 3Department of controls (overall p=0.0020, Fisher’s exact test). These Human Genetics, Radboud university medical center, Nij- results pinpoint that MEPE might be a key player in tem- megen, Netherlands, 4Donders Institute for Brain, Cogni- poral bone and middle ear mineralization implicating its tion and Behaviour, Radboud university medical center, importance inthepathogenesis ofotosclerosis. Currently,a68 follow-up study is being performed investigating the con- Results: mRNA analysis evidenced the presence of tribution of rare variants in the complete gene in a popu- CEP290 isoforms lacking exons encompassing the pre- lation of approximately 3400 otosclerosis patients and matureterminationcodons(PTC)inthetwoindividualsbut ethnically matched controls. not in other cell lines. Protein analysis detected a CEP290 H. Valgaeren: None. I. Schrauwen: None. L. Tomas- protein around 290 KDa, which like the wildtype counter- Roca:None.U.Altunoglu:None.M.Wesdorp:None.M. part, could be detected in a 670 KDa protein complex Sommen:None.M.Rahmouni:None.E.vanBeusekom: (BNPage), supporting the view that exon-skipping allowed None. M.J. Huentelman: None. E. Offeciers: None. I. bypassing PTC. In sharp contrast with MKS and LCA dHooghe: None. R. Vincent: None. A. Huber: None. P. fibroblasts,whichexhibitedseveretomildcilia defects,the Van de Heyning: None. D. Zanetti: None. E.M.R. De fibroblasts from the two individuals had apparently unal- Leenheer: None. C. Gilissen: None. C.W. Cremers: tered ciliation ability, as determined by comparison to None.B.Verbist:None.A.P.M.deBrouwer:None.G.W. control cells. Padberg:None.H.Kremer:None.G.VanCamp:None. Conclusions: Here, we report naturally occurring exon- H. van Bokhoven: None. skippingandproteinsynthesisintwoindividualshavingan unusually mild retinal phenotype despite biallelic PTC C11.4 mutations, providing strong support for CEP290 splice Naturally-occuring exon-skipping allows bypassing switching oligonucleotide-mediated therapy. completeCEP290loss-of-functioninindividualswith I. Barny: None. I. Perrault: None. S. Thomas: None. unusually mild retinal disease T. Attié-Bitach: None. C. Hamel: None. H. Dollfus: None. J. Kaplan: None. J. Rozet: None. X. Gérard: I. Barny1, I. Perrault1, S. Thomas2, T. Attié-Bitach2, C. Hamel3, H. None. Dollfus4, J. Kaplan1, J. Rozet1, X. Gérard1 C11.5 1Institut Imagine - Lab of Genetics in Ophthalmology - Hiddengeneticvariation inStargardt disease: novel InsermU1163 -Université Paris Descartes,Paris, France, copy number variations, cis-regulatory and deep- 2Institut Imagine - Lab of Embryology and Genetics of intronic splice variants of the ABCA4 locus Congenital Malformations - Inserm U1163 - Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France, 3Centre de Références des M. Bauwens1, R. Sangermano2, T. Cherry3, C. Van Cauwenbergh1, Maladies Sensorielles Génétiques et INSERM U1051- J.Gómez-Skarmeta4,N.Weisschuh5,S.Kohl5,B.Leroy1,6,F.Cremers2, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, CHU-Saint E. De Baere1 Eloi Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 4Centre de référ- ence pour les affections génétiques ophtalmologiques 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, CARGO, CHRU Strasbourg, INSERM1112, Université de Ghent,Belgium,2DepartmentofHumanGenetics,Radboud Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France UMC, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3University of Washington, School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, United States, 4Centro Introduction: CEP290 is pivotal for the assembly/main- Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo, CSIC, Universidad tenance of primary and motile cilia in a wide range of cell Pablo de Olavide, Sevila, Spain, 5Molecular Genetics systems. Biallelic CEP290 mutations cause a spectrum of Laboratory,UniversityEyeHospitalTuebingen,Tuebingen, devastating ciliopathies ranging from monosymptomatic Germany, 6Dept of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA10) to multi-visceral and Hospital, Ghent, Belgium sometimes embryo-lethal syndromes (Meckel Syndrome, MKS). LCA10 manifests invariably as a congenital and Purpose: Stargardt disease (STGD1) is hallmarked by a dramatically severe cone-dominant disease with visual large proportion of patients with single coding variants in function reduced to light perception. Using targeted-NGS, the disease gene ABCA4, suggestive for hidden genetic we identified homozygosity and compound heterozygosity variation in non-coding regions. We aimed to assess the for CEP290 truncating mutations (p.Ile556Phefs*17 and p. contribution of copy number variations (CNVs) and non- Lys170*/p.Glu1364*)intwounrelatedindividualshavinga coding sequence variations in STGD1 patients. rod-dominant disease with preserved cone function (visual Methods: A total of 116 monoallelic STGD1 patients acuity from 3/10 to 6/10). The present study aimed at underwent targeted resequencing of the whole ABCA4 understanding the molecular bases of these observations. gene. Candidate splice variants were tested by mini-gene Material and Methods: mRNA, protein and ciliation assays while putative cis-regulatory variants were investi- analyseswereperformedinpatient,LCA,MKSandcontrol gated by ex vivo electroporation in mouse retinas. 4C-seq fibroblasts. was performed on human retinal cells, using an anchor inAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 69 the ABCA4 promoter region. Customized arrayCGH We ascertained a cohort of 18 individuals with mild to (arrEYE) was used for CNV analysis of 5 patients. moderatePBD-ZSDwithmutationsinPEX1whopresented Results: Mini-gene assays were performed for a subset of with hearing loss, developmental delay, and varied obser- 12 intronic variants, confirming a splice effect for 3 var- vations of microcephaly, retinopathy, and movement dis- iants. The cis-regulatory effect of 3 promoter and 2 deep- orders. Analysis of plasma samples included quantitative intronic variants were tested in mouse retinal explants, peroxisomal biochemical diagnostics in parallel with revealing a significant effect on regulation for some of untargeted small molecule metabolomic profiling with them. A chromatin interaction map of the ABCA4 region detectionof>650namedmolecules.Metabolomicprofiling wasgeneratedby4C-seqinhumanadultretinalcells.CNV show anticipated elevations in pipecolic acid, long chain analysisrevealedanovelABCA4deletion(ex40–50)anda fatty acids, and several bile acids, as well as reduced plas- duplication (ex 2–6) in 2 patients without candidate non- malogens, with concordance between quantitative and coding variants. untargeted measurements. Metabolomics analyses also Conclusions: Resequencing of the whole ABCA4 locus revealed unanticipated significant reductions in sphingo- uncoverednoveldeep-intronicsplicevariantsandcis-acting myelins in every patient sample. These perturbations in the regulatory variants, representing the first report of non- plasma metabolomic profiles are unique, specific, and not coding regulatory ABCA4 variants. In addition, a retinal previously seen in>700 other samples analyzed as normal chromatin interaction dataset for the ABCA4 locus was controls or for other indications. Reduced sphingomyelin generated. Finally, apart from a novel deletion, the first was one of the strongest effects observed in these samples duplication was identified in ABCA4, expanding the CNV and detected only by the untargeted metabolomic profiling spectrum of ABCA4. process. As the clinical presentation of mild PBD-ZSD M. Bauwens: None. R. Sangermano: None. T. broadens and as sequencing identifies novel genetic var- Cherry: None. C. Van Cauwenbergh: None. J. Gómez- iants, the need for assessment of peroxisomal function Skarmeta:None.N.Weisschuh:None.S.Kohl:None.B. increases. Untargeted metabolomic screening identifies Leroy: None. F. Cremers: None. E. De Baere: None. several specific biomarkers that taken together allow for effectivedetectionofthesemildcasesofPBD-ZSD,ending C11.6 the diagnostic odysseys for many of these patients. New diagnostic biomarkers for peroxisomal S.H. Elsea: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; biogenesis disorders revealed by untargeted Baylor College of Medicine, Baylor Genetics. L. Hubert: metabolomicsprofilingincludesignificantreduction None. T. Donti: None. M. Ventura: None. M. Miller: of sphingomyelin, bile acid alterations, and unique A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Modest;BaylorCollege long chain fatty acid elevations of Medicine, Baylor Genetics. N. Braverman: None. M. Bose: None. W. RIzzo: None. R. Jones: None. S. H. Elsea1, L. Hubert1, T. Donti2, M. Ventura1, M. Miller1, N. A. Moser: None. Q. Sun: A. Employment (full or part- Braverman3, M. Bose4, W. RIzzo5, R. Jones6, A. Moser6, Q. Sun1, time); Modest; Baylor College of Medicine, Baylor A. Kennedy7, M. Wangler1 Genetics. A. Kennedy: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Metabolon, Inc. M. Wangler: None. 1Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 2Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, United States, 3McGill University-Montreal Children’s Hospital C12 Research Institute, Montreal, QC, Canada, 4Montclair Engaging Patients in Genomics State University, Montclair, NJ, United States, 5Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE, United States, 6Kennedy C12.1 Krieger Institute, Baltimore, MD, United States, 7Metabo- SEQUAPRE: Preferences and representations from lon, Inc., Durham, NC, United States patientsandparentswithregardtotheuseofNext- Generation Sequencing technologies in medical Peroxisomal biogenesis disorders in the Zellweger genetics. The case of development anomalies spectrum (PBD-ZSD) encompass a range of multisystem diseases with prominent neurological, hepatic, renal, and A. Chassagne1,2, A. Pélissier3,2, C. Peyron3,2, F. Houdayer4, D. Salvi3, bone features, comprising a broad clinical spectrum, with S. Kidri3, A. Charpin5, A. Godard1, O. Putois6,2, C. Thauvin-Robinet7,2, phenotypesrangingfromsevere,presentingwithintractable A.Masurel7,N.Jean7,2,D.Lehalle7,J.Thevenon7,L.Joly7,E.Gautier2, seizures, neuronal migration defects and neonatal hypoto- nia, to milder forms with mild-moderate developmental delay, retinopathy, adrenal insufficiency, and hearing loss.70 P.Ancet8,A.Lapointe9,P.Morin9,P.Edery4,M.Rossi4,D.Sanlaville4, A. Lapointe: None. P. Morin: None. P. Edery: None. S. Bejean3,2, E. Cretin1,2, L. Faivre7,2 M. Rossi: None. D. Sanlaville: None. S. Bejean: None. E. Cretin: None. L. Faivre: None. 1Centre d’Investigation Clinique – Inserm 1431 – CHRU Besançon, Besançon, France, 2FHU TRANSLAD – CHU C12.2 Dijon, Dijon, France, 3LEDI - UMR6307 CNRS - U1200 Children with a rare chromosome disorder. How Inserm–UBFCDijon,Dijon,France,4CentredeRéférence have UK families’ experiences of diagnosis and Anomalies du Développement – CHU Lyon, Lyon, France, counselling changed over the ten year period 5CentredeRéférenceAnomaliesduDéveloppement–CHU 2003 - 2013? Dijon, Dijon, France, Dijon, France, 6SuLiSoM EA 3071, Université de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 7Centre de A. Szczepura1, S. Wynn2, B. Searle2, A. J. Khan1, T. Palmer3, Référence Anomalies du Développement – CHU Dijon, D. Biggerstaff4, J. Elliott1, M. Hultén5 Dijon, France, 8Centre Georges Chevrier – UMR 7366 – UBFC Dijon, Dijon, France, 9Alliance Maladies Rares, 1CoventryUniversity, Coventry,UnitedKingdom,2Unique, Paris, France The Rare Chromosome Disorder Support Group, Oxted Surrey,UnitedKingdom,3LancasterUniversity,Lancaster, Background: Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) of gen- UnitedKingdom,4UniversityofWarwick,Coventry,United ome has revolutionized diagnostic odyssey in development Kingdom, 5Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden diseases. In order to optimize information given to patients to obtain consent to undergo this examination, it is neces- ABSTRACT sarytoaskthemabouttheirpreferencesandrepresentations Background: The UK 2014 Strategy for Rare Diseases with regard to the arrival of these new technologies in (SRD) recommends involving those affected by such dis- healthcare. eases in order to improve diagnosis, intervention, and Methods: A mixed methodology was implemented to coordination of care in clinical genetics services1. Patient answer these questions in two centers of expertise for rare Reported Outcome Measures (PROMS) for genetics ser- diseases in France. The study involved teams from human vicesarestillintheirinfancy2.UKfamilies’experiencesof and social sciences as well as patient organizations. The RCD diagnosis and counselling have been analysed over a objectives were: 1/ to estimate and analyze the preferences tenyearperiod(2003-2013)leadinguptothelaunchofthe ofparentsofpatientswithdevelopmentanomalies,whoare national SRD. potentialcandidatesforNGS,concerningthenatureandthe Methods: Two surveys were undertaken ten years apart announcement of the results (quantitative study before the (2003 and 2013) byUnique (http://www.rarechromo.co.uk/ NGS); 2/ Describe, analyze and understand, following the html/History.asp). An identical questionnaire investigated use of NGS for diagnostic purposes, the experiences, seven stages of the clinical genetics service pathway expectations and reactions of families with regard to their including: pre-testing process; testing and communication diagnostic trajectory and the announcement of the results oftestresult;referraltogeneticsexpert;conductofgenetics (qualitative study). consultation; RCD information provided; follow-up genet- Results: 528 parents completed questionnaires for the ics counselling; sign-posting to peer support; plus the quantitative analysis. The respondents were strongly in quality of the overall service. Comparison of responses at favor of the communication of uncertain (particularly the differenttime-pointsrevealedtrendsandchangesovertime, mostlikelyuncertainresults)andunsolicitedresults,andfor and helped identify areas for improvement. thereanalysisofexaminations,mainlyinanautomaticway. Results: 583 UK families’ responses in 2003 were com- 47 interviews with parents were conducted. Whatever the pared to 575 in 2013. Respondents were mainly mothers resultoftheNGS,itwasconsideredastepandnotanendin (reducing from 92.3% to 85.9% in 2013); mean age was itself. Even when a diagnosis is made, the trajectory con- similar (42.3 years and 43.0 years in 2013). Most families tinues and a feeling of powerlessness may persist. had only one child with a RCD (rising from 86.1% to Conclusions: NGS thus represents a transition from a 92.3%). Families’ ratings of overall service received were diagnostic odyssey to a step in care trajectory. not particularly high, and have not improved significantly A. Chassagne: None. A. Pélissier: None. C. Peyron: over time. Key areas for improvement are identifiable. None. F. Houdayer: None. D. Salvi: None. S. Kidri: Conclusions: The findings reported will hopefully enable None. A. Charpin: None. A. Godard: None. O. Putois: the experiences of families of children with RCDs to be None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. A. Masurel: None. integrated more effectively into national strategies and N. Jean: None. D. Lehalle: None. J. Thevenon: None. policies for rare diseases. L. Joly: None. E. Gautier: None. P. Ancet: None.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 71 A.Szczepura:None.S.Wynn:None.B.Searle:None. surveillance with the vast majority undergoing age- A.J.Khan:None.T.Palmer:None.D.Biggerstaff:None. appropriate RRSO. Funded by BCRF. J. Elliott: None. M. Hultén: None. S.Lieberman:None.A.Tomer:None.A.BenChetrit: None. O. Olsha: None. R. Beeri: None. A. Raz: None. C12.3 A. Lahad: None. E. Levy-Lahad: None. BRCA1/BRCA2 population screening in Ashkenazi Jews: Long term impact C12.4 TheEuropeanGen-Equipprojecttocreateaccessible S.Lieberman1,A.Tomer1,A.BenChetrit2,O.Olsha3,R.Beeri1,A.Raz4, resources for genetics education in primary care: an A. Lahad5, E. Levy-Lahad1 account of the process, the challenges and the successes 1Medical Genetics Institute, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Women’s Health Center, Clalit Health L.Jackson1,2,M.Cornel3,M.Paneque4,V.Stefansdottir5,D.Turchetti6, Services, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Surgical Department, Shaare V. Curtisova7, P. W. Lunt2, M. Campos8, A. Kent8, M. Macek Jnr7, Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Department of E. Houwink9, A. O’Connor2, H. Skirton2 Sociology and Anthropology, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer Sheva, Israel, 5Department of Family Medi- 1University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom, 2University cine, Clalit Health Services, Jerusalem, Israel of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Kingdom, 3VUMC, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4IBMC, University of Porto, Background: Ashkenazi Jews (AJ) population screening Porto, Portugal, 5Landspitali Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, for common (2.5%) BRCA1/BRCA2 mutations could 6Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 7Charles Uni- identify all carriers, including many (approximately half) versity, Prague, Czech Republic, 8Genetic Alliance UK, lackingsuggestivefamilyhistory.Towardsimplementation, London, United Kingdom, 9Maastricht University, Maas- we examined the long-term impact of BRCA screening. tricht, Netherlands Methods: Unaffected AJs, age≥25 years were either self- referred (SR) or recruiter-enrolled (RE), received pre-test The Gen-Equip project was undertaken to provide written information and self-reported family history (FH). accessible genetics education to primary care health pro- Post-testing, non-carriers with significant FH and carriers fessionalsinEurope.Withadvancinggenomicmedicine,all received in-person genetic counseling. Psychosocial out- health professionals require knowledge and skills to detect comes and health behaviors were assessed quantitatively patients at genetic risk, to provide them with appropriate one week, 6 months and 2 years post-testing healthcare. However, obtaining access to current genetics Results: We report the 2 year follow-up of 1771 partici- education, appropriate to their setting and language, is pants, including 32 carriers. challenging. Partners from six European countries have Psychosocial outcomes: RE and SR participants had worked collaboratively to produce nine online modules similar rates of satisfaction (94%), and endorsement of based on patient cases relevant for primary care. The pro- population screening (90%), and similarly low stress (IES cess has involved: 1) Writing materials and agreeing con- score=4.1). Knowledge scores were higher in SR vs. RE tent, 2) Production of videos and other resources to (7.5 vs. 6.9/10, P<0.001). Among carriers, 94% expressed supplementtext,3)Uploadingtoamulti-mediaplatform,4) satisfaction and 92% endorsed population screening. Stress Translation and adaptation of modules to suit specific was higher but declined over time (IES score 13.9 vs. 19.9 requirements of each partner country. Educational evalua- at 6 months (NS)). Knowledge was greater than in non- tioniscrucial.Learnerscanundertakepreandpost-module carriers (8.7 vs. 7.15/10, p<0.001). quizzes: we have now collected over 200 sets of pre and Health behaviour: All 25 women carriers had breast sur- post-moduledata.Statisticalanalysisindicatesthatthereare veillance, 3/25 (12%) underwent risk-reducing bilateral highly significant differences in knowledge as a result of mastectomy (similar to published rates in Israeli carriers). taking a module. For example, mean pre-test score for the 15/16 (94%) carriers age>40 underwent Risk-reducing breast/ovarian cancer module was 77.6% (standard error= salpingo-oophorectomy (RRSO). Among non-carriers, 2.97),comparedwiththepost-testscoreof90.4%(standard mammography screening rates did not decline compared to error=2.69) and this represented a highly significant dif- pretest rates, and even increased in non-carriers>50 with ference in the means (t(33)=−5.87, p=0.000). We pre- non-suggestive FH (p=0.003). sentthefullresultsofthemoduleevaluations,theprocessof Conclusions: Long-term, BRCA screening is highly preparing and disseminating these materials, and how we acceptable. Non-carriers do not demonstrate false reassur- have addressed the challenges of involving multiple part- ance, whereas carriers universally adopted increased ners from different professions and countries. The online72 case-based approach seems effective and the Gen-Equip C12.6 experience has transferable lessons for further genetics Genomics Education at Scale education programmes in Europe. L. Jackson: None. M. Cornel: None. M. Paneque: M. Bishop, E. Miller, A. McPherson, A. Pope, A. Seller None. V. Stefansdottir: None. D. Turchetti: None. V. Curtisova: None. P.W. Lunt: None. M. Campos: Health Education England Genomics Education Pro- None.A.Kent:None.M.MacekJnr:None.E.Houwink: gramme, Birmingham, United Kingdom None. A. O’Connor: None. H. Skirton: None. Health Education England’s Genomics Education Pro- C12.5 gramme (GEP) has the mandate to ensure all staff working UKinvestigationoftheexperiencesandinformation within the National Health Service (NHS) are prepared for preferences of patients with an increased risk of the integration of genomic medicine into clinical practice. bowel cancer; Family Web Study survey results To educate and inform at this scale the GEP is utilising informing website content different learning technologies. In 2016, the GEP launched a three-week Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) on S. M. A. Goodman, H. Skirton, R. Jones whole genome sequencing via the FutureLearn platform. Over three iterations, the course has registered 15,000 Plymouth University, Plymouth, United Kingdom learners, representing a range of professions within the NHS. This MOOC is a synchronous learning activity, with Relatives of people diagnosed with an increased risk of course educators and mentors facilitating the education bowel cancer may also share a high lifetime risk of this experience in real time. Crucially, the platform allows cancer and it is important that patients share information participants to interact and learn from each other’s experi- about the implications of their diagnoses. However, evi- ences. This interprofessional learning environment, as well denceindicates thatlessthan halfofat-risk relatives access as the presence of course mentors (clinical scientists in the genetic testing or screening colonoscopy: this is sometimes NHS) was shown via course evaluation to be extremely due to a lack of understanding of personal risk. effective. We have also used social media as a tool to Theaimofthiscross-sectional survey wastoinvestigate educate and inform the largest NHS professional group, experiencesandpreferencesforreceivinginformationabout nurses and midwives. Using the WeCommunities platform, thefamilialdiagnosisandrisk.Participants(n=238)atrisk the GEP has facilitated a series of twitter conversations, of colorectal cancer were recruited either online via charity with experts driving the discussion by posting key ques- websitesorbypostviageneticsandcolorectalclinicsinsix tions.Ourdatademonstratesthatthepowerofthisplatform hospitals.Quantitativedatawereanalysedusingdescriptive isitsreach,andthereforeitspotentialtoinformandeducate statistics with additional qualitative analysis of free text on a large scale: each conversation reached five million responses. Results indicate that only a third (79/238) people. As well as proving to be successful learning and received all or most of the information they wanted when awarenessraising tools, these platforms have also provided they learnt of their risk. Most (148/238) indicated they valuable insight into education and training gaps and wouldlikeinformationinotherformats;viaemail,websites highlightedareasgoodpracticewithingenomicmedicinein or social media, but also through follow-up appointments the NHS. (102/238). Issues of particular interest were: healthy life- M. Bishop: None. E. Miller: None. A. McPherson: style (111/238) genetic testing (108/238) and talking to None. A. Pope: None. A. Seller: None. children (73/238). These data are being used in the Family Web study to improve the dissemination of information within families C13 via a website (www.familyweb.org.uk) designed so rela- Innovative Variant Interpretation tives can share personal information securely online. This survey has informed web site development. Survey C13.1 responsesendorsetheneedtoimproveexistinginformation Noveldiagnosticguidelinesforpredictionofvariant andsupporttothispopulation,buttheseresultsmayalsobe spliceogenicity derived from a set of 311 combined applicable to other genetic conditions. in silico and in vitro studies: an international S.M.A. Goodman: None. H. Skirton: None. R. Jones: collaborative effort None. S. Krieger1,2,3, R. Leman1,2,3, P. Gaildrat2, M. Parsons4, N. Boutry- Kryza5, F. Bonnet-Dorion6, M. Guillaud-Bataille7, A. Rousselin1,2,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 73 G.Davy1,2,V.Caux-Montcoutier8,S.Caputo8,S.Mazoyer5,E.Rouleau7, their corresponding transcript analysis. We met an unpre- G. Castelain2, B. Wappenschmidt9, T. Van Overeem Hansen10, cedented sensitivity of 99.2% (134 out of 135) and speci- L.Castéra1,2,D.Muller11,V.Bourdon12,F.Revillon13,J.Sokolowska14, ficity of 93.7% (30 out of 32). In other words, impact on F. Coullet15, N. Sevenet6, A. Spurdle4, A. Martins2, C. Houdayer8,16 splicing wascorrectlypredictedfor 161outof164variants (98%).WethereforeproposetheSPiCEprotocolasthenew 1Laboratoire de Biologie et Génétique du Cancer, Centre guideline for prediction of variant spliceogenicity. It could François Baclesse, Caen, France, 2INSERM U1245, be easily implemented in any diagnostic laboratory as a Genomics and Personalized Medecine in Cancer and routine decision making tool to help geneticists to face the Neurological Disorders, Université de Rouen, Rouen, deluge of variants in the nextgen era. France, 3Université Caen-Normandie, Caen, France, S.Krieger:None.R.Leman:None.P.Gaildrat:None. 4Department of Genetics and Computational Biology, M. Parsons: None. N. Boutry-Kryza: None. F. Bonnet- QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Herston, Dorion:None.M.Guillaud-Bataille:None.A.Rousselin: Queensland, Australia, 5Unité Mixte de Génétique Con- None. G. Davy: None. V. Caux-Montcoutier: None. stitutionnelle des Cancers Fréquents, Centre Léon Bérard, S. Caputo: None. S. Mazoyer: None. E. Rouleau: None. Lyon, France, 6INSERM U1218, Département de Patholo- G. Castelain: None. B. Wappenschmidt: None. T. Van gie, Laboratoire de Génétique Constitutionnelle, Institut Overeem Hansen: None. L. Castéra: None. D. Muller: Bergonié,Bordeaux,France,7ServicedeGénétique,Institut None. V. Bourdon: None. F. Revillon: None. J. Soko- Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France, 8Service de Génétique, lowska: None. F. Coullet: None. N. Sevenet: None. InstitutCurie,Paris,France,9CenterforHereditaryBreast A. Spurdle: None. A. Martins: None. C. Houdayer: and Ovarian Cancer and Centre for Integrated Oncology, None. Medical Faculty, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 10Centre for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, C13.2 University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, PEDIA study Phase 2: Prioritizing Exomes of 11Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique, Centre Paul Strauss, unsolved patients with Image Analysis Strasbourg, France, 12Laboratoire d’oncogénétique Molé- culaire, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France, P. M. Krawitz1, I. Vrecar2, S. Kamphausen3, J. Zschocke4, D. Mitter5, 13Laboratoire d’Oncogénétique Moléculaire Humaine, S. Wilson6, G. Lyon7, A. Orrico8, I. Ivanovski9, G. Rudolf2, D. Wahl6, Centre Oscar Lambret, Lille, France, 14Service de Génét- L. Graul-Neumann1, D. Horn1, N. Ehmke1, M. A. Mensah1, C. E. Ott1, ique, CHU Nancy, Nancy, France, 15Service de Génétique, R. Flöttmann1, M. Coutelier1, J. T. Pantel1, U. Kornak1, B. Fischer1, HôpitalPitiéSalpétrière,AP-HP,Paris,France,16INSERM M.Jäger1,M.Schubach1,S.Köhler1,M.Spielmann10,P.N.Robinson11, U830, Institut Curie et Université de Paris Descartes, A. Knaus1, B. Wollnik12, M. Rodriguez de los Santos1, N. Hajjir1, Paris, France K. Boss13, E. Mangold14, A. Kaindl15, S. Picker-Minh15, H. Muhle16, M. Zenker17, K. Hoffmann18, P. Lorini18, S. Mundlos1 Variant interpretation is the key issue in molecular diagnosis. Splice variants exemplify this issue as each 1Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Berlin, Germany, nucleotidevariantcanbedeleteriousviadisruption,creation 2Ljubljana University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, of splice site consensus sequences. Consequently, reliable 3Institute of Human Genetics - University hospital Magde- in silico prediction of variant spliceogenicity would be a burg, Magdeburg, Germany, 4Medical Genetics and major improvement. Thanks to a collaborative effort from Human Genetics, Innsbruck, Austria, 5MedVZ Leipzig, the French UGG splice network and the ENIGMA con- Leipzig, Germany, 6MVZ Martinsried, Martinsried, Ger- sortium,asetof311BRCA1andBRCA2variantsstudiedat many, 7Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring the mRNA level and occurring in 5’ and 3’ consensus Harbor, NY, United States, 8Molecular and Genetic Medi- regions(definedasthe9and23basessurroundingtheexon/ cine - Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, intron junction, respectively) was collected and used to Italy, 9Genetica Clinica -Azienda Ospedaliera Arcispedale optimize previous prediction guidelines. Among these 311 Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy, 10University of variants,147(including40novelones),wereusedtotraina Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 11Jackson Lab, new prediction protocol named SPiCE (Splicing Prediction Farmington, CT, United States, 12Human Genetics, Göt- in Consensus Elements). Briefly, SPiCE first uses in silico tingen, Germany, 13Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany, splicepredictionsfromSpliceSiteFinderandMaxEntScan. 14Humangenetik, Bonn, Germany, 15Charité, Berlin, Ger- After that probability of splicing alteration and optimal many, 16Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Kiel, decision thresholds are calculated by logistic regression. Germany, 17Human Genetics, Magdeburg, Germany, Following training, SPiCE was evaluated on a set of con- 18Human Genetics, Halle, Germany secutive publications gathering 164 BRCA variants with74 Combining molecular data with phenotype information A. Roetig7, P. Freisinger15, F. Distelmaier16, T. M. Strom1,2, has become the key bioinformatics strategy in interpreting T. Meitinger1,2, J. Gagneur3, H. Prokisch1,2 exomesofpatientswithrareMendeliandisorders.Withthis approach, the correct mutation can be ranked first place in 1Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum roughlyhalfofpatientswithknowndysmorphicsyndromes Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 2Institute of Human andadisease-causingsequencevariantinthecodingpartof Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical University of thegenome.Asthehighinformationcontentofdysmorphic Munich, Munich, Germany, 3Computational Biology, human faces is only incompletely describable by the ter- Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, minology of the human phenotype ontology, we aimed to 4Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max- analyze the gain in performance by including automated Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany, imageanalysis.Weusedfacialrecognitiontechnologyfrom 5InstituteofBioinformaticsandSystemsBiology,Helmholtz FDNAtodetectdysmorphicfeaturesinfrontalphotographs Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 6Institute of ofpatients,andderivedsimilarityscoresforthecomparison Experimental Genetics, Genome Analysis Center, Helm- of the gestalt to all known syndromes. In a multicenter holtz Zentrum Muenchen, Neuherberg, Germany, 7Neuro- effortwithcurrently15participatinginstitutions,webuilta pädiatrie, Neonatologie, Villingen-Schwenningen, cohort of more than 400 meticulously studied and mole- Germany, 8INSERM U1163, Université Paris Descartes - cularly confirmed monogenic syndromic cases. The inclu- Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, sion of pattern recognition for the human face in the 9Metabolic Unit, A. Meyer Children’s Hospital, Florence, prioritization process increased the ratio of exome cases Italy, 10Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, Foundation with the top-ranked disease-causing mutation by more than IRCCS (Istitutodi Ricovero e Cura a Carettere Scientifico) thirty percent. In the clinical routine, where only a limited Neurological Institute “Carlo Besta”, Milan, Italy, number of candidate mutations is evaluated, this also 11Inserm UMR 1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France, translates into a higher diagnostic yield. Interestingly, we 12Genetikum, Genetic Counseling and Diagnostics, Neu- were also able to delineate classifiers for gene-specific Ulm,Germany,13WellcomeTrustCentreforMitochondrial phenotypes of recently identified disease genes and we are Research, Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle, United therefore advocating to define case groups of yet undiag- Kingdom, 14Department of Pediatrics, Paracelsus Medical nosed patients by computer-assisted image analysis. University, Salzburg, Austria, 15Department of Pediatrics, P.M. Krawitz: None. I. Vrecar: None. S. Kamphau- Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany, 16Department sen: None. J. Zschocke: None. D. Mitter: None. S. of General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardi- Wilson: None. G. Lyon: None. A. Orrico: None. ology, University Children’s Hospital, Heinrich-Heine- I. Ivanovski: None. G. Rudolf: None. D. Wahl: None. University Düsseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany L. Graul-Neumann: None. D. Horn: None. N. Ehmke: None. M.A. Mensah: None. C.E. Ott: None. AcrossalargevarietyofMendeliandisorders,~50–75% R. Flöttmann: None. M. Coutelier: None. J.T. Pantel: of patients do not receive a genetic diagnosis by whole None. U. Kornak: None. B. Fischer: None. M. Jäger: exome sequencing indicative of underlying disease-causing None. M. Schubach: None. S. Köhler: None. M. Spiel- variants in non-coding regions. In contrast, whole genome mann: None. P.N. Robinson: None. A. Knaus: None. sequencing facilitates the discovery of all genetic variants, B. Wollnik: None. M. Rodriguez de los Santos: None. but their sizeable number, coupled with a poor under- N. Hajjir: None. K. Boss: None. E. Mangold: None. standing of the non-coding genome, makes their prior- A. Kaindl: None. S. Picker-Minh: None. H. Muhle: itization challenging. Here, we demonstrate the power of None. M. Zenker: None. K. Hoffmann: None. P. Lorini: transcriptome sequencing to provide a confirmed genetic None. S. Mundlos: None. diagnosis for 10% (5 of 48) of undiagnosed mitochondrial disease patients and identify strong candidate genes for C13.3 patientsremainingwithoutdiagnosis.Wefoundamedianof Genetic diagnosis of Mendelian disorders via RNA 1aberrantlyexpressedgene,5aberrantsplicingevents,and sequencing 6mono-allelicallyexpressedrarevariantsinpatient-derived fibroblasts and established disease-causing roles for each L. S. Kremer1,2, D. M. Bader3, C. Mertes3, R. Kopajtich1,2, G. Pichler4, kind. Private exons often arose from sites that are weakly A. Iuso1,2, T. B. Haack1, E. Graf1, T. Schwarzmayr1, C. Terrile1, splicedinotherindividuals,providinganimportantcluefor E.Konarikova1,B.Repp1,G.Kastenmueller5,J.Adamski6,P.Lichtner1, future variant prioritization. One such intronic exon- C. Leonhardt7, B. Funalot8, A. Donati9, V. Tiranti10, A. Lombes11, creating variant was found in three unrelated families in C. Jardel11, D. Glaeser12, R. W. Taylor13, D. Ghezzi10, J. A. Mayr14, the complex I assembly factor TIMMDC1, which we con- sequentlyestablishedasanoveldisease-associatedgene.InAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 75 conclusion, our study expands the diagnostic tools for Results: In total, we identified 92 probands in our cohort detecting non-exonic variants of Mendelian disorders and with recessive inheritance of NOD2 alleles, carrying providesexamplesofintronicloss-of-functionvariantswith homozygous or compound heterozygous combinations of pathological relevance. rare and low-frequency CD-risk alleles or novel variants. Paper preprint available: http://biorxiv.org/content/early/ Weinvestigatedthecontributionofrecessiveinheritanceof 2017/01/16/066738 NOD2 in IBD patients from the DiscovEHR study and L.S. Kremer: None. D.M. Bader: None. C. Mertes: confirmedthatrecessiveinheritanceofNOD2rareandlow- None. R. Kopajtich: None. G. Pichler: A. Employment frequency variants explained ~7% of cases. (full or part-time); Significant; PreOmics GmbH, Am Conclusions:Insum,~8%oftheprobandsinourpediatric- Klopferspitz 19, D-82152 Planegg/Martinsried. A. Iuso: onset IBD cohort conform to a recessive inheritance mode None. T.B. Haack: None. E. Graf: None. T. Schwarz- of NOD2 rare and low frequency deleterious variants. This mayr: None. C. Terrile: None. E. Konarikova: None. wassimilarlyconfirmedinanindependentIBDcohortwith B. Repp: None. G. Kastenmueller: None. J. Adamski: several cases having been diagnosed with CD at an earlier None. P. Lichtner: None. C. Leonhardt: None. than average age. Our findings implicate NOD2 as a Men- B. Funalot: None. A. Donati: None. V. Tiranti: None. delian disease gene for a subset of early-onset CD, A. Lombes: None. C. Jardel: None. D. Glaeser: None. molecularly defined by recessive inheritance of NOD2 R.W. Taylor: None. D. Ghezzi: None. J.A. Mayr: None. variants. A. Roetig: None. P. Freisinger: None. F. Distelmaier: J. Horowitz: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- None. T.M. Strom: None. T. Meitinger: None. J. Gag- nificant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. N. Warner: None. neur: None. H. Prokisch: None. J. Staples: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, C13.4 stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; Mutation spectrum of NOD2 reveals recessive Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Crowley: None. inheritance as a main driver of Early Onset Crohn′s R. Murchie: None. C. Van Hout: A.Employment (full or Disease part-time); Significant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other J.Horowitz1,N.Warner2,J.Staples1,E.Crowley2,R.Murchie2,C.Van intellectual property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. Hout1, A. K. King1, K. Fiedler2, J. G. Reid1, J. D. Overton1, A. R. A.K. King: A.Employment (fullorpart-time); Significant; Shuldiner1, A. Baras1, A. Griffiths2, F. Dewey1, O. Gotessman1, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, A. Muise2, C. Gonzaga-Jauregui1 stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. K. Fiedler: None. J.G. Reid: 1Regeneron Genetics Center, Regeneron Pharmaceuticals A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron Inc., Tarrytown, NY, United States, 2Hospital for Sick Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Children, Toronto, ON, Canada options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; RegeneronPharmaceuticals.J.D.Overton:A.Employment Introduction: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), encom- (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. passing Crohn’s Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis(UC), E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other results in chronic and destructive inflammation of the gas- intellectual property); Modest; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. trointestinaltractingeneticallysusceptibleindividuals.IBD A.R. Shuldiner: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- is typically diagnosed in the 3rd decade of life; however nificant;RegeneronPharmaceuticals.E.OwnershipInterest pediatric-onset IBD, diagnosed before age 18, represents (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); ~25%ofalldiagnosesandisgenerallymoresevere.NOD2 Significant; Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. A. Baras: A. was the first and to date most replicated gene associated Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron with adult CD; its role in pediatric IBD remains not well Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock understood. options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; Methods: We performed WES in a cohort of 1183 pro- RegeneronPharmaceuticals.A.Griffiths:None.F.Dewey: bandswithpediatricIBD(<18y)andtheiravailableparents A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron and siblings. Trio-based analysis was executed on 492 Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock complete trios for initial discovery, and replicated our options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; findings in the remaining probands. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. O. Gotessman: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Significant; Regeneron76 Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock CRiSPR/Cas9 technology, in combination with the easily- options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; deliverable AAV9 system. RegeneronPharmaceuticals.A.Muise:None.C.Gonzaga- S. Daga: None. M. Baldassarri: None. C. Lo Rizzo: Jauregui: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; None.C.Fallerini:None.V.Imperatore:None.I.Longo: Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. E. Ownership Interest (stock, None. E. Frullanti: None. F. Ariani: None. M.A. stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; Mencarelli: None. F. Mari: None. A.M. Pinto: None. Regeneron Pharmaceuticals. A. Renieri: None. C13.5 C13.6 Podocytes differentiated from urine renal precursor Machine learning models for the characterization of as a tool for Alport syndrome diagnosis and for genes associated with adult brain diseases assessing therapeutic strategies based on patient- derived cells J.A.Botía1,S.Guelfi1,K.D’sa1,J.Vandrovcova1,J.Hardy1,M.Weale2, M. Ryten1 S. Daga1, M. Baldassarri1,2, C. Lo Rizzo2, C. Fallerini1, V. Imperatore1, I.Longo2,E.Frullanti1,F.Ariani1,2,M.A.Mencarelli1,2,F.Mari1,2,A.M. 1Institute of Neurology, University College London, Lon- Pinto1,2, A. Renieri1,2 don, United Kingdom, 2King’s College London, London, United Kingdom 1Medical Genetics, Univeristy Of Siena, Siena, Italy, 2Medical Genetics, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Overthepast5yearstherehasbeenamassivegrowthin Senese, Siena, Italy genetic testing and this has had a huge and arguably dis- proportionate impact on our understanding of adult neuro- Alport syndrome is a genetic disorder caused by muta- logical disorders. In parallel there has been an equally tionsincollagenIVgenes,leadingtoultrastructurallesions impressive growth in the availability of omics data. Given oftheglomerularbasementmembraneuptoend-stagerenal thiscriticalmassofdataweaskwhetherwecanidentifythe disease.COL4chainsexpressionisrestrictedtokidney,eye key features of a gene relevant to adult brain disease. We and ear. Podocytes, key component of the glomerular apply Machine Learning (ML) on DNA, RNA and protein structure,aretheonlycellsabletoproducethethreeCOLIV features of disease genes defined by DisGeNET and expert alpha chains and thus, they are key-players in ATS patho- curation to achieve this. Regarding DNA, we include as a genesis. However, podocytes-targeted therapeutic strate- predictorExACpLI(probabilityofbeingintoleranttoLoss gies,havebeenhamperedbythedifficultyofisolatingthem of Function). Regarding RNA data, we consider specificity by non-invasive methods and transcripts-based diagnostic ofgeneexpressionin42tissuesasdetailedinGTExV6,and approaches have been complicated by the inaccessibility of theoverallandspecificconnectivitypatternsofthegenesas other cell types expressing COL4chains. Forthe first time, measured by WGCNA-based co-expression networks. We we have recently demonstrated that it is possible to isolate use data from HEXEvent to account for variability in and differentiate renal precursors from urine of Alport transcript structure. Using this approach we demonstrate syndrome patients and healthy carriers, providing an easily thatgeneconnectivityratherthangeneexpressionisamore available cell system closer to podocytes’ physiological useful classifier. Furthermore, this approach highlights the conditions. RT-PCR analysis revealed COL4A3, COL4A4 importance of gene expression within adipose tissue (over and COL4A5 expression associated with Podoplanin brain tissue) for Alzheimer’sdisease(AD), inkeepingwith expression, marker involved in shaping podocytes mem- evidencelinkingadiposityandADrisk.Ap-valueof5.79e- brane. RNA studies on patients-derived podocytes harbor- 10 for the classifier accuracy being better than the non- ing intronic variants of uncertain significance in COLIV information ratio suggests the utility of this approach. genes led to identify aberrant splicing patterns leading to Thus, we conclude that by using ML we can efficiently premature stop codons and truncated proteins. Our data generate novel insights into the location and processes highlight that urine-derived podocytes’ precursors can be driving disease in genetic forms of adult neurological used as tool to establish the pathogenic role of uncertain disorders. variants, thus allowing us to provide the patient with a J.A. Botía: None. S. Guelfi: None. K. D’sa: None. molecular diagnosis and with a recurrence risk for the sib- J.Vandrovcova:None.J.Hardy:None.M.Weale:None. lings. Furthermore, the established system opens up the M. Ryten: None. possibility of testing personalized gene therapy-based approaches on disease-relevant cells taking advantage of aAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 77 C14 C14.2 Population Genetics and Ancient DNA Clustered de novo mutations with large intra- mutational distance contribute to the maternal age C14.1 effect Extremely rare variants reveal patterns of germline mutation rate heterogeneity in humans J. M. Goldmann1, V. Seplyarskiy2, T. Vilboux3, D. L. Bodian3, B. D. Solomon3,4,5,6, J. F. Deeken3, J. A. Veltman1,7, W. S. W. Wong3, S. Zoellner, J. Carlson, BRIDGES Consortium, J. Li C. Gilissen1, J. E. Niederhuber3,8 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States 1Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Division of Genet- ics, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical Precise estimates of the single-nucleotide mutation rate School, Boston, MA, United States, 3Inova Translational and its variability are essential to the study of human gen- Medicine Institute (ITMI), Inova Health Systems, Falls ome evolution and genetic diseases. However, estimates Church, VA, United States, 4GeneDx, 207 Perry Pkwy, using common variants are biased by selection and biased Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 5Department of Pedia- gene conversionwhile analyzingde novo variants provides trics, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medi- insufficientobservationstoconsidersequencecontext.Here cine,, Richmond, VA, United States, 6Department of we use ~36 million singleton variants observed in 3,716 Pediatrics,InovaChildren’sHospital,InovaHealthSystem, whole-genome sequences to characterize the heterogeneity Falls Church, VA, United States, 7Institute of Genetic of germline mutation rates across the genome. These sin- Medicine, International Centre for Life, Newcastle Uni- gletons arose very recently in the population, and are thus versity, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 8Johns largelyunaffectedbyconfoundingevolutionaryfactors.We Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MA, show that nucleotide context is the strongest predictor of United States mutability, with mutation rates varying by>650-fold depending on the identity of three bases upstream or Clustered mutations are series of point mutations downstream of the mutated site. Histone modifications, occurring in close proximity. Clustering of mutations has replication timing, recombination rate, and other local been observed in humans in germline, somatic and cancer genomic features further modify mutability; magnitude and cells.Evidencesuggeststhatthesemutationclustersmostly direction of this modification varies with the sequence arise from single mutational events, giving rise to point context. We evaluate the estimated models in an indepen- mutationswithreciprocaldistancesofupto20kb.However, dent dataset of ~46,000 de novo mutations and show that the exact mutational mechanism of germline mutation singleton-based estimates provide a more accurate predic- clusters remains elusive. tion of the mutation patterns than estimates based on Here, we collected data on clustered de novo mutations common variants used in previous approaches. Incorporat- by sequencing whole genomes of 1,291 parent-offspring ing the effects of genomic features further improves the trios. We identified 1,796 clustered de novo mutations prediction. Finally we demonstrate how highly mutable 7 (cDNMs) and determined the parent-of-origin for 660 base pair motives can help identify new mechanisms of cDNMs (37%) to investigate the differences between male germ-line mutation. The effects of sequence contexts, and female germline cDNMs. genomic features, and their interactions we present capture We show that mutation clusters containing C-G sub- the most refined portrait to date of the germline mutation stitutionspreferspecificmutationorders,suggestingthatthe patterns in humans. underlying mutational influences are oriented according to S. Zoellner: None. J. Carlson: None. J. Li: None. the DNA backbone. Unlike unclustered DNM, we do not find a paternal age effect for clustered DNM. However, specifically maternal DNM clusters with inter-mutational distances above 1kb are correlated with maternal age, accounting for a significant proportion of the maternal age effectofallDNMs.Interestingly,theseclustersareenriched onchromosomes8,9and16inknownmaternalaccelerated regions. In conclusion, our study sheds light on the potential mechanisms underlying these events and reveals the sig- nificant contribution of cDNMs to the maternal age effect.78 J.M. Goldmann: None. V. Seplyarskiy: None. T. Vil- C14.4 boux: None. D.L. Bodian: None. B.D. Solomon: None. Farming in Estonia was introduced by Early Bronze J.F. Deeken: None. J.A. Veltman: None. W.S.W. Wong: Age migrants from the Steppe None. C. Gilissen: None. J.E. Niederhuber: None. L. Saag1,2, L. Varul3, C. L. Scheib4, J. Stenderup5, M. E. Allentoft5, C14.3 L. Saag2, L. Pagani2, M. Reidla2,1, K. Tambets2, E. Metspalu2,1, Admixture mapping identifies Inuit ancestry loci A. Kriiska6, E. Willerslev5, T. Kivisild4,2,1, M. Metspalu2 associated with metabolic traits in the Greenlandic population 1Department of Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, V. Yakimov, L. Skotte, A. Koch, B. Søborg, M. Andersson, S. W. 2EstonianBiocentre,Tartu,Estonia,3SchoolofHumanities, Michelsen, M. L. Pedersen, F. Geller, M. Melbye, B. Feenstra Tallinn University, Tallinn, Estonia, 4Department of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark Cambridge, United Kingdom, 5Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Background: Greenland is inhabited by a small, histori- Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6University of Tartu, cally isolated Inuit population, which only in the last few Tartu, Estonia centuries admixed with Europeans. Indigenous Inuit Greenlanders have adapted to harsh Arctic conditions, The shift from hunting-gathering to farming and animal including low temperatures and restricted access to plant- husbandry happens relatively late in Northeast Europe and basedfood.Weaimtomakeuseofrecentadmixtureinthe the extent to which it involved genetic ancestry change is Greenlandic population to investigate ancestry specific still poorly understood. genetic associations with metabolism. To shed more light on the genetic changes during the Materials and Methods: We genotyped 1570 Green- shift to farming based economies in Estonia, we extracted landers and inferred locus-specific (local) ancestry. Using and sequenced aDNA from skeletal remains uncovered in linear mixedmodelsto controlfor the population structure, the context of Mesolithic Narva Culture (MNC) (7,200– we performed admixture mapping with 232 serum meta- 5,900 yr BP), and Neolithic Comb Ceramic Culture (CCC) bolites quantified by NMR spectroscopy. (5,900–3,800 yr BP) and Corded Ware Culture (CWC) Results: We found three loci where local ancestry asso- (4,800–4,000 yr BP) from Estonia. We compared these ciated with changed levelsofoneormore metabolites. The autosomalaswellasmtDNA,XandYchromosomedatato first is located on 11q13.2, where Inuit ancestry was asso- sequence and genotype data from modern and ancient ciated with several metabolites including decreased degree populations of Europe, West Asia and Siberia to make of fatty acid unsaturation (p=8.5e-38). At the second inferencesabouttheextentofcontinuityandgeneticchange locus,locatedon8q21.3,Inuitancestrywasassociatedwith during the end of the Stone Age in Estonia. an increased ratio of ω-3 fatty acids to all fatty acids (p= WefindthatEstonianhunter-gatherersofCombCeramic 1.1e-6). Finally, at 12q13.13, Inuit ancestry was associated Culture are closest to Eastern hunter-gatherers. The Esto- with increased levels of lactate (p=1.1e-6). nian first farmers of Corded Ware Culture show high Conclusions: Our findings indicate that Inuit ancestry at similarity in their autosomes with Steppe Belt Late Neo- specific regions in the genome is associated with the reg- lithic/Bronze Age individuals, Caucasus hunter-gatherers ulation of metabolism in the Greenlandic population, and Iranian farmers while their X chromosomes are most demonstrate that admixture mapping can localize ancestry- closely related with the European Early Farmers of Anato- specific functional variants, and illustrate the power of lian descent. genetic studies in small, historically isolated populations. These findings suggest that the shift to intensive culti- Funding: Danish Medical Research Council, The Green- vation and animal husbandry in Estonia presents a unique landic Ministry of Education, Church, Culture and Gender caseofasex-specificprocesstriggeredbythearrivalofnew Equality, Maersk Foundation, Aase and Ejnar Danielsens peopleandculture,whoseancestrycanbetracedbacktothe Foundation, Novo Nordisk Foundation, Oak Foundation, Steppe rather than to Anatolia. Carlsberg Foundation. L. Saag: None. L. Varul: None. C.L. Scheib: None. V. Yakimov: None. L. Skotte: None. A. Koch: None. J. Stenderup: None. M.E. Allentoft: None. L. Saag: B. Søborg: None.M.Andersson:None.S.W.Michelsen: None. L. Pagani: None. M. Reidla: None. K. Tambets: None.M.L.Pedersen:None.F.Geller:None.M.Melbye: None. E. Metspalu: None. A. Kriiska: None. E. Will- None. B. Feenstra: None. erslev: None. T. Kivisild: None. M. Metspalu: None.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 79 C14.5 J.Bybjerg-Grauholm:None.C.M.Hagen:None.V.F. Complex spatio-temporal distribution and Goncalves: None. M. Bækvad-Hansen: None. C.S. genogeographic affinity of mitochondrial DNA Hansen: None. P.L. Hedley: None. J.K. Kanters: None. haplogroups in 24,216 Danes J. Nielsen: None. M. Theisen: None. O. Mors: None. J. Kennedy: None. A.B. Demur: None. T.M. Werge: J. Bybjerg-Grauholm1, C. M. Hagen1, V. F. Goncalves2, M. Bækvad- None. M. Nordentoft: None. A. Børglum: None. P.B. Hansen1, C. S. Hansen1, P. L. Hedley1, J. K. Kanters3, J. Nielsen4, Mortensen: None. D.M. Haugaard: None. M. Chris- M. Theisen1, O. Mors5, J. Kennedy6, A. B. Demur7, T. M. Werge7, tiansen: None. M. Nordentoft8, A. Børglum5, P. B. Mortensen5, D. M. Haugaard1, M. Christiansen1 C14.6 FromlostempirestomoderncitieswithancientGPS 1StatensSerumInstitut,Copenhagen,Denmark,2University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 3University of Copen- E. Elhaik1, R. Das2, M. Pirooznia3, U. Esposito1 hagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Aalborg University Hos- pital, Aalborg, Denmark, 5Aarhus University, Aarhus, 1University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Man- Denmark, 6Toronto University, Toronto, ON, Canada, ipal University, Manipal, India, 3NIH, Bethesda, MD, 7Mental Health Centre, Sct Hans, Copenhagen, Denmark, United States 8Mental Health Centre, Capital Region, Copenhagen, Denmark Recent studies have demonstrated that geographical ori- gin can be accurately inferred from genomic data and Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) haplogroups (hgs) are prompted us to embark on the unresolved question of evolutionarily conserved sets of mtDNA SNPs. Associa- inferring the geographical origin of skeletal finds, thus far tions of hgs with geographical origin, disease and physio- assumed to be synonymous with their burial site. Whereas logical characteristics have been reported, but have geographical inference based on anatomical or morpholo- frequently not been reproducible. We assessed, using 418 gical information is highly complex and error-prone, parti- mtDNA SNPs on the PsychChip (Illumina), the spatio- cularly when the remains are physically damaged or temporal distribution of mtDNA hgs in DNA isolated from fragmented, using ancient DNA for localization entails 24,642 geographically un-biased dried blood spots (DBS), different challengesduetothelackofintermediatesamples collected from 1981 to 2005 through the Danish National over space or time, the small number of SNPs, and their NeonatalScreeningprogram.Geno-geographicaffinitywas spurious nature. We developed the ancient Geographic established with ADMIXTURE using a reference of 100K Population Structure (aGPS), an admixture-based method +autosomal SNPs in 2,248 individuals from nine popula- thatusestherelationshipbetweenadmixtureandgeography tions.ThehgdistributionwastypicallyNorthernEuropean, to predict the geographical locations of samples. aGPS and hgs were highly variable based on median-joining implements a genetic clustering approach and uses a analysis, suggesting multiple founder events. Considerable dynamic reference panel based on the chronology of the heterogeneity and variation in autosomal geno-geographic sample. Applied to a genomic dataset of over 300 ancient affinity (ancestry background) was observed. Thus, Eurasians and Near-Easterners (Pleistocene - Late Iron individuals with hg Hexhibited95 %, and Uhgs38.2% – Age),aGPSlocalized~50%ofthesampleswithin0–200km 92.5 %, Danish ancestry. Significant clines between geo- from their burial site, ~32% within 200–1,000km, and the graphical regions and rural and metropolitan populations remaining within 1,000–3,175km, with an overall average were found. Over 25 years, macro-hg L increased from accuracy of 525km. We have also identified “biodiversity 0.2 % to 1.2 % (p=1.1*E-10), and M from 1 % to 2.4 % centers”, which correspond with ancient Empires that drew (p=3.7*E-8).HgUincreasedamongtheRmacro-hgfrom immigrants from other countries, and the spatio-temporal 14.1 % to 16.5 % (p=1.9*E-3). Geno-geographic affinity, structure of the corresponding migration fluxes. Our results geographicalskewedness,andsub-hgdistributionsuggested confirmthemassiveYamnayamigrationfromthesteppeto that the L, M and U increases are due to immigration. The Central Europe during the Late Neolithic. Our findings complex spatio-temporal dynamics and geno-geographic allow addressing long standing questions in history con- heterogeneity of mtDNA in the Danish population reflect cerning the identity of the Old World residents. repeated migratory events and, in later years, net immigra- E.Elhaik:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest;DNA tion. Such complexity may explain the often contradictory Diagnostic Center. R. Das: None. M. Pirooznia: None. andpopulation-specificreportsofmito-genomicassociation U. Esposito: None. with disease.80 C15 A.Gylfason:None.A.Jonasdottir:None.A.Jonasdottir: Reproductive Genetics None. T. Rafnar: None. M. Frigge: None. S.N. Stacey: None. O.T. Magnusson: None. U. Thorsteinsdottir: C15.1 None. G. Masson: None. A. Kong: None. B.V. Aging oocytes accelerate regional sequence Halldorsson: None. A. Helgason: None. D.F. Gudb- diversity in humans and African apes jartsson: None. K. Stefansson: None. H. Jónsson, P. Sulem, B. Kehr, S. Kristmundsdottir, F. Zink, E. C15.2 Hjartarson,M.T.Hardarson,K.E.Hjorleifsson,H.P.Eggertsson,S.A. Interactome between embryo trophectoderm cells Gudjonsson,L.D.Ward,G.A.Arnadottir,E.A.Helgason,H.Helgason, and endometrial epithelial and stromal cells: novel A.Gylfason,A.Jonasdottir, A.Jonasdottir,T.Rafnar,M.Frigge,S.N. insights into implantation process in human Stacey,O.T.Magnusson,U.Thorsteinsdottir,G.Masson,A.Kong,B.V. Halldorsson, A. Helgason, D. F. Gudbjartsson, K. Stefansson M. Koel1, K. Krjutškov1,2, A. Reddy2, M. Saare3, S. Katayama2, L. Kumar4, K. Gemzell Danielsson4, F. Lanner5,6, E. Einarsdottir2,7, deCODE genetics / Amgen Inc., Reykjavík, Iceland D. Blesa8, C. Simon9, J. Kere2,7, A. Salumets1,3,10, S. Altmäe1 Introduction: The accumulation of germline de novo 1Competence Centre on Health Technologies, Tartu, Esto- mutations (DNMs) is a primary requisite for evolution. nia, 2Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Despite this, there is considerable uncertainty about the Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, 3Institute of Clinical Medi- parent-of-origin effects on DNM accumulation and the cine, Department ofObstetricsand Gynecology, University mutational mechanisms inducing them. of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 4Department of Women’s and Material and Methods: We whole-genome sequenced Children’s Health, Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 1,548 Icelanders (~35X coverage), their parents, and for a Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Department of subset of 225, at least one child. Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska Results: We found 108,778 DNMs, whereof we identified Institute, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Division of Obstetrics and parental origin of 42,961 DNMs. We estimated a paternal Gynecology, Karolinska Universitetssjukhuset, Stockholm, and maternal age effect of 1.51 and 0.37 DNM per year of Sweden, 7Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, and Molecular the age of the parents, respectively. There was a consider- Neurology Research Program, University of Helsinki, abledifferenceintherelativecontributionofmaternalCpG Helsinki, Finland, 8Igenomix, Valencia, Spain, 9Valencia >TpG (0.26% decrease per year) and C>G (0.33% University/INCLIVA & Igenomix, Valencia, Spain, increase per year) DNMs with increasing maternal age. 10Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Strikingly, the maternal age at conception affects the Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, regional distribution of DNMs especially for C>G DNMs, Finland resulting in a 50 fold greater C>G mutation rate in a 20 megabase region of chromosome 8p. We found that age- Human embryo implantation is a complex process that relatedgeneconversionsfrommothersmostlyoccurwithin requires dialogue between the receptive lineage of uterus theregionsenrichedwithmaternalC>GDNMs,providing i.e. endometrium and blastocyst stage embryo. As it is a causal link between double strand break repair and the ethicallyandtechnicallyimpossibletostudyhumanembryo accumulationofDNMswithmaternalage.Thisage-related implantation in vivo, the molecular processes during the regionalinfluxofmaternalC>GDNMsisreflectedinrare implantation process are still not well known. Protein- and common C>G mutations and pairwise divergence protein interaction (PPI) networks were constructed using between African great ape species. transcriptome data on upregulated genes from receptive Conclusions: Our result showcase the interaction of par- endometrial epithelium or stromal cells and polar- ental age effect on the location, type and rate of mutations; trophectodermal cells. The detected mRNAs were con- and how these sex differences have shaped generation of verted into corresponding proteins, the subset of proteins sequence diversity throughout human history and African localized in cell membrane and surface were extracted, and great ape divergence. PPI networks were created based on interactions in H. Jónsson: None. P. Sulem: None. B. Kehr: STRING 10.0 database. Endometrial epithelial- None. S. Kristmundsdottir: None. F. Zink: None. trophectodermal cell network contains 157 and endo- E. Hjartarson: None. M.T. Hardarson: None. K.E. metrial stromal-trophectodermal network 138 interacting Hjorleifsson: None. H.P. Eggertsson: None. S.A. Gud- cell surface proteins. Biological processes related to cell jonsson: None. L.D. Ward: None. G.A. Arnadottir: attachment and proliferation were detected in both None. E.A. Helgason: None. H. Helgason: None. blastocyst-epithelialandblastocyst-stromalcell-specificPPIAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 81 networks. The largest super-cluster in stromal-specific cell can pass the developmental barrier, resulting in complex network was related to the positive regulation of kinase fetal segmental anomalieswithsevere clinical implications. activity and extracellular matrix organization, while in In addition, the detected maternal and fetal segmental epithelial-specific cell network blood coagulation and cell imbalances triggered expert ultrasound follow-up and, in junction assembly clusters were detected. The hyaluronan somecases,hadimplicationsonfuturereproductivechoice. metabolism pathway, known to be important in embryo Genome-wideNIPT alsoenablespresymptomaticdetection implantation, was uniquely enriched in epithelial cell net- of maternal tumors. Altogether, we demonstrate that work, underlining the cell type specific nature of human genome-wide NIPT analysis improves pregnancy manage- embryo implantation process. This is the first comprehen- ment without introducing unnecessary invasive testing. sive study of molecular networks between blastocyst and N. Brison: None. K. Van Den Bogaert: None. specific cell types of receptive human endometrium, pro- L. Dehaspe: None. H. Peeters: None. H. Van Esch: viding new understanding about the molecular processes None. G. Van Buggenhout: None. A. Vogels: None. that lead to successful embryo implantation, thus allowing J. Breckpot: None. T. de Ravel: None. E. Legius: None. to predict the best timing for embryo transfer in in vitro K. Devriendt: None. J.R. Vermeesch: E. Ownership fertilization cycles. Funding: grants IUT34-16; EU48695; Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual EU324509. property); Modest; Cartagenia. Other; Modest; Collabora- M.Koel:None.K.Krjutškov:None.A.Reddy:None. tion with Cartagenia. M. Saare: None. S. Katayama: None. L. Kumar: None. K. Gemzell Danielsson: None. F. Lanner: None. C15.4 E. Einarsdottir: None. D. Blesa: None. C. Simon: None. Clinical implementation of non-invasive prenatal J. Kere: None. A. Salumets: None. S. Altmäe: None. diagnosis (NIPD) for single gene disorders C15.3 E.C.Young1,B.Bowns1,A.Gerrish1,M.Parks2,S.Court1,S.Cleary1,S. Diagnostic value of non-invasive prenatal testing Clokie1,J.Hewitt1,D.Williams1,T.Cole1,M.Griffiths1,F.MacDonald1, (NIPT) using genomic imbalance profiling (GIPseq) S. K. Allen1 N. Brison, K. Van Den Bogaert, L. Dehaspe, H. Peeters, H. Van Esch, 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, G. Van Buggenhout, A. Vogels, J. Breckpot, T. de Ravel, E. Legius, United Kingdom, 2Nonacus Ltd., Birmingham, United K. Devriendt, J. R. Vermeesch Kingdom Centre for Human Genetics-KULeuven, Leuven,Belgium Introduction: We have developed and implemented a method for NIPD of multiple single gene disorders (SGD), Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) enables risk esti- including spinal muscular atrophy (SMA), Duchenne and mation for common fetal autosomal aneuploidies with high Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD/BMD), cystic fibrosis sensitivity and specificity. Using clinical analysis of over (CF) and congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH). We laun- 20.000 pregnancies, we show that NIPT by in-house opti- ched a diagnostic service for SMA and DMD/BMD in mized genomic imbalance profiling (GIPseq) increases the September 2016. sensitivity for detection of fetal trisomy 21, 18 and 13 to Materials and Methods: The test involves targeted 100%, 97,2% and 100% respectively without reducing the enrichment of thousands of SNPs across multiple genomic specificity, which exceeds 99,9% for each of these triso- regionsandmassivelyparallelsequencing(IlluminaMiSeq) mies.Furthermore,NIPTbyGIPseqofferstheadvantageof of cfDNA followed by relative haplotype dosage (RHDO) detecting other genomic imbalances that are clinically analysis. Maternal, paternal and proband genomic DNA relevantfor fetal ormaternal health.Thesefindingsinclude samples are tested alongside cfDNA for haplotype phasing (i)otheraneuploidies(0.5%),withthehighestincidencefor and to measure fetal fraction. Our method can test 2–3 trisomy 7, 16 and 22 respectively, (ii) fetal or maternal patients on a single MiSeq run, thus increasing the multi- segmental imbalances (15 and 13 cases respectively) and plexing capacity and decreasing testing costs for clinical (iii) maternal cancer (7 cases). We show that, although laboratories. uncommon aneuploidies mostly exist as confined placental Results: We have received referrals from across the world, mosaicismwithdifferentgradesofmosaicismdependingon including8pregnanciesatriskofSMA,1pregnancyatrisk thesampledregion,theyposeariskforintra-uterinegrowth of DMD and 1 pregnancy at risk of BMD. Samples have retardationanduniparentaldisomy(UPD),asillustratedina ranged in gestational age from 8 to 13 weeks, with an fetus with mosaic trisomy 15 and a UPD15 cell line. We average turnaround time for results of 12 calendar days. also demonstrate that placental chromosomal imbalances82 Overall,wehavereported3normal,5unaffectedcarrierand targeted single/panel gene testing) fails to establish a defi- 2 affected pregnancies. nitive diagnosis. Genetic variants aretriaged viaastringent Conclusions:Wehaveencountered anumberofscenarios, filtering pipeline established for the UK Deciphering including consanguinity, 2+0 SMA carrier parents and Developmental Disorders (DDD) project and potentially recombinationevents.WehaveshownthatNIPDbyRHDO pathogenic variants are assessed and classified by a UK- is feasible in a clinical setting, increasing accessibility to wide multidisciplinary clinical review panel (CRP), tech- many more couples with a pregnancy at risk of a SGD. nically validated in NHS accredited labs and reported back Validation is still ongoing for CF and CAH, with similarly to Clinical Genetics units and families where appropriate. promising results so far. Thus far from 259 trios reviewed by the CRP, 16 likely Funding: Health Innovation Challenge Fund (DoH, Well- diagnoses have been revealed, giving a diagnostic yield of come Trust). ~6%. Diagnostic yield varies by phenotypic class, with E.C. Young: None. B. Bowns: None. A. Gerrish: multisystem phenotypes showing the highest (~16%). None. M. Parks: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Diagnoses include de novo mutations in known dominant nificant; Nonacus Ltd. S. Court: None. S. Cleary: None. developmentaldisordergenes(n=9),biparentallyinherited S. Clokie: None. J. Hewitt: None. D. Williams: None. homozygous/compound heterozygous variants (n=6) and T.Cole:None.M.Griffiths:None.F.MacDonald:None. maternalUPDchromosome15.Themajorityofvariantsare S.K. Allen: None. SNVs/indels which would escape targeted detection by conventionaltesting.Whencomparedtoanullmodelbased C15.5 on triplet mutation rate, an excess of de novo mutation is Exome sequencing of 406 parental/fetal trios with observed,morepronouncedinknowndominantgenes(such structural abnormalities revealed by ultrasound in as KMT2D). Further analysis is predicted to identify new the UK Prenatal Assessment of Genomes and gene and mechanistic associations underlying observed Exomes (PAGE) project phenotypes as more samples are processed. PAGE aims to catalyseresponsibleadoptionofWESandpotentiallyWGS D. J. McMullan1, J. Lord2, R. Eberhardt2, G. Rinck2, S. Hamilton1, in routine diagnostics in the prenatal setting. R. Keelagher1, L. Jenkins3, E. Quinlan-Jones4, D. Williams5, R. Scott6, D.J.McMullan:F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest; M. Kilby4,7, L. Chitty6, E. Maher8, M. Hurles2 Congenica. J. Lord: None. R. Eberhardt: None. G.Rinck:None.S.Hamilton:None.R.Keelagher:None. 1West Midlands Regional Genetics Laboratory, Birming- L.Jenkins:None.E.Quinlan-Jones:None.D.Williams: ham Women’s and Children’s NHS Foundation Trust, None. R. Scott: None. M. Kilby: None. L. Chitty: None. Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2The Wellcome Trust San- E. Maher: None. M. Hurles: None. ger Institute, Wellcome Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cam- bridge, United Kingdom, 3NE Thames Regional Genetics C15.6 Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, Lon- Evaluationofanexpandedcarrierscreeningofferin don, United Kingdom, 4Department of Fetal Medicine, a non commercial setting Birmingham Women’s and Children’s Hospital, Birming- ham, United Kingdom, 5West Midlands Clinical Genetics P. Lakeman1, S. van Koningsbruggen1, E. J. W. Redeker1, C. P. E. Service, Birmingham Women’s and Children’s NHS Ottenheim1, I. B. Mathijssen1, M. C. Cornel2, M. M. A. M. Mannens1, FoundationTrust,Birmingham,UnitedKingdom,6Genetics E. J. Meijers-Heijboer1,2, L. Henneman2 and Genomic Medicine, UCL Institute of Child Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Founda- 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2VU tion Trust, London, United Kingdom, 7Centre for Women’s University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands and New-born Health, IMSR, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 8Department of Medical Since May 2016, expanded carrier screening for Genetics, University of Cambridge and Cambridge NIHR 50 severe recessive disorders is available in a non- Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom commercial hospital setting in Amsterdam, to facilitate informedreproductivedecision-making.Thescreeningaims PAGEaimstoapplywholeexomesequencing(WES)to at couples without a priori increased risk (no family his- 1000triosrecruitedintheUK-NHSover3yearstoidentify tory). Couples can apply for counseling via www.dra pathogenic variation underlying heterogeneous fetal struc- gerschapstest.nl, or hospital referral. Pre- and posttest tural abnormalities detected by ultrasound scan (USS). counseling is provided by genetic professionals at the out- Trio WES is conducted after resolution of pregnancy if patient clinic. External geneticists can send in blood sam- conventional testing (QF-PCR, chromosomalmicroarray or ples as well. Outcome and impact of testing was evaluated.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 83 Methods: A capture-based next generation sequencing Medicine, University of Southampton and Wessex Clinical strategy is used. Only pathogenic variants are reported Genetics Service, University Hospital Southampton NHS (individual reports). CNV analyses is included. Reimbur- Trust, Southampton, United Kingdom, 7West Midlands sement is possible for couples with high-risk indication Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham Women’s Hospital (HRI) based on ancestry/consanguinity. Pre- and posttest NHS Foundation Trust and University of Birmingham, questionnaires were completed including reasons for test- Birmingham Health Partners, Birmingham, United King- ing, knowledge, psychological impact, and satisfaction. dom, 8South West Thames Regional Genetics Service, St Partners could opt for parallel or sequential testing. George’s University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Results:Inthefirstninemonths,39couples(25withHRI) London, United Kingdom and6individuals (4with HRI)visitedtheoutpatient clinic. One couple refrained from testing. Sixteen couples choose To explore the genetic architecture of overgrowth syn- parallel testing. Eventually, eighty individuals were tested, dromes and human growth control we performed experi- including5 partners sequentially tested after positive tested mental and bioinformatic analyses of 710 individuals with carriers, and 15 additional external requests. Carrier status overgrowth (height and/or head circumference≥+2SD) of one (n=21 persons), two (n=3), three (n=1) or four and intellectual disability (OGID). We identified a causal (n=1) mutation(s) was identified. Fifty-four (68%) indi- mutation in one of 14 genes in 50% (353/710). This viduals tested negative. No carrier couples were found. includes HIST1H1E, encoding histone H1.4, which has not Conclusions: Preliminary analyses shows that about one been associated with a developmental disorder previously. third of tested individuals were carriers. Although the test ThepathogenicHIST1H1Emutationsarepredictedtoresult was designed for couples with no a priori risk, more than ina product thatisless effectiveinneutralising negatively- half reported HRI. One-year outcome will be presented at charged linker DNA because it has a reduced net charge, ESHG Conference, including results from questionnaires. and in DNA binding and protein-protein interactions P. Lakeman: Other; Significant; All authors are affili- because key residues are truncated. Functional network atedtoahospitalthatoffers(expanded)carrierscreeningin analyses demonstrated that epigenetic regulation is a pro- a non-commercial setting. S. van Koningsbruggen: None. minent biological process dysregulated in individuals with E.J.W. Redeker: None. C.P.E. Ottenheim: None. I.B. OGID.Mutationsinsixepigeneticregulationgenes,NSD1, Mathijssen: None. M.C. Cornel: None. M.M.A.M. EZH2, DNMT3A, CHD8, HIST1H1E and EED, accounted Mannens: None. E.J. Meijers-Heijboer: None. L. for 44% of individuals (311/710). There was significant Henneman: None. overlap between the 14 OGID genes and 611 genes in regions identified in GWAS to be associated with height (P=6.84×10−8), suggesting common variation impacting C16 OGIDgenefunctioninfluencesheightatapopulationlevel. Intellectual Disability Increased cellular growth is a hallmark of cancer and there was striking overlap between the OGID genes C16.1 and 260 somatically mutated cancer driver genes (P= Mutations in epigenetic regulation genes are a 1.75×10−14). However, the mutation spectra of genes major cause of overgrowth with intellectual involved in OGID and cancer differ, suggesting complex disability genotype-phenotype relationships. These data reveal insights into the genetic control of human growth and N. Rahman1,2, C. Loveday1, S. Yost1, M. Clarke1, E. Ramsay1, demonstrate that exome sequencing in OGID has a high A. Zachariou1, A. Elliott1, H. Wylie1, S. Mahamdallie1, S. Seal1, (50%) diagnostic yield, and could be have utility as a first- E. Ruark1, A. Ardissone3, O. Rittinger4, F. Stewart5, K. Temple6, line test in OGID. Funder, Wellcome:100210/Z/12/Z. T. Cole7, K. Tatton-Brown1,8 N. Rahman: None. C. Loveday: None. S. Yost: None. M. Clarke: None. E. Ramsay: None. A. Zachariou: 1Institute of Cancer Research, London, Sutton, United None.A.Elliott:None.H.Wylie:None.S.Mahamdallie: Kingdom, 2Cancer Genetics Unit, Royal Marsden NHS None. S. Seal: None. E. Ruark: None. A. Ardissone: Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 3Child Neu- None. O. Rittinger: None. F. Stewart: None. K. Temple: rology Unit, Foundation IRCCS C Besta Neurological None. T. Cole: None. K. Tatton-Brown: None. Institute, Milan, Italy, 4Landeskrankenanstalten Salzburg, Kinderklinik Department of Pediatrics, Klinische Genetik, Salzburg, Austria, 5Northern Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, Ireland, 6Human Development and Health Academic Unit, Faculty of84 C16.2 disability,speechdelay,ataxia,andfacialdysmorphismand Mutations in EBF3 disturb transcriptional profiles carrying a deleterious EBF3 variant detected by whole- and cause intellectual disability, ataxia, and facial exome sequencing. One 9-bp duplication and one splice- dysmorphism site,fivemissense,andtwononsensevariantsinEBF3were found;themutationsoccurreddenovoineightindividuals, F.L.Harms1,K.M.Girisha2,A.A.Hardigan3,4,F.Kortüm1,A.Shukla2, and the missense variant c.625C>T (p.Arg209Trp) was M. Alawi5,6,7, A. Dalal8, L. Brady9, M. Tarnopolsky9, L. M. Bird10,11, S. inheritedbytwoaffectedsiblingsfromtheirhealthymother, Ceulemans11, M. Bebin12, K. M.Bowling3, S. M.Hiatt3, E. J. Lose4,M. who is mosaic. EBF3 belongs to the early B cell factor Primiano13, W. K. Chung13, J. Juusola14, Z. C. Akdemir15, M. family (also known as Olf, COE, or O/E) and is a tran- Bainbridge16,W.Charng15,M.Drummond-Borg17,M.K.Eldomery15,A. scription factor involved in neuronal differentiation and W. El-Hattab18, M. A. M. Saleh19, S. Bézieau20, B. Cogné20, B. maturation. Structural assessment predicted that the five Isidor20,21, S. Küry20, J. R. Lupski15, R. M. Myers3, G. M. Cooper3, K. amino acid substitutions have damaging effects on DNA Kutsche1 binding of EBF3. Transient expression of EBF3 mutant proteins in HEK293T cells revealed mislocalization of all 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center but one mutant in the cytoplasm, as well as nuclear locali- Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 2Department of zation.Bytransactivationassays,allEBF3mutantsshowed Medical Genetics, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal significantly reduced or no ability to activate transcription University, Manipal, India, 3HudsonAlpha Institute for of the reporter gene CDKN1A, and in situ subcellular Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, United States, 4Department fractionation experiments demonstrated that EBF3 mutant of Genetics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Bir- proteins were less tightly associated with chromatin. mingham, AL, United States, 5University Medical Center Finally,inRNA-seqandChIP-seqexperiments,EBF3acted Hamburg-Eppendorf, Bioinformatics Service Facility, asatranscriptionalregulator,andmutantEBF3hadreduced Hamburg,Germany,6CenterforBioinformatics,University genome-wide DNAbinding and gene-regulatory activity. of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany, 7Virus Genomics, Hein- Our findings demonstrate that variants disrupting EBF3- rich-Pette-Institute, Leibniz-Institute for Experimental Vir- mediated transcriptional regulation cause intellectual dis- ology, Hamburg, Germany, 8Diagnostics Division, Centre abilityanddevelopmentaldelayandarepresentin~0.1%of for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad, Tel- individuals with unexplained neurodevelopmental angana, India, 9Department of Pediatrics, McMaster Uni- disorders. versity Medical Center, Hamilton, ON, Canada, Grants Sponsors: NIH, Simons Foundation, Deutsche 10Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Forschungsgemeinschaft, Cancer Prevention & Research Diego, CA, United States, 11Division of Genetics/Dysmor- Institute of Texas training program phology, Rady Children’s Hospital San Diego, San Diego, F.L. Harms: None. K.M. Girisha: None. A.A. Hard- CA, United States, 12Department of Neurology, University igan: None. F. Kortüm: None. A. Shukla: None. of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United M. Alawi: None. A. Dalal: None. L. Brady: None. States,13DepartmentofPediatricsandMedicine,Columbia M.Tarnopolsky:None.L.M.Bird:None.S.Ceulemans: University, New York, NY, United States, 14GeneDx, Gai- None.M.Bebin:None.K.M.Bowling:None.S.M.Hiatt: thersburg, MD, United States, 15Department of Molecular None. E.J. Lose: None. M. Primiano: None. W.K. and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Hous- Chung: None. J. Juusola: A. Employment (full or part- ton, TX, United States, 16Human Genome Sequencing time); Significant; GeneDX. Z.C. Akdemir: None. Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United M. Bainbridge: E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock States, 17Cook Children’s Genetic Clinic, Fort Worth, TX, options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; United States, 18Division of Clinical Genetics and Meta- Codified Genomics LLC. W. Charng: None. M. Drum- bolic Disorders, Department of Pediatrics, Tawam Hospi- mond-Borg: None. M.K. Eldomery: None. A.W. El- tal, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates, 19Section of Medical Hattab: None. M.A.M. Saleh: None. S. Bézieau: None. Genetics, Children’s Hospital, King Fahad Medical City, B. Cogné: None. B. Isidor: None. S. Küry: None. J.R. Riyadh,SaudiArabia,20CHUNantes,ServicedeGénétique Lupski:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, patent Médicale,Nantes,France,21INSERM,UMR-S957,Nantes, or other intellectual property); Significant; 23andMe, France Lasergen Inc.. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; RegeneronPharmaceuticals,BaylorGenetics.R.M.Myers: From a GeneMatcher-enabled international collabora- None. G.M. Cooper: None. K. Kutsche: None. tion, we identified ten individuals affected by intellectualAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 85 C16.3 altered the binding pocket of GTP/GDP and resulted in Recurrent de novo missense mutations in small disturbed cytosolic and Golgi localization in transfected GTPase gene RAB11B cause severe intellectual hTERT-RPE1 cells. Interestingly, these observations were disability and a distinctive brain phenotype comparable to the known GDP-bound inactive mutant, suggesting that the RAB11B mutations in patients resulted M. R. F. Reijnders1, I. J. C. Lamers2, H. Venselaar3, A. Kraus4, inapredominantlyinactivestateoftheprotein.Inlinewith S.Jansen1,B.B.A.deVries1,G.Houge5,G.AaslandGradek5,J.Seo6, these findings, we observed that the patient mutations M. Choi6, J. Chae7, S. J. F. Letteboer2, S. E. C. van Beersum2, alteredprotein-proteininteractionswithcanonicalRAB11B S.Dusseljee2,H.G.Brunner1,8,D.Doherty9,T.Kleefstra1,R.Roepman2 binding partners. In conclusion, we report two recurrent dominantmutationsinRAB11BleadingtoaNDsyndrome, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University likely caused by impaired GTP binding and subsequently, MedicalCenter;DondersInstituteforBrain,Cognitionand altered protein-protein interactions. Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Human M.R.F. Reijnders: None. I.J.C. Lamers: None. Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center; Radboud H. Venselaar: None. A. Kraus: None. S. Jansen: None. Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, Nether- B.B.A. de Vries: None. G. Houge: None. G. Aasland lands, 3Centre for Molecular and Biomolecular Infor- Gradek: None. J. Seo: None. M. Choi: None. J. Chae: matics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, None. S.J.F. Letteboer: None. S.E.C. van Beersum: Netherlands,4YorkshireRegionalGeneticsService.Chapel None. S. Dusseljee: None. H.G. Brunner: None. Allerton Hospital, Leeds, United Kingdom, 5Center for D. Doherty: None. T. Kleefstra: None. R. Roepman: Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland None. University Hospital, Bergen, Norway, 6Department of Biomedical Sciences, Seoul National University College of C16.4 Medicine, Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 7Department of Asyndromicneurodevelopmentaldisorderiscaused Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, bydenovodisruptionoftheproteasomeregulatory Seoul, Korea, Republic of, 8Department of Clinical Genet- subunit PSMD12 ics and School for Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht University Medical Center, Maas- S.Küry1,T.Besnard1,F.Ebstein2,T.N.Khan3,T.Gambin4,J.Douglas5, tricht, Netherlands, 9Department of Pediatrics, Seattle C. A. Bacino6, S. J. Sanders7, A. Lehmann2, X. Latypova, M. Pacault1, Children’s Research Institute and University of Washing- K. Khan8, S. Sacharow9, K. Glaser10, E. Bieth11, L. Perrin-Sabourin12, ton, Seattle, WA, United States M. Jacquemont13, M. T. Cho, K. G. Monaghan14, E. Roeder15, A. Denommé-Pichon16, B. Yuan, F. Xia15, S. Simon17, D. Bonneau18, The Rab GTPase family comprises approximately 70 P.Parent,K.Uguen19,B.Gilbert-Dussardier20,S.Odent21,A.Toutain22, GTP-binding proteins that function in vesicle formation, L. Pasquier21, D. Barbouth23, C. A. Shaw, A. Patel15, J. L. Smith, transport and fusion. Interaction with downstream proteins Weimin Bi15, S. Schmitt, W. Deb, M. Nizon, S. Mercier, M. Vincent1, is only present in their GTP-bound, active state. Here, we C.Rooryck24,V.Malan25,I.Briceño,A.Gómez26,K.M.Nugent27,J.B. report six patients with two recurrent de novo missense Gibson28,B.Cogné1,J.R.Lupski15,H.A.F.Stessman29,E.E.Eichler29, mutations in RAB11B (p.(Val22Met)/four patients; p. K. Retterer14, Y. Yang15, R. Redon30, N. Katsanis8, J. A. Rosenfeld15, (Ala68Thr)/two patients). An overlapping neurodevelop- P. Kloetzel2, C. Golzio8, S. Bézieau1, P. Stankiewicz15, B. Isidor1 mental (ND) phenotype, including severe intellectual dis- ability with absent speech, epilepsy, and spasticity was 1CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 2Charité Uni- observed in all patients. Additionally, visual problems, versitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Center for musculoskeletal abnormalities and microcephaly were pre- Human Disease Modeling, Duke University Medical Cen- sent in the majority. Re-evaluation of brain MRI images of ter, Durham, NC, United States, 4Baylor College of Medi- four patients, showed a shared distinct brain phenotype, cine, Houston, TX 77030, USA, TX, United States, 5Boston consisting of severely decreased white matter volume, Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, thinned corpus callosum, hypoplasia of the cerebellar ver- MA 02115, MA, United States, 6Baylor College of Madi- mis, optic nerve hypoplasia and mild ventriculomegaly. To cine, Houston, TX, United States, 7Weill Institute for Neu- study the functional effect of the identified RAB11B var- rosciences, University of California, San Francisco, CA, iants, and to compare this with known inactive GDP- and United States, 8Duke University Medical Center, Durham, active GTP-bound RAB11B mutants (p.(Ser25Asn) and p. NC, United States, 9Boston Children’s Hospital and Har- (Gln70Leu), respectively), we modeled the variants on the vard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 10Miller three-dimensional protein structure and performed sub- School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, Uni- cellular localization studies. We found that both variants ted States, 11Hôpital Purpan, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse,86 France, 12Hôpital Robert Debré, Assistance Publique – S. Sacharow: None. K. Glaser: None. E. Bieth: None. Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France, 13CHU de La Réunion, L. Perrin-Sabourin: None. M. Jacquemont: None. M.T. SaintPierre,France,14GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD,United Cho,K.G.Monaghan:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); States, 15Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United Significant; GeneDx. E. Roeder: None. A. Denommé- States, 16CHU d’Angers, Angers, France, 17INSERM, Uni- Pichon: None. B. Yuan, F. Xia: None. S. Simon: None. versité d’Angers et Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, D. Bonneau: None. P. Parent, K. Uguen: None. B. Gil- 18CHU d’Angers, Angers, France, 19CHU de Brest, Brest, bert-Dussardier: None. S. Odent: None. A. Toutain: France, 20CHU de Poitiers, Poitiers, France, 21CHU de None. L. Pasquier: None. D. Barbouth: None. C.A. Rennes, Rennes, France, 22CHU de Tours, Tours, France, Shaw, A. Patel: None. J.L. Smith, Weimin Bi: None. 23School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, FL, S. Schmitt, W. Deb, M. Nizon, S. Mercier, M. Vincent: United States, 24CHU d None. C. Rooryck: None. V. Malan: None. I. Briceño, A. Gómez: None. K.M. Nugent: None. J.B. Gibson: Introduction: Degradation of proteins by the ubiquitin- None. B. Cogné: None. J.R. Lupski: None. H.A.F. proteasome system is an essential biological process in the Stessman: None. E.E. Eichler: None. K. Retterer: A. development of eukaryotic organisms and the maintenance Employment (full or part-time); Significant; GeneDx. of physiological homeostasis. Dysregulation of this Y.Yang:None.R.Redon:None.N.Katsanis:None.J.A. mechanism leads to numerous human neurodevelopmental Rosenfeld: None. P. Kloetzel: None. C. Golzio: None. and/or neurodegenerative disorders. Two independent S.Bézieau:None.P.Stankiewicz:None.B.Isidor:None. teams recently highlighted the same candidate gene for intellectual disability within the ubiquitin-proteasome C16.5 system. Biallelic variants of UBA5 reveal that disruption of Materials and Methods: Additional anomalies of the the UFM1 cascade can result in early-onset candidate gene were sought in data from 50,000 exomes encephalopathy and59,000chromosomalmicroarray analyses,thankstoan international collaboration between six research centers E.Colin1,2,J.Daniel3,A.Ziegler1,4,J.Wakim4,A.Scrivo5,T.B.Haack6, specialized in neurodevelopmental disorders. To determine S. Khiati4, A. Denommé1,4, P. Amati-Bonneau1,4, M. Charif4, V. the role of the candidate gene in the disorder, a zebrafish Procaccio1,4,P.Reynier1,4,K.A.Aleck7,L.D.Botto8,C.L.Herper3,C.S. modelwasgeneratedandinvitroubiquitinationassayswere Kaiser3, R. Nabbout9, S. N’Guyen10, J. A. Mora-Lorca11, B. Assmann12, performed from normal and affected individuals’ cells. S. Christ12, T. Meitinger6,13, T. M. Strom6,13, H. Prokisch6,13, The FREX Results:WeidentifiedsixdenovogenomicdeletionCNVs Consortium, A. Miranda-Vizuete11, G. F. Hoffmann12, G. Lenaers4, P. and four de novo point mutations involving PSMD12, Bomont5, E. Liebau3, D. Bonneau1,4 encodingnon-ATPasesubunitRPN5ofthe19Sregulatorof the 26S proteasome complex, in unrelated individuals with 1Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, University intellectual disability, congenital malformations, ophthal- Hospital, Angers, France, 2UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM mologic anomalies, and subtle dysmorphic facial features. 1083 and PREMMI, University of Angers, 49933 Angers We observed a reduced RPN5 protein level and an accu- Cedex 9, France, 3Department of Molecular Physiology, mulation of ubiquitinated proteins without any impairment Westfälische Wilhelms-University Münster, Münster, Ger- of proteasome catalytic activity. Our psmd12 loss-of- many, 4UMR CNRS 6214-INSERM 1083 and PREMMI, function zebrafish CRISPR/cas9 model exhibited micro- University of Angers, Angers, France, 5Avenir-Atip team, cephaly, as well as renal and craniofacial anomalies. INSERM U1051, Institute of Neurosciences of Montpellier, Conclusions:Conclusions:ourdatasupporttheimportance UniversityofMontpellier,Montpellier,France,6Instituteof ofRPN5tohumanbiologyanddiseasedirectlyimplicating Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, PSMD12 haploinsufficiency, and aberrant functioning of München, Germany, 7Department of Genetics and Meta- the scaffolding subunit of the proteasome, in impaired bolism, Phoenix Children’s Medical Group, Phoenix, AZ, neurodevelopment. These enable the definition of a neuro- United States, 8Division of Medical Genetics, Department developmentaldisorderduetoPSMD12variants,expanding of Pediatrics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, thephenotypicspectrumofubiquitin-proteasomedependent United States, 9Department of Pediatric Neurology, disorders. National Reference Center for Rare Epilepsies, University (Grant: HUGODIMS, 2013, RC14_0107) Hospital Necker-Enfants-Malades, Paris, France, S. Küry: None. T. Besnard: None. F. Ebstein: None. 10Department of Pediatric Neurology, University Hospital, T.N. Khan: None. T. Gambin: None. J. Douglas: None. Angers, France, 11Institute of Biomedicine of Seville, Uni- C.A. Bacino: None. S.J. Sanders: None. A. Lehmann: versity Hospital Virgen del Rocio/CSIC/University of None. X. Latypova, M. Pacault: None. K. Khan: None. Seville, Seville, Spain, 12Department ofGeneral Pediatrics,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 87 Division of Pediatric Metabolic Medicine and Neurope- Introduction: Rett syndrome (RTT) is predominantly diatrics, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Ger- caused by Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) muta- many, 13Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum tions. Development of targeted therapeutics has been ham- München, Neuherberg, Germany pered by an imprecise understanding of the pathophysiologyofRTT.Weandothershavedemonstrated Via whole-exome sequencing, we identified rare that neuronal microtubule dynamics are disrupted in RTT, autosomal-recessive variants in UBA5 in five children from in association with reduced α-tubulin acetylation and four unrelated families affected with a similar pattern of increased histone deacetylase 6 (HDAC6). We hypothe- severe intellectual deficiency, microcephaly, movement sized that pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 could disorders, and/or early-onset intractable epilepsy. UBA5 restore microtubule stability and function, potentially ame- encodes the E1-activating enzyme of ubiquitin-fold modi- liorating the RTT phenotype. fier 1 (UFM1), a recently identified ubiquitin-like protein. Materials and Methods: We tested this hypothesis in a Biochemical studies of mutant UBA5 proteins and studies number of in vitro studies and in the Mecp2T158A mouse infibroblastsfromaffectedindividuals revealed thatUBA5 modelofRTT.Acetylatedtubulin andHDAC6levelswere mutations impair the process of ufmylation, resulting in an measured in MeCP2-deficient cells. Microtubule stability abnormal endoplasmic reticulum structure. In Cae- wasmeasuredinRTTpatientfibroblastsandthetrafficking norhabditis elegans, knockout of uba-5 and of human speed of mitochondria was measured in Mecp2T158A cul- orthologous genes in the UFM1 cascade alter cholinergic, turedcorticalneurons.Further,wetestedifahighlyspecific but notglutamatergic, neurotransmission. In addition, uba5 HDAC6 inhibitor could ameliorate the impaired motor and silencing in zebrafish decreased motility while inducing behavioural phenotype of the Mecp2T158A mice. abnormalmovementssuggestiveofseizures.Theseclinical, Results: We found reduced acetylated tubulin and biochemical, and experimental findings support our finding increased HDAC6 expression in both patient and ofUBA5mutationsasapathophysiologicalcauseforearly- Mecp2T158A mouse brain, a reduction in mitochondrial onsetencephalopathiesduetoabnormalproteinufmylation. velocity RTT mouse cortical neurons, increased micro- E. Colin: None. J. Daniel: None. A. Ziegler: None. tubule instability in patient fibroblasts, and that HDAC6 J. Wakim: None. A. Scrivo: None. T.B. Haack: None. inhibition restores tubulin acetylation levels and improves S.Khiati:None.A.Denommé:None.P.Amati-Bonneau: microtubule stability. Preliminary studies with our HDAC6 None.M.Charif:None. V.Procaccio:None.P. Reynier: inhibitor revealed that treated Mecp2T158A mice show None. K.A. Aleck: None. L.D. Botto: None. C.L. improvement in their impaired motor, behavioural and Herper: None. C.S. Kaiser: None. R. Nabbout: respiratory phenotype. None. S. N’Guyen: None. J.A. Mora-Lorca: None. Conclusions: Together, these early studies suggest that B.Assmann:None.S.Christ:None.T.Meitinger:None. pharmacological inhibition of HDAC6 potentially provides T.M. Strom: None. H. Prokisch: None. A. Miranda- a novel therapeutic option for RTT, restoring neuronal Vizuete:None.G.F.Hoffmann:None.G.Lenaers:None. trafficking deficits, and may stabilize the neurological P. Bomont: None. E. Liebau: None. D. Bonneau: None. phenotypeassociatedwiththedisorderinouranimalmodel of RTT. C16.6 W. Gold: None. N.B. Sangani: None. T. Lacina: Is Rett syndrome treatable? In vitro restoration of None. S. Williamson: None. G.P. Gian Paolo Vallerini: neuronal microtubule dynamics and preclinical None. L. Cantrill: None. A. Kozikowski: None. studies J. Christodoulou: None. W. Gold1,2, N. B. Sangani1,2, T. Lacina3, S. Williamson1, G. P. Gian Paolo Vallerini4, L. Cantrill2,5, A. Kozikowski4, J. Christodoulou6,7,1,2 C17 Hereditary Cancer 1Children’s Hospital at Westmead, Westmead, Australia, 2University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Hochschule C17.1 Mannheim - University of Applied Sciences, Mannheim, The contribution of rare variants, polygenic risk, Germany, 4University of Illinois, Chicago, Chicago, IL, and novel candidate genes to the hereditary risk of United States, 5Children’s Hospital at Westmead, West- mead, Australia, 6Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, 7University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia88 breast cancer in a large cohort of Breast Cancer C17.2 families Assessing risk of familial breast cancer: effectiveness of current UK guidelines P. A. James1,2, N. Li1, S. Rowley1, D. Goode1, L. Devereux1, S. McInerny2, N. Grewal2, A. Trainer2, LifePool, R. Scott3, I. Campbell1 L. A. Littlejohn1,2, J. Gibbs2, L. B. Jordan2, Z. H. Miedzybrodzka3,4, C. Bell3, D. Goudie2, J. Dunlop2, J. N. Berg1,2 1Research Division, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 2Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, 1University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, 2NHS Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, Tayside, Dundee, United Kingdom, 3NHS Grampian, 3Division of Genetics, Hunter Area Pathology Service, Aberdeen, United Kingdom, 4University of Aberdeen, Newcastle, Australia Aberdeen, United Kingdom Identifying the missing hereditary factors underlying the Introduction: Breast cancer risk is a common indication familial risk of breast cancer could have a major and for referral to clinical genetics. UK National Institute of immediate impact on managing the breast cancer risk for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) guidelines use family these families. historytostratifyby10yrriskofbreastcancerfromage40. Methods: We identified candidate breast cancer predis- Patients are divided into low (LR, 10-year risk<3%), positiongenesthroughwholeexomesequencingofBRCAx moderate(MR,3–8%)andhighrisk(HR,>8%).Womenat families, and sequenced, up to 1325 genes, along with 76 increased risk are offered screening at or prior to age 40. common variants associated with breast cancer, in index Methods: Family history data was obtained for all unaf- cases from 5,900 BRCAx families and 5,600 cancer free fected women with a family history of breast cancer aged women (ethnically matched on PCA). <50, referred to Tayside clinical genetics from 2000–2010. Results: The role of recently described (PALB2) or sus- Patients were risk stratified de novo by NICE criteria, pected (MRE11A) moderately penetrant genes was con- identifying patients who subsequently developed breast firmed. Conversely, the size of the cohort means that the cancer. absence of enrichment for LoF mutations provides strong Results: 1,409 women had 15,414 patient-years of follow evidenceagainstotherreportedbreastcancergenes(BRIP1, up.30invasivebreastcancersdeveloped,13inMRand13 RINT1, RECQL). For further moderate risk variants (in in HR women. Kaplan-Meier analysis demonstrated no CHEK2, ATM, BRCA2) we observed significant risk mod- significant difference in breast cancer rate between LR and ificationbasedonthepolygenicriskscore(PRS-calculated MR women from ages 40–49 (Log rank p=0.431). There from the common variant data), with the risk restricted to wasasignificantdifferencefrom40–49yrsbetweenLRand the co-occurrence of the rare variant and high PRS. Novel HR women (p=0.036), but not on exclusion of BRCA candidate genes were identified based on LoF mutations, mutation carriers (p=0.136). NICE absolute 10yr risk includingNTHL1(38casesversus15controls,OR2.5p= thresholds from 40–49 were not met in any risk group 0.002): a member of the base excision repair (BER) path- (LR=0.82%, MR=1.68%, HR=3.56%). way. We analysed data from additional genes in the BER Conclusions: Screening prior to age 50 in those without a pathway, along with somatic sequencing, tumour mutation BRCA mutation may be unnecessary. NICE family history profiling and familial segregation to examine this criteria donotidentifywomenwiththesuggested10yrrisk association. values.Thereisaneedforfurtherevaluationofthebenefits Conclusions: Our data shows that the effect of rare varia- of early screening, and criteria for identifying women at tion in established and novel breast cancer genes, along increased risk of breast cancer may need to be improved. with consideration of the background polygenic risk, toge- L.A. Littlejohn: None. J. Gibbs: None. L.B. Jordan: therexplainsasubstantialcomponentoftheheritableriskof None. Z.H. Miedzybrodzka: None. C. Bell: None. breast cancer in our cohort. D. Goudie: None. J. Dunlop: None. J.N. Berg: None. P.A. James: None. N. Li: None. S. Rowley: None. D.Goode:None.L.Devereux:None.S.McInerny:None. C17.3 N. Grewal: None. A. Trainer: None. R. Scott: None. The optimal cancer genetics testing tool? - I. Campbell: None. Diagnostic whole genome sequencing in research participants with multiple primary tumours J. Whitworth1, NIHR BioResource - Rare Disease project2, E. Martin- Rodriguez1, P. Smith1, H. West1, F. Rodger1, A. Luchetti1, A. Skytte3, J. Hoffmann4, D. Evans5, F. Lalloo5, E. Woodward5, A. Henderson6,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 89 J.Adlard7,J.Barwell8,C.Brewer9,K.Snape10,H.Hanson10,L.Izatt11, None. J. Barwell: None. C. Brewer: None. K. Snape: L.Greenhalgh12,L.Side13,V.AjithKumar13,M.Tischkowitz1,E.Maher1 None. H. Hanson: None. L. Izatt: None. L. Greenhalgh: None. L. Side: None. V. Ajith Kumar: None. M. 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Tischkowitz: None. E. Maher: None. 2Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 3Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, C17.4 Denmark, 4Birmingham Women’s Hospital, Birmingham, A somatic mutational signature in different tumor United Kingdom, 5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medi- types associated with biallelic germline NTHL1 cine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 6International Centre mutations for Life, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 7Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 8University of Leicester, Leice- J. E. Grolleman1, R. D. A. Weren1, R. A. Kuiper1, M. Nielsen2, F. A. ster,UnitedKingdom,9PeninsulaGenetics Service,Exeter, Elsayed2, M. J. L. Ligtenberg1, K. Neveling1, I. Rost3, A. Lang3, United Kingdom, 10St Georges Hosptial, London, United D. Schindler3, A. Dimovski4, R. M. de Voer1, T. van Wezel2, Kingdom, 11Guys Hospital, London, United Kingdom, N. Hoogerbrugge1, R. P. Kuiper5 12LiverpoolWomen’sHospital,Liverpool,UnitedKingdom, 13Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom 1Radboud University and Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Leiden University and Medical Center, Lei- Whole genome sequencing (WGS) offers a variety of den, Netherlands, 3University of Würzburg, Würzburg, potential benefits in diagnostic settings such as improved Germany, 4University “St. Cyril and Methodius”, Skopje, coverage of coding regions and the opportunity to detect Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of, 5Princess structural variation. In the clinical cancer genetics context, Máxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, application of WGS has thus far been limited and assess- Netherlands ments of performance are not abundant in the literature. HerewepresentdiagnosticinterpretationofWGSdatafrom We previously found that biallelic germline mutations the Multiple Primary Tumours arm of the NIHR affectingthebaseexcisionrepairgeneNTHL1predisposeto BioResource-Rare Disease study (recruitment criteria≥2 the development of adenomatous polyposis and colorectal primaries<60 years or≥3 primaries<70 years and no cancer (CRC). However, the clinical characteristics asso- identified molecular diagnosis), to which 720 individuals ciated with biallelic germline NTHL1 mutations suggest a have been recruited. This cohort is expected to be enriched broader tumor spectrum that includes multiple extracolonic for tumour predisposing variants but is unselected for malignancies. Characterization of the somatic mutation tumourtype,arguablyrepresentingthekindofpatientgroup profile in multiple colorectal carcinomas derived from that agnostic diagnostic testing might be applied to in a individuals with biallelic germline NTHL1 mutations “mainstreaming” model of genetic testing. Variants were revealed a bias towards C:G>T:A (C>T) transitions. The called using Illumina Isaac (SNVs and indels), Canvas aim of this study was to genetically characterize colorectal (CNVs) and Manta (CNVs, translocations and inversions). and extracolonic tumors in order to delineate the somatic They were extracted for analysis if occurring in a gene mutational signature caused by NTHL1 deficiency to pro- included in a comprehensive list (n=133) of cancer pre- vide further insight in the associated tumor spectrum. disposition genes (CPGs) and annotated with a sequence Whole-exome sequencing was performed on six tumors ontology term reflecting potential alteration in function. from four different tissues (colon (n=3), thyroid-gland, Variants where then assessed with stringent criteria based urothelium, and tonsil) derived from four individuals with on quality, predicted biological consequence and literature. biallelic NTHL1 mutations. Mutational signatures were Thedetectionrateofclinicallyrelevantvariantsispresented identifiedusingMutationalPatterns(https://doi.org/10.1101/ and the added value of WGS compared with other techni- 071761). ques is assessed. The majority of samples in the study had WeanalyzedthesomaticmutationprofilesofthreeCRCs concurrent sequencing of 94 CPGs using the Illumina from three newly identified NTHL1-deficient families. TruSightCancerpanel,allowingidentificationofSNVsand These revealed a strong bias towards C>T mutations at indels missed by WGS. non-CpG sites, which is clearly distinct from the CpG> J. Whitworth: None. J. Whitworth NIHR BioR- TpG mutations commonly encountered in sporadic CRC. esource - Rare Disease project: None. E. Martin- Thismutationprofilefitsauniquemutationalsignaturethat Rodriguez: None. P. Smith: None. H. West: None. comprises 40–70 mutations in the three extracolonic F. Rodger: None. A. Luchetti: None. A. Skytte: None. tumors, butappearedtobeextremelyrareinthemutational J. Hoffmann: None. D. Evans: None. F. Lalloo: None. profiles from The Cancer Genome Atlas (https://ca E. Woodward: None. A. Henderson: None. J. Adlard: ncergenome.nih.gov).90 Our results demonstrate that NTHL1 deficiency is asso- toacceleratetumourdevelopmentinTrp53-/-andwt/-mice ciated with aunique mutational signature, andconfirmsthe (OR=6.46, p-value=1.24.10−3 and OR=3.91, p-value =5.76.10−4, broad tumor spectrum found in individuals with biallelic respectively), unlike Docetaxel (a spindle germline NTHL1 mutations. This finding provides an poison), which was devoid of effect. interesting strategy to correlate tumors to this novel Conclusions: This study provides evidence that genotoxic NTHL1-associated tumor syndrome. chemotherapies contribute to MPC development in LFS J.E. Grolleman: None. R.D.A. Weren: None. R.A. patients. Therefore, in germline TP53 mutation carriers, Kuiper: None. M. Nielsen: None. F.A. Elsayed: None. radiotherapy should be avoided, surgical treatment prior- M.J.L. Ligtenberg: None. K. Neveling: None. I. Rost: itized, and non genotoxic treatments should be considered None. A. Lang: None. D. Schindler: None. A. Dimovski: in the future to reduce the risk of MPC. As we validated None. R.M. de Voer: None. T. van Wezel: None. in vivo the results obtained using the genotoxicity assay, N. Hoogerbrugge: None. R.P. Kuiper: None. this assay will be helpful to discriminate drugs with and without genotoxic risk for LFS patients. C17.5 E. Kasper: None. E. Ango: None. E. Colasse: None. Genotoxic chemotherapies and X-rays are L. Nicol: None. J. Sabourin: None. S. Adriouch: None. responsible for the development of multiple Y. Lacoume: None. C. Le Clezio: None. S. Raad: None. primary tumours in patients with Li-Fraumeni Y. Zerdoumi: None. T. Frebourg: None. J. Flaman: syndrome None. G. Bougeard: None. E. Kasper1,E. Ango2,E. Colasse2, L. Nicol3,J. Sabourin2,S. Adriouch4, C17.6 Y. Lacoume5, C. Le Clezio1, S. Raad1, Y. Zerdoumi1, T. Frebourg1, Raising the age limit for routine MMR testing in J. Flaman1, G. Bougeard1 colorectal cancer from 50 to 70 years improves recognition of new Lynch syndrome families 1Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245 and Rouen University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Normandy N. Hoogerbrugge1, I. E. Fakkert1, R. W. Willems2, Y. K. Peeks1, Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, S. Langenveld3, I. D. Nagtegaal2, E. M. Leter3, A. R. Mensenkamp1, France,2NormandieUniv,UNIROUEN,InsermU1245and L. Spruijt1, M. J. Ligtenberg1,2 Rouen University Hospital, Department of Pathology, NormandyCentreforGenomicandPersonalizedMedicine, 1Department of Human Genetics, Radboud university Rouen, France, 3PICTUR – Small Animal Imaging, Rouen medical center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of University,Rouen,France,4NormandieUniv,UNIROUEN, Pathology, Radboud university medical center, Nijmegen, Inserm U1234, Rouen University, Rouen, France, 5Animal Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht Facility, Faculty of Medicine and Pharmacy, Rouen Uni- University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands versity, Rouen, France Background: To improve Lynch syndrome (LS) recogni- Introduction: Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS), one of the tion, in the Netherlands, the age-limit for routine mismatch most severe predispositions to cancer, is due to TP53 repair(MMR)deficiencytestingincolorectalcancer(CRC) germline mutations, and is characterized by the develop- by the pathologist was raised from 50 to 70 years. Referral ment of early-onset and multiple primary cancers (MPC). for genetic counseling is advised for patients with MMR We recently reported in LFS patients a rate of MPC above deficient CRC without MLH1 hypermethylation. 40% including secondary tumours in radiation fields. Methods: The Dutch Pathology Registry (PALGA) was MaterialsandMethods:Wefirstadaptedthegenotoxicity usedtoevaluateMMRtestingin14pathologylaboratories. assay,previouslydevelopedinourlaboratoryandbasedon Patients referred to two regional genetic centers were cou- the p53-transcriptional response to DNA damage in human pled to PALGA data to evaluate referral rates. Pathology lymphocytes, to mouse cells. Then, Trp53 KO-/-, wt/- and laboratories received feedback on percentage of correctly wt/wtmicewereexposedtoX-raysortovariousanti-cancer tested CRCs. drugs. The control group was NaCl treated. Tumour Results: From January 15th to October 2016, in 1499 of development was monthly monitored using whole-body 1951 (77%) CRCs before age 70 MMR test results were MRI. available. Of 68 patients with MMR test results suggestive Results: Thegenotoxicity assay performed onmurine cells for LS, 30 (44%) were referred for genetic counseling. In exposed in vitro or in vivo confirmed that all classical eight of 18 (44%) patients with complete diagnostic chemotherapies, except spindle poisons, are genotoxic. X- workup,germlineLSmutationswereidentified.Sixofthese rays andEtoposide(atopoisomerase inhibitor) were shown new LS patients (75%) represent previously unknown LSAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 91 families.Five(83%) hadCRC between age50and 70,and mainly by the leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF). Mutational didnotcomplywithformerreferralcriteriaonyoungageat analysisof121furtherpatientswithsevereCAKUTyielded diagnosis or family history. two rare heterozygous LIFR missense variants predicted to Conclusions: Raising the age-limit for routine MMR test- be pathogenic in three patients. LIFR mutants showed ing in CRC from 50 to 70 years improves recognition of decreasedhalf-lifeandcellmembranelocalizationresulting new LS families, of which the majority would not have in reduced LIF-stimulated STAT3 phosphorylation. LIFR been identified by criteria based on young age at diagnosis showed high expression in human fetal kidney and the or family history. human ureter, and was also expressed in the developing The project was supported by the Dutch Digestive murine urogenital system. Lifr knockout mice displayed Foundation with funding from the ‘Vriendenloterij’. urinary tract malformations including hydronephrosis, N. Hoogerbrugge: None. I.E. Fakkert: None. R.W. hydroureter, ureter ectopia, and, consistently, reduced Willems:None.Y.K.Peeks:None.S.Langenveld:None. ureteral lumen and muscular hypertrophy, similar to the I.D. Nagtegaal: None. E.M. Leter: None. A.R. phenotypes observed in patients carrying LIFR variants. Mensenkamp: None. L. Spruijt: None. M.J. Ligtenberg: Additionally, a form of cryptorchidism was detected in all Lifr−/− None. mice and the patient carrying the LIFR frameshift mutation. Altogether, we demonstrate heterozygous novel or rare LIFR mutations in 3.3% of CAKUT patients, and C18 provideevidencethatLifrdeficiencyanddeactivatingLIFR Internal organs mutations cause highly similar anomalies of the urogenital tract in mice and humans (supported by Else Kröner-Fre- C18.1 senius-Stiftung grant no. 2014_A234). Mutationsintheleukemiainhibitoryfactorreceptor F.Brand:None.A.Kosfeld:None.A.C.Weiss:None. (LIFR) gene and Lifr deficiency cause urinary tract M. Kreuzer: None. M. Goerk: None. H. Martens: None. malformations S. Schubert: None. A.K. Schäfer: None. V. Riehmer: None. I. Hennies: None. J.H. Bräsen: None. L. Pape: F. Brand1, A. Kosfeld1, A. C. Weiss2, M. Kreuzer3, M. Goerk4, H. None. K. Amann: None. L. Krogvold: None. A. Bjerre: Martens1, S. Schubert1, A. K. Schäfer2, V. Riehmer1, I. Hennies3, J. H. None. C. Daniel: None. A. Kispert: None. D. Haffner: Bräsen5, L. Pape3, K. Amann4, L. Krogvold6, A. Bjerre6, C. Daniel4, None. R.G. Weber: None. A. Kispert2, D. Haffner3, R. G. Weber1 C18.2 1Hannover Medical School - Department of Human The microbiomeof inflammatorybowel diseaseand Genetics, Hannover, Germany, 2Hannover Medical School irritable bowel syndrome - a case-control study of - Institute of Molecular Biology, Hannover, Germany, 1792 individuals 3Hannover Medical School - Department of Pediatric Kidney, Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover, A. Vich Vila1,2, F. Imhann1,2, V. Collij1,2, S. Jankipersadsing2, Germany, 4Friedrich-Alexander University of Erlangen- Z. Mujagic3, T. Gurry4,5, A. Kurilshikov2, M. J. Bonder2, X. Jiang5, Nürnberg - Department of Nephropathology, Erlangen, D.Dijkstra1,E.A.M.Festen1,R.J.Xavier6,E.J.Alm4,5,7,C.Wijmenga2, Germany, 5Hannover Medical School - Department of D. Jonkers3, A. Zhernakova2, R. K. Weersma1 Pathology, Hannover, Germany, 6Oslo University Hospital - Division of Paediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Oslo, 1University Medical Center Groningen, Department of Norway Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Groningen, Nether- lands, 2University of Groningen and University Medical Congenital anomalies of the kidneys and urinary tract Center Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, (CAKUT) are the most common cause of chronic kidney Netherlands, 3Maastricht University Medical Center+, disease in children. As most CAKUT cases are genetically Maastricht, Netherlands, 4Department of Biological Engi- unexplained, we aimed to identify new CAKUT causing neering,MassachusettsInstituteofTechnology,Cambridge, genes. Using whole-exome sequencing and trio-based de MA,UnitedStates,5CenterforMicrobiomeInformaticsand novo analysis, we identified a novel heterozygous de novo Therapeutics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, frameshiftvariantintheleukemiainhibitory factorreceptor Cambridge, MA, United States, 6Crohn’s and Colitis Cen- (LIFR) gene causing instability of the mRNA in a patient ter, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United presenting with bilateral CAKUT and requiring kidney States, 7The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cam- transplantation at one year of age. LIFR encodes a trans- bridge, MA, United States membrane receptor utilized by IL-6 family cytokines,92 Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and inflammatory bowel Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland, disease (IBD) are two of the most common gastrointestinal Reykjavik, Iceland (GI) disorders, affecting respectively 7–21% and 0.3%– 0.5% of the global population. Next to host-genetics, Introduction: Chemical analysis of urine with dipstick microbiome plays an important role in disease pathology. measurementsallowsforthesimultaneoustestingofawide Here, we present the largest gut microbiome case-control range of traits typically assessed in clinical practice. analysis in both IBD and IBS to date, using metagenomic Materials and Methods: We identified 35.5 million shotgun sequences of stool samples from 1025 Healthy sequence variants through whole-genome sequencing of Controls 355 IBD and 412 IBS patients. Taxonomy was 15,220 Icelanders and imputed them into up to 143,900 determined for bacteria, viruses and micro-eukaryotes. Icelanders with urinary dipstick measurements. These var- Bacterial pathways were determined using HUMAnN2. In iants enabled us to perform a genome-wide association addition, bacterial strain diversity and growth rates were studytosearchforsequencevariantsinfluencingtheurinary inferred from the sequencing data. In the case-control ana- markers of metabolic disease and kidney function. lyses, correcting for 25 previously identified microbiome- Results: We tested all variants for association with the modifyingfactors,we observed157differentially abundant presenceofglucose,ketones,bloodandproteininurineand species associated with CD, 87 species associated with UC detected associations at several loci for each trait. These and 125 species for IBS. We observed an increased strain included four loci that are located in or near genes with a level diversity for Eschericia coli and Bacteroides vulgatus functionthatmatchestheassociatingurinarytrait(SLC5A2, and several species with differential growth rate dynamics OXCT1, LRP2 and COL4A3). We detected common and inpatientscomparedtohealthycontrols.Predictionmodels rare independent variants, coding in or close to SLC5A2, for differentiating between IBS and IBD based on micro- associating with glucosuria. This gene encodes Sodium biome data show a best predictive value up to 94.6%. In GlucoseTransporter2,aproteintargetedpharmacologically addition, we previously described alterations of the gut totreat diabetes.Weobservedtwoproteinuriaassociations, microbiota of healthy individuals with a high genetic risk a novel signal at LRP2 and a previously reported urinary for IBD. In this study, we present a high-resolution char- albuminexcretion signalatCUBN.Interestingly LRP2 and acterization of changes in the microbiome, and its func- CUBN encode cubilin and megalin, which interact and tional implications, in patients with IBD or IBS, which can together mediate proximal tubule protein uptake. We iden- be used in the disease prediction. tified a rare Iceland-specific 2.5 Kb exonic deletion in A.VichVila:None.F.Imhann:None.V.Collij:None. COL4A3 that associates with hematuria (OR=9.4). This S. Jankipersadsing: None. Z. Mujagic: None. T. Gurry: deletion is present in 1/700 Icelanders and mutations in None. A. Kurilshikov: None. M.J. Bonder: None. COL4A3 cause autosomal dominant familial benign X.Jiang:None.D.Dijkstra:None.E.A.M.Festen:None. hematuria. R.J.Xavier:None.E.J.Alm:None.C.Wijmenga:None. Conclusions: The identification of these associations pro- D. Jonkers: None. A. Zhernakova: None. R.K. vide insight into the biology underlying urinary disease Weersma: None. markers, potential disease mechanisms, and treatment. S. Benonisdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); C18.3 Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen,Inc.A.Oddsson:A. Whole-genomesequencingidentifiesassociationsof Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE sequence variants with clinically relevant urinary genetics/Amgen, Inc. G. Sulem: A. Employment (full or disease markers part-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen,Inc.R.P. Kristjansson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- S. Benonisdottir1, A. Oddsson1, G. Sulem1, R. P. Kristjansson1, nificant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen,Inc..I.Olafsson:None. I.Olafsson2,P.T.Onundarson2,B.Kehr1,G.A.Arnadottir1,H.Holm1, P.T.Onundarson:None.B.Kehr:A.Employment(fullor G. Masson1, V. O. Edvardsson2,3, R. Palsson2, A. Jonasdottir1, part-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen,Inc.G.A. A. Jonasdottir1, E. Mikaelsdottir1, G. I. Eyjolfsson4, B. O. Jensson1, Arnadottir:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; U.Thorsteinsdottir1,3,D.F.Gudbjartsson1,5,P.Sulem1,K.Stefansson1,3 deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. H. Holm: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, 1deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc., Reykjavik, Iceland, Inc. G. Masson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- 2Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, nificant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen,Inc..V.O.Edvardsson: 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, None. R. Palsson: None. A. Jonasdottir: A. Employment Iceland, 4Icelandic Medical Center (Laeknasetrid), (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, LaboratoryinMjodd(RAM),Reykjavik,Iceland,5Schoolof Inc. A. Jonasdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. E.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 93 Mikaelsdottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- difference:4.23, p=0.0007), which is the main drug target nificant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc.. G.I. Eyjolfsson: forurgencyincontinence,SULF2(folddifference:1.52,p= None. B.O. Jensson: A. Employment (full or part-time); 0.005)inthetoplocusfromthediscoveryphase,andEDN1 Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. U. Thor- (fold difference:−1.60, p=0.09) in the top locus from the steinsdottir:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; replication phase. deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. D.F. Gudbjartsson: A. Conclusions: We identified two genetic variants strongly Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE associated with urinary incontinence. The first, genetics/Amgen, Inc. P. Sulem: A. Employment (full or rs138724718, is situated near MARCO, with a role in host part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc. K. defense. The second, rs34998271, is situated near EDN1 a Stefansson:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; potent constrictor of smooth muscle, which was differen- deCODE genetics/Amgen, Inc.. tially expressed in bladder. This work highlights the myo- genicandurotheliogenic mechanismsfor incontinence,and C18.4 suggests the potential of endothelin modulating drugs for Genomewideassociationstudyidentifiestwo novel urgency incontinence loci associated with female stress and urgency R. Cartwright: None. M. Jarvelin: None. P. Miotla: urinary incontinence None. V. Khullar: None. P. Bennett: None. A. Walley: None. R. Cartwright1, M. Jarvelin1, P. Miotla2, V. Khullar1, P. Bennett1, A. Walley3, the IGNITE Consortium C18.5 A PMM2 promoter mutation causing congenital 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, polycystic kidney and hyperinsulinemic 2UniversityofLublin,Lublin,Poland,3StGeorge’sMedical hypoglycemia School, London, United Kingdom O. Rubio-Cabezas1, S. Flanagan2, H. Stanescu3, HI PKD Consortium, Introduction: Stress and urgency incontinence are heri- R. Kleta3, K. Hussain4, D. Bockenhauer3, S. Ellard2 table,butnorisklocihavebeenidentified.Weundertooka GWAS, using three European cohorts, followed by repli- 1Hospital InfantilUniversitario NiñoJesús, Madrid,Spain, cation in six further studies, with supplementary tran- 2University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United scriptomic analyses using human bladder biopsies. Kingdom, 3UCL Centre for Nephrology, London, United Materials and Methods: Genotyping in discovery cohorts Kingdom, 4UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United (n=8,979) was conducted using Illumina arrays. Replica- Kingdom tion genotyping used competitive PCR (n=4,069). Biop- sies from women with urgency or stress incontinence were Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and congenital poly- run on Affymetrix-U133 arrays. cystic kidney disease are rare, genetically heterogeneous Results: Discovery analyses identified five genome-wide disorders. The co-occurrence of hyperinsulinemic hypo- significant loci. Two loci replicated: rs138724718 (p= glycemia and enlarged polycystic kidneys in 18 children 3.39×10−09) (p=1.70×10−09). and rs34998271 In ana- from 12 unrelated families suggested a shared cause. lysis of differential expression, the top-ranked process Autozygosity analysis of SNP-chip genotype data in a p=7.5×10−10), (GO:0003012, includes CHRM3 (fold consanguineousfamilywith 3affected members revealed a GRCh37 SNP EffectAllele OtherAllele MAF Phenotype DiscoveryCohorts ReplicationCohorts Overall Position (n=8,997) (n=4,069) OR 95%CI p OR 95%CI p p 20 46424160 rs139329202 c g 0.01 UUI 8.50 4.12–17.55 8.07×10−9 1.35 0.82–2.21 0.238 2.38×10−05 6 1430664 rs146033157 a t 0.03 UUI 0.33 0.23–0.48 1.73×10−8 0.97 0.35–2.71 0.960 n/a 14 55489229 rs146757102 a g 0.05 UUI 0.45 0.34–0.60 1.95×10−8 1.13 0.87–1.45 0.360 5.12×10−03 7 141328145 rs78851245 t c 0.02 AnyUI 3.22 2.13–4.86 2.92×10−8 1.46 1.00–21.3 0.051 2.11×10−07 7 34354797 rs78878767 a c 0.01 UUI 4.26 2.56–7.10 3.04×10−8 0.86 0.51–1.43 0.556 2.11×10−07 3 55473083 rs13059018 c g 0.07 SUI 0.70 0.61–0.81 1.01×10−7 1.14 1.00–1.29 0.054 1.40×10−06 12 11049362 rs201363123 ag a 0.06 AnyUI 0.65 0.56–0.76 1.03×10−7 1.14 1.00–1.29 0.053 5.43×10−05 1 154881110 rs1218596 t c 0.06 AnyUI 0.64 0.55–0.75 1.04×10−7 0.95 0.75–1.20 0.681 4.49×10−06 11 39642765 rs10768519 a c 0.26 UUI 0.80 0.74–0.87 2.26×10−7 1.00 0.85–1.17 0.954 1.40×10−04 9 105517298 rs72738866 t c 0.26 SUI 0.79 0.71–0.87 2.55×10−7 1.01 0.89–1.14 0.895 5.97×10−05 2 119587824 rs138724718 a g 0.02 SUI 1.85 1.47–2.35 2.89×10−7 1.73 1.20–2.48 0.003 3.39×10−09 6 12533066 rs34998271 a g 0.05 UUI 1.70 1.40–2.07 4.97×10−7 1.55 1.20–2.01 0.0008 1.70×10−0994 homozygous 2.5Mb region on chromosome 16p13.2. Variantsinfamilieswithrenalagenesis Whole genome multipoint parametric linkage analysis in Family NGSfindings PredictionPolyphen MAF this and 4 other informative families confirmed and refined MutationTasterSift 1000Genomes this to a single significant locus of 2.3 Mb that includes 14 ProveanCADD ExAC annotated genes (combined LOD score 6.5). Exome or 2000DK genomesequencingofthecodingregionsofthese14genes 1 ROBO1c.526C -probablydamaging --- failedtoidentifybi-allelicmutationsbutaPMM2promoter >Tp. -diseasecausing-damaging variant(c.-167G>T)wasfoundinallpatients.Thisvariant (Pro176Ser) -deleterious-PHRED24.7 was either homozygous or in trans with PMM2 coding 1 ROBO1 -NA-diseasecausing-NA --- variants,includingmutationspreviouslyreportedinpatients c.4823C>Gp. -NA-PHRED50 (Ser1608*) with congenital disorder of glycosylation type 1a. Typical 2 GREB1L -NA-diseasecausing-NA --- features of systemic autosomal recessive PMM2 glycosy- c.5608+1del -NA-PHRED25.8 lation disease were absent and the diagnostic test of trans- p.? ferrin isoelectric focusing was normal. In vitro studies in 3 GREB1L -probablydamaging --- patient cells revealed decreased transcription activity of the c.5378T>Gp. -diseasecausing-damaging mutant promoter. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (Leu1793Arg) -deleterious-PHRED31 demonstrated impaired binding of the transcription factor 4 GREB1L -probablydamaging --- ZNF143. In silico analysis reveals the importance of c.371G>Tp. -diseasecausing-damaging ZNF143forthestructuralconfirmationofachromatinloop (Gly124Val) -deleterious-PHRED29.2 including PMM2 to enable tissue-specific transcription. In 5 ROBO1 -NA-diseasecausing-NA --- c.3685G>Tp -NA-PHRED44 conclusion we report a previously undescribed rare disease (Glu1229*) characterized by the combination of hyperinsulinemic 5 ROBO1 -NA-diseasecausing-NA --- hypoglycemia and congenital polycystic kidney disease. c.4823C>Gp. -NA-PHRED50 Thenovelpromotervariantappearstoexertacriticaltissue- (Ser1608*) specific effect on PMM2transcription, leading to an organ- specific phenotype. Introduction: Renal agenesis is the extreme example of O. Rubio-Cabezas: None. S. Flanagan: None. congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract.We H. Stanescu: None. R. Kleta: None. K. Hussain: None. identified two novel genes associated with renal agenesis, D. Bockenhauer: None. S. Ellard: None. and provide functional validation in zebrafish for one of these, GREB1L. C18.6 Methods: Fetuses with bilateral kidney agenesis were GREB1L and ROBO1 -Two novel genes associated screenedusingatargetedkidney-genepanel.Incaseswhere with renal agenesis candidate variants were not identified, whole-exome sequencing was performed. Genes uncovered by this ana- M.Rasmussen1,D.L.Lildballe1,P.D.Brophy2,M.Parida3,G.Bonde4, lysis were added to our targeted panel, and placed in a X.Hong3,J.C.Clarke2,M.Schneider5,C.R.Sussman6,L.Sunde1,7,J.M. pipeline for functional validation in zebrafish. Hertz8, M. Ramsing9, A. Petersen10, R. A. Cornell4, J. R. Manak2,3 Results: Whole-exome sequencing identified GREB1L and ROBO1 variants in families with renal agenesis. We added 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Aarhus University Hos- GREB1LandROBO1toourtargetedkidney-genepaneland pital, Aarhus, Denmark, 2Department of Pediatrics, Uni- identified additional variants in both genes (Table 1). SLIT versity of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 3Department and ROBO genes are involved in cell guidance. Although ofBiology,UniversityofIowa,IowaCity,IA,UnitedStates, variants in ROBO2 or SLIT2 have previously been asso- 4Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of ciated with kidney anomalies, this is the first example of a Iowa, Iowa City, IA, United States, 5Medical Genetics, renal agenesis phenotype associated with ROBO variants. Carle Foundation Hospital and Physician Group, Urbana, GREB1Lencodesaco-activatorofsteroidhormone/retinoic IL, United States, 6Department of Nephrology and Hyper- acid receptors but has not previously been associated with tension, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, kidney anomalies. Analysis of a zebrafish greb1l mutant 7Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, revealed severe defects in the pronephros, the proper spe- Denmark, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Odense Uni- cification of which is required for downstream kidney versity Hospital, Odense, Denmark, 9Department of development. Pathology,RandersRegionalHospital,Randers,Denmark, Conclusions: We report identification of multiple ROBO 10Department of Pathology, Aalborg University Hospital, and GREB1L variants in renal agenesis cases, implicating Aalborg, Denmark two pathways (cell guidance and steroid hormone/retinoicAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 95 acid signaling) not previously known to be associated with large triplet repeat expansions and cytogenetic abnormal- human renal agenesis. ities are not included and would increase this total. M. Rasmussen: None. D.L. Lildballe: None. P.D. Discussion: Technically challenging variants are a sub- Brophy: None. M. Parida: None. G. Bonde: None. stantial fraction of findings in routine clinical testing. X.Hong:None.J.C.Clarke:None.M.Schneider:None. However, published validation studies often omit these C.R.Sussman:None.L.Sunde:None.J.M.Hertz:None. variants, and benign SNPs dominate many sensitivity cal- M. Ramsing: None. A. Petersen: None. R.A. Cornell: culations. This may, in part, be due to difficulty obtaining None. J.R. Manak: None. positive controls. We have thus developed synthetic con- trols containing a diverse set of challenging mutations in commonlytestedgenes.Thesehavebeentestedinmultiple C19 laboratories using different protocols and will be available Diagnostic variant interpretation and to the ESHG community by the time of the meeting. quality control S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- nificant; Invitae. R. Truty: A. Employment (full or part- C19.1 time); Significant; Invitae. J. Zook: None. C. Huang: The spectrum of sequence and copy-number A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Seracare. variants in 80,000 patients: Implications for test M. Ferber: None. B. Shirts: None. R. Garlick: development and validation A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Seracare. M.Salit: None.S. Aradhya:A.Employment (full or part- S. Lincoln1, R. Truty1, J. Zook2, C. Huang3, M. Ferber4, B. Shirts5, time); Significant; Invitae. R. Nussbaum: A. Employment R. Garlick3, M. Salit6,7, S. Aradhya1, R. Nussbaum1,8 (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. 1Invitae, San Francisco, CA, United States, 2National C19.2 InstituteforStandardsandTechnology,Gaithersburg,MD, ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation Work UnitedStates,3Seracare,Gaithersburg,MD,UnitedStates, Group recommendations for ACMG-AMP guideline 4Mayo Clinic, Rochester,MN, United States,5University of specification Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 6National Institute for Standards and Technology, Palo Alto, CA, United S.M.Harrison1,2,H.Rehm1,2,M.Greenblatt3,L.G.Biesecker4,ClinGen States, 7Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group 8UniversityofCalifornia,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates 1Harvard Medical School, Cambridge, MA, United States, Introduction:Manymedicallyimportantgenesarelocated 2Partners HealthCare Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, in technically challenging regions of the genome. More- Cambridge, MA, United States, 3University of Vermont, over, complex but highly medically relevant classes of Robert Larner, M.D., College of Medicine College, Bur- mutation are well-known. The overall impact of these facts lington, VT, United States, 4National Human Genome on diagnostic yield and on appropriate technologies for Research Institute (NHGRI); NIH, Bethesda, MD, United routineclinicalgenome/exomesequencinghasnotyetbeen States thoroughly described. Methods: We examined over 80,000 patients clinically In 2015, the American College of Medical Genetics and tested forphysician-specifiedgenes underlyingahereditary Genomics (ACMG) and the Association for Molecular cancer, cardiovascular, neurological or pediatric condition. Pathology (AMP) published a guideline for variant inter- Sensitive methods using NGS, long read sequencing, pretation that provides an evidence-based framework to MLPA,andarrayswereusedtodetectandconfirmabroad classify variants (PMID:25741868). The guideline defines spectrum of variants. 28 criteria that address types of variant evidence. The Results: Of 12,489 pathogenic, potentially actionable committee recognized that the guideline was a starting findings, approximately 10% belong to a technically chal- framework that would evolve over time. ClinGen’s lenging class not easily addressed by short-read NGS SequenceVariantInterpretation(SVI)WorkingGroupaims methods. Approximately 3% are CNVs affecting only a to standardize application of the ACMG-AMP guidelines singleexon,2%areeitherlargeindelsorcomplexvariants, by providing recommendations to adapting the guidelines and 5% were in low-complexity, highly conserved or and converting qualitative criteria to quantitative, where extreme-GC regions. This general observation was con- applicable. To date, SVI has refined the “stand-alone” sistent across clinical areas, although specifics varied. Very benign allele frequency criterion (BA1) for additional clarity, worked with ClinGen Clinical Domain WGs96 (CDWG) to harmonize approaches to calculating gene- Introduction:TheClinicalGenomeResource(ClinGen)is specific allelefrequency thresholds, provided nomenclature focused on defining the clinical relevance of genes and recommendations for documenting criteria strength mod- variants through sharing genomic information, developing ifications, and developed a draft proposal for quantifying and applying standards, deploying tools to store and eval- segregation data. Additionally, a subgroup of SVI is uate evidence, and creating a knowledgebase to make this focusedoncomputationalandpredictiveevidence,working information freely available. to provide additional guidance on the use of computation Materials and Methods: ClinGen utilizes genomic data, tools sequence variant interpretation. SVI also reviews and health data and curated knowledge submitted by labora- approvesgene/diseasespecificationstotheguidelinesmade tories, clinicians, and patients. Interpreted variants are by CDWGs and will review proposals from CDWGs to sharedthroughtheClinVardatabase.Standardizedevidence develop new evidence categories. These harmonization frameworks and curation interfaces enable evaluation of approaches by the SVI will facilitate transparency and gene-disease associations, gene dosage sensitivity, variant consistency in application of the ACMG-AMP guidelines pathogenicity and clinical actionability. and variant classifications across different CDWGs and Results: To date, 642 submitters from 59 countries have laboratories.TheSVIhasalsobegunworkonalongerterm submitted 384,623 interpreted variants to ClinVar. Reas- goalofdevelopingageneralBayesianframework,tobetter sessmentofvariantswithinterpretationdifferencesresolved quantify and integrate different types of evidence in an 72% and 87% of differences in two studies. Ten expert overall assessment of pathogenicity. Funded by NIH- groups are curating variants using gene-specific modified NHGRI U41HG006834. ACMG-AMP criteria. Over 1,200 genes have been S.M. Harrison: None. H. Rehm: B. Research Grant reviewed using one or more ClinGen curation processes, (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and including:45gene-diseaseassociationsforclinicalvalidity, pendinggrantsaswell asgrantsalreadyreceived); Modest; 66 gene-condition pairs for clinical actionability and 1,237 NIHfunding.M.Greenblatt:B.ResearchGrant(principal genes for dosage sensitivity. Results are available on clin- investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants icalgenome.org. as well as grants already received); Modest; NIH funding. Conclusions: ClinGen’s curated information on genes, L.G. Biesecker: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, diseases, variants and clinical actions is publicly available. collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as This information is useful in a variety of clinical and grants already received); Modest; NIH funding. research applications, including building evidence-based clinical genetic testing panels, determining the effects of C19.3 deletions or duplications identified on cytogenomic micro- ClinGen: The Clinical Genome Resource array, resolving discrepancies in variant interpretation, and developing actionability frameworks for deciding when to D. R. Azzariti1, E. R. Riggs2, J. S. Berg3, C. D. Bustamante4, K. A. B. return results to patients. Goddard5,M.J.Landrum6,D.H.Ledbetter2,C.L.Martin2,S.E.Plon7, FundingfromNHGRI,NICHD,andNCI:U41HG006834, E. M. Ramos8, M. S. Watson9, M. S. Williams2, H. L. Rehm1,10,11, U01HG007437, U01HG007436, UO1HG006487, and on behalf of the Clinical Genome Resource HHSN261200800001E, also supported in part by Intramural Research Program of NLM/NIH. 1Laboratory for Molecular Medicine, Partners HealthCare D.R. Azzariti: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- Personalized Medicine, Cambridge, MA, United States, nificant; Massachusetts General Hospital. E.R. Riggs: 2Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United States, None. J.S. Berg: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- 3University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, nificant;TheUniversityofNorthCarolinaatChapelHill.B. NC, United States, 4Stanford University, School of Medi- Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or cine, Stanford, CA, United States, 5Center for Health consultant and pending grants as well as grants already Research, Kaiser Permanente Northwest, Portland, OR, received); Significant; National Institutes of Health, UNC United States, 6National Center for Biotechnology Infor- Yang Family Biomedical Scholars Award. C.D. Busta- mation, Bethesda, MD, United States, 7Baylor College of mante: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 8National Human borator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, already received); Significant; MacArthur Foundation, Betheseda, MD, United States, 9American College of National Institutes of Health. E. Ownership Interest (stock, Medical Genetics and Genomics, Bethesda, MD, United stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Sig- States, 10Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United nificant; CDB Consulting, LTD. F. Consultant/Advisory States, 11Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, Uni- Board; Modest; IdentifyGenomics, LLC, Med-Tek, Liberty ted States Biosecurity, Personalis, Inc., 23andme, Ancestry.com,Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 97 Etalon,Inc.K.A.B.Goddard:B.ResearchGrant(principal Genetics,BroadInstitute ofMIT andHarvard,Cambridge, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants MA, United States, 6Partners HealthCare Personalized as well as grants already received); Significant; National Medicine,LaboratoryforMolecularMedicine,Cambridge, Institutes of Health. M.J. Landrum: None. D.H. Ledbet- MA, United States, 7epartment of Pathology, Harvard ter: None. C.L. Martin: B. Research Grant (principal Medical School/Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants MA, United States, 8National Heart Centre Singapore, as well as grants already received); Significant; National Singapore, Singapore Institutes of Health. S.E. Plon: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Baylor Genetics Laboratories. E.M. Allele frequency (AF) is a key discriminator between Ramos:None.M.S.Watson:A.Employment(fullorpart- pathogenic variants and benign bystanders, but the thresh- time); Significant; American College of Medical Genetics olds that should be used to classify variants as benign are and Genomics. B. Research Grant (principal investigator, often unclear, given that Mendelian diseases may also be collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as present in the population. The recent Genome Aggregation grants already received); Significant; National Institutes of Database (gnomAD) comprises variation from 138,633 Health, Maternal and Child Health Bureau of the Health individuals, providing unprecedented power to characterise Resources and Services Administration, Genetic Services rare variants. Branch.M.S.Williams:A.Employment(fullorpart-time); We have developed a rigorous statistical framework to Significant; Geisinger Health System. B. Research Grant evaluate whether an observed AF is compatible with (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pathogenicity. Our approach considers disease prevalence, pending grants as well as grants already received); Sig- genetic/allelic heterogeneity and variant penetrance, to nificant; National Institutes of Health. D. Speakers Bureau/ determine whether a variant frequency is compatible with Honoraria(speakersbureau,symposia,andexpertwitness); disease causation, whilst taking into account sampling Modest; Chambersburg Hospital (PA), Harvard Medical variance. School, Gundersen Health System, Tokyo Genomic We evaluated our approach using high quality reference Research Institute, Georgetown University, American Col- variants from 7,855 clinically classified cardiomyopathy lege of Medical Genetics and Genomics, Association of cases, with gnomAD as a population reference dataset. Professors of Human and Medical Genetics, University of Compared to a conventional 0.1% AF filter, our more Wisconsin-Madison, Sanford Health, Mayo Clinic, City of stringentfilterreducedthenumberof‘VariantsofUncertain Hope. H.L. Rehm: B. Research Grant (principal investi- Significance’ by 10% (69 variants), while preserving 375/ gator,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswell 376 ‘Pathogenic’ variants. Additionally, of 28 ClinVar as grants already received); Significant; National Institutes ‘pathogenic’ variants that failed our stringent filter: none of Health. had robust evidence of disease-causation. In addition to permitting the safe and appropriate use of C19.4 muchmorestringentAFthresholds,ourapproachfacilitates High-resolution variant filtering empowers clinical investigationofdiseasearchitecture.Usingadiversedataset interpretation and provides insights into variant of>1,500cardiomyopathycaseswecanaccuratelyquantify penetrance and population-specificity disease penetrance and identify disease-causing variants that are specific to a single ethnic population. N. Whiffin1,2,3, E. Minikel4,5, R. Walsh2,3, A. O’Donnell-Luria4,5, K. To aid variant interpretation, we have released pre- Karczewski4,5,A.Y.Ing6,P.J.R.Barton2,3,B.Funke6,7,S.A.Cook1,2,8, computed frequency annotations for all variants in the D. G. MacArthur4,5, J. S. Ware1,2,5 gnomAD dataset. Additionally,tofacilitateinvestigationof diseasearchitectureandvariantpenetrance,wehavecreated 1MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, Uni- an online tool: cardiodb.org/allelefrequencyapp/. ted Kingdom, 2National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial N. Whiffin: None. E. Minikel: None. R. Walsh: None. College London, London, United Kingdom, 3Cardiovas- A. O’Donnell-Luria: None. K. Karczewski: None. A.Y. cular BRU, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Trust, Ing: None. P.J.R. Barton: None. B. Funke: None. S.A. London, United Kingdom, 4Analytic and Translational Cook: None. D.G. MacArthur: None. J.S. Ware: None. Genetics Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 5Program in Medical and Population98 C19.5 C19.6 External Quality Assessment of Clinical Genetics: Assessing clinical consistency among inconsistent from pilot assessment to full EQA scheme variant classifications C. M. van Ravenswaaij-Arts1, C. van Asperen2, C. Benjamin3, S. Abbs1, D. Moore2, F. Khawaja3, Z. Deans3 L. Garavelli4, B. Peterlin5, M. Nielsen2, T. De Ravel6, L. Tranebjaerg7, K. Usha8, K. Writzl5, R. Hastings9 1East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge Uni- versity Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, Uni- 1DepartmentofGenetics,UMCG,Groningen,Netherlands, ted Kingdom, 2South East Scotland Genetic Service, 2Department of Genetics, LUMC, Leiden, Netherlands, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3University of Central Lancashire, Liverpool, United 3UK NEQAS for Molecular Genetics, The Royal Infirmary Kingdom, 4Azienda Ospedialiera Santa Maria Nuova, of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Reggio Enilia, Italy, 5Ljubljana UMC, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 6DepartmentofGenetics,KU,Leuven,Belgium,7University It is essential for diagnostic genetics laboratories to of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 8The Churchill interpret and report sequence variants consistently. Much Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom, 9Oxford University effort is being directed towards achieving consistency Hospitals NHS Trust, CEQAS, Oxford, United Kingdom through the introduction of standardized and objective classification guidelines (eg ACMG standards and guide- Quality assessment has long been associated with lines 2015). Once a variant has been classified, it is laboratory,butnotclinical,services.Toaddressthisgap,in potentially more important that clinicians are consistent in 2012 the ESHG Genetic Services Quality Committee whether they use that variant to manage their patients. explored the needs for a European Quality Assessment To assess and improve consistency between laboratories (EQA) scheme for clinical genetics and counselling. Eur- theUK National External QualityAssessment Service (UK opean national societies of human genetics were surveyed NEQAS) for Molecular Genetics has been assessing and a need for EQA for clinical genetics was expressed. annually how laboratories classify and interpret variants CEQAS was chosen as the EQA provider and three pilot since2012.Laboratoriesaregiventypicalreferralscenarios EQAs have now been completed and evaluated. Each year, and asked to classify and interpret a number of variants theworkinggrouppreparesfourcasescenariosinthefields using the standard 5 point pathogenicity scale. of cardiogenetics, oncogenetics, monogenetics and dys- Inapilotschemein2016twelveclinicalgeneticistswere morphology.Eachscenariostartedwithareferralletterand askedtoclassify7variantsthat44laboratorieshadassessed consistedofmultiplestages,toreflectanepisodeofclinical previously,andtostatewhethertheywouldusethevariants care. At each stage further information was given and a tomanagepatients.Onlyonevariantwasclasseduniformly number of questions presented. For each question, con- by all laboratories and clinicians (class 1, benign); four sensus answers were agreed by independent experts variantswereclassedaseither4or5,or1or2,respectively; includingtwoclinicalgeneticistsandapatientorganisation. two variants were classed into one of three classes, (1–3 or In 2014, 2015 and 2016, a total of 15, 29 and 42 genetic 3–5). Despite similar inconsistencies in classification by centres from 11, 16 and 21 countries respectively partici- clinicians and scientists, reassuringly there was good con- pated in the pilot EQA. All answers were reviewed by two sensusamongthecliniciansregardinguseofthevariantsto clinical geneticists.Basedontheexperienceswiththethree manage patients. pilotEQAs,aguidelineforthedevelopmentofsuitablecase This assessment scheme is being expanded via a virtual scenarios was written, including how questions and criteria training and competency tool (G-TACT) to help large should be formulated. The answers provided by thecentres numbers of scientists and clinicians learn and improve highlighted differences in clinical genetics practice across consistency in this important skill of classifying and inter- Europe. The EQA for clinical genetics proved to be highly preting genomic variants. educational. The working group will continue to improve S. Abbs: None. D. Moore: None. F. Khawaja: None. the process for the benefit of the Clinical Genetics Z. Deans: None. community. C.M. van Ravenswaaij-Arts: None. C. van Asperen: None. C. Benjamin: None. L. Garavelli: None. B.Peterlin: None.M.Nielsen:None.T. DeRavel:None. L. Tranebjaerg: None. K. Usha: None. K. Writzl: None. R. Hastings: None.Abstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 99 C20 anomalies and has an autosomal dominant inheritance with Molecular syndromology variable expression. We identified heterozygous mutations in two genes of the cadherin-catenin complex, CDH1, C20.1 encodingE-cadherin,andCTNND1,encodingp120-catenin Mutations in the cadherin-catenin complex in delta1 in 15 of 17 BCDS index patients. CDH1 plays an Blepharo-Cheilo-Dontic Syndrome essentialroleinepithelialcelladherence;CTNND1bindsto CDH1andcontrolsthestabilityofthecomplex.Functional A. Kievit1, F. Tessadori2,3, J. Douben1, I. Jordens2, M. Maurice2, experiments in zebrafish and human cells showed that the A. Hoogeboom1, R. Hennekam4, S. Nampoothiri5, H. Kayserili6, CDH1 mutations impair the cell-adhesion function of the M. Castori7, M. Whiteford8, C. Motter9, C. Melver9, M. Cunningham10, cadherin-catenin complex in a dominant-negative manner. A. Hing10, N. Kokitsu-Nakata11, S. Vendramini-Pittoli11, A. Richieri- Mutations in CDH1 have been linked tofamilial hereditary Costa11,A.Baas2,C.Beugem12,K.Duran2,M.Massink2,P.Derksen13, diffuse gastric cancer and invasive lobular breast cancer, W. F. J. van IJcken14, L. van Unen14, F. Santos-Simarro15, however no cases of gastric or breast cancer have been P. Lapunzina15, V. L. Gil-da Silva Lopes16, E. Lustosa-Mendes16, reported in our BCDS cases. Functional experiments M.Krall17,A.Slavotinek17,V.Martinez-Glez15,J.Bakkers3,K.L.I.van reported here indicated the BCDS mutations comprise a Gassen2, A. de Klein1, M. J. van den Boogaard2, G. van Haaften2 distinct class of CDH1 mutations. Together, we discovered the genetic cause of BCDS enabling DNA diagnostics and 1DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,ErasmusMedicalCenter, counseling, in addition we describe a novel class of domi- Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Genetics, Center nant negative CDH1 mutations. for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center A.Kievit:None.F.Tessadori:None.J.Douben:None. Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Hubrecht Institute-KNAW I. Jordens: None. M. Maurice: None. A. Hoogeboom: and University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether- None. R. Hennekam: None. S. Nampoothiri: None. lands, 4Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Cen- H. Kayserili: None. M. Castori: None. M. Whiteford: ter, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, None. C. Motter: None. C. Melver: None. M. Cunning- 5Department of Pediatric Genetics, Amrita Institute of ham: None. A. Hing: None. N. Kokitsu-Nakata: None. Medical Sciences & Research Centre, Kerala, India, S. Vendramini-Pittoli: None. A. Richieri-Costa: None. 6DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,KoçUniversitySchoolof A. Baas: None. C. Beugem: None. K. Duran: None. Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 7Department of Clinical M. Massink: None. P. Derksen: None. W.F.J. van Genetics, San Camillo-Forlanini General Hospital, Rome, IJcken: None. L. van Unen: None. F. Santos-Simarro: Italy, 8Department of Clinical Genetics, Queen Elizabeth None. P. Lapunzina: None. V.L. Gil-da Silva Lopes: University Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 9Division None. E. Lustosa-Mendes: None. M. Krall: None. of Medical Genetics, Akron Children’s Hospital, Akron, A. Slavotinek: None. V. Martinez-Glez: None. J. Bak- OH, United States, 10Division of Craniofacial Medicine, kers:None.K.L.I.vanGassen:None.A.deKlein:None. UniversityofWashingtonDepartmentofPediatrics,Seattle M.J. van den Boogaard: None. G. van Haaften: None. Children’sCraniofacialCenter,Seattle,WA,UnitedStates, 11Department of Clinical Genetics, Hospital for Rehabili- C20.2 tation of Craniofacial Anomalies, University of São Paulo, Heterozygous loss-of-function ACTB mutations Bauru, Brazil, 12Department of Pediatric Plastic Surgery, result in a novel developmental syndrome WilhelminaChildren’sHospital,UniversityMedicalCentre Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 13Department of Pathology, S. Cuvertino1, H. Stuart1,2, K. E. Chandler2, N. A. Roberts1, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, R.Armstrong3,L. Bernardini4,S.Bhaskar2,B. Callewaert5,J.Clayton- 14Erasmus Center for Biomics, Erasmus Medical Center, Smith1,2,C.H.Davalillo6,C.Deshpande7,K.Devriendt8,M.C.Digilio9, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 15Institute of Medical and Mole- A. Dixit10, M. Edwards11, J. M. Friedman12, S. Joss13, B. Kerr2, A. K. cularGenetics,HospitalUniversitarioLaPaz,Universidad Lampe14,R. McGowan13,M.D. Medt8, J. O’Sullivan2,S. Odent15,M.J. Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain, 16Department of Parker16, C. Pebrel-Richard17, F. Petit18, Z. Stark19, S. Tinschert20, Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University P. Vasudevan21, O. Villa6, &. M. White19,22, F. Zahir12,23, The DDD of Campinas, Campinas, Sao Paulo, Brazil, 17Department study, R. Lennon1, A. S. Woolf1, S. Banka1,2 of Pediatrics, University of California, Benioff Children’s Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United States 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2St. Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom, Blepharocheilodontic syndrome (BCDS) consists of 3Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom, lagophthalmia,ectropionofthelowereyelids,distichiasisof 4Mendel Laboratory, Rome, Italy, 5Ghent University Hos- theuppereyelids,euryblepharon, cleft lip/palate and dental pital, Ghent, Belgium, 6Quantitative Genomic Medicine100 Laboratories, Barcelona, Spain, 7Guy’s Hospital, London, S. Cuvertino: None. H. Stuart: None. K.E. Chandler: United Kingdom, 8KU Leuven and University Hospital None. N.A. Roberts: None. R. Armstrong: None. Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 9IRCCS Ospedale Pediatrico L. Bernardini: None. S. Bhaskar: None. B. Callewaert: Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 10Nottingham City Hospital, None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. C.H. Davalillo: None. Nottingham, United Kingdom, 11University of Western C. Deshpande: None. K. Devriendt: None. M.C. Digilio: Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 12University of British Colum- None. A. Dixit: None. M. Edwards: None. J.M. Fried- bia,Vancouver,BC,Canada,13QueenElizabethUniversity man: None. S. Joss: None. B. Kerr: None. A.K. Lampe: Hospital, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 14Western General None. R. McGowan: None. M.D. Medt: None. Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 15Hôpital SUD, J.O’Sullivan:None.S.Odent:None.M.J.Parker:None. Rennes, France, 16Sheffield Children’s NHS Foundation C.Pebrel-Richard:None.F.Petit:None.Z.Stark:None. Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 17CHU-Clermont-Fer- S.Tinschert:None.P.Vasudevan:None.O.Villa:None. rand, Clermont-Ferrand, France, 18CHU Lille, Lille, &.M. White: None. F. Zahir: None. R. Lennon: None. France, 19Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Mel- A.S. Woolf: None. S. Banka: None. bourne, Australia, 20Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria, 21Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, C20.3 United Kingdom, 22University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Variants in the degron motif of AFF3 cause a multi- Australia, 23Hamad Bin Khalifa University, Doha, Qatar sytem disorder with skeletal dysplasia and severe neurologic involvement Introduction: ACTB, encodes β-actin an abundant cytos- keletal house-keeping protein. Homozygous Actb mice are N.Voisin1,R.E.Schnur2,3,S.Douzgou4,5,A.J.Tanaka6,C.F.Rustad7, embryonic lethal and, in humans, postulated gain-of- S. M. Hiatt8, E. Del Giudice9, A. Mikhaleva1, The DDD study10, function missense mutations cause Baraitser-Winter syn- B. Yalcin1, D. Donnai4,5, N. Brunetti-Pierri9,11, A. Reymond1, W. K. drome (BRWS), characterised by intellectual disability, Chung6 agyria/pachygyria, coloboma, sensorineural deafness and characteristic facial features. To date, the effects of loss-of- 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, function ACTB mutations are unknown. Lausanne, Switzerland, 2GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, Uni- Methods and Results: We describe heterozygous ACTB ted States, 3Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, deletions(grossorintragenic)ortruncatingmutationsin33 Division of Genetics, Camden, NJ, United States, 4Man- individuals with growth retardation, developmental delay, chester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester intellectual disability, internal organ malformations University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester (affecting heart, kidneys, spine and palate amongst others), Academic Health Sciences Centre, St Mary’s Hospital, minor anomalies (e.g. nail hypoplasia and overlapping Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Institute of Human Devel- toes), variable systemic manifestations and a recognisable opment, University of Manchester, Manchester, United facial gestalt (interrupted eyebrows, dense eyelashes, wide Kingdom,6Department ofPediatrics,ColumbiaUniversity, nose,widemouthandaprominentchin)thatisdistinctfrom New York, NY, United States, 7Department of Medical individuals with BRWS. Strikingly, this spectrum overlaps Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway, 8Hud- with that of several chromatin remodelling disorders. sonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology, Huntsville, AL, Uni- In developing mice, β-actin was enriched in tissues ted States, 9Department of Translational Medicine, Section correlating with the human disease. ACTB mRNA levels in of Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy, patient-derived lymphoblastic lines and fibroblasts were 10Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United approximately 50% versus control cells. Patient-derived Kingdom, 11Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine fibroblasts and ACTB siRNA knockdown in wild-type (TIGEM), Naples, Italy fibroblasts showed altered cell shape and migration, con- sistent with known roles of cytoplasmic β-actin. Notably, a The ALF transcription factor paralogs, AFF1-AFF4 are decrease in β-actin protein levels was detected in nuclei of componentsofthetranscriptionalsuperelongationcomplex thesecellsalongwithalteredexpressionofcellcyclegenes thatregulatesexpression ofgenesinvolvedinneurogenesis correlating with a decrease in cell numbers. and development. We identified five individuals with de Conclusions: Loss-of-function ACTB mutations cause a novo missense variants in the AFF3 degron motif, a signal novel developmental syndrome. Our linked developmental for protein degradation. They present with a recognizable and cell biology studies suggest that a critically reduced pattern of anomalies including microcephaly, global level of this protein alters cell morphology, migration and developmental delay, intellectual disability, brain atrophy, gene expression to the detriment of brain, heart and kidney seizures, dysmorphic features, horseshoe kidney, a development. mesomelic form of skeletal dysplasia resemblingAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 101 Nievergelt/Savarirayan type and other skeletal features, 6Department of Genetics and Center for Molecular Medi- only partially overlapping the AFF4 variants-associated cine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Nether- CHOPS syndrome. Consistent with a causative role of lands, 7Department of Pathology, “Hospices Civils de AFF3 variants in this syndrome, a previously reported Lyon”, Lyon, France, 8Department of Obstetrics and individual with a microdeletion encompassing AFF3 Gynecology, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research exhibited overlapping clinical features. Murine models Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 9Swiss Institute of Bioinfor- lacking the orthologous gene display brain and skeletal matics (SIB), Lausanne, Switzerland, 10Sant’Orsola-Mal- anomalies, and kidney defects. pighi Hospital, Medical Genetics Unit, Bologna, Italy, The three described CHOPS individuals carry de novo 11Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB), LAUSANNE, variants in the degron of AFF4 that altered the binding to Switzerland, 12Department of Clinical Genetics, Royal the SIAH E3-ubiquitin ligase and its stability. These indi- Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, United viduals and two additional probands with de novo AFF4 Kingdom, 13Center for Fetal Diagnosis and Treatment, variantsweidentifiedallowtodefinethatseizures,failureto Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, thrive and a distinctive skeletal dysplasia are specific to United States individuals with AFF3 variants and absent in CHOPS. In conclusion,althoughproteinsencodedbyAFF2,AFF3and Whole exome sequencing of 10 individuals from 9 AFF4 were reported to be partially redundant, the pheno- unrelated families with overlapping clinical manifestations typesassociatedwithAFF3andAFF4variantsareclinically identified loss-of-function (LoF) and missense variants in distinct and show only minimal phenotypic overlap. While KIAA1109 allowing description of a new autosomal reces- CHOPS syndrome is due to an accumulation of AFF4 sive multi-system syndrome. Shared phenotypic features protein, functional analyses are warranted and underway to representing the cardinal characteristics of this syndrome understand the mechanism of AFF3-associated syndrome combine brain atrophy, hydrocephalus and encephalic that may explain phenotype differences. Dandy-Walker malformation with clubfoot and arthro- N. Voisin: None. R.E. Schnur: A. Employment (full or gryposis.Severecaseswereincompatiblewithlife,whereas part-time); Significant; GeneDx. S. Douzgou: None. A.J. those with milder missense variants presented with severe Tanaka: None. C.F. Rustad: None. S.M. Hiatt: None. global developmental delay, syndactyly of 2nd and 3rd toes E. Del Giudice: None. A. Mikhaleva: None. A. Mikha- and severe muscle hypotonia resulting in incapacity for levaTheDDDstudy:None.B.Yalcin:None.D.Donnai: patients to stand without support. Histology of the brain of None. N. Brunetti-Pierri: None. A. Reymond: None. two affected fetuses revealed defects of cerebellar cortical W.K. Chung: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- lamination. The 5005 amino acid KIAA1109 is evolutio- nificant; GeneDx. narily conserved and interacts with proteins previously associated with intellectual disability and regulation of cell C20.4 division such as CTNNB1, PPP2R4 and BUB3. Consistent KIAA1109 variants are associated with a severe with a causative role for KIAA1109 loss-of-function and disorder of brain development and arthrogryposis hypomorphic variants in this new syndrome, knockdowns ofthezebrafishorthologousgenewithmorpholinosresulted L.Gueneau1,R.Fish2,H.Shamseddin3,N.Voisin1,F.TranMau-Them4, in embryos with hydrocephaly, abnormally curved noto- E. Preiksaitiene5, G. Monroe6, F. Allias7, Q. Ambosaidi8, L. chords, and dysmorphic overall body shape. Similarly, Ambrozaityte5, L. Cimbalistiene5, J. Delafontaine9, N. Guex9, M. published knockouts of the Mus musculus and Drosophila Hashem3, W. Kurdi8, T. Pippucci10, S. Pradervand9, B. Roechert11, orthologs of KIAA1109 resulted in lethality or severe neu- P.VanHasselt6,M.Wiederkehr1,C.Wright12,DDDStudy,I.Xenarios9, rological defects reminiscent of proband features. G. Van Haaften6, C. Shaw-Smith12, E. Schindewolf13, M. Neerman- L. Gueneau: None. R. Fish: None. H. Shamseddin: Arbez2, J. Chelly4, V. Kucinskas5, F. Alkuraya3, A. Reymond1 None. N. Voisin: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. E. Preiksaitiene: None. G. Monroe: None. F. Allias: 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, None. Q. Ambosaidi: None. L. Ambrozaityte: None. Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Department of Genetic Medicine L.Cimbalistiene:None.J.Delafontaine:None.N.Guex: and Development, CH-1211 University of Geneva Medical None. M. Hashem: None. W. Kurdi: None. T. Pippucci: School, Geneva, Switzerland, 3Department of Genetics, None. S. Pradervand: None. B. Roechert: None. P. Van King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Hasselt: None. M. Wiederkehr: None. C. Wright: None. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, 4Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génét- I. Xenarios: None. G. Van Haaften: None. C. Shaw- ique, Hôpitaux Universitaire de Strasbourg, Strasbourg, Smith:None.E.Schindewolf:None.M.Neerman-Arbez: France, 5Department of Human and Medical Genetics, None.J.Chelly:None.V.Kucinskas:None.F.Alkuraya: Faculty ofMedicine, Vilnius University, Vilnius, Lithuania, None. A. Reymond: None.102 C20.5 linesaswellastheeffectsofbmp2knockdownonzebrafish Heterozygous BMP2 mutations leading to craniofacial/skeletal cartilages and cardiac development. haploinsufficiency cause a recognisable human Our data suggest an elevated sensitivity to reduced BMP2 syndrome comprising short stature, palatal levelsinhumandevelopmentanddemonstrateinvolvement anomalies, congenital heart disease and skeletal of BMP2 mutations in a recognizable human syndrome malformations comprisingcraniofacial,skeletalandcardiacmalformations. T.Y. Tan: None. E. Bhoj: None. K. Strauss: None. T. Y. Tan1,2,3, E. Bhoj4, K. Strauss5, K. Brigatti5, E. Puffenberger5, K. Brigatti: None. E. Puffenberger: None. D. Li: None. D. Li4, C. G. Gonzaga-Jauregui6, P. J. Simm7,2, B. O. Jones7,2, C.G. Gonzaga-Jauregui: None. P.J. Simm: None. B.O. M.Raabus2,L.Miles8,M.Ramialison8,J. Kaslin8, N.L.Baker2,3,P.G. Jones: None. M. Raabus: None. L. Miles: None. M. Farlie2,3 Ramialison:None.J.Kaslin:None.N.L.Baker:None.P. G. Farlie: None. 1Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Mel- bourne,Australia,2MurdochChildren’sResearchInstitute, C20.6 Melbourne, Australia, 3Dept of Paediatrics, University of Reverse phenotyping of whole-genome sequencing Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 4Center for Applied datafrompatientswith22q11.2deletionsidentifies Genomics, Department of Pediatrics, Children’s Hospital an extensive catalog of broader phenotypic of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 5Clinic variability and benign variation in pathogenic for Special Children, Strasburg, PA, United States, disease genes 6Translational Genetics, Regeneron Genetics Center, Tar- rytown,NY,UnitedStates,7TheRoyalChildren’sHospital, M. S. Hestand1,2, B. A. Nowakowska2,3, E. Vergaelen2, W. Demaerel2, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia, 8Australian Regenerative J. Breckpot2, D. J. Cutler4, T. B. Crowley5, M. Armando6, N. Philip7, Medicine Institute, Monash University, Clayton, Mel- G. Repetto8, M. Schneider9, S. Eliez9, K. Devriendt2, D. M. McDonald- bourne, Australia McGinn5,10, B. E. Morrow11,12, A. Swillen2, J. R. Vermeesch2, International 22q11.2 Brain Behavior Consortium Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) on chromosome 20p12 belongs to a gene superfamily encoding TGF-beta 1Department of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical signalling peptides involved in bone and cartilage biology. Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Department of Human Heterozygous chromosome 20p12 deletions are variably Genetics,KULeuven,Leuven,Belgium,3InstituteofMother associatedwithcleftpalate,shortstatureanddevelopmental and Child, Warsaw, Poland, 4Department of Human delay. We report individuals with short stature, a recog- Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, nizable gestalt, skeletal anomalies and congenital heart GA, United States, 5Human Genetics, The Children’s diseasebutnormalintellectwithheterozygousmutationsin Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, BMP2. Craniofacial features include cleft palate, flat mid- 6Department of Neuroscience, Research Hospital IRCCS face, short, upturned nose, long philtrum and low-set ears. Bambino Gesù, Rome, Italy, 7Department of Medical Skeletal features include 11-pairs of ribs, clinodactyly and Genetics,AixMarseilleUniversity,APHM,GMGF,Timone pectus deformity. Congenital heart disease includes trans- Hospital, Marseille, France, 8Center for Genetics and position of great arteries and Ebstein anomaly. In affected Genomics, Clínica Alemana Universidad del Desarrollo, sisters with a BMP2 splice site mutation we demonstrate Santiago, Chile, 9Department of Psychiatry, University of abnormal exon 2 splicing and paternal mosaicism; in an Geneva School of Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland, 10Perel- unrelated individual we identified a de novo frameshift man School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Phi- mutation. A heterozygous chromosome 20p12 deletion ladelphia, PA, United States, 11Department of Genetics, involvingBMP2wasidentifiedinanotherindividualandhis Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United father with a similar phenotype. The craniofacial and ske- States, 12Departments of Ob/Gyn and Pediatrics, Albert letal phenotype of individuals with intragenic BMP2 Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, United States mutations is similar to the deletion phenotype, suggesting that haploinsufficiency of BMP2 is the primary phenotypic The 22q11.2 deletion syndrome is the most common determinant. Bmp2-null mice die from defects including chromosomal deletion syndrome in humans with an inci- heart malformation in early gestation while mice with het- dence of 1 in 2–4000 live births. Individuals with the syn- erozygous loss of Bmp2 appear normal. We present ana- drome most often have a classically associated 1.5–3 Mb lyses of secreted BMP2 peptide in affected and control cell deletion and extremely variable clinical presentations. TheAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 103 hemizygous nature of the region offers the opportunity to 4Razavi Hospital, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic Republic of, evaluatemutationsinrelationtoknownrecessivedisorders. 5Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden, 6Mashhad Hope Wehaveevaluatedtheremainingallelefrom382whole- Generation Genetic Polyclinic, Mashhad, Iran, Islamic genome sequenced patients. A total of 90% were identified Republic of, 7Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, to have the typical 3Mb deletion, 6% the 1.5Mb deletion, Sweden and theremainder a varietyof more atypical deletion sizes. Weidentified8,093totalvariantpositions,ofwhich117are Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy (HCM) is a common predictedtoberare(frequency⩽5%)andproteindamaging autosomaldominantgeneticdiseaseassociatedwithsudden across a total of 185 subjects. Reverse phenotyping is now death and progressive heart failure. Pathogenic variants of being performed to associate this genetic variation with genes associated with metabolic disorders may also cause expected phenotypes. Findings in these subjects may pro- HCM, but usually with recessive inheritance, or maternal vide evidence for broader phenotypic variability in the inheritance in the case of mitochondrial DNA mutations. previously described conditions and/or new features that Here we report seven young adults with hypertrophic car- werenotpreviouslyrecognizedtobeassociatedpriortothe diomyopathy from two consanguineous families. Two identificationofmutationsontheotherallele.Alternatively, individuals died suddenly and one woman had a cardiac variation that appears damaging may be demonstrated to transplant at age 26 due to heart failure. Endomyocardial actually be benign. For example, four patients (3 variants) biopsy in two individuals from one family showed storage haveSCARF2mutations,butdonotclinicallypresentsigns of polyglucosan, and these two individuals also showed of Van den Ende-Gupta syndrome. It has become evident abnormal glycogen storage and other structural abnormal- that mapping the variation in the remaining alleles of ities in skeletal muscle biopsy but no muscle weakness. genomic deletion disorders provides a rich annotation of Intermediate filaments composed of desmin were accumu- more detailed pathogenic variation, but also benign lated in both heart and skeletal muscle. Whole-exome variation. sequencing of affected individuals in both families identi- Funding: National Institute of Mental Health fied homozygous potentially deleterious variants in the (5U01MH101723-02), FONDECYT-Chile (1130392). Kelch-like family member 24 gene, KLHL24. One variant M.S. Hestand: None. B.A. Nowakowska: None. was a nonsense mutation, c.1048G>T, p.Glu350*, and the E. Vergaelen: None. W. Demaerel: None. J. Breckpot: other a missense mutation, c.917G>A, p.Arg306His. None. D.J. Cutler: None. T.B. Crowley: None. Kelch-like proteins have been identified as adaptors for the M. Armando: None. N. Philip: None. G. Repetto: None. recruitment of substrates for Cul3-based E3-ubiquitin liga- M.Schneider:None.S.Eliez:None.K.Devriendt:None. ses and are important for protein turnover. KLHL24 is D.M. McDonald-McGinn: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria highly expressed in striated muscle. In zebrafish, the (speakers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; homolog gene klhl24a is expressed in the heart. Down- Natera. B.E. Morrow: None. A. Swillen: None. J.R. regulation by antisense morpholino resulted in defective Vermeesch: None. heart development visible at 2 days post fertilization, leadingfinallytodeathataroundday5,thusdemonstrating the importance of klhl24 for cardiac development and C21 function. These findings support the pathogenicity of Cardiovascular disorders KLHL24 mutations, and suggest that KLHL24 is a new cardiomyopathy-associated gene. C21.1 C. Hedberg-Oldfors: None. A. Abramsson: None. Inactivation of KLHL24 is associated with D.P.S. Osborn: None. O. Danielsson: None. hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and abnormal A. Fazlinezhad: None. L. Hübbert: None. I. Nennesmo: glycogen storage in heart and skeletal muscle None. K. Visuttijai: None. J. Bharj: None. E.G. Karimiani: None. E. Petropoulou: None. A. Shohreim: C. Hedberg-Oldfors1, A. Abramsson1, D. P. S. Osborn2, O. Danielsson3, None. R.K. Banote: None. R. Maroofian: None. A. Fazlinezhad4, L. Hübbert3, I. Nennesmo5, K. Visuttijai1, J. Bharj2, M. Edling: None. M. Taherpour: None. H. Zetterberg: E. G. Karimiani4,6, E. Petropoulou2, A. Shohreim2, R. K. Banote1, None. A. Oldfors: None. Y. Jamshidi: None. R.Maroofian2,M.Edling1,M.Taherpour4,H.Zetterberg1,7,A.Oldfors1, Y. Jamshidi2 1University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2St George’s University of London, London, United Kingdom, 3Linköping University Hospital, Linköping, Sweden,104 C21.2 C21.3 Epigallocatechin-3-gallate prevents cardiac Generalized compound heterozygosity analysis hypertrophy in a Williams-Beuren syndrome mouse highlights associated loci for coronary artery model disease in genetic and exome data P. Ortiz-Romero1,2, G. Aranaz1, L. A. Perez-Jurado1,2,3, M. Munoz1,2,3, M. Munz1,2,3, D. Gola2,4, L. Zeng5,6, T. Keßler5,7, I. R. V. Campuzano1,2,3 König2,4, H. Schunkert5,6, J. Erdmann1,2,3 1Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain, 2Neu- 1InstituteforCardiogenetics,UniversityofLübeck,Lübeck, rosciences Program, Institut Hospital del Mar d’Investi- Germany, 2DZHK (German Research Center for Cardio- gacions Mèdiques (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain, 3Centro de vascular Research), partner site Hamburg-Lübeck-Kiel, Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras Lübeck, Germany, 3University Heart Center Lübeck, (CIBERER), ISCIII, Barcelona, Spain Lübeck, Germany, 4Institut für Medizinische Biometrie und Statistik, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, Introduction: The hallmark feature of Williams-Beuren 5Deutsches Herzzentrum München, Technische Universität syndrome(WBS)isageneralizedarteriopathysecondaryto München, Munich, Germany, 6DZHK (German Centre for elastin deficiency that may lead to serious cardiovascular Cardiovascular Research), partner site Munich Heart complications.Amousemodelwithcompletedeletion(CD) Alliance, Munich, Germany, 7Klinikum Rechts der Isar, of the orthologous interval deleted in WBS recapitulates Munich, Germany mostcardiovascularfeatures,increasedoxidativestress,and heart hypertrophy as adults. Epigallocatechin-3-gallate Background: The active search for genetic factors con- (EGCG) is a flavonoid widely studied due to its safety tributing to coronary artery disease(CAD) has seen major and remarkable antioxidant effects that include radical- progress from (hypothesis-free) genome-wide association scavenger functions. studies(GWAS) of common SNPs. However for CAD, a Materials and Methods: CD mice were fed with EGCG complexdiseases, GWAS’sonly explainasmall portion of dilutedinthedrinkingwater.Culturedcardiomyocyteswere phenotypicvariance.Anewproposedapproachistolookat also treated with EGCG in the media. We then compared the generalized form of compound double heterozygosity treated and untreated CD mice and wild-type animals and (GCDH) to detect the genetic associations caused by com- cells for several features: 1) heart weight and cardiomyo- pound heterozygosity(CH) and thereby aid in explaining cyte’sareabyhistology;2)oxidativestresslevelsincardiac some of the ‘missing heritability’. Our study aimed to use tissue byquantificationofdihydroethidium staining;and3) the GCDH test to discover genetic loci associated with CH gene and protein expression (oxidative stress pathways) by of CAD in European ancestry genetic and exome data. RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry. Methods: Our genetic sample are based on the German Results: Treated CD mice did not show the cardiac Myocardial Infarction Family Study V(GerMIFS V) hypertrophypresentinuntreatedCDanimals,mainlydueto population-based study cohort which consists of 1,261 normalization of cardiomyocytes size. A slight increase in families(Men=64.52%) whereby all cases(N =2,459; cases oxidative stress levels that did not change with treatment N =1,611) had myocardial infarction. Our exome controls was observed in CD tissue. Treated animals showed a samples are based on the German CAD North and South normalized expression levels of Nqo1 (NADPH-dehy- Studies(Ncase|Ncontrol for North:4,464|2,886 and drogenase quinone), decreased in untreated CD mice. The South:5,255|2,921). The CollapsABEL software tool was nuclear proportion of NRF2 (direct regulator of Nqo1) was used,toconductagenome-wideassociationscan–PLINK2 alsorecoveredbytreatmentinculturedCDcardiomyocytes. was called internally - and subsequently a GCDH test was Conclusions: EGCG prevents cardiac hypertrophy in CD performed. mice by normalizing alterations in NRF2 pathway. Thus, Results: For chr1, we found 2 genetic loci to be sig- EGCG is a potential therapeutic agent for preventing car- nificantly associated (≤1.25×10−10) with CH in CAD. diovascular complications in WBS individuals. Interestingly,ofthese,oneSNPwasalreadyidentifiedusing Grant support: SAF2016-78508-R (AEI/MINEICO/ the “traditional” single-SNP based method while the other FEDER, UE) SNP was only found by using GCDH. Remaining auto- P.Ortiz-Romero:None.G.Aranaz:None.L.A.Perez- somal chromosomes and exome data are currently being Jurado: None. V. Campuzano: None. analysed. Conclusions:Basedontheanalysisofonechromosomone, GCDH test was able to reveal a locus that was associatedAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 105 withCHinCADwhichcouldhaveotherwisebeen‘missed’ cardiomyopathypatients.Wepresentlikely-pathogenicrare using single-SNP based method. CNVs in non-syndromic heart disease demonstrating the M. Munoz: None. M. Munz: None. D. Gola: None. significantcontributionofthesevariantstoheritablecardiac L. Zeng: None. T. Keßler: None. I.R. König: None. conditions. H. Schunkert: None. J. Erdmann: None. F. Honti: None. G. Beaman: None. M. Edwards: None. T. Monk: None. S. Wilkinson: None. L. Brett: C21.4 None. S. Cook: None. J.S. Ware: None. W.G. Newman: Copy number variants account for at least 2% of None. D. Morris-Rosendahl: None. non-syndromic cardiomyopathies C21.5 F. Honti1, G. Beaman2,3, M. Edwards1, T. Monk1, S. Wilkinson1, A major beneficial effect of angiotensin II receptor L. Brett1, S. Cook4,5,6, J. S. Ware4,6,7, W. G. Newman2,3, D. Morris- blockadefor preventing spontaneous aortic rupture Rosendahl1 in a new mouse model of vascular Ehlers Danlos syndrome 1Clinical Genetics and Genomics, Royal Brompton and Harefield NHS Foundation Trust, London, United King- E. Fontaine1, J. Faugeroux1, I. Loisel-Ferreira2, F. Vignol1, dom, 2Evolution and Genomic Sciences, University of A. Gianfermi1, H. Nematalla3, P. Bruneval3, J. Hadchouel1, Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 3Manchester E. Messas3,2, X. Jeunemaitre1,3,2 Centre for Genomic Medicine, Central Manchester Uni- versity Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, 1INSERM, Paris, France, 2University Paris Descartes, United Kingdom,4CardiovascularGenetics andGenomics, Paris Sorbonne Cité, Faculty of Medicine, Paris, France, NHLI,ImperialCollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom, 3APHP, Hôpital Europeen Georges Pompidou, Paris, 5National Heart Research Institute Singapore, National France Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore, Singapore, 6MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences, London, United Vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (vEDS) is a rare dis- Kingdom,7RoyalBromptonandHarefieldNHSFoundation ordercausedbygeneticdefectsattheCOL3A1genewhich Trust, London, United Kingdom codes for the pro-α1 chain of collagen type III, a fibrillar collagen arranged as an homotrimer. The prognosis is Copy-number variants (CNVs) are generally under- worsened by unpredictable arterial ruptures occurring in ascertained in routine diagnostics, although their involve- youngadulthood.Twothirdsofthedisease-causingvariants ment in heritable diseases is widely appreciated. CNV correspond to missense substitutions at glycine residues of calling from next-generation sequencing data suffers from the mature triple helix, acting in a dominant negative lowprecision-producinguncertainfindingsthathavetobe manner. We report here the characterization of the first tested by orthogonal techniques - while short deletions and knock-in mouse model of the pathology. Heterozygous col3a1+/G183R duplications involving one or two exons can remain unde- mice were viable, had a 10% reduction in tected. Recently, clinically-significant CNVs have been body weight without significant changes in blood pressure found in less than 1% of cardiomyopathy patients, ques- (BP). Their main striking feature was a 60% mortality at tioning the worth of CNV calling in these conditions. 24weeksofage(0%incontrols),mainlyobservedinmales We have developed a method for reproducible CNV and caused by aortic rupture which was not preceded by calling from targeted next-generation sequencing data and aortic dilatation but with reduced arterial wall thickness. implemented it into routine variant detection and assess- Electronic microscopy showed collagen fibers less dense ment in our laboratory. Using a panel of 169 genes impli- and heterogeneous as well as altered morphology of cated ininherited cardiac conditions, we havevalidated the adventitial fibroblasts with dilated endoplasmic reticulum CNV-callingmethodwithknowndeletionsandduplications suggesting retention of abnormal collagen. Compared to and by confirming new CNV predictions with digital PCR placebo,survivalrate wasnotmodifiedby propranolol,but andMLPA.Wehavecomparedourmethodtothreewidely considerably improved by losartan (10% mortality at used CNV-calling tools and found a superior precision in 24 weeks) that markedly decreased BP −25mmHg). calling short intragenic deletions and duplications. Stopping losartan was associated with aortic rupture and We have examined the burden of CNVs in 882 healthy mortality in the following weeks. The use of amlodipine volunteersand1681cardiacdiseasepatientsandobserveda whichalsoreducedBP,albeittoalessextent(−10mmHg), significant enrichment of rare CNVs (OR=3.5, p=0.001) was conversely associated with an increased mortality. In in the patient cohorts. In contrast to published reports, we thisvEDSmousemodel,wedemonstratethebenefitsofBP find clinically-relevant CNVs in more than 2% of106 reduction and angiotensin I receptor blockade. This ther- odds ratios for each of 1,640 pairs of discordant lesions apeutic strategy should be tested in humans. observed between affected family members. E.Fontaine:None.J.Faugeroux:A.Employment(full Results: We observed a high variability in the rates of orpart-time);Modest;SERVIER.I.Loisel-Ferreira:None. concordance and discordance and we were able to identify F. Vignol: None. A. Gianfermi: None. H. Nematalla: 178 pairs of malformations that co-occurred significantly None. P. Bruneval: None. J. Hadchouel: None. moreorlessoftenthanexpectedinfamilies.Thedatashow E. Messas: None. X. Jeunemaitre: None. that distinct groups of cardiac malformations co-occur in families, suggesting influence from underlying develop- C21.6 mental mechanisms. Analysis of human and mouse sus- Patterns of co-occurrence of congenital heart ceptibility genes showed that they were shared in 19% and defects follows distinct patterns 20% of pairs of co-occurring discordant malformations, respectively, but none of malformations that rarely co- S. G. Ellesøe1, C. T. Workman2, P. Bouvagnet3, C. A. Loffredo4, K. L. occur, suggesting that a significant proportion of co- McBride5, R. B. Hinton6, K. van Engelen7,8, E. C. Gertsen7, B. J. M. occurring lesions in families is caused by overlapping sus- Mulder9, A. V. Postma7,10, R. H. Anderson11, V. E. Hjortdal12, ceptibility genes. S. Brunak1, L. A. Larsen13 Conclusions: Our data show that familial CHD follow specific patterns of recurrence and suggest that part of co- 1Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, occurrence of malformations in familial CHD may be University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, caused by shared susceptibility genes. 2Department of Biotechnology and Biomedicine, Technical S.G. Ellesøe: None. C.T. Workman: None. P. Bou- University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark, 3Laboratoire vagnet: None. C.A. Loffredo: None. K.L. McBride: Cardiogénétique, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Bron, France, None. R.B. Hinton: None. K. van Engelen: None. E.C. 4Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University, Gertsen: None. B.J.M. Mulder: None. A.V. Postma: Washington,DC,UnitedStates,5CenterforCardiovascular None. R.H. Anderson: None. V.E. Hjortdal: None. and Pulmonary Research, Nationwide Children’s Hospital, S. Brunak: None. L.A. Larsen: None. Columbus, OH, United States, 6Division of Cardiology, CincinnatiChildren’sHospitalMedicalCenter,Cincinnati, OH, United States, 7Department of Clinical Genetics, C22 Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8VU Systems Genetics University, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 9Department of Car- diology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Nether- C22.1 lands, 10Department of Anatomy, Embryology & Four glycaemic trait trans-ethnic genome-wide Physiology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Neth- association meta-analyses using densely imputed erlands, 11Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle Uni- genetic data in up to 281,416 non-diabetic versity, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, individuals 12Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Aarhus Uni- versity Hospital, Skejby, Denmark, 13Department of Cel- I. Prokopenko, for the Meta-Analyses of Glucose and Insulin-related lular and Molecular Medicine, University of Copenhagen, traits Consortium (MAGIC) Investigators Copenhagen, Denmark Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom Introduction: Congenital heart defects (CHD) affect almost 1%of thepopulation and thenumber ofadultswith Introduction: Large-scale glycaemic trait genome-wide CHD is increasing. In families where CHD has occurred association studies (GWAS) have identified more than 120 previously, estimates of recurrence risk and the type of loci in Europeans. We aimed to dissect the trans-ethnic recurring heart defect are important for counseling and (71% European, 13% East Asian, 7% Hispanic, 6% clinical decision making, but the recurrence patterns of African-Americanand3%SouthAsian)geneticarchitecture CHD in families are poorly understood. of fasting glucose (FG), fasting insulin (FI), glycated hae- Materials and Methods: We investigated the co- moglobin (HbA1c) and 2-hour glucose (2hG), in up to occurrences of congenital heart defects in 1,163 CHD 281,416 non-diabetic individuals from 144 studies. families,comprising10,278individuals,ofwhich3,080had MaterialsandMethods:Weinversenormallytransformed a clinically confirmed CHD diagnosis. We calculated rates all phenotypes, adjusted FG/FI/2hG for body mass index of concordance and discordance for 41 types of CHD and (BMI)andtestedforassociationthe1000GenomesProject- imputed (Mar,2012) GWAS, assuming additive geneticAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 107 effects. Ethnic-specific fixed-effects meta-analyses were ofpotentialbiomarkers,whilethe“specific”regulatorsmay combined using MANTRA, allowing for heterogeneity in become candidates for therapeutic modulation. alleliceffectsbetweenethnicitiesandassuminglog Bayes Conclusions: Both of these miRNA groups are recognized 10 factor (log BF)≥6 for genome-wide significance. asbiomarkersassociatedwithadverseprognosticfeaturesin 10 Results:Wedetected102signalsforFG(53novel),62for cancer and other severe pathologies. Only about 1% of FI(43novel),130HbA1 for(60novel)and21for2hG(10 mRNAs are actively engaged in miRNA interactions. Fur- c novel).Theseincluded lociatNFX1(log BF=12.42)and thermore, we identified several coding mRNAs with a 10 ZBTB38(log BF=11.79)genesforFG;waist-to-hipratio/ substantial sponge effect, including AGO1, which function 10 BMI-associated BCL2 (log BF=11.66) for FI, LRRC16A may reflect the competition and resultant coevolution of 10 (log BF=18.60)involvedinplateletcountandvolumefor mRNAs and miRNAs. 10 HbA1c, and human cerebrospinal fluid monoamine meta- O.M. Plotnikova: None. M.Y. Skoblov: None. bolite level-associated CLEC14A (log BF=9.68) for 2hG 10 not previously known to be involved in diabetes. Cluster C22.3 analysis classified ~70% of HbA1c signals as influencing Deconvolution of whole blood eQTLs into rare erythrocytic and ~30% glycaemic pathways. Enrichment immune-subpopulations uncovers key players of analyses with GARFIELD and DEPICT highlighted blood, immune mediated diseases hemic and immune system signatures for HbA1c; pancreas for HbA1c/FG; adipose, fat tissues, adrenal glands and R.Aguirre-Gamboa1,N.deKlein1,D.V.Zhernakova1,P.Deelen1,M.J. cortex for FI. Bonder1, Z. Borek1, Swertz1, I. Jonkers1, S. Withoff1, Joosten2, V. Conclusions: Novel clues about genetic architecture of Kumar1,H.J.P.M.Koenen2,M.Netea3,C.Wijmenga1,L.Franke1,Li1 glucose and insulin level regulation from this trans-ethnic analysis provide new hypotheses about their biology. 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center Gro- I. Prokopenko: None. ningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, the, Gronin- gen, Netherlands, 2Department of Laboratory Medicine, C22.2 laboratory for Medical Immunology, Radboud University Expression insights into the human miRNA-mRNA Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of interactome Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Dis- eases, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, O. M. Plotnikova1, M. Y. Skoblov1,2 Netherlands 1Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology, Moscow, Many genetic variants have been associated to immune Russian Federation, 2Research Centre for Medical Genet- mediated diseases, yet their molecular consequences are ics, Moscow, Russian Federation unclear. Expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studies revealed that the majority of these variants have regulatory Introduction: miRNAs play akeyroleintheregulationof effects and that these eQTLs are often cell-type specific gene expression, while a majority of miRNA-mRNA (CTs).Tostudytheseeffects,eachsubpopulationshouldbe interactions remain unidentified. The recent development sorted and transcriptionally profiled, but this is often of a high-throughput CLASH (crosslinking, ligation and impossible due to resource constraints. In our study, we sequencing of hybrids) technique for discerning miRNA- have identified these CTs eQTL effects by employing a mRNAinteractionsallowedanexperimentalanalysisofthe deconvolution approach that does not require expression human miRNA-mRNA interactome. profilesfrompurifiedcells.Weused89sampleswithwhole Materials and Methods: The direct miRNA-mRNA blood (WB) RNA-seq data and quantifications of 73 dif- interaction data were gained from the experimental ferent blood subpopulations using FACS. From these sub- CLASH data. Expression levels for mRNAs and miRNAs populations, 22 could be inferred using WB RNA-seq were retrieved from FANTOM5 and GEO. (r>=0.5 predicted against measured). Next, we imputed Results: Expression analysis of miRNA revealed two these subpopulations in an independent cohort (N=2,176) interesting groups: “specific” regulators expressed at high and subsequently tested how 29,750 previously identified levels while forming only a few interactions with cognate cis-eQTL are influenced by these cell-types. mRNAs and “promiscuous” regulators expressed at low To validate our approach we show that our identified levels each forming more than 100 interactions with CTs eQTLs have significantly bigger eQTL effect sizes in mRNAs.Innormalcells,these“promiscuous”miRNAsare purified cell, such as CD4 and CD8 T cells. We also kept under tight transcriptional control that may be relaxed observed that the expression of genes in our detected CTs inpathophysiologicalstates,thusforminganattractivepool108 eQTL is significantly higher in their relevant cell types, performing gene-gene expression correlations separately in when compared to other cell subpopulations. the lean (BMI<25, n=118) and obese group (BMI>30, Finally, we overlapped the genetic risk factors of n=118), we discovered that correlation coefficients for 34 immune-related diseases and observed and enrichment of of the 54 genes show significant differences between lean CTs eQTLs from immune cell subpopulations. In conclu- and obese individuals (permutation p<0.01), implying that sion, our proposed method detects CTs eQTLs effects obesity disrupts normal correlation structure in adipose without transcriptionally profiling purified cell subpopula- transcriptomes among these BMI-correlated genes. tions, aiding in the characterization of the downstream Conclusions: Our results uncover variants in regulatory effects of auto-immune genetic risk factors. enhancer-promoter interaction circuits influencing adipose R. Aguirre-Gamboa: None. N. de Klein: None. D.V. gene expression underlying obesity. Zhernakova:None.P.Deelen:None.M.J.Bonder:None. D.Z. Pan: None. K. Garske: None. A. Ko: None. Z. Borek: None. Z. Borek Swertz: None. I. Jonkers: Y. Bagat: None. M. Alvarez: None. C.K. Raulerson: None. S. Withoff: None. S. Withoff Joosten: None. V. None. J. Sinsheimer: None. K.L. Mohlke: None. Kumar:None.H.J.P.M.Koenen:None.M.Netea:None. M. Laakso: None. P. Pajukanta: None. C. Wijmenga: None. L. Franke: None. L. Franke Li: None. C22.5 Trans-eQTL analysis in 25,000 individuals reveals C22.4 clear differences between diseases in the types and Adipose cis-eQTL variants at enhancer-promoter number of causally involved biological pathways interaction circuits regulate obesity genes A. Claringbould1, U. Vōsa1, eQTLGen Consortium, T. Esko2, L. Franke1 D.Z.Pan1,K.Garske1,A.Ko1,Y.Bagat1,M.Alvarez1,C.K.Raulerson2, J. Sinsheimer1, K. L. Mohlke2, M. Laakso3, P. Pajukanta1 1University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 2Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia 1UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, United States, 2University of NorthCarolina,ChapelHill,NC,UnitedStates,3University Understanding the role of genetic risk factors identified of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University Hospital, through genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in Kuopio, Finland complex disease remains difficult. For many diseases, hundreds of mostly non-coding variants contribute to dis- Introduction: Obesity has a high heritability, but its ease risk through largely unknownmolecular pathways.To polygenic nature and environmental factors have made it identify these disease pathways, the eQTLGen consortium difficult to uncover underlying biological mechanisms. is integrating genetic and gene expression data from whole Materials and Methods: To identify genetic variants blood of>25,000 unrelated individuals, by conducting influencing obesogenic gene expression in adipose tissue, expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) meta-analysis. wecombinedexpressionquantitativetraitloci(eQTLs)with We performed local cis- eQTL mapping for 7 million chromatin interaction data. We detected cis eQTLs geneticvariantsanddistaltrans-eQTLmappingfor>10,000 (+/−500 kb from the TSS, FDR<1%) using RNA- known genetic risk factors for disease. Finally, by using sequence data from 793 subcutaneous adipose biopsies GWAS summary statistics for>1,000 (disease) phenotypes from the Finnish METSIM cohort, and then detected distal we calculated polygenic risk scores for each individual and enhancers interacting with promoters by generating pro- correlated these to gene expression levels. moter capture Hi-C data in primary human white In an intermediate analysis (N=~18,000), we identified adipocytes. 36,730significanttrans-eQTLs,representingalmost20%of Results: We identified 10,667 adipose cis-eQTL variants all tested GWAS Catalog SNPs. Trans-actingSNPs are5.4 residing inside distal enhancers that loop to physically times as likely to also affect the expression of a cis-gene. interact with thepromoter oftheeQTLandenhancer target Integrating the effects from single SNPs and combined gene (permutation p<0.001). To focus on genes related to disease risk allows for comparison of the number and the obesity, we correlated the expression of the target genes nature of molecular pathways involved in several complex with body mass index (BMI). Of 1,312 genes with looping diseases. For example, inflammatory bowel disease SNPs cis-eQTLs, 54 were correlated with BMI (genome-wide affect various pathways (such as the type 1 and type 2 p<3.197×10−6). corrected Of these, MAP2K5 and interferon response and B-cell receptor signalling), while IL20RB, are regulated by looping cis-eQTLs that are LD the combined risk SNPs for HDL cholesterol specifically proxies (r2>0.80) for BMI GWAS SNPs, suggesting them modulate the expression level of genes known to cause astheunderlyinggenesatthesewideBMIGWASloci.By familial hypercholesterolemia. In addition, preliminaryAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 109 analyses suggest that the large number of blood trans- This work was supported by ERC Starting Grant, Olle eQTLs can also be used to infer relevant associations in Enqvist Byggmästare Foundation and Beijer Laboratory of othertissues,andtoassesswhichgenesarelikelycausalfor Genome Research to L.A.F. disease. J.Halvardson:None.M.D.Fernow:None.H.Davies: A. Claringbould: None. U. Vōsa: None. T. Esko: None. C. Rasi: None. J.P. Dumanski: E. Ownership None. L. Franke: None. Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property);Significant;CrayinnovationAB.L.A.Forsberg: C22.6 E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other MenwithLOYandcellswithouttheYchromosome- intellectual property); Significant; Cray innovation AB. transcriptomes and functional effects studied in 6000 single cells by RNA sequencing using the 10X Chromium platform C23 Neurogenetics 2 J. Halvardson1,2, M. D. Fernow1,2, H. Davies1,2, C. Rasi1,2, J. P. Dumanski1,2, L. A. Forsberg1,2,3 C23.1 Complex cis-interaction is responsible for the 1Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, craniofacial and neuroanatomical defects of the Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Science for Life 4p16.1 copy number variant Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Beijer Laboratory of Genome Research, Uppsala University, G. Hayot1,2, C. Bonnet1,2, N. Katsanis2, C. Golzio1,2 Uppsala, Sweden 1Institut de Génétique Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire The life expectancy of men is shorter compared to (IGBMC), Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France, 2Center for women but the underlying mechanism(s) are not well Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, NC, understood. Our recent discoveries regarding pathogenic United States effectsfrommosaiclossofchromosomeY(LOY)inblood might help explainthisdifference inlongevity(Nat.Genet. Copy number variants (CNVs) are frequent lesions 2014 PMID:24777449, Science 2015 PMID:25477213, involved in both rare and complex disorders. We have AJHG 2016 PMID: 27231129). shown previously how the use of structural surrogate phe- Here we present the results of single cell RNAsequen- notypes in zebrafish embryos can identify the major genes cing (scRNAseq) of more than 6000 peripheral blood responsible for CNV-associated phenotypes. Here we dis- mononuclearcells(PBMCs)usingbloodfroma93yearold sected functionally the five genes present in a CNV on man, utilizing the 10X Genomics chromium system. Using 4p16.1.ExistingcasesfrombothDecipherandAChro-Puce t-DistributedStochasticNeighborEmbeddingtogetherwith databases indicated that the 4p16.1 deletion was associated clusteringtechniqueswecoulddeterminecelltypesandthe with micrognathia (small jaw) and microcephaly whereas fraction of LOY for each cell population. the duplication was associated with an abnormal facial WealsostudiedthelevelofLOYinsixFACSsortedcell shape and macrocephaly. We thus sought to determine the fractions from the same man using the Illumina Infinium contribution of these genes to brain and face development. QC Array−24 kit and found a strong concordance in LOY To mimic the duplication, we expressed each of the five fractions in the different cell types. Furthermore, we could human transcripts in zebrafish embryos. We found discrete identify genes showing LOY specific expression within drivers for the two major anatomical features tested. Over- cell-types. expression of either SLC2A9 and ZNF518B were sufficient A goal of the project is to describe the functional con- to induce macrocephaly. However, scoring for the possible sequences of LOY in blood that could explain associations drivers of the craniofacial defect neither gene induced with increased risk for disease processes in other organs, appreciablepathology.Incontrast,expressionofCLNKand suchasnon-hematologicalcancersandAlzheimer’sdisease WDR1ledtomacrognatiaandabnormalU-shapedMeckel’s inagingmen.OurresultsshowthatscRNAseqmethodscan cartilage respectively. Finally, we asked whether the same be used to identify LOY in PBMCs. Furthermore, we pro- transcripts might be relevant to the deletion by inducing vide proof-of-concept that our approach will be useful for deletions in each of WDR1 and CLNK orthologs by studying the impact of LOY at both a cellular and tran- CRISPR/Cas9; in contrast to the duplication experiment, scriptional level. only the loss of Wdr1 led to micrognatia. Taken together110 thesedatasuggestthatthecraniofacialandneuroanatomical C23.3 phenotypes aredue to the dose imbalance of several genes Dominant mutations in DCC cause isolated agenesis present in the 4p16.1 following a cis-interaction complex of the corpus callosum with sex specific penetrance model rather than the effect of a major gene driver.Labex Starting Grant, NIH R01 MH106826 A.P.L.Marsh1,D.Heron2,T.J.Edwards3,A.Quartier4,A.Rastetter5, G.Hayot:None.C.Bonnet:None.N.Katsanis:None. C. Nava5, S. Heide2, B. Keren2, C. Mignot2, C. Garel6, A. Faudet2, C. C. Golzio: None. Galea7, G. Mcgillivray8, S. A. Mandelstam9, S. Odent10, M. Bahlo11, J. Mandel4,A.Piton4,A.Méneret5,E.Roze5,M.Moutard12,T.Billette12, C23.2 E. H. Sherr13, R. J. Leventer9, L. J. Richards3, P. J. Lockhart1, C. Foxp1 is essential for sex-specific murine neonatal Depienne4,14,5 ultrasonic vocalization 1Bruce Lefroy Centre for Genetic Health Research, Mur- H. Fröhlich, R. Rafiullah, N. Schmitt, S. Abele, G. A. Rappold doch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hos- pital, Victoria, Australia, 2AP-HP, Hôpital de la Pitié- Institute of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg, Salpêtrière, Département de Génétique, Paris, France, Germany 3TheUniversityofQueensland,QueenslandBrainInstitute, Brisbane, Australia, 4IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 5INSERM, Autism and speech and language deficits are pre- U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC dominantly found in boys, however the causative mechan- Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du Cerveau et de la isms for this sex bias are unknown. Human FOXP1 is Moelle épinière, Paris, France, 6AP-HP, GHUEP, Hôpital associated with autism, intellectual disability and speech Armand-Trousseau, Service de Radiologie, Paris, France, and language deficits. Its closely related family member 7Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics (D4), Monash FOXP2 is involved in speech and language disorder and Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Foxp2 deficient mice have demonstrated an absence of Victoria, Australia, 8Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, ultrasonic vocalization (USV). Since Foxp1 and Foxp2 Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Victoria, Australia, form heterodimers for transcriptional regulation, we inves- 9Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Vic- tigated USV in neonatal brain-specific Foxp1 KO mice. toria,Australia,10ServicedeGénétiqueClinique,Centrede Foxp1 KO pups had strongly reduced USV and lacked the référence CLAD-Ouest, CHU Rennes, Rennes, France, sex-specific call rate from WT pups, indicating that Foxp1 11Population Health and Immunity Division, The Walter is essential for normal USV. As expression differences of and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Foxp1 or Foxp2 could explain the sex-dimorphic vocali- Victoria,Australia,12AP-HP,HôpitalTrousseau,servicede zation in WT animals, we quantified both proteins in the neuropédiatrie, Paris, France, 13Department of Neurology, striatum and cortex at P7.5 and detected a sex-specific UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital, San Francisco, CA, expression of Foxp2 in the striatum. We further analyzed United States, 14Hôpitaux universitaires de Strasbourg, Foxp1 and Foxp2 expression in the striatum and cortex Strasbourg, France of CD1 mice at different embryonic and postnatal stages and observed sex differences in both genes at E17.5 Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) is the most and P7.5. frequent viable brain malformation in humans, usually Sexhormones,especiallyandrogensareknown toplay detected during the prenatal period by ultrasound. It is a acrucialroleinthesexualdifferentiationofvocalizations widely heterogeneous condition thatcanbeassociated with in many vertebrates. We show that Foxp1 and the a normal or subnormal cognitive development when iso- androgen receptor are co-expressed in striatal medium lated,orwithvariabledegreesofintellectualdisability(ID). spiny neurons and that brain-specific androgen receptor Although mutations in many genes cause syndromic ACC KOmiceexhibitreducedFoxp1expressioninthestriatum with ID, genes accounting for isolated ACC remain largely at E17.5 and P7.5 and an increased Foxp2 level in the unknown. The netrin receptor Dcc (Deleted in Colorectal cortex at P7.5. Thus, androgens may contribute to sex- Cancer)playsacriticalroleinformationofcorpuscallosum specific differences in Foxp1 and Foxp2 expression in mice by guiding callosal axons at the midline. DCC and USV. mutations have previously been associated with mirror Sponsor: Else Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (2013_A212) movements (MM) in humans but not ACC. We used a H.Fröhlich:None.R.Rafiullah:None.N.Schmitt:None. combination of genetic approaches to investigate the cause S. Abele: None. G.A. Rappold: None. of isolated ACC in 4 multigenerational families and 70 sporadic cases. We demonstrate that DCC mutations leading to premature termination codons or altering aminoAbstractsfromthe50thEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 111 acids preferentially located in the netrin binding domain with LIS1, which causes lissencephaly. Mice lacking cause dominant isolated ACC, with or without MM and Wdr47 showed lethality, extensive fibre defects, micro- incomplete penetrance. In individuals with ACC and/or cephaly and sensory-motor gating abnormalities reminis- MM,mutationswereassociatedwithfailureofcorticospinal cent of a patient harbouring mutation in WDR47. We axons to cross at the pyramidal decussation. Interestingly, demonstrated that WDR47 indeed shares functional char- individuals with truncating DCC mutations showed sex- acteristics with LIS1, as it participates in key microtubule- biasedACCorMMphenotypicexpression,possiblyrelated mediated processes. Interestingly, WDR47 specific CTLH to enhanced DCC expression by testosterone during brain domain was associated with functions in autophagy for the development. DCC mutations therefore cause a variable first time in mammals. Silencing WDR47 in hypothalamic phenotype ranging from MM to isolated ACC with a GT1–7 neuronal cells and yeast models independently favorable cognitive development in humans and testoster- recapitulated these findings, demonstrating highly con- one could act as a phenotypic modifier. served mechanisms. Finally, our data identified two A.P.L. Marsh: None. D. Heron: None. T.J. Edwards: WDR47-interacting partners: SCG10 and Reelin. Taken None. A. Quartier: None. A. Rastetter: None. C. Nava: together, these results provide a starting point for studying None.S.Heide:None.B.Keren:None.C.Mignot:None. the implication of WDR proteins in neuronal regulation of C. Garel: None. A. Faudet: None. C. Galea: None. microtubules and autophagy, bringing a new insight to the G.Mcgillivray:None.S.A.Mandelstam:None.S.Odent: biology of corpus callosum. None.M.Bahlo:None.J.Mandel:None.A.Piton:None. B. Yalcin: None. M. Kannan: None. C. Wagner: A. Méneret: None. E. Roze: None. M. Moutard: None. None. M. Ross: None. B. Rinaldi: None. P. Kretz: None. T.Billette:None.E.H.Sherr:None.R.J.Leventer:None. L. McGillewie: None. S. Bär: None. S. Minocha: None. L.J.Richards:None.P.J.Lockhart: None.C.Depienne: C. Po: None. J. Chelly: None. J. Mandel: None. None. R. Borgatti: None. A. Piton: None. S. Collins: None. C. Kinnear: None. Y. Hérault: None. S. Friant: None. C23.4 B. Loos: None. WD40-repeat 47 is essential for brain development via microtubule-mediated processes and autophagy C23.5 ATPase-deficient ATAD3A alters mitochondrial B. Yalcin1, M. Kannan1, C. Wagner1, M. Ross2, B. Rinaldi3, P. Kretz1, dynamics in hereditary spastic paraplegia L. McGillewie4, S. Bär3, S. Minocha5, C. Po6, J. Chelly1, J. Mandel1, R.Borgatti7,A.Piton1,S.Collins8,C.Kinnear4,Y.Hérault1,S.Friant3, R. A. Woldegebriel1, H. M. Cooper2, Y. Yang1, E. A. Ylikallio1, B. Loos9 R. Khairullin3, K. Lin2, L. Euro1, E. Palin1, A. Wolf4, R. Trokovic1, P. Isohanni1, S. Kaakkola1, M. Auranen1, T. Lönnqvist1, S. Wanrooij3, 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2Department of Physiological H. Tyynismaa1 Sciences,StellenboschUniversity,SouthAfrica,3Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, GMGM UMR7156, Strasbourg, 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2Åbo Akademi France, 4SAMRC Centre for Tuberculosis Research, Stel- University, Turku, Finland, 3Umeå University, Umeå, lenbosch, South Africa, 5Center for Integrative Genomics, Sweden, 4Helmholtz-Zentrum Muenchen-German Research Lausanne, Switzerland, 6ICube, UMR 7357, FMTS, Stras- Center for Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Germany bourg, France, 7IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Lecco, Italy, 8Université Bourgogne Franche Comté, Dijon, France, ATAD3A is a mitochondrial inner membrane AAA 9DepartmentofPhysiologicalSciences,Stellenbosch,South ATPase with an unknown precise function. Membrane Africa AAA ATPases form hexameric rings, which are catalyti- callydependentontheco-operationofthesubunits.IfATP ThefamilyofWD40-repeat(WDR)proteinsisoneofthe hydrolysis is blocked in one subunit the entire protein is largestineukaryotesbutlittleisknownabouttheirfunction rendered nonfunctional. ATAD3A was only recently asso- inbrain development.Among26WDR genesassessed,we ciated with inherited human disease when de novo muta- found seven displaying a major impact in neuronal mor- tions were reported in isolated patients presenting with a phology when inactivated in mice. Remarkably, all seven neurological syndrome. On the contrary, we identified genes showed corpus callosum defects, from thicker dominant inheritance of mutant ATAD3A, leading to her- (Atg16l1, Coro1c, Dmxl2 and Herc1), thinner (Kif21b and editary spastic paraplegia (HSP), a disorder of the upper Wdr89)toabsent(Wdr47),revealingacommonimplication motor neurons. The mutation p.G355D in our patients of WDR genes in brain connectivity. We focused on the affects the Walker A motif, which is responsible for ATP poorlystudiedWDR47proteinsharingstructuralhomology bindingintheAAAmoduleofATAD3A.Weshowthatthe112 recombinant mutant ATAD3A protein has a strong 4Institute of Biochemistry I, Medical Faculty, University of dominant-negative effect on the wild type enzyme. We Cologne, Cologne, Germany further observed that the patient fibroblasts with the ATPase-deficient ATAD3A have elongated mitochondria Introduction: Autosomal recessive microcephaly is a rare and substantially increased lysosome mass. These altera- neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by small brain tions were verified to associate with upregulated basal andintellectualdisability.Thedisorderisusuallyassociated autophagy through mTOR inactivation, resembling starva- with aberrant neuronal progenitor cell proliferation, caused tion.Wealsoderivedmotorneuronsthroughdifferentiation by mutation of genes encoding centrosomal proteins. of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells, and Materials and Methods: Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0 observed alterations in mitochondrial network dynamics in and whole exome sequencing (WES) was used to identify the neurons, particularly presenting as elongated mito- regions of homozygosity and rare mutations. Human fetal chondria. We currently focus on transcriptome profiling of brain sections were used for expression analysis. Patient’s the ATAD3A-deficient motor neurons using single cell and control fibroblasts and RPE cells were used for func- RNA sequencing. tional studies. Zebrafish and P19.CL6 cells were used as We present the first dominantly inherited ATAD3A model systems. mutation associated with loss of ATPase activity, inducing Results: We identified a rare homozygous missense muta- mitochondrial elongation. This finding adds ATAD3A to tion in the gene encoding ribosomal RNA-processing pro- the group of mitochondrial inner membrane AAA proteins tein 7 homolog A (RRP7A). Immunostaining showed that associated with spasticity. RRP7A is highly expressed in radial glia cells and motile This work was supported by The Academy of Finland. cilia of the human developing brain, and zebrafish rrp7a R.A. Woldegebriel: None. H.M. Cooper: None. mutants display impaired craniofacial development, small Y. Yang: None. E.A. Ylikallio: None. R. Khairullin: heads and eyes, cell proliferation defects and increased None. K. Lin: None. L. Euro: None. E. Palin: None. apoptosis.Further,P19.CL6 Rrp7amutantstem cellclones A. Wolf: None. R. Trokovic: None. P. Isohanni: None. show defects in neuronal differentiation. At the cellular S. Kaakkola: None. M. Auranen: None. T. Lönnqvist: level, RRP7A localizes to nucleoli, primary cilia, centro- None. S. Wanrooij: None. H. Tyynismaa: None. somes as well as spindle pole bodies during all stages of mitosisinfibroblastsandRPEcells.Themissensemutation C23.6 in patient-derived primary skin fibroblasts causes ribosome Mutation of ribosomal RNA-processing protein 7 biogenesis defects detected by impaired rRNA processing homolog A (RRP7A) cause autosomal recessive as well as cell cycle defects with slower proliferation rate microcephaly with intellectual disability comparedtowild-type cells. Similarly,RPEcellssubjected toRNAi-mediateddepletionofRRP7Adisplayoverlylong M. Farooq1, L. Lindbæk2, N. Krogh1, V. S. Nielsen2, M. Mönnich1, primarycilia,whichareassociatedwithdefectsincellcycle S. Sakthivel1, C. Doganli1, Y. Mang1, A. Fatima3, M. S. Hussain4, entrance. K. Møllgård1, H. Eiberg1, L. Hansen1, K. W. Kjær1, H. Nielsen1, S. M. Conclusions: Impairment of ribosomal RNA processing is Baig3, N. Tommerup1, S. T. Christensen2, L. A. Larsen1 a novel cause of autosomal recessive microcephaly. M. Farooq: None. L. Lindbæk: None. N. Krogh: 1Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Uni- None. V.S. Nielsen: None. M. Mönnich: None. S. Sak- versity of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Depart- thivel: None. C. Doganli: None. Y. Mang: None. ment of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, A. Fatima: None. M.S. Hussain: None. K. Møllgård: Denmark,3Human Molecular GeneticsLaboratory; Health None. H. Eiberg: None. L. Hansen: None. K.W. Kjær: Biotechnology Division, National Institute for Biotechnol- None.H.Nielsen:None.S.M.Baig:None.N.Tommerup: ogy and Genetic Engineering, Faisalabad, Pakistan, None. S.T. Christensen: None. L.A. Larsen: None.