EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)27:689–744 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0405-6 MEETING ABSTRACTS Abstracts from the 2018 European Meeting on Psychosocial Aspects of Genetics ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2019 June 16–19, 2018, Fiera Milano Congressi, Milan Italy Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement was sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was reviewedandapprovedbytheESHGScientificProgrammeCommittee,whichheldfullresponsibilityfortheabstractselections. DisclosureInformation:Inordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing financial interests. :,;)(0987654321 :,;)(0987654321 ContributionsofuptoEUR10000.-(TenthousandEuros,orequivalentvalueinkind)peryearpercompanyareconsidered “Modest”. Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered “Significant”. Oral presentations Weidentified1179articlesofwhich180articlescouldbe included. We identified 169 reasons, 90 reasons for and 79 EBPL1 Hopes and expectations on genome editing reasons against future clinical application of germline genome modification. None of the included articles EBPL1.1 mentioned more than 60/169 reasons. The reasons could The ethics of clinical applications of germline genome becategorisedinto:(i)qualityoflifeofaffectedindividuals; modification:a systematic review of reasons (ii) safety; (iii) effectiveness; (iv) existence of a clinical need or alternative; (v) costs; (vi) effects on homo sapiens I.vanDijke1,2,L. Bosch2, A.L. Bredenord3,M.Cornel1, as a species; (vii) social justice; (viii) potential for misuse; S. Repping2,S. Hendriks2,4 (ix)specialinterestsexercisinginfluence;(x)parentalrights and duties; (xi) comparability to acceptable processes; (xii) 1VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, rights of the unborn child; (xiii) human life and dignity. 2Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Besides the need for biotechnical and clinical studies on Amsterdam, Netherlands, 3University Medical Center Utrecht, safetyandeffectiveness,thereisanevidentneedforasound Utrecht, Netherlands, 4National Institutes of Health, pre-implementation process. The provided overview of all Washington DC, DC, United States reasons will aid in allowing for a systematic and thorough debate on the introduction of germline genome editing. Germline genome modification is still unsafe and insuffi- I. van Dijke: None. L. Bosch: None. A.L. Bredenord: ciently effective for clinical purposes. However, the pro- None. M. Cornel: None. S. Repping: None. gress made using CRISPR-Cas has led scientists to expect S. Hendriks: None. to overcome the technical hurdles in the foreseeable future. This has invited debate on the socio-ethical and legal EBPL1.2 implications.Asystematicoverviewofreasonsforbeingin Enablinginformed opinionsabout germline editingamong favouroragainstgermlinegenomemodificationismissing. the general public: a pilot study We systematically searched ‘Medline/Pubmed’ (January 2011 - June 2016) and included all types of articles except B. Vijlbrief1,R. Hofstra1,K. Doslma2,S.Riedijk1 for original biological research, that covered reasons for or againstclinicalapplicationofintentionalmodificationofthe 1Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, nuclear DNA of the germline. 2Erfocentre, Utrecht, Netherlands690 J.delPicchia Background: The commonness of crispr-cas in the genetic donors) in this study, we analysed relevant informed con- community is in great contrast with the ignorance about it sentformsfocusingoninformationaboutsensitivenatureof among the general public. A lack of initiative from the thestudy,genomicsequencing,andreadabilityoftheforms. geneticcommunitytobridgethisgapmayexplainthis.We Preliminary results show that some content pertaining to aimed to inform the general Dutch public about germline ethically sensitive nature of the study may be misleading, editing and its potential use in the clinic in order to enable which raises doubts whether research participants could informed opinions. have given genuinely informed consent to the study. Methods: Interested lay attendees of an informative Although information about genetic testing was present, afternoon containing three lectures about germline editing whole genome/exome sequencing was not explicitly men- were invited to participate in a survey regarding their tioned. Questions arise whether lack of explicit consent for attitude and opinion towards germline editing before and whole genome/exome sequencing is an adequate practice. after the lectures. A total of 39/66 attendees were included Averagereadinggradelevelofinformedconsentformswas inboththepreandpostafternoonsurvey(agex̅=57years; 13 (SMOG test), which is above the recommended grade 54% completely lay). level of 8. To respect research participants and maintain Results: A shift in attitude towards germline editing in transparency and trust in research, informed consent docu- bothdirectionswasobservedatpost-measurement(P<.01). mentsshouldpresentaccurateinformation.Debatableissues A significant shift (P<.01) was also found in the preferred pertaining to adequacy of content of such documents for source of information; generally from political entities to GLGE studies should be discussed and clarified among professionalgeneticorganizations.Thosefavoringgermline stakeholders, especially given that these studies are of editing used significantly more sources of information than ethically sensitive nature. those opposing (P<.001). At pre-measurement, opposing E. Niemiec: None. H.C. Howard: None. attendees relied on opinions significantly more than those favoring germline editing (P=.05), whereas at the post- EBPL1.4 measurement this ratio flipped. The PRISM-IMPACT study: What are the hopes and Discussion/conclusion: Our pilot study demonstrates a expectations of families and health care professionals significantimpactofthreelecturesaboutgermlineeditingon enrolling in a personalised medicine trial for high risk the attitudes of lay people. After having received informa- childhood cancers? tion, lay people wished the genetic community to take responsibility for informing them about germline editing. J.Vetsch1,2, C.E. Wakefield1,2,K. Tucker3, M.Warby3, This pilot study indicates a leading role for the genetic P.Techakesari1,2,G.Marshall4,1,T.N.Trahair4,1,T.O’Brien4,1, community in educating the public about germline editing. J.M. Marron5,L. Lau4,1, V.Tyrell6,D.Ziegler4,1 B.Vijlbrief:None.R.Hofstra:None.K.Doslma:None. S. Riedijk: None. 1School of Women's and Children's Health, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 2Behavioural Sciences Unit, Kids EBPL1.3 Cancer Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Informedconsentinahumangermlinegeneeditingstudy- Australia, 3Hereditary Cancer Centre, Prince of Wales ethical issues Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 4Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia, 5Department E. Niemiec, H.C.Howard of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children’s Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, 450 Brookline Ave,, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden Boston, MA, United States, 6Children’s Cancer Institute, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, Australia Recent discussions over ethical aspects of germline gene editing (GLGE) tend to focus on its potential clinical Background: The PRISM precision medicine trial uses applications. This may somewhat eclipse the importance of novel technologies (e.g. genomic, in vitro/in vivo drug addressing ethical aspects (e.g. adequacy of research parti- testing) to identify personalised therapies for patients with cipants’ informed consent) of research involving GLGE. high risk childhood cancers. PRISM-Impact aims to pro- Genomic sequencing, which is usually part of such studies spectively assess families’ and health care professionals’ introduces an additional layer of ethical challenges. Ma (HCP)hopes,expectations,andconcernsregardingPRISM. et al. (2017) conducted one of the first studies in which Methods: Patients aged <21 years with a high-risk CRISPR-Cas9wasusedtocorrectageneinviableembryos malignancy(anticipatedsurvivalrate<30%)areeligiblefor createdforthepurposeofthisresearch.Toprovideinsights PRISM. Patients, parents and HCPs opt in to PRISM- into information provided to research participants (gamete Impact and complete surveys upon enrolment (T0), afterAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 691 results delivery (T1), and then annually for five years (T2- concomitantincreaseingenerating,validatingandreporting 5). HCP will be interviewed annually. secondary findings, and increasing use of multidisciplinary Results:Todate,17familiesand28HCPshaveoptedin. teams involving new professional groups or existing Eleven parents (8 mothers) and three adolescents have professionals in novel ways. Together these highlight returnedsurveysand23HCPswereinterviewed.Aminority potentialchangestothescopeofthedutyofcareinclinical ofparentsexpecteda‘verylikely’-‘extremelylikely’benefit genomics (e.g. a potential duty to feedback secondary from PRISM (4/11). At T0, most parents and adolescents findings); by whom (e.g. by non-clinicians) and to whom expected that their child’s chance of being cured would such a duty might be owed (e.g. to genetic relatives). increase (7/11) and that they would learn something about Although the presentation will primarily focus on UK their child’s genes (9/11). Most parents indicated that they case law, this provides a precedent for a more general understood well what PRISM was about (6/11). Most exploration of legal duties to patients and families and the parents also believed that PRISM would help find cures for aim will be to clarify how such risks might be ameliorated future patients (10/11). Eighteen percent of HCPs believed and inform the development of best practice. that patients will benefit the most from PRISM and 40% of A.E. Hall: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- HCPs believed that future patients will benefit the most. cant; PHG Foundation. J. Ordish: A. Employment (full or Conclusion: At enrolment, families’ hopes of a benefit are part-time); Significant; PHG Foundation. high. Through PRISM-Impact, we will identify barriers to, and predictors of, application of precision medicine trials EBPL2.2 into clinical practice. Our results are important for future Concerns about genetic discrimination after regulation: a trials across illnesses and age groups. qualitative study of the situation regarding BRCA and J. Vetsch: None. C.E. Wakefield: None. K. Tucker: Huntington’s disease in Belgium None. M. Warby: None. P. Techakesari: None. G. Marshall: None. T.N. Trahair: None. T. O’ Brien: A. Wauters,I.Van Hoyweghen None. J.M. Marron: None. L. Lau: None. V. Tyrell: None. D. Ziegler: None. KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium Despite not having unequivocal evidence for genetic dis- EBPL2 The legal side of Genomic Care crimination and laws that have installed prohibition of genetic discrimination, individuals confronting genetic dis- EBPL2.1 easestillseemtobeconcerned.Theaimofthisstudywasto The evolving duty of care in clinical genomics under gain in-depth understandingof experiences and concerns of UK law possible genetic discrimination. This paper presents an analysis of semi-structured interviews with 42 individuals A. E.Hall, J.Ordish whohave,hadorwereatriskforbreast-andovariancancer (BRCA) or Huntington’s disease (HD) in Belgium. Our PHG Foundation, Cambridge, United Kingdom findings demonstrate that even after regulation, participants express concerns about possible genetic discrimination. Technological changes coupled with new ways of working These concerns relate to direct forms of genetic dis- have created opportunities for new paradigms of treatment crimination, as in the context of insurance and employment and care in clinical genomics. This presentation explores but concerns were also expressed about more subtle and emergent challenges – specifically the extent to which indirect forms of genetic discrimination, e.g. in social rela- existing duties of care might be modified or new duties tions, where individuals fear to be treated ‘differently’ and created in the light of recent UK case law. The three cases unfairly. Worries for these rather subtle forms of genetic which will be explored exemplify three foundational ele- discriminationaremoredifficulttoprotectbylaw.Ourstudy ments of genomics practice: consent [Montgomery (Appel- further demonstrates how these concerns emerge at parti- lant) v Lanarkshire Health Board (Respondent) (Scotland) cularmomentsinlife,howlevelsandformsofconcernsare [2015]]; confidentiality [ABC v St George’s Healthcare influenced by the specific genetic disorder, and how these NHS Trust and Others (UK)[2017]] and the reporting of concerns are grounded in previous discriminatory experi- findings [Meadows v Khan [2017]]. ences (of others), stereotype thinking and being part of a The particular features that will be explored characterise familywithageneticillness.Furthermore,ithasbeenshown the transition from genetics to genomics and include the that participants apply differentstrategies to copewith their widening scope of testing from targeted testing to whole concerns (e.g. selectively disclosing genetic information). exome sequencing/whole genome sequencing; the A. Wauters: None. I. Van Hoyweghen: None.692 J.delPicchia EBPL2.3 J.Savard1,2,C. Hickerton3,S.Metcalfe3,4,B. Terrill2,5, Life insurance and genetic discrimination: A barrier for A. Newson1,2, C.Gaff4, K.Gray4,A.Middleton6,B. Wilson7 genomic medicine in Australia 1The University of Sydney, Camperdown, Australia, 2Garvan J.M. Tiller Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, Australia, 3MurdochChildren'sResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia, Public Health Genomics, School of Public Health and 4The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5The Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, University of New South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 6Society Australia and Ethics Research, Connecting Science, Welcome Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 7The University of Introduction: Genetic discrimination by life-insurers Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada remains an issue of international concern, with many Eur- opeancountriesbanningtheiruseofgenetictestresults.The Personal genomic testing (PGT) for multiple purposes are Australian situation, by contrast, is concerning and should marketedtoostensiblyhealthypeople.Interestinthesetests notedbyEuropeancountriesasareminderofthecontinued has significantly expanded in recent years, blurring importance of this issue. Australian life-insurance compa- boundaries between medical, ‘wellness’ and ‘recreational’ nies can still use genetic test results to discriminate, with genomic testing. scant regulatory oversight[1]. As a result, Australians are AspartofourGeniozproject,in2017weconductednine now avoiding predictive gene testing, and participation in public deliberative workshops Australia-wide, involving research, due to insurance fears[2-4]. The life-insurance 129 participants with (n=23) and without (n=106) industry is under scrutiny by a Parliamentary Inquiry[5], experience of testing. We aimed to explore non-expert while Australia moves towards implementing genomic perspectives on PGT. Drawing on earlier survey and medicine[6, 7]. Regulatory reform is now overdue[8]. interview data, we selected three categories of testing for Genetics professionals play a key role. exploration: ancestry (n=61), personal wellness (n=34), Materials and Methods: On behalf of the Australian and children’s health and aptitudes (n=34). Genetic Non-Discrimination Working Group, we present Four stepwise, neutrally-framed information sets were evidence from a) official submissions to the Parliamentary presented pertaining to key scientific and ethical issues in Inquiry regarding genetic discrimination; b) results from a PGT, with time for facilitated discussion. Data were survey of over 85 Australasian clinical geneticists and captured using mixed methods approach. We report the genetic counsellors regarding professional practices and results of: tracker questions from 5 time points in the attitudes under current regulation; c) results from a survey workshops; participant attitudes regarding information of over 100 Australian cancer mutation carriers regarding consumers should know about personal genomic tests; experiences obtaining life-insurance. andathematicanalysisofdiscussionsandwrittenresponses Results: Findings show evidence of genetic discrimina- by participants. tionbylife-insurancecompaniesinAustralia,andidentified Tracker question data registered trends of participants considerable variability in professional practices and work- becoming less comfortable with and more thoughtful about force training on the issue. The Parliamentary Inquiry will pursuing testing. Discussions and written responses make its official recommendations for reform in March reflected this change, with participants identifying ethically 2018, which we will update. complex issues (about consent, family communication and Conclusions: The Australian situation regarding genetic privacy) that aligned with information they rated as testing and life-insurance demonstrates the dangers of important to know when considering PGT. failing to regulate as many European countries have done This published deliberative methodology highlights a and serves as a timely reminder of the importance of useful public engagement strategy, demonstrating that non- continuing vigilance regarding this issue. experts can contribute to meaningful conversations about J.M. Tiller: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; the decision to pursue PGT. These findings can inform myDNA- legal consulting. policyandresourcestohelppeoplecriticallyreflectsothey can make informed decisions around PGT. EBPL2.4 J. Savard: None. C. Hickerton: None. S. Metcalfe: Working with the public: engaging with consumers about None. B. Terrill: Other; Modest; Genome.One. the ethics of and decision to pursue personal genomic A. Newson: None. C. Gaff: None. K. Gray: None. testing A. Middleton: None. B. Wilson: None.Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 693 EPL1 Ensuring good clinical practice in whole genome GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States sequencing Introduction: Exome sequencing (ES) is often ordered on EPL1.1 patients with complex phenotypes and non-diagnostic prior Knowledge about and attitudes towards whole-genome testing.WesurveyedclinicianstodeterminehowESisutilized, sequencing among participants in the 100,000 Genomes its impact on medical management, and overall outcomes. Project: a multi-site survey Methods: Participants completed either two IRB- approved prospective surveys (four-weeks and one-year S. C.Sanderson, C.Lewis,L. C. Chitty after ES report) or one retrospective survey (one-year after ES report). Surveys examined demographics, results inter- Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom pretation, and medical management following ES. Results: Of 1064 surveys sent, 249 were completed (139 Introduction:Patientswithrarediseasesandtheirrelatives prospective, 98 retrospective, 12 follow-up); 23% response will increasingly be offered diagnostic whole-genome rate. Respondents were mostly female (64%), Caucasian sequencing (WGS). Our aim was to examine knowledge (89%),eitherphysicians(64%)orgeneticcounselors(34%), and attitudes among families who had been offered WGS. andordered>3EStests/month(76%).Priortestingincluded Materials and Methods: A questionnaire was adminis- microarray, imaging, and metabolic screening. Of 163/249 tered to patients and relatives (n=220) who had been cases with reportable variants, 48% of clinicians said result invited to take part in the 100,000 Genomes Project. The explainedpatient’sphenotype,33%wereuncertain,and19% survey instrument included the 9-item Knowledge of thought itdid notexplain the phenotype.In42% ofcases,a Genome Sequencing (KOGS) scale and a 14-item attitudes molecular diagnosis was established via ES. In 27% of measure,bothofwhichwerenewlydevelopedforthisstudy. inpatient cases (14/51), ES result impacted length of Results: Ninety-four (43%) participants were patients hospitalization. In 34% of cases, the ES result clarified the with rare diseases, 126 (57%) parents/relatives; 62% patient's prognosis. Overall, participants rated clinical female; mean age 45yrs (range 16-79yrs); 48% had a usefulness of ES testing 80/100. In select families, 69% of degree; 83% White British. The mean KOGS score was clinicianssaidtheESresultimpactedfamilyplanning.After 5.05 (0=low knowledge, 9=high knowledge). On ES result, 27% of retrospective families found a family individual items, most (85.5%) understood that “a person’s supportnetwork,33%contactedresearchgroups,29%joined genome is their body’s ‘instruction manual’ containing the research studies, and 10% participated in clinical trials. information needed to make them, run them and repair Conclusion: Clinicians rated ES clinical utility highly them.”Fewer(57.7%)understoodthat“thereareuncertain- and used results to guide medical management. ES ties about what a person’s genome can tell them.” In terms impacted hospitalization times, clarified prognoses, family of attitudes, most believed WGS could identify the under- planning, and establishing family support. lyingcauseoftheircondition(89.5%)andadvancemedical K. McWalter: A. Employment (full or part-time); research(99.5%).Someworriedaboutinsurancecompanies Significant; GeneDx. M. Cho: A. Employment (full or (20.5%) and commercial companies (13.2%) having access part-time); Significant; GeneDx. J. Juusola: A. Employ- to their health information; more (29.1%) were worried ment (full or part-time); Significant; GeneDx. about how they would feel if they learned they had a high risk of developing a serious disease. Few differences EPL1.3 between socio-demographic groups were detected. Motivations and Barriers for participants and decliners of Conclusions: These findings may be of value to the 100,000 Genomes Project from different ethnic researchers, clinicians and policy-makers involved in backgrounds developing WGS protocols and information materials for patients and their families. N.Chauhan1,2,S. Ellis1,3,K. Tricker4,W.Newman1,4, S.C. Sanderson: None. C. Lewis: None. L.C. B. Starling4,5,G.Hall1,4 Chitty: None. 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, EPL1.2 2Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, A clinician survey: diagnostic utility, impact on patient UnitedKingdom,3NHSGreaterGlasgowandClyde,Glasgow, management, and outcomes of clinical exome sequencing United Kingdom, 4Central Manchester University Hospitals, Manchester, United Kingdom, 5Wellcome Trust Manchester, K. McWalter, M.Cho,J.Juusola Manchester, United Kingdom694 J.delPicchia Introduction: Using genomic testing in medicine is aspects of patient and familial utility. We administered increasingly establishing a role in clinical services. The surveys to patients receiving either germline or somatic 100,000 Genomes Project (100kGP) is offering Whole genomic sequencing as part of their clinical care pathway. GenomeSequencing(WGS)topatientsincentresacrossthe To date, response rates are 70% (566/805) at baseline and U.K. Our research aim is to explore the motivations and 48%(116/240)atfollow-up,with62%(72/116)responding barriers faced by people from different ethnic backgrounds atfollow-upforthemselves and38%(44/116)as parents of and decliners of this project. a child. Although all (47/47) with a diagnosis or actionable Method: 14 people were interviewed for this study, 13 mutation correctly recalled their result, 8/26 (31%) cancer participants and 1 decliner; 8-White British, 4-Asian, 1- patients and 3/35 (9%) germline patients with an unin- Mixed race and 1- Unknown. This qualitative research formative result were unsure or incorrect. Those who utilised semi-structured interviews, conducted face-to-face obtained a diagnosis/actionable mutation had a significant oron thetelephone.Datawas analysedusing Interpretative increase in perceived personal control (empowerment) Phenomenological Analysis. (1.064v1.463,p<0.001),butthiswasnotevidentforthose Results: Our participants have often experienced a people who did not (1.064 v 0.989, p = 0.3). Interestingly, previous 'diagnostic odyssey'. Most were motivated to results with clinical utility may be not always be viewed participatetopotentiallygain agenetic diagnosisortohelp positively by patients. 7/104 (7%) participants exhibited others if this wasn't personally attainable. Participants also decision regret, including 3 cancer patients with clinically shared some barriers to participation; a link between non- actionable findings. Furthermore, 17 patients reported native language and trust, impact of cultural and religious unanticipated consequences, with two who did not obtain a beliefs on decision making; lack of education and diagnosis surprised this was not the end of investigations. awareness, ‘bad’ timing' and an overwhelming amount of Differences between test outcomes valued by patients information received. were evident across the 11 clinical subgroups and will Conclusions: Very little is known about why we see bedetailed.Thoughgenerallypositive,ourresultsshedlight fewerpeoplefromminoritygroupsutilisinggeneticservices on those who may need greater attention and contribute to in the UK. This also applies to the views of those who debateaboutmeasurementofpatientoutcomesingenomics. declined to participate in this kind of research. Our study M. Martyn: None. A. Kanga-Parabia: None. providesaninsightintotheneedsofparticipants,whichcan L. Keogh: None. A. Trainer: None. C.L. Gaff: None. beutilisedtosupportpotentialparticipantstogainaccessto geneticservices.Thefindingsfromthisstudyformastrong EPL1.5 base for future research and outline valuable clinical Reproductive and heteronormative presumptions in recommendationsthatcouldbeusedtomotivatetheuptake disclosure of pediatric whole exome sequencing results of genetic services. N. Chauhan: None. S. Ellis: None. K. Tricker: None. A. Werner-Lin,S. Merrill, R.Mueller, M.Carlson, L.Zaspel, W. Newman: None. B. Starling: None. G. Hall: None. S. Walser,S.Biswas, B. Bernhardt EPL1.4 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States Patient perspectives after genomic sequencing testing in clinical care Introduction: Whole exome sequencing (WES) can iden- tify variants associated with future reproductive risk. M.Martyn1,2,3,A. Kanga-Parabia1,3, L.Keogh3,A. Trainer4,5, Though fully informed reproductive decision-making is of Melbourne GenomicsHealth Alliance Community Advisory potential benefit, research has not explored the potential Group,C. L. Gaff1,3 negativeimpactonautonomyorself-esteem,particularlyin pediatric settings. Consideration of how reproductively 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, VIC, relevant pediatric WES results are relayed and received is Australia, 2Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, critical to inform best practices. VIC, Australia, 3The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, Methods: Adolescents with hearing loss, personal/family Australia, 4Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Parkville, VIC, historyofcardiacconditions,andplateletdisorderscompleted Australia, 5Melbourne Health, Parkville, VIC, Australia WES for a research protocol. Beyond diagnostic results, familiescouldopttoreceiveincidentalfindingsformedically Studies of clinical utility have demonstrated the medical actionable childhood disorders, adult onset disorders, and/or impact of genomic sequencing tests on the management of carrierstatus.Aninterdisciplinaryteamanalyzedaudiofilesof patientswithgermlineorsomaticdisorders.Here,wereport 10resultsdisclosuresessionspairedwiththree-monthfollow- results of the first pre- and post-test study investigating up interviews with parents and patients.Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 695 Findings: Regardless of patient age, providers implicitly Materials and Methods: With input from young people and explicitly conveyed that WES findings, primarily we developed a 2.5 minute animation about whole-genome carrier status results, necessitated active family planning. sequencing, “My Genome Sequence,” which is freely At follow-up, parents and adolescents repeated these availableonYouTube(https://goo.gl/ogkzYA).Todevelop messages. In all sessions, provider language revealed thenew10-itemmeasureofYoungPeople’sKnowledgeof assumptions that adolescents planned on both marriage to Genome Sequencing (the “Kids-KOGS ”) we conducted opposite-sex partners and biological parenthood. Providers qualitative interviews, reviewed 100,000 Genomes Project counseled,andadolescentsrepeated,pre-conception testing patient information and consent documents and other offuturepartnersand,inonecase,pre-implantationgenetic published literature. We piloted the measure with young diagnosis, to prevent the birth of an affected child. No people to ensure readability. Finally, we showed the provider queried patient sexual orientation or intent to animation to young people (n=417) aged 11-17yrs at partner or reproduce. three UK schools. Participants completed the Kids-KOGS Conclusions: Providers suggested adolescents prevent and a subjective knowledge measure before and after the birth of an affected child by avoiding unplanned watching the animation. pregnancy through utilization of prenatal testing and/or Results: Objective knowledge was higher after viewing reproductive technologies. These messages implicitly the animation: mean Kids-KOGS scores increased from challenged adolescents’ self-worth during a critical period 4.68 to 7.88 (t=26.52, p=0.000009), where 0=low and of identity development and challenged future reproductive 10=high knowledge. Mean subjective knowledge scores choicebyintroducingmoralimperativesaroundresponsible also increased, from 2.01 to 2.27 (possible range 1-3) (t= genomic citizenship. 9.86, p=1.06X10-20). A. Werner-Lin: A. Employment (full or part-time); Conclusion: We have developed a 2.5 minute animation Significant; University of Pennsylvania. B. Research Grant and10-itemknowledgemeasurethatmaybevaluabletools (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and for healthcare providers and researchers working with pending grants as well as grants already received); young people in the area of whole-genome sequencing. Significant;NationalInstitutesofHealth.S.Merrill:None. C. Lewis: None. S.C. Sanderson: None. L.S. R. Mueller: None. M. Carlson: None. L. Zaspel: None. Chitty: None. S. Walser: None. S. Biswas: None. B. Bernhardt: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already EPL2 Improving communication in genetic counselling received); Significant; National Institutes of Health. EPL2.1 EPL1.6 'Music of Life' a new metaphor for genomics, delivered as Facilitating understanding of whole genome sequencing in film within genetic counselling young people A. Middleton1,J. Borra2, T.Pope3,V.Wiles4,J.Roberts1, C. Lewis1,2,S. C.Sanderson1,2,L. S.Chitty1,2 L.Farley1,I.Turbin4,A.O’Shaughnessy-Kirwan4,F.Wadrup4, S. Kenwrick4,B. Speight4,E. Davies4,J.Matthews-Kelly4, 1NorthEastThamesRegionalGeneticsService,GreatOrmond S. Wilcox4,M.Farrer4,H.Pierce4,L. Hughes4,A.Taylor4 Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 2Genetics and Genomic Medicine, The UCL 1ConnectingScience,WellcomeGenomeCampus,Cambridge, GreatOrmondStreetInstituteofChildHealth,London,United UnitedKingdom,2ThinAirFactory,London,UnitedKingdom, Kingdom 3Black Label Productions, London, United Kingdom, 4Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom Introduction: Young people with rare diseases are increasingly having whole-genome sequencing for diag- Introduction:Themetaphorscurrentlyusedwithingenetic nostic purposes. To make informed decisions, they need counsellingpracticetodescribegeneticsconceptshavevery adequateknowledge,butsuitabledecision-supporttoolsare little evidence that underpin their use. Using creative story lacking,asarerelevantknowledgemeasures.Youngpeople telling expertise and cutting-edge film making, we have in the general public also need adequate knowledge to made a series of films that aim to socialise genomics for engage in public discourse. The aims of this study were to patients; these will be delivered and evaluated within develop a new educational tool and knowledge measure genetic counselling practice. aboutwhole-genomesequencingforusewithyoungpeople, Materials and Methods: An iterative series of 4 and to evaluate the impact of the intervention. workshops were conducted with the team of 13 genetic696 J.delPicchia counsellors from Addenbrooke’s Hospital Cambridge. Led Materials and Methods: Data was collected with by an expert from the creative storytelling industry validated questionnaires from 2502 counselees on three (collaborator: Thin Air Factory), we gathered feedback different time-points: before genetic counseling started from genetic counselling experts on their use of existing (T0), after the intake (T1) and after the results were metaphors and explored the development of a new communicated (T2). Questionnaires were the GCOS-18 metaphor about genomics that they perceived would cross (empowerment and different facets), PPC (perceived cultures, span generations and be meaningful to all socio- personal control), STAI (state anxiety) and PANAS demographic groups of patients. (positive and negative emotions). Results: The ‘music oflife’ concept emerged through an Results:ComparedtoT0,thereweresignificantbutsmall inductive process of discussion and debate. The concept: improvements in most outcome measures on T1 and T2. Song = Gene, Notes in a song = DNA, Album = Exceptions were a moderate increase in empowerment Chromosome. Changes to the notes within a song could (d=.52) anda large decreasein uncertaintyabout heredity representthevariation between us.This metaphor hasbeen (d=.67). Regarding subgroups, outcomes of genetic used as the basis to create 6, 90 sec films: ‘what is gene?’, counseling were significantly associated with referral ‘recessive’, ‘dominant’, ‘X-linked’, ‘de novo’ and ‘out- reason, type of disease and genetic test result, while comes from a diagnostic test’. We will show the films and socio-demographic variables were not. Conclusion: Coun- present preliminary findings from their delivery and selees in our sample experienced the strongest gains in evaluation within genetic counselling practice. empowerment, most explained by decreased uncertainty Conclusions:Wehavefoundanewmetaphortodescribe about heredity. Other facets of empowerment (like knowl- genomics with patients. edge,hope,negativeemotions)andotheroutcomemeasures Grant: Translation Fund, Biodata Innovation Centre, (like state anxiety) changed less. This study provides more Wellcome Genome Campus, Cambridge insightintheblackboxofgeneticcounselinganditsdesired A. Middleton: None. J. Borra: A. Employment (full or outcomes plus which subgroups profit more and where part-time);Significant;ThinAirFactoryFounder.T.Pope: improvements are possible. A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;BlackLabel J.S. Voorwinden: None. M. Plantinga: None. Productions Film Director. V. Wiles: None. J. Roberts: M. Ausems: None. N. Knoers: None. M. Velthuizen: None. L. Farley: None. I. Turbin: None. A. O’Shaugh- None. E. Birnie: None. A.M. Lucassen: None. nessy-Kirwan: None. F. Wadrup: None. S. Kenwrick: A.V. Ranchor: None. I.M. van Langen: None. None. B. Speight: None. E. Davies: None. J. Matthews- Kelly: None. S. Wilcox: None. M. Farrer: None. EPL2.3 H. Pierce: None. L. Hughes: None. A. Taylor: None. Improving communication for individuals with a rare condition EPL2.2 A large outcome study on genetic counseling in the A. L.Crowe, H.McAneney, J.C. McMullan, A.McKnight Netherlands: empowerment and emotional functioning Centre for Public Health, Queen’s University Belfast c/o J.S. Voorwinden1,M.Plantinga1, M.Ausems2,N.Knoers2, Regional Genetics Centre, Level A, Tower Block, Belfast City M.Velthuizen2,E. Birnie1, A.M.Lucassen3,A. V. Ranchor1, Hospital, Lisburn Road, BT9 7AB, Belfast, United Kingdom I.M.van Langen1 Introduction:Onein17individualsintheUKareaffected 1UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands, 2UMCU, Utrecht, by a rare condition, with ~80% having a genetic cause. Netherlands, 3University of Southampton, Southampton, Major local problems include a lack of accurate diagnosis, United Kingdom no clarity about specialist care, a lack of coordinated approach, medical professionals who have not heard of the Introduction: More evidence based research to understand disease, and challenges sourcing relevant therapies. how genetic counseling is experienced by counselees, as Alongside our newly implemented whole genome sequen- compared to the goals/objectives of counseling viewed by cing programme to improve rare disease diagnosis, itsproviders,isneeded.Theaimofthisstudyistomeasure improving complementary communication mechanisms in these outcomes including empowerment and emotional the health and social care system is of vital importance. functioningforalargeanddiverseDutchstudysampleand Materials and Methods: A review of existing informa- associate these with socio-demographic and clinical tionandcommunicationresourcesforindividualslivingand variables. working with rare diseases was held in Northern Ireland between January 2017 and February 2018. StrategiesAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 697 included three surveys, five public consultation meetings, psychiatry.EachpatientwasaskedtocompletetheGenetic and individual interviews with a range of stakeholders. CounsellingOutcomeScale(GCOS-24),priortoaone-hour Using the DELPHI model, priorities for improving com- genetic counselling session. Patients were then asked to munication were identified and consensus achieved. complete the GCOS-24 at a four week (post counselling) Results: More than 500 individuals engaged with the follow up telephone appointment. process and contributed to identifying >60 priority needs, Results:Participantsreportedasignificantincreaseinself alongside evaluating strengths/barriers to implementing efficacy and empowerment over their illness post this improved communication strategies. Identified priorities genetic counselling intervention. were categorised under the following four headings: (i) Conclusions:Inlinewithpreviousdata(Austin&Honer sources of information, (ii) medical care, (iii) rare disease 2008; Hippman et al. 2016) this study demonstrates that community, and (iv) public awareness. genetic counselling has a positive impact on this patient Conclusions: Developing an effective information hub group and is considered both an acceptable and useful for rare diseases in Northern Ireland was the top-ranked addition to their usual psychiatric care . strategicpriorityfromallindividualandcollectiveinforma- M.S. Watson: None. K.A. McGhee: None. J.C. tion procurement strategies. Austin: None. ALC is supported by a PhD studentship from the Department for the Economy. This work was conducted EPL2.5 in collaboration with the Northern Ireland Department of Bridgingthegapsofuncertaintyingeneticcounsellingwith Health,thePublicHealthAgency,andtheNorthernIreland ethnic-specific data Rare Disease Partnership. A.L.Crowe: None.H.McAneney: None.J.C. McMul- Y. M.Bylstra1,2, J.Kuan1,3, W.Lim1,4, B.Digambar5,J. Teo1, lan: None. A. McKnight: None. S. Davila1,4, B.Teh1,4,6, S.Rozen1,4, E.Tan3,W.Meng3,4, K. Yeo5,P. Tan1,4,7,S. Saw8,9,4,C.Cheng9,4,S. Cook1,5,4, EPL2.4 R. Foo8,4, S.Jamuar1,3,4 Empowering service users: Assessing the potential benefits of psychiatric genetic counselling from the 1st UK pilot 1Singhealth Duke-NUS Institute of Precision Medicine, study Singapore, Singapore, 2National University Hospital, Singapore,Singapore,3KKWomen’sandChildren’sHospital, M.S. Watson1, K.A. McGhee2,J.C. Austin3 Singapore,Singapore,4Duke-NUSMedicalSchool,Singapore, Singapore, 5National Heart Centre Singapore, Singapore, 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United Singapore, 6National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore, Kingdom, 2Bournemouth University, Bournemouth, United 7Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore, Kingdom, 3University Of British Columbia, Southampton,BC, Singapore, 8National University of Singapore, Singapore, Canada Singapore, 9Singapore National Eye Centre, Singapore, Singapore Introduction:PsychiatricGeneticCounselling(PGC)isan emerging specialty within the genetic counselling profes- Uncertainty is intrinsic to genetic counselling and whilst sion. The world's first specialist PGC service was estab- genomicsequencingisvaluableinmedicaldiagnosis,italso lished inVancouver 2012,providinggeneticcounsellingto brings uncertainty regarding clinical utility. Human geno- individuals with mental illness and their families. Psychia- mic variant databases assist with variant interpretation tricdisordershavebothageneticandnon-geneticaetiology. however they contain information derived largely from This study aimed to ascertain whether British patients with European origin. In under-served populations, the mentalillnesswouldwelcomesuchaserviceandafterPGC challenges experienced in understanding genomic variant report an increase in self-efficacy, empowerment over their significance are further pronounced. The SingHealth Duke- illness and a reduction in stigma. NUS Institute of Precision Medicine (PRISM) was estab- Materials and Methods: Patients (n=10) with a lishedtopromoteprecisionmedicineformedicalconditions diagnosis of schizophrenia, bipolar or depression, under relevant to South East Asian populations, currently an the care of Dorset Healthcare University Foundation Trust under-represented cohort. To identify disease-causing var- wereinvitedbytheirpsychiatriststoparticipateinagenetic iants within the Singaporean population, existing exome counselling session, led by a genetic counsellor (Wessex and genome sequencing data of 831 Singaporeans with no Regional Genetics Service). The session was a clinical knownpre-existinghealthconditionswereaggregated.This intervention similar to that offered for a referral for any evolving dataset serves as a valuable reference for under- disease with a hereditary component, but specific to standing genomic variant significance for the Singaporean698 J.delPicchia population. In the first instance, we chose to define the messages/interpretations; and has a mixed media section prevalence of 80 treatable inherited disorders (TIDs). containing ‘tips’ for communicating with relatives. Genomic variant filtering and analysis identified 1 in 18 Discussion: We have previously demonstrated that individuals(6%)tobecarriersofoneof13treatablecauses current methods employed to alert relatives miss a of intellectual disability. Citrin deficiency and Wilson dis- significant group of at-risk relatives. myKinMatters could ease had the highest carrier frequency of 1 in 41, and 1 in provide a useful additional tool for clinicians to offer 103 individuals, respectively. In addition, the pathogenic patients and will facilitate relatives to make informed variants associated with citrin deficiency were 24 times decisionsabouttheirowntesting,screeningprogrammes,or more prevalent in our local cohorts when compared to preventativetreatment.Wearenowtestingtheusabilityand Western cohorts. The development of this framework has acceptabilityoftheappwithpatientswhorecentlyreceived enabled the discovery of novel pathogenic variants to a genetic test result and specialist and non-specialist health optimise diagnosis and carrier risk assessment in genetic professionals. counselling practice. This research adds further evidence Grant information: Wessex Medical Research Innova- that ethnic-specific data is necessary for variant interpreta- tion Fund was awarded to Dr Dheensa. tion and genetic counselling. L.M. Ballard: None. S. Dheensa: None. M. Weal: Y.M.Bylstra:None.J.Kuan:None.W.Lim:None.B. None. A. Fenwick: None. A. Lucassen: None. Digambar:None.J.Teo:None.S.Davila:None.B.Teh: None.S.Rozen:None.E.Tan:None.W.Meng:None.K. Yeo:None.P.Tan:None.S.Saw:None.C.Cheng:None. EPL3 Educating Professionals and Public S. Cook: None. R. Foo: None. S. Jamuar: None. EPL3.1 EPL2.6 ‘What is genomics as I’ve never heard of it?’: The myKinMatters: developing a web app tool to help patients challenges of identifying the education needs around an create a family tree and communicate genetic health emerging clinical area information to at-risk relatives M.Bishop1,S. Simpson1,H.Brown2, Y.Sawbridge2,A. Seller1 L. M.Ballard1,S.Dheensa2,1,M. Weal3,A. Fenwick1, A. Lucassen1 1Genomics Education Programme, Edgbaston, United Kingdom, 2University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, United 1Clinical Ethics and Law, University of Southampton, Kingdom Southampton, United Kingdom, 2Cardiff School of Social Sciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3Web In October 2018, a new genomic medicine service in Eng- Science Institute, University of Southampton, Southampton, land’sNationalHealthService(NHS)willlaunch,bringing United Kingdom with it a need for education and training across the 1.3 million workforce. Health Education England’s Genomics Introduction: The result of an individual’s genomic test EducationProgrammehastakentwoapproachestoidentify can clarify risks for close relatives, but research has shown theeducationalneedsacrossthislargeanddiversegroupto that patients do not always communicate their results to inform our development priorities. First, we surveyed, via those to whom it is relevant. Research suggests that certain our network inthe Genomic Medicine Centres, 2,578 NHS groups of patients want more information and help through employees, representing all professional groups. While the online sources. Our aim was to increase rates of commu- results did reveal knowledge and skill gaps, it was difficult nication by developing a Web app tool, making sharing to determine clear themes for content owing to the broad genetic information easier. variety of responses. In addition, many professionals stated Methods:AprototypeWebapptoolwasbuiltusingopen they had no or limited knowledge of genomics and as such source software frameworks (Laravel 5, MySQL), which couldn’t define the education or training they’d require. allowed patients to build a family tree and upload test Secondly, we conducted an exploratory study focused on results to share with at-risk relatives. This tool has been twopatientpathways wheregenomics isintegratedintothe designedtobeembeddedinanexistingeHealthrecord(My patient pathway (ovarian cancer and familial hypercholes- Medical Record). terolaemia). Contact-point mapping was undertaken to Results: myKinMatters enables: patients and health identifytheprofessionalsinvolved,and19individualswere professionals to draw a family tree highlighting who has a interviewed. Transcripts were analysed using thematic condition and who might be at risk; patients to upload test analysis,revealingthreekeythemes:forcontenttofocuson results and share these with relatives with accompanying skills (e.g. communication) rather than scientificAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 699 knowledge; to educate within a multidisciplinary environ- countries in Europe responded. Results showed that most ment to help staff consider their role in the context of the genetic counsellors in Europe perform similar tasks, irre- patientpathway;andtoensurecontentisdirectlyrelevantto spective of their backgrounds. The main factor influencing individuals’ practice. The findings from these studies have what tasks genetic counsellors’ do was the years of highlighted the complexity of identifying the educational experience in the field, not background nor education. needs of such a broad group, and demonstrate the impor- Genetic counsellors and medical geneticists agreed regard- tanceofintegratingdatafrommultipleapproachestobuilda ing the genetic counsellor’s role. Tasks with psychosocial picture of the genomics education landscape. implications were mainly seen as genetic counsellors’ role M.Bishop:None.S. Simpson:None.H.Brown:None. and tasks with medical implications were seen as medical Y. Sawbridge: None. A. Seller: None. geneticists’ attribution. Our study shows that most genetic counsellors work in tune with international recommenda- EPL3.2 tions and support working in multidisciplinary teams. Genetic counsellors’ clinical practice in Europe: a mixed Finally, we discuss potential implications for practice and method assessment/approach on their contribution training in genetic counselling. C. Ingvoldstad: None. C. Cordier: None. R. Moldo- C. Ingvoldstad1,2,3,C. Cordier4,R. Moldovan5,M.Paneque6,7, van: None. M. Paneque: None. R. Pestoff: None. C. R. Pestoff8,9,C.Serra-Juhé10,11 Serra-Juhé: None. 1Dept of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, EPL3.3 Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Stockholm, Sweden, Clinical Genetics Educational external assessment (EQA)- 2Department of Public Health and Caring Science, Uppsala assuring improvement in the Clinical Service University, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Department of Women´s and children´s health, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, R. H.Hastings1,C. vanRavenswaaij-Arts2,C. vanAsperen3, 4Synlab Genetics, Department of Genetics, Lausanne, L. Garavelli4,M.Neilsen3, B.Peterlin5,K. Writzl5 Switzerland, 5Department of Psychology, Babeş-Bolyai University, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 6i3S Instituto de 1Oxford University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Oxford, Investigação e Inovação em Saúde, Universidade do Porto, United Kingdom, 2Dept of Clinical Genetics, Faculty of Porto, Portugal, 7Centre for Predictive and Preventive Medical Sciences, Groningen, Netherlands, 3Dept of Clinical Genetics CGPP- IBMC Institute for Molecular and Cell Genetics,, Leiden, Netherlands, 4Dept of Clinical Genetics,, BiologyUniversidadedoPorto,Porto,Portugal,8Department reggio emilia, Italy, 5Dept of Clinical Genetics,, Ljubjiana, ofClinicalGenetics,LinköpingUniversityHospital,Linköping, Slovenia Sweden, 9Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, 10Genetics Unit, Qualityassessmenthasbeenassociatedwithlaboratory,but Universitat Pompeu Fabra – Hospital del Mar Research, not clinical services. To address this gap, CEQAS was Barcelona,Spain,11CentrodeInvestigaciónBiomédicaenRed invitedbytheESHGEurogentestQualitysub-committeeto deEnfermedadesRaras(CIBERER),InstitutodeSaludCarlos provide an Educational EQA for clinical genetics services. III, Madrid, Spain A clinical working group advises CEQAS on the EQA format and contentas well as preparingfour case scenarios Non-medical healthcare professionals are integrated in in the fields of cardiogenetics, oncogenetics, monogenetic genetic services everywhere. Nevertheless, genetic coun- disorders and dysmorphology. Each scenario starts with a sellors’rolesdifferwithoutaunifiedapproachinhealthcare referral letter and consists of multiple stages, to reflect an servicesinEurope.Theprofessionisstillemerginginmany episode of clinical care. At each stage further clinical and countries and the educational backgrounds diverge notice- genetictestinformation isgiven andanumberofquestions ably.Thismixedmethodsstudycombinedaqualitativeand presented.ForeachEQA,consensusanswerswereprovided quantitative approach and aimed to explore tasks and byatleasttwoclinicalgeneticistsandapatientorganisation responsibilities in Europe, and identify potential added was consulted. Sixteen EQAs have been distributed over value of genetic counsellors in clinical genetics teams. Our fouryearsto57geneticcentresfrom25countries.AllEQA study also explored whether and to what extent genetic submissions were reviewed by two assessors per case. The counsellors’ characteristics have an impact in practice, and learning objectives are included in the summary letter. The which tasks are most relevant for genetic counsellors, answers provided by the centres highlighted differences in according to genetic counsellors themselves and according clinical genetics practice. The EQA identified that some tomedical geneticistcolleagues.Atotal of143participants centres omitted to include the need for: (a) consent of the (104 GC; 29 MD) providing genetic counselling in 15 index patient; (b) a three generation family history to be700 J.delPicchia taken; (c) discussion of the implications of a recessive clinical genetics workforce. Participants identified that disorder; (d) comprehensive reproductive options and (e) medical specialists and other clinical HPs may require psychosocial support for the patient and family. The EQA additional education/training in genomics. Additional to for clinical genetics is both feasible and highly educational university and College-based training, hands-on workshops showing improvement in the comprehensiveness of the (CME) with supporting online learning to cover basics of answers given. The EQA cases, genetic consultation issues genomics was a preferred approach to education delivery. and proposals for a future Genetic Counselling pilot EQA Interestingly, experiential learning activities such as MDT will be presented. meetings, department meetings, ‘hallway conversations’, R.H.Hastings: None.C.vanRavenswaaij-Arts:None. scientific conferences and involvement in research were C. van Asperen: None. L. Garavelli: None. M. Neilsen: also identified. However, these were not perceived as edu- None. B. Peterlin: None. K. Writzl: None. cational opportunities per se and pose challenges for eva- luation, such as benchmarking against competencies. EPL3.4 ModelsofpracticeingenomicmedicineandHPs’rolesare The changing clinical practice of genomic medicine: what evolving. Education/training, at a number of levels, is are the preferences of and education/training needs of essential to facilitate best practice to ensure successful health professionals? implementation of genomics in healthcare. B. McClaren: None. Z. Prichard: None. A.E. Nisselle: B. McClaren1,2,Z. Prichard2,3,A. E.Nisselle1,2,E. Crellin1,2, None.E.Crellin:None.M.Janinski:None.L.Ng:None. M.Janinski1,2,L.Ng4,2,E.Zilliacus3,K.Dunlop3,2,D.Graves5,2, E. Zilliacus: None. K. Dunlop: None. D. Graves: None. B. Terrill6,2,A. Newson7,2,C. Gaff8,2,S.A. Metcalfe1,2 B. Terrill: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Genome.One. A. Newson: None. C. Gaff: None. S.A. 1Murdoch Childrens Research Institute and Dept Paediatrics, Metcalfe: None. UniversityofMelbourne,Parkville,Vic,Australia,2Australian Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 3Centre EPL3.5 for Genetics Education, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 4Murdoch Exploring the experiences of genetic health professionals Childrens Research Institute, Parkville, Vic, Australia, 5The with adoptees Royal College of Pathologists of Australasia, Sydney, NSW, Australia, 6Kinghorn Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan R. Spinoso1,2, J.Hodgson1,2,M.Sahhar3, K.Pereira4,2 InstituteofMedicalResearch,Sydney,NSW,Australia,7Centre for Values, Ethics andthe Law in Medicine, SydneySchool of 1University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Murdoch Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Children'sResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia,3Victorian Australia, 8Walter and Eliza Hall Institute for Medical Clinical Genetic Services, Melbourne, Australia, 4Genetic Research, Parkville, Vic, Australia Support Network of Victoria, Melbourne, Australia Successful implementation of genomics in healthcare Background:Familyhistoryisimportantindeterminingan requires well-informed, engaged health professionals (HPs) individual’s risks of genetic conditions. Adoptees often torequest,identifyand/orreferpatientsforgenomictesting. havelimitedknowledgeoftheirfamilyhistory.Theclinical This study describes current practice and identifies future andpsychosocialimplicationsofthis,aswellasthegenetic genomic education/training needs of Australian health counsellingstrategiesemployedbyprofessionalstosupport professionals. National data were collected in semi- these clients have not been previously explored. structured interviews. HPs were recruited through profes- Aim: This research aimed to explore the experiences of sional networks and medical Colleges; providers of recent genetic health professionals with adopted clients. In education activities were contacted directly. Interviews particular, it sought to identify the issues posed and the were audio-recorded, transcribed and analysed using: counselling strategies employed when working with deductive content analysis to document current education adoptees. activities; and inductive coding to compare and contrast Methods: This study took a mixed-methods approach participant perspectives. HPs (n=81) and education pro- comprising quantitative and qualitative data collection. A viders (n=32) were interviewed. Clinical HPs reported survey was conducted of members of the Australasian varied practice in requesting genomic testing including: Society of Genetic Counsellors (ASGC) and Australasian referral to specialist genetic services; informal peer con- Association of Clinical Geneticists (AACG) and statistical sultation; and/or formal case review at multidisciplinary analysis was performed. The survey data informed the (MDT)meetings.Newmodelsofpracticeareneededdueto qualitative phase, where professionals, who have worked the complexity and volume of tests and the available with an adoptee, were recruited for semi-structuredAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 701 interviews. Interviews were audio-taped, transcribed verba- Results: Overall participants figured out games contents tim, coded and analysed thematically to identify common and experienced moderate levels of immersion and flow, themes. suggesting a balance between fun and cognitive engage- Results:Atotalof68surveyresponseswerereceivedand ment. Players experienced low levels of negative feelings eight interviews were conducted. A number of practical such as annoyance and frustration and prevalence of challenges as well as counselling issues specific to the positive emotions. However, they reported that the games adoptees limited knowledge of family history were should be more intuitive. identified. Lastly, interviewees made a number of recom- Conclusions: Playability results showed that the serious mendations to assist genetic health professionals when gamesdevelopedmightefficientlyimprovepublic’sknowl- working with these clients. edge of basic biology and genetic concepts, and foster Conclusions: The findings from this study will help public’s ability in using genomic information for health- informgeneticcounsellingpracticewhenworkingadoptees related decision making. The Swedish Foundation for by raising awareness of the challenges posed by limited Humanities and Social Sciences. Grant nr. M13-0260:1 family history knowledge and providing insight into the S. Oliveri: None. R. Mainetti: None. I. Cutica: None. strategies and interventions employed by professionals A. Gorini: None. N.A. Borghese: None. G. when working with these clients. Pravettoni: None. R. Spinoso: None. J. Hodgson: None. M. Sahhar: None. K. Pereira: None. EPL4 What's New in Hereditary Cancer EPL3.6 Learningtheroleofgenomicsinhumanhealth:theserious EPL4.1 games experience Irememberthefeelingnotthegene:Families'experiencesof and attitudes towards genetic testing in childhood cancer S.Oliveri1,R.Mainetti2,I.Cutica1,A.Gorini1,N.A.Borghese2, G.Pravettoni1 B. C.McGill1,2,C. E.Wakefield1,2, J.Vetsch1,2,R. J.Cohn1,2, M.Warby3,4,K. M.Tucker3,4 1Department of Oncology and Hemato-Oncology, Università degliStudidiMilano,Milan,Italy,2AppliedIntelligentSystems 1School of Women's and Children's Health, UNSW Sydney, Laboratory AISLab, Dept. of Computer Science, Università Sydney, Australia, 2Kids Cancer Centre, Sydney Children's degli studi di Milano, Milan, Italy Hospital, Randwick, Australia, 3Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Department of Medical Oncology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Introduction: Despite the growth of genomics in health Randwick,Australia,4PrinceofWalesClinicalSchool,UNSW care, current approaches to genetic and genomic education Sydney, Sydney, Australia donotadequatelypreparethepublictounderstandpersonal health issues related to genomic medicine. Serious games Introduction: Genetic technologies have great potential in can play an important role in bringing genomic science the paediatric setting in diagnosing hereditary cancer syn- closer to the public, as they supplement traditional educa- dromesandpredictingcancerriskinchildren.However,we tion through interactive modalities. know little about families’ experiences of the counselling Materials and Methods: Starting from the social and testing process. We aimed to synthesise the existing cognitive theory, which recognizes the importance of self- evidence on children and young adults’ understanding of efficacyasaprerequisitetomanagehealthinformation,and genetic testing for disease predisposition, followed by web-basedlearningenvironmentstheories,wedesignedtwo qualitative analysis of the understanding, experiences, and mini-games focused on heredity and mutation and an attitudes of families affected by hereditary childhood can- adventure game, with an avatar storytelling, focused on cer/tumour syndromes. genetic testing, inheritance, and genes-behavior- Methods: Study one: We conducted a systematic environment interaction. The playability testing was con- literature review to examine children and young adults’ ducted with a sample of 30 participants, subdivided into 3 (≤21 years-old) understanding of, and attitudes towards, equal groups and randomly assigned to each game. genetic testing for disease predisposition across illnesses. Participants were asked to report what they learnt by Study two: We conducted semi-structured interviews with playingthegamesandanynegativeissuetheyfoundduring parents and young adults (<16 years-old at the time of the play. They also completed the Games Experience referral) who were offered cancer predisposition genetic Questionnaire. testing.702 J.delPicchia Results:Studyone:Weidentified20studiesrepresenting findings indicate that decisions are made in a social the views of 1813 children and young adults (1498 context, where the relatives’ views are heard and taken population-risk, 315 affected/at-risk). Children and young into account. adults generally hold positive attitudes towards clinical Conclusions: The findings suggest that the conventional genetic testing, but misunderstandings were evident in bioethical approach to autonomy, which perceives the termsoftheimplicationsofageneticdiagnosis.Studytwo: decision-making unit comprised of a clinician and an We interviewed 35 participants from 28 families (M at individual patient, is challenged in genetics. The findings age diagnosis=10.3 years, SD=5.5). Families expressed high thus require bioethicists, lawyers and policy-makers to satisfaction with genetic services and reported benefits to consider whether this individualistic approach is still valid receiving a genetic diagnosis. However many families and applicable. reported unmet genetic information needs. S. Barnoy: None. R. Gilbar: None. Conclusions: Families have largely positive experiences ofgenetictesting. However,unmet information needs were EPL4.3 common. For the effective utilisation of genetic healthcare Uptake of polygenic risk information among women at information in the paediatric cancer setting this barrier potentially high breast cancer risk needs to be addressed through the provision of developmentally-appropriate educational resources. T. Yanes1,B. Meiser1, R.Kaur1, M.Scheepers-Joynt2, B.C. McGill: None. C.E. Wakefield: None. J. Vetsch: M.Young3,4,K. Barlow-Stewart5, T.John6, M.Harris7, None. R.J. Cohn: None. M. Warby: None. K.M. Y.Antill8,J.Halliday9,10,J.Burke11,T.Roscioli12,P.Mitchell1, Tucker: None. P. James2 EPL4.2 1University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 2Parkville Companionsorpatients?Theimpactoffamilypresencein Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, genetic counseling for hereditary breast cancer Melbourne, Australia, 3Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 4Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter S. Barnoy1,R. Gilbar2,3 MacCallumCancerCentre,Melbourne,Australia,Melbourne, Australia, 5University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 6Clinical 1Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel, 2Netanya Academic Genetics Service, Austin Health, Melbourne, Australia, College, Netanya, Israel, 3University of Leicester, Leicester, 7FamilialCancerClinic,MonashMedicalCentre,Melbourne, United Kingdom Australia, 8Familial Cancer Clinic, Cabrini Hospital, Melbourne,Australia,9MurdochChildren'sResearchInstitute, Introduction: As other areas of medical practice, relatives Melbourne,Australia, 10University of Melbourne,, Melbourne, accompany patients to genetic consultations. However, Australia, 11Tasmanian Clinical Genetics Service, Hobart, unlike other areas, the consultations may be relevant to the Australia, 12Department of Medical Genetics, Sydney relatives’ health because they may be at risk of developing Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia the same genetic condition as the patient. The presence of relatives in genetic consultation may affect the decision- Background: Despite increasing scientific evidence makingprocessanditraisesquestionsabouttheperception regarding the utility of polygenic risk score (PRS) for of patient autonomy andthe way it ispracticed in genetics. families at high-risk of breast cancer, research findings are However, these issues have not been examined in previous yettobeintegratedintoclinicalpractice.Beforeintegrating empirical studies. polygenicinformationintoclinicalpracticeitisimportantto Methods: This was a qualitative study using semi- understandthepsychologicalimplications.Thisprospective structured, face-to-face interviews with 28 clinicians work- study aims to assess uptake of breast cancer polygenic risk ing in the area of inherited breast cancer. The study was information,andascertainthepsychosocialandbehavioural based on a framework analysis approach. implications of receiving this information. Results: The findings indicate that family presence has Methods: Eligible women are invited to participate and an impact on the patient’s decisions to undergo genetic receive their breast cancer PRS. Eligibility: affected and testing and preventative operations when she is diagnosed unaffected women currently enrolled in the Variants in as a carrier. The findings further indicate that unlike other PracticeStudy,whohaveahighorlowPRS,andapersonal areasofmedicalpractice,bloodrelativeswhoarepresentin and/orfamilyhistory ofbreastcancer wheregenetic testing consultations are perceived by clinicians as patients or for BRCA1/2 is negative. Participants complete three self- potential patients, and this in turn increases their involve- administered questionnaires: T1 prior to result, T2 two ment in discussions in the consultation room. Finally, the weeks and T3 one year post receipt of PRS.Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 703 Results:AsofJanuary2018,132/153(86%)participants targeted DNA tests, because uncertainty is increased. reported interest in receiving their PRS with 21/153 (14%) Counselees experienced difficulty in recalling which declining. Primary reasons cited to receive PRS included: uncertainties related to multigene panel testing had been helping research (84%) and family members (68%), and to discussed during genetic counselling. They primarily manage breast cancer risk (64%). Preliminary analysis reported to have experienced uncertainty about their own showed uptake of PRS is associated with having daughters and their relatives’ risk of developing cancer. Counselees (r=0.16, p=0.041), higher uncertainty avoidance (r= felt they had had a say in the decision. 0.38, p=<0.001) and higher perceived severity of breast Conclusions: Counsellors need more guidance on cancer (r=0.20, p=0.018). Conclusion: There is strong whether and how to convey uncertainty to counselees. interest in receiving PRS among women at high-risk of Undesirable practice variation in the communication of breast cancer. Recruitment is ongoing, with additional data uncertainty may be prevented by determining what regarding short-term and long-term psychological and information should minimally be discussed to enable behavioural impact of receiving PRS to be collected. informed decision making. T.Yanes:None.B.Meiser:B.ResearchGrant(principal N.M. Medendorp: None. M.A. Hillen: None. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants L. Murugesu: None. C.M. Aalfs: None. A.M. Stiggelb- as well as grants already received); Modest; AstraZeneca. out: None. E.M.A. Smets: None. R. Kaur: None. M. Scheepers-Joynt: None. M. Young: None. K. Barlow-Stewart: None. T. John: None. EPL4.5 M. Harris: None. Y. Antill: None. J. Halliday: None. The efficacy of genetic counselling for familial colorectal J. Burke: None. T. Roscioli: None. P. Mitchell: None. cancer: a meta-analysis P. James: None. A. Ciucă1,R. Moldovan1, S.Pintea1, A.Băban1, T.Clancy2 EPL4.4 Uncertaintyrelatedtomultigenepaneltestingforcancer:a 1Department of Psychology, Babe�-Bolyai University, Cluj- qualitative study on counsellors’ and counselees’ views Napoca, Romania, 2Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom N.M.Medendorp1, M.A.Hillen1,L. Murugesu1,C. M.Aalfs1, A. M.Stiggelbout2,E.M. A.Smets1 Introduction: Prospective studies and RCTs have shown that genetic counselling is effective for a number of 1Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Leiden conditions in relation to outcomes such as risk perception University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands and knowledge. By statistically combining data from individual studies, a meta-analysis can provide a precise Introduction: Multigene panel testing for cancer improves estimate of an intervention overall effect. This approach theidentificationofgeneticcausesinfamilieswithpossible allows us to assess the efficacy of genetic counselling for cancer syndromes. Panel tests may however yield uncer- various conditions and outcomes. The aim of the current tainty, for example when variants of unknown significance quantitative meta-analysis was to analyse the efficacy of are identified. Since insight is limited into how these genetic counselling for familial colorectal cancer and uncertainties play a role in counseling, we explored coun- explore characteristics that might influence the direction sellors’ and counselees’ experiences with uncertainty, and or magnitude of the relation between the intervention and how they discuss uncertainties and decide about multigene the outcome. panel testing. Method: An extensive electronic search was conducted Materials and Methods: Six focus groups were investigating the literature published until January 2018. conducted including a total of 38 counsellors. Twelve This identified 2121 articles, 30of which met the inclusion counselees who had received genetic counselling about a criteria. Effect size parameters and sample sizes for all multigene panel test were interviewed individually. The variables in each study were included. transcribed audio recordings were analyzed inductively by Results: Data showed that genetic counselling has an twocodersanddatawerecollatedtodistillbroaderthemes. overall statistically significant effect size, of small magni- Results: Counsellors mostly experienced difficulty in tude. Results indicate that genetic counselling is effective deciding what uncertain information to communicate to for affective, cognitive and behavioural outcomes; for counselees and how to do so. The extent and manner of individuals with both personal and family history; whether providing uncertain information differed between centers they pursue testing or not; regardless of the purpose of and between counsellors. Counsellors attached more value testing; and, with the exception of uninformative results, to counselees’ preferences in decision making compared to regardless of the mutation status. Analyses also show that704 J.delPicchia teams that included a genetic counsellor generated a EPL5 To know or not to know significantly larger effect. Conclusion: We found that genetic counselling is EPL5.1 beneficial at both post- intervention and follow-up, which 1 in 39 individuals carries a dominant high-risk disease indicates that the benefits gained during the genetic allele counselling session are maintained over time. A. Ciucă: None. R. Moldovan: None. S. Pintea: None. H.G.Yntema1,L.Haer-Wigman1,A.Vulto-vanSilfhout1,V.van A. Băban: None. T. Clancy: None. derSchoot2,C.Gilissen1,H.G.Brunner1,3,I.Feenstra1,L.E.L. M.Vissers1 EPL4.6 Moving into the mainstream: Treatment focussed genetic 1DeptHumanGenetics,Nijmegen,Netherlands,2DeptClinical testing a screening tool or diagnostic resource? Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands N.Hallowell1,S.Wright2,D.Stirling3,J.Lawton3,C.Gourlay3, O.Young4, M.Porteous3 Clinical genomic sequencing can identify pathogenic var- iantsunrelatedtotheinitialclinicalquestion,butofmedical 1UniversityofOxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,2Universityof relevance to the patient and their families. To promote Edinburgh, edinburgh, United Kingdom, 3University of standardized reporting of these incidental (unintentionally Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Western General detected in analysis) and/or secondary findings (deliberate Hospital, Edinburgh, United Kingdom analysis of available data), the American College of Med- ical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) published 59 medi- For many years clinical geneticists used BRCA1 and 2 cally actionable genes recommended for return of such genetictestingasascreeningtesttoidentifythosewhohad findings. With ongoing discussions on obligatory genetic a genetic predisposition to develop breast and ovarian testing of employees and disclosure of the results to their cancer. More recently BRCA testing is used to direct the employers, it is of crucial importance to obtain unbiased treatment of patients with breast or ovarian cancer, either insight on the potential risks and benefits. We analysed informing their adjuvant chemotherapy regimes or surgical WES data of 1,640 anonymized healthy Dutch individuals management. Thus, the role of BRCA testing in patient to establish the frequency of medically actionable disease management has changed from that of a screening tool, allelesinthegeneralpopulation.Ourstudyshowsthatwhen used by a small group of specialists, to a diagnostic/treat- healthy individuals would be routinely screened for muta- ment resource employed in mainstream cancer care tionsinthe59ACMGmedicallyactionablegenes,atleast1 (oncology and breast surgery). Using interview data, this in 39 individuals (2.6%) has a lifetime increased risk for a paper will explore how healthcare professionals (n=21) – severe dominant disease. Additionally, we identified 36 oncologists, breast surgeons and clinical genetics profes- individuals (2.2%) to be a carrier of a recessive pathogenic sionals in one UK teaching hospital - conceive of this new disease allele. Whereas it is recommended not to return application of BRCA testing. We will show that healthcare carrier status to these individuals unless identified as bi- professionals prioritise treatment focussed BRCA testing allelic mutations, one may wonder whether carrier status is (TFGT) very differently from the way it is intended within not relevant for reproductive decisions, especially if more the patient pathway. We will argue the introduction of prevalent diseases, such as cystic fibrosis, were to be BRCA testing in the mainstream raises issues for profes- included in this communication. Hence, our results con- sionalidentityandthatindescribingtheirengagementwith tribute significantly to the debate on genetic risk factor BRCA testing healthcare professionals involved in the screening in healthy individuals and the discussion if the treatment focussed testing pathway engage in professional benefits of this knowledge outweigh the risk of living with boundary maintenance, as demonstrated by their reconfi- uncertainty and possible stigmatization. guration of the purpose of BRCA testing in this context. H.G. Yntema: None. L. Haer-Wigman: None. A. Thispaper,willthus,enableustointerrogatethescreening- Vulto-van Silfhout: None. V. van der Schoot: None. C. diagnosisdichotomyandprovideinsightintotheissuesthat Gilissen: None. H.G. Brunner: None. I. Feenstra: None. will require addressing prior to more widespread imple- L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. mentation of genomics in the NHS. Breast Cancer Now Grant no: [2016MayPR700]. EPL5.2 N. Hallowell: None. S. Wright: None. D. Stirling: To report or not to report? That's not the only question! None. J. Lawton: None. C. Gourlay: None. O. Young: Analysis of VUS reporting, variant reinterpretation, and None. M. Porteous: None. recontact policies in clinical genomics consent formsAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 705 D.F. Vears1,2, E.Niemiec3,H. C.Howard3,P. Borry1,2 Genomic data from clinical testing is potentially valuable for research. In contrast to community and research parti- 1CentreforBiomedicalEthicsandLaw,DepartmentofPublic cipant views,patientexpectations about theresearchuseof Health and Primary Care, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, germline data from clinical genomic testing is unknown. 2Leuven Institute for Human Genomics and Society, Leuven, We have addressed this gap by surveying patients Belgium, 3Centre for Research Ethics and Bioethics, Uppsala receiving genomic testing through clinical care and University, Uppsala, Sweden consenting, or not, to use of their data for research. Surveysincludecategoricalandopen-endedquestionson Whether laboratories and clinics should report variants of how clinical genomic data should be stored, accessed and uncertain significance (VUS) to clinicians and/or patients, used for research. Categorical data is analysed using reinterpret VUS in response to the growing knowledge in descriptive statistics, and open-ended questions using the field, reissue reports to clinicians based on any revised qualitative content analysis. The survey response rate is classifications, and recontact patients, are all key unsolved 70% (566/805). issues in the clinical use of next-generation sequencing To date, 99% (857/868) of patients agree to additional (NGS). We systematically analyzed 58 consent forms in research use of their clinical genomic data. Despite the EnglishbeingusedintheUSA,Europe,andothercountries, clinical community's concerns about effectiveness of pre- to investigate their policies for a) reporting VUS, b) rein- test counselling, 96% (511/531) of respondents indicate terpretingvariants,includingwhoshouldinitiatethis,andc) they had enough information before making their decision. recontacting patients and the mechanisms for undertaking Patient expectations about control over the use of their any recontact. One-third (20/58) of the forms did not data is informing the design of systems around data use. mention VUS in any way. Of the 38 forms that did, only Blanketconsentandrefusalwererarelypreferred, butthere halfprovidedsomedescriptionordefinitionforwhataVUS was no clear preference between opt-in or opt-out consent is. Nineteen forms explicitly stated that reinterpretation of for each study, nor for reinitiating contact to withdraw. variants for clinical purposes may occur. An additional 12 Patients were surprisingly supportive of data sharing, forms did not explicitly state that they report VUS but indicating they would allow a range of organisations to reporting was implied. Twenty forms referred to the idea access data and even re-identify them. Aminority (5%, 21/ that reinterpretation of variants for clinical purposes may 470) felt it would be easy for their data to be reidentified take place, eight mentioned that variants might be reclas- and would be concerned if this occurred. sified,andfivestatedmoreinformationmightcometolight Patientvoicesare informing data governance,designand in the future. Less than half mention recontact for clinical prioritisationofasinglesystemforresearchaccesstostate- purposes, varying as to whether the laboratory, patient or wide clinical genomic sequencing data. clinician should initiate this. The variability in variant M.Martyn:None.P.Gleeson:None.C.Walker:None. reporting, reinterpretation, and recontact policies and prac- H. Chia: None. A. Kanga-Parabia: None. C.L. tices revealed by our analysis may lead to diffused Gaff: None. responsibilityandresultinmissedopportunitiesforpatients or family members to receive a diagnosis in response to EPL5.4 updates in variant classification. Predicting willingness to receive four different types of D.F. Vears: None. E. Niemiec: None. H.C. Howard: genetic risk information - A population based study None. P. Borry: None. A. Haukkala1, M.Vornanen1,O.Halmesvaara1,H. Konttinen1, EPL5.3 H.Kääriäinen2, K.Aktan-Collan1 The patient voice in design of systems to share clinical genomic sequencing data 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland M.Martyn1,2,3,P.Gleeson4,C.Walker1,3,5,H.Chia4,A.Kanga- Parabia1,3,MelbourneGenomicsHealthAlliance,C.L.Gaff1,2,3 Introduction: in general, people wish to know about their health-related genetic risk information, but do not neces- 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, VIC, sarily differentiate between different types of risk informa- Australia, 2Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, tion.Wecreatedathree-minutevideoaboutfourcategories VIC, Australia, 3The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC, of genetic risk information and examined predictors of Australia, 4Melbourne Law School, Parkville, VIC, Australia, individuals’ intentions to receive each category of risk 5Chronic Illness Alliance, Melbourne, VIC, Australia information.706 J.delPicchia Materialand Methods: 792 respondents from arandom period of 1.5 years, as well as semi-structured interviews population sample of 18 to 64 year olds participated in a withhealthcareprofessionals(HCPs)acrossawiderangeof web survey, which included the three -minute video. The clinical genetics settings in all (8) Dutch genomics centres. video covered four categories of genetic risk information It explores how healthcare professionals make decisions (actionable, non-actionable, multifactorial, carrier status). regarding whether and which genetic IFs and VUS to We measured participants’ attitudes, perceived norms and communicate to patients: what factors play a role in this intention toward learning about each type of risk informa- process and how are benefits and disadvantages of tion. Education, gender, anxiety, genetic knowledge and disclosing these results weighed up? How do healthcare need for cognitive closure were also investigated as professionals view the concept of patient autonomy and potential predictors of intentions. consent in relation to genetic findings? This study attempts Results: Respondents evaluated the presented video as to unravel the complexities behind clinical management of useful and comprehensible. Respondents were willing to IFs and VUS and provide new insights for policy. learn their actionable, multifactorial and carrier risk Results: Initial results show important differences in information, but were less interested in non-actionable approaches to IFs and VUS across different clinics and heritable risk information. Need for cognitive closure was diagnosticsettings.Forexample,somecentresofferpatients related to willingness to learn actionable (β=0.08, a choice which IFs (including non-actionable IFs) they p=.030), multifactorial (β=0.09, p=.013), and carrier wouldliketoreceive,whereasinothers,HCPsfeelitisthe status risk information (β=0.11, p=.002), while professional’s responsibility to make that choice. other predictors were non-significant. More educated J. el Mecky: None. M. Plantinga: None. A. Fenwick: participants were less motivated to learn their non- None. A. Lucassen: None. I. van Langen: None. actionable risks (β=−0.09, p=.017). Conclusion: Respondents had a positive attitude toward EPL5.6 genetictestingandwereinterestedtolearndifferenttypesof Consent for Genetic Testing and Disclosure of Results: genetic risks. Need for cognitive closure had moderate Shifting the Paradigm to Non-Genetics Clinicians association to intentions while many other predictors, includinggeneticknowledge,werenotrelatedtointentions. K.E.Ormond1,M.L.Hallquist2,E.Tricou2,K.Brothers3,C.R. A. Haukkala: None. M. Vornanen: None. O. Halmes- Coughlin II4,L. Hercher5,L. Hudgins1,H.Levy6, H.Peay7, vaara: None. H. Konttinen: None. H. Kääriäinen: None. M.Roche8,M.Stosic9,M.Smith10,W.Uhlmann11,K. Wain12, K. Aktan-Collan: None. W.A. Faucett12, A.H.Buchanan12 EPL5.5 1Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 2Geisinger, Disclosure of incidental findings (IFs) and variants of Danville, PA, United States, 3University of Louisville, uncertain significance (VUS) to patients: what happens in Louisville,KY,UnitedStates,4UniversityofColorado,Denver, practice? CO, United States, 5Sarah Lawrence University, Bronxville, NY,UnitedStates,6JohnsHopkinsUniversity,Baltimore,MD, J.el Mecky1,M.Plantinga1,A.Fenwick2,A. Lucassen2,I.van United States, 7RTI International, Research Triangle, NC, Langen1 UnitedStates,8UniversityofNorthCarolina,ChapelHill,NC, United States, 9Natera, Inc, San Carlos, CA, United States, 1University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, 10Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States, Netherlands, 2University of Southampton, Southampton, 11University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States, United Kingdom 12Geinsinger, Danville, PA, United States Introduction: It is well-known that the introduction of Timely access to genetic testing and counseling remains an whole genome sequencing approaches increases the poten- issuethatwillonlygrowasgeneticsassumesalargerrolein tial for IFs and VUS. A host of guidelines have been pub- routine healthcare; it is unclear how best to increase access lishedonclinicalmanagementofIFsand,toalesserdegree, while providing patients with adequate genetic testing of VUS. But what actually happens in practice? Currently, education and support. ClinGen’s Consent and Disclosure very little has been published on the clinical decision- Recommendations working group (CADRe) has developed making process regarding which IFs and VUS should be and evaluated rubrics for determining a suggested com- disclosed to patients (and which should not) and how this munication approach for consent and disclosure. We pro- differsamongdifferenthealthcareprofessionalsandclinics. pose three possible communication approaches: (1) Methods:Thisstudyinvolvesobservationofonegenetic traditional genetic counseling (TGC) with a genetics spe- centre’s clinical multidisciplinary team meetings over a cialist,(2)targeteddiscussionwithanorderingclinician,orAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 707 (3) brief communication supported by educational resour- understand perceived benefits or concerns, identify ethical ces. The CADRe recommendations provide guidance issues and establish support and counselling needs. regarding which conditions and indications would benefit Materials and Methods: Semi-structured qualitative mostfromTGCwheredetaileddiscussion,complicatedtest interviews were conducted with four groups; 1. Parents / selection, and psychosocial support are provided, with the carers of children affected with OI; 2. Adults affected with goal of directing genomics expertise to those patients for OI;3.Healthprofessionals;4.Patientadvocates.Interviews whomitismostimpactful.Wereviewtheapplicationofthe were digitally recorded, transcribed verbatim and analysed modelusingtheACMGSecondaryFindingsv2.0genelist, using thematic analysis. examining each in the context of specific indications for Results: Interviews with 50 participants revealed gen- genetic testing, including: confirmation of a clinical diag- erally positive views towards stem cell infusions for OI. nosis, testing an individual with a suggestive personal his- Early treatment was considered advantageous for reducing tory, testing an unaffected individual with a suggestive severity by avoiding fractures at a time of rapid bone family history, and testing an unaffected individual for a development and could bring psychological benefits for known familial variant. Our current classification trends parents, as it offers hope. Common concerns were suggestthatmuchofthecounselingassociatedwithgenetic procedure safety, short/long-term side effects, and whether testing can be triaged and transitioned to targeted discus- infusions would be effective. Difficulties inherent in sions with ordering physicians. We support shifting the decision-making were frequently discussed, as treatment paradigmofgenetictestingtoemphasizetheuseofgenetics efficacy is unknown and, by necessity, parents will make providersincomplexcasesthatrequirespecializedgenetics decisions at a time of vulnerability and are potentially expertise. willing to “do anything” to help their child. Support needs K.E.Ormond:None.M.L.Hallquist:None.E.Tricou: maydifferwherethereisafamilyhistoryofOIcomparedto None. K. Brothers: None. C.R. Coughlin II: None. an unexpected diagnosis of OI. L. Hercher: None. L. Hudgins: None. H. Levy: None. Conclusions: Good communication, significant support H. Peay: None. M. Roche: None. M. Stosic: A. Employ- and time for reflection during the decision-making process ment (full or part-time); Modest; Natera Inc. M. Smith: will becrucial toallow parents tomake informed decisions None.W.Uhlmann:None.K.Wain:None.W.A.Faucett: about stem cell infusions in the management of OI. None. A.H. Buchanan: None. European Union Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme: grant agreement No 681045. M. Hill: None. C. Lewis: None. M. Riddington: None. EPL6 Perinatal decision-making B. Crowe: None. C. DeVile: None. C. Götherström: None. L.S. Chitty: None. EPL6.1 Stakeholder views towards prenatal and postnatal fetal EPL6.2 mesenchymal stem cell infusions for osteogenesis Factors contributing to new parents’ perspectives on imperfecta retentionandsecondaryuseofneonataldriedbloodspots- A mixed methods study in the Netherlands M.Hill1,2,C. Lewis1,2,M.Riddington3, B.Crowe3,C. DeVile3, C. Götherström4,L. S.Chitty1,2 M.E.Jansen1,2,L.J.M.vandenBosch3,M.J.Hendriks1,M.M. J.Scheffer1,M.L. Heijnen3,C. M.W.Douglas4, C.G.vanEl1 1NE Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 1APH research institute VU University Medical Centre, 2Genetics and Genomic Medicine, UCL Great Ormond Street Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2Centre for Health Protection, Institute of Child Health, London, United Kingdom, National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, 3Osteogenesis Imperfecta Service, Great Ormond Street Bilthoven, Netherlands, 3Centre for Population Screening, Hospitalfor ChildrenNHSFoundationTrust, London,United National Institute for Public Health and the Environment, Kingdom,4CenterforHematologyandRegenerativeMedicine, Bilthoven, Netherlands, 4Department of Technology and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Society Studies, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands Introduction: The Boost Brittle Bones Before Birth (BOOSTB4) clinical trial is investigating the safety and Introduction: Neonatal bloodspot screening (NBS) identi- efficacy of using prenatal and early postnatal fetal fies conditions to minimize irreversible damage. NBS mesenchymal stem cell infusion for severe osteogenesis policies guide a comprehensive system including processes imperfecta (OI). We are exploring stakeholder views to for storage of neonatal dried blood spots (NDBS). NDBS708 J.delPicchia policies have been subject of public debates internationally reasonoftheinvolvementinthedonationprogram,donor’s suggestingthatthepublic’sperceptionsofNDBSpolicyare knowledgeandawarenessofriskfactors.Sinceintherecent not always on par with policies in place. The current study years, genetic screening has become more common, the aimstoprovideinsightinrelevantfactorsfornewparentsin donors were questioned about their knowledge on the the Netherlands regarding retention and secondary use. subject. Thesefactorscanbetakenintoaccountwhendevelopingor Results: Majority of the donors (70%) were undergoing updating NDBS policies. donation programs due to financial problems. The donors Methods A mixed methods design was used combining were especially not aware that DNA from their blood an online survey (n=765), focus group interviews (n=6, samples could be tested for genetic variations or predis- 37participants),andindividualin-depthinterviews(n=7). positions. Furthermore, they did not know about genetic The discussed topics included: parental information; anonymity and the possibility of being exposed later on in obtaining informed consent; support for retention; and life. support for secondary use. The study population consisted Conclusion:Thehealthprofessionalshavethemainduty of Dutch-speaking new parents: pregnant women toinformthedonorsaboutanypossibleproblemstheymay (≥20 weeks) and/or their partner, and parents of at least faceinthedonationprograms.Paymenttooocytedonorsis one child (≤5 years). a slippery slope in oocyte donation programs. High Results Overall, participants were positive about pro- compensation may make women to think that donation is longed retention and different types of secondary use. The a profession without considering possible risks. Further- participants indicated transparency and safety in NDBS more, with the wider use of direct-to-consumer genetic policy and practice as important overarching themes. testing, genetic anonymity may be at risk, thus the donors Transparency was discussed in subthemes such as knowl- have to be counselled properly. edge and engagement, while safety translated into sub- P. Tulay: None. O. Atilan: None. themes such as autonomy, anonymity, and trust. Conclusions Needs were expressed for easily accessible EPL6.4 information, adequate communication on the retention and Development and pilot study of the prenatal informed (potential) use of NDBS, clearly described safeguards for decision-making (PRENID)-scale: a measure for informed privacy protection, a more active consent process, retrie- decision-making in first trimester prenatal screening vable information and regulation for the actors conducting NDBS research, and participation of new parents in I.M.Bakkeren1,M.G.Polak2,F. K. C.Kisters2,R.H. decisions on secondary use. Galjaard1,A. Tibben3,S. R.Riedijk1 M.E.Jansen:None.L.J.M.vandenBosch:None.M.J. Hendriks: None. M.M.J. Scheffer: None. M.L. Heijnen: 1Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 2Erasmus None. C.M.W. Douglas: None. C.G. van El: None. University Rotterdam, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands EPL6.3 Slippery slope for oocyte donations Introduction: Pregnant women in the Netherlands can choose between NIPT, the combined test (CT) and not P. Tulay1,O.Atilan2 participating in first trimester screening (FTS). It is unclear whether pregnant women are making informed decisions 1Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus, 2Nicosia IVF Clinic, about this screening offer. Nicosia, Cyprus Methods: The PRENID-scale was developed with medical and psychological experts and consists of a Introduction: In recent years oocyte donation programs knowledge-scale(range0-25),testingknowledgeoftrisomy havegainedmoreattention.Althoughinsomecountriesthe phenotypesandtestcharacteristics,andadeliberation-scale donation programs are tightly regulated; in some, there are (range39-195)measuringtheprocessofthinkingaboutthe no strict guidelines or regulations. This introduces many consequences of (not) engaging in FTS and imagining the issuesinsuchcountrieswheretheoocytedonationsbecome consequences of an abnormal result, such as continuing or the drive of health tourism. The aim of this study was to ending one’s pregnancy. evaluatetheethicalaspectsofoocytedonationsanddonors’ Results:Inthispilotstudyamongpregnantwomen(N= awareness of the consequences in undergoing donation 23), both the knowledge- and deliberation-scales possessed programs. ahighinternalconsistencyreliability(respectivelyα=0.83 Materials and Methods: A detailed questionnaire based and α =0.89). Women choosing theCT hadhighest(M= survey wasconductedwith thedonors toevaluatethemain 19.8), whereas women not opting for FTS had lowestAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 709 knowledge scores (M = 14.7) (p = ns). Women opting for Results: Out of 348 eligible women, 190 participated in bothNIPT andCTdeliberatedmostextensivelyabout their the survey and 117 couples accepted the test (all results choice (M = 167), whereas women declining FTS had were normal). 1) Anxiety: mean (SD) acceptors vs non- deliberated least (M = 128.3) (p = .03). acceptors T0: 32.2 (8.5) vs 33.6 (10.4). p=0.35. T3: 28.4 Conclusion: The PRENID-scale is the first scale (8.5) vs 36.4 (11.4). P< = 0.001. T0-T3: The STAI-score extensivelymeasuring deliberationinthelow-riskpregnant decreased for acceptors -3.5 (8.1) and increased for non- population. We found that women wanting their pregnancy acceptors 1.8 (8.8)(p=0.003). 2) Worry: median (IQR): examined more extensively, had more knowledge and T0:6(6-8)vs6(6-7.5);p=0.99T3:6(6-7)vs6(6-8);p= deliberation than women who do not, or less extensively, 0.81. want their pregnancy examined. An informed decision, The worry-score decreased for acceptors (0, -1-1) and based on sufficient knowledge and deliberation, was made non-acceptors (0, 0-1)(p=0.33). Conclusion: Our study is by 43.5% of women. Whether women declining FTS make thefirsttoreportonpsychologicalimpactofaGP-provided informed decisions according to the PRENID-scale will be couple-based ECS-offer. Some differences exist between investigated in a larger study. test-acceptors and non-acceptors, which will be further I.M. Bakkeren: None. M.G. Polak: None. F.K.C. investigated. Kisters: None. R.H. Galjaard: None. A. Tibben: None. J. Schuurmans: None. M. Plantinga: None. A. S.R. Riedijk: None. Lucassen: None. A. Fenwick: None. K. Abbott: None. E. Birnie: None. I. van Langen: None. A. EPL6.5 Ranchor: None. Shortandlong-termpsychologicalimpactofanactiveGP- provided couple-based ECS test-offer in the Dutch general EPL6.6 population Next-generation counseling: a model for non-invasive prenatal screening results disclosure and patient J.Schuurmans1,2,M. Plantinga1,A. Lucassen2, A.Fenwick2, management K. Abbott1,E. Birnie1,I.van Langen1, A.Ranchor3 A. Arjunan,J.Kostialik, R. Ben-Shachar,B. Denne, G.A. 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Lazarin, C. Haverty Groningen/UniversityofGroningen,Groningen,Netherlands, 2Clinical Ethics and Law, University of Southampton, Counsyl, South San Francisco, CA, United States Southampton, United Kingdom, 3Department of Health Psychology, University Medical Center Groningen/ University Non-invasive prenatal screening (NIPS) is increasingly of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands offered to the general population by non-genetics specia- lists. US guidelines recommend patients with negative and Introduction: Expanded carrier screening (ECS) could positive results be counseled regarding limitations of test- inform reproductive decisions for couples when both part- ing.Asalaboratorythatprovidesaresultsdeliverysystem, ners carry the same autosomal recessive condition. We we report how this service is utilized for patients implemented our new GP-provided couple-based (free) undergoing NIPS. ECS-test for 50 serious recessive conditions (carrier-couple Upon results availability, providers are notified. If risk: 1 in 150). We investigated short and long term psy- negative, patient is contacted by automated email to access chological impact (presented here) as well as uptake and resultsthroughasecureportalwhereshemaywatchtailored feasibility. informationalvideos,request“on-demand”geneticcounsel- Methods: GPs from nine practices invited 4295 female ing,schedulealaterconsult,ordeclinealloftheabove.Ifa patients aged 18-40 to participate in a longitudinal survey. consultation is elected, a summary is sent to the ordering Inclusioncriteria:havinga(male)partner,planningchildren provider.Ifresultsarepositive,eithertheorderingprovider and not being pregnant. GP-provided pre-test counseling or our own genetic counselor contacts the patient directly. was required prior to accepting the test. Psychological 64,501 NIPS results were issued through the system. Of impact was measured as: 1) anxiety (6-item STAI, 4-point these, 4,352 patients elected genetic counseling. 96.1% of likert-scale; prorated score range 20-80) and 2) worry of all tests were for patients who received negative results. being a carrier-couple (6-items, 4-point likert-scale). Data Approximately 70% of patients requested an on-demand werecomparedbetweenfemaletest-acceptorsandtestnon- consult. Median consultation time was 14 minutes (inter- acceptors and over time (T0-T3 after six months) (T-tests/ quartile range: 4-10 minutes) for positive results and six non-parametric tests). minutes (interquartile range: 4-9 minutes) for negative710 J.delPicchia results. The median patient satisfaction rating for consulta- symposium, some of the techniques used in the workshops tions was 5.0/5.0. willbediscussedinmoredetail,alongwithadescriptionof Combining web education and tele-counseling, we how and why the activities work to improve family com- implemented a service that efficiently manages results munication, and why it is so important. This will lead to a disclosure. The majority of patients choosing to schedule a discussion with the audience participants about how some consultationhadnegativeresults,demonstratingadesirefor of these techniques might be used in genetic counselling post-test genetic counseling irrespective of test results. We sessions to build patients' confidence in communicating describeascalablemeansofmanifestingmedicalguidelines with their family members about their risks of an inherited on post-NIPS patient management, which is imperative to genetic condition. Relevant recent references: Mendes A, qualitycareasuptakegrowsamongthegeneralpopulation. Metcalfe,A,SousaL,MileP,ClarkeA,SequeirosJ,(2017) A. Arjunan: A. Employment (full or part-time); Communication of Information about Genetic Risks: Put- Significant; Counsyl. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock ting Families at the Center. Family Process https://doi.org/ options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; 10.1111/famp.12306 Rowland E, Plumridge G, Considine Counsyl. J. Kostialik: A. Employment (full or part-time); AM, Metcalfe A (2016) Preparing young people for future Significant; Counsyl. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock decision-makingaboutcancer riskinfamiliesaffectedorat options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; risk from hereditary breast cancer: A qualitative interview Counsyl. R. Ben-Shachar: A. Employment (full or part- study.EuropeanJournalofOncologyNursing.Vol.25,p9- time); Significant; Counsyl. E. Ownership Interest (stock, 15. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2016.08.006 Socio- stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Psychological Research in Genomics (SPRinG) Collabora- Significant; Counsyl. B. Denne: A. Employment (full or tive. Metcalfe A (Lead investigator) (2016) Training part-time); Significant; Counsyl. E. Ownership Interest Genetic Counsellors to Deliver an Innovative Therapeutic (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Intervention: Their views and experiences of Facilitating Significant; Counsyl. G.A. Lazarin: A. Employment (full Multi-Family Discussion Groups. Journal of Genetic or part-time); Significant; Counsyl. E. Ownership Interest Counselling https://doi.org/10.1007/s10897-016-0008-0. (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Socio-Psychological Research in Genomics (SPRinG) Significant; Counsyl. C. Haverty: A. Employment (full or Collaborative. Metcalfe A (Lead investigator) Developing part-time); Significant; Counsyl. E. Ownership Interest an intervention to facilitate family communication about (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); inheritedgeneticconditionsandtraininggeneticcounsellors Significant; Counsyl. initsdelivery(2015)EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics advanceonlinepublication,7October2015;https://doi.org/ 10.1038/ejhg.2015.215. ES1 Communication of genetic information with and A. Metcalfe: None. within families ES1.1 Poster presentations Facilitating Parents and their Children's Communication about Genetic Conditions: Techniques and Activities EMP1.01A Expanded carrier screening for recessive disorders: an A. Metcalfe analysis of the maturing market Sheffield Hallam University, Sheffield, United Kingdom D.Chokoshvili, D.F.Vears, P. Borry Many parents have difficulty talking to their children about KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium an inherited genetic condition that affects them or their child. There are several reasons for this difficulty but one Expanded carrier screening (ECS) for a large number of important factor is that parents fear their own and their recessive disorders is increasingly available to prospective children's emotional reaction. We have previously co- parents, predominantly through commercial providers. To designed workshops with parents, children, young people explorethe currentECS landscape,we performed a mixed- and genetic counsellors, which facilitate family commu- methods study which involved reviewing websites of ECS nicationaboutthegeneticcondition.Aspartofthedesigna providers and in-depth interviews. We performed a com- number of techniques and activities are used to facilitate prehensive, multi-step search of websites of commercial family communication including sculpting, tree of life, ECS providers in English and collected three types of data news reporting and goldfish bowl. As part of the for analysis: website text, information brochures/Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 711 educational materials, and video transcripts. In-depth or more independent mutations in NF1 gen. In our patient interviews were conducted with representatives of com- cohort, we have observed this fact in 3 of 450 families. mercialECSproviders.Datacollectedthroughbotharmsof Several possible mechanisms might offer an explanation: the study were analyzed using inductive content analysis. ahighfrequencygeneconversionoradefectinDNArepair Websites of 18 commercial providers met our inclusion segregating in the family as well as a highly unstable or criteria and 7 interviews comprise our data set. ECS pro- mutableNF1allele.Regardlessofthepossibleexplanation, viderswerehighlytransparentregardingthecompositionof these findings should contribute to increase the awareness their tests on their websites, and representatives were will- of the possibility of independent mutation events in NF1 ing to discuss ECS test development in detail in the inter- gene among relatives. In the context of prenatal screening, views. However, providers differed considerably in their the analysis of the whole NF1 gene should be considered views on how ECS tests should be developed. While most insteadofonlystudyingthemutationoftheaffectedparent. ECSprovidershadateamofgeneticcounselorsavailableto B. García-Jiménez: None. A. Ros: None. E. Castella- support patients before or after testing, genetic counseling nos: None. F. Roca-Ribas: None. E. Amilibia: None. A. was typically optional and provided upon request, largely Castillo: None. J. Becerra: None. I. Bielsa: None. A. explained by the providers’ efforts to minimize conflicts of Plana: None. E. Serra: None. C. Lazaro: None. I. interest in genetic counseling. In the interviews, ECS pro- Blanco: None. viders also reported increasingly prioritizing commercial partnershipswithmedicalinstitutions,andutilizingtheirin- EMP1.03C housedatabasesforresearchpurposes.AsECSisbecoming Preimplantation genetic testing (PGT): an acceptable widely available, its providers are strategically positioning alternative? A retrospective study in couples at risk for themselves tosucceed in amaturing market.It isimportant cystic fibrosis and haemoglobinopathies that ECS providers are mindful of the ethical issues arising in ECS. V.Bianchi1,M.Gatti1,F.Natacci1,C.Cesaretti1,G.A.Cagnoli1, D. Chokoshvili: None. D.F. Vears: None. P. E. Gavazzi1,D.Quagliarini2,M.Seia3,C. Curcio3, Borry: None. A. Biffignardi3,L. Porcaro3,G.Zuliani2,A. Riccaboni4, L. Restelli4,E. Somigliana4,F.Lalatta1 EMP1.02B Prenatal diagnosis in NF1: What should be offered? 1Clinical Genetics Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 2Department of B. García-Jiménez1,A. Ros1,E. Castellanos1, F.Roca-Ribas1, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda, E. Amilibia1,A. Castillo1,J.Becerra1, I.Bielsa1, A.Plana1, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 3Medical E. Serra1, C.Lazaro2,I. Blanco1 Genetics Laboratory, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy, 4Infertility Unit, 1Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain, 2Hospital Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore GermansTriasiPujol,HospitalGermansTriasiPujol,Spain Policlinico, Milan, Italy We present the case of a couple who decided to carry on a Introduction: We analyzed a cohort of couples who par- prenatal diagnosis due to the husband was affected by ticipatedinageneticcounsellingsessiontopreparethemfor Neurofibromatosistype 1 (NF1). The genetic test identified prenatal diagnosis (PD) or preimplantation genetic testing a pathogenic genetic variant in NF1 gene (PGT). Materials and Methods: We conducted a retro- (c.2033_2034insC) responsible of his disease but finally, spective study, over a three-year period (January 2015 to thecouplerejectedtoperformtheprenataldiagnosis.Ather December 2017). From a total of 620, we selected 244 birth, it was ordered the direct genetic test which showed couples, 181 at risk for haemoglobinopathies (Hbpathies) that she was not a carrier. In her paediatrician follow-ups and 63 for cystic fibrosis (CF). We have chosen these two wereidentifiedmorethansixcafeaulaitspotssuggestiveof autosomal recessive diseases because of their high pre- NF1.Therefore,thecompletegenetictestofNF1genewas valence in Italy and because our Institution offers a com- performed,identifyingthepresenceofadenovopathogenic prehensive service for both diseases which includes a variant (c.6792C>A). paediatric and adult clinical centre, a prenatal and an The co-existance of two or more different mutations is infertility unit and an on-site genetic laboratory for both highly unlikely to be found in a family affected by an reproductive options. autosomaldominantdisease.However,ithasbeenreported Results: We compared the 92 couples who chose PGT an unusual frequency of families affected of NF1 with two versusthe152couplesthatoptedforPD.Amongthe63CF712 J.delPicchia couples43%chosePDand57%optedforPGT,while69% cultural respcts. Overall, although participants found the of Hbpathies couples requested DP and 31% PGT. experience stressful and time consuming it remained their Conclusions: The aim of our study is to find indicators favored option. Conclusion: The findings of the research (clinical, genetic, socio-demographic) that can predict the have provided insight into the PGD experiences of Omani choice of PD versus PGT, in order to personalise genetic families. These provide some unique cultural and religious counsellingandtofindways torationalize scarceresources perspectives that can be considered when counselling basedontherealneedsofatriskcouples.Tothebestofour Omani, Arab and Muslim couples. knowledge this is the first Italian study that analyse such a K. Al-Kharusi: None. Z. Bruwer: None. T. homogeneous cohort (the same clinical entities, time span, Wessels: None. hospital, and full resources and opportunities). Moreover havingtwosignificativecohortsforbothdiseases,wecould EMP1.05A further dissect the data between pathologies and within the Do couples who opt for preimplantation genetic diagnosis same pathology. get pregnant spontaneously? V.Bianchi:None.M.Gatti:None.F.Natacci:None.C. Cesaretti: None. G.A. Cagnoli: None. E. Gavazzi: None. I.Slegers,C.Winter,K.VanBerkel,B.Dimitrov,K.Keymolen, D. Quagliarini: None. M. Seia: None. C. Curcio: None. M.Bonduelle, J.Nekkebroeck A. Biffignardi: None. L. Porcaro: None. G. Zuliani: None. A. Riccaboni: None. L. Restelli: None. E. Centre for Medical Genetics, Brussels, Belgium Somigliana: None. F. Lalatta: None. Introduction: Prenatal diagnosis (PND) and preimplanta- EMP1.04D tion genetic diagnosis (PGD) play an important role in The experience of Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis reproductive choice for couples who are at risk of trans- (PGD)amongMuslimcouplesinOmanintheMiddleEast mitting a genetic disorder. However, choosing between PND and PGD appears to be complex. The goal of this K. Al-Kharusi1,Z. Bruwer1,T. Wessels2 research project is to explore whether and why couples are switching between PND and PGD; in this specific analyses 1Sultan Qaboos University Hospital, Muscat, Oman, wefocusoncoupleswhochosePGDandstillgotpregnant 2University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa spontaneously. Methodology: An explorative retrospective analysis was Introduction: Preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) is performed on non-pregnant Belgian couples who chose to an alternative reproductive technology integrated with in- startaPGDtreatmentattheCentreforMedicalGeneticsof vitro fertilisation (IVF). It is a well-established technique theUZBrusselbetweenJanuary2016andSeptember2017. offering a reproductive option for families at a high risk of Results: Out of 425 couples, 30 couples (7%) got transmitting a genetic disorder, allowing them to avoid pregnant spontaneously. Across these 30 couples, 46% termination of pregnancy (TOP). Traditional prenatal test- got pregnant prior to a first PGD attempt i.e. during the inginvolvestestingfetalcellswiththeoptionofTOPofan threemonthtestdevelopment,53%performedatleastone affectedfetus.InArabcommunitieswhereTOPisrestricted PGD attempt. Only one couple planned their pregnancy, under the majority of Muslim law, invasive testing for this in contrast to nine couples who got pregnant unexpected. purposeisnotpreferable.Forthesecouplesandtheirfamily The motivation for the twenty other couples is unknown. members,PGDisafeasibleoptionasthefetusisdiagnosed In total, seventeen out of thirty couples ended up doing beforeimplantationandallowsforonlyhealthyembryosto PND. Among the remaining thirteen couples, only two be implanted. couples declined PND and one couple reported a Materials and method: This qualitative study utilised a miscarriage. The continuation of the other couples phenomenological approach to explore the experience of (n=10) is unknown. Omani families who had selected to undergo PGD as a Conclusion:Thesepreliminarydataconfirmthatcouples meansofreducingtheriskofhavingachildaffectedwitha are intentionally or not switching from PGD to a genetic disorder. Fourteen participants from eight families spontaneouspregnancy,despitetheirgeneticrisk.However, whounderwentPGDwereinterviewed.Datacollectedwere future research is needed to clarify the motivation for transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematic analysis. switching since this could have an influence on the clinical Results: The research identified four main themes; practice of genetic counselors. Anxiety “Taraqub”; Unforeseen; Secrecy; Me and My I. Slegers: None. C. Winter: None. K. Van Berkel: Partner. Some participants were confronted with unseen None. B. Dimitrov: None. K. Keymolen: None. M. procedural aspects that contradict with their religious and Bonduelle: None. J. Nekkebroeck: None.Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 713 EMP1.06B H.McMillan1,2, T.Austin1,3, T.Clancy1,2 Looking back A retrospective study of the unaffected BRCA1 & 2 testing completed by the Cheshire & 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, Merseyside Clinical Genetics Service from July 2013 - 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, March 2017 United Kingdom, 3West Midlands Regional Genetics Service, Birmingham, United Kingdom J.J. Bussell,D.L. Melville Introduction: Phenylketonuria (PKU) and medium chain Cheshire & Merseyside Clinical Genetics Service, Liverpool, acylCoAdehydrogenasedeficiency(MCADD)areincluded United Kingdom on the newborn blood spot (NBS) screening programme in England and Wales. Pressure exists from advocacy groups, IntheCheshire&MerseysideClinicalGenetics Servicewe cliniciansandresearcherstoincludemoreconditions.Others provide genetic counselling to a population of 2.8 million. stress the need for a comprehensive assessment of benefits, In 2013 the National Institute of Health and Care Excel- harms and costs before adding any conditions. Taking lence (NICE) released recommendations for the imple- accountofparents’viewsaboutthisisessentialbecausethey mentation of genetic testing of the BRCA1 & BRCA2 and their children are directly affected. genes for unaffected individuals with a family history of Methodology:ParentsofchildrenwithPKUorMCADD cancer: were ascertained through purposive sampling and semi- ‘Offer genetic testing in specialist genetic clinics to a structured interviews were conducted. Transcripts were personwithnopersonalhistoryofbreastorovariancancer analysed using interpretive phenomenological analysis. if their combined BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutation carrier Results:7of29eligibleparentsconsentedtoparticipate. probability is 10% or more and an affected relative is All described a parental duty to maximise the health of the unavailable for testing’1 child as the reason for accepting screening. But there was This project reflects back on our application of this limited engagement with standardised information provi- guidelinewithinourservicefrom2013-2017andevaluate sion. Parents perceived screening as routine and had our compliance with N.I.C.E guidance when offering expected a normal result. All supported an expansion of unaffected BRCA testing to our patients. the screening programme, advocating recognition of the We found that of 157 unaffected BRCA tests performed broader benefits of early diagnosis to families. in our service between, there was an average Manchester Discussion:Ourfindingsshowsomedivergencebetween score of 25. The BRCA mutation and Variant of Uncertain parentalviewsandthoseofhealthprofessionalsontheNBS Significance (V.U.S) combined pick-up rate was 22.29% screening programme. Any further expansion should be andtheredoesnotappeartobeanysignificanttrendsinthe preceded by a review of the efficacy of current information amountofteststhatwerecompleted.Additionallytherewas provision, as well as more qualitative explorations of how anincidentalCHEK2pick-uprateof1.91%.Wefoundthat couples can be supported during the diagnostic period. 21 patients had <10% BRCA probability and therefore did H.McMillan:None.T.Austin:None.T.Clancy:None. notmeettheN.I.C.Erecommendations.Thereasonsforthis included Jewish ancestry, small family size and uncon- EMP1.08D firmed familial testing. Telegenetic counselling consultations - A qualitative study REFERENCES: ofcriticalimplementationfactors,accordingtohealthcare 1.N.I.C.E.(2013).Familialbreastcancer:classification, professionals in Sweden care and managing breast cancer and related risks in people with a family history of breast cancer. Available: R. Pestoff1,2,P. Johansson3,4,P. Nilsen1,C. Gunnarsson5,6 https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/cg164/chapter/ Recommendations. Last accessed 9th February 2018. 1Division of community medicine, Department of Medical and J.J. Bussell: None. D.L. Melville: None. Health Sciences, Faculty of Medicine Health Sciences, Linköping, Sweden, 2Centre for rare diseases in Southeast EMP1.07C region,Linköping,Sweden,3Departmentofsocialandwelfare Exploring the views of parents of children affected by studies, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden, phenylketonuriaormediumchainacylCoAdehydrogenase 4Department ofInternalMedicineandDepartment ofMedical deficiencyonextendingthenumberofmetabolicconditions and Health Sciences, Linköping University, Norrköping, includedintheNewbornBloodSpotScreeningProgramme Sweden, 5Department of Clinical and Experimental Science, in England and Wales Linköping University, Department of Genetics, Linköping,714 J.delPicchia Sweden, 6Centre for rare diseases in Southeast region of Materials and Methods: We have collected data about Sweden, Linköping, Sweden thekindofandnumberofgeneticcounsellingconsultations duringthefirstthreeyearsofourgeneticcounselingservice. Thisresearchfocusedonanalternativemodeofdeliveryfor Genetic counselling consultations have been differen- genetic counselling in Sweden. The aim was to explore tiated according to first visits and successive ones. perceptions of telegenetic counselling consultations among Furthermore, these consultations has been classified into: healthcareprofessionals(HCPs)inordertoidentifycrucial preconception and prenatal focused on the reproductive factors for implementation in Swedish Health care. Tele- genetic counseling, pediatric consultation related to the genetic counselling is the use of videoconferencing to genetic counseling about family repercussions of genetic provide genetic counselling. Due to factors such as lack of diseases on its children and adult consultation based on professional genetic counsellors, vast geographical dis- diagnosis confirmation and family studies. tances, and physical barriers genetic counselling is not Results: always offered to patients in need. Qualitative, semi- GeneticCounseling Totalnº Nº Preconceptionandprenatal Paediatrics Adults structured interviews were performed with 16 genetic First 305 205 119 28 58 counselling providers, in the Southeasthealthcare region in Successive 100 58 14 28 Sweden, and a phenomenographic approach was applied. First 341 241 135 52 54 Significant exerts were identified in each transcript, which Successive 100 56 22 22 First 445 372 137 94 141 ledtosubcategoriesthatsupportedthemaincategories.The Successive 73 37 14 22 findings reveal three main categories: Perceived require- ments for optimal use; Impact on clinical practice and Patient benefits. Benefits were identified for both patients Conclusions: During the first three years of genetic andHCPs,butalsospecificbarrierstoovercomebeforethis counselling service implementation, there has been an mode of delivery is introduced into the clinical genetic exponential increase in demand. This fact demonstrates the counselling setting. The findings from this study could good acceptance of genetic counselling from other services improve the use and accessibility of genetic counselling in in our hospital Sweden.However,alsotheperceptionsofpatientswillneed N. Capdevila: None. M. Guitart: None. N. Baena: to be sought in further exploratory research to include as None. A. Ruiz: None. E. Gabau: None. many critical factors as possible. R.Pestoff:None.P.Johansson:None.P.Nilsen:None. EMP1.10B C. Gunnarsson: None. Anewmodelofcareforwomenataveragetomoderaterisk of familial breast cancer EMP1.09A Genetic Counselling Service in tertiary Hospital of K. J.Storey, E.Higgs, R. Purvis, M.Kentwell, T. Schenberg, Catalonia, experience for the first 3 years Y. Antill N.Capdevila, M.Guitart, N.Baena,A. Ruiz,E. Gabau Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Parkville, Australia Parc Taulí Sabadell, University Hospital, Sabadell, Spain Introduction:Duetoincreasedawarenessandreducedtest costs, referrals for advice and genetic testing for familial Introduction:Geneticcounsellingisconsideredanintegral breast cancer (FBC) have increased in recent years. Many part of medical care for patients with genetic diseases in referralsareforwomenataveragetomoderateriskforFBC. developed countries. Additional pressure to already busy genetic services has In Spain, genetic counselling is recognized in the required consideration of novel solutions. Bioethical Law since 2006, but its implementation is still Method: A group seminar was offered to women from in progress. familiesassessed asnon-high risk for FBC, while minimis- The Genetics Unitin our hospital was consolidated in ing impact on waitlists for families at high risk. Seminars 1985. It was made up by a biologist specialized in covered a range of issues including: factors known to laboratorygeneticsandapediatricianspecializedinclinical influence breast cancer risk (including non-genetic), breast genetics who also offered genetic counselling. In January cancer genetic risk assessment, self-funded genetic testing, 2015, a genetic counsellor was incorporated into the and psychosocial issues commonly arising in families Genetics Unit starting an specific genetic counseling affected by cancer. Brief consults with a genetics staff service. memberwereavailable directlyafter theseminar todiscussAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 715 any issues specific to the individual. Attendees could and Adams MB (2015) Randomized Trial of Telegenetics choose to proceed with genetic testing on the day. vs.In-PersonGeneticCounseling:Cost,PatientSatisfaction Results: Since April 2015, 5 seminars have been and Attendance. J Genet Couns. 24(6): 961-70. conducted with a total of 46 attendees from 40 families Otten E, Birnie E, Lucassen AM, Ranchor AV and Van (between 6 and 15 attendees per seminar). Individual Langen IM (2016) Telemedicine Uptake Among Genetics consults were requested by 41 (89%) attendees. A third Professionals in Europe: Room for Expansion. Eur J Hum (33%) proceeded with privately funded genetic testing. Of Genet 24(2): 157-63. theresultsavailable,nomutationswereidentified.Feedback J.J. Bussell: None. D.L. Melville: None. forms were gathered from attendees of 4 seminars. Of the 27 (63%) responses, 26 (96%) reported their knowledge EMP1.12D improved,25(93%)indicatedtheirneedsweremet,and17 Evaluation of a centralised national telephone genetic (63%) found their perception of breast cancer risk reduced. counselling service that facilitates BRCA1/2 testing for Conclusion: This streamlined approach has been beneficial women with recurrent high-grade serous ovarian cancer for patients while minimising the impact on our genetics service. L. E.Forrest1,2,J. McKinley1,R. ForbesShepherd1,2, K.J. Storey: None. E. Higgs: None. R. Purvis: None. V. Rasmussen1,P. A. James1,2,B. Meiser3,4,M. Young5 M.Kentwell:None.T.Schenberg:None.Y.Antill:None. 1Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer EMP1.11C Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 2Sir Peter MacCallum Makinggeneticcounsellingservicesaccessible-Resultsofa Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, pilot service delivery feasibility study of telemedicine Melbourne, Australia, 3Prince of Wales Clinical School, The appointments University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 4Psychosocial Research, Hereditary Cancer Clinic, Prince of J.J. Bussell,D.L. Melville WalesHospital,Sydney,Australia,5GenomeOne,TheGarvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia Cheshire & Merseyside Regional Clinical Genetics Service, Liverpool, United Kingdom Introduction: Women with recurrent high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) with germline BRCA1/2 muta- We provide genetic counselling to a population of 2.8 tions benefit from poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) million, including 80,000 on the Isle of Man. Literature inhibitors. Prompt access to genetic testing is essential to from the US and the Netherlands suggests that telegenetic guidetreatmentdecisions,yetuptakeofBRCA1/2testingby consultations could be an alternative to face to face Australian women with HGSOC remains low. In 2016, a consultations. national centralised telephone genetic counselling (TGC) This small pilot study aimed to test the feasibility and serviceforwomenwithHGSOCwasestablishedtoaddress acceptability of telemedicine services. A European study barriers to BRCA1/2 testing in Australia. This study exam- showedthatonly9%ofgeneticsprofessionalscurrentlyuse inedhowwomenwithHGSOCexperiencedreceivingTGC. telemedicine facilities (Otten et al., 2016). It is unknown Methods: 213 (75%) women with recurrent HGSOC who how widespread this practice is within the UK. usedtheTGCservicewereinvitedtoparticipateinasurvey. Of 60 patients offered a telemedicine appointment, six Survey domains included accessibility of genetic services, accepted. Advantages included convenience for the patient acceptabilityandexperiencesofTGC,anddecision-making and reduction in travel. Reduced quality of interaction and about BRCA1/2 testing. technologyproblemsaroseandthesefindingsareconsistent Results: 107 women (48%) responded to the survey; withBuchananetal.,(2015)andOttenetal.,(2016).Of21 7.5% tested positive for a BRCA1/2 mutation. Mean time patients asked, 14 felt telemedicine was an acceptable since genetic testing was 6.0 months (0.4-18.6 months). alternative, however 7 did not. Women predominantly used TGC to inform clinical In conclusion, telemedicine appointments stimulated management of their cancer and to overcome geographical mixed reviews. But in order to be a viable alternative, the barriers to their local genetics service, and were highly hosting IT system needs to be robust and clinicians require satisfied with the TGC content, process, and timing. relevant training and support. Overcoming these problems However, their preferred provider for BRCA1/2 testing would enhance the acceptability to patients and clinicians. was their oncologist. The majority (64%) made informed References choices regarding genetic testing. Overall, women reported Buchanan AH, Datta SK, Skinner CS, Hollowell GP, limited impact from results disclosure after genetic testing. BeresfordHF,FreelandT,RogersB,BolingJ,MarcomPL716 J.delPicchia Nineteen women reported severe ovarian cancer-related EMP1.14B distress. Does the type of disease matter when receiving secondary Conclusions:TGCisanacceptableservicetomainstream findings? A qualitative vignette study on Finnish adults' treatment focussed BRCA1/2 genetic testing for women views withrecurrentHGSOC.Thisserviceovercamegeographical barriers impeding access to genetics services ensuring M.Vornanen1,K. Aktan-Collan1,N.Hallowell2,H.Konttinen1, BRCA1/2 testing was facilitated expediently to inform A. Haukkala1 treatment. Funding: NHMRC program grant (APP 1092856). 1University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland, 2University of L.E. Forrest: None. J. McKinley: None. R. Forbes Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom Shepherd: None. V. Rasmussen: None. P.A. James: None. B. Meiser: None. M. Young: None. Background: Validated, clinically actionable secondary findings of genomic sequencing (SFs) are recommended to EMP1.13A bereportedbacktoconsentedpatients/researchparticipants. Parent's understanding and attitudes towards therapeutic Professionals have discussed how to categorize SFs when trials in Rett syndrome asking for consent. To create SF reporting practices that best serve people’s needs, public’s perspectives need to be S. Russ,A. J.Clarke integrated in these discussions. Methods: We performed a qualitative vignette study Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom among Finnish adults. Participants were asked to imagine themselvesreceivingaletterthatrevealedaSFpredisposing Novel 'rational' treatments are being developed for numer- toaseverebutactionabledisease–familialhypercholester- ous rare diseases, including Rett syndrome (RTT). Ther- olemia, long QT syndrome, Lynch syndrome, or apeutic trials will be required to determine the safety and Li–Fraumeni syndrome. Participants wrote down their efficacy of these treatments but face significant challenges initial reactions to receiving this hypothetical information from the small pool of patients available to participate and (N=29), and then attended focus group discussions (N= will raise issues of ethics and communication. 23). Written reactions and transcribed focus group discus- Semi-structured interviews were conducted with parents sions were analysed using inductive thematic analysis. ofpatientswithRTT(n=10)toexploretheir(hypothetical) Results:WrittenfirstreactionstohypotheticalSFsvaried responses to an invitation to participate in a trial. according to perceived severity and familiarity of disease. Parentsthoughtclinicaltrialswereimportantbutmultiple Focus groups considered cancer related SFs more threaten- factors would impact on their decision. Families also ingthancardiovascularrelatedSFs,butlessdistressingthan experienced tension between their wish to participate in genetic risks for psychiatric or neurological disorders. In trials and the practical/emotional barriers, especially if an addition to actionability, illness severity in terms of lived affected daughter's health could be described as fragile and experience, access to available treatment, and individual’s vulnerable. Parents often demonstrated their competing responsibility to control risk were perceived to vary across sense of 'responsibilities' as both the parent of an affected diseases and influence how threatening knowing one’s daughter and as a member of the RTT community. Among genetic risk would be. parents of younger affected girls in the cohort (aged 11-18 Conclusion:Inadditiontoclinicalvalidityandutility,SF years), there was also some evidence of therapeutic consent and reporting practices need to take into account misconception. potential familiarity and lay illness representations of Awareness of the family perspectives on clinical trials different diseases. (Funding: Academy of Finland, grant willbeimportantinenablingrecruitment.Thiswillinvolve 275033 to AH.). (i) using a cross-over trial design, where feasible, (ii) M. Vornanen: None. K. Aktan-Collan: None. N. minimisingrequirementforhospitaladmissionaspartofthe Hallowell: None. H. Konttinen: None. A. trial, and (iii) taking care to minimise the sense of tension Haukkala: None. set up by an invitation to participate in a clinical trial. This willmeantakingcarenottoinflatetheexpectationsofwhat EMP1.15C the treatment under trial is likely to achieve. This may Howaremoderngenetherapiesportrayedtothepublic?A reduce barriers to recruitment and improve family experi- contentanalysisofselectednewspapercoverageconcerning ences of participation. the approval of Kymriah in the US, Germany and S. Russ: None. A.J. Clarke: None. SwitzerlandAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 717 N.Aebi1,H.MeyerzuSchwabedissen1,B. Zimmermann2 Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Federal Research Center Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Novosibirsk, Russian 1Biopharmacy,DepartmentofPharmaceuticalSciences,Basel, Federation, 4Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Switzerland, 2Institute for Biomedical Ethics, Basel, Russian Federation Switzerland MaincauseofcongenitaldeafnessintheSakhaRepublicis Introduction: On 30 August 2017, Kymriah (launched by recessive mutation c.-23+1G>A in the GJB2 gene. The c.- Novartis)becamethefirstgenetherapyapprovedbytheUS 23+1G>A carrier frequency among Yakut population is Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the treatment of extremely high (10%) [Barashkov et al., 2016] and the children and young adults suffering from Acute Lympho- probabilityofthebirthofdeafchildbybothhearingparents cystic Leucemia (ALL). The aim of this study was to ana- (with unknown GJB2 status) according torecessive type of lyzehowprintmediainformedthepublicaboutKymriahby inheritance may be estimated as 0.25%. We developed exploringwhich aspects of the therapy were emphasized in specialized questionnaire consisted of 21 questions con- media coverage and whether the assessment of gene cerning genetic testing of deafness. 304 young people therapies by media changed after the FDA approval. (meanage21years)wereinvolvedinthesurvey.Thisstudy Methodology: We qualitatively analyzed print media aims to evaluate the awareness of young hearing people articlesaboutgenetherapyin2017usingthematicanalysis. about existence of “genetic deafness”, their understanding The analysis was focused on broadsheet newspapers from of peculiarities of deafness inheritance, and their opinions the US, Germany and the German-speaking part of about hypothetical risk of the birth of deaf child. For this Switzerland. purpose we analyzed the respondents' answers to appro- Results: Key aspects in print media coverage on gene priate questions from questionnaire. Respondents' answers therapy shifted from good medical results and side effects wereasfollows:"Isdeafnessahereditarydisease?"-"yes"- towards the issue of high treatment costs after Kymriah’s 62.2%, "nо" - 36.5%, no response - 1.3%; "Is there a FDA-approval. Media reporting about Kymriah was most probability of birth of deaf child by hearing parents?" - profound in the US, but merely present in Germany. In "yes"-83.9%,"no"-15.1%,noresponse-1.0%;"Istherea Switzerland, the focus was on high treatment costs and probabilityofbirthofdeafchildbyyou?"-"Idon’tknow"- success-rates. 65.1%, "no" - 29.3%, "yes"- 4.3%, no response - 1.3%. Conclusions: The public was exposed to a rather Thus, the majority of respondents (83.9%) admitted a skeptical reporting, focusing more on treatment costs or potentialriskofthebirthofdeafchildrenbyhearingparents side effects of Kymriah than on the medical advantages of but only 4.3% of respondents may attribute this risk to healingALL.ThiswasmostextremeinSwitzerland,where themselves. The study was supported by RFBR (#18-013- Novartis’ headquarter is situated. Despite the upcoming 00738_А), FASO_BRK0556-2017-0003 and the Project of submission of Kymriah’s approval in the European Union, the MESRF of Russia (#6.1766.2017). the subject of gene therapies was not discussed extensively A.M. Cherdonova: None. A.V. Solovyev: None. V.G. in German newspapers compared to the other countries. Pshennikova:None.N.A.Barashkov:None.G.P.Roma- Unsurprisingly,reportingwasbroadestintheUSwherethe nov: None. A.A. Nikanorova: None. S.K. Kononova: therapy got approved. None. O.L. Posukh: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. F.M. N. Aebi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Teryutin: None. Wettstein Apotheke (pharmacist assistant 30%). H. Meyer zu Schwabedissen: None. B. Zimmermann: None. EMP1.17A Who has a say in mass media coverage about predictive EMP1.16D genetictesting?Acomparativemediacontentanalysisfrom Opinions of young hearing people living in the Sakha UK and Switzerland Republic (Russia) about potential risk of the birth of deaf child B. M.Zimmermann1,S. Kolb2, N.Aebi3, B.S. Elger1,D.M. Shaw1 A. M.Cherdonova1,A. V.Solovyev1,2,V.G.Pshennikova1,2, N.A.Barashkov1,2,G.P.Romanov1,2,A.A.Nikanorova2,S.K. 1Institute of Biomedical Ethics, University of Basel, Basel, Kononova1,2,O.L. Posukh3,4,S. A.Fedorova1,2,F.M. Switzerland, 2Department of Business Communication, Teryutin1,2 UniversityofappliedSciences-HTWBerlin,Berlin,Germany, 3Biopharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1Institute of Natural Sciences, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland 2Yakut Scientific Center of Complex Medical Problems,718 J.delPicchia Introduction: Predictive genetic testing (PGT) is increas- Neonatology,RabinMedicalCenter,PetahTikva,Israel,5The ingly used in clinics and by direct-to-consumer genetic Raphael Recanati Genetics Institute, Rabin Medical Center, testingcompanies,butisaccompaniedbyimportantethical, Beilinson Hospital, Petah Tikva, Israel, 6Pediatric Genetics legal and social issues. A balanced public debate is Unit,SchneiderChildrenMedicalCenter,PetahTikva,Israel, important to enable lay people to form informed autono- 7Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, mous opinions. Our research question thus was: To what Israel, 8Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Rabin Medical extend is media coverage about PGT balanced by citing a Center,PetahTikva,Israel,9TheHelenSchneiderHospitalfor high variety of stakeholders and highlighting both positive Women, Rabin Medical Center, Petah Tikva, Israel and negative aspects? Methodology: We performed a quantitative comparative media content analysis on two Introduction: Chromosomal microarray analysis (CMA) Swiss-German and two UK broadsheet newspapers about has largely replaced conventional karyotyping in prenatal PGT in the period 2011-2016. Stakeholders that were cited testing. The major advantage of CMA is higher detection inthecoveragewerecollected,aswellastheirevaluationof rateofabnormalities.Nevertheless,CMAalsoincreasesthe the topics. likelihood of identifying susceptibility loci and variants Results: A total of 137 articles matched our inclusion associated with adult-onset conditions. Implementation of criteria, 72% of which were published in the UK. Most CMA in prenatal testing is debated and no international stakeholders cited in coverage were natural scientists and consensus has been reached. This study examined attitudes medical doctors, but other experts, i.e., bioethicists or of women towards reporting of genomic testing results in lawyers were rare. Switzerland quoted more politicians, pregnancy. Methods: Population-based study of women whereas UK coverage more frequently featured statements hospitalized in maternity departments. Post-partum inter- of affected people. On average, Swiss articles quoted three views were conducted using a computerized multiple- times more stakeholders than UK articles. Evaluation of choice questionnaire. PGT was more positive in the UK. Switzerland had more Results: 750 women (75% response rate) participated in negative and ambivalent articles. the study. Women’s responses clearly differed based on Conclusions: Our findings show that media coverage severity, treatment availability and penetrance of condi- differs significantly between Switzerland and the UK, tions. For example, 69% of women reported an interest in illustrating cultural differences. Switzerland, which is receivinggeneticinformationonseverecongenitaldiseases; considered more conservative and legally restrictive 61%wereinterestedininformationontreatable adult-onset towards genetics, had less coverage but more balanced diseases, compared to 33% when treatment is unavailable; reportingintermsofamountandvariabilityofstakeholders 65% expressed interest in receiving information when risk as well as evaluations compared to the more genetics- forautismwas40%asopposedto41%whenriskwas10%. friendly UK, where coverage was more positive. Psycho-social characteristics, such as educational attain- B.M. Zimmermann: None. S. Kolb: None. N. Aebi: A. ment, level of religious observance, and degree of concern Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Wettstein for newborn’s health, were associated with responses Apotheke Basel, Switzerland (pharmacy assistant, 30%). (p-values<0.01). 73% of participants thought that parents B.S. Elger: None. D.M. Shaw: None. should be able to decide what results to receive. Conclusions:Participants, representingthepopulationof EMP1.18B pregnant women in Israel, are generally interested in Prenatal chromosomal microarray analysis: A population- receiving information in pregnancy on a range of genetic based study of women’s attitudes towards reporting of conditions, yet responses differ by characteristics of genomic testing results in pregnancy condition and respondent. Participants support autonomy ofparentsindecidingwhatinformationtheyshouldreceive. V. Libman1,M.Macarov2,Y. Sompolinsky3,M.Osovsky4, Funding: Israel NIHP grant 2015/82 A. HutaWinter2,D.Hochner-Celnikier3,L. Basel5,6,7,8, V. Libman: None. M. Macarov: None. Y. Sompo- A. Wiznitzer9,7,Y. Neumark1,V. Meiner2,A. Frumkin2, linsky:None.M.Osovsky:None.A.HutaWinter:None. Y. Friedlander1,S. Shkedi-Rafid2,H.Hochner1 D. Hochner-Celnikier: None. L. Basel: None. A. Wiznit- zer: None. Y. Neumark: None. V. Meiner: None. A. 1BraunSchoolofPublicHealth,HebrewUniversity-Hadassah Frumkin: None. Y. Friedlander: None. S. Shkedi-Rafid: Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 2Department of Genetics None. H. Hochner: None. and Metabolic Diseases, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Department of Obstetrics EMP1.19C and Gynecology Mount Scopus, Hebrew University-Hadassah The attitudes of gamete and embryo donors towards the Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel, 4Department of genetic screening of donorsAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 719 N.Somanathan1, D.Amor1,S. Lewis2 University of Iceland and Landspitali, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7Dept. of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali – 1University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2Murdoch National University Hospital,, Reykjavik, Iceland Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia Introduction: In the Icelandic genetics clinic we use a Background: Chromosomal karyotyping and carrier genealogy database and nationwide cancer registry to con- screeningare two different forms ofgenetic screeningused struct electronic mega-pedigrees. Experience with HBOC within IVF clinics, to test donors for chromosomal worksuggeststhat3°pedigreeshaveoptimalefficiency,but abnormalities and common single gene disorders. To date, is this dependent on number of individuals? there is no research available that explores the opinions of Methods: The study group comprised randomly chosen thedonors towards thecurrent andfuturegenetic screening 209 women from the genetics clinic: 104 positive and practices. 105 negative for the founder pathogenic BRCA2: Method: Nine gamete and embryo donors in total were c.771_775delTCAAA. Boadicea to estimate the likelihood interviewedabouttheirjourneyinchoosingtodonate,their of having the PV and MedCalc™ Receiver Operating experiences of completing the donor information and Characteristic (ROC) Curve Analysis and C-statistics genetic health questionnaires and their attitudes towards were used. current and future genetic screening practices within IVF. Results: To further evaluate the relationship between the Results: The donors were comfortable answering the size of the pedigree and efficiency of risk assessment, we Genetic Health Questionnaires (GHQ) and understood its dividedthe3°pedigreesintotwogroupsrankedonthebasis significance for recipients. The majority of participants of number of individuals in each pedigree. The lower found the current genetic screening practices important. In number group (n = 105, average no. of individuals 30, regards to future screening, all the participants were range = 9-46) had a C-statistic of 0.718, but the higher apprehensive about advanced genomic technologies such number group (n=104, average no. of individuals 133, as: Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) and Whole Exome range =46-220) hada C-statisticof 0.822.We dividedthe Sequencing (WES). Their main concerns focused on the 4° pedigrees in two according to size. The lower number disclosure of their results and whether these technologies group (n =103, average no. of individuals 56, range = 15- would lead to the creation of designer babies. 87)had aC-statistic of 0.719,but thehigher numbergroup Conclusion: This study suggests that gamete donors (n=103,averageno.ofindividuals145,range87-257)had understandtheneedforgeneticscreening;however,thereis a C-statistic of 0.815. The differences between the groups a misconception about the use of genomic technologies, for 3° and 4° relative pedigrees were not statistically suggesting an educational need amongst the public. If significant. We converted the lower number groups in 3° genomic technologies were to be introduced into IVF pedigrees to 4° relative pedigrees, but there was no centers for the screening of donors, then health profes- improvement in the C-statistic (0.718). sionals need to consider whether this type of screening Conclusions: There was no gain of efficiency by should be targeted towards well understood disease, that including 4° relatives. benefit from treatment or screening. V. Stefansdottir: None. H. Skirton: None. G. Olafs- N. Somanathan: None. D. Amor: None. dottir: None. O.T. Johannsson: None. H. Olafsdottir: S. Lewis: None. None. L. Tryggvadottir: None. J.J. Jonsson: None. EMP1.20D EMP1.21A Does optimal size of cancer pedigrees depend on degree of Hereditary cancer predisposition syndromes: Evaluation relatedness or the number of individuals? on the influence of personality in predictive genetic testing V. Stefansdottir1,2,H.Skirton3,G.Olafsdottir4,O.T. L. Moreno1,T. Ocaña1,A. Sánchez1,M.Salinas2,S. Iglesias2, Johannsson5,H.Olafsdottir6,L.Tryggvadottir4,J.J.Jonsson7,2,6 A. Teulé2,J. Peri1, F.Balaguer1 1Landspitali National University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 1Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain, 2Institut 2Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Univ. of Català d'Oncologia, Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain Iceland, Reykjavik, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Faculty ofHealth and Human Sciences, University of Plymouth, Plymouth, United Background: Knowing the carrier status of mutations in Kingdom, 4Icelandic Cancer Registry, Reykjavik, Iceland, cancer predisposing genes has been hypothesized to have a 5Dept.OfMedicalOncology,Landspitali–NationalUniversity negative effect on psychological well-being. Different Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 6Genetical committee of the published studies have not reached any consensus. Some720 J.delPicchia personality traits have been suggested to have a great Methods and Materials: Eligible women were invited influence on psychological distress but only two studies from 4 general practices. Participants completed family have assessed this issue in this population. history and psychological outcome questionnaires at base- Objectives: Assess the psychological impact of genetic line, with follow-up outcome questionnaire at 2 weeks. testing, evaluate changes in social life and behaviour, and Participants’ risk of familial breast cancer was assessed estimate if personality influences the use of medical using bespoke computer programme (FaHRAS). Outcomes resources. relatedtoanxiety,emotionalresponse,worryandperceived Methodology: Ten adults undergoing predictive genetic risk were measured pre- and post-intervention. testing for cancer predisposition syndromes were included Results: Outcome variables were low at baseline, scores between January and March 2017. Demographic informa- in the lower half of their range, specifically state anxiety tion, personality traits, psychological distress, behaviour in withmedianscoreof33/80forthewholecohort.Therewas some daily activities and medical resources use were nosignificancechangefrombaselinefor13/18ofoutcomes collected before testing and two months after results tested. The most significant increases in median anxiety disclosure. scores were from baseline to follow-up in the higher than Results and discussion: High pre- and post-test psycho- population risk group (p=.032, r=.18). There were logical distress was associated to low education levels, significant decreases in median breast cancer worry from having psychopathological history, pursuing testing for baseline to follow-up in population risk group (p=.001, offspring,andbeingrecruitedatICO(p<0.05).Itwasalso r=.18) and median perceived relative risk (p=.009, associated with high negative affect, detachment, psychoti- r=.14). cismandnoveltyseeking,andlowrewarddependence,self- Conclusions: This study suggests proactive family directiveness, cooperativeness, and persistence (p<0.05). history screening does not induce adverse psychological Highpost-testdistresswasalsoassociatedwithhavingpre- impact in most women assessed. However, anxiety did testpsychologicaldistress(p<0.05).It wouldbeimportant significantly increase in the higher than population group toknow ourcounselees’personality because itgives usthe which requires further exploration. opportunitytoknowwhotooffermoresupportandhowto Grant reference: 205 and 206 personalize genetic counselling. B. Dutton: None. N. Qureshi: None. S. Weng: None. Conclusions: Our results suggest that there are some E. Robertson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- personalitytraitswhichcaninfluencepsychologicaldistress nificant; FaHRAS. inindividualsundergoingpredictivegenetictesting.Further studies need to be performed in order to extrapolate these EMP1.23C results to this particular population. ThepsychologicalimpactofRapidBRCA1/2genetictesting L. Moreno: None. T. Ocaña: None. A. Sánchez: None. to guide cancer treatment M. Salinas: None. S. Iglesias: None. A. Teulé: None. J. Peri: None. F. Balaguer: None. A. Dearing,S.Limb, K. Kohut,K.Snape, H.Hanson EMP1.22B St George's Hospital, London, United Kingdom Exploring the psychological impact of conducting population-based family history screening for familial Introduction: Increasingly, genetic test results are used to breast cancer influence cancer treatment. To meet this need, the South West Thames Regional Genetics Service developed a B. Dutton1,N.Qureshi1, S.Weng1,E. Robertson2 “RapidAccess”pathway.Eligiblewomenareconsentedfor BRCA1/2 analysis by their Oncology team at the point of 1University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom, diagnosis, and then contacted by the Clinical Genetics 2FaHRAS, Nottingham, United Kingdom department within two working days to discuss. However, the psychological impact of this pathway is unclear. Background: Around 5% of breast cancer cases are her- Aims: To gain an understanding of the psychological editary. These breast cancers can be associated with poorer responseofwomenwhohavegenetictestingatthepointof health outcomes. Taking a family history can identify diagnosis(“RapidPatients,RP”),andcompareittowomen women at increased cancer risk. Women at higher than who have genetic testing after their cancer treatment has population risk should be referred for assessment. Those at completed (“Diagnostic Patients, DP”). population risk would be cared for by their doctor. How- Methods: RP (n=98) and DP (n=99) who were ever, it is still unclear what psychological impact of referred between January 2017 and December 2017 were proactively screening for breast cancer has on women. sent online surveys. The survey was composed of serviceAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 721 satisfaction items modified from George et al. (2016), the childbearing plans, conversations with their healthcare Multidimensional Impact of Cancer Risk Assessment providers, and cancer risk perception. All the women who (MICRA) Questionnaire, and open-ended, qualitative had taken tamoxifen experienced transient side effects, questions. yet all bar one continued with the medication. Conclusion: Preliminary Results and Discussion: Twenty-six (13%) Decision-making about tamoxifen was nuanced and participants have completed the survey to date (07/02/ informed by considerations characteristic of young adult- 2018), and data collection is on-going. Although both hood,especiallychildbearing.Whilefewparticipantschose subgroups report being satisfied with the process and tamoxifen, it is important to offer young women with qualityofgeneticcounselling,RPsscoredhigherondistress BRCA1/2mutations different risk managementstrategies to and uncertainty subscales on the MICRA. This may reflect enable choices that meet their needs during young theirfeelingsofdistressanduncertaintywiththeiron-going adulthood. Funding: National Breast Cancer Foundation cancer treatment and prognosis. Analysis of the complete (PF-14-009), Australia. datasetwillbepresented,identifyingsignificantdifferences L.E. Forrest: None. R. Forbes Shepherd: None. between the two groups. This work may have implications M. Young: None. L.A. Keogh: None. P.A. James: None. for practice, including providing on-going psychological support to women receiving treatment. EMP1.25A A. Dearing: None. S. Limb: None. K. Kohut: None. Evaluation of the eviQ genetic testing guidelines and risk- K. Snape: None. H. Hanson: None. managementforpeoplewithhereditarycancersyndromes: Survey and audit of Familial Cancer Clinics EMP1.24D Decision-making and experience of tamoxifen as R. Kaur1,B. Meiser1,M.Peate1,R.Ward2,F. Macrae3,4, chemoprevention to manage breast cancer risk for young J.Hiller5,J. Kirk6,A. Trainer7,G.Mitchell7,8 women with a BRCA1/2 mutation 1Prince of Wales Clinical School, Sydney, Australia, L. E.Forrest1,R. ForbesShepherd1,M.Young2,L. A. Keogh3, 2University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia, 3The Royal P. A.James1 Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 4University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5Swinburne University of 1PeterMacCallumCancerCentre,Melbourne,Australia,2The Technology, Hawthorn, Australia, 6Crown Princess Mary GarvanInstituteofMedicalResearch,Sydney,Australia,3The Cancer Centre at Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia 7PeterMacCallumCancerCentre,Melbourne,Australia,8The Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Medical Oncology, Introduction: Tamoxifen can be offered to premenopausal University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia women at high risk of breast cancer, and can reduce breast cancer risk by approximately 38%. Tamoxifen is a less Introduction: Web-based point-of-care cancer genetics invasive option for risk management than risk reducing guidelines were launched across Australia in 2005 surgery, yet uptake among young women with BRCA1/2 (http://www.eviq.org.au) to support the clinical decision- mutations is low. Evidence about decision-making and making in patient care. This project aimed to assess adherence to tamoxifen stems largely from clinical trials adherence to guidelines. Materials and methods: Data col- with older women. This study examines decision-making lection was performed by trained genetic counsellors at 13 andexperienceoftamoxifenbyyoungwomenwithBRCA1/ familial cancer clinics across Australia. (i) A file audit was 2 mutations. Methods: Women aged 18-40 years with carried out to assess compliance with guidelines regarding BRCA1/2 mutations predominantly from Victoria, Aus- selection of patients for an offer of genetic testing for tralia, were invited to participate in a qualitative interview heritable mutations in the BRCA1/2 genes. (ii) From each exploring their psychosocial needs. A grounded theory familial cancer clinic, a random sample of unaffected car- approach informed study design; data were analysed itera- riers of BRCA1, BRCA2 and Lynch Syndrome-related tively and inductively. mutations were selected. Patients were interviewed to Results: Thirty-eight interviews with women aged 20-40 assess their adherence to recommended risk management years with BRCA1/2 mutations were conducted in 2015. guidelines and barriers in compliance to guidelines. Twenty-onehadchosennottotaketamoxifen,sixhadtaken Results: (i) A total of 1,053 files were audited. tamoxifen, and the remainder could not recall discussing Preliminary data analysis shows a high interrater reliability chemopreventionwiththeirhealthcareproviderorweretoo (k-statistics=0.89). Compliance of genetic testing uptake young to commence cancer risk management. Women’s after the introduction of guidelines was more than 70%. In tamoxifen-related decisions were frequently influenced by more than 95% of noncompliant cases publicly funded722 J.delPicchia genetic testing was used. (ii) 168 BRCA1, 161 BRCA2 and of the respondents had decided whether to pursue 215 Lynch Syndrome-related mutation carriers were inter- BRCA testing before their pre-test counseling session; the viewed. Twenty-eight percent to 32% of known mutation decisiontobetested wasoftenreportedtohavebeenquick carriers for BRCA1/2 are in the younger age group and are and straightforward, and the dimension of choice was waitingtocompletetheirfamiliesbeforecompletingbreast- interwoven with notions of responsibility and moral cancer related risk-reducing surgery. Other reasons com- obligation. monlycitedfornon-adherencewerelackofawareness,past Conclusions: While not generalizable, these findings bad experience and fear of adverse effects. suggest that a subset of Italian women may arrive at their Conclusion: This study provides data on the reasons for first CGC consultation having already made a decision non-adherence to risk management recommendations abouttesting.NewmodelsofCGCcouldusefullytakeinto amongst patients and thus provides the basis for the account differences in how women approach the testing developmentofinterventionstoaddresssuchnonadherence. process to ensure that informed consent and CGC protect R. Kaur: None. B. Meiser: None. M. Peate: None. them from the potential risks of testing. R. Ward: None. F. Macrae: None. J. Hiller: None. L. Battistuzzi: None. M. Franiuk: None. O. Puricelli: J. Kirk: None. A. Trainer: None. G. Mitchell: None. None. N. Rania: None. L. Migliorini: None. L. Varesco: None. EMP1.26B I had already made up my mind: a qualitative interview EMP1.27C study on Italian women participating in clinical cancer Young cancerpatient perspectives on undertaking whole genetic counseling and testing of the BRCA genes genome sequencing: A qualitativestudy L. Battistuzzi1,M.Franiuk2,O.Puricelli3, N.Rania4, s1,2,P. Butow1,N.Bartley1, C.Jacobs3,I.Juraskova1, L. Migliorini5,L. Varesco6 A.Newson2,J.Savard2,B.Meiser4,M.Ballinger5,D.Thomas5, B. Biesecker6 1Dept of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and Systems Engineering - Dept of Internal Medicine and Medical 1School of Psychology, University of Sydney, Australia, Specialities,Genoa,Italy,2OspedalePoliclinicoSanMartino- 2SydneyHealthEthics,UniversityofSydney,Australia,3Prince UnitofHerditaryCancer,Genoa,Italy,3OspedalePoliclinico of Wales Clinical School, University of NSW, Australia, SanMartino-UnitofClinicalPsychologyandPsychotherapy, 4University of NSW, Sydney, Australia, 5Garvan Institute of Genoa,Italy,4UniversityofGenoa-DISFOR-Departmentof Medical Research, Sydney, Australia, 6RTI International, Education Sciences, Genoa, Italy, 5Univesity of Genoa - Washington, MD, United States DISFOR - Department of Education Sciences, Genoa, Italy, 6Ospedale Policlinico San Martino - Unit of Hereditary Introduction: Molecular tumour profiling (MTP), aiming Cancer, Genoa, Italy to link molecular targets in tumours to personalised thera- pies, is entering clinical practice. Little is yet known about Introduction: As cancer panel testing is becoming routine the ethical, psychosocial and behavioural implications of clinical practice, the need has emerged to develop new MTP. The current longitudinal psychosocial study models of Cancer Genetic Counseling (CGC). Developing (PiGeOn) aims to explore understanding, experiences and such new models requires that efforts be directed at views regarding MTP for 1,000 patients with an advanced, understanding how best to support patients’ decision- solid, rare cancer who undergo testing. Baseline qualitative making in CGC. To date, most of the research that has results are reported here. investigated the experiences of individuals participating in Materials and Methods: Purposive sampling is used to diagnostic BRCA testing has focused on English-speaking ensurediversityincancertypesanddemographics.PiGeOn orNorthern-European populations, andvery little isknown participants participate in semi-structured interviews which about patients and families from Southern Europe. are analysed by Framework analysis. Materials and Methods: We conducted in-depth semi- Results: Data collection is ongoing. Thus far, partici- structured interviews with 19 Italian women with no pants’ motivations include: fear of death, trust in their personal history of cancer who had had BRCA testing in oncologist, need for control and a sense of ‘nothing lost’. a clinical setting. Desperation and fear of dying dominate motivation, but Results:Anumberofthemesemerged;herewefocuson participantsalsovaluebeingabletohelpothersinasimilar three that are related to decision-making: “I had already situation, and the chance to benefit other family members. made up my mind”, “Thinking it through”, and “The right Participants tolerate uncertainty and hope for reduced thing to do”. Analysis of the interviews showed that most prognosticuncertainty,butfearlossofhopeifnoactionableAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 723 resultisfound.Theyoftenlackunderstanding,buttrustthe todiscusstheletter'scontentandallowedonwardreferralto science of MTP and the research process. be facilitated. Conclusions: Identifying new treatment options over- The inclusion of a telephone genetic counsellor in the shadowsbroaderandfamilialimplicationsofgenetictesting notification protocol for lifepool has resulted in a sig- inthispopulation.Thecurrentdatawillinformfuturepolicy nificantly higher uptake of onward referral to clinical and practice on how to effectively engage/support patients genetics services compared to other Australian studies that in the MTP decision-making process, and how uncertainty have relied upon a letter alone. should be managed in this complex area. A. Lewis: None. M. Young: None. L. Devereux: None. This study is sponsored by a Grant from the National P.A. James: None. A.H. Trainer: None. Health and Medical Research Council Australia. M. Best: None. P. Butow: None. N. Bartley: None. EMP1.29A C. Jacobs: None. I. Juraskova: None. A. Newson: None. ThepsychosocialexperiencesofAustralianadolescentsand J. Savard: None. B. Meiser: None. M. Ballinger: None. young adults with Li-Fraumeni Syndrome: a qualitative D. Thomas: None. B. Biesecker: None. study EMP1.28D R. ForbesShepherd1,2,3,L. A.Keogh4, A.Werner-Lin5, Genetic counselling outcomes for lifepool research M.B. Delatycki3,6,7,L. E. Forrest1,2 participants notified of HBOC mutations via a letter providing direct access to a telephone genetic counsellor 1Parkville Familial Cancer Centre, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 2Sir Peter MacCallum A. Lewis1,M.Young2,L. Devereux1,P. A. James1, Department of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, A. H.Trainer1 Melbourne,Australia,3BruceLefroyCentreforGeneticHealth Research, Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, 1Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, Australia, 4Melbourne School of Population and Global 2Genome.One Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, Darlinghurst, Australia 5School of Social Policy and Practice, University of Pennsylvania,Philadelphia,PA,UnitedStates,6Departmentof Genetic research may produce information that has clinical Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, implications for research participants and their family. 7Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Australia Uptakeofclinicalgeneticsreferralandconfirmatorygenetic testing for research participants notified via letter of the Introduction: Li-Fraumeni Syndrome (LFS), a devastating availability of genetic health information has been poor in cancer predisposition caused by germline mutations in several Australian studies (between 8-56%) TP53, confers considerable multi-organ cancer risks from . Research studies have identified access to a genetic childhood. Adolescents and young adults (AYAs: aged 15- counsellor as a barrier for some to act on mutation 29years)withLFSexperiencetheirtransitionallifestageof notification information. To overcome this barrier a model emerging adulthood concurrently with the prospect of was developed that provided research participants notified intensive life-long surveillance, limited cancer prevention via letter with direct telephone access to a genetic options, cancer diagnoses and treatment, and for some, counsellor (TGC). mortality. The complex and unique psychosocial needs for Thismodelwasusedtonotifyparticipantsfoundtocarry AYAs with LFS remain critically understudied. This is the clinically actionable hereditary breast and ovarian cancer first study internationally to explore the psychosocial (HBOC)mutationsintheAustralianpopulationbasedstudy experiencesofAYAswithLFSandmakerecommendations of healthy women, lifepool. for genetic counselling practice. Thirty five women in this cohort identified to have a Materials and Methods: Australian AYAs with a TP53 HBOCmutationwerenotifiedvialetterthat“informationof germline mutation were invited to participate in a semi- relevancetotheirhealth”hadbeenidentified,withtheletter structured interview examining the psychosocial impact of containingthedirectcontactdetailsofageneticcounsellor. LFS. Data collection and analysis is ongoing, informed by Thirty two (91%) women contacted the genetic counsellor interpretive description and the Family System Genetic directly after receiving the letter, all of whom accepted Illness model. referral to a clinical genetics service. Thirty one women Results: Fifteen interviews have been conducted to date (88%) underwent confirmatory genetic testing after genetic (meanage22).Familialandpersonalexperiencesofcancer counselling.TGCprovidedthewomennotifiedopportunity were highly varied and influenced risk perception and cancer fear. Comprehensive screening was critical in724 J.delPicchia buffering LFS-related distress. Despite this, feelings of their fear of lawsuits on medical malpractice if a child is isolation were common, especially among AYAs with de subsequently diagnosed with neurodevelopmental pro- novomutations(n=3),aswerefeelingsofpersonalburden blems. Interviewees largely oppose parental-choice in with managing LFS. AYAs strove for an identity indepen- disclosure of genomic information due to its complexity. dent of LFS and although it had a limited day-to-day Conclusions: Support in reporting low-penetrance SL is impact, LFS remained a grave concern for most. eitherbasedonperceivingthisinformationashelpful,oron Conclusions: AYAs with LFS follow a range of fear of medical practice litigation. Participants largely psychosocial trajectories through development and could prioritize their own judgment about disclosure over benefit from tailored longitudinal care from a psychosocial parental-choice. Funding: Israel NIHP grant 2015/82. genetically-oriented multidisciplinary team. Funding: Mel- M. Macarov: None. V. Meiner: None. V. Libman: bourne Research Scholarship, The University of None. H. Hochner: None. S. Shkedi-Rafid: None. Melbourne. R. Forbes Shepherd: None. L.A. Keogh: None. EMP1.31C A. Werner-Lin: None. M.B. Delatycki: None. User acceptability of whole exome pre-conception carrier L.E. Forrest: None. testing for consanguineous couples in Australia EMP1.30B K. K.Barlow-Stewart1,S. Josephi-Taylor2,3,A. Selvanathan4, Prenatal chromosomal microarray analysis: Exploring T. Roscioli2,A. Bittles5,B. Meiser6,L. Worgan7, views of genetics healthcare professionals on disclosure of S. Rajagopalan7,A. Colley7, E.Kirk8,2,3 susceptibility loci 1University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 2Centre for Clinical M.Macarov1,V.Meiner1,V.Libman2,H.Hochner2,S.Shkedi- Genetics, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sydney, Australia, Rafid1 3University of NSW, Sydney, Australia, 4Clinical Genetics Services, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia, 5School of 1Department of Genetics and Metabolic Diseases, Hebrew Medical and Health Sciences, Edith Cowan University, Perth, University-Haddasah Medical Center, Jerusalm, Israel, Australia, 6University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, 2BraunSchoolofPublicHealth,HebrewUniversity-Haddasah 7Clinical Genetics Services, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Medical Center, Jerusalm, Israel Australia,8GeneticsLaboratory,NSWHealthPathologyEast, Sydney, Australia Introduction:Chromosomalmicroarrayanalysis(CMA)in prenatal diagnosis allows for an increased diagnostic yield Purpose: To explore with consanguineous couples in of pathogenic copy-number variations (CNVs), but also Australia the acceptability and perceived utility of pre- identifies CNVs with incomplete penetrance, associated conception clinical exome screening for autosomal reces- with increased risk for neurodevelopmental phenotypes sive and X-Linked conditions. (susceptibility loci, SL). Practices regarding prenatal dis- Methods: Semi-structuredinterviewswith21consangui- closure of SL range from full-disclosure to non-disclosure neous couples of diverse ethnic and religious backgrounds of low-penetrance SL. There is no consensus as to whether conducted prior to offering preconception screening. Inter- parents should be given a choice regarding which findings views were thematically analysed using by an inductive to receive. This study explored views of Israeli healthcare approach. professionals (HCPs) on disclosure of SL and the factors Results: Three major themes were identified: the influencing these views. consanguineouscouple;childhooddisorders;andperceived Methods: Semi-structured interviews with twenty Israeli utility of genomic screening. 16/21 reported consanguinity HCPs analyzed using grounded theory methodology. as being common within their own community; several Results: SL are routinely reported, regardless of reported surprise at learning after immigrating that it was penetrance. Full-disclosure is supported by the view that uncommon in Australia. While no stigma was reported, 6/ providing this information allows women/parents to make 21 expressed concerns about its potential and disclosure of informed choices regarding the pregnancy's future. Non- theirconsanguinityinthewidercommunitywaslimited.20/ disclosure is perceived as paternalistic, and as not 21wereawareofchildhooddisorderswithintheirfamilyor conforming to Israeli norms, where couples generally seek community; 13/21 perceived consanguinity as increasing to avoid any risks for their future child. The minority of the risk of having affected children. While explanatory participants believe that low-penetrance SL should not be beliefs included war as a source of stress, exposure to reported, as they cause anxiety and unjustified pregnancy chemicals released by bombs and unclean water, none terminations. Nevertheless, they do report SL because of expresseddisbelief ingenetics asa contributor.Nine spokeAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 725 of premarital screening programs routinely conducted in their own justified paternalism to DTC-GT, weighing the their countries of origin. 14/21 proceeded with genomic pros and cons of the testing, regardless of their personal testing; however, all supported the availability of genomic experiences. preconception screening. If found to be carriers of a severe Conclusion: This study provides evidence for how childhood disorder, 13/21 would test a pregnancy; twelve genetic counsellors’ opinions differ substantially regarding would consider termination of pregnancy or pre- DTC-GT. These divergent viewpoints underscore the implantation genetic diagnosis. A majority of couples importanceofacoordinatedapproachintacklingtheissues would communicate a potential at risk status to family surrounding DTC-GT and its impact on clinical genetics members. services,withmanyparticipantscallingforconsistencyand Conclusion: Those who chose to have testing would regulation. utilise the results with the goal of preventing childhood E. James: None. C. Lewis: None. N. Taverner: None. disorders. M. McAllister: None. K.K. Barlow-Stewart: None. S. Josephi-Taylor: None. A. Selvanathan: None. T. Roscioli: None. A. Bittles: EMP1.33A None. B. Meiser: None. L. Worgan: None. S. Rajagopa- Case study: Ethical issues around sharing of information lan: None. A. Colley: None. E. Kirk: None. whenababyisbornwithageneticconditionfollowingIVF with sperm donation EMP1.32D Split opinions: A qualitative study exploring Genetic M.Kosicka-Slawinska Counsellors' attitudes and experiences of direct-to- consumer genetic testing North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, Harrow, United Kingdom E. James1,C. Lewis2,N.Taverner1,M.McAllister1 We present a genetic counselling case where a baby was 1Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University School of diagnosed with, and died of GM1-gangliosidosis (lipid Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2Great Ormond Street storage disorder) following IVF with sperm donation. Hospital and UCL Institute of Child Health, London, United Wedescribethecommunicationwhichoccurredbetween Kingdom the genetic counsellor and couple, genetic counsellor and fertility centre, and genetic counsellor and sperm donor. Aim: The market for Direct-to-Consumer Genetic Testing Thecaseraisedseveralissuesregardingconfidentialityof (DTC-GT) is rapidly growing, with increased uptake, and both the couple and the donor and the role of the genetic lackofpost-testsupportleadingmanypatientstoseekhelp counsellor insuchasituation.The Human Fertilisationand fromtheirlocalhealthservices.Theaimofthisstudywasto Embryology Authority (UK) have clear guidelines on what explore the implications of DTC-GT for clinical genetics the fertility centre should do in such an event so that other practice, and consider what shapes genetic health care couples who have conceived using the same donor sperm professionals’ (HCPs) attitudes towards DTC-GT. can be alerted. Method: This qualitative study used semi-structured In this case the donor wondered whether to inform his interviews to collect data from 12 Genetic Counsellors own (adult) daughter about the genetic diagnosis because with experience of seeing patients regarding DTC-GT. A the carrier frequency of GM1-gangliosidosis is low and thematic analysis was then conducted on the resulting carrier testing is not routinely offered to unrelated partners transcripts. ofcarriers.Thedonorworrieditwouldraiseanxietyforhis Results: The participants expressed divided opinions, daughter and bring into focus his decision to be a with some “rejecting” DTC-GT and others “cautiously sperm donor. accepting” the technology. These split opinions resulted in The donor’s decision to have carrier testing in this case an exploration of a range of themes considering both wouldimpactonthecouple’sabilitytogoaheadwithPGD advantages and disadvantages of this technology. Core in a future pregnancy as they had stored frozen embryos. themes highlighted negative implications of DTC-GT We comment on the role of the genetic counsellor in these including information imbalance, patient abandonment, discussions. negative psychosocial impact and strain on health care Wedrawacomparisonwithanothercase,whereacouple services.Inamorepositivelight,participantsalsodiscussed were referred to Genetics because they had been informed the empowerment provided by these tests, and a hope for that their sperm donor had fathered a baby with PTS the future. These themes lead to the formation of a deficiency. theoretical framework considering how participants apply M. Kosicka-Slawinska: None.726 J.delPicchia EMP1.34B 1Australian Genomic Health Alliance, Parkville, Australia, Professional'sopinionsofgeneticinformationandtestingin 2Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Parkville, Australia, the context of adoption 3The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia, 4Australasian Society of Genetic Counsellors, Sydney, N.Jackson1,K. Burke2,A. Clarke2 Australia, 5Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Parkville, Australia, 6Centre for Genetics Education, NSW Health, St 1University Hospitals Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom, Leonards, Australia. 2Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom Introduction: Work practices of genetic counsellors (GCs) Introduction:Looked-afterchildren(LAC)withdisabilities are changing rapidly in response to the introduction of are some of those who wait longest for permanency. For genomics in healthcare and ‘direct-to-consumer’ tests. A many of these children, the assessment of their health and professional census by the Australasian Society of Genetic developmental needs will involve family history informa- Counsellors (ASGC) and Australian Genomics Health tion and genetic testing. This study explored professionals' Alliance, provides insights into the current status of the opinions and experiences concerning family medical profession and preferred future genomics practice. information and genetic/genomic testing in the adoption Materials and Methods: Online survey developed, process in Wales, considering its utility and the attitudes piloted and deployed February–April 2017 to ASGC surrounding it. members and Australian GC training program graduates. Method: Semi-structured qualitative interviews were Dataanalysedusingdescriptiveandinferentialstatisticsand conducted with 6 social workers and 7 medical advisors. content analysis. The data was transcribed and thematically analysed. Results: Surveys were completed by 271 respondents Results: Professionals described challenges to collation with GC qualifications (56.3% response). 96.3% were of family history of the LAC, in particular a lack of female; 65.9% worked in clinical roles, 10.7% in labora- understanding of the relevance of genetic information. tory/research, 4.6% administration/education and 17.6% Medical advisors described altering the testing 'threshold' other. Of those working clinically (n=172), 41.3% were for children awaiting adoption to try and establish a certified and 55.8% becoming certified. 74.7% worked for diagnosis and expressed concern about the possible publicly-funded genetics/pathology services, 22.5% had uncertainty of information arising from such testing. This multiple jobs and 79.4% reported unpaid overtime. 74.2% uncertainty was expressed by all professionals, especially of all GCs recently attended genomics education and many towards the impact of genetic information and how it is clinical GCs already incorporated genomics into practice – understood and handled by professionals and prospective assisting patients with a DTC test (64.4%) or regularly parentsonachild’splacement.Inresponsetothistherewas completing a task associated with chromosomal microarray a call from professionals for improved training and for (62.5%), non-invasive prenatal testing (51.4%) or whole increased networking between genetics services and those genome/exome sequencing (WE/GS; 48.6%). All GCs working with LAC. wanted to become more involved in WE/GS in the future, Conclusions: There are particular challenges around includingcreatinggenelists(40.5%),providingphenotypic collectingandsharinggeneticinformationandprofessionals information(55.2%),variantcuration(44.8%)andliterature lack confidence in their knowledge and the protocols searches when reporting results (59.9%). involved. As new genetic technologies increase the scope, Conclusions: These data provide critical insight for rather than the nature, of these challenges, a programme of workforce planning into the education, training, accredita- genetic education could be implemented for social workers tion and work practices of genetic counsellors, and a and local doctors working in adoption. baselineforlongitudinalcomparisonsasgenomicsbecomes N. Jackson: None. K. Burke: None. A. Clarke: None. part of routine health care. Grant reference: GNT1113531 EMP1.35C A. Nisselle: None. I. Macciocca: None. K. Dunlop: Genomic counselling: what are we doing and what do we None. S. Metcalfe: None. C. Gaff: None. thinkweshouldbedoing?-Aprofessionalstatussurveyof genetic counsellors in Australasia EMP1.36D The experiences, motivations and expectations of A. Nisselle1,2,3,I. Macciocca2,4,5,K.Dunlop1,6,S. Metcalfe1,2,3, participants in a research project implementing genomics C. Gaff1,2,3,Australian Genomics Health Alliance Genomic as a paediatric diagnostic service in Wales Workforce, Education &Ethics WorkingGroupAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 727 G.A. PintoJuma1, S.Doheny1,I. Tully1,2,3, A.J. Clarke1,2, 1The Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, R. Butler2 2Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 3Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia 1Institute of Medical Genetics, School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 2All Wales Medical The Royal Children’s Hospital (RCH) in Melbourne, Aus- GeneticsService,UniversityHospitalofWales,Cardiff,United tralia has seen a significant increase in genetic test requests Kingdom,3NeuroscienceandMentalHealthResearchInstitute and associated expenditure within the last three years. (NMHRI), Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom Prompted by this, two laboratory-based genetic counsellors (LBGCs) employed by the Victorian Clinical Genetics Introduction: The project, ‘Studying the Implemention of Services (clinical genetics service of RCH) have been GeNomics in wALes (SIGNAL)’ proposed to investigate appointed to a three-year full-time job-sharing role. The theclinical,economicandpsychosocialimpactsofgenomic overallaimofthisappointmentistofacilitateasystemthat testing in the diagnosis of paediatric genetic disease. The ensures access to high-quality, cost-effective, clinically present nested sub-project aimed to understand the experi- indicated and accurate genetic and genomic testing. The ences, motivations and expectations of the participants in utility of LBGCs has been demonstrated in the USA, but the SIGNAL project and their views regarding the use of this is the first formal role in Australia to our knowledge. genomics as part of their family’s healthcare. Since the role commenced in 2017, a major responsibility Methods: Families with children affected by develop- has been overseeing the test request review process which mental delay were recruited to SIGNAL and underwent assesses tests according to their clinical utility. Using their exome or whole genome sequencing. Data was collected skill base, LBGCs are the interface between the referring using a questionnaire survey of participants and interviews clinicians and the laboratory, ensuring appropriate clinical were conducted with a subset of participants. information is provided and adequate patient consent Results: This study demonstrated that a central theme of obtained. In consultation with senior medical specialists ‘trust, hope and progress’ was implicit in the participants' within RCH, assistance is provided to determine the most experiences, and structured their motivations and expecta- appropriate test. LBGCs assist in sourcing accredited tions. Participation in genomic research was seen as laboratories with clinically acceptable turnaround times, promoting self and social empowerment as the results whichenablesclinicianstomakecrucialinformeddecisions could reduce isolation and contribute to the overall good. regarding patient care. The LBGCs will also develop The project uncovered issues with securing informed streamlinedprocessesforgenetic/genomictestorderingand consentandparticipantsdidnotfeeltheneedto'understand' consent, including decision support and just-in-time edu- the genomic test. This lack of understanding affected how cation of medical specialists. Cases arising from the test some participants managed the wait for their results. request review process demonstrate the value of LBGCs Conclusions: The findings demonstrate the willingness, within an Australian health policy context, in turn even eagerness, of many families to access genomic strengthening a future workplace-model for LBGCs. investigations. However, they also emphasise the contested TheLBGCroleissupportedbyaRCHFoundationgrant. nature of what constitutes (informed) 'consent'. In addition, Y.Smagarinsky:None.I.Macciocca:None.J.Phillips: they show that most research participants wish to remain None. H. Savoia: None. S. White: None. updated on progress throughout the project. The role of L. Curnow: None. geneticcounsellorsinthenegotiationofconsentremainsto be defined, especially as genomics moves into mainstream EMP1.38B medicine. General practitioner views towards providing personal G.A. Pinto Juma: None. S. Doheny: None. I. Tully: genomic risk information to the general population None. A.J. Clarke: None. R. Butler: None. A.K.Smit1,2,3,A.J.Newson2,L.Keogh4,M.Best2,5,K.VoonSen EMP1.37A Tan6,J. Kirk7, P.Butow8,L. Trevena9, A.E. Cust1,3 Implementationofalaboratory-basedgeneticcounsellorin an Australian tertiary paediatric hospital 1Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention Research, Sydney School of Public Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Y. Smagarinsky1,2,3,I.Macciocca2,3,J. Phillips1,H.Savoia1, Australia, 2Sydney Health Ethics, Sydney School of Public S. White2,3,L. Curnow1,2,3 Health, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Melanoma Institute Australia (MIA), The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 4Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne,728 J.delPicchia Australia, 5Psycho-Oncology Co-operative Research Group A.Kustermann1,A.Piccinini2,P.Bailo2,M.Miozzo3,L.Micci1, (PoCoG), The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 6The G.Barbara1,E. Battaglioli4,C.Farè3, L.Cirella1,A. Pitidis5, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 7Westmead Clinical P. Cremonesi6,P. Schinco7, T.Emanuele8,D.Morero8, School and Westmead Institute for Medical Research, Sydney S. Gaudi5 Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 8CentreforMedicalPsychologyandEvidence-basedDecision- 1Department of Women’s and Children’s Health and Service making, School of Psychology, The University of Sydney, for Sexual and Domestic Violence (SVSeD), Fondazione Sydney, Australia, 9Sydney School of Public Health, The IRCCS Ca’ Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia Italy, 2Forensic Genetics Laboratory. Department of Biomedical Sciences for Health – University of Milan, Milan, Introduction: Exploring general practitioner (GP; primary Italy, 3UOS coordinamento laboratori di ricerca, IRCCS Ca' care physician) views about providing genomic risk infor- Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, mation for common, complex diseases will assist with Milan,Italy,4IDept.MedicalBiotechnologyandTranslational developing professional educational resources and the Medicine University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 5Italian National potential implementation of this testing in future clinical Institute of Health, Rome, Italy, 6Medicina e chirurgia practice. d'accettazioneed'urgenza-EmergencyDepartment-Galliera Materials and methods: We conducted semi-structured Hospital,Genoa,Italy,7GeneralHospitalUniversity ofTurin, interviewswith22GPsinNewSouthWales,Australia.We Turin, Italy, 8Maria Vittoria and S. Giovanni Bosco General explored their experiences in managing patients’ genomic Hospitals, Turin, Italy riskinformationincurrentpracticeandviewsonpotentially providingthisinformationonapopulationscale.Interviews Introduction: Violence against women is a relevant health were transcribed and analysed using qualitative analysis. and social problem, frequently associated with post trau- Results: GPs described genomic risk information as part matic stress disorder (PTSD), with negative repercussions of ‘preventive healthcare’, however, their limited confi- on the overall quality of life. The projectaim istoevaluate dence in communicating about genomic risk and concern the psycological evolution in parallel with the epigenetic that research evidence is still preliminary restricted percep- signature in battered women during their psycotherapy. tionsoftheusefulnessofthisinformationincurrentdisease Materials and Methods: Psychological therapy evalua- prevention. GPs believed that communicating genomic risk tion will be held by analysing a cohort of 200 women who will inevitably become part of clinical practice, especially experienced violence and 400 matched controls, followed because increasing public awareness is already increasing for 18 months with medical and psychological appoint- pressureonclinicianstodiscussgenomicrisk.GPsfeltthat ments. Abbreviated PCL-C Post-Traumatic Checklist 6- patients should be able to decide whether they receive item Civilian Version and CESD-R Scale for the presence genomic risk information. Perceived benefits of delivering of depressive symtoms will be administrated. A panel of this information depended on whether it was likely to CpG islands regulating, by methylation, genes involved in change patient management or behaviours. Concerns the PTSD response will be studied using Mass array included potential adverse psychological responses and spectometry. insurance discrimination. Resources required for the future Results: In the first six months of multi-centric study 42 include disease risk calculators that incorporate genomic women were enrolled as cases, selected by severity and and traditional risk factors, succinct evidence-based continuity of violence criteria, and 25 as controls. In cases resources and patient-appropriate educational information. the prevalence of PTSD (score >= 14) was 67.5% (IC Conclusions: GPs believe that communicating genomic 95.0%: 53.0% -- 82.0%) compared to 12.0% (IC 95.0%: - risk will become part of clinical practice, but they are 0.7% - 24.7%) among controls. Among the first 8 patients unpreparedandconcernedaboutpotentialpsychosocialand that completed first 6 months of follow-up 71.4% (IC ethical implications. GPs require practical, evidence-based 95.0%: 38.0% - 100.0%) showed an amelioration or resources and patient-appropriate educational information. remained stable as to PTSD score. A.K.Smit:None.A.J.Newson:None.L.Keogh:None. Conclusions: Great contribution to personalised and M. Best: None. K. Voon Sen Tan: None. J. Kirk: None. precision medicine will be given by the epigenetic study P. Butow: None. L. Trevena: None. A.E. Cust: None. in association with the relevant questionnaire. By knowing the mechanisms responsible for resilience, we can derive EMP1.39C cluesaboutthebesttreatmentforPTSDandthebestpublic Womenvictims ofintimatepartnerviolence: psychological policy. aspects and future epigenetic perspectives A. Kustermann: None. A. Piccinini: None. P. Bailo: None. M. Miozzo: None. L. Micci: None. G. Barbara:Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 729 None. E. Battaglioli: None. C. Farè: None. L. Cirella: E.L. Lynch: None. M. Martyn: None. A. Kanga- None. A. Pitidis: None. P. Cremonesi: None. P. Schinco: Parabia: None. P. James: None. S. Lunke: None. None. T. Emanuele: None. D. Morero: None. I. Macciocca: None. M. Wallis: None. M.F. Hunter: S. Gaudi: None. None. A. Trainer: None. J. Halliday: None. N. Brown: None.L.Keogh:None.J.Wale:None.I.Winship:None. EMP1.40D C. Gaff: None. A novel approach for offering additional findings to patients - separating the decision from diagnostic testing EMP1.41A The issue of the fate of a foetus with a mutation after a E. L.Lynch1,2,3,M. Martyn1,3,4,A. Kanga-Parabia1,3,4, prenatal diagnosis of spinocerebellar ataxia type I in P. James5,6,S. Lunke2,3,I.Macciocca2,3,M.Wallis4,7,M. F. comparison with myotonic dystrophy in the Yakutia Hunter8,9,A. Trainer5,6,J.Halliday3,4,N.Brown2,7,L. Keogh4, (Sakha Republic) J.Wale1,I.Winship4,5,MelbourneGenomics Health Alliance, C. Gaff1,4 S. K.Kononova1,2,O.G.Sidorova1,M.A. Varlamova1, K. A.Kurtanov1,F. A.Platonov2, V.L. Izhevskaya3, 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, E. K.Khusnutdinova4, S.A. Fedorova2 2Victorian Clinical Genetics Service, Melbourne, Australia, 3MurdochChildren'sResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia, 1Yakut Scientific Centre of Complex Medical Problems, 4The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 5The Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 2M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 6Peter Federal University, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Medical MacCallum Cancer Institute, Melbourne, Australia, 7Austin Genetics Research Center RAMS, Moscow, Russian Health, Melbourne, Australia, 8Monash Health, Melbourne, Federation, 4Institute of Biochemistry and Genetics, Ufa, Australia, 9Monash University, Melbourne, Australia Russian Federation Genomicsequencinghasthepotentialtorevealinformation We discuss one of the issues of prenatal diagnostics – the unrelatedtodiagnosticindicationsfortesting,includingthe bioethical dilemma of the fate of a foetus with a mutation. presence of variants that may predict future health risks. For this issue, we compare two of the most widespread Several studies are generating evidence regarding uptake hereditary diseases in the Sakha Republic (Yakutia): spi- and management of additional findings (AFs) in clinical nocerebellar ataxia type 1 (SCA1) and myotonic dystrophy settings, with consent for AFs at the time of diagnostic (DM). We believe that prior to theonset of the disease, the testing. We evaluate a novel model, offering reanalysis for individuals-carriersofSCA1genemutationcannotbecalled AFs to adult patients after they have received genomic diseased, as they are completely healthy in their physical sequencing results for their clinical indication. Adults who and intellectual development. Among the carriers of SCA1 received diagnostic exome sequencing results are later re- gene mutation there were and there are many well-known contacted to offer reanalysis of their stored data for AFs. sportsmen,politicalandpublicfigures,scientistsetc.Letus Those interested receive decision support materials and think for a moment: by suggesting a termination of preg- geneticcounsellingbeforedecidingwhether toconsent and nancy to parents of carriers of SCA1 disease, we are, in after receiving results of reanalysis. Evaluation focusses on essence, suggesting to get rid of a productive member of aspects impacting on how AFs are provided, including society. Unlike SCA1, DM has a type that causes birth patient decision-making, uptake, clinical and laboratory defects. The phenomenon of DM anticipation depends service impact, psychosocial impact and views on future heavilyoninheritancefromdiseased mothersandincreases service delivery. Evaluation of health impact will not be theriskofbirthofanalmostcompletelyunviablebabywith feasible due to the recruitment target of 100 participants a severe congenital DM. An ethical dilemma arises: undergoing reanalysis. To date, 20 patients have been “Should we classify spinocerebellar ataxia type 1 as a ‘less approached, with 10 opting to attend a genetic counselling serious’ genetic disease for prenatal diagnostics, and myo- appointment. Three actively opted-out, citing logistical tonic dystrophy as a more serious disease for prenatal reasons or preference to address health problems as they diagnostics?” This is a very complex issue and requires arise. Of those approached to date, 86% had earlier discussionnotonlyamongthespecialists,butalsolawyers, expressed hypothetical interest in receiving AFs. An addi- psychologists and the general population of the republic. tional80patientswillbeapproachedbyJune2018.Results The study was supported by Ministry of Education and from this novel model will provide Australian data to Science of Russian Federation #6.1766.2017, FASO complement international studies and will enable compar- (BRK_0556-2017-0003). ison with studies in healthy adults and paediatric cohorts.730 J.delPicchia S.K. Kononova: None. O.G. Sidorova: None. M.A. Southwest Thames Clinical Genetics Service, St George's Varlamova:None.K.A.Kurtanov:None.F.A.Platonov: Hospital, London, United Kingdom None. V.L. Izhevskaya: None. E.K. Khusnutdinova: None. S.A. Fedorova: None. InSeptember2011,amutationwithintheC9orf72genewas found, which is known to cause almost 40% cases of EMP1.42B inheritedMotorNeuroneDisease(MND).Sincethen,ithas TheCardiogeneticsconsultation:aninventorisationofthe beenpossibletoofferpredictivetestingtounaffectedfamily Liège population members. C9orf72 gene expansions are associated with a reduced S. Bertoli, L. VanCasteren, S. Bulk, V.Bours penetrance, which makes predictive testing complex. Research suggests that only approximately 50% of CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium individuals with the gene expansion will go on to develop eitherMNDorFTDbeforetheageof70.Thereiscurrently Introduction: Hereditary cardiac problems are a common no treatment or medication to stop the progression of these reasonforclinicalgeneticsconsultation.Duetothefamilial conditions. implications, a workup is recommended in order to offer Whenconsideringpredictivetestingfortheseindividuals, screening to at-risk family members. The purpose of this we follow the recommended guidelines for Huntington’s study is to inventory our cardiogenetics patient population. disease(HD)predictivetesting.However,unlikeHDtesting Method: We performed a retrospective observational whichwould,inmostcases,providesomecertaintywhether study of the cardiogenetics consultation patients from the or not the disease would manifest, individuals at risk of a CHU Liège (July 2015 - December 2017). Each index C9orf72 expansion aremaking a decision tobe testedfor a patient with a presumed hereditary cardiac problem condition which may or may not manifest in the future. received a clinical workup. We performed descriptive From experience, this makesthedecision makingcomplex, statistical analyses. Genetic analysis was performed for andwehaveconcernsabouthowindividualsmaycopewith each index case. this uncertainty post result. Results: We have seen 55 patients for an hereditary We present a review of the current literature regarding cardiac condition in our cardiogenetics consultation : 19 genetic counselling for individuals at risk of C9orf72 women and 36 men (mean age 49.1 (±15.7) years). 23 expansions,andpresentfindingsofapilotstudy,whichhas patients were referred for HCM, 16 patients for DCM and been carried out to establish the psychological outcomes 16 patients for a cardiac arrhythmia, including Brugada and experience individuals have when going through syndrome, QT long syndrome and ARVC/D. A causative testing. This preliminary work will help inform a further mutation was found in 5 patients with HCM (n=18; wider UK study, to help improve genetic counselling 27.8%), in 3 patients with DCM (n=12; 25%) and in 4 outcomesinindividualsatriskofC9orf72geneexpansions. patients with cardiac arythmia (n=10; 40%). A variant of J.A. Bailey: None. N. Lahiri: None. M. unknown significance (VUS) was found in 8 patients with McEntagart: None. HCM (n=18; 44.4%), in 1 patient with DCM (n=12; 8.3%)andin1patientwithcardiacarythmia(n=10;10%). EMP1.45A Conclusion: Hereditary cardiac problems are not rare. Decision-makingforadditionalgenomicfindingsinparents These conditions are frequently autosomal dominant. of newborns with congenital deafness Therefore, a multidisciplinary cardiogenetics consultation including analysis of first degree at-risk family members L. Downie1,2,3, M.Martyn1,2,4, A.Jarmolowicz1,3,4,V. Sung1,2,5, fulfills a need in the clinic. In our population, in 30.8% of A. Kanga-Parabia1,2,4, J.Halliday1,2,E. Lynch3,4, index patient, a pathogenic mutation was identified. Z. Poulakis1,2,5,Y. Prawer4,6,-.Melbourne Genomics Health S. Bertoli: None. L. Van Casteren: None. S. Bulk: Alliance4,C. Gaff2,4,D.Amor1,2 None. V. Bours: None. 1MurdochChildren'sResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia, EMP1.44D 2University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Victorian Genetic counselling and the implications of predictive Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, 4Melbourne testing for individuals at risk of C9orf72 gene expansions Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 5Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 6Monash Health, J.A. Bailey, N.Lahiri,M. McEntagart Melbourne, AustraliaAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 731 Genomicsequencingtechnologiesareincreasinglyavailable Introduction: Use of whole exome sequencing (WES) in to paediatric patients for diagnostic testing. Research indi- patients with idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) is cates parents are interested in receiving additional findings, expected to increase the molecular diagnostic yield com- when this offer is presented in a hypothetical scenario. pared to a gene-panel approach. In addition to making However, few studies have explored the decisions parents cascadetestingavailableforrelatives,amoleculardiagnosis actually make about additional findings alongside diag- can impact management of patients if a pathogenic variant nostic testing. To address this, we offered diagnostic is identified in certain genes. WES for patients diagnosed genomictestingtoeligibleinfantsidentifiedwithcongenital with DCM has only recently been offered in Victoria, deafness through a population screening program, 2016- Australia. Therefore, it is important to examine the specific 2017. Consenting parents were given the options of counselling issues that arise. receiving additional findings for treatable or treatable and Materials and Methods: Individuals attending an adult untreatablechildhoodonsetconditions.Theywereprovided genetics clinic between April 2016 and August 2017 were with a decision-aid and pre-test genetic counselling. Parent offered WES if they had idiopathic DCM, either diagnosed surveys were sent after consent and results appointments. under the age of 40, or with a known family history of Evaluation focus includes parent decision-making, uptake DCM and/or sudden cardiac death. Participants received of additional findings, psychosocial impact and experience genetic counselling prior to consenting to WES and at ofcounselling.Todate,129parentshavebeenapproached: results.Geneticcounsellorsprospectivelyrecordedcounsel- 79(61%)consentedtoparticipation,26activelydeclined,1 ling issues that arose during each consultation, which were lost to follow-up and 23 are still deciding. 65% of partici- analysed to identify recurring themes. pantsconsentedtoreceiveadditionalfindings(treatable:25/ Results: Eighty-one eligible adult participants consented 79; treatable and untreatable: 26/79). Participants who to WES. Most participants were male (58.5%), and the requested additional findings hope for information regard- mean age at consent was 47.72 years. The mean length of ing their child’s health and wellbeing - for future planning geneticcounsellingwas53minutesforinitialappointments (28/28; 100%) and knowing what to expect in their child’s and29minutesforresultsappointments.Counsellingissues future (26/28; 93%). Most participants (44/46; 96%) felt included managing expectations, implications for relatives, they received enough information about options prior to insurance and privacy concerns and uncertain family consent. 93% (42/45) of respondents agreed they had history. weighed up pros and cons, selecting the best option for Conclusions: Patients with DCM who undertake WES them.Morethantwo-thirdsofsurveyrespondentsdisplayed raise similar counselling issues compared to patients no decisional conflict. This study will inform clinical undertaking WES for other reasons. As the use of genomic practise and policy for offering additional findings along- sequencing increases in DCM, our findings highlight the side diagnostic genomic sequencing in paediatric patients. vital role genetic counsellors play for affected individuals L. Downie: None. M. Martyn: None. A. Jarmolowicz: and their families. None. V. Sung: None. A. Kanga-Parabia: None. J. G. Valente: None. J. Ramchand: None. E. Creed: Halliday: None. E. Lynch: None. Z. Poulakis: None. Y. None.K.West:None.Y.Prawer:None.J.Taylor:None. Prawer: None. -. Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance: M.Bogwitz: None.I.Macciocca: None.E.Lynch:None. None. C. Gaff: None. D. Amor: None. M. Wallis: None. P. James: None. C. Gaff: None. EMP1.46B EMP1.47C What are the counselling issues that arise when offering Workshops to improve mainstreaming for BRCA analysis diagnostic whole exome sequencing with targeted analysis in the West of Scotland for dilated cardiomyopathy in an adult population? C. M.Watt, N.Bradshaw,S. Gibson,J.Gorrie, M.Longmuir, G.Valente1,2,J.Ramchand2,E. Creed1,3,K. West1,3, L. Snadden,R. Davidson Y.Prawer1,4,J.Taylor3,M.Bogwitz3,I.Macciocca5,E.Lynch1, M.Wallis2,P. James3, MelbourneGenomics Health Alliance, West of Scotland Regional Genetics Service, Glasgow, United C. Gaff1 Kingdom 1Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Parkville, Australia, Workshops were held for colleagues out with genetics to 2Austin Health, Heidelberg, Australia, 3Melbourne Health, improve the patient care pathway for younger women Parkville, Australia, 4Monash Health, Clayton, Australia, affected breast cancer with oestrogen receptor negative, 5Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Parkville, Australia progesteronereceptornegativeandHER2receptornegative732 J.delPicchia pathologyandwomenaffectedbyhighgradeserousovarian C. Thomas1,M.McAllister2 cancer. The workshops aimed to increase the knowledge and 1Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Southampton, United understandingofBRCAmutationanalysisandtoprovidea Kingdom, 2School of Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, practical guide to obtaining blood samples for molecular United Kingdom genetics. By obtaining samples for analysis sooner BRCA results would be available for more timely discussions on Introduction: To establish the smallest change in genetic medical and surgical management. counsellingoutcomethatismeaningfulforpatients,theaim 47colleaguesfrom variousspecialtiesacrosstheWestof of this study was to establish the Minimum Clinically Scotland including breast screening, surgery and oncology Important Difference (MCID) for the Genetic Counselling attended the sessions which were interactive. Outcome Scale (GCOS-24). GCOS-24 is a patient-reported Participantsweregivenevaluationformsatthebeginning outcome measure for clinical genetics services. Secondary of each workshop to determine their knowledge in three aims included understanding what patients deem important areasthenattheendoftheworkshopcolleagueswereasked for reaching this score. to re-evaluate their knowledge again, similarly colleagues Materials and Methods: Participants were new patients provided feedback on the workshops. recruited fromtheAllWalesMedical GeneticsService.An After the workshops comparing the first quarter of 2016 anchor-based, global transition question methodology was to the first quarter of 2017 samples for BRCA mainstream- used to identify the MCID, by asking participants how ing increased from 37 to 75. much meaningful change they experienced following their Results: appointment, and comparing this with GCOS-24 change Q1 How much do you know about how to identify scores.Themeanscoreofthegroupwhofelt‘alittlebetter’ individuals eligible for BRCA testing in the NHS? was determined to be the MCID, using an independent samples t-test to compare with the group ‘neutral’. This Nothing Verylittle Little Fairunderstanding Good ensuredthattheestablishedscorewasclinicallymeaningful to patients. Comments from a free text response box were Start1330hrs 9 16 6 6 analysed using qualitative thematic analysis. End1630hrs 30 17 Results: The response rate for completing GCOS-24, bothbeforeandafterappointment,wasapproximately10% Q2 How would you rate your ability to discuss BRCA (n=53). Of these, 56.6% (n=30), also completed a free mutation analysis in the NHS? textresponse.TheMCIDwasestablishedtobeaGCOS-24 score increase of 9 points after clinical attendance. This Poor Notverygood Okay Good Verygood score was significantly different from the group ‘neutral’ Start1330hrs 32 8 7 (p=.003). Themes identified as important for reaching the End1630hrs 35 12 MCID included ‘future’ and ‘family’. Conclusions:Thesefindingscontributetointerpretability of GCOS-24. Information provision alone was insufficient Q3.How would you rate your understanding about the to ensure participants experienced clinical meaningful practical aspects of obtaining a blood sample for molecular change, providing insights useful for genetic counselling genetics? service development. C. Thomas: None. M. McAllister: None. Poor Notverygood Okay Good Verygood Start1330hrs 32 8 7 EMP1.49A End1630hrs 35 12 The Tell Me More Study: Returning medically actionable genomic variants in the setting of a neonatal genome sequencing study C.M. Watt: None. N. Bradshaw: None. S. Gibson: None.J.Gorrie:None.M.Longmuir:None.L.Snadden: T. DeMarco1,K. Hurley2,S.Hull3,B.E. Berkman3, E.Klein1, None. R. Davidson: None. A. Fuller1, K.Huddleston1,B. Solomon1,F. M.Facio3 EMP1.48D 1Inova Translational Medicine Institute, Fairfax, VA, United Measuringoutcomesfromgeneticcounselling:Establishing States, 2Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH, United States, theminimumclinicallyimportantdifferencefortheGenetic 3National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, Counselling Outcome Scale United StatesAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 733 The Tell Me More Study (TMM) investigated parental who were either HD-positive, or the partner of someone decision-making about enrolling newborns in genome who was HD-positive. In contrast with previous research, sequencing (GS) research. This qualitative study is part of findingsshowedthatwhilstsomeparticipantsreportedthey the larger Inova Childhood Longitudinal Study at Inova had not yet told their children and other relatives, all part- Translational Medicine Institute. Through TMM, GS was ners had been informed about the risk of HD. In most performed concurrently for mother-father-child trios. Par- couples, the knowledge of HD was shared at a timely and entscouldlearnGSresultsdeemedmedically-actionablefor suitable opportunity; either immediately after the risk was themselvesand/ortheirchild.Wereportacaseofa45-year- discovered, or early in the relationship. Thematic analysis old Asian-American male found to carry a deleterious indicated two styles of communication that continued after BRCA2 truncating mutation previously reported in indivi- disclosure:(1)‘opencommunication’inwhichHDisfreely duals of Filipino descent. GS analysis showed that his 3- andregularlydiscussed,and(2)‘pragmaticcommunication’ year-old daughter carries the BRCA2 mutation also; how- in which HD is only discussed for practical reasons. ever, the parents were counseled to defer clinical con- Communicationstylesappearedtoberelatedtodiscovering firmatorytestingtoanagewhenshecanmake thedecision and disclosing the risk of HD, and to couples’ coping autonomously.Thus,onlythefather’sresultwasconfirmed strategies. This study provides novel insight into an under- in a CLIA-certified lab. An interview at 1-month post-dis- researched subset of family communication, highlighting closureindicatedthatwhilethefatherwasinitiallysurprised the role healthcare professionals can play in supporting by the results and concerned about his daughter’s risk, he disclosure to partners and facilitating ongoing discussion feltthattheinformationwasempowering,allowinghimand about HD between couples. The importance of this support hisat-riskrelativestoparticipateinrisk-reducingstrategies. cannot be understated when such communication is known Hereportedsharingtheinformationwithrelativesandafew to contribute to relationship stability and adjustment to a colleagues, and intention to share it with his primary care diagnosis. provider. He envisioned sharing the results with his J. Giblin: None. R. Dimond: None. daughterwhensheisolderandabletounderstandscientific principles. Despite learning this unexpected result, he did EMP1.51C not regret his participation in the TMM study. Geneticcounsellingininheritedretinaldiseases:challenges Thecaseillustratesthatpeoplecanadjusttoandmakeuse associated with incomplete penetrance and variable of unexpected GS results. However, it foreshadows new expressivity challengesinpredictivetesting foradult-onsetconditionsif GS in newborns is adopted more widely. M.Arasanz Armengol, G.Arno,A. Webster T. DeMarco: None. K. Hurley: None. S. Hull: None. B.E. Berkman: None. E. Klein: None. A. Fuller: None. Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom K. Huddleston: None. B. Solomon: None. F.M. Facio: None. Purpose: To discuss the challenges associated with pro- viding genetic counselling to families that have a mutation EMP1.50B inanautosomaldominantgenewithincompletepenetrance Couples’communicationaboutHuntington’sdisease:“The and variable expressivity, in the context of inherited retinal good, the bad, and the indifferent” diseases. Methods: We are describing six families that have been J.Giblin, R. Dimond found to have mutations in CRX, PROM1 or PRPF31 through unbiased exome and genome sequencing. These Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom genesareexamplesofgenesthathavebeenassociatedwith cone dystrophy and rod cone dystrophy and show Facilitating family communication about inherited condi- incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity. We tions is a crucial aspect of genetic counselling. Previous exemplify the different challenges that arise as a result of research has explored how families communicate about mutations in non penetrant genes: assessing the recurrence Huntington’s Disease (HD). However, despite research risk based on a family history that looks autosomal demonstrating that partners are also greatly impacted by recessive, discussing this risk with the patients and their HD, communication between couples has largely been familiesordiscussingincompletepenetranceanditsfamilial neglected. This qualitative study explored how individuals implications. communicate about HD with family and friends, with par- Discussion: Genetic counselling should be provided to ticular focus on communication between couples. Semi- every patient or family that is undergoing genetic testing. structuredinterviewswereconductedwithnineparticipants The aim should be to provide accurate, sufficient and734 J.delPicchia comprehensible information along with psychological importance of such studies as mainstreaming is being support to the patients. The complexity of genetics makes increasingly implemented in medicine. thisprocessmorechallengingandincomplete penetranceis B.A. Burns: None. H. Shipman: None. C. Kirwan: an example of this and of the importance of genetic None.S.Davies:None.A.Clarke:None.R.Kirby:None. counselling. It exemplifies how careful we must be in counselling prior and post gene sequencing. EMP1.53A M. Arasanz Armengol: None. G. Arno: None. Parental considerations about the communication of A. Webster: None. myotonic dystrophy to their children EMP1.52D Z. D'Souza1,2,D.Scotcher1,2 Parents’ experiences of array comparative genomic hybridisation tests, when requested by a paediatrician 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s B.A.Burns1,H.Shipman2,C.Kirwan3,S.Davies3,A.Clarke3, Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, R. Kirby4 Manchester, United Kingdom 1Wessex Clinical Genetics, Southampton, United Kingdom, Communication about geneticconditions differs from other 2East Anglian Medical Genetics Service, Cambridge, United health problems, in that parents face the challenges of dis- Kingdom,3AllWalesMedicalGeneticService,Cardiff,United cussing the condition, its treatment and prognosis, and also Kingdom, 4All Wales Medical Genetic Service, Betsi the risk to their offspring. This communication process can Cadwaladr University Health Board, Rhyl, United Kingdom be daunting for parents, who may feel ill-equipped and unsupported in this task. Introduction: Array comparative genomic hybridisation Myotonic Dystrophy (DM) is a dominant genetic (array CGH) is increasingly being used in the clinical set- condition affecting multiple organ systems. Symptoms of ting. The range of potential results, particularly uncertain DM are variable, and may cause problems from birth, in results, pose challenges for the requesting clinician. Due to childhood or adulthood. Although DM is generally well mainstreaming, professionals outside the genetics service researched,thereislimiteddataabouthowparentswithDM are increasingly requesting genetic tests. Lack of genetic tell their children about their 50% risk of inheriting the knowledge and understanding in such professionals may condition. heighten these challenges. This research study explores how parents with DM, and Materials and Methods: Three face-to-face interviews theirpartners,communicate,orcontemplatecommunicating were carried out and audio-recorded. Interview transcripts the risk of DM to their children. The study focusses on the werecreatedandanalysedusingthematicanalysis.Themes facilitators and the barriers to this discussion, and the were discussed in relation to current literature. support from genetic services that parents could benefit Results: Overall participants’ experiences were positive from during this disclosure. andthelevelofinformationgivenwasreportedasadequate. Eight participants were interviewed, via semi-structured Little information was provided prior to the test being interviews;andtranscripts were analysed using Interpretive carried out and upon receiving the test result. Detailed Phenomenological Analysis. Superordinate themes identi- information was later provided by the genetics service. fied parents’ emotions on having this discussion about the Participants reported that they felt this was appropriate and risk of DM, facilitators and barriers to disclosure, and the level of information provided at each time point was supportfromgeneticservicesthatparentsmayvalueduring satisfactory. this disclosure process. Conclusion:Limitedpre-testcounsellingiscontradictory There is currently no framework to help with the to the literature which emphasises the importance of psychosocial impact of disclosure of risk of DM. By detailed pre-test discussions. The literature also highlights highlighting the personal experiences of parents in DM- concerns of mainstreaming where non-genetic healthcare families, this study has the potential to help genetics professionals request genetic tests and in particular the services frame a guidance strategy that addresses concerns, potential negative implications this can have for patients. and helps support other parents who may face similar However, all participants were glad that the Paediatrician challenges in the future. wastheonetorequestthetestandreportedthattheydonot Z. D'Souza: None. D. Scotcher: None. feeltheywouldhavefurtherbenefitedfromdetailedpre-test counselling.Thisstudyhighlightedthelackofresearchand EMP1.54B information in the literature regarding this topic and the Three patients with pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy -Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 735 psychological, ethical and professional issues in diagnostic Purpose: The provision of recurrence numbers is often approach as a proof of importance of pre and post-test considered a fundamental component of genetic counsel- genetic counseling ling.Wesoughttofillknowledgegapsregardinghowoften patients request recurrence numbers, and how receiving M.Mijovic1, A.Miletic1, B.Dimitrijevic1, J.RumlStojanovic1, numbers impacts patient outcomes. M.Zivanovic1,G.Cuturilo1,2 Methods:Weconductedaretrospectivechartreviewata clinic where patients routinely complete the Genetic 1University Children's Hospital, Department of Medical Counselling Outcomes Scale [GCOS-24, measuring Genetics,Belgrade,Serbia,2FacultyofMedicine,Universityof empowerment] pre (T1)/post-appointment (T2). We used Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia ANCOVA to evaluate the effect of a) receiving recurrence numbers and b) patient perception of recurrence numbers, Introduction: The era of genomic testing has led to new on patient outcomes at T2. standards regarding genetic counseling. Results: Recurrence numbers were a primary indication Materials, Methods and Results: In the period of last for 134 of 300 patients (45%). Some of these patients four years we had seven patients with pyridoxine or decided to not receive recurrence numbers after counseling pyridoxalphosphate-responsiveepilepsy.Threeofthoseare about etiology and risk-reducing strategies (N = 36), and represented in the table. recurrencenumbers were ultimately provided to 116(39%) Patient Specificity Methods Gene Varianttype Dilemmas patients, most of whom (n=64, 55%) perceived the &Issues numbertobelowerthanexpected.Therewasnodifference 1. clearclinical Sanger PNPO c.520C>T(mat) misattributed betweenGCOS-24scoresofthosewhoreceivedrecurrence diagnosis sequencing c.674G<A(?) paternity numbers and those who did not. However, a subset of 2. atypical Exome ALDH7A1 c.328C>T(mat) latediagnosis patients - those who decided to not receive recurrence presentation sequencing c.1566- infantdied 1G>T(pat) numbersdespiteitbeinganinitialprimaryindicationforthe 3. suspect Exome& PNPO homozygot consanguinity appointment - had greater increases in GCOS-24 scores. metabolic Mitochondrial MTATP6 c.674G>A comorbidity disorders Genome and homoplasmia prenatal PerceptionofrecurrencenumbershadnoimpactonGCOS- mother sequencing MTATP8 testing pregnant 24 scores. Conclusion: Our data challenge the notions that patients shouldroutinelybeprovidedrecurrencenumbersingenetic In the first case we had a dilemma about the best way of counselling, and that optimal patient outcomes of genetic genetic counseling when discovering a suspicion of counselling are contingent on receipt of recurrence misattributed paternity. The second patient had an atypical numbers. clinical presentation, and unfortunately neurologist did not K.Borle:None.E.Morris:A.Employment(fullorpart- suspectthisdiseasewithavailabletherapy.Thepatientfrom time); Significant; Provincial Health Services Authority. A. a third family is from an ethnically closed community, and Inglis: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; thehomozygous variant ofthediseasearousessuspicion of Provincial Health Services Authority. J. Austin: A. consanguinity.For this family, we also considered possible Employment (full or part-time); Significant; BC Mental comorbidity, as well as prenatal diagnosis in advanced Health and Addictions institute. B. Research Grant pregnancy. (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and Conclusion: In order to successfully overcome different pending grants as well as grants already received); ethical, psychological and professional issues and provide Significant; Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Gen- thebestservicetopatientsitisessentialtohaveoptimalpre ome Canada. and post-test genetic counseling. M. Mijovic: None. A. Miletic: None. B. Dimitrijevic: EMP1.56D None.J.RumlStojanovic:None.M.Zivanovic:None.G. Clinical uncertainty and familial interactions in the Cuturilo: None. inherited cardiac conditions clinic in Hong Kong: reconsidering individualised notions of autonomy EMP1.55C Recurrence numbers in genetic counselling: exploring H.Shipman1,O.Zayts1,B. Chung2 patientuptake,perception,andimpactonclinicaloutcomes 1School of English, Hong Kong, Hong Kong, 2Department of K. Borle,E. Morris, A. Inglis,J.Austin Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, Hong University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada Kong736 J.delPicchia Introduction:Thelasttwentyyearshaveseenanumberof offered at a young age, leaving parents responsible for empirical sociological and linguistic studies examining the informing their children of the diagnosis. This study process of genetic counselling (for both diagnostic and attempts to address how parents disclose a diagnosis of predictive testing), mostly in western contexts (Pilnick VHL to their affected children. Parents of affected children 2002;Sarangi2016),butalsomorerecentlyinnon-western were identified through the North West Genetic Service (Pilnick and Zayts 2014). Now, the changing technological VHL Register and were invited to participate in semi- environment(genepaneltestsandgenomewidetesting)has structured telephone interviews. Four parents agreed to cast increasing levels of uncertainty regarding diagnostic participate and interview data was analysed using Inter- testing results and again established a need to genetically pretive Phenomenological Analysis. Three themes were test other family members to substantiate a meaningful identified in the data; the disclosure process, parental diagnostic genetic result. This development increasingly experiences and support and challenges of VHL. The challenges Western ideologies of an individualistic model research showed that the aim of disclosure was to of informed consent to genetic testing, adding strength to acknowledgethesignificanceofVHLwhileminimisingthe the long-recognised notion that genetics is a ‘family affair’ negative impact it may have. A novel finding was that (Hallowell 1999, 2009). disclosure conversations tended to happen around the time Methods and Results: We present discourse data from of screening appointments and considerations made by aninheritedcardiacconditionsclinicinHong Kong, where parents were similar to what has been reported for other several family members are co-present. Drawing on Goff- genetic conditions. Both the affected and unaffected parent man’s participation framework (1981) we examine the played a significant role in disclosure and support of a process of giving and receiving clinically uncertain results geneticcounsellorwasseenasbeneficial.Thereweremany from a gene panel test and negotiating ongoing testing challenges specific to VHL disclosure, most prominently a within the family. We explore how this test blurs the lackofchild-friendlyinformation.Theresearchshowedthat boundaries between diagnostic and ongoing genetic testing current advice given to parents is appropriate and support withinonefamilyandleadstheresearchertore-considerthe from genetic counsellors should continue. However child- question‘whoisthepatient?’,theindividualundergoingthe friendly information should be developed so that genetic testing or the family. counsellors can better support families affected by VHL. Conclusions:Weconsidertheimplicationsofourresults S.A. Hamilton: None. D. Scotcher: None. for Hong Kong, where genetic counselling is being established and where Western and Eastern cultures meet EMP1.58B (Zayts et al. 2013) and beyond, in challenging individua- FamilymanagementoflifewithDownsyndromeintheera lisednotionsofautonomousdecision-makingandinformed of noninvasive prenatal testing consent. H. Shipman: None. O. Zayts: None. B. Chung: None. M.L. Van Riper,G.J.Knafl, K.A. Knafl EMP1.57A University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, Disclosing a Diagnosis of Von Hippel-Lindau Disease to United States Affected Children: Parental Experiences and Views Introduction: There is growing evidence that many S. A.Hamilton1,2,D.Scotcher1,3 families successfully manage the ongoing challenges asso- ciated with raising an individual with Down syndrome 1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of (DS). Ironically, widespread use of noninvasive prenatal Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, testing (NIPT), appears to be exacerbating some of the United Kingdom, 2North of Scotland Genetic Service, challenges faced by families of individuals with DS (e.g., Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, NHS Grampian, Aberdeen, United stigma, discrimination, access to services). The purpose of Kingdom, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St thisstudywastoexplorecross-culturaldifferencesinfamily Mary's Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals management of DS. NHSFoundationTrust,ManchesterAcademicHealthSciences Method: 2740 parents of individuals with DS (2387 Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom mothers and 353 fathers) completed a 53-item Family ManagementMeasureaspartofalargecross-culturalstudy Von Hippel-Lindau Disease (VHL) is a dominantly inher- concerning adaptation and resilience in families of indivi- ited tumour predisposition syndrome in which manifesta- duals with DS. Means for each of the six subscales tions can potentially occur in childhood. As screening can (ConditionManagementAbility,Child’sDailyLife,Family commence from age five, predictive genetic testing is Life Difficulty, Condition Management Effort, View ofAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 737 Condition Impact, and Parental Mutuality) were ranked by disorder has on the spousal relationship can assist genetic country. counsellors to provide more focused and empathic support Results: Parents from Portugal, Spain and the US had for women and couples in this situation in South Africa. mean scores that ranked 6 or below for all the subscales T.S. Haw: None. S. Henriques: None. indicatinggreatereaseinfamilymanagement,whileparents from Ireland, Italy, Korea, and Thailand had mean scores EMP1.61A thatranked6oraboveforallthesubscalesindicatingmore An eclectic approach to decision-making in genetic problematic family management. For the remaining three counselling, incorporating person-centred, motivational countries (Brazil, Netherlands, and United Kingdom), interviewing and skilled helper models rankings on the subscales were mixed. Conclusion: Findings from this study suggest there are H.M.Brandon, K.Kohut, E.Winchester cross-cultural differences in family management of DS. More research is needed to fully understand if these St George's University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, differences arerelatedtosocialdeterminants ofhealthsuch London, United Kingdom as culture, societal attitudes towards DS and national approaches to integrating NIPT into clinical practice. Background: There is no single model of genetic coun- M.L. Van Riper: None. G.J. Knafl: None. K.A. selling that will suit all clients due to unique differences, Knafl: None. diverse preferences and needs. Method: To meet client needs, a technical eclecticism EMP1.60D approach to genetic counselling has been developed, BlackSouthAfricanwomen’sperspectivesontheimpactof primarily consisting of Roger’s person-centred counselling, having a child with a genetic disorder on their spousal motivational interviewing and Egan’s skilled helper model. relationship Discussion: Roger’s person-centred model was initially adopted in genetic counselling to separate the profession T. S.Haw1,S. Henriques2 from eugenics. Whilst empathy, unconditional positive regard and congruence mean clients are supported to 1National Health Laboratory Service, Johannesburg, South explore issues and make their own decisions, they can Africa, 2Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, avoid difficult issues. Combining with other models can Manchester, United Kingdom improve decision-making. Motivational interviewing aims to explore ambivalence, South Africa has high levels of poverty with an unem- support self-efficacy and when the client is ready, initiate ployment rate of 25 %. Census studies have shown that of change plans, whilst maintaining empathy. It can be childrenaged0-4yearsoldinSouthAfrica,only36%live particularly helpful in assisting clients to resolve ambiva- with both parents. Very little is known about how having a lence using active counselling techniques, such as high- baby with a genetic condition impacts on the spousal rela- lighting discrepancies and affirmations for empowerment. tionship in an already fragmented society. This study Egan’s Skilled helper model outlines a systematic examined the impact that having a child with a genetic decision-making plan which integrates with skills, tools condition has on the spousal relationship from the per- and techniques from other models, providing an ideal spective of black South African women in state healthcare. framework for an eclectic approach. Eight mothers who have a child with a genetic disorder Resultsandconclusion:Aneclecticapproachmeansthat were invited to take part in this study while attending a clients’ goals, blind spots and options are explored with a Genetic Counselling Clinic in a state funded hospital in variety of counselling skills, before the client chooses their Johannesburg, South Africa. Data was collected through ‘best fit’ option, minimizing possible post-decision regret. semi-structured interviews lasting about 30 minutes. Each The practical application of this approach will be demon- participant’spersonalexperiencesandhowtheymadesense strated with a decision-making case exemplar. of them were analysed using thematic analysis. Three main H.M. Brandon: None. K. Kohut: None. themes were identified during the study including blame, E. Winchester: None. the importance of spousal and family support and the spouse’sreactiontothechild.Thestudyhighlightstheneed EMP1.62B to provide support to the spousal relationship when a Family burden of children suffering from Epidermolysis genetic diagnosis is made, perhaps by increasing efforts to Bullosa include the male spouse in the genetic counselling session. Understandingtheimpactthathavingachildwithagenetic738 J.delPicchia S. DeStefano1,F. Lalatta2,G.Tadini3,F. S.Grassi4, S. De Stefano: None. F. Lalatta: None. G. Tadini: D.Rossetti4,S.Salera4,M.Brena5,A.Lopopolo6,O.Picciolini6, None. F.S. Grassi: None. D. Rossetti: None. S. Salera: A. Spinelli7,G.Montani2,G.Scuvera4, S.Guez8 None.M.Brena:None.A.Lopopolo:None.O.Picciolini: None. A. Spinelli: None. G. Montani: None. G. Scuvera: 1Clinical Genetics Unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda None. S. Guez: None. Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 2Clinical Genetic Unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale EMP1.65A Maggiore Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 3Pediatric dermatology BIUX^2X2 unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 4Pediatric Highly Intensive Care A. Ros,B. García-Jiménez, E. Castellanos, F.Roca-Ribas, Unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore E. Amilibia, A.Castillo, J. L.Becerra, I.Bielsa,A. Plana, Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 5Pediatric Dermatology Unit C. Lázaro, E.Serra, I.Blanco Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 6Pediatric Physical Medicine and SpanishNationalReferenceCentre(CSUR)forPhakomatoses, Rehabilitation Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Badalona, Spain Maggiore Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 7Social service unit Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore A pilot study was performed to validate and adapt the ori- Policlinico, MILANO, Italy, 8Pediatric Highly Intensive Care ginal NF2 Impact on Quality of Life (NFTI-QOL) ques- Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Cà Granda Ospedale Maggiore tionnaire to assess Neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2) Spanish Policlinico, MILANO, Italy patients. Our previous pilot results showed low internal consistence. The aim of the present study was to improve Introduction: Few studies have considered the psycho- the cross-cultural adaptation and validation of the Spanish socialimpactofEpidermolysisBullosaonaffectedchildren version of NFTI-QOL Scale. and their families. Patients and methods: A new translation, retro- Cases and methods: 50 EB families were recruited to translation of the NFTI-QOL to Spanish was performed to answera20itemquestionnairetoassesstheburdenontheir optimize the structure of the answers. Validation of the familiesandtheiradaptationtothedisease.Thediagnosisof Spanish scale was performed by means of the factorial EB was based on clinical observation, on histopathological analysis of principal components and the use of a second analysis and/or molecular testing. The cohort consisted of generic QoL questionnaire (EuroQOL) in a sample of 23 13 cases of EBS, 3 of JEB, 32 of DEB (11 DDEB and 21 patients with NF2, under care of Spanish National RDEB) and 2 cases of KS. Disease severity was evaluated Reference Centre for Phakomatoses. using the Birmingham Epidermolysis Bullosa Severity Results: The participants were 7 males and 16 females (BEBS) score. The questionnaire demonstrated high inter- with an age rate of 17 to 77 years. Results did not show nal consistency (Cronbach’s alpha is 0,90) and the EB statistically significant differences by gender (p>0.01) and BurdenofDisease(EB-BoD)scorewaswellcorrelatedwith did not correlate with age (r=0.287). The new translated the mental HRQoL outcome of the SF-12, confirming its version showed good internal consistence (Cronbach's α= concurrent validity. The interclass correlation coefficient 0.86). The analysis of principal factor showed a bidimen- (ICC) was 0.97 while EB-BoD scores were significantly sionalstructureofthescale (KMO=0,716,Bartletttestp< discriminating between EB subtypes. The survey included 0.01). The total NFTI-QOL score correlated significantly evaluations of family life, the child’s well-being, disease with total score of the five items of EuroQOL (r=−0,857, and treatment as well as economic and social impact. The p<0.001). Mean NFTI-QOL score obtained was 9,57. format included a six-point Likert scale. Further data Conclusions: The modified version of the translated included family composition, demographic data and socio- NFTI-QOL scale has better internal validity and reliability. cultural aspects of the family members. It is a validated scale to evaluate the QoL in Spanish NF2 Result: all parents answered the questionnaire. Prelimin- patients. Ref: Hornigold et al. J Neurol Surg ary results revealed that there is not strict correlation B 2012;73:104–111. between BEBS scores and levels of burden. There are A. Ros: None. B. García-Jiménez: None. E. Castella- psychological, socioeconomic and medical aspects that nos: None. F. Roca-Ribas: None. E. Amilibia: None. influence the entire family, regardless of the severity of the A. Castillo: None. J.L. Becerra: None. I. Bielsa: None. condition.So,itisimportanttoimproveourknowledgeand A. Plana: None. C. Lázaro: None. E. Serra: None. our ability to measure these aspects to set priorities for I. Blanco: None. children and families.Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 739 EMP1.66B Á. Mendes1,M.Paneque1,A. Clarke2,J.Sequeiros1,3 ‘We’remoredefinedbywhatwearenotthanwhatweare’: Exploring adoptees’ attitudes and experiences of family 1i3S,IBMC-UnIGENeandCGPP,UniversityofPorto,Porto, health history and genetic information Portugal, 2School of Medicine, Institute of Medical Genetics, Cardiff University, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 3ICBAS – T. R.O'Brien1,2,J.Hodgson1,2,M.Sahhar3,K. Pereira4,3 Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas Abel Salazar, Universidade do Porto, Porto, Portugal 1The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 2MurdochChildren'sResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia, Few studies have addressed those who remain uninformed 3Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia, about their genetic status for their family’s disease. We 4The Genetic Support Network of Victoria, Melbourne, report the accounts from people at-risk or affected by Australia Huntington disease, familial amyloid polyneuropathy TTR Val30Met and Machado-Joseph disease, and their family Introduction: Due to the nature of adoption, people who members, who have decided not to undertake pre- are adopted often have limited access to family health his- symptomatic testing (PST) for those diseases. We draw on tory (FHH) information. Although previous research has individual semi-structured interviews, and on family inter- explored the perspectives of adoptive parents on limited views,involvingatotalof21participantsrecruitedthrough FHHknowledgeoftheiradoptedchild,littleisknownabout patients’ associations. Qualitative thematic analysis was howthisimpactsonadopteesthemselves.Anecdotalreports undertaken. Findings show that some participants frame suggest adoptees access direct-to-consumer (DTC) genetic access to predictive genetic information as pointless testingtogaininformationabouttheirinheritedhealthrisks. because, although removing uncertainty, no effective Thisstudyaimedtoexploretheattitudesandexperiencesof treatment or cure is available for their family´s disease. adoptees regarding FHH and genetic information, and They also anticipate genetic knowledge as having the interest in genetic testing. potential to become seriously burdensome psychologically. Methods: This was a qualitative study, involving 10 Other participants prioritize the focus of their lives on semi-structured interviews with adoptees. Interviews were everyday pressing concerns, without the destabilizing transcribed verbatim, coded and analysed using thematic knowledge of an impending disease. Some participants analysis. affirmedthatbyavoidingformalknowledgeoftheirgenetic Results: The main findings of this research highlight the status they are able to preserve hope towards the future. In importanceoftheadoptionexperienceinprovidingcontext doingso,theyareallowedtolivea“validlife”.Therewere to participant’s attitudes to FHH and genetic information. alsoaccountswhereambivalenceamongfamilymembersin The complex nature of facets of the adoption experience, relationtonon-engagementwasnoticeable.Thisstudymay includingcontactandrelationshipswithbirthfamilyandthe be relevant for genetic counselling and for the provision of process of searching, illustrate potential psychosocial support to families, by bringing further insights about the impacts for adoptees. This research confirms anecdotal reasoning of those who opt for non-engagement with reports that adoptees are accessing DTC testing to fill gaps medical genetic services, and specifically with PST, and in their knowledge. It provides novel insights into the intothedecision-makingprocessofat-riskfamilymembers. potential interest and value of genetic testing for adoptees, Á. Mendes: None. M. Paneque: None. A. Clarke: suchasnotfacingbarriersthatarecommontootheraspects None. J. Sequeiros: None. of the adoption experience, and the perceived ability of genetic testing to uncover the ‘truth’. EMP1.68D Conclusions:Thefindingsofthisresearchhelptoinform Ectodermal Dysplasia: motivating and sustaining practiceinprovidinggeneticcounsellingtothisgroup.They involvement in a trial involving newborn boys also demonstrate the importance of training for genetic counsellors in aspects of adoption. S. Doheny,A. Clarke T.R. O'Brien: None. J. Hodgson: None. M. Sahhar: None. K. Pereira: None. Division of Cancer and Genetics, Cardiff, United Kingdom EMP1.67C In October 2013, Edimer initiated a phase 2 trial to deter- Choosing not to know: accounts of non-engagement with mine the safety of administering the drug EDI200 to new- pre-symptomatic testing for late onset-neurological born males. While raising the possibility of treating disorders Ectodermal Dysplasia (specifically, X-linked Hypohidrotic Ectodermal Dysplasia (XLHED)), involvement in this trial740 J.delPicchia required a great deal of participating families. Not only did consultation did not have any additional value. Since the the eligible foetus have to be identified and screened to diagnosis is based on clinical findings, it is essential to checktheirsex,butthenewbornswererequiredtomoveto make other practitioners aware of this. Referral criteria a participating hospital in their first week after birth, where shouldbedefinedinordertoselectcasesneedingaclinical they were to spend nearly the first month of their lives. genetic evaluation. Making such a commitment to determine the safety of a L. Kukor: None. S. Bertoli: None. V. Bours: None. drug, suggests that recruiting clinicians, patients and S. Bulk: None. E. Docampo: None. families at the very least share perceptions and values. Through an analysis of interviews conducted with the EMP1.70B families of the infants, participating clinicians, and repre- Motivations and expectations of those participating in the sentativesofEdimer,weunpacktheviewsandexperiences Enroll-HD observational study of some of those involved in this trial. Driving the will- ingness to participate in the trial was a strong sense of the E. Davies1,2,R. MacLeod1,3 personal and social problems caused by Ectodermal Dys- plasia, coupled with discourses on hope and scientific pro- 1Division of Evolution and Genomic Sciences, School of gress. What is noteworthy, however, is how this Biological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, combination of discourses motivated and sustained invol- United Kingdom, 2Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge vement in a lengthy and burdensome trial. University Hospitals, Cambridge, United Kingdom, S. Doheny: None. A. Clarke: None. 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary's Hospital, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS EMP1.69A Foundation Trust Manchester Academic Health Sciences Ehlers-DanlossyndromeintheuniversityhospitalofLiege Centre, Manchester, United Kingdom L. Kukor,S.Bertoli, V.Bours, S. Bulk, E.Docampo Introduction: Predictive test guidelines for Huntington’s disease recommend that individuals are offered opportu- CHU Liège, Liège, Belgium nities to participate in research regardless of test outcome. In MCGM individuals are invited to participate in the Introduction:EhlersDanlosSyndrome(EDS)isacommon observation study Enroll-HD. Limited research has been reason for consultation in clinical genetics. In our genetic conducted todate on theviews ofresearch participants and consultations, we are confronted with a large number of the possible impact of participation on their lives. The aim patients referred for joint hypermobility. Often, another of this study was to explore the experiences of individuals practician has already established a diagnosis of hypermo- takingpartinEnroll-HDstudyfollowingpredictivetesting. bility type EDS. The hypermobility type diagnosis isbased MaterialsandMethods:Tenindividualsparticipatingin on clinical findings only. Thus, the genetic consultation Enroll-HDatMCGMagreedtoasemi-structuredtelephone does not seem to be of additional value. The aim of this interview.AllhadundergonepredictivetestingforHD;five study was to characterize patients referred to clinical individuals tested mutation positive, and five individuals genetics consultations for EDS suspicion. tested mutation negative. The interviews were audiotaped, Methods: We performed a retrospective observational transcribed verbatim and analysed using thematic analysis. study of the patients from the University Hospital of Liège Results: Participants had both personal and altruistic who had come to a genetic consultation for the Ehlers- motivationsfortakingpartinEnroll-HD.Overall,theywere Danlos syndrome between March 2016 and December very positive about their experiences, citing valuable 2017. We performed descriptive statistical analyses of aspects such as good relationships with the research team, demographic and clinical characteristics including increasedunderstandingofHD,anenhancedself-imageand Beighton score, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome associated a shared experience with an affected relative. Issues clinical signs, family history, as well as the prescribed highlighted were of a practical nature including distance complementary tests. travelled or car parking. Several participants would have Results:Weincluded143patients.Exceptforrarecases, welcomed more information about study progress. Partici- the vast majority of the evaluations only confirmed the pants generally had realistic expectations for the study, alreadyestablisheddiagnosisofEDShypermobilitytype.A awareofthespeedandlimitationsofresearch,butwerealso consultation in the genetics polyclinic was therefore not cautiously optimistic for the future. necessary for those patients. Conclusions:Participantswereoverallpositiveaboutthe Conclusion:Thevastmajorityofthepatientsreferredfor experience of research participation. Understanding the an EDS suspicion presented a hypermobile type. Genetic motivations and possible barriers to taking part in researchAbstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 741 isessentialtoimprovepatientexperienceandtohelpretain Introduction: Previous studies examining family carers’ study participants. experiencesofsupportserviceshavehighlightedtheroleof E. Davies: None. R. MacLeod: None. interpersonal factors such as trust, honesty and the impor- tance of listening to family members. However, little is EMP1.71C known about how service organisation issues impact upon ThecostofjuvenileonsetHuntingdon’sDisease(JOHD)in family members’ psychosocial experiences and, more the UK broadly, their perceptions of effective support. Aim: To identify key components of effective support from the T. A.Young1,O.W.J. Quarrell2 perspectives of young people with Huntington’s Disease and their family carers. 1University of Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield Methods: The paper presents findings from qualitative Children's NHS Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom data generated within a multiphase, mixed-methods study. Multiple strategies (including referrals from clinical genet- Introduction:Huntington’sdiseasepatientswithonset≤20 ics centres and from the Huntington Disease Association) yearsaccountfor5%ofcases.EstimatesofthecostsofHD wereutilisedtoidentifyfamilies.24familyinterviewswere have been published; to date no study has estimated the conducted, of which 9 included young people with JOHD. costs of JOHD. Methods: 33 people with JOHD or their Data was subjected to framework analysis. families/carers were interviewed and completed a ques- Results: For many families, formal support services are tionnaire on the use of resources in the past 12 months. experienced as sub-optimal, with consequent negative Costs were estimated overall and for those with mild, impact on families’ psychosocial experiences. Seven core moderate and severe JOHD. components of effective support were identified. These Results: the mean age of the people with JOHD was 23 were: proactivity; accessibility and ease of communication; years: 52% were male. There were 10 mild, 7 moderate, positive interpersonal relationships; continuity of relation- 14 severe and two unclassified cases. The majority of costs ships; partnership working; specialist knowledge of JHD incurred were due to accessing services. 50% of people and; access to a key worker. accessed accident & emergency mainly because of falls. Conclusion: There is considerable potential to improve The majority of costs borne by the person with JOHD or the support provided to young people with JHD and their their family were for direct care (£26,577). The mean familycarers.Keytosuchimprovementistheallocationof overall cost of JOHD was £112,581 per person per year. a key worker with whom family members can initiate and The average cost to the NHS was £69,368 and 30% of the maintain contact over time as the disease progresses, the overall cost to the person with JOHD and their family young person’s health deteriorates and support needs (mean=£34,758).Overallcostswerelowestforthosewith change. [Research funded by the NHS National Institute mild JOHD (mean = £27,764), and highest for those with for Health Research. Research for Patient Benefit stream. severe JHD (mean - £181,523) with moderate JHD costing PB-PG-112-29056]. on average £110,341 per year. P.A. Curtis: None. J. Thompson: None. O.W.J. Conclusions: A UK study on HD reported cost per year Quarrell: None. H. Santini: None. tobe£21,605andincludedsimilarresourceuse:thecostof JOHDisnearlyfivetimesmorethanthis.[Researchfunded EMP1.73A by the NHS National Institute for Health Research. JuvenileonsetHuntington’sdisease: Thehealthstatusand Research for Patient Benefit stream. PB-PG-112-29056]. perspective of family carers T.A. Young: None. O.W.J. Quarrell: None. A. K.Ho1,O.W.J.Quarrell2 EMP1.72D ‘They’re not there for you’: a qualitative study exploring 1University of Reading, Reading, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield the impact of service organisation on the psychosocial Children's NHS Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom experiences of young people with juvenile onset Huntington’s Disease, and their parents, in England Introduction: Juvenile onset Huntington’s disease (JOHD) is defined as onset ≤20 years. Although most patients are P. A.Curtis1,J. Thompson1,O.W.J. Quarrell2,H.Santini3 caredforwithinthefamily,theexperiencesoffamily-carers of JOHD is lacking. This study explores the perspective of 1Sheffield University, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 2Sheffield JOHD family-carers together with their health status. Children's NHS Trust, Sheffield, United Kingdom, Methods: Twenty six JOHD family-carers (with an 3Huntington'sDiseaseAssociation,Liverpool,UnitedKingdom average age 45 years) completed the EQ-5D questionnaire.742 J.delPicchia They were also asked about their experience as carers and trust the medical knowledge and balanced between their their responses were analysed qualitatively. religious belief and adjustment to the diagnosis being seen Results: Family-carers reported positive elements, which as a duty. Belief in fate was a primary coping strategy to were growth in the carer’s character, strength of the JOHD overcome difficult situations. patient’s character, enriched family experiences, and Conclusion:MuslimpatientsuseR/Sasacopingstrategy supportive external relationships. Negative points reported in the context of LQTS. However, genetic counsellors were the personal and emotional toll on carers, toll on the should explore individualised beliefs around R/S since family, and issues with external parties regarding JOHD. people vary in their interpretations of religious principles. Carers’ responses on what would be helpful centred on Patients who believed fate is predetermined focus more on financial support, respite, and an increase in both the controlling how they respond to life events. quantity and quality of services appropriate for JOHD. K. Bakur: None. F. Ulph: None. H. Brooks: None. Family-carers’healthstatuswaslowerthannormalfortheir T. Clancy: None. agegroup(EQ-5Dvisualanaloguescalerating =73,EQ5- D index score = 0.74). Pain/Discomfort was most affected EMP1.76D in family-carers, followed by Mobility, with poorer scores “I just wanted answers”: Exploring personal genomic for those caring for more severely affected JOHD patients. testing for nutrition and wellness Conclusions: Family-carers face a high physical and emotional toll, especially when JOHD patients become E. Tutty1,2,C.Hickerton2,1,M.Adamski3,J. Savard4,5, severely affected. Greater understanding and acknowl- B. Terrill5,6,7,A. Newson4,C. Gaff8,K. Gray1,A. Middleton9, edgementofthisisneededtoaddressthehealthandquality B. Wilson10,S. Metcalfe1,2 of life of carers. [Research funded by the NHS National Institute for Health Research. Research for Patient Benefit 1The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, stream. PB-PG-112-29056]. 2MurdochChildrensResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia, A.K. Ho: None. O.W.J. Quarrell: None. 3Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 4The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 5Garvan Institute of Medical EMP1.74B Research,Sydney,Australia,6Genome.One,Sydney,Australia, Exploring the role of religion and spirituality on Muslim 7The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, patients with Long QT Syndrome 8Melbourne Genomics Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 9Society and Ethics Research, Connecting Science, Welcome K. Bakur1,2,F. Ulph1,H.Brooks1,3,T. Clancy1,4 Genome Campus, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 10The University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada 1University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2KingAbdulazizUniversity,Jeddah,SaudiArabia,3University Personal genomic testing (PGT) for nutrition and wellness ofLiverpool,Liverpool,UnitedKingdom,4ManchesterCentre offers new ways to personalise dietary advice. While pro- for Genomic Medicine, Manchester University Hospitals NHS mising, commercial adoption of nutritional genomics may Foundation Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom be hasty: many tests lack clinical validity and utility (e.g. MTHFR). Nevertheless, companies and complementary/ Introduction: Individuals’ religious beliefs and spirituality alternative health practitioners (e.g. naturopaths/nutri- (R/S) can influence their experience with a personal and/or tionists)encouragingPGTfornutritionandwellnessonline family history of a genetic disorder. The aim of this quali- have increased, particularly in Australia; little is known tativestudyistoexploretheroleofreligionandspirituality about peoples’ experiences of this. We aimed to explore on Muslim patients with Long QT Syndrome. how PGTfor nutrition andwellnessisframedonlinetothe Materials and Methods: To date, 7 participants have public and how Australians experience testing. This study been recruited through a cardio-genetic clinic in Saudi involved:contentanalysisofwebsites(n=39)thatpromote Arabia. Interviews have been analysed using IPA. PGT services for nutrition and wellness to Australians, Preliminary Results: All participants felt that their faith using a newly created framework; and thematic analysis of helpedthemovercomedifficultsituationsingeneralandthe semi-structured interviews (n=12) with participants (from geneticconditioninparticular.Ontheotherhand,theyalso Genioz study survey) who had testing. Websites were believed that difficult situations strengthened their relation framed to empower the consumer, claiming testing as an with Allah (God). Participants viewed their diagnoses essential tool for optimising health, with little emphasis on through the lens of religious belief, but did not consider it scientific and ethical aspects. Most interviewees experi- to be a punishment from God. Although participants enced chronic ill-health and found PGT was not as infor- attribute ultimate knowledge to Allah, they confidently mative as promised nor easy to translate into real life.Abstractsfromthe2018EuropeanMeetingonPsychosocialAspectsofGenetics 743 However, participants remained positive about PGT and ≤ 0.05, was used to determine significance for correlation valued the involvement of a complementary/alternative coefficients. health practitioner following negative experiences with Results: BRS was associated with multiple psychosocial conventional medical professionals regarding testing and measures for both the overall cohort and quartiles e.g. their condition.Despite concerns regardingclinical validity CohenPerceivedStressScale,-0.55,p<0.01.BRSwasnot and utility, findings revealed that PGT for nutrition and associated to any physiological measures, such as white wellness provides the chronically ill with self-knowledge blood cell count or hematocrit levels, in the overall cohort. andasenseofempowerment.Thehealthypublic,however, Conclusions: Our findings suggest that BRS is strongly may be more prone to disappointment and psychological linked to psychosocial measures and is not correlated with distress. Clearly, greater accuracy of information, and ade- physiological disease severity. Interventions targeting the quate pre- and post-test counselling, is necessary to facil- resilience of individuals with a chronic genetic disease itate informed consent. needs to involve psychosocial factors. This study is funded E. Tutty: None. C. Hickerton: None. M. Adamski: by NHGRI, NIH, United States, 1ZIAHG200394-04 None. J. Savard: None. B. Terrill: Other; Modest; C.I. Conn: None. L. Jackson: None. N.S. Trivedi: Genome.One.A.Newson:None.C.Gaff:None.K.Gray: None. A. Buscetta: None. K. Abdallah: None. K.D. None. A. Middleton: None. B. Wilson: None. S. Blizinsky: None. C.P. Minniti: None. V.L. Metcalfe: None. Bonham: None. EMP1.78B EMP1.79C Psychosocial effects on a genetic disease-Investigating the Interrelation of smoking with neuroendocrine and psychological resilience of adults living with sickle cell psychological phenotypes in young men from the Sakha disease Republic of Russia C. I.Conn1,L. Jackson2,N.S. Trivedi1,A. Buscetta1, S. S.Nakhodkin1,N.A. Barashkov1,2,V. G.Pshennikova1,2, K. Abdallah1,K.D.Blizinsky3,C. P. Minniti4,V. L. Bonham1 A.V.Kazantseva3,E.K.Khusnutdinova3,4,N.N.Sazonov1,S.A. Fedorova1,2 1National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, MD, United States, 2Pediatrics and Child Health, College of 1M.K. Ammosov North-Eastern Federal University, Yakutsk, Medicine, Howard University, Washington D.C, DC, United Russian Federation, 2Yakut Science Centre of Complex States, 3Rush Alzheimer’s Disease Center, Rush University, Medical Problems, Yakutsk, Russian Federation, 3Institute of Chicago,IL,UnitedStates,4DepartmentofMedicine,Division BiochemistryandGenetics,Ufa,RussianFederation,4Bashkir of Hematology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, State University, Ufa, Russian Federation Montefiore Medical Center, Bronx, NY, United States On the risk of developing socially significant diseases and Introduction: Sickle cell disease (SCD) affects about lifeexpectancyamongtheyoungergeneration,asignificant 100,000peopleintheU.S.Itsfrequencyissteadilyrisingin contribution is made by behavioral stereotypes (smoking), Europe with immigration. Psychological resilience is con- neuroendocrine and genetic determinate psychological sidered a characteristic of healthy patients living with phenotypes. The study involved 116 healthy Yakut men, chronic diseases, but has rarely been explored in adults whose average age was 21.5±2.25. The sample was divi- living with SCD. The Brief Resilience Scale (BRS) mea- ded into two groups: smokers (n=36) and non-smokers sures an “individual’s ability to bounce back from stress.” (n=80). A statistically significant increase in the level of Using BRS, we sought to explore what factors influence cortisol insmokers(11.52 μg/dl)was foundcomparedwith individuals’ resilience while living with SCD and how non-smokers(9.28μg/dl)(p=0.02).Itwasestablishedthat resilience relates to these individuals’ physical and psy- theaverage grade ofextraversionand neuroticism ishigher chosocial wellbeing. in smokers than in non-smokers (extraversion: 12.91 and Methods: A cross-sectional study using psychosocial, 11.50,respectively,p=0.04;neuroticism:13.13and11.36, physiological, and environmental data within U.S. Partici- respectively, p=0.04). The prevalence of choleric pants (N=102) with the highest and lowest quartiles of (38.89%)andsanguine(33.34%)temperamentinthegroup BRS scores were identified. Student’s t-test or chi-square of smokers was found in comparison with non-smokers analysis was conducted between data on participants in the (22.50% and 20.00%, respectively). Exposure to smoking distal quartiles. Spearman correlations were calculated from extraverts can be explained by psychological pheno- between BRS scores and all data variables for the overall types of the basal personality traits characteristic for this cohortandthedistalquartiles.Acutoffof±0.3withp-value typeoftemperament(impulsiveness,sociability,cravingfor744 J.delPicchia newimpressions).ThedependenceoftheDHEAcontentin №6.1766.2017,FASOBRK_0556-2017-0003,Grantofthe the blood serum of smokers on the extraversion rates (r= Head of the Republic of Sakha (Yakutia) to young scien- 0.47,p=0.02)wasshown:themoreextraversionvaluewas tists, specialists and students for 2018 and RFBR (18-34- pronounced, the higher DHEA level was observed. Thus, 00521_mol_a). the study showed that the status of smoking among Yakut S.S. Nakhodkin: None. N.A. Barashkov: None. V.G. men influenced on the level of steroid hormones and Pshennikova: None. A.V. Kazantseva: None. E.K. linked with psychological phenotypes. The study was Khusnutdinova: None. N.N. Sazonov: None. S.A. supported by Ministry of Education and Science of Russia Fedorova: None.