EuropeanJournalofHumanGenetics(2019)27:748–869 https://doi.org/10.1038/s41431-019-0407-4 MEETING ABSTRACTS Abstracts from the 51st European Society of Human Genetics Conference: Oral Presentations ©EuropeanSocietyofHumanGenetics2019 June 16–19, 2018, Fiera Milano Congressi, Milan Italy Sponsorship: Publication of this supplement is sponsored by the European Society of Human Genetics. All content was reviewed and approved by the ESHG Scientific Programme Committee, which held full responsibility for the abstract selections. DisclosureInformation:Inordertohelpreadersformtheirownjudgmentsofpotentialbiasinpublishedabstracts,authors are asked to declare any competing financial interests. :,;)(0987654321 :,;)(0987654321 ContributionsofuptoEUR10000.-(TenthousandEuros,orequivalentvalueinkind)peryearpercompanyareconsidered "Modest". Contributions above EUR 10 000.- per year are considered "Significant". Plenary Sessions PL1 Opening plenary lecture T. Lappalainen: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speak- ers bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Merck. PL1.1 Leena Peltonen Lecturer - Complex Genetics PL1.2 Recent advances in mutational signatures of human cells T. Lappalainen1,2 S. Nik-Zainal 1New York Genome Center, New York, NY, United States, 2Columbia University, New York, NY, United States DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom Detailed characterization of cellular effects of genetic var- A cancer genome contains the historic mutagenic activity iantsisessentialforunderstandingbiologicalprocessesthat that has occurred throughout the development of a underlie genetic associations to disease, to improve the tumour. While driver mutations were the main focus of interpretation of the personal genome, and to characterize cancer research for a long time, passenger mutational the genetic architecture of molecular variation. This has signatures-theimprintsofDNAdamageandDNArepair inspired large consortium projects to create and integrate processesthathavebeenoperativeduringtumorigenesis- population-scale genome data with transcriptome data – as arealsobiologicallyinformative.Inthislecture,Iprovide well as other molecular phenotype data – in human popu- a synopsis of this concept, describe the insights that we lations.Thecatalogsofgeneticeffectsonthetranscriptome have gained through combinations of computational across multiple human tissues and conditions now allows analysis and experiments in cell-based systems, and downstream discovery in diverse questions in genetics, showcase how we have developed the concept into including joint effects of regulatory and coding variants applications that we hope to translate into clinical utility underlyingmodifiedpenetranceofdisease-causingvariants, in the near future. and novel methods to understand variation in gene dosage S. Nik-Zainal: None. in human populations and patients.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 749 PL2 What's New and Late Breaking Session P. Lacaze: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; BC Platforms. R. Sebra: A. Employment (full or part-time); PL2.1 Significant; Sema4. M. Riaz: None. R. Woods: None. Genomic sequencing 15,000 healthy elderly individuals - I.Winship:None.E.Schadt:A.Employment(fullorpart- Implications for clinical genetics time); Significant; Sema4. J. McNeil: None. P. Lacaze1,R. Sebra2,M.Riaz1,R. Woods3,I. Winship4,5, PL2.2 ASPREEInvestigator Group,ASPREE Healthy Ageing CRISPR-QTL mapping as a genome-wide association Biobank,E. Schadt2,J.McNeil3 framework for cellular genetic screens of the noncoding genome 1Public Health Genomics, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 2Icahn Institute and Dept. of Genetics & Genomic M.Gasperini1, A.Hill1,J.L. McFaline Figueroa1,B. Martin1, Sciences at Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, C. Trapnell1,N.Ahituv2,J. Shendure1,3,4 United States, 3School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia, 4Genetic 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, Medicine and Family Cancer Clinic, Royal Melbourne 2University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 5Department of Medicine, UnitedStates,3BrotmanBatyInstituteforPrecisionMedicine, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia Seattle,WA,UnitedStates,4HowardHughesMedicalInstitute, Seattle, WA, United States Introduction: The variable penetrance of pathogenic var- iantsremainsamajorchallengetoclinicalgeneticspractice, Almostallnoncodingvariantsreturnedfromwholegenome particularly in predictive testing of hereditary cancer risk sequencing (WGS) cannot be confidently interpreted. genes. Ascertainment bias towards affected individuals and Although most are thought to disrupt gene function by their families has in part shaped our understanding of gene disrupting regulatory-elements such as enhancers, it is still penetrance. Here we report, for the first time, rates of largely unknown which noncoding regions constitute true pathogenic variation in hereditary cancer genes across enhancers, nor which genes each enhancer influences. To thousands of healthy elderly individuals, ascertained with- empirically address this, we have developed CRISPR-QTL out reference to clinical phenotype or family history, mapping, a framework in which large numbers of noncod- enrolled in an aspirin primary prevention trial. ingperturbations areintroduced to eachcell on an isogenic Materials and Methods: Individuals enrolled in the background, followed by single-cell RNA-sequencing ASPirin in Reducing Events in the Elderly (ASPREE) (scRNA-seq). This framework is borrowed from conven- Healthy Ageing Biobank were screened using a 760 gene tional human expression quantitative loci (eQTL) studies, ‘super-panel’ including pan-cancer gene coverage. The but with individual humans replaced by individual cells; average age was 75 years (min 65 years, max. 98 years), variantsreplacedby'unlinked'combinationsofguideRNA- and all participants were confirmed to be free of life- programmed perturbations per cell; and tissue-level RNA- threatening cancer diagnoses, cardiovascular disease or seq of many individuals replaced by scRNA-seq of many cognitive decline at time of enrolment. Medical records, cells. WeappliedCRISPR-QTLmapping toevaluate1,119 family history andclinical data wereminedfor evidenceof candidateenhancerswithnostrongapriorihypothesisasto cancer phenotypes in mutation carriers. theirtargetgene(s).Perturbationsweremadebyanuclease- Results: We detected hundreds of pathogenic and high- dead Cas9 tethered to KRAB, and introduced at a mean confidence predicted-deleterious mutations in hereditary ‘allele frequency’ of 1.1% into a population of 47,650 cancer genes in elderly individuals (>10,000 samples profiledhumanK562cells(medianof15gRNAsidentified sequenced Feb 2018). Mutations were often detected in per cell). We tested for differential expression of all genes the absence of any reported disease phenotype or family within 1 megabase of each candidate enhancer, evaluating history. Overall, pathogenic variants were found at a 17,584 potential enhancer-target gene relationships in one comparable rate to population-based cohorts, suggesting experiment. We identify 128 cis CRISPR-QTLs whose over-representation of non-penetrant individuals in targeting resulted in downregulation of 105 nearby genes this study. (of which 49 genes are thought to underlie disease). We Conclusions: Pathogenic germline mutations in cancer anticipate that the power of CRISPR-QTL mapping will predisposition genes may exist more commonly in the facilitate the comprehensive characterization of enhancer- population than expected, raising questions about clinical gene relationships, thus advancing interpretation of non- actionability, risk and penetrance. coding variants discovered through WGS.750 J.delPicchia M. Gasperini: None. A. Hill: None. J.L. McFaline A. Munnich1,D.Papy-Garcia2,M. DeLa Dure-Molla1, Figueroa: None. B. Martin: None. C. Trapnell: None. V. Cormier-Daire1 N. Ahituv: None. J. Shendure: None. 1Institut Imagine INSERM U1163, Paris, France, 2CRRET PL2.3 Laboratory, Université Paris-Est Créteil, Créteil, France, Elimination of aneuploid cells in the early mammalian 3Polygene AG, Rümlang, Switzerland, 4Cerrahpasa Medicine embryo School, Istanbul, Turkey, 5Akdeniz University Facultu of Medecine, Antalya, Turkey, 6Medical University of Innsbruck, S. Singla,M.Zernicka-Goetz Innsbruck, Austria, 7University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 8Center for Molecular Medecine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom Utrecht, Netherlands, 9University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 10Radboud University Medical Center, Whole chromosomal aneuploidies - loss and/or gain of Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Hôpital Bichat, Paris, France chromosomes froma euploid complement- areresponsible for the low fecundity in humans. Here we use mouse Skeletal dysplasias with multiple dislocations are a group of embryo as a model system to understand how severedisorderscharacterizedbydislocationsoflargejoints, mosaic aneuploidy affects embryonic development. To scoliosis, short stature and a variable combination of cleft experimentally induce chromosome missegregation in the palate,heart defects,intellectual disabilityand obesity.With cleavage stage embryos, we inhibit the master spindle the help of massively parallel sequencing technologies, the assembly checkpoint kinase Mps1, which results in a high majority of these rare disorders have been linked to patho- percentageofaneuploidcellsintheembryos.Weintroduce genic variants in genes encoding glycosyltransferases (“lin- mosaicisminthesystembymakingchimerasusingeuploid keropathies”), sulfotransferases, epimerases or transporters, and aneuploid cells. Detailed analysis of such chimeras required for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) biosynthesis. These revealed that during blastocyst maturation abnormal cells findingssupporttheexistenceofanewgroupofinbornerrors contributing to the inner cell mass undergo preferential of development defined by impaired GAG biosynthesis. elimination up to 40%. Using an in vitro culture system However, several findings suggest that GAG synthesis is capable of recapitulating in vivo mosaic embryos during morecomplexthanpreviouslydescribedandthattherearea peri-implantation development and time-lapse imaging, we numberofpartnersofunknownfunctionstilltobeidentified. have found aneuploid cells are further preferentially elimi- Using exome sequencing, we identified homozygous nated from the epiblast via apoptosis. Moreover, we mutations in SLC10A7 in five individuals with a skeletal demonstrate that autophagy genes are significantly upre- dysplasia with dislocations and amelogenesis imperfecta. gulated in aneuploid cells. Using pharmacological treat- Common features were severe growth retardation< -3SD, ments to knockdown genes involved in autophagy cleft palate, yellow/brown teeth, knee dislocations, spine apoptosis, we have found the onset of autophagy-mediated anomalies and advanced carpal ossification. SLC10A7 apoptosis during embryogenesis. Overall, our findings encodes a 10-transmembrane-domain transporter located at suggestthatp53-mediatedautophagypromotesapoptosisof the plasma membrane, with a yet unidentified substrate. aneuploid cells in mouse preimplantation embryos. This Functional studies in vitro demonstrated that SLC10A7 work gives an insight into the mechanisms behind sub- mutations were loss-of-functions mutations reducing fertility, developmental defects, and miscarriages during SLC10A7 protein expression. We generated a Slc10a7-/- pregnancy. Funding Wellcome Trust; Cambridge Com- mouse model which displayed short long bones, growth monwealth, European and International Trust. plate disorganization and tooth enamel anomalies, recapi- S. Singla: None. M. Zernicka-Goetz: None. tulating the human phenotype. Furthermore, we identified decreased heparan sulfate levels in Slc10a7-/- mouse PL2.4 cartilage and patient fibroblasts. Finally, we found an SLC10A7 mutations in human and mouse cause a skeletal abnormal N-glycoprotein electrophoretic profile in patient dysplasia with amelogenesis imperfecta mediated by GAG blood samples. Together, our findings support the involve- biosynthesis defects ment of SLC10A7 in glycosaminoglycan synthesis and specifically in skeletal and tooth development. J.Dubail1, C.Huber1,S. Chantepie2,S. Sonntag3,B. Tüysüz4, J.Dubail:None.C.Huber: None.S.Chantepie:None. E. Mihci5,C. Gordon1, E.Steichen-Gersdorf6,J.Amiel1, S. Sonntag: None. B. Tüysüz: None. E. Mihci: None. B. Nur4,I.Stolte-Dijkstra7,A. vanEerde8,K. vanGassen8, C.Gordon:None.E.Steichen-Gersdorf:None.J.Amiel: C. Breugem9,A. Stegmann10, A.Bruneel11,N.Seta11, None. B. Nur: None. I. Stolte-Dijkstra: None. A. van Eerde: None. K. van Gassen: None. C. Breugem: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 751 A. Stegmann: None. A. Bruneel: None. N. Seta: None. PL2.6 A. Munnich: None. D. Papy-Garcia: None. M. De La miR-204overexpressionexertsaprotectiveroleininherited Dure-Molla: None. V. Cormier-Daire: None. retinal diseases PL2.5 M.Karali1,2,E. Marrocco1, M.Pizzo1, I.Guadagnino1, Local and global chromatin interactions are altered by A. Carissimo1,I.Conte1, E.M. Surace1,3,S. Banfi1,2 large genomic deletions associated with human brain development 1Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine (TIGEM), Pozzuoli, Italy, 2Dept. of Biochemistry, Biophysics and X. Zhang1,Y. Zhang2,X. Zhou1,C. Purmann1,M.S. Haney1, General Pathology, University of Campania 'Luigi Vanvitelli', T. R.Ward1,J.Yao3, S.M.Weissman3,A. E.Urban1 Naples, Italy, 3Department of Translational Medicine, University of Naples 'Federico II', Naples, Italy 1Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 2Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 3Yale University, New Introduction: Inherited retinal diseases (IRDs) are pro- Haven, CT, United States gressive neurodegenerative conditions of the retina that represent a main cause of genetic blindness in the Western Large copy number variants (CNVs) in the human genome world. Their high genetic heterogeneity hinders the devel- are strongly associated with common neurodevelopmental, opmentofeffectivegene-basedtherapies.Wehaverecently neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and aut- demonstrated that the microRNA miR-204 is essential for ism. Using Hi-C analysis of long-range chromosome retinal function and plays a pathogenic role in IRD in interactions, including a novel approach for haplotype- humans. Therefore, we investigated the potential ther- specificHi-Canalysis,andChIP-Seqanalysisofregulatory apeutic action of this microRNA in IRDs. histone marks, we studied the epigenomic effects of the Materials and Methods: We delivered by subretinal prominent heterozygous large deletion CNV on chromo- injectionanadeno-associatedviralvectorcarryingthemiR- some 22q11.2, with replication analyses for the CNV on 204 precursor to the Aipl1 knockout and the P347S-RHO 1q21.1 [BioRxiv 182451]. transgenic mouse lines, models of autosomal recessive and There are local and global gene expression changes as dominantformsofIRDs,respectively.Theimpactonretinal well as pronounced and multilayered effects on chromatin function and degeneration was assessed by electroretino- states, chromosome folding and topological domains of the graphic and immunohistological analyses. chromatin, that emanate from the large CNV locus. Results:WedetectedanotableimprovementoftheERG Regulatoryhistonemarksarealteredinthedeletionflanking responseinthemiR-204-injectedeyesofP347S-RHOmice. regions,inopposingdirectionsforactivatingandrepressing Thiseffect persisted for twomonths post-injectionand was marks. Histone marks are changed along chromosome 22q prevalent under photopic conditions that reflect cone and genome wide. Chromosome interaction patterns are activity. We also observed a preservation of cone photo- weakened within the deletion boundaries and strengthened receptors and a significant decrease in apoptotic photo- between the deletion flanking regions. The long-range receptor cells. Photoreceptors were better preserved also in folding contacts between the telomeric end of chromosome the miR204-injected eyes of Aipl1 knockout mice. Tran- 22q and the distal deletion-flanking region are increased. scriptome analysis suggested that dampening of microglia Using haplotype specific Hi-C analysis we determined that activation represents one of the main mechanisms under- on the chromosome 22q with deletion the topological lying the neuroprotective effect of miR-204. domain spanning the CNV boundaries is deleted in its Conclusions: Our findings indicate that the subretinal entirety while neighboring domains interact more intensely delivery of miR-204 attenuates retinal degeneration in IRD witheachother.Finally,thereisawidespreadandcomplex mousemodelsandpreservesretinalfunction,supportingthe effect on chromosome interactions genome-wide, i.e. gene-independent therapeutic potential of this microRNA. involving all other autosomes, with some of this effect tied Supported by the Foundation Fighting Blindness and the to the deletion region on 22q11.2. Italian Telethon Foundation. Thesefindingssuggestnovelprinciplesofhowsuchlarge M.Karali:None.E.Marrocco:None.M.Pizzo:None. genomic deletions can alter nuclear organization and affect I. Guadagnino: None. A. Carissimo: None. I. Conte: genomic molecular activity. None. E.M. Surace: None. S. Banfi: None. NIH grants X. Zhang: None. Y. Zhang: None. X. Zhou: None. C. LB1 Purmann: None. M.S. Haney: None. T.R. Ward: None. NAXDmutations cause a novel neurodegenerative disorder J.Yao:None.S.M.Weissman:None.A.E.Urban:None. exacerbated by febrile illnesses752 J.delPicchia N.J.VanBergen1,2,Y.Guo3,J.Rankin4,5,N.Paczia6,J.Becker- glycolysis, the citric acid cycle and the mitochondrial Kettern6,L. S. Kremer7,8, A.Pyle9,J. Conrotte6,C.J. respiratory chain. Hydration of their reduced forms (either Ellaway10,11,12,P. Procopis13,12, K.Prelog14, T.Homfray15, spontaneously if the temperature is elevated or following J.Baptista4,5,E.Baple4,5,M.Wakeling4,S.Massey1,D.P.Kay6, specific enzymatic processes) leads to the accumulation of A. Shukla16,K. M.Girisha16, L.E. S. Lewis17,S. D.Santra18, NADHX and NADPHX, which are toxic and can inhibit a R. Power19, P.Daubeney19,20,J. Montoya21,E. Ruiz-Pesini21, number of dehydrogenases. Highly conserved dehydratase R. Kovacs-Nagy7,22,M. Pritsch23,U.Ahting7,D.R. NAD(P)HX Dehydratase (NAXD) is one of the key intra- Thorburn1,2,24,H.Prokisch7,8,R.Taylor9,J.Christodoulou1,2,24, cellular NADHX/NADPHX repair enzymes. C. Linster6,S.Ellard4,5,H.Hakonarson3 Materials and Methods: We describe 6 unrelated children with generally fever-induced recurrent episodic 1MurdochChildren'sResearchInstitute,Melbourne,Australia, neurological impairment and/or cardiac failure with early 2Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, demise, and its genetic basis. Melbourne, Australia, 3Center for Applied Genomics, Results: Genomic sequencing revealed biallelic NAXD Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United variants in all cases, and in silico analyses predicting States, 4University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, United potentialpathogenicityforeachofthem.Pathogenicitywas Kingdom,5RoyalDevonExeterNHSFoundationTrust,Exeter, functionally validated using patient fibroblasts through a United Kingdom, 6Luxembourg Centre for Systems combination of transcript analysis (splicing abnormality in Biomedicine, University of Luxembourg, Belvaux, one case), demonstration of markedly elevated S-NADHX, Luxembourg, 7Institute of Human Genetics, Technische R-NADHX and cyclic-NADHX, impaired mitochondrial Universität München, Munich, Germany, 8Institute of Human function, and reduced viability in culture media containing Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany, galactose and azide but not glucose. Transduction with 9Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of wildtypeNAXDrestoreddamagedmetabolitelevelsbackto Neuroscience, The Medical School, Newcastle University, normal. Finally, in vitro studies revealed that the two Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 10Western Sydney missense variants [(p.(Gly63Ser) and p.(Arg608Cys)] were Genetics Program, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, thermolabile, and specific ATP-dependent NADHX dehy- Australia, 11Discipline of Genetic Medicine, University of dratase activity showed abnormal enzyme kinetics. Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 12Discipline of Child and Conclusion: This is the first report of a human disorder Adolescent Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, caused by NAXD deficiency, showing remarkable clinical 13Neurology Department, Children's Hospital at Westmead, overlapwiththeotherknowndefectoftheNADH/NADPH Sydney, Australia, 14Medical Imaging Department, Children's repair pathway, NAXE deficiency. Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 15Royal Brompton N.J. Van Bergen: None. Y. Guo: None. J. Rankin: and St George’s University Hospital, London, United None. N. Paczia: None. J. Becker-Kettern: None. L.S. Kingdom, 16Department of Medical Genetics, Kasturba Kremer: None. A. Pyle: None. J. Conrotte: None. C.J. Medical College and Hospital, Manipal, India, 17Department Ellaway: None. P. Procopis: None. K. Prelog: None. T. of Paediatrics, Kasturba Medical College and Hospital, Homfray: None. J. Baptista: None. E. Baple: None. M. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, India, Wakeling: None. S. Massey: None. D.P. Kay: None. A. 18Birmingham Children’s Hospital, Birmingham, United Shukla: None. K.M. Girisha: None. L.E.S. Lewis: None. Kingdom, 19Royal Brompton Hospital, London, United S.D.Santra:None.R.Power:None.P.Daubeney:None. Kingdom, 20National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial J. Montoya: None. E. Ruiz-Pesini: None. R. Kovacs- College, London, United Kingdom, 21Departamento de Nagy: None. M. Pritsch: None. U. Ahting: None. D.R. Bioquimica y Biologia Molecular y Celular- CIBER de Thorburn:None.H.Prokisch:None.R.Taylor:None.J. Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER)-Instituto de Investigación Christodoulou:None.C.Linster:None.S.Ellard:None. Sanitaria de Aragón (IISAragon), Universidad Zaragoza, H. Hakonarson: None. Zaragoza, Spain, 22Department of Medical Chemistry, Molecular Biology and Pathobiochemistry, Semmelweis LB2 University,, Budapest, Hungary, 23Department of Pediatric GTF2I regulates social behavior by promoting neuronal Neurology, DRK-Childrens-Hospital, Siegen, Germany, maturation:implicationsforWilliams-Beurenand7q11.23 24Victorian Clinical Genetics Services, Melbourne, Australia microduplication syndromes Introduction: Niacin (vitamin B3) is the precursor for the A. LopezTobon1,2, R.Shyti1,2,E. Villa1,N.Caporale1, nicotinamide nucleotide cofactors NAD+ and NADP+ , S. Trattaro1,2,C. Cheroni1, F.Troglio1,B. MarcódelaCruz1, whicharecriticalcoenzymesforanumberofkeymetabolic M.Gabriele1, N.Malerba1,F. Kooy3,G.Merla4,G.Testa1,2 processes involving oxidation/reduction, includingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 753 1Laboratory of Stem Cell Epigenetics, European Institute of 1IDIBELL, Barcelona, Spain, 2Navarra Hospital Complex, Oncology, Milan, Italy, 2University of Milan, Milan, Italy, Pamplona, Spain, 3Naval Medical Center San Diego, San 3Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Diego,CA,UnitedStates,4INSERMUMR1163,Paris,France, Antwerp, Belgium, 4Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa 5Robert Debre Hospital, Paris, France, 6Mayo Clinic, Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Rochester, MN, United States, 7Howard Hughes Medical Italy Institute, San Diego, CA, United States, 8Robert Debre Hospital, PAris, France, 9Johns Hopkins University, Copy number variationsatthe 7q11.23locuscomprising26- Baltimore, MD, United States, 10ZClinics, Barcelona, Spain, 28genescauseneurodevelopmentaldisorderswithsharedand 11Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain opposite phenotypes. Deletion cause Williams-Beuren syn- drome (WBS) characterized by hypersociability, anxiety and Sphingolipid imbalance is the culprit in a variety of intellectual disability, while duplication give rise to 7q neurological diseases, some affecting the myelin sheath duplication syndrome (7DupASD) with severe impairments as the lysosomal storage disorders Krabbe and Meta- in language, anxiety and autism spectrum disorder (ASD). chromatic leukodystrophy, among others. Here we have Despite the well-established genetic underpinnings of these used whole exome sequencing to uncover the endo- disorders effective treatments are unavailable. Converging plasmic reticulum lipid desaturase DEGS1 as the cau- evidence points to GTF2I as a major player mediating the sative gene of a novel leukodystrophy. This enzyme cognitive-behavioral phenotype associated with WBS and catalizes the final step in the de novo biosynthesis of 7DupASD. We showed previously in patient-derived iPSC ceramidescontrollingtheconversionofdihydroceramide and neural progenitors that GTF2I associates with LSD1 to (DhCer)toceramide(Cer),andmayplayintriguingroles suppress expression of genes involved in neuronal function, in antiapoptotic, and anabolic and insulin signalling. whereasinhibitionofLSD1restoredgeneexpressionbalance. Through international collaborative networks, we have Hereweusedmousemodelstogetherwithpatient-derived3D identified eighteen patients from twelve unrelated cortical organoids and single-cell transcriptomics to dissect families carrying biallelic deleterious variants in the themolecularfoundationsofWBSand7DupASD.Micewith DEGS1gene.Commonfeaturesamongthecasesinclude duplication of GTF2I faithfully recapitulated the ASD-like severehypomyelination,cerebellaratrophy,andthinning phenotype in the three-chambered sociability apparatus. of the corpus callosum on MRI, accompanied by speech Remarkably,inhibitionofLSD1withanirreversibleinhibitor, abnormalities, developmental delay and intellectual dis- rescued the ASD-like phenotype. Bulk and single-cell ability,suggestingacriticalroleofDEGS1andceramide RNAseq from cortical organoids revealed divergent dynam- metabolism in myelin development and maintenance. ics of neuronal maturation with accelerated maturation in Patients’ fibroblasts exhibited accumulation of DhCer, 7DupASD and decelerated in WBS organoids resulting in a which increased ROS production. Knockdown of the divergent neural fate, which was confirmed by relative DEGS1 ortholog in Danio rerio recapitulated the bio- abundance of basal progenitor populations. Strikingly, chemical imbalance of ceramides, showed diminished knockdown of GTF2I in 7DupASD organoids rescued neu- numbers of mature oligodendrocytes and impaired ronalmaturationratetocontrollevels.Thesefindingssuggest locomotor abilities. The enzymatic inhibition of cer- thatGTF2I-LSD1 axis playsa criticalrolein social behavior amidesynthase,onesteppriortoDEGS1inthepathway, andcognitionbycontrollingthetimingofcorticalmaturation. by the multiple sclerosis treatment Fingolimod A.LopezTobon:None.R.Shyti:None.E.Villa:None. (FTY720), restored the critical DhCer/Cer balance, and N. Caporale: None. S. Trattaro: None. C. Cheroni: amelioratedthecellularandlocomotorphenotypesinthe None. F. Troglio: None. B. Marcó de la Cruz: None. zebrafish model. These results pave the way to clinical M. Gabriele: None. N. Malerba: None. F. Kooy: None. translation, illustrating the transformative, timely impact G. Merla: None. G. Testa: None. of clinical genomics in patient care. Funded by Marató TV3; Fondo de Investigación Sanitario ISCiii, Hesperia LB3 Foundation. Biallelic mutations of the dihydroceramide desaturase A. Pujol: None. D. Pant: None. A. Schluter: None. N. DEGS1 gene cause a novel hypomyelinating Launay: None. S. Aguilera: None. M. Willis: None. L. leukodystrophy with a therapeutic hope Colleaux:None.I.Dorboz:None.M.Patterson:None.J. Gleeson: None. O. Boespflug-Tanguy: None. A. Fatemi: A. Pujol1,D.Pant1,A. Schluter1,N.Launay1,S.Aguilera2, None. J. Terriente: None. C. Pujades: None. M.Willis3,L.Colleaux4,I.Dorboz5,M.Patterson6,J.Gleeson7, O.Boespflug-Tanguy8,A. Fatemi9, J.Terriente10, C.Pujades11754 J.delPicchia PL3 Mendel Lecture Hong Kong, Hong Kong PL3.1 Cell-free DNA molecules circulate in human plasma in the CRISPR-Cas9: How bacteria revolutionize genome form of short fragments. Cell-free fetal DNA demonstrate engineering an even shorter size profile than the circulating maternal DNA in maternal plasma. This observation could be E. Charpentier1,2 exploited as a means to differentiate the fetal DNA popu- lation from the maternal DNA in maternal circulation. For 1Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany, example, aneuploidies of fetal origin may result inaberrant 2Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany genomic representation among the shorter DNA molecules in the maternal plasma sample. While noninvasive prenatal The CRISPR-Cas9 system has recently emerged as a testing by maternal plasma DNA sequencing generally transformative technology in biological sciences, allowing provideshighsensitivitiesandspecificitiesforthedetection rapid and efficient targeted genome editing, chromosomal of common fetal chromosomal aneuploidies, false-positive marking and gene regulation in a large variety of cells and results may occur. We reasoned that the combined used of organisms.ThesystemconsistsofCas9,anenzymethatcan cell-free DNA counting and size measurements may allow be programmed with RNA guides to target site-specifically one to identify the false-positive cases. We applied the any DNA sequence of interest. The system is efficient, combined protocol to test for fetal chromosomal aneu- versatile and easily programmable. CRISPR-Cas9 research ploidies among 20,000 cases seeking NIPT screening. The has developed into one of the most dynamic and fastest- approachwasabletoidentifysexchromosomeaneuploidies moving fields in life sciences and holds great promise for of maternal origin, copy number variations of maternal future biotechnical and biomedical applications. The origin, artefacts caused by sequencing biases or conditions CRISPR-Cas9 system is remarkably simple in its design, that perturbed the maternal plasma DNA profile, such as close to a plug-and-play method, which can therefore be systemic lupus erythematosus. The adoption of the easily leveraged for a large variety of gene targeting. approach led to a substantial reduction in the number of Application of the system has been extraordinarily broad, reports that would otherwise become a false-positive result including among many others the generation of transgenic with respect to the fetal chromosome profile. Next, we animals, genetic modification of various eukaryotic cell reasoned that if cell-free fetal DNA molecules were shorter types, and genetic modification of plants and crops. Tool than the cell-free maternal DNA molecules, the fragmen- and kit service companies offer CRISPR-Cas9-related pro- tation sites of the two different population of DNA mole- ductsandatleastthreebiotechnologycompanieshavebeen culesmightbedifferent.Interestingly,wedemonstratedthat foundedduringthepastyearstodevelopthetechnologyfor the ending sites between the cell-free fetal and maternal the treatment of serious human genetic disorders, with DNA molecules indeed showed consistent differences. probably many more to come. Already, the CRISPR-Cas9 Someoftheendingsiteswerereproduciblydetectablefrom systemisanintegralandcriticalpartofthetoolboxforany maternal plasma collected from different pregnancies and researcher who intends to modify genetic information by served as a means to assess the fetal DNA fraction in the means of targeted introduction or correction of mutations, sample. (supported by the Research Grants Council of the replacement of genes, modification of DNA or modulation Hong Kong SAR Government under the Theme-based of transcription in any cell or organism - and the applica- research scheme (T12-403/15-N).) tions of this breakthrough technology are continuing to increase at a rapid pace. S01.2 E. Charpentier: None. Mommy and me sequencing: incidental detection of maternal abnormalities via non-invasive prenatal testing Concurrent Symposia D.W.Bianchi National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, S01 Prenatal Genetics - joint with EMPAG Bethesda, MD, United States S01.1 Noninvasive prenatal testing (NIPT) using circulating cell- The utility of sizing up cell-free fetal DNA free (cf) DNA in the plasma is currently the most mature example of implementation of genomics into clinical med- R. Chiu icine. Since 2011, the testing has been widely incorporatedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 755 into prenatal care, resulting in a significant reduction in the measure was used in both a research and a routine clinical number of invasive diagnostic procedures and cytogenetic setting and rates of informed choice were measured and analyses performed globally. Most women who undergo compared. Recommendations for practice relating to how prenatal cf DNA screening do not realize that the testing best to facilitate informed decision-making in the prenatal analyzes placental as well as maternal DNA, and further- clinic will also be discussed. more, that maternal DNA abnormalities are sometimes the C. Lewis: None. underlying biological explanation for false positive results. When the NIPT result is abnormal and the fetal karyotype or chromosome microarray results are normal, the differ- S02 DNA damage and repair in cancer ential diagnosis includes confined placental mosaicism, twin demise and maternal findings. In this presentation I S02.1 willreviewtheincreasingnumberofmaternalabnormalities DNA damage and non coding RNA in cancer and ageing that have been detected via NIPT, including autoimmune and metabolic conditions, benign and malignant tumors, F. d'AddadiFagagna autosomal and sex chromosome aneuploidies, and copy number variants with clinical significance. The ethical and IFOM Foundation, Milan, Italy medical management implications of the release of these secondary maternal findings will also be discussed. Cellular senescence in the context of ageing and cancer is D.W. Bianchi: None. often associated with DNA damage generation and DNA damage response (DDR) activation. I will discuss the evi- S01.3 dence in support of the presence of DNA damage in Supporting informed choice for non-invasive prenatal senescencecellsandtheemergingroleofnoncodingRNA testing in clinical practice: How well are we doing? in DDR signaling and the potential of their inhibition by new therapeutic approaches. C. Lewis F. d'Adda di Fagagna: None. NorthEastThamesRegionalGeneticsService,GreatOrmond S02.2 Street Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, London, Differential DNA repair across human chromosomes United Kingdom shapes somatic mutation landscapes Non-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT) using cell-free DNA F. Supek1,B. Lehner2,3,4 in maternal blood is an advanced screening test which has been shown to be highly accurate for Down syndrome as 1Institut de Recerca Biomedica (IRB Barcelona), Barcelona well as trisomies 13 and 18. The clinical advantages of Institute of Science and Technology(BIST), Barcelona, Spain, NIPT are that the test is safe, easy to conduct and can be 2CentreforGenomicRegulation(CRG),BarcelonaInstituteof administered within the first trimester of pregnancy. ScienceandTechnology(BIST),Barcelona,Spain,3Universitat Nevertheless, there are concerns that NIPT may compro- Pompeu Fabra(UPF), Barcelona, Spain, 4Institució Catalana mise informed decision-making as the risk-free nature of de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain the test may lead parents to agree to testing without ade- quate consideration of the potential outcomes including a Cancer genome sequencing has revealed considerable var- positive NIPT result (thus requiring consideration about iation in somatic mutation rates across the human genome, invasive testing) or an inconclusive result. Moreover, with mutations accumulating faster in heterochromatic late because NIPT is a blood test, consent procedures may replicating regions and slower in early replicating euchro- potentially become less rigorous than those used for inva- matin. We identify variable DNA mismatch repair (MMR) sive testing and the ease with which the test can be con- as the basis of this domain-scale variation. While regional ducted may promote routinisation of testing. A number of mutation rates are broadly stable between tumors, there are studies have been conducted in recent years to establish systematicdifferencesthataccuratelyreflectthecancercell- whetherNIPTisundermininginformeddecision-making.In of-origin, related to changes in replication timing and gene this talk I will present key findings from this body of lit- expression. However, mutations arising after the inactiva- erature as well as presenting the findings from my own tion of MMR are no longer enriched in late replicating research from the RAPID study where we adapted the heterochromatin relative to early replicating euchromatin. Multidimensional Measure of Informed Choice (MMIC) ThisimplicatesdifferentialDNArepairastheprimarycause developed by Marteau et al. (2001) for NIPT. The adapted756 J.delPicchia ofthelarge-scaleregionalmutationratevariationacrossthe leads to gene endo-activation and a partial arm-to-leg human genome (Supek and Lehner, 2015 Nature). transformation. In conclusion, our data not only suggest an At the smaller, sub-megabase scale, we find that interplay between enhancer specificity, transcriptional differential MMR also shapes gradients in mutation rates robustness and 3D chromatin dynamics but also provide a across gene bodies. In particular, we examined clustered framework to understand the pathomechanism of many mutation patterns across >1,000 tumor genomes and non-coding mutations. identified a novel and prevalent mutational signature G. Andrey: None. matching the error-prone DNA polymerase eta (POLH). Such clustered mutations occur in tumors associated with S03.3 carcinogen exposure and they target H3K36me3-marked Transgenerational inheritance: The role of CTCF and 3D chromatin,commonlyfoundat3’endsoftranscribedgenes. genome organization In the absence of carcinogens however, the H3K36me3 regions have a considerably lower mutation rate. This is V. Corces becausethecanonical,error-freeMMRisnormallytargeted towards the H3K36me3 histone mark, protecting active Emory University, Atlanta, GA, United States genes from alterations. Carcinogens therefore not only increase mutation burden, but can also redistribute muta- Mechanisms by which epiphenotypes are transmitted tions to the more important regions of the genome by between generations through the paternal germline remain activating error-prone DNA repair. We predict this can poorly understood. The nuclei of mammalian sperm are contribute a substantialmutation load in many tumorssuch thought to be highly condensed and the DNA mostly cov- as melanoma, gastrointestinal tract and lung cancers, with ered by protamines with only a few retained nucleosomes. highpotentialtoyielddrivermutations(SupekandLehner, Epigenetic information stored in the form of DNA methy- 2017 Cell). lation is erased from paternal chromosomes after fertiliza- F. Supek: None. B. Lehner: None. tion.Resultsfromourlabsuggestamorecomplexpictureof the mouse sperm epigenome, indicating the presence of multiple histone modifications at retained nucleosomes. S03 Genome Organization and Function Mostpromotersinmousespermcontaintheelongatingform ofRNApolymeraseII,andareflankedbyseveralpositioned S03.2 nucleosomes marked by a variety of active histone mod- The Dynamics of 3D Chromatin Structures Influence ifications. The sperm genome is bound by several tran- Transcription and Morphogenesis scription factors, including Mediator, the pioneer factor FoxA1, and estrogen receptor alpha. These proteins are G.Andrey found at promoters, enhancers, and super-enhancers, many of which are active in mESCs or adult tissues. CTCF and Max Planck Institut for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany cohesinarealsopresentinspermDNA,wheretheyorganize the sperm genome into domains that overlap extensively Thecomplexgeneexpressionofdevelopmentalgenesoften with those found in mESCs. This information suggests that relies on the communication between promoters and long- mammalian sperm contain a rich and complex palette of range regulatory elements called enhancers. Enhancers and epigenetic information that could be altered by environ- promoters can interact in the nuclear space in a tissue- mental factors to paint novel phenotypic outcomes in the specific or tissue-unspecific manner. Yet little is known next generation. This is supported by experiments in which about the functional role of these different modes of inter- pregnant females exposed to endocrine disruptor chemicals actions. Here we present two in-depth functional studies give rise to progeny showing a variety of phenotypes, illustrating how these modes of interaction contribute to including obesity. The obese phenotype is transmitted achieve specific expression patterns and transcriptional between generations in the absence of further exposure. robustness invivo. Inthe first case, thedisruption of apre- Experiments indicate that approximately 110 new protein established, tissue-unspecific interaction between the Shh bindingsitesarepresentinthespermandfattissueofobese promoter and its limb enhancer strongly reduces Shh tran- mice from the F1 through the F4 generations. These new scription. In the second case, a tissue-specific enhancer- binding sites correspond to CTCF and ERalpha, suggesting promoter interaction modulates the fore- and hindlimb that effects of these proteins on 3D chromatin organization activity of an enhancer to drive Pitx1 transcription in hin- and transcription of specific genes are responsible for the dlimb only. The disturbance of this particular communica- establishment and transmission of epiphenotypes. tioninhumanpatientsandinmicewithstructuralvariations V. Corces: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 757 S04 Genetics of dizziness anditisenrichedinpatientswithacomorbidautoimmune disorder. Moreover, rs4947296 is a trans-expression S04.2 quantitatve trait locus (eQTL) which regulates gene Genetic basis of Meniere's disease expression of multiple genes in the tumor necrosis factor- like weak induced of apoptosis (TWEAK)/Fn14 pathway J.Lopez-Escamez1,2,3 in peripheral mononuclear cells (PBMCs). By using genotype-conditioned PBMCs, we found an increase of 1Otology & Neurotology Group CTS495, Department of NF-κB-mediated inflammatory response in the carriers of Genomic Medicine- Centro de Genómica e Investigación the risk genotype. Meniere disease shows clinical and Oncológica – Pfizer/Universidad de Granada/ Junta de genetic heterogeneity and common and rare variants may Andalucía (GENYO), Granada, Spain, Granada, Spain, contribute to shape the phenotype in a given patient. 2Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), Ongoing projects include exome sequencing in >100 University of Luxembourg, Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg, familial MD patients or early onset sporadic cases and the 3Department of Otolaryngology, Instituto de Investigación analysisoftwocustomsequencingpanelsdesignedbyour Biosanitaria,ibs.GRANADA,HospitalUniversitarioVirgende group using data-mining, phenotyping information and las Nieves, Granada, Spain gene expression profiles in cochlear and vestibular supporting cells. Meniere Disease (MD) represents a heterogeneous group Acknowledgments JALE is supported by Instituto de of relatively rare disorders with three core symptoms: Salud Carlos III (PI17/01644 Grant) by FEDER Funds and episodic vertigo, tinnitus and sensorineural hearing loss H2020-MSCA-ITN-2016-722046 from EU, Luxembourg involving low and medium frequencies. Although the National Research Fund (INTER/Mobility/17/11772209 majority of cases are considered sporadic, familial aggre- Grant), Meniere’s Society-UK and Asociación Sindorme gation has been recognized in European and Korean de Meniere España (ASMES). populations,butthefindingoffamilialMDgeneshasbeen J. Lopez-Escamez: None. elusive until the last few years. Detailed phenotyping and hierarchical cluster analyses have found several clinical S04.3 predictors for different subgroups of patients, which may An approach to restoring vestibular function? indicate different mechanisms of disease, including genetic and immune factors. The familial cluster include A. Forge1,R. R.Taylor2 allcaseswithunilateralorbilateralMD,andmostfamilies show an autosomal dominant pattern of inheritance with 1London, United Kingdom, 2UCL Ear Institute, London, incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity in Eur- United Kingdom opean population. Whole-exome sequencing have found rare and novel variants in 6 genes associated with familial The sensory epithelia of the cochlea and vestibular system MD including COCH, FAM136A, DTNA, PRKCB, are composed of sensory “hair” cells and non-sensory SEMA3DandDPTgenes;however,noconsistentgenehas supporting cells. Supporting cells surround each hair cell been described in multiple unrelated families. Although and separated it from its neighbours. Hair cells derive their the significance of these variants remain to be established name from the organised bundle of projections from their inanimalmodels,thecandidategenesareinvolvedinvery apical surface. During development expression of the tran- differentfunctionssuchasproteinphosphorylation,axonal scription factor Atonal Homologue 1(Atoh1) in precursor guiding signalling or structural proteins in the cytoskele- cellsdirectsdifferentiationtowardsahaircellfate.Thefirst tonorextracellularmatrix.So,familialMDshowsgenetic cells to do so activate Notch-Delta signalling in their heterogeneity as it has been also demonstrated for syn- immediate neighbours to inhibit Atoh1 expression. The dromic and non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss. To laterally inhibited cells differentiate as supporting cells. investigate the immunogenetic contribution in MD, we Death of hair cells is a major cause of hearing loss and have also conducted a genome association study using a vestibular dysfunction, which manifests as dizziness, ver- high density genotyping array containing covering loci tigoandimbalance.Ageingandcertaindrugswithototoxic associated with autoimmunity (Immunochip). Our group side-effects, most notably aminoglycoside antibiotics, are have identified a locus in theclassicalclassI subregionof amongst the primary causes of hair cell death. When a hair the MHC ~9 kb at 6p21.33 (31,081,878-31,090,401), cell dies the surrounding supporting cells close the lesions. being the leading signal rs4947296 (metanalysis,OR = Innon-mammalianvertebrates,newhaircellsaregenerated 2.089 (1.661-2.627); p = 1.39x 10−09). The variant is from the supporting cells, some following supporting cell associated with bilateral MD in the Spanish population division, others by direct conversion of supporting cells.758 J.delPicchia There is no hair cell regeneration in the mammalian This enormous progress has been facilitated by genome- cochlea. However, there is a limited capacity to regenerate wide association studies. By nature, these studies focus on haircellsinthemammalianvestibularsystemthroughdirect frequentalleles.Thus,theallelesthathavebeenidentifiedto phenotypic conversion of supporting cells. We have some increase the risk of coronary disease are also relatively evidence that spontaneous regeneration of hair cells may frequent in our population. As a consequence, virtually all occurthroughoutlifeinthehumanvestibularsystem.Using individuals of our population carry a variable degree of human vestibular sensory epithelia in explant culture, hair genetic predisposition for coronary artery disease. More cells were ablated by incubation in an aminoglycoside recently, the focus turned to rare variants with more (gentamicin). Subsequent transduction of supporting cells profound effects. In this regard, the domain of human with ATOH1 using an Ad-2 viral vector resulted in gen- genetics,i.e.familybasedresearchandcounseling,received erationofhighlysignificantnumbersofcellsexpressingthe more attention – once again. The presentation will address hair cell maker protein myosin VIIa. Cells expressing how this information can be utilized for a better under- myosin VIIa were also generated after blocking the Notch standing of disease mechanisms as well as for genomic signalling pathway with TAPI-1 but much less efficiently. prediction of coronary artery disease. Transcriptomic analysis following ATOH1 transduction confirmed up-regulation of 335 putative hair cell marker S05.3 genes, including several postulated downstream targets of Harnessing large-scale genetics and genomics to derive ATOH1, as well as downregulation of 5 chromatin modi- biological insights in type 2 diabetes fiers. Morphological analysis revealed numerous cells bearing dense clusters of microvilli at the apical surfaces. M.McCarthy However, no cells bore organised hair bundles and several expected hair cell markers genes were not expressed. The Oxford, United Kingdom results show a potential to induce conversion of supporting cells in the vestibular sensory tissues of humans, but that Individual risk of common complex diseases such as dia- differentiation of fully functional hair cells is incomplete betes (and the complications thereof) is influenced by var- undertheconditionsused.Thissuggeststhelikelynecessity iation at many hundreds (even thousands) of genetic risk of additional factors to achieve this goal. loci, together with a range of exposures experienced over R.R. Taylor: None. thelifecourse.Adeeperunderstandingofthesefactors,and the mechanisms through which they influence disease risk anddevelopment,isaprerequisiteifwearetodevelopmore S05 Large-scale genetic studies in complex diseases effective strategies for prevention and treatment. Over the past decade there has been substantial progress towards S05.2 thesegoals.Themostrecentgenome-wideassociationstudy Large-scale sequencing studies in coronary artery disease (involving nearly a million subjects) has extended the number of independent genetic signals for type 2 diabetes H.Schunkert beyond 400. For a growing number of these loci, we now know which specific genetic variant is responsible, which Munich, Germany regulatory element active in which tissue is disturbed, whichdownstreameffectorgenemediatesthecausaleffect, Theprimarymanifestationofcoronarydiseaseoccursoften and which pathophysiological process is consequently suddenly and unexpectedly in form of myocardial infarc- perturbed. By combining genome-wide association and tion.Thus,thepredictionofsilentatheroscleroticalterations sequence data, we have a clear description of the genetic in coronary arteries is a highly relevant medical need. architecture of this disease. These and other advances pro- Recent genomic research identified numerous genetic var- vide exciting translational opportunities. We use genetic iants that associate with a higher prevalence of coronary associations to highlight novel human validated therapeutic disease.Atpresent,associationwithcoronaryarterydisease targets and to evaluate those targets for both efficacy and has been demonstrated at more than 160 chromosomal safety. We use individual genetic profiles to explore the locations with risk alleles increasing relativerisk by 5-25% potential for stratification of disease risk. We use the per allele. Moreover, genetic variants primarily affecting combination of human genetics and large-scale omics data cardiovascular risk factors such as hypertension or LDL sets to identify and characterise biomarkers that may be of cholesterolwereshowntoaffecttheriskofcoronarydisease clinicalvalue.Weusehumangeneticstohighlightwhichof as well. many potentially modifiable environmental exposures are truly causal for type 2 diabetes, and represent promisingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 759 avenues for preventative intervention. And we use all of demonstrated a reduction in size of the biopsied liver thesedatatypestoinformourunderstandingofwhattype2 metastasis harboring the MAP2K1 mutation, but revealed diabetesactuallyis,andhowwecanaccountfortheevident that some other lesions had progressed. Pre-treatment heterogeneity with respect to both presentation and plasma ctDNA was analyzed using NGS, confirming the prognosis. presence of MAP2K1 variant, but unveiling an additional KRAS mutation. Longitudinal analysis of plasma samples unveiled that MAP2K1 mutant levels declined, while S06 Liquid biopsies in cancer KRAS mutant increased markedly during therapy, indicat- ingoutgrowthofaresistantKRAS-mutantclone.Biopsyof S06.3 adifferentlivermetastasis’segmentthatprogresseddespite Liquid Biopsies for Monitoring Temporal Genomic PMAB and trametinib revealed the same KRAS mutation Heterogeneity identified in ctDNA. Inaseparatestudy,wefocusedonHer2amplifiedCRC. G.Siravegna Targeting HER2 is effective in 30% of ERBB2-amplified metastatic colorectal cancer, and most sensitive cases Torino, Italy eventually relapse.Westudiedthe molecular evolution of individual metastases during treatment to discover spa- Liquid biopsy -tumor genotyping using circulating cell-free tiallyresolveddeterminantsofresistance.ctDNAanalysis tumor DNA (ctDNA) in the blood- has been recently identified alterations associated with lack of response in applied to molecularly profile cancer patients, monitoring the majority of refractory patients. CtDNA profiles and tumor burden during therapy and uncovering novel lesion-specific radiographic reports revealed organ- and mechanisms of resistance to targeted therapies. We used metastasis-private evolutionary patterns in patients who metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC) as a model system to had initially responded. When radiologic assessments assess whether liquid biopsies could in principle uncover documented progressive disease in target lesions, molecular mechanisms responsible for the emergence of response to HER2 blockade was often retained in other resistance to targeted therapies, in particular to the mono- metastases. Genomic and functional analyses on samples clonal antibodies (moAbs) cetuximab and panitumumab. and cell models from eight metastases of a patient co- Emerging evidence indicates that escape from EGFR tar- recruited to a post-mortem study unveiled lesion-specific geted therapy might be molecularly heterogeneous and evolutionary trees and pharmacologic vulnerabilities. A involveseveralgenes.WeexploitedplasmactDNAanalysis correlation between lesions’size and contribution of by Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) and Digital PCR distinctmetastasestoplasmactDNAwasobserved.These (ddPCR) in mCRC patients to define gene alterations data highlight the significance of coupling radiologic responsibleforprimaryoracquiredresistancetoanti-EGFR analysis, liquid biopsies and avatar models in precision therapies. oncology. While most mCRC patients who receive anti EGFR antibodies develop KRAS mutations during the course of therapy we found that additional mutations affecting key S07 Drug repurposing for treating genetic disorders nodes of the EGFR signaling pathway can also confer resistance. An interesting mCRC case harbored a novel S07.1 MAP2K1 mutation (p.K57T) in tissue and liquid biopsies Drug repurposing to improve cognitive defects in Down post EGFR blockade. To validate the biological and syndrome molecular relevance of this mutation in resistance to anti- EGFR therapy, we used a CRC cell line which harbored a L. Cancedda1,2,3 MAP2K1 mutation when made resistant to CMAB. Biochemical analysis showed that MAP2K1 variants 1Genova, Italy, 2Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy, affecting position p.K57 drive constitutive activation of 3Istituto Telethon Dulbecco, Rome, Italy MEK and ERK and conferred resistance to CMAB and PMAB. However, the combination of the MEK inhibitor Down syndrome (DS) represents the leading cause of trametinibwitheitherCMABorPMABrestoredsensitivity, genetically-defined intellectual disability. Interestingly, a suggesting a potential therapeutic strategy to overcome numberof mouse modelsofDS arecurrently available and resistance to EGFR blockade caused by this mutation. basic research has provided insights on possible molecular Accordingly, the patient was treated with the combination targets for pharmacological therapy aimed at treating cog- of PMAB and trametinib. After 3 months, imaging nitive impairment in these mice. Nevertheless, developing760 J.delPicchia newdrugsabletoactonnewlydiscoveredmoleculartargets RANKL activity due to reduced levels of the endogenous is an extremely long, risky and expensive process that soluble decoy receptor osteoprotegerin (OPG). proves unsuccessful in most cases, especially for brain Our recent findings suggest that the RANK and down- disorders. In this context, identifying new therapeutic stream NF-κB pathways are aberrantly activated in luminal indications for already existing and clinically used drugs progenitor cells in preneoplastic (ostensibly normal) BRCA1mut/+ (drug repurposing) may strongly reduce the time, risks and breast tissue. The augmented proliferation of costs associated to classical drug discovery, leading to a these cells and their predilection for DNA damage suggest faster track from the laboratory benches to the bedsides in that they are prime cellular targets for basal-like breast the clinics. Here, we summarize recent finding from our cancers arising in BRCA1-mutation carriers. Targeting of + laboratory on DS mouse models and we discuss the possi- RANK progenitors using a RANKL inhibitor in pre- bility of drug repurposing to recover cognitive deficits in clinical models has revealed a promising new prevention DS mice in the view of potential translational applications strategy for these high-risk women. These findings have in the near future. raised the possibility that the RANKL inhibitor denosumab (currently only approved for the treatment of osteoporosis S07.2 and bone metastases) could be ‘repurposed’ as a breast DrugrepurposingforbreastcancerpreventioninBRCA1- cancerpreventiondrug.Plansareunderwaytoformallytest mutation carriers this hypothesis in an international, randomized, double- blind, placebo-controlled multi-center phase 3 prevention E. Nolan1,J.E. Visvader2,G.J.Lindeman2,3 study, ‘BRCA-P’, led by the Austrian Breast & Colorectal Study Group. 1The Francis Crick Institute, London, United Kingdom, 2The E. Nolan: None. J.E. Visvader: None. G.J. Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Lindeman: None. Melbourne, Australia, 3The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Australia S08 Microbiome and Virome Women who carry a germline mutation in BRCA1 are at heightened risk of developing breast (and ovarian) cancer. S08.1 Tumorsoftenariseatanearlyage,withthepeakrelativerisk Naturalselectioninhumansandpathogens:sequencingthe occurring before 40 years of age. Although breast MRI has next deadly virus substantiallyimprovedscreeningformutationcarriers,thisis not preventive and its impact on mortality is uncertain. K. Andersen Interval cancers (arising between screening) are not uncom- mon and screen-detected tumorscan berelativelyadvanced. La Jolla, CA, United States Furthermore,tumorsareusuallytriple-negativewithabasal- likephenotype,necessitatingchemotherapyevenifidentified Our group is using viral genomics, computational biology, early. Asymptomatic BRCA1 mutation carriers have few andtraditionalmolecular biology,togaininsightsintohow effective breast cancer prevention options beyond bilateral viruses emerge and spread in human populations. By gen- prophylacticmastectomy(BPM).AlthoughBPMreducesthe erating large-scale genomic datasets of Ebola virus and riskofbreastcancerbyupto90%,onlyasubsetofmutation Lassa virus sequences from hundreds of infected patients, carriers pursue this option. An effective prevention therapy wedissectedthetrajectoryofhowthesevirusesevolvedand therefore remains an important area of need. spread across West Africa. RANKL is an important paracrine mediator of progester- More recently, our group led efforts to sequence and one signaling in breast tissue. Activation of the RANKL/ analyze Zika virus dataset from local human transmissions RANK signaling has been shown to accelerate tumor and mosquitoes in across the Americas. Based on this data, formation and to be associated with aggressive tumor wehavebeenabletodemonstratethattheFloridaoutbreakis behavior in vivo. Conversely, ablation of RANK signaling muchmorecomplexthanpreviouslyaccepted.Weshowthat in mammary epithelium delays the onset of medroxypro- multiple introductions happened into Florida in the spring of gesterone/DMBA-driven mammary tumors. Accumulating 2016leadingtosustainedtransmissionchains.Weshowthat evidencepointsto arole for progesterone/RANKL/RANK- theseZikaviruslineagesoriginatedintheCaribbeanandwere mediated signaling in breast tumorigenesis in BRCA1 likely brought to the United States via frequent cruise ship mutation carriers. BRCA1 mutation carriers may have traffic. By modeling genomic data and mosquito abundance, elevated levels of serum progesterone during the luteal wealsoshowthatMiamiandSouthernFloridaisatparticular phase compared to non-carriers and possibly augmented risk for future Zika outbreaks.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 761 S09 New Genomic Technologies Wehaverecentlydeveloped'surveyofregulatoryelements' (SuRE),amethodthatassays>150millionDNAfragments S09.1 (each ~500bp) for their ability to drive transcription in a Applications and analysis methods for nanopore reporterplasmid.Thethroughputoftheassayenablesusto sequencing data cover entire human genomes at approximately 30 fold, providing high-resolution genome-wide maps of autono- J.Simpson mous enhancer and promoter activity. We now report the applicationofSuRE tosystematically determinetheimpact Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Toronto, ON, Canada ofnon-codingSNPsonpromoterandenhanceractivity.By surveying four entire human genomes that collectively Nanopore-based sequencing instruments have become harbor ~7 million SNPs, we identified thousands of SNPs commercially available in the past few years. In my talk I thatalterpromoterorenhanceractivityinK562andHepG2 will review how these devices sequence DNA and discuss cells.Weillustratehowthesedatahelptoidentifycandidate the analysis challenges they present. In particular I will causal variants in GWAS and eQTL data. focus on our work on developing signal-level algorithms J. van Arensbergen: A. Employment (full or part-time); that operate directly on the measurements made by the Significant; GenX. L. Pagie: None. M. de Haas: None. instrument. I will highlight how these algorithms can V.D. FitzPatrick: None. H.J. Bussemaker: None. B. van improvetheaccuracyofgenomeassembliesanddetectbase Steensel: None. modifications by their subtle perturbations of the electrical current signal. Finally I will discuss how this technology canbeusedtoassemblehighlycontiguoushumangenomes, S11 Epigenetics of the brain detect methylation and find structural variation in cancer. J. Simpson: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, S11.1 collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as Epigenetic mechanisms regulating energy balance grants already received); Significant; Oxford Nanopore Technologies. R. Waterland S09.2 Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States Whole organism lineage tracing Environmental influences duringcritical periodsofprenatal A. Schier and early postnatal development can cause persistent alterations in regulation of energy balance. Although a Cambridge, MA, United States potentially important factor in the worldwide obesity epi- demic, the fundamental mechanisms underlying such The development of systems ranging from embryos to ‘developmentalprogramming’ofenergybalancearepoorly metastasesisgovernedbytranscriptionfactorsthatregulate understood,limitingourabilitytointervene.Moststudiesof specification trajectories and by cell division patterns that developmental programming of energy balance have determine the lineage relationships of cells. I will illustrate focused on persistent alterations in food intake; energy how single-cell RNA sequencing and CRISPR-Cas9 gen- expenditure has been relatively underemphasized. In parti- omeeditingprovidenewtoolstoreconstructdevelopmental cular, very few studies have evaluated developmental pro- trajectories and lineage trees at unprecedented scales (also gramming of physical activity. In the past several years we see Farrell et al. Science 2018; Raj et al. Nature havestudiedthreedifferentmousemodelsofdevelopmental Biotechnology 2018). programming of energy balance. In all three, we observed alterations in body weight regulation that persisted to S09.3 adulthood, but no group differences in food intake. Rather, Genome-wide identification of human non-coding variants programming of energy balance appeared to be due to that affect regulatory elements persistentalterationsinenergyexpenditureandspontaneous physical activity. We are now taking a transgenic approach J.vanArensbergen1,L.Pagie1,M.deHaas1,V.D.FitzPatrick2, to assess the role of hypothalamic epigenetics in energy H.J.Bussemaker2,B. vanSteensel1 balance. Specifically, mice lacking the de novo DNA methyltransferase Dnmt3a in a specific class of hypotha- 1Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands, lamic neurons exhibit dramatic alterations in epigenetic 2Columbia University, New York, NY, United States regulation and, remarkably, voluntary physical activity,762 J.delPicchia withnochangeinfoodintake.Together,theseobservations E. DeBaere indicate that epigenetic mechanisms in the central nervous system play a key role in regulating physical activity Ghent University and Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, behavior and, consequently, energy balance. Belgium R. Waterland: None. The integration of genome and transcriptome sequencing S11.3 reveals an increasing number of non-coding mutations in Epigenetics of major psychiatric disease: the circadian Mendelian disease such as inherited retinal disease (IRD). perspective IRD represents a major cause of early-onset blindness, having an overall prevalence of ~1/3,000. Whole exome A. Petronis (WES) and genome sequencing (WGS) revealed the underlying genetic cause in over 260 disease genes CentreforAddictionandMentalHealth,Toronto,ON,Canada (RetNet) in ~60% of cases, with few novel disease genes identified in the remaining cases. The largest part of Putativeepigeneticmisregulationofgenesshedsanewlight missing heritability of IRD is assumed to reside in non- on numerous epidemiological, clinical, and molecular coding regions, harboring cell-specific functional ele- complexities of psychiatric and other complex diseases. ments. The likelihood of finding non-coding variants Epigenetic modifications of DNA can explain a series of increases in IRD subtypes with recognizable phenotypes non-Mendelian disease features such as discordance of and without or - in case of autosomal recessive disease - identical twins, relatively late age of onset, fluctuating monoallelic coding variants in a known disease gene. Of course and sometimes partial or even full recovery. Prin- thenon-codingpathogenicvariants,themajorityaredeep- ciples for experimental epigenomic studies in disease are intronic splicing variants, often leading to pseudo-exon still being developed. We recently discovered that DNA inclusion and amenable to antisense oligonucleotide- modifications in somatic differentiated cells of humans and mediated rescue, as demonstrated for CEP290, USH2A mice exhibit circadian oscillations. Such oscillating cyto- and more recently for ABCA4. Thus far, non-coding sines (osc-modCs) were linked to the circadian tran- mutations in cis-regulatory elements (CREs) are more scriptome and explained a fraction of epigenetic variation, scarce, with only a few examples in choroideremia which has traditionally been treated as stochastic. We also (CHM), Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA5, NMNAT1), found that osc-modCs were associated with the aging epi- North Carolina Macular Dystrophy (PRDM13, IRX1) and genome, where the osc-modCs preceded age-dependent Stargardt disease (ABCA4). Particularly interesting CREs DNA modification changes, and osc-modC amplitude are ultraconserved non-coding elements (UCNEs) that are strongly correlated with the magnitude of the aging effect. clustered in genomic regulatory blocks (GRBs) and that These findings indicate that epigenetic aging outcomes, to may act as distant enhancers. A recent search for RetNet some extent, can be predicted from the circadian epige- genes and GRBs revealed genes in 12 GRBs. In three of nomicparametersatayoungerage.Finally,weperformeda these genes (CHM, PRDM13, USH2A), non-coding re-analysis of five epigenome-wide association studies, mutations have already been reported. In general, GRBs including schizophrenia and obesity. We detected that dif- strongly coincide with topologically associating domains ferentially modified cytosines in disease were significantly (TADs), a basic unit of chromosome folding playing key associated with human neutrophil osc-modCs (odds ratio roles in gene regulation. The generation of epigenomic ranged from 1.2 to 8.1). In summary, circadian DNA data in retinal cells and its integration with genomic data modifications provide a new perspective on several funda- will be important to understand the non-coding morbid mentalquestionsinbiomedicalresearch.Inthebroadsense, genome of IRD and of other diseases. circadian rhythmicity, one of key adaptations of life on E. De Baere: None. Earth, seems to also be mediating an organism’s demise. A. Petronis: None. S12.2 Monosymptomatic and syndromic childhood-onset severe retinal dystrophies: News and Views S12 Retinal diseases J.ROZET, S. MECHAUSSIER, I.BARNY, X. GERARD, J. S12.1 KAPLAN,I.PERRAULT The non-coding morbid genome in inherited retinal diseases INSERM UMR1163- Institute of genetic diseases, IMAGINE. Laboratory genetics in Ophthalmology, PARIS, FranceAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 763 Yearly, in Europe, approximately three hundred and fifty inherited retinal dystrophy (IRD) patients to study the individuals are born blind despite a normal eye globe, a mechanisms of disease and to test potential therapies. In normal eye fundus and no other apparent heath issue, sup- particular,IwilldescribehowdifferentiatingiPSCtoretinal portingaretinaldysfunction.Someoftheseindividualswill pigment epithelium (RPE) and 3D retinal organoids that experience spontaneous improvement of all or part of their contain photoreceptors can explain the retinal specificity visual function, but the majority of them is affected with a associated with some inherited changes, revealing why photoreceptor-neuron degenerative diseases of dramatically retinal cells are more susceptible to disease than other cells poor prognosis known as Leber congenital amaurosis that also express the disease gene. Furthermore, iPSC (LCA).TheinitialpresentationofLCAisinvariableandthe derived retinal cells are ideal for testing gene and mutation disease has long been regarded as homogenous. But, there specifictherapiesthatcannotbetestedonknock-outanimal exist a variability of the retinal outcome ranging from a models. This technology also offers the potential for quick stationary disease with dramatically poor visual perfor- translation to the clinic by showing not only efficacy, but mances to a progressive, yet very severe disease with low also safety in the target human cells. butmeasurablevisualacuityinthefirsttwodecadesoflife. M.Cheetham:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator, Occasionally, the same or similar retinal findings can be collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as seen as the initial symptom in a range of systemic diseases grantsalreadyreceived);Significant;ProQR.F.Consultant/ involving in particular, the bone, kidney, liver, ear, cere- Advisory Board; Modest; ProQR. bellum and/or the central nervous system. Some associa- tions of symptoms are not uncommon and describe well defined syndromes but some others are exceptional, ques- S13 Genome editing tioning their classification as syndromes. The characteriza- tion of the molecular bases of monosymptomatic and S13.1 systemic diseases sharing severe visual deficiency at, or High-resolution interrogation of functional elements in the near birth has identified large numbers of genes and func- noncoding genome tions along with some strong genotype-phenotype correla- tions.Thisknowledgehasconsiderablymodifiedthecareof N.Sanjana neonates born apparently blind by disclosing potential therapeutic targets, some of which undergo intensive stu- New York Genome Center & NYU, New York, NY, United dies, and by providing some reliable markers predictive of States the visual and extraocular outcomes. In addition, now that highthroughputmoleculardiagnostictestinghasbecomeof Althoughthenoncodinggenomeplaysamajorroleingene commonpractice, it proved highlyvaluableto sort disease- regulation and harbors many common disease genetic var- causing mutations from polymorphisms, to detect non- iants, we have lacked tools for rapid identification and codingmutationsandsometimestoredirectdiagnoses.This manipulation of functional elements in the noncoding gen- presentation will review these advances and will discuss ome.Theeasyprogrammabilityofnewgenomeengineering their limitations. Some novel associations of symptoms, tools like CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short candidate genes and pathways will be discussed as well. palindromic repeats)-associated nucleases suggests a new J.Rozet:None.S.Mechaussier:None.I.Barny:None. way to interrogate genomefunction ina targeted fashion at X. Gerard: None. J. Kaplan: None. I. Perrault: None. the DNA level. In addition to genome-scale screens targeting protein- S12.3 coding genes, we have recently developed techniques for Seeing disease through stem cells: using patient iPSC to adapting CRISPR screens into noncoding regions of the understand disease mechanisms and test therapies genome. By examining drug resistance to a targeted chemotherapy in human melanoma, we find that mutations M.Cheetham at specific noncoding elements lead to changes in transcription factor occupancy and in the local epigenetic UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom landscape and that these changes are coincident with modulation of nearby gene expression. We also find that The ability to reprogramme human cells into induced functional elements harbor predictive hallmarks of noncod- pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) and then differentiate them ing function, such as physical interaction (3C), open into a wide range of different cell types has revolutionized chromatin (DNase I hypersensitivity, ATAC-seq), cross- ourabilitytostudyhumandiseaseandoffersgreatpotential species evolutionary conservation, transcription factor forregenerativemedicine.WehaveusediPSCderivedfrom binding (ChIP-seq), and post-translational histone764 J.delPicchia modifications associated with enhancer elements. This KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden expands the potential of pooled CRISPR screens into noncoding regions for fundamental genomic discovery, Compartmentalization of biological reactions is an important gene regulation, and therapeutic development to overcome mechanism to allow multiple cellular reactions to occur in drug resistance. parallel. Resolving the spatial distribution of the human pro- N. Sanjana: None. teome at a subcellular level increases our understanding of human biology and disease. We have generated a high- S13.3 resolution map of the subcellular distribution of the human Gene Therapy for Preventing Heritable Diseases proteome as part of the open access Human Protein Atlas database.Wehaveshownthatasmuchashalfofallproteins S. Mitalipov localize to multiple compartments. Such proteins may have contextspecificfunctionsand‘moonlight’indifferentpartsof CenterforEmbryonicCell&GeneTherapy,OregonHealth& thecell,thusincreasingthefunctionalityoftheproteomeand Science University, Portland, OR, United States the complexity of the cell from a systems perspective. I will present how this spatial data can complement quantitative Normal0falsefalsefalseEN-USX-NONEX-NONE/*Style omics data for improved functional read-out. Furthermore, I Definitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- will present unpublished data on the extent of single cell Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-col- variationsofthehumanproteome,incorrelationtocellcycle band-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; progression and other deterministic factors, as well as the mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0in 5.4pt 0in 5.4pt; overlap with observed variations at the RNA level. In sum- mso-para-margin:0in;mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt;mso- mary,Iwilldemonstratetheimportanceofspatialproteomics pagination:widow-orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font-family: data for improved single cell biology. "Calibri",sans-serif; mso-ascii-font-family:Calibri; mso-ascii- E. Lundberg: None. theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-font-family:Calibri; mso- hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-bidi-font-family:"Times S14.3 New Roman"; mso-bidi-theme-font:minor-bidi;} In vitro fer- Evolutionary selection of oncogenic mutant clones in tilization (IVF) represents a successful cell therapy approach normal epithelia for treatment of infertility. However, IVF is increasingly uti- lized for preimplantation genetic diagnosis (PGD) followed P. Jones1,2 by embryo selection to prevent the transmission of heritable human diseases. Our Center is actively investigating novel 1Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Wellcome Sanger Institute, germlinegenetherapyapproachesthatwouldallowtorepair Cambridge, United Kingdom gene defects in mutant gametes or early preimplantation embryos. Weare focused on answering importantsafety and Somatic mutations accumulate in healthy cells throughout efficacyquestionsregardingtechniquesthatcouldonedaybe life. Most of these mutations do not alter cell behavior and useful in preventing thousands of inherited genetic disorders accumulatepassively,butoccasionallyakeygeneisaltered that affect millions of people worldwide. The focus of this in a way that provides mutant cells with a competitive lectureisto inform on applicationsof gene editing and gene advantage. This leads to the formation of large clones that replacement strategies in preclinical and clinical studies persistlongterminnormaltissues.However,detectingsuch demonstrating feasibility, efficacy and long-term safety of clones is challenging due to the difficulties of identifying germ line gene therapy. <!--EndFragment--> mutations present in small numbers of cells. The most S.Mitalipov:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, highly mutated normal tissue reported to date is sun- patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Mitogenome exposed human skin. Most mutations are caused by ultra- Therapeutics. violetlightanditisunclearwhetheragedsun-exposedskin represents a special case due to a lifetime exposure to a powerful mutagen. This motivated us to investigate the S14 Cellular heterogeneity in health and disease mutational landscape of a similar tissue, the lining of the oesophagus, which also consists of layers of keratinocytes. S14.2 As in the skin, cells are continually shed from the tissue Dissectingthespatiotemporalsubcellulardistributionofthe surface and replaced by proliferation throughout life. human proteome However, the exposure to mutagens and the tissue envir- onmentinaninternalepitheliumledareverydifferentfrom E. Lundberg the skin, leading us to hypothesize that normal oesophagusAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 765 may have a distinct mutational landscape. We mapped P. Rugg-Gunn mutant clones in normal oesophageal epithelium from nine donorsaged20-75usingultra-deeptargetedsequencingfor The Babraham Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom 74 genes implicated in epithelial cancers. We found the density of mutant clones increased progressively, rising to Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) exist in multiple over100/cm2bymiddleage.Mutationsweremainlycaused states that are broadly termed naïve and primed. Both cell by age-related mutational processes. There was strong states can self-renew and undergo multi-lineage differ- Darwinianpositiveselectionofclonescarryingmutationsin entiation, but are functionally and molecularly distinct. 14 genes that are also recurrently mutated in oesophageal Naïve hPSCs largely recapitulate the transcriptome and cancers. By middle age NOTCH1 and TP53 mutant clones epigenomeofpre-implantationembryos,andprimedhPSCs cover over 40% and 10% of the epithelium respectively. are similar to early post-implantation embryos. This is an Remarkably, the prevalence of NOTCH1mutations in nor- important distinction because these two developmental mal esophagus is several times higher than in oesophageal stages differ enormously in gene regulation and in epige- cancers. We conclude that the normal oesophagus is an netic hallmarks such as X-inactivation status and DNA evolving patchwork of mutant clones, which colonize the methylation. The research in my lab is focused on under- majority of the epithelium as we age. standing the mechanisms of epigenetic and gene regulatory changes as hPSCs transition between the two states, with the aim of applying that information to more precisely S15 Understanding non-coding variants control cell fate decisions and to better understand human development.Recently,wehavemappedthetranscriptional S15.2 and epigenetic dynamics during cell state change, dis- Non-coding repeat insertion in human disease covering that different reprogramming methods drive dif- ferent trajectories. We have also examined the 3D genome I.Silveira organisation of naïve and primed hPSCs. By applying new network-scale computational approaches, we have inter- Porto, Portugal rogatedtheorganisationatmultiplegenomicscales,ranging from a global overview to local communities that recapi- Non-codingrepeatexpansionscomposedoftrinucleotideto tulate architectural domains, down to individual promoter- hexanucleotide repeats cause more than 10 neurodegen- enhancerinteractions.Investigatingchromatintopologyand erativediseases.Iwilldescribethefindingofan(ATTTC) activityinhumanpluripotentstatesoffersnewinsightsinto n insertion,inapolymorphicATTTTrepeatinDAB1causing features of gene regulatory control during human spinocerebellarataxia(SCA),mappingtoSCA37.Thenon- development. pathogenicATTTTrepeatallelescanreach400unitsinthe P. Rugg-Gunn: None. normal population, whereas the pathogenic alleles have about 200 pentanucleotides with the configuration S16.2 [(ATTTT) (ATTTC) (ATTTT) ]. In the DAB1- Epigenetics,aging and age-related disorders 60-79 31-75 58-90 oriented strand, (ATTTC) is located in 5’-UTR introns of n cerebellar-specific transcripts. They arise from the usage of R.F.Perez,J.Tejedor,P.Santamarina,A.F.Fernandez,M.F. alternative promotors and are highly expressed during Fraga humanfetalbraindevelopment.Weinvestigatedtheinvivo deleterious effect of the non-coding repeat by injecting Cáncer Epigenetics Laboratory, CINN-CSIC, ISPA, IUOPA, zebrafishembryoswithRNAcontainingtherepeatinsertion Oviedo, Spain resulting in lethal developmental malformations. These resultsallowedustoestablishthecausativeroleofthisnon- Epigenetics refers to the study of stable genetic modifica- coding repeat insertion in SCA37. tionsthat resultinchangesingeneexpressionand function without a corresponding alteration in the DNA sequence. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for embryonic devel- S16 Human epigenome dynamics opment, but they also play an important role during adult life. In addition to the epigenetic changes that occur that S16.1 have a specific biological purpose, genomic DNA can also Establishing the epigenome during human development: accumulateepigeneticalterationsornoiseduringlifetime.It New insights of chromatin states and regulatory networks has been proposed that this process, known as "epigenetic in pluripotent stem cells drift",isassociatedwithage-relateddiseases.Althoughitis766 J.delPicchia well-known that cancer is an age-dependent disease, the A. Klungland: None. underlying molecular mechanisms are still poorly under- stood. In this regard, recent work has shown that aberrant DNA hypermethylation in aging and cancer share similar S17 ESHG-ASHG Building Bridges Debate: Germline chromatin signatures. It is also well established that in the genome editing - joint with EMPAG processes of both aging and cancer there is a global loss of DNA methylation. However, it remains unknown whether S17.1 the chromatin signatures of DNA hypomethylation were CRISPR-Cas9: Advances and Challenges also similar in aging and cancer. Conceptually, this is an important issue because the similarity of the chromatin E. Charpentier1,2 signatures of DNA hypermethylation in cancer and aging hasledtotheproposalthatDNAmethylationisamolecular 1Max Planck Institute for Infection Biology, Berlin, Germany, link between the two processes. In my talk, I will present 2Humboldt University, Berlin, Germany recent work from our laboratory showing that: i) the genomic distribution of differentially methylated CpG sites The discovery of the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing technol- is similar in aging and cancer, ii) there is a considerable ogyisconsideredoneofthemostimportantbiotechnology tissue-independent component to DNA methylation chan- breakthroughs of our times. Initially described as a bac- ges in both aging and cancer and, iii) in contrast to DNA terialimmunesystem,researchinourlaboratoryultimately hypermethylation, the chromatin signatures of DNA hypo- demonstrated that CRISPR-Cas9 works as molecular methylation inagingandcancer aredifferent. Theseresults scissors that can be harnessed as a tool to edit any genetic reveal novel aspects of the relationship between DNA sequence. Similar to a text editing software, the CRISPR- methylation and aging that could be important to under- Cas9 technology can correct typos, delete or exchange standing the possible role of DNA methylation as a mole- letters and sentences in the DNA of living cells. Only five cular link between aging and cancer. years after our discovery, CRISPR has transformed the R.F. Perez: None. J. Tejedor: None. P. Santamarina: worldoflifesciences.Thousandsofresearchersarefurther None. A.F. Fernandez: None. M.F. Fraga: None. developing the technology into innovative applications in biotechnology, agriculture and medicine. It has triggered S16.3 high hopes for the development of therapies against can- Epigeneticandepitranscriptomicregulationofmeiosisand cer, HIV and serious genetic diseases. In agriculture, the the preimplantation embryo CRISPR-Cas9 technology is already waiting in the wings to be marketed, e.g. to make crops more resistant A. Klungland against the effects of climate change or certain types of fungiandparasites.Mostcertainly,wewillwitnessalotof Institute of Medical Microbiology, BIG CAS-OSLO Genome new developments to apply the CRISPR-Cas9 Research Cooperation, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, technology in our everyday lives in the future - but not Norway all of them are positive. CRISPR has brought forward extensive ethical discussions around one central question: Post-transcriptional RNA modifications were identified sev- How far can we go with the technology in its applications eral decades ago, but the reversible nature of RNA mod- in humans? ifications,discoveredjustrecentlybyChuanHe’slabandour E. Charpentier: None. group (reviewed in Klungland et al., Nat Meth, 2017). We have identified demethylases specific for mRNA (Zheng S17.2 et al., Mol Cell, 2013) and tRNA (Liu et al., Cell, 2016). Human germline genome editing: the ASHG position Owing to technological advances, knowledge of epitran- statement scriptomic; the study of functionally relevant posttranscrip- tional modifications of RNA, and their writers, readers and K. Ormond erasers has recently advanced tremendously. We also study theepigeneticmake-upoftheoocyteandthepreimplantation Stanford, CA, United States embryo. The presentation will include an update on rever- siblemodificationsinRNA(epitranscriptomicmodifications) Between 2015 and 2017, the American Society of Human and their potential for regulating meiosis and embryo Genetics(ASHG)workgroupdevelopedapolicystatement, developmentaswellasourworkonepigeneticregulationin which was approved by the ASHG Board in March 2017 the oocyte and preimplantation embryo. and published in August 2017. The statement, which wasAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 767 endorsed by professional societies in North America, Eur- 1Institut de Biologie de l'Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, ope, Asia, South Africa and Australasia, includes the France,2EuropeanMolecularBiologyLaboratory-European positions below: 1. At this time, given the nature and Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 3CRUK- number of unanswered scientific, ethical and policy ques- CI, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom tions, it is inappropriate to perform germline gene editing that culminates in human pregnancy. 2. Currently, there is Tissues and cell types have largely conserved gene no reason to prohibit in vitro germline genome editing on expression programs across mammals, enabling extra- human embryos and gametes, with appropriate oversight polationfromanimalstudiestohumanmedicalconditions. and consent from donors, to facilitate research on the pos- These gene expression patterns are controlled by collec- sible future clinical applications of gene editing. There tions of regulatory elements combining promoters and should be no prohibition on making public funds available tissue-specific enhancers. However, it is now well- to support this research. 3. Future clinical application of documented that regulatory elements have experienced humangermlinegenomeeditingshouldnotproceedunless, extensive divergence and turn-over during mammalian ataminimum,thereisa)acompellingmedicalrationale,b) evolution. How stable gene expression is maintained by an evidence base that supports its clinical use, c) an ethical rapidly evolving regulatory landscapes remains a funda- justification, and d) a transparent public process to solicit mental question in evolutionary genetics, as well as a and incorporate stakeholder input. crucial prior to the use of animal models for human func- tional genetics. S17.4 Wereporthereonanin-depthanalysisofgeneexpression Societal opportunities and challenges of genome editing and regulation across mammalian evolution. Using liver as a representative organ, we profiled gene expression as well A. Charo as histone marks typical of active promoters and enhancers in20differentmammals.Weusedthisdatatoquantifyhow Madison, WI, United States promotersandenhancersevolveinmammals,andhow this evolution affects gene expression downstream. This analy- Because genome editing makes genetic engineering sis revealed a complex relationship between gene expres- easier and less expensive, it has the potential to be used sionandregulatoryevolution.First,weshowthatpromoters for both profoundly important benefits, such as disease andenhancersareundersignificantlydifferentevolutionary treatment and prevention, as well as less urgent - one pressures:promotersremainlargelyactiveacrossmammals might say even frivolous - uses. These range from so- while enhancers are much more evolutionarily labile. called human enhancement to de-extinction to engi- Second, regulatory elements exhibit a broad range of neering animals as a form of art. It also may usher in a evolutionary plasticity from those active across most new era for genetically engineered foods, which have in mammals to those found in only one or a few species. the past been the subject of controversy and mixed We show how these degrees of conservation correlate with governmental and consumer acceptance. Regulation in local gene functions, gene expression levels, and gene mostcountriesconcernsitselfwithensuringareasonable expression stability. Importantly, we report that highly balancebetweenphysicalrisksandbenefitstohealthand expressed and stable genes are associated with complex theenvironment.Ontheotherhand,objectionsgrounded arrays of promoters and enhancers, which can exhibit in concerns about possible effects on culture, religion, significant turnover across species as long as the overall social structures, and inter-generational equity are han- landscapecomplexityismaintained.Ourresultsunderscore dled in very different ways among nations. It is in these how functional redundancy in regulatory programs allows variations that one may find the greatest challenge to for resilience at the gene expression level in mammalian harmonization of governance policies for this emerging genomes. area of biotechnology. C.Berthelot:None.D.Villar:None.D.T.Odom:None. P. Flicek: None. S18 Regulatory sequence functions and elements S18.2 Regulatory principles governing enhancer function during S18.1 animal development The gene expression consequences of mammalian regulatory evolution E. K.Farley, G.A. Jindal,F. Lim,J. L.Grudzien, B.Song C. Berthelot1,2, D.Villar3,D.T. Odom3,P. Flicek2 UC San Diego, San Diego, CA, United States768 J.delPicchia The human genome contains on the order of a million that many of these sequences are distant-acting enhancers, enhancers. These segments of the DNA act as switches to the drivers of such extraordinary evolutionary constraint regulate where and when the approximately 20,000 genes remainunclear.Surprisingly,initialdeletionstudiesshowed are expressed. As such, enhancers provide the instructions thatthelossofindividualultraconservedenhancersinmice fortissuespecificgeneexpression,thusenablingsuccessful has no obvious impact on viability or fertility. To explore developmentandcellularintegrity.Numerousstudieshave this apparent discrepancy between extreme evolutionary demonstrated that mutations in enhancers can alter tissue constraint and lack of obvious phenotypes in more depth, specific expression and cause phenotypic variation and weexaminedtheinvivoconsequencesoflossofaseriesof disease. For example, a single mutation in a limb ultraconserved enhancers near the essential neuronal tran- budenhancerleadstoaberrantexpressionofthegeneSHH scription factor Arx. The Arx locus has an unusually high andresultsinextrafingersand toes.Inanenhancerforthe density of ultraconserved sites, including the three longest membrane protein Duffy, a point mutation results in perfectly human-mouse-rat conserved sequences in the malarial resistance. Computational analysis suggests that genome. Four ultraconserved regions near Arx drive gene the majority of mutations associated with disease are expression in the developing forebrain, in patterns that located within enhancers. Despite the fundamental impor- cumulatively recapitulate the gene’s expression domains. tance of enhancers for successful development and their Single-cell transcriptome sequencing from transgenic discoveryover30yearsago,welackabroadunderstanding embryos confirmed that the enhancer activity is specific to of how enhancer sequence encodes tissue specific expres- Arx-expressing neuronal subpopulations. We engineered sion. As a result we do not understand which changes in mice missing these four enhancers singly, as well as pair- enhancer sequence are simply inert variation between wise for enhancersthat display overlapping invivoactivity individuals and which mutations lead to phenotypic patterns. While the loss of any single or pair of ultra- diversity and disease. These fundamental questions remain conserved enhancers resulted in viable and fertile mice, unsolved because we cannot relate enhancer sequence to detailed phenotyping revealed neurological or growth gene expression patterns and phenotype on a scale suffi- abnormalities in nearly all cases, including substantial def- cient to identify the overarching regulatory principles. The icits of cholinergic neurons, altered densities of cortical two main challenges in deciphering the relationship interneuron populations, and abnormalities of the dentate between enhancer sequence and tissue specific gene gyrus.Ourresultsdemonstratethefunctionalimportanceof expression are: 1) the complexity of enhancers, and 2) ultraconserved enhancers and highlight that extreme the complexity of organisms. To address these problems, sequence conservation may result from evolutionary selec- we have developed high-throughput functional assays to tionagainstfitnessdeficitsthatappearsubtleinalaboratory test millions of enhancer variants in millions of whole setting. developing embryos. The model organism that enables suchin-depthfunctionalapproachesisthemarinechordate Ciona intestinalis. I will discuss our recent findings using S19 New nanotechnologies: the DNA Origami these high-throughput functional approaches to identify regulatory principles governing enhancer function. I will S19.2 also discuss how violations in these principles can help us DNA nanostructures as innovative vehicles for smart drug pinpoint mutations associated with disease. delivery E.K.Farley:None.G.A.Jindal:None.F.Lim:None.J. L. Grudzien: None. B. Song: None. M.Kostiainen, V. Linko S18.3 Aalto University, Espoo, Finland Ultraconserved enhancers are required for normal development DNA molecules can be assembled into custompredesigned shapes via hybridization of sequence-complementary D.Dickel domains. The folded structures have high spatial addressa- bility and a tremendous potential to serve as platforms and Berkeley, CA, United States active components in a plethora of bionanotechnological applications.DNAisatrulyprogrammablematerial,andits More than 450 regions in the human genome have perfect nanoscale engineering thus opens up numerous attractive sequence conservation between human and rodents, and possibilitiestodevelopnovelmethodsfortherapeutics.The these “ultraconserved”siteshave intrigued biologistsinthe tailored molecular devices could be used in targeting cells decade since they were first described. While it is known and triggering the cellular actions in the biologicalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 769 environment. This presentation focuses on the DNA-based cancers.ThepenetranceofTP53mutationsisnotknownand assemblies - primarily DNA origami nanostructures - that heterogeneous and depends both from the type of alteration canperformcomplextasksincellsandserveassmartdrug- and modifier factors. Dominant negative missense mutations delivery vehicles in, for example, cancer therapy, prodrug are usually highly penetrant and associated with the severe medication, and enzyme replacement therapy. forms of LFS characterized by childhood cancers. Null M. Kostiainen: None. V. Linko: None. mutations are predominantly identified in families with only adult cancers and have a lower penetrance. Germline TP53 mutations acting as permissive mutations to oncogenic stres- Educational Sessions ses,theirphenotypicexpressionisalsoprobablydependenton environmental factors. The recently published surveillance protocols areheavy andare based, fromthefirstyear oflife, E02 Hereditary cancer onabdominalultrasoundevery4-6months,annualtotalbody MRI, annual brain MRI, and in females from 20 years on E02.1 annual breast MRI. Considering the diversity of the clinical From Li-Fraumeni syndrome to TP53-related inherited severity associated to germline TP53 mutations, the benefits cancers: update on molecular basis and clinical of such heavy protocols regardless to the psychological management impacts should be carefully analyzed and discussed in each family. TP53 mutation carriers have an exceptionally high T. Frebourg risk of developing multiple primary tumours, estimated at least to 40%. Several lines of evidence show, in agreement Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Inserm with the key role of p53 in response to DNA damage, that U1245, Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, radiotherapy and genotoxic chemotherapies contribute to the Rouen, France development of secondary tumours in LFS. Therefore, in patients with clinical presentations strongly suggestive of Li-Fraumeni syndrome is a remarkable predisposition to LFS, analysis of TP53 should be performed before the cancerduetogermlinemutationsoftheTP53suppressorgene initiation of treatment and in mutation carriers, radiotherapy andcharacterized by early-onsettumoursanda wide tumour should be, only if possible, avoided, surgical treatment spectrum. Diagnosis criteria have sequentially been updated prioritized and non-genotoxic treatments, such as immu- in order to cover the 4 different clinical presentations asso- notherapies, considered in the future. ciated with germline TP53 mutations: Familial presentation: T. Frebourg: None. Proband with a LFS spectrum tumour (soft-tissue sarcomas (STS), osteosarcoma, adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC), cen- E02.2 tral nervous system (CNS) tumours or female breast cancer) Prostate Cancer Predisposition: Implications for Early priortoage46yearsANDatleastonefirst-orsecond-degree Detection and Treatment relativewithaLFStumourbeforetheageof56yearsorwith multipletumours.(2)Multipletumours:Patientwithmultiple P. Nelson1,2 malignancies, two of which belonging to the LFS spectrum, the first being developed before 46 years or with a second 1-, Seattle, WA, United States, 2Fred Hutchinson Cancer tumour developed within a radiotherapy field; (3) Rare Research Center, Seattle, WA, United States tumours: Patients with ACC, choroid plexus tumours (CPT) or embryonal anaplastic subtype rhabdomyosarcoma Prostate cancer is among the most heritable of all human (anRMS); (4) Breast cancer before age 31 years. Therefore, malignancies. Risk alleles range from a large number of familialhistoryisnotmandatorytoconsiderthepresenceofa relativelycommon,butlowpenetrancepolymorphismstoa germline TP53 mutation in a patient. Independently of the small number of rare, high-penetrance gene variants. With familial history, the mutation detection rate in children pre- respect to these latter variants, prostate cancer is now senting with ACC, CPT or anRMS is approximately 50%, recognized as a cancer type associated with familial cancer andinfemaleswithbreastcarcinomabefore31years6%.The syndromesdrivenbyDNArepairgenemutationsincluding contribution to LFS of de novo mutations has recently been mismatch repair (Lynch syndrome) and homology directed estimated to be at least 14% and approximately 1/5 of these repair (BRCA1/2-Related Breast/Ovarian Cancer Syn- de novo mutations occur during embryonic development, drome). Notably, family history often fails to identify resultingthereforeinmosaics.TP53beingincludedincancer individuals with heritable mutations. This presentation will gene panels, germline TP53 mutations are now more fre- describe current knowledge with respect to inherited pre- quently identified in patientswhohave developed only adult disposition to prostate cancer with implications for770 J.delPicchia screening/early detection strategies and therapeutic inter- Mapping5’-endsofRNAsisthekeytounderstandthegene ventions for advanced disease. regulation as they identify promoters, as well as long non- coding RNAs (lncRNAs) with functions. In order to com- prehensivelyunderstandregulatoryelements,wedeveloped E03 Resources for gene function analysis the Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) technology, whichenablestoidentifytranscriptionstartsites(TSSs)and E03.1 quantitativelymeasuretheiractivitythroughoutthegenome Analysis of mammalian gene function through mouse athigh-throughput.IntheRIKENFunctionalAnnotationof phenotyping theMammalianGenome5(FANTOM5)project,wecreated a very broad map of the promoterome and regulatory net- D.Smedley, onbehalfof theInternational MousePhenotyping works by simultaneously mapped mRNAs and lncRNAs Consortium TSSs and measured their expression at each different pro- moters with CAGE, on a comprehensive panel of human London, United Kingdom and mouse primary cells and other tissues. The study revealed the existence of 223,428 and 162,264 promoters Over the last decade, new sequencing technologies have and 65,423 and 44,459 enhancers, in human and mouse enabled the discovery of numerous new disease-associated respectively, which are often tissue specific (Forrest et al. genes. However, for many genes we still know very little Nature 507, 462, 2014, Andersson et al. Nature 507, 455, about their function and potential role in disease and many 2014). Using CAGE, we also built an atlas of human patientsremainundiagnosed.Modelorganismsfacilitatethe lncRNAswithaccurate5’-ends(Honetal.Nature543,199, exploration of genotype to phenotype associations and 2017). Classification of lncRNAs revealed that most inter- publicdatabasesofthisknowledgeallowustoassessgenes genic lncRNAs are derived from enhancer-like regions with no previous involvement in human disease. Towards rather than classic promoters and GWAS trait-associated this goal, the InternationalMouse Phenotyping Consortium SNPs enriched at lncRNA loci were specifically expressed (IMPC) is building the first complete functional catalogue in cell-types relevant to the specific diseases, suggesting ofthemammaliangenomebyproducingandphenotypinga their roles in diseases. Ongoing FANTOM6 project is knockout mouse strain for every protein coding gene. aiming at creating the broadest database of functional Standardised phenotyping is performed on over 250 para- lncRNAs, as a valuable resource in the community. Fur- meters covering all the major body systems. Over 5,000 thermore,wearepursuingastrategiccollaborationwiththe knockout mouse lines, many for poorly annotated genes, International Human Cell Atlas (HCA) project, which is have already been produced, phenotyped, and made avail- aimingatthecreationofacomprehensivemapofallhuman ablefordistributiontotheresearchcommunity.Inaddition, cell types and states at single cell level, with our newly over 1,000 embryonic lethal and subviable mouse lines developed single cell CAGE. have been analyzed in a specialized embryonic develop- P.Carninci:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, ment pipeline that uses high-resolution 3D imaging. Ana- patentorotherintellectualproperty);Significant;TranSINE lysisofthisdatahasalreadyledtonovelpublicationsonthe Technologies Co. Ltd. wide-ranging prevalence of sexual dimorphism, the corre- lation between essential genes and disease, novel genes associated with deafness and metabolic disease, as well as E04 Pharmacogenomics the identification of hundreds of new animal models for human disease. In my lecture I will describe the IMPC and E04.1 the key findings from these studies, as well as how the Preemptive pharmacogenomic testing for preventing resourceisbeingusedtodayforprioritisationandvalidation adverse drug reactions of variants in large-scale disease sequencing projects such as the 100,000 Genomes Project. H.Guchelaar E03.2 Leiden Genome Technology Center, Leiden, Netherlands An atlas of human long non-coding RNAs Pre-emptive pharmacogenomic testing for preventing P. Carninci Adverse Drug Reactions Pharmacogenomics(PGx),thestudyofgeneticvariability RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, affecting an individual’s response to a drug, holds the Japan promisetoleadtomoreefficacious,saferandcost-effectiveAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 771 drug therapy. In recent years, guidelines with therapeutic Evenmorechallengingistodemonstratethatsuchtestingis recommendationshavebecomeavailabletoguideclinicians cost-effective, particularly in the context of on-demand how to interpret and adjust drug therapy based upon a testing required for safe prescribing of a specific drug. pharmacogenomic test result. Indeed, for some drug-gene Specific examples of variants of knownclinical importance pairs (such as capecitabine – DPYD; mercaptopurine - will be discussed. An alternative approach is pre-emptive TPMT) pre-therapeutic testing has been implemented in genotypingforapanelofvariantsthatinformprescribingof routine clinical care in some centers but there remain oneormoredrugs.Thisstrategyensuresthattheprescriber barriers for widescale implementation of pre-therapeutic willhavethegeneticinformationatthetimeofprescribing, testing. which can be delivered using point-of-care decision sup- Studieshave shown that atleast 90-95% of patients have port. This strategy has been implemented at University of an actionable genotype when tested for a panel of ChicagoMedicineas“The1200PatientsProject”,whichis pharmacogenes including CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, led by Peter O’Donnell, MD, using a genomic prescribing CYP3A5, DYPD, SLCO1B1, TPMT, HLA-B, UGT1A1 system (GPS). Results to date have demonstrated that and VKORC1. Therefore, pre-emptive testing (that is: pharmacogeneticresultsimpactprescribing,andthatpatient multiple pharmacogenomic variants are collected prospec- satisfaction and recall of medication recommendations are tively and embedded into thepatient’s medical record) of a enhanced. Ease of use of the GPS continues to be an issue panel of genetic variants seems a promising and cost- for busy practitioners in the outpatient setting. Ongoing effective approach. studies aim to assess the feasibility and impact of the GPS We have performed a pilot study in 200 primary care for hospitalized patients, as well as those undergoing elec- patients with pre-emptive testing of a PGx panel with the tive surgery. However, larger randomized studies will be aim to reduce ADRs. In addition, the EU Horizon2020 required to measure the impact of the GPS (and other funded U-PGx consortium was establishedandinvestigates similar approaches) on clinical endpoints, such as serious a pre-emptive genotyping approach of a panel of important adverse events and treatment failure. PGx variants as a new model of personalised medicine. To M.J.Ratain:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, meetthisgoal,94existingpharmacogenomicsguidelinesof patent or other intellectual property); Modest; pending the Dutch Pharmacogenomics Working Group (DPWG) of patents for genomic prescribing systems. the Royal Pharmacists Association (KNMP) are combined with novel IT solutions. Implementation is conducted at a large scale in seven European health care environments E05 Bone Density: High and Low (The Netherlands, UK, Spain, Italy, Austria, Greece and Slovenia) for a total of 8,100 patients and accounts for the E05.1 diversity in health system organisations and settings. The Decreased Bone Density: From Gene to Pathways multicenter randomized study is open since Q1 2017. Feasibility, health outcome and cost-effectiveness are O.Mäkitie investigated; the study is powered to show a reduction of 30% of the incidence of grade 2 or higher adverse drug University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland events. The U-PGx consortium (www.upgx.eu) ultimately aimstoformulateEuropeanstrategiesforimprovingclinical Geneticdiscoveriesinpatientsandfamilieswithearly-onset implementation of pharmacogenomics. osteoporosis have increased our understanding of the H. Guchelaar: None. molecular mechanisms and cellular pathways governing normal bone health. Several forms of monogenic bone E04.2 fragility disorders, directly or indirectly related to type I From pharmacogenomics testing to point-of-care clinical collagen, have been described. Importantly, other forms decision support also exist, often with unique skeletal and extra-skeletal features and with variable inheritance patterns. The most M.J. Ratain common monogenic bone fragility disorder is osteogenesis imperfecta(OI)inwhichdominantlyinheritedmutationsin The University of Chicago, CHICAGO, IL, United States the genes encoding type I collagen (COL1A1and COL1A2) areresponsibleforapproximately90%ofthecases.Several While there are a myriad of publications reporting an rare autosomal recessive forms of OI have also been association between germline variants and drug response - described. Recent discoveries have further elucidated the both safety and efficacy - demonstration of the clinical genetic determinants of early-onset skeletal fragility utility of pharmacogenomic testing has been challenging. and several forms not related to type I collagen have772 J.delPicchia been identified. The discovery of LRP5 mutations in community) have been introduced in the past few years osteoporosis-pseudoglioma syndrome and in early-onset which make documentation much easier. osteoporosisfirstindicatedthattheWNTsignalingpathway K. Baggerly: None. plays animportantrole inbonemass accrual.Several other studies thereafter, including our discovery of WNT1 muta- E06.2 tions in early-onset osteoporosis, have further highlighted Statistics in genetic diagnostics the pathway’s significance in various disorders of low and high bone mass and provide evidence for the potential C. Azencott of WNT-targeted therapies in osteoporosis treatment. X-chromosomal osteoporosis caused by PLS3gene muta- Paris, France tions is another example of novel monogenic forms of osteoporosis. PLS3 osteoporosis affects especially males This lecture will address some of the current statistical and leads to severe progressive spinal osteoporosis; even challengesencounteredwhenattemptingtobuildpredictive females carrying the mutation may develop symptomatic models from genomics data. osteoporosis. PLS3 may play a role in bone mineralization Technologicalprogressallowsustogatherlargeamounts but the pathogenetic mechanisms are not fully understood. of molecular measurements for cohorts of increasing sizes. Several other monogenic forms of osteoporosis are under However, these data sets have characteristics that make investigation. These highlight the complexity of molecular them very different from the "big data" on which recent mechanisms governing normal bone homeostasis and yearshavewitnessedsomanymethodologicaladvances.In underscore the need for individualized treatment protocols. particular,they countain orders ofmagnitude more features O. Mäkitie: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers than samples, which creates strong statistical difficulties. bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Kyowa The lecture will illustrate these challenges on simple Kirin, Alexion, Shire, Strakan International. examples, and describe solutions from the statistics and machine learning fields. Morespecifically,wewilldiscusssparsityandhowtouse E06 Statistics in Genetic Research and Diagnostics prior knowledge, in particular in the form of networks, to constrainthemodelsandalleviatethestatisticalburden.The E06.1 lecture will also present how multitask approaches can, by The Importance of Reproducible Research in High- buildingseveralrelatedmodelssimultaneously,alleviatethe Throughput Biology small sample size issue. To conclude we will describe additional challenges and K. Baggerly opportunities for the use of machine learning in building predictive models from omics data. UT MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, United States Modern high-throughput biological assays let us ask E07 Organoids detailedquestionsabouthowdiseasesoperate,andpromise to let us personalize therapy. Our intuition about what the E07.1 answers“should”looklikeinhighdimensionsisverypoor, Applications scenarios of Organoids socarefuldataprocessingisessential.Whendocumentation of such processing is absent or incomplete, we must apply A. Manfrin “forensic bioinformatics” to work backwards from the raw dataandthereportedresultstoinferwhatthemethodsmust -, Lausanne, Switzerland have been. Such explorations occasionally reveal errors. Themostcommonerrorsweuncoveraresimpleones,often Inthepasttenyears,theconvergenceofdevelopmentaland involvingmislabelingofrows,columns,orvariables.These stem cell biology, combined with technical innovations in errors are easy to make, but if documentation is adequate, cellculturemethods,hasresultedintheemergenceofanew they may be easy to fix. Incomplete documentation is, generation of in vitro models. These models, referred to as however, pervasive in much of the scientific literature. We organoids, recapitulate at a very basic level some of the give examples illustrating the potentially severe implica- complexity of real tissues and organs, and as such promise tions of such mistakes for patient care, and discuss steps to bridge the gap between in vitro and in vivo models. journals and US funding agencies are taking in response. Organoids are believed to play an important role in the Fortunately, new tools (many from the open-source future of both basic and applied research. In thisAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 773 presentation,Iwillsummarizesomeofthemainfeaturesof M.Vikkula organoids, such as their generation by poorly understood self-organization and similarities with real tissues. I will Brussels, Belgium then focus on examples of organoid applications as models for embryonic development and organogenesis, as well as Vascular malformations are localized errors of vascular for disease modelling, drug testing, personalized and development. They are often identified on the skin as regenerative medicine. Finally, I will describe our recent “birthmarks” of various sizes and shapes. They usually effortincombiningbioengineeringandstemcellbiologyto slowlygrowwiththegrowthofthechild.Theymayalsobe extrinsically steer self-organization of human Pluripotent encounteredinotherorgans,suchastheliver,intestineand Stem Cell-derived embryonic organoids. the brain. The lesions are consisted of tortuous vascular A. Manfrin: None. channels of various types, with continuous endothelium surrounded by various numbers of support cells. Most of E07.2 these lesions occur sporadically, yet sometimes as part of a On the self-engineering of embryonic stem cells syndrome or as an inherited disorder. Genetic studies of suchfamiliesandpatientshaveledtotheidentificationofa A. Martinez-Arias numberofgenesthatcausevariousvascularmalformations. The pathway to unravel the pathophysiological mechan- Cambridge, United Kingdom isms of vascular anomalies started by the discovery that inherited TIE2/TEK mutations (an endothelial receptor Embryonic Stem (ES) cells are clonal derivatives from the tyrosine kinase) are responsible for hereditary mucocuta- blastocystsofmammalianembryoswhichhavethepotential neous venous malformations (“cavernous hemangioma”). to give rise to all lineages of the embryo and the ability to Further studies to explain the multifocality of lesions in self renew this ability. Mouse ES cells have proven an these patients made realize the importance of tissular excellentsysteminwhichtostudydevelopmentalevents,in second-hits for lesion development in this autosomal particular the mechanisms of cell fate decisions. However, dominant disease. This directed the search for causes of while it is easy to coax them into elements of different sporadiccasestowardstissularmutations,andopenedanew tissues in culture, they do not organize themselves as they era, in conjunction with the advent of NGS, for somatic do in embryos. Non adherent culture leads them to form genetic screens in vascular anomalies and other develop- aggregates in which some cell types appear in clusters but ment disorders. there is no overall organization. Genetic mutations take place during each cell division. Recently we have developed a non adherent culture The earlier they occur, the larger the cell population that system in which small aggregates of mouse ES cells carries the mutation is. Most of the mutations in vascular undergosymmetrybreaking,polarizedgeneexpressionand anomaliesoccurinendothelialcells,andtheyhaveallowed growth and gastrulation like movements in vitro. Using a generation of in vitro and in vivo models, another major variety of reporter ES cell lines and comparison with the step towards development of novel therapies for these embryo we observe organization of Wnt, Nodal and FGF chronic, debilitating diseases. As most of the mutations signalingthatmirrorseventsintheembryoandhaveshown activate well-known oncogenes and signaling pathways, that they can develop in culture until an equivalent of this has opened an era for repurposing of cancer-drugs to embryonic day 9 (E9). We observe that these embryonic vascular anomaly patients. (miikka.vikkula@uclouvain.be; organoids develop anteroposterior, dorsoventral as well as https://www.deduveinstitute.be/human-genetics). bilateralasymmetries.Analysisofpatternformationinthese aggregates suggests that they do not develop through E08.2 standard self organization but that there is a strong genetic Clinical management of vascular malformations components to what otherwise would be simple thermo- dynamically driven process. These issues will be discussed L. M.Boon1,E. Seront1,N.Revencu1,M. Vikkula2 in course of the talk. 1Cliniques universitaires Saint Luc, Brussels, Belgium, 2De Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium E08 Congenital vasculopathies Vascular anomalies are classified according to clinical and E08.1 histopathological characteristics into tumors, the most Etiology of vascular malformations: A question of place common being infantile hemangioma, and malformations, and timing that are subsequently subdivided according to the affected774 J.delPicchia vesseltype(s).Treatmentofvascularanomaliesdependson palmitoylation in cultured fibroblasts of NBIA subjects. the affected vessel type, the location of the lesion, and the These observations suggest therapeutic strategies aimed at symptoms. As many lesions are extensive, patients should targeting impaired TfR1 recycling and palmitoylation in be aware that a complete cure is often not possible. A NBIA for which no therapy is yet available. multidisciplinary approach is mandatory to obtain the best A. Rötig: None. result with the least complications and/or recurrence. Treatments can vary from active follow-up to medication, laser, interventional radiology and/or surgical resection. E10 Genetics of infertility Identification of several signaling pathways involved in varioustypesofvascularmalformationsallowedustotarget E10.1 new molecular therapies for vascular malformations, such Genetic basis of male reproductive disorders asmTorinhibitorforslow-flowvascularmalformationsand anti-angiogenic medication for fast-flow lesions. Clinical C. Krausz trials are currently on going with promising results. L.M. Boon: D. Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers Dept. of Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences bureau, symposia, and expert witness); Modest; Pierre "Mario Serio"; University of Florence, Florence, Italy Fabre. E. Seront: None. N. Revencu: None. M. Vikkula: None. Couple infertility concerns 15% of couples and male reproductive anomalies are present in about half of the cases, either as the main reason or as a cofactor. Male E09 Iron in the brain - joint session with the European infertilityisamultifactorialcomplexpathologicalcondition Society of Neurology in which genetic factors play a relevant role. Azoospermic men are at highest risk for being carriers of a genetic E09.2 anomaly (25%).The genetic landscape of this condition is NBIA - new angles highly complex as semen and testis histology phenotypes are extremely heterogeneous and at least 2,000 genes are A. Rötig involved in spermatogenesis (Krausz et al. 2015). Known geneticfactorscanbescreenedinalletiologiccategoriesof Imagine Institut, Paris, France male infertility (hypothalamic-pituitary axis dysfunction, quantitative and qualitative alterations of spermatogenesis, Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is ductal obstruction/dysfunction). Genetic testing is relevant a genetically heterogeneous condition due to iron accumu- foritsdiagnosticvalueandclinicaldecision-makingandfor lation in basal ganglia, manifesting as a progressive extra- appropriate genetic counselling (Krausz et al. 2018). pyramidal syndrome with dystonia, rigidity and Anomalies in sex chromosomes have major role in severe choreoathetosis. Mutations in eleven genes have been spermatogenic impairment: i) Y chromosome microdele- hitherto identified. Only two genes are reportedly involved tions (AZF deletions) are the most frequent molecular inironmetabolism,FTLandCP,respectivelyencodingthe genetic causes of severe oligo/azoospermia. Carriers of light subunit of ferritin, and ceruloplasmin. How the other complete AZFa and AZFb deletions have virtually zero NBIA proteins involved in lipid metabolism, lysosomal chance for successful sperm recovery through Testicular activity and autophagic processes disturb iron metabolism Sperm Extraction, hence this genetic test has also a pre- remains poorly understood. Thanks to whole exome TESEprognosticvalue(KrauszandCasamonti,2017);ii)X sequencing in patients with NBIA we identified mutations chromosome-linked, TEX11 mutations are novel causes of in REPS1 gene that allowed us to better understand iron meiotic arrest. Over the last 20 years, two approaches have homeostasis deregulation in NBIA. REPS1 is involved in beenusedforthediscoveryofnovelgeneticfactors:i)array endocytosis of membrane receptors, including transferrin basedanalyses(SNPandCNV);ii)exomeanalysis.Results receptor (TfR1) and vesicle transport. Studying fibroblast from whole-genome association studies suggest a marginal cells lines from subjects carrying biallelic mutations in role for common variants as causative factors. Studies on REPS1 and known genes (PANK2, PLA2G6, C19ORF12 Copy number variations (CNVs) demonstrated a con- andFA2H),weascribeironoverloadtoabnormalrecycling siderably higher CNV load in infertile patients compared of TfR1 and reduction of TfR1 palmitoylation in NBIA. with normozoospermic controls. This phenomenon may Moreover, we describe palmitoylation as a hitherto unre- well be an expression of a more generalized genomic portedlevelofpost-translationalTfR1regulation.Awidely instability, which could be one of the explanations for the used antimalarial agent, artesunate, rescued abnormal TfR1 epidemiological observations indicating lower lifeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 775 expectancy and higher morbidity (including cancer) in healthanddevelopmentisaglobalchallenge. Thisrequires infertile men. Recently a genetic link between late-onset differentiating those variants that contribute to healthy Fanconi Anemia due to FANCA mutations and SCOS has variationandresilienceofpopulationstodiseasefromthose been identified which further link infertility to a cancer that have adverse consequences contributing to disease and prone disease. Whole-exome analysis has proved a highly developmental disorders in individuals successful diagnostic tool in patients belonging to con- Wholeexomeandwholegenomesequencingforpatients sanguineous families. It allowed the identification of novel with rare disease often yields novel variants that cannot be candidate genes (mainly autosomal) for central hypogo- confidently interpreted in isolation. DECIPHER (https:// nadism, monomorphic teratozoospermia/asthenozoos- decipher.sanger.ac.uk) is a node in the federated MME permia,congenitalobstructiveazoospermiaandquantitative system.Itisamajorglobalplatformforthevisualizationof spermatogenic disturbances. Despite efforts, the aetiology phenotypic and genomic relationships with a mission is to ofinfertilityremainsunknowninabout40%ofpatientsand map the clinically relevant elements of the genome and the discovery of novel genetic factors in idiopathic inferti- understand their contribution to human disease and lityisamajorchallengeforthefieldofandro-genetics.The development. DECIPHER has facilitated >1500 publica- large majority of idiopathic patients are affected by quan- tionsinthepeer-reviewedscientificliterature;atestamentto titative spermatogenic disturbances and are not familial the importance of match-making in rare disease. cases (sporadic). The development of a diagnostic gene Database silos inhibit diagnosis and discovery in rare panelbasedonexomedataoriginatingfromfamilialcasesis disease. The 'Matchmaker Exchange (MME)' project was highly limited, since these are due to recessive inheritance launched in 2013 to address this barrier to progress and is (i.e.one mutated allele is tolerated). In sporadic cases, now a demonstration project for the Global Alliance for hemizygous mutations and heterozygous autosomal muta- Genomics and Health (GA4GH). MME facilitates the tions with dominant negative effect or haploinsufficiency matching of cases with similar phenotypic and genotypic are the most obvious candidates.While the diagnostic profiles (matchmaking) through standardized application interpretation of a pathogenic mutation on the sex chro- programming interfaces (APIs) and procedural conventions mosomes is relatively easy, the causative link for a het- for the following connected databases: DECIPHER, erozygote mutation is rather complex. It is expected that Phenome Central, MatchBox, Patient Archive, MyGene2 ongoing,large,consortium-based,whole-exomeandwhole- and GeneMatcher. The GA4GH Matchmaker Exchange genomestudieswillacceleratethediscoveryofthemissing increasesthepowerfordiscoveryanddiagnosisbyusersof genetic aetiology of idiopathic male infertility. References: its component nodes by enabling searching for matching -KrauszC,CioppiF,Riera-EscamillaA.Testingforgenetic cases in a much larger data-set. contributions to infertility: potential clinical impact. Expert H. Firth: None. Rev Mol Diagn. 2018 Mar 22:1-16. -Krausz C, Casamonti E. Spermatogenic failure and the Y chromosome. Hum Genet. 2017 May;136(5):637-655. -Krausz C, Escamilla E13 Brain abnormalities in fetal life AR,ChianeseC.Geneticsofmaleinfertility:fromresearch to clinic. Reproduction. 2015 Nov;150(5):R159-74. E13.1 C. Krausz: None. Malformations of the corpus callosum C. Depienne1,2 E12 Undiagnosed disease and matchmaking initiatives 1InstitütfürHumangenetik,UniversitätsklinikumEssen,Essen, E12.2 Germany, 2INSERM, U 1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Sorbonne A User Guide to Matchmaking - the value of data-sharing Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06 UMR S 1127, Institut du in rare disease exemplified by DECIPHER and Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, ICM, Paris, France Matchmaker Exchange The corpus callosum is the main cerebral commissure in H.Firth placental mammals with a key role in the communication between the brain hemispheres. Agenesis of the corpus Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom callosum (ACC) corresponds to the complete or partial absence of the corpus callosum and is one of the most Analysis of whole genome sequences in the 1000 genomes frequent brain malformations in humans. The incidence of project identified 4-5 million variants in every genome. ACC is 1/4,000 in newborns but rises to 3-5% in patients Establishing the consequence of these variants for human with intellectual disability (ID). ACC is a highly776 J.delPicchia heterogeneous condition: complex ACC is commonly tothe cerebellum are common and canoften berecognized associated with other cerebral or extracerebral anomalies based on the pattern of abnormality, and that these two and/orvariabledegreesofID.Incontrast,isolatedACChas processes may co-occur. been associated with a 75% chance of a normal or sub- K.A. Aldinger: None. normaldevelopmentaloutcome,althoughspecificcognitive processessuchasreasoning,verbalandsocialabilitiesmay be impaired. ACC is usually diagnosed prenatally by E15 Disorders of sexual development ultrasound from the second trimester of pregnancy. Prog- nostication is difficult due to the widely variable neurode- E15.1 velopmental outcomes and ACC is a relatively common Disorders of sex development: genetics, diagnostics and cause of late pregnancy termination in European countries. clinical management ACC associated with ID is frequently caused by mutations in genes encoding transcription factors or chromatin A. Sinclair remodelers, suchas subunits of theSWI-SNFcomplex.On the contrary, the genetic factors responsible for isolated Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia ACC remain poorly understood. Recently, we have shown that mutations in DCC, encoding the receptor for netrin 1, Disorders of sex development (DSD) represent a major cause isolated ACC with incomplete penetrance. pediatric concern and clinical management of these condi- C. Depienne: None. tionscanbedifficult.Uncertaintyaboutachild’sgendercan betraumaticfortheindividualandtheirfamily.Itmayalso E13.2 carry profound psychological and reproductive con- Canary in the coal mine: the cerebellum as a sentinel for sequences. Most often the underlying cause of DSD is a developmental brain disorders variant in a gene or genes regulating gonadal/genital or steroidogenic pathways. Providing a molecular diagnosis W.Dobyns1,K. A.Aldinger2 for patients with a DSD and their families can serve mul- tiple purposes: naming the underlying cause contributes to 1Seattle, WA, United States, 2Seattle Children's Research acceptance, reduces stigma or blame, and provides crucial Institute, Seattle, WA, United States clues and guidance for clinical management, including information on the malignancy risks associated with some Thecerebellumisoftenoverlookedinassessingfetusesand typesofDSD.Adiagnosisisintegraltogeneticcounseling children with developmental brain disorders because of andfamilyplanningandyetithasbeenfoundthatcurrently multiple patterns of malformation that are inconsistently asfewas13%ofpatientswithaDSDwillreceiveaclinical defined, lack of experience in recognizing these patterns, molecular genetic diagnosis. variable severity including non-penetrance, occasional co- To address this we have developed a massively parallel occurrence of atrophy, and limited understanding of the sequencing targeted DSD gene panel which allows us to underlying causes.Afterexcludingtwo well-known groups sequence 64 known diagnostic DSD genes and 1000 ofautosomal recessive disorders with recognizable patterns candidate genes simultaneously. Using this we have of malformation (Joubert syndrome and pontocerebellar analyzed DNA from the largest reported international hypoplasia), cerebellar malformations have been con- cohort of patients with DSD (278 patients with 46,XY sistently observed with only two copy number variants DSDand48with46,XXDSD).Wefoundvariantsinatotal (deletion3q24or6p25.3)andafewgenes(CASK,OPHN1 of28diagnosticgenes highlighting thegenetic spectrumof and FOXC1). Recent experience has shown that prenatal thisdisorder.Sequencingrevealed93previouslyunreported events such as late 2nd-early 3rd trimester posterior fossa DSD gene variants. Overall, we identified a likely genetic and cerebellar bleeds and (less often) cerebellar ischemia, diagnosis in 43% of patients with 46,XY DSD. In patients can cause cerebellar injuries that mimic cerebellar mal- with 46,XY disorders of androgen synthesis and action the formations. Accordingly, genetic studies have shown a genetic diagnosis rate reached 60%. Surprisingly, little lower rate of abnormalities than other developmental dis- difference in diagnostic rate was observed between orders such as agenesis of the corpus callosum, intellectual singletons and trios. In many cases our findings were disabilityandautism.WehaveperformedSNPmicroarrays informative as to the likely cause of the DSD, which will in~250childrenandwholeexomesequencingdatain~100 facilitate clinical management. The clinical utility of this children with cerebellar malformations. Our analysis sug- targeted DSD genetic screen will be discussed as will the geststhatcerebellarhypoplasiaisavariablefeatureinmany additional approaches we are taking to fill the diagnostic geneticdevelopmentalbraindisorders,thatprenatalinjuries gaps that still exist.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 777 A. Sinclair: None. Understanding the genetic basis of these conditions is important for counselling families, predicting associated E15.2 features and long-term history, and sometimes for persona- Reproductive and adrenal development: Insights from lising approaches to management. nuclear receptor gene mutations J.C.A. is a Wellcome Trust Senior Research Fellow in Clinical Science (grant 098513/Z/12/Z, 209328/Z/17/Z) J.Achermann with research support from Great Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity (grant V2518) and the NIHR GOSH UCLGOSInstituteofChildHealth,London,UnitedKingdom BRC (IS-BRC-1215-20012). Achermann JC, Schwabe J, Fairall L, Chatterjee K. The nuclear receptor (NR) superfamily plays a crucial role Genetic disorders of nuclear receptors. J Clin Invest. 2017 in development as well as diverse aspects of endocrine, Apr 3;127(4):1181-1192. reproductive,neurologicalandmetabolicfunction.Humans J. Achermann: None. have 48 nuclear receptors and to date, defined conditions have been reported for almost half of them. Initially, phe- notypes were predicted based on the known physiology of E16 Genetics with a Bite classic ligand-dependent NRs (e.g thyroid receptor beta, vitamin D receptor, androgen receptor, estrogen receptor, E16.1 mineralocorticoid receptor and glucocorticoid receptor). Genetics of early tooth development and dental disorders Subsequently, defects in “orphan” nuclear receptors were found based on genetic mapping strategies or phenotypes O.D.Klein predicted from expression/mouse models (e.g. DAX-1/ NR0B1, SF-1/NR5A1, PPAR gamma, FXR alpha). More UCSF, San Francisco, CA, United States recently, exome/genome sequencing has uncovered novel NR-associated conditions that would not immediately be Teethareuniquetovertebratesandhaveplayedacentral predicted clinically (e.g. COUP-TFI & II, ROR gamma). role in their evolution, and the tooth is an important In this educational session I will provide an overview of model system for many areas of research. Clinically, the clinical features, inheritance and biology of nuclear dental anomalies are common congenital malformations receptor gene mutations with a focus on genes involved in that can occur either as isolated findings or as part of a reproductive and adrenal development and function: syndrome. I will use genetic causes of abnormal tooth 1)Classicligand-dependentNRs.Thisincludestherole development as a point of entry to discussion of the of the a) androgen receptor (NR3C4) in complete and molecular pathways and morphogenetic processes partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS) (OMIM: involved in tooth development. Developmental biolo- 300068, 312300), as well as CAG trinucleotide repeats in gists have exploited the clear distinction between the X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (313200); b) epithelium and the underlying mesenchyme during tooth estrogen receptor alpha (ESR1/NR3A1) in estrogen resis- development to elucidate reciprocal epithelial/mesench- tance (615363); c) glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1) in ymal interactions during organogenesis. The preserva- glucocorticoid resistance (615962); and d) mineralocorti- tion of teeth in the fossil record makes these organs coid receptor (NR3C2) in pseudohypoaldosteronism type I invaluable for the work of paleontologists, anthro- (177735). pologists, and evolutionary biologists. In addition, with 2) Orphan NRs. This includes a) DAX-1/NR0B1 in X- the recent identification and characterization of dental linked adrenal hypoplasia (with hypogonadotropic hypogo- stem cells, teeth have become of interest to the field of nadism and infertility) (OMIM: 300200); and b) steroido- regenerativemedicine.Inthis talk,I willreviewsome of genic factor-1 (SF-1)/NR5A1 in combined adrenal/gonadal the major research areas and studies in the development dysgenesis (612965) (rare), reproductive anomalies in 46, and evolution of teeth, including morphogenesis, XY individuals (DSD, hypospadias, male factor infertility) genetics and signaling, evolution of tooth development, (612965, 613957) (common) or primary ovarian insuffi- and dental stem cells. ciency (POI) in 46,XX women (612964). O.D. Klein: None. 3) Recent discoveries. The role of a) SF-1/NR5A1 (617480)in(ovo)testisdevelopment(46,XX);b)COUPTF- E16.2 II/NR2F2 in (ovo)testicular development (46,XX) with GenoDENT: A targeted next-generation sequencing assay cardiac defects; and c) estrogen receptor beta (ESR2/ for the molecular diagnosis of genetic disorders with NR3A2) in syndromic and non-syndromic 46,XY DSD. orodental involvement778 J.delPicchia A. Bloch-Zupan1,2,3,T. Rey1,4,V. Laugel-Haushalter1,5, C. for orodental diseases, GenoDENT, that targets239 known Stoetzel5, M.Prasad5,M.Kawczynski1,2,S. Troester2,J. and271candidategenes.Theoveralldiagnosticratefor300 Muller4,5, H.Dollfus5,B. Gérard4,J.Chelly4,3 patients was 60%. This panel, often offered definitive diagnosis, modified previous diagnosis, identified digenic 1Université de Strasbourg, Faculté de Chirurgie Dentaire, inheritance, allowed genotype/phenotype correlations, Strasbourg, France, 2Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, orientated patients towards genetic counseling, targeted the Pôle de Médecine et Chirurgie Bucco-Dentaires, Centre de clinical procedures according to the disease type, identified Référence des Maladies Rares Orales et Dentaires (CRMR, new diseases/genes, and facilitated the multidisciplinary Reference Center for Rare Oral and Dental Diseases), CRMR management of rare diseases patients. O-Rares, Filière TETECOU, ERN CRANIO, Strasbourg, Conclusions: We have developed a novel targeted NGS France, 3Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire and assay for the efficient diagnosis of a variety of isolated and Cellulaire, Centre Européen de Recherche en Biologie et en syndromic oro-dental diseases. This panel includes novel Médecine, CNRS UMR7104, INSERM U964, Université de candidate genes, hence is a tool for gene discovery. Strasbourg, Illkirch, France, 4Hôpitaux Universitaires de RARENET (http://www.rarenet.eu/en/) is a French- Strasbourg, Laboratoires de diagnostic génétique, Institut German-Swiss cross-border cooperative project, in the de Génétique Médicale d’Alsace, Strasbourg, France, frameworkofINTERREGV,EU(ERDF)fundedprogram, 5Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, INSERM UMRS_1112, which has the objective of improving the management and InstitutdeGénétiqueMédicaled’Alsace,FMTS,Université de health of patients with complex rare diseases. Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France A. Bloch-Zupan: None. T. Rey: None. V. Laugel- Haushalter: None. C. Stoetzel: None. M. Prasad: None. Rare genetic disorders are often challenging to diagnose. M. Kawczynski: None. S. Troester: None. J. Muller: Anomalies of tooth number (hypodontia, oligodontia, ano- None. H. Dollfus: None. B. Gérard: None. dontia),shape,size,mineralizedtissuestructure(i.e.enamel J. Chelly: None. (amelogenesis imperfecta), dentin (dentinogenesis imper- fecta, dentin dysplasia), cement, alveolar bone), eruption, and resorption may exist as isolated symptoms or diseases, Concurrent Sessions but are often part of the clinical synopsis of numerous syndromes. A vast number of genes are implicated inthese disorders.Itisdifficulttodistinguishsyndromicversusnon- C01 Precision and Predictive Medicine syndromicdiseases,asthesamegenesareofteninvolvedin both categories. In addition, subclinical or non-observed C01.1 phenotypes might be underestimated. Concerning amelo- Polygenic risk score can replace clinical risk scores in genesis imperfecta, mutations in a number of genes have predicting diabetic complications and their response to been reported to cause isolated enamel defects, including therapy AMELX, ENAM, KLK4, MMP20, FAM83H, WDR72, C4orf26, SLC24A4, and LAMB3. In addition, many other P. Hamet1,M.Haloui1,F. Harvey1, R.Tahir1,F. Marois- genes such as DLX3, CNNM4, ROGDI, FAM20A, STIM1, Blanchet1, C.Long1,R.Attaoua1, P.Simon1,J. Chalmers2, M. ORAI1, and LTBP3 have been shown to be involved in Marre3, S.Harrap4, M.Woodward2,J. Tremblay1 developmentalsyndromeswithenameldefects.Theclinical presentation of the enamel phenotype (hypoplastic, hypo- 1Department of Medicine, Université de Montréal, CRCHUM, mineralized, hypomature, or a combination of severities), Montréal, QC, Canada, 2The George Institute for Global alone does not allow a reliable prediction of possible cau- Health, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Hôpital sative genetic mutations. Our team has documented oro- Bichat, Claude Bernard, Université Paris 7, Paris, France, dental phenotypes which are described in the D[4]/ 4Royal Melbourne Hospital, University of Melbourne, phenodent Diagnosing Dental Defects Database registry Melbourne, Australia (www.phenodent.org), which now comprises more than 4000 patients spanning 185 diseases linked to biological Background:Thereisgrowinginterestintheuseofgenetic sample collection. Understanding the potential genetic variants to predict the risk of diseases but they are con- cause(s) of rare diseases is critical for overall health man- sidered ineffective compared to clinical risk scores. Objec- agement of affected patient. One effective strategy to reach tive: To develop polygenic risk scores (PRS) with high a genetic diagnosis is to sequence a selected gene panel predictive value for complications of diabetes and for dis- chosen for a determined range of phenotypes. Here we tinguishing patients responding to ADVANCE intensive describetheresultsandproblemswithaspecificgenepanel antihypertensive therapy.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 779 Methods: Genetic variants of diabetes complications personalized risk information, we developed an interactive were selected from GWAS publically available catalog. graphical interface which utilizes both traditional and PRSweregeneratedbyweightingriskallelesbytheireffect genomicriskdata(polygenicriskscore(PRS)from~49,000 size. common genetic variants). While the follow-up of the full Results: A genetic model composed of 620 SNPs, sex, cohort is underway, we here report prospective results for age and geno-ethnicity had an area under the curve of the 1,022 subjects. receiver operating characteristics of 0.72 for cardiovascular Whenreassessedbyane-questionnaireandaclinicalvisit death in 4098 Caucasian of ADVANCE, comparable to 1.5 years after the baseline 88.4% of participants said that ADVANCE clinical score of 0.70 and exceeding Framing- their personal risk information had inspired them to take hamriskengine.Whenindividualsweredividedintotertiles better care of their health. 13.7% had achieved sustained of genetic risk, a significant gradient for incident and weightloss(-3kg)and17.0%ofsmokershadquitsmoking prevalent outcomes was demonstrated from 1.55 for heart compared to 4% annual cessation rate in the general failure to over 3 fold for macroalbuminuria, myocardial population. The propensity for risk-reducing interventions infarction and stroke. For events such as albuminuria and (weight loss, smoking cessation or visiting a physician), cardiovascular death, ADVANCE blood pressure medica- was 32.4% in subjects with predicted 10-year risk of CVD tion could be administered as preventive measure in the >10% and 18.4% in subjects at lower risk. An increased highesttertileofgeneticriskmodel.Coxcumulativehazard PRS associated with successful intervention particularly in plots revealed that individuals with the highest genetic risk the high risk-group (p<0.001). Our preliminary data show had a decrease in mortality by ADVANCE anti- that integrating genomic and traditional health information hypertensive treatment, persisting in ADVANCE-ON forcommonchronicdiseasepreventionandcommunicating post-trial observation. Conclusion: PRS identified diabetic this information back to individuals can support lifestyle patients with increased risk for outcomes prior to the changes.Bythetimeoftheconference,weestimatetohave penetranceofactualrisks,increasingitsclinicalutilityover follow-up data available on >3000 individuals. clinical risk score. The highest benefit of treatment was E. Widen: None. I. Surakka: None. N. Mars: None. P. confined to the highest genetic risk category. Pöllänen: None. K. Hotakainen: None. J. Partanen: P. Hamet: None. M. Haloui: None. F. Harvey: None. None. J. Aro: None. S. Ripatti: None. R. Tahir: None. F. Marois-Blanchet: None. C. Long: None. R. Attaoua: None. P. Simon: None. J. Chalmers: C01.3 None. M. Marre: None. S. Harrap: None. M. Wood- Development of a point of carepharmacogenetic test to ward: None. J. Tremblay: None. avoid antibiotic related hearing loss in neonates C01.2 J.H.McDermott1,S.Ainsworth2,M.Szynkiewicz2,G.Miele2,W. Returning cardiovascular disease risk prediction back to Newman1 individuals motivate beneficial lifestyle changes: Preliminary results from the GeneRISK-study 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Genedrive, Manchester, United Kingdom E.Widen1,I.Surakka1,N.Mars1,P.Pöllänen2,K.Hotakainen3, J.Partanen4,J.Aro1,S. Ripatti1,5 Introduction: In conjunction with a beta-lactam the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) 1Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, Helsinki, recommends the use of gentamicin, an aminoglycoside, as Finland, 2Carea - Kymenlaakso social and health care thefirst-choiceantibioticforempiricaltreatmentofsepsisin services, Kotka, Finland, 3Mehiläinen Oy, Helsinki, Finland, theneonatalperiod.Themitochondrialm.1555A>Gvariant, 4Finnish Red Cross Blood Service, Helsinki, Finland, 5Public with a prevalence of 1 in 500, predisposes to ototoxicity Health, Univeristy of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland after aminoglycoside administration. This relationship is particularlyprofoundinearlychildhood,withasingledose Whilenumerousgeneticlociimpactingtheriskforcommon causing irreversible profound sensorineural hearing loss. complex disease have been identified, their clinical use for Current genetic testing can take 3 days, an unacceptable disease prevention has remained minimal. To facilitate the delay in the acute setting. We aimed to develop a point of translationofgenomicresearchandtoempowerindividuals care test (POCT) to identify the variant in a clinically to undertake risk-reducing interventions, we tested the relevant timeframe. effectsofreturningindividualcardiovasculardisease(CVD) Methods: We used a Genedrive® POCT platform to risk information to 7,328 randomly sampled middle-aged genotype m.1555A>G. An asymmetric polymerase chain individuals from Southern Finland. To communicate the reaction amplifies the target region before identification of780 J.delPicchia the genotype via melt-curve analysis. The assay was Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 15Blood Bank optimised using buccal cell samples from the inner cheek andPlatelet&NeutrophilImmunologylaboratories,Rambam andthesystemisdesignedtoextractDNA,genotypeusing Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel the above methodology and provide an actionable readout of the variant. Introduction. Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) manifests Results: This POCT identifies the m1555A>G genotype as hypoalbuminemia, edema, and malabsorption due to in less than 40 minutes with sensitivity and specificity intestinal or lymphatic disruption. We studied an extended comparable to the validated laboratory methodology. consanguineous Muslim-Arab family comprising of six Conclusions: Using this system we can identify the patients diagnosed with PLE and hypercoagulability. m.1555A>G variant in a clinically relevant timeframe. The Methods. Whole exome sequencing (WES) was per- assay is portable, non-invasive and will allow for tailored formed on three patients and a healthy mother. Flow antibiotic prescribing in the acute setting to avoid neonatal cytometry was used to test for CD55 and complement hearing loss. Afeasibility study introducing the POCT into overactivation. Three patients were treated by off-label neonatal units is starting in summer 2018, representing the compassionate eculizumab therapy, a humanized anti-C5 first pharmacogenetic assay for use in the acute setting. monoclonal antibody. J.H. McDermott: None. S. Ainsworth: A. Employment Results.WESanalysisrevealedahomozygousframeshift (fullorpart-time);Significant;Genedrive.M.Szynkiewicz: variant in CD55 (c.43del; p.Leu15Serfs*46), supported by A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Genedrive. two-pointLODscoreof4.43andco-segregationanalysisin G. Miele: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; the extended family (n=32). Absence of CD55 was Genedrive. W. Newman: None. confirmed by flow cytometry. Furthermore, membrane attack complex (MAC) and iC3b depositions on WBCs C01.4 were significantly increased in patients compared to age- From genetics to therapy: successful one-year eculizumab matched controls (p<0.001). Significant clinical and treatment of protein-losing enteropathy caused by loss of laboratory improvement was observed in patients treated the complement regulator CD55 with eculizumab, including resolution of diarrhea, normal- ization of serum albumin, and 60% reduction in MAC A. Kurolap1,2,O.Eshach-Adiv3,1,T. Hershkovitz2,T. Paperna2, deposition on WBCs within two months, and further A.Mory2,D.Oz-Levi2,Y.Zohar4,1,H.Mandel5,1,J.Chezar6,D. improvement within a year. Azoulay6,S. Peleg7,E. E. Half8,1,V.Yahalom9,L. Finkel9, O. Discussion. CD55 encodes a membrane-bound comple- Weissbrod10,11,D.Geiger10, A.Tabib12, R.Shaoul13,1,D. ment-regulatory protein that inhibits the C3/C5 convertases Magen14,1,L. Bonstein15,1,D.Mevorach12,H. N.Baris2,1 and protects cells against complement-induced self-injury. Thegeneticfindingsandevidenceofabnormalcomplement 1TheRuthandBruceRappaportFacultyofMedicine,Technion activation prompted successful off-label compassionate - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel, 2The Genetics therapy with eculizumab, a terminal complement inhibitor. Institute, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, The treatment led to rapid improvement and ultimately 3PediatricsBandPediatricGastroenterology,RambamHealth achieved complete amelioration of symptoms in three Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 4Institute of Pathology, Rambam treated patients. This path from genetic analysis to tailored HealthCareCampus,Haifa,Israel,5MetabolicUnit,Rambam therapy warrants studying the roles of complement and Health Care Campus, Haifa, Israel, 6Laboratory for Clinical CD55 in other intestinal disorders that may benefit from CellAnalysis&TranslationalResearch,Hematology,Western similar treatment. Galilee Hospital, Nahariya, Israel, 7Pediatric A.Kurolap:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stockoptions, GastroenterologyUnit,HaEmekMedicalCenter,Afula,Israel, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; Submitted 8Department of Gastroenterology, Rambam Health Care patentwithAlexion,withoutroyalties.O.Eshach-Adiv:E. Campus, Haifa, Israel, 9National Blood Group Reference Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other Laboratory (NBGRL), Magen David Adom (MDA), National intellectual property); Modest; Submitted patent with Blood Services, Ramat Gan, Israel, 10Computer Science Alexion, without royalties. T. Hershkovitz: None. Department, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, T. Paperna: None. A. Mory: None. D. Oz-Levi: None. Israel, 11Department of Statistics and Operations Research, Y. Zohar: None. H. Mandel: None. J. Chezar: School of Mathematical Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel None. D. Azoulay: None. S. Peleg: None. E.E. Half: Aviv, Israel, 12Rheumatology Research Center, Hadassah None. V. Yahalom: None. L. Finkel: None. O. Weiss- MedicalCenterandtheHebrewUniversity,Jerusalem,Israel, brod: None. D. Geiger: None. A. Tabib: None. 13Pediatric Gastroenterology Unit, Rambam Health Care R. Shaoul: None. D. Magen: None. L. Bonstein: None. Campus, Haifa, Israel, 14Pediatric Nephrology Institute, D. Mevorach: None. H.N. Baris: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 781 C01.5 GTEx data, and it is able to modulate gene expression ApharmacogeneticstudyimplicatesNINJ2intheresponse in vitro using a luciferase assay (P < 0.01). to IFNbeta in Multiple Sclerosis patients Conclusions: This study validates the role of rs7298096 intheclinicalresponsetoIFNβinMSpatients.Exvivoand S. Peroni1,M.Sorosina1,S. Malhotra2,F. Clarelli1,L. Villar3, in vitro experiments suggests that the SNP is able to V. Martinelli4,C.Guaschino1, L.Citterio5,J.Lechner-Scott6,7, influence the expression of NINJ2, an adhesion molecule X. Montalban8,2, G.Comi4,1,F. Esposito1,4, M.Comabella2, involved in inflammation and endothelial cell activation, F. Martinelli Boneschi9,1,10 supporting its role in relapse occurrence and inflammatory activity in MS. 1Laboratory of Human Genetics of Neurological Disorders, S. Peroni: None. M. Sorosina: None. S. Malhotra: Institute of Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of None. F. Clarelli: None. L. Villar: None. V. Martinelli: Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, None. C. Guaschino: None. L. Citterio: None. 2Multiple Sclerosis Center of Catalonia (Cemcat), Hospital J. Lechner-Scott: None. X. Montalban: None. G. Comi: Universitari Vall d’Hebron, Barcellona, Spain, 3Departments None. F. Esposito: None. M. Comabella: None. of Neurologyand Immunology, Hospital Universitario Ramón F. Martinelli Boneschi: None. y Cajal, Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigacion Sanitaria, Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Neurology, Institute of C01.6 Experimental Neurology (INSPE), Division of Neuroscience, Genome-wide association study of Pandemrix-induced San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy, 5Genomics of narcolepsy in Sweden - a possible role for glial cell line- Renal Diseases and Hypertension Unit, Division of Genetics derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) and Cellular Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan,Italy,6DepartmentofNeurology,JohnHunterHospital, M.Wadelius1,N.Eriksson2,H.Smedje3,Q.Y. Yue4,P.K.E. Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia. Hunter Medical Magnusson3, P.Hallberg1, onbehalfof Swedegene Research Institute, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia, 7Faculty of Medicine and Public Health, Hunter 1Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 2Uppsala Clinical Medical Research Institute, University of Newcastle, Research Center, Uppsala, Sweden, 3Karolinska Institutet, Newcastle, Australia, 8St. Michael’s Hospital, University of Stockholm, Sweden, 4Medical Products Agency, Uppsala, Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 9Department of Biomedical Sweden Sciences for Health, University of Milan, Milan, Italy, 10Department of Neurology, IRCCS Policlinico San Donato, Background: Narcolepsy is an autoimmune disease char- San Donato Milanese, Italy acterized by an inability to control sleep and wakefulness. The number of young diagnosed with narcolepsy rose Introduction: Several therapies are available for Multiple sharply in Sweden following vaccination with Pandemrix sclerosis (MS), however clinical response is heterogeneous against swine influenza 2009-2010. The most frequent and a more personalized approach is needed to maximize form, narcolepsy type I, is caused by a loss of hypocretin treatment efficacy. We aim to confirm and test the func- neurons, and isstrongly associated withHLA-DQB1*0602. tional role ofrs7298096,a polymorphism located upstream However, only 0.02% of HLA-DQB1*0602 carriers devel- to the NINJ2 (nerve injury-induced protein 2) gene in a oped narcolepsy following vaccination, and it is probable putativeenhancerregion,intheclinicalresponsetoIFNβin thatacombinationofothergeneticandexternalriskfactors Multiple Sclerosis (MS). are required. Materials: a total of 928 IFNβ-treated MS patients have Method: 43 adjudicated cases of Pandemrix-induced beenrecruitedacross4centersinItaly,SpainandAustralia. narcolepsyfromtheSwedishadversedrugreactionbiobank We also run eQTL analysis between rs7298096 and NINJ2 Swedegene were compared with 4891 controls from expression using available GTEx data and GEO datasets, TwinGene. Genotyping was performed on Illumina arrays. and we performed a luciferase reporter assay. The merged dataset contained 600K single nucleotide Results: an association between rs7298096 and time to polymorphisms (SNPs), and after phasing and imputation G first relapse (TTFR) after drug start was observed in the 8.6millionSNPs.Wecorrectedforprincipalcomponents1- Italian discovery cohort (P = 0.032) and confirmed 4. The genome-wide significance p-value threshold was set discovery in two additional cohorts (P = 0.031 and 0.025), to p < 5x10-8. replication with rs7298096 being associated with a longer TTFR Results:Pandemrix-inducednarcolepsywassignificantly G (P = 2x10-4; HR: 1.51). Furthermore, we associated with HLA-DQB1*0602, odds ratio (OR) 6.4 meta-analysis discovered that the SNP has an eQTL effect on NINJ2 [95%confidenceinterval(CI)4.2,9.8],p=1.4x10-17.After expression in whole blood (P = 7.0x10-6) according to correction for HLA-DQB1*0602, the strongest association782 J.delPicchia was with GDNF-AS1 (OR=8.6 [95% CI 4.2, 17.6], p= and its function is still poorly understood. We performed 2.6x10-9). whole exome sequencing in two unrelated families, each Conclusion: We found an association with the non- with two affected siblings, and identified ultra-rare, reces- coding RNA gene GDNF-AS1, which is located head to sive missense mutations in GLIS1 that segregate with dis- headwithGDNFandpotentiallyregulatesthisgene.GDNF ease.Thevariationsmodifiedhighlyconservedaminoacids encodes an essential neurotrophic factor that supports and were predicted to be deleterious by 3 different bioin- neuronalsurvivalandhasbeenassociatedwithAlzheimer’s formatics tools. Comparison of the clinical features of the disease. This finding may increase the understanding of four individuals harboring GLIS1 mutations shows pheno- disease mechanisms underlying narcolepsy. typic overlap, including IUGR, arthrogryposis, short ribs, Grants:SwedishResearchCouncil(Medicine521-2011- vertebralanomalies,andmicroretrognathiaandmicrostomia 2440, 521-2014-3370 and 521-2017-00641); Swedish as the predominant craniofacial dysmorphisms. Notably, Medical Products Agency; Clinical Research Support individuals in these two families display a different degree (ALF) at Uppsala University. of severity: lethal (resembling the Crane-Heise syndrome) M. Wadelius: None. N. Eriksson: None. H. Smedje: and non-lethal (similar to Bhoring-Opitz syndromes), None. Q.Y. Yue: None. P.K.E. Magnusson: None. respectively. To establish the relevance of GLIS1 loss of P. Hallberg: None. function to disease, we have developed F0 glis1 zebrafish mutants and transient loss of function models. These ani- mals display significant defects in craniofacial cartilage C02 Syndrome updates 1 patterning in comparison to controls. Together, our clinical and genetic findings as well our preliminary modeling stu- C02.1 dies,indicatealikelyroleforGLIS1inearlydevelopmental Lethal and non-lethal GLIS1 related malformation processes in humans, and potentially represent differing syndromes aspects of an allelic spectrum of severity. P. Prontera: None. C. Le Caignec: None. J. Philippe: P.Prontera1,C.LeCaignec2,J.Philippe3,D.Martin-Coignard4, None. D. Martin-Coignard: None. C.S. Gunn: None. C. S.Gunn3,P. Lindenbaum5,C. Bokobza3,R. Redon5, P. Lindenbaum: None. C. Bokobza: None. R. Redon: E. Sallicandro1, A.Mencarelli1,D.Rogaia1,C. Gradassi1, None. E. Sallicandro: None. A. Mencarelli: None. M.Schippa1, R.Romani1,C. Ardisia1, G.Merla6,S. Troiani7, D.Rogaia:None.C.Gradassi:None.M.Schippa:None. G.Stangoni1,E. E.Davis3 R. Romani: None. C. Ardisia: None. G. Merla: None. S. Troiani: None. G. Stangoni: None. 1Medical Genetics Unit, University and Hospital of Perugia, E.E. Davis: None. 06129, Perugia, Italy, 2Service de génétique, Centre hospitalierduMans,LeMans,France;CHUNantes,Medical C02.2 genetics department,, Nantes, France, 3Center for Human The Study of Adults and Adolescents with Silver-Russell Disease Modeling, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, syndrome:evaluatingtheadultphenotypeofSilver-Russell NC 27701, Durham, NC, United States, 4Andrée Delahaye, syndrome INSERM,UMR1141,RobertDebréUniversityHospital,Paris, France; Cytogenetics Unit, AP-HP, Jean Verdier Hospital, O.Lokulo-Sodipe1,2,E.L. Wakeling3,H.M.Inskip4,C.D. Bondy,Paris,France,5InsermUMR1087,Nantes,France,6S. Byrne5,6, D.J. G.Mackay1, J.H.Davies7,I. K.Temple1,8 C. di Genetica Medica; IRCCS Ospedale Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo (FG), Italy, 7Neonatal 1Human Development and Health, Faculty of Medicine, Intensive Care Unit, University and Hospital of Perugia, University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 06129, Perugia, Italy 2Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Hospital, University Hospital Southampton NHS Foundation Trust, GLI-similar (Glis)1-3 proteins constitute a subfamily of the Southampton,UnitedKingdom,3NorthWestThamesRegional Krüppel-likezincfingertranscriptionfactorsthatareclosely Genetics Service, London North West Healthcare NHS Trust, related to the Gli family. Glis1-3 play critical roles in the Harrow, United Kingdom, 4MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology regulation of a number of physiological processes and, to Unit, University of Southampton, Southampton, United date, mutations in GLIS2 and GLIS3 have been implicated Kingdom, 5MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit, University of in human pathologies (nephronophthisis, an autosomal Southampton,, Southampton, United Kingdom, 6Southampton recessive cystic kidney disease; neonatal diabetes and National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research congenital hypothyroidism, respectively). The role of Centre, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, GLIS1 in human embryogenesis and disease is unknown, United Kingdom, 7Department of Paediatric Endocrinology,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 783 University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, United Genoa, Italy, 3Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, IRCCS Giannina Kingdom, 8Wessex Clinical Genetics Service, Princess Anne Gaslini Institute, Genoa, Italy, 4IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Hospital, University Hospital Southampton, Southampton, Sofferenza, Laboratory of Bioinformatics, San Giovanni United Kingdom Rotondo(FG),Italy,5LaboratoryforPediatricBrainDiseases, RadyChildren’sInstituteforGenomicMedicine,Universityof Clinical features of Silver-Russell syndrome (SRS) may California, San Diego, CA, United States, 6Howard Hughes becomelessapparentovertimeandtheadultconsequences Medical Institute, La Jolla, CA, United States, 7Institute of are unknown. Small-for-gestational-age (SGA) birth is MolecularBiologyandPathology,NationalResearchCouncil, associated with adult metabolic syndrome but relevance to Rome,Italy,8DepartmentofMolecularMedicine,Universityof SRS(acauseofSGA)isunclear.Educationalattainmentin Pavia, Pavia, Italy adults with SRS has not been assessed. We, therefore, soughttodeterminethephenotype,cardio-metabolicprofile Introduction: Basal ganglia (BG) are subcortical gray and academic attainment in adults with SRS and propose a nuclei which play essential roles in controlling voluntary scoring system. movements, cognition and emotion. While BG dysfunction Methods:UKparticipantsaged≥18yearswithSRSwere is observed in many neurodegenerative or metabolic dis- invited to a study appointment involving a medical history, orders, congenital malformations are rare. Dysplastic BG clinical examination and investigations. are typical of tubulinopathies but their agenesis/marked Results: 33 individuals (18 females) aged 13.32-69.71 hypoplasia has never been reported to date. years (median 29.58) were recruited. Loss of methylation Material and methods: We ascertained two unrelated at H19/IGF2 was diagnosed in 81.8%; maternal unipar- sporadicgirlspresentingwithspastictetraparesisandsevere ental disomy for chromosome 7 in 18.2%. Median height intellectual impairment, sharing a unique malformation standard deviation score (SDS) was -2.67; weight SDS characterized by agenesis/hypoplasia of BG (mainly puta- 1.72; body mass index SDS -0.53; and head circumfer- men and globus pallidus) and olfactory bulbs, and ence SDS -0.95. Short stature (height SDS≤-2) was hypothalamic-mesencephalic fusion. WES identified two present in 60.6%. Asymmetry and relative macrocephaly novel homozygous variants, c.26C> A (p.Ser9*) and were present in 66.7% and 57.6% respectively. Con- c.752A> G (p.Gln251Arg) in the GSX2 gene, a member genital anomalies were present in 45.5%. In those aged of the family of homeobox transcription factors, which are ≥18 years (n=25), GCSEs were gained by 84%; key regulators of embryonic development. GSX2 is university degrees by 48%. Type 2 diabetes mellitus (n selectively expressed in the lateral ganglionic eminence, a =3),hypertension(n=2),andhypercholesterolaemia(n protrusion of the ventral telencephalon from which, along =2) were observed. with themedialganglioniceminence, theBGand olfactory Conclusions: the clinical features show similarities and tubercles originate. differences to childhood reports suggesting a change over Results:Thetruncatingvariantresultedincompleteloss time. Educational attainment in this cohort is above the UK of protein expression. The missense variant affects a averagebutcardio-metabolicproblemsappearsimilar.Wewill highly conserved residue of the homeobox domain (HD) proposeasystemfortargetingepigenetictestinginadultswith and is consistently predicted as pathogenic. Molecular shortstature.Funding:NIHRRfPBgrantPB-PG-1111-26003. dynamics showed impaired HD structural stability and O. Lokulo-Sodipe: None. E.L. Wakeling: None. H.M. weaker interaction with DNA. Expression studies on Inskip: None. C.D. Byrne: None. D.J.G. Mackay: None. both patients’ fibroblasts demonstrated reduced expres- J.H. Davies: None. I.K. Temple: None. sion of GSX2 itself, likely due to altered transcriptional self-regulation, as well as significant expression changes C02.3 of target genes ASCL1 (downregulated) and PAX6 Mutations in the homeobox gene GSX2 cause hypoplasia/ (upregulated). agenesis of the basal ganglia and the olfactory bulbs and Conclusions: We report for the first time the clinical diencephalic-mesencephalic junction dysplasia phenotypeandmolecularbasisassociatedtoBGagenesisin humans. Funding: ERC Starting Grant 260888; Ricerca R. DeMori1, M.Severino2,M. Mancardi3, D.Anello1, S. Finalizzata NET-2013-02356160. Tardivo1,T.Biagini4,M.Breuss5,6,E.Lorefice1,A.Gamucci3,B. R. De Mori: None. M. Severino: None. M. Mancardi: Illi7,A. Micalizzi1, M.Ginevrino1,8, A.Casella1,R. Rosti5,6,T. None. D. Anello: None. S. Tardivo: None. T. Biagini: Mazza4, J.Gleeson5,6,A. Rossi2,E. Valente1,8 None. M. Breuss: None. E. Lorefice: None. A. Gamucci: None. B. Illi: None. A. Micalizzi: None. M. Ginevrino: 1Neurogenetics Unit, IRCCS Santa Lucia Foundation, Rome, None.A.Casella:None.R.Rosti:None.T.Mazza:None. Italy,2NeuroradiologyUnit,IRCCSGianninaGasliniInstitute, J. Gleeson: None. A. Rossi: None. E. Valente: None.784 J.delPicchia C02.4 network. Finally, rescue of tcf12 loss of function GnRH Loss of function mutations in TCF12 cause autosomal phenotypeswasachievedbymRNAcorrespondingtooneof dominant Kallmann syndrome and reveal network-level these loci, STUB1. In addition to extending the rapidly interactions between causal loci evolving genetic architecture of IGD, these studies begin to assemble one of the functional networks that regulate the E. E.Davis1, R.Balasubramanian2,Z. A.Kupchinsky1, ontogeny of GnRH neurons and potentially modulate phe- D.Keefe2,L. Plummer2,B. Meczekalski3,K.E. Heath4, notype. These findings also highlight an emerging class of V.Lopez-Gonzalez5,M.J.Ballesta-Martinez6,G.Margabanthu7, pleiotropic genes including FGFR1, SMCHD1, CHD7, and S. Price8,J.Greening9,M.E. Wierman10,W.F. Crowley2, now TCF12 that contribute to both IGD and distinct cranio- N.Katsanis1 facial abnormalities. Funding: US NIH P50HD028138 (E.E. D., W.F.C., N.K.); K23HD077043 (R.B.). 1Center for Human Disease Modeling, Duke University E.E. Davis: None. R. Balasubramanian: None. Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 2Harvard Z.A. Kupchinsky: None. D. Keefe: None. L. Plummer: Reproductive Endocrine Science Center, Massachusetts None. B. Meczekalski: None. K.E. Heath: None. General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of V. Lopez-Gonzalez: None. M.J. Ballesta-Martinez: Gynecological Endocrinology, Poznan University of Medical None. G. Margabanthu: None. S. Price: None. Sciences,Poznan,Poland,4InstituteofMedicalandMolecular J. Greening: None. M.E. Wierman: None. W.F. Crow- Genetics (INGEMM) Hospital Universitario La Paz, ley:None.N.Katsanis:E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock UniversidadAutonomadeMadrid,IdiPAZ,Madrid,Spainand options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 5Medical Genetics Unit, Rescindo Therapeutics, Inc. Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Clinico Universitario Virgen de la Arrixaca, IMIB-Arrixaca, Murcia, Spain and C02.5 CIBERER, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain, 6Medical Genetics Unit, Predictors of all-cause mortality in adults with 22q11.2 Department of Pediatrics, Hospital Clinico, Universitario deletion syndrome Virgen de la Arrixaca, IMIB-arrixaca, Murcia, Spain and CIBERER,ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,7KetteringGeneralHospital A. S.Bassett1,2,3,T. Heung2,E.Ng2,J.Graffi2, S.Van Mil2, Foundation Trust Coventry, Kettering, Northamptonshire, S.Malecki2,E.Chow2,3,D.Andrade4,3,E.Boot1,3,E.Breetvelt1,3, United Kingdom, 8Northampton General Hospital, C. Silversides4 Northampton, United Kingdom, 9University Hospitals Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom, 10Department of 1TorontoGeneralHospital,Toronto,ON,Canada,2Centrefor Medicine, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, ON, Canada, Aurora, CO, United States 3University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 4University Health Network, Toronto, ON, Canada Dysfunction of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) causes a range of reproductive disorders resulting from Background:Relativelylittleisknownaboutlateoutcomes defects in the specification, migration and/or function of in genomic disorders. Elevated risk of premature death has GnRH neurons. To identify new molecular components of beenreportedfor22q11.2deletion syndrome(22q11.2DS), this system, we performed a systematic genetic interrogation howevertheeffectofkey22q11.2DS-associatedfeatureson viawholeexomesequencingoffamilieswithisolatedGnRH all-cause mortality is unknown. deficiency (IGD). We report 10 families with an anosmic Methods: We studied 1265 adults (≥17 years): 290 with form of IGD (Kallmann Syndrome; [KS]) harboring auto- 22q11.2DS (135 male; median age 29.7, range 17.8-68.6, somal dominant loss-of-function mutations in TCF12, a years), their 444 unaffected siblings and 531 unaffected transcription factor also known to cause syndromic cranio- parents,followedforupto23years.Wecomparedsurvival synostosis. We observed no distinction in mutation localiza- between groups using Kaplan-Meier estimates and Cox tion on the TCF12 locus for KS versus the reported regression (hazard ratio (HR) and 95% confidence interval craniosynostosis alleles. Additionally, 3/10 families display (CI)) to investigate the relationship between all-cause both KS and craniosynostosis indicating that allelism at the mortality and potential predictor variables including major driver gene alone is insufficient to explain the phenotypic congenital heart defects (CHD), psychotic illness, and variability.Todissectthisphenomenonfurther,weshowthat intellectual disability. lossof tcf12in zebrafish perturbsGnRH neuronalpatterning Results: Adults with 22q11.2DS had lower (p<0.0001) with concomitant attenuation of the expression of several survival than unaffected siblings or parents. The 22q11.2 potentially downstream genes that are both mutated in other deletion (HR 10.3, 95% CI 3.2-32.5) and major CHD (HR syndromic forms of IGD and map to a TCF12 affinity 4.7, 95% CI 2.1-10.6) were significant predictors ofAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 785 mortality.Within22q11.2DS,majorCHD(HR3.0,95%CI hyperplasia,hyperkeratosisandathickenedmusclelayerin 1.2-7.5) remained a significant risk predictor when control- theforestomach,showingtheincreasedexpressionofgenes ling for other factors. There were 31 (10.7%; 13 M) deaths related to cell adhesion, epithelium development and kera- of individuals with 22q11.2DS at median age 46.4 (range tin.TreatmentwithMEKinhibitors,includingPD0325901, 18.1-68.6) years. MEK162 and AZD6244, partly ameliorated the growth Conclusions: Individuals with 22q11.2DS who survive retardation, esophageal dilation, hyperkeratosis and thick- BrafQ241R/+ childhood have diminished life expectancy, attributable ened muscle layer in the forestomach in mice. largely to the 22q11.2 deletion, with major CHD as an The esophageal dilation and aberrant skeletal-smooth additional significant contributor. Median age at death was muscle boundary were ameliorated in BrafQ241R/+ mice nearly5yearsolderthanwhenexamined~10yearsagoina treated with the histone H3K27 demethylase inhibitor, smaller cohort. A substantial minority of patients outlive GSK-J4. Our results provide clues to elucidate the patho- both parents. Further longitudinal studies are needed to genesis and possible treatment of gastrointestinal dysfunc- determine the underlying mechanisms, and potential tion and failure to thrive in patients with CFC syndrome. modifying effects of anticipatory care. S. Inoue: None. S. Takahara: None. T. Yoshikawa: A.S. Bassett: None. T. Heung: None. E. Ng: None. None. T. Niihori: None. K. Yanai: None. Y. Matsubara: J. Graffi: None. S. Van Mil: None. S. Malecki: None. None. Y. Aoki: None. E. Chow: None. D. Andrade: None. E. Boot: None. E. Breetvelt: None. C. Silversides: None. C03 Multi-omics 1 C02.6 Pathogenesis and treatment of esophageal dilation and C03.1 gastric epithelial hyperplasia in a mouse model for cardio- Host genetics and microbial impact on plasma metabolites facio-cutaneous syndrome is linked to the cardiovascular risk S.Inoue1, S.Takahara1,T. Yoshikawa2, T.Niihori1,K.Yanai2, A. ZHERNAKOVA1,A. Kurilshikov1,I.van denMunckhof2, Y. Matsubara3, Y.Aoki1 E.Slagboom3,K.Schraa2,L. Joosten2,R.Xavier4,F. Kuipers1, M.Netea2, C.Wijmenga1,J.Fu1 1DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,TohokuUniversitySchoolof Medicine, Sendai, Japan, 2Department of Pharmacology, 1University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan, Netherlands, 2Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, 3National Research Institute for Child Health and Netherlands, 3Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Development, Tokyo, Japan Netherlands, 4The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Boston, MA, United States Germline mutations in BRAF are a major cause of cardio- facio-cutaneous(CFC)syndrome,whichischaracterizedby The gut microbiome is an attractive therapeutic target for heartdefects,characteristiccraniofacialdysmorphologyand metabolic health, however the functional links between the dermatologic abnormalities. Patients with CFC syndrome microbiome and host metabolism is missing. Our study alsocommonlyshowgastrointestinaldysfunction,including aims to investigate the relationships between gut bacteria feeding and swallowing difficulties and gastroesophageal and pathways, host genetics, and the fasting plasma meta- reflux. We have previously found that knock-in mice bolome, and understand their relevance to metabolic risk expressing a Braf Q241R mutation exhibit CFC syndrome- of cardiovascular disease (CVD). For 1,370 individuals related phenotypes,suchasgrowth retardation,craniofacial (n=1073 from population cohort, and n=297 from obe- dysmorphisms, congenital heart defects, learning deficits sity cohort) we collected extensive phenotype data, and ectodermal abnormalities. However, it remains unclear genome-wide genotyping, metagenome sequencing data whether BrafQ241R/+ mice exhibit gastrointestinal dysfunc- and plasma metabolomics profiling of 231 metabolomic BrafQ241R/+ tion. Here, we report that mice have neonatal traits. We investigated associations between host genetics, feeding difficulties and esophageal dilation. The esophagus the gut microbiome and metabolism, using discovery and BrafQ241R/+ tissues from mice displayed incomplete repla- replication analysis, and linked metabolism-related micro- cement of smooth muscle with skeletal muscle and bial factors to cardio-metabolic phenotypes in the obesity decreased contraction response to carbachol, an acetylcho- cohort.Next,weidentifiedbacterialpathwaysassociatedto line receptor agonist. In contrast, achalasia-like loss of metabolic risk score of CVD. Finally, we examined neuronal cells was not observed in the lower esophageal microbe-diet-metabolism-immune interaction through inte- sphincter. The BrafQ241R/+ mice also showed epithelial gration analysis with 78 dietary factors, 12 inflammatory786 J.delPicchia cytokines,andstoollevelsof5short-chainfattyacids.Both profiles with genes involved in the negative regulation of hostgeneticsandmicrobiomefeatureswereassociatedwith apoptosis, metastasis, RET signaling and/or increasing cell host metabolism. 54 bacterial pathways were linked to motility. In addition, ERBB2 was identified as a marker individual metabolic risk scores for CVD; these microbial gene in accordance with the HER2+ molecular classifica- effectsarelargelymediatedbyBMI,dietandinflammatory tion of the tumor. cytokines. In particular, bacterial metabolism of L- Furthermore, in this experiment, we were able to methionine was consistently associated to higher level of unambiguously study for the first time the effect of copy glycoprotein N-acetyls in plasma, and to atherosclerotic numberstateonthetranscriptomeinbreasttumorsusingthe plaques in obese individuals. L-methionine is associated to G&T-seq technique. higher metabolic risk score of CVD, higher inflammatory Grants: cytokinesandlowerfruitintake.Thesefindingspointtothe FWO strategic basic research grant (1/1/18-1/1/22) potential use of bacterial L-methionine biosynthesis and Stichting Tegen Kanker grant 2014-145. other microbial pathways as a therapeutic target of meta- S. Vanuytven:None. A.Sifrim: None. M.Teng:None. bolic diseases and CVD. D. Brown: None. L. Mora Bitria: None. E. Fernandez A. Zhernakova: None. A. Kurilshikov: None. I. van Gallardo: None. K. Theunis: None. S. Majjaj: None. H. den Munckhof: None. E. Slagboom: None. K. Schraa: Duvilliers: None. F. Rothe: None. C. Sotiriou: None. P. None. L. Joosten: None. R. Xavier: None. F. Kuipers: Van Loo: None. C. Desmedt: None. T. Voet: None. None.M.Netea:None.C.Wijmenga:None.J.Fu:None. C03.3 C03.2 Unravelingthecisandtransgeneticregulatorymapinover Single-cell multi-omics sequencing to understand the 1,500 induced pluripotent stem-cells lines nature, extent and biology of cellular heterogeneity in breast cancer M.J. Bonder1,C. Smail2,D.Jakubosky3,The i2QTL CONSORTIUM,C. Brown4,S.Montgomery2,E. Smith3, K. S. Vanuytven1,2,A.Sifrim1,M.Teng3, D.Brown1,L. Mora Frazer3,O.Stegle1 Bitria1,E. FernandezGallardo1,K. Theunis1,S.Majjaj4, H.Duvilliers4,F.Rothe4,C.Sotiriou4,P.VanLoo2,C.Desmedt4, 1EMBL-EBI, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 2Stanford University, T. Voet1,3 Stanford, CA, United States, 3UCSD, San Diego, CA, United States, 4University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United 1KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 2Francis Crick Institute, States London, United Kingdom, 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, United Kingdom, 4Institut Jules Bordet, Brussels, Genome-wide association studies have yielded a compen- Belgium dium of genetic variants that are associated with human diseases. However, the majority of these variants are in Single-cell sequencing techniques allow the study of the intergenic region, and understanding their function remains subclonal architecture of tumors and reveal the co- challenging. One strategy for linking these risk variants to occurrence of (driver) mutations as well as their order of genes are expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) studies. acquisition over molecular pseudo-time. Recently novel To date, most large scale eQTL studies have been per- single-cell multi-omics methods have been developed. formed in LCLs, blood, or post-mortem collected tissues. Importantly, such technologies now enable us to study the However, disease-causing variants often have tissue- diversity of cancer cell states (determined by the interplay specific effects. To understand effects manifesting in plur- of their genome, epigenome and transcriptome) that arises ipotentanddedifferentiatedcells, wemappedeQTLsinthe within a tumor, at its most fundamental level, the cell. One largest panel of human induced pluripotent stem-cells example is the genome and transcriptome sequencing (iPSCs) considered to date. (G&T-seq) method, where DNA and RNA of the same Using the data collected in the i2QTL CONSORTIUM single cell can be sequenced in parallel. we mapped eQTLs in a set of ~1,500 iPSC-lines, derived 480 single cells of a patient with unifocal breast cancer from over 1,000 donors. Gene expression was quantified were sequenced and we were able to computationally using RNA-sequencing, enabling the mapping of eQTLsto separate and identify normal and cancer cells based on the genes, exons, transcripts, splicing and UTR usage. We genomic and transcriptome profiles. The single-cell DNA identified significant cis-eQTLs for over 63% of expressed copy number landscapes disclosed clear genetic alterations genes(FDR<5%),5%ofwhichhavenotbeenobservedin present in subclonal populations of cells. We identified otherstudies.Ourintegrativeanalysisidentifiedhundredsof biologically relevant marker genes from the transcriptomic trans-acting regulatory variants, including ~100 GWASAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 787 variants. One example is the trans-acting SNP near the measured by three profiling approaches (Brain Shake transcriptionfactorELF2whichleadstoexpressionchanges metabolites, general metabolites and untarget metabolites) in genes, downstream of ELF2. Another interesting in500healthyDutchindividuals.Intotal,wemapped>200 example is the observed link between a GWAS variant to independent genome-wide significant loci as being influen- a trans-egene (MED19), both previously implicated in tial on 1229 metabolic features. Pathway analysis on the prostate carcinoma, but not previously linked. This high- mQTL genes show a significant enrichment in metabolic lightstherelevanceofthismapforcancerandpluripotency. processes.Wefound116nonsynonymousmQTLSNPsout Currently, we are including both rare- and structural- of which 17 SNPs show a deleterious effect on metabolic variants to try and make a definitive map of cis- and trans- enzyme function. Interestingly, >10 mQTLs shared com- eQTLs in iPSCs. mon co-regulation with Crohn disease or Celiac disease. M.J. Bonder: None. C. Smail: None. D. Jakubosky: We further systematically associated these metabolites None.C.Brown:None.S.Montgomery:None.E.Smith: features with 9 categories’ host factors consisting of None. K. Frazer: None. O. Stegle: None. baseline immune parameters (including 73 immune cell subpopulation frequencies), molecular profiles (including C03.4 transcriptome, gut microbiome) and immune response Integration of ~10,000 metabolite features with genotype (cytokineproductioncapacityuponstimulation).Ingeneral, data and immune phenotypes reveals genetic determinants metabolitesshowhighercorrelationwithmonocyte-derived and common regulatory modules cytokines than with lymphocyte-derived cytokines. By combining genetic markers and metabolite measurements X. Chu1,M.Jaeger2,O.B. Bakker1,R. Aguirre-Gamboa1, we achieved a significant improvement in predicting M.Oosting2,S. P. Smeekens2,S. Withoff1, R.T. Netea-Maier3, cytokine production when compared to solely using H.J.P. M.Koenen4,I. Joosten4, R.J. Xavier5,6, L.Franke1, genetics (p value <0.05). L. A.B. Joosten2,S. Sanna1,V. Kumar1,C. Wijmenga1,7, In summary, this study reveals novel genetics factors M.G.Netea2,8, Y.Li1 regulating blood metabolite levels and highlights the importance of baseline metabolites in immune response. 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University X. Chu: None. M. Jaeger: None. O.B. Bakker: None. Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, R. Aguirre-Gamboa: None. M. Oosting: None. S.P. 2Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Smeekens: None. S. Withoff: None. R.T. Netea-Maier: Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical Center, None. H.J.P.M. Koenen: None. I. Joosten: None. R.J. Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Xavier:None.L.Franke:None.L.A.B.Joosten:None.S. Division of Endocrinology, Radboud University Medical Sanna:None. V.Kumar:None. C.Wijmenga: None. M. Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Laboratory G. Netea: None. Y. Li: None. Medicine, Laboratory for Medical Immunology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 5Broad C03.5 Institute of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, Plasma protein levels - a link between host microbiome, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics, Harvard T.H. genetics, metabolites and disease-related phenotypes Chan School of Public Health, Boston, MA, United States, 7Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo D.V. Zhernakova1,2, U.Võsa1, T.H. Le1,A.Kurilshikov1, University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, B. Atanasovska1,3,M.Bonder1,S.Sanna1,A. Claringbould1, 8Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, Life and P. Deelen1, LifeLines cohortstudy,BIOS consortium, R. A.de MedicalSciencesInstitute(LIMES),UniversityofBonn,Bonn, Boer4,F.Kuipers3,M.G.Netea5,6,M.Hofker4,C.Wijmenga1,7, Germany L. Franke1,A. Zhernakova1,J.Fu1 Blood metabolites are involved in important biological 1Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University pathways such as immune homeostasis, but can also be Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, used as biomarkers for human disease. As part of the 2Theodosius Dobzhansky Center for Genome Bioinformatics, Human Functional Genomics Project we aim to char- St. Petersburg State University, St. Petersburg, Russian acterize the genetic determinants of baseline metabolites Federation, 3Department of Pediatrics, University of levels to better understand how these changes relate to the Groningen,UniversityMedicalCenterGroningen,Groningen, previously observed inter-individual variation in immune Netherlands, 4Department of Cardiology, University of response. Groningen,UniversityMedicalCentreGroningen,Groningen, We conducted a metabolite quantitative trait locus Netherlands, 5Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud (mQTLs) mapping for 10,431 baseline metabolic features Center for Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical788 J.delPicchia Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 6Department for Genomics Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United and Immunoregulation, Life and Medical Sciences Institute States (LIMES), University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 7K.G. Jebsen CoeliacDiseaseResearchCentre,DepartmentofImmunology, Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) have impli- University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway cated >60 loci in the susceptibility to Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE). However, it is known that GWAS Bloodcirculatingproteinsareoftenmeasuredasbiomarkers onlyreportsgenomicsignalsandnotnecessarilytheprecise orriskfactorsforvariousdiseases,includingcardiovascular localization of culprit genes. Chromatin conformation cap- disease (CVD). However, causal relationships between ture technologies that detect contacts between distant proteins and clinical phenotypes are not fully understood. regions of the genome offer an opportunity to physically Here, we used genetics as an instrumental variable and map disease variants to effector genes. To move beyond assessed causality between circulating proteins, gut micro- analyzingonelocusatatime,andtoimproveuponthelow biome, metabolic traits and complex diseases in 1,294 resolution of available Hi-C datasets, we developed a individuals from the LifeLines-DEEP cohort, which has massivelyparallel,high-resolutionCapture-Cbasedmethod genetics, proteomics, gut microbiome data and over 2,000 to characterize the genome-wide interactions of all human phenotypes available. promoters in any cell type. We designed a custom Agilent Inthisstudy,wefocusedon92CVD-relatedproteinsand SureSelect RNA library targeting DpnII restriction frag- first tested their association with genetic variation and ments overlapping 36,691 promoters of protein-coding, microbiome. Then we performed a two-directional Mende- noncoding, antisense, snRNA, miRNA, snoRNA and lian randomization analysis to assess causal relationships lincRNA genes. We applied our method of SPATIaL-seq between proteins and microbiome, metabolic traits and (genome-Scale, Promoter-focused Analysis of chromaTIn clinical phenotypes. To do so, we constructed genetic risk Looping) to primary human T follicular helper (TFH) cells scores (GRS) for 73 proteins, 42 microbial factors, over from healthy tonsil, a cell type relevanttoSLE.Thesesub- 1000 complex traits and diseases based on our dataset and 1kbdatasetswereintersectedwithATAC-seqmapsofTFH published GWAS studies. We found 327 protein-GRS open chromatin and SLE proxy SNPs from the 63 loci, associationssignificantatFDR<0.05.Themostsignificant resulting in an assessment of accessible variants at 48 of proteins include GRN, SELE, PECAM-1 and ICAM-2, these loci. Some ‘nearest’ genes to the sentinel SNP were potentially relevant to CVD. Around one third of the supported e.g. STAT4 and IKZF3, while at other loci more associated GRS involve metabolic traits. We also see distant genes were implicated e.g. LCLAT1 at the ‘LBH’ associationswithGRSforlipidsandimmunecelltraits.We locus, and the master TFH transcription factor BCL6 at the detected numerous associations between GRS of proteins ‘LPP-TPRG1’ locus. In conclusion, high-resolution, three- with microbiome and clinical traits. dimensional promoter interactions with accessible, disease- Our study suggests bi-directional causal relationships associated SNPs in disease-relevant tissue can connect key between circulating proteins, gut microbiome and complex variants to relevant effector genes with high accuracy. traitsanddiseases.Weprioritizeproteinsaspotentialtargets S.F.A. Grant: None. M.E. Johnson: None. E. Man- for therapeutic treatment if they are causal risk factors, and duchi: None. C. Le Coz: None. M.E. Leonard: None. S. proteins as biomarkers to monitor disease progression if Lu: None. K.M. Hodge: None. N. Romberg: None. A. their alteration is a consequence of a specific disease. Chesi: None. A.D. Wells: None. D.V. Zhernakova: None. U. Võsa: None. T.H. Le: None. A. Kurilshikov: None. B. Atanasovska: None. M. Bonder: None. S. Sanna: None. A. Claringbould: C04 Epigenetics and Gene Regulation None. P. Deelen: None. R.A. de Boer: None. F. Kuipers: None. M.G. Netea: None. M. Hofker: None. C04.1 C. Wijmenga: None. L. Franke: None. A. Zhernakova: Acomprehensivestudycomparingon-andoff-targetlevels None. J. Fu: None. of the most common forms of CRISPR/Cas9 guide RNAs C03.6 A. Jacobi1,G.Rettig1,M.Schubert1,J.Shapiro2,O.Iancu2, A. A high-resolution, genome-scale promoter 'interactome' in Tovin2,E.Cedrone3,M.Dobrovolskaia3,A.Hendel2,M.Behlke1 human T follicular helper cells implicates novel effector genes at SLE GWAS loci 1Integrated DNA Technologies, Coralville, IA, United States, 2TheMinaandEverardGoodmanFacultyofLifeSciencesand S.F.A.Grant,M.E.Johnson,E.Manduchi,C.LeCoz,M.E. Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology Institute, Bar-Ilan Leonard,S.Lu,K.M.Hodge,N.Romberg,A.Chesi,A.D.Wells University, Ramat-Gan, Israel, 3Frederick NationalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 789 Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD, United 1Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent University, Ghent States University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium, 2Department of Life Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, The CRISPR/Cas9 system is a powerful tool for manip- Israel ulating mammalian genomes. Genome editing requires deliveryofboththeCas9nucleaseandthetargetingguide Introduction: Myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) is a RNA (gRNA). The gRNA can be generated in multiple core transcription factor in neurodevelopment. MEF2C ways. Here we compare the efficiency of editing, the on- haploinsufficiency has been associated with a Rett-like and off-target repair profiles, and the innate immune sti- syndrome, characterized by severe intellectual disability, mulation of gRNAs delivered as a plasmid-expressed seizures and stereotypic movements. So far, 11 deletions, single guide RNA (sgRNA), an in-vitro transcribed (IVT) eight translocations and one inversion involving 5q14.3 in sgRNA, a chemically-synthesized sgRNA and a Rett-like patients have been described, that do not directly chemically-synthesized bipartite complex (crRNA + affect the MEF2C coding sequence, suggesting that dis- tracrRNA) in HEK293 cells and human primary CD34+ ruption of MEF2C regulatory elements could result in this hematopoieticstemandprogenitorcells.Weshowthatthe Rett-like syndrome. The MEF2C regulatory network, editing repair profiles generated from delivery of the however, is yet to be deciphered. different gRNA constructs are identical. However, our Material & Methods: We performed Circularized results show that the chemically-modified crRNA + Chromosome Conformation Capture (4C) sequencing and tracrRNA complex or sgRNA enable the highest genome characterized the activity of putative, neuronal MEF2C editing with lowest toxicity. Furthermore, studies per- enhancers using in vitro and in vivo enhancer assays. formedusinghumanPBMCsrevealedhighlevelsofIFNα Results:Extensive4Csequencinginaneuronalcellline following delivery of IVT sgRNAs, with no detectable revealed an intricate interaction network, in which the immune activation using chemically-modified gRNAs. A MEF2C promoter physically contacts distal putative comprehensiveanalysisoftheoff-targeteventsassociated enhancers located in the region affected in Rett-like with the delivery of the common gRNA forms is pre- patients. We confirmed enhancer potential for 10 out of sented. In addition, the specificity of the gRNA forms is 15 selected candidate elements using luciferase assays. compared when delivered into cells stably expressing Moreover, eight candidate enhancers exhibited in vivo Cas9 or when delivered as a ribonucleoprotein complex neuronal activity in zebrafish. Six of these were active in with wild-type or high-fidelity (HiFi) Cas9 nuclease. The the forebrain, of which three also displayed additional off-target profiles for each class of gRNA were first activity in specific neurons above the eye and two in the compared using the unbiased GUIDE-seq approach and notochord. Further, one enhancer displayed mid- and quantified using rhAmpSeq™, a multiplexed, amplifica- hindbrain activity and one was specifically active in the tion-based, target enrichment next-generation sequencing notochord. approach. Data suggest delivery of a chemically-modified Conclusions: Insummary, we have beguntounravel the gRNA precomplexed to the Alt-R HiFi Cas9 nuclease complex regulatory network governing neuronal MEF2C results in the lowest off-target activity. transcription, involving multiple distal enhancers. Disrupt- A. Jacobi: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- ing this regulatory structure is likely detrimental to normal cant;IntegratedDNATechnologies.G.Rettig:A.Employ- neurodevelopmentandcangiverisetoneurodevelopmental ment (full or part-time); Significant; Integrated DNA disorders such as Rett-like syndrome. Technologies. M. Schubert: A. Employment (full or part- E. D'haene: None. R. Bar-Yackov: None. I. Bariah: time); Significant; Integrated DNA Technologies. None. L. Vantomme: None. S. Van Loo: None. F. Avila J. Shapiro: None. O. Iancu: None. A. Tovin: None. Cobos: None. R. Eshel: None. R. Alatawna: None. E. Cedrone: None. M. Dobrovolskaia: None. A. Hendel: B.Menten:None.R.Birnbaum:None.S.Vergult:None. None. M. Behlke: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Integrated DNA Technologies. C04.3 Personalized co-expression networks reveal genetic risk C04.2 factors that change the regulatory wiring of cells The MEF2C regulatory network is disrupted in patients with Rett-like characteristics M.G.P. vander Wijst, D.H.deVries,H.Brugge, P.Deelen, M.A. Swertz, Lifelines CohortStudy, BIOS Consortium, E.D'haene1,R.Bar-Yackov2,I.Bariah2,L.Vantomme1,S.Van L. Franke Loo1,F. Avila Cobos1,R. Eshel2,R.Alatawna2,B. Menten1, R. Birnbaum2,S. Vergult1 UMCG, Groningen, Netherlands790 J.delPicchia Expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) analyses have MedicineandDermatology,UniversityMedicalCenterUtrecht taught us that genetic risk factors for disease often affect (UMCU), Utrecht, Netherlands, 4Regenerative Medicine geneexpressioninacelltype-specificway.However,much Center Utrecht, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, less is known about their effect on the regulatory wiring of Netherlands, 5Netherlands Heart Institute, Utrecht, individual cells. In order to study how genetic variants Netherlands, 6Wilhelmina Children’s Hospital, Department of can affect regulatory networks, we generated personalized Pediatric Gastroenterology, Division Child Health, Utrecht, co-expression networks for 45 different individuals by Netherlands,7Epigenomicsfacility, UniversityMedicalCenter generating single-cell RNA-seq (scRNA-seq) data for Utrecht (UMCU), Utrecht, Netherlands, 8The Zena and approximately 29.000 peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Michael A. Wiener Cardiovascular Institute, Icahn School of We first validated our approach by replicating 261 cis- Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, eQTLs that were previously identified in bulk RNA-seq 9Stanford Cardiovascular Institute and Department of data,andsubsequentlyascertained whethergeneticvariants Medicine, Stanford University, Standford, CA, United States, can also alter the co-expression between genes (so-called 10Institute of Cardiovascular Science, Faculty of Population ‘co-expression QTLs’). We identified several of these co- Health Sciences, University College London, London, United expression QTLs at a false discovery rate of 0.05 and Kingdom replicated these in large bulk RNA-seq datasets. For instance, we found 93 significant co-expression QTLs for Introduction:TheactivityofDNAregulatoryregions,such the type I diabetes (T1D) variant rs11171739. This SNP as promoters and enhancers, is a crucial factor in tran- affects the co-expression between RPS26 and 93 other scriptional regulation. They contain hotspots for transcrip- genes, many of which are known to be involved in mRNA tion factor binding sites and are considered candidate translation, which suggests that this T1D variant might regions harboring disease-related non-coding mutations. dysregulate this particular pathway. However,thereislackofinformationabouthowchromatin In conclusion, this study shows the feasibility of using transcriptional regulation differs between health and (car- scRNA-seqdataforeQTLandco-expressionQTLanalysis. diac) disease. Here we focus on cardiac material of a With the expected growth in scRNA-seq eQTL datasets in homogeneous Dutch founder cohort of genetic cardiomyo- the near future, we expect many more genetic variants will pathy due to same PLN R14del mutation as compared to be identified that affect the regulatory wiring within cells, controls. and which could be used to infer personalized regulatory Materials and Methods: We performed H3K27ac networks using solely genotype data. ChIPseq, RNA sequencing, and 4C on several tissues/cell Funding: M.S.: ZonMW-VIDI 917.164.455, L.F.: lines related to PLN R14del cardiomyopathy and controls. ZonMW-VIDI 917.14.374, ERC Starting Grant 637640, Results: Based on H3K27ac ChIPseq data, 2,107 BIOS Consortium: NWO 184.021.007 differentially acetylated peaks and 1,302 topologically M.G.P. van der Wijst: None. D.H. de Vries: None. associating domains (TADs) have been detected. Using a H. Brugge: None. P. Deelen: None. M.A. Swertz: None. windowof+/-5kbfromTSS,wehaveannotated863genes L. Franke: None. in their proximity. Enrichment of binding motifs related to 200 transcription factors (TFs) inside these regions have C04.4 beenfound.Next,weshowacorrelationbetweenH3K27ac Integrated analysis of transcriptional regulation in PLN promoter occupancy and the level of RNA expression. R14del cardiomyopathy Furthermore,wedetectedaconditionspecificfingerprintby comparing the differentially active regions in PLN R14del J.Pei1,2,3,4,M.Harakalova1,2,5,E.Nagyova1,2,J.M.I.H.Gho1, to acetylation profiles of additional patients with ischemic S. Sepehrkhouy2,J.van Dinter1,A.van Mil1,4,M.P. cardiomyopathy and unrelated non-ischemic cardiomyopa- Buijsrogge1,N.deJonge1,M.M. Huibers2,E.E.S. thy. iPSC-derived cardiomyocyte cell lines of PLN R14del Nieuwenhuis6,4,7, H.M.denRuijter1,G.Pasterkamp1,P.A. patient and control were used for 4C-based annotation of Doevendans1,5,R.Hajjar8,M.Mercola9,J.P.G.Sluijter1,4,5,R. most significant differentially acetylated regions. A. deWeger2, C.Cheng3,4,A. Vink2, M.Mokry6,4,7, F.W. Conclusions: Integrative chromatin analysis based on Asselbergs1,5,10 H3K27ac ChIP-seq, RNAseq and 4C identifies the major effector processes involved in PLN R14del end-stage 1Department of Cardiology, Division Heart and Lungs, cardiomyopathy, including many novel candidates. University Medical Center Utrecht (UMCU), Utrecht, J.Pei:None.M.Harakalova:None.E.Nagyova:None. Netherlands, 2Department of Pathology, University Medical J.M.I.H. Gho: None. S. Sepehrkhouy: None. J. van Center Utrecht (UMCU), Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department Dinter:None.A.vanMil:None.M.P.Buijsrogge:None. of Nephrology and Hypertension, Division of Internal N. de Jonge: None. M.M. Huibers: None. E.E.S.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 791 Nieuwenhuis: None. H.M. den Ruijter: None. C04.6 G. Pasterkamp: None. P.A. Doevendans: None. R. Treating Retinitis Pigmentosa with transcriptional-based Hajjar: None. M. Mercola: None. J.P.G. Sluijter: None. therapeutics R.A. de Weger: None. C. Cheng: None. A. Vink: None. M. Mokry: None. F.W. Asselbergs: None. S. Botta,E. Marrocco,E. M.Surace C04.5 TIGEM, Pozzuoli (NA), Ita, Italy AlterationofHDAC9exonsthatalsofunctionasenhancers leads to TWIST1 haploinsufficiency that result in limb and CRISPR/Cas9, transcription activator like effectors (TAL) craniofacial phenotypes and zinc-finger-proteins (ZF), are emerging as remarkably potent and popular DNA targeting platforms for genome N.Hirsch1, F.shemuluvich1,T. Kaplan2,D.G.Lupiáñez3, editing and transcriptional regulation (gene activation and R. Y.B. Birnbaum1 repression) in research applications. Here we investigated the design and development of therapeutics based on tran- 1BenGurionUniversityoftheNegev,BeerSheva,Israel,2The scriptional modulation. In particular, as experimental mod- Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel, 3Max els to establish the proof of concept of transcriptional Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany repression as therapeutic, we used a RHODOPSIN (RHO) genegain-of-functionmutanttransgenicmouseandthepre- The transcription factor TWIST1 plays a vital role in clinical pig retina. RHO is the gene most commonly mesoderm development, particularly in limb and craniofa- involved in the blinding disease autosomal dominant reti- cial formation. TWIST1 haploinsufficiency during devel- nitis pigmentosa (adRP). In vivo retinal gene transfer by opment could lead to craniosynostosis and limb Adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors of transcriptional malformationsuchasSaethre-Chotzensyndrome.However, repressors based on synthetic ZF DNA-binding proteins the transcriptional regulatory mechanism that controls with (ZF6-R) or without (ZF6-DB) canonical repressor TWIST1 expression during development is yet to be eluci- domain, enable the complete RHO transcriptional silencing date. Here, we characterized active enhancers in the and in turn therapy in the P347S mouse model of RHO TWIST1-HDAC9 locus that control transcription in the adRP. In addition, we showed that the AAV mediated developing limb and branchial arches. Using p300 and ectopic expression of the endogenous transcription factor H3K27ac ChIP-seq data, we identified 12 enhancer candi- (TF)KLF15similarlygeneraterobustRHOsilencing.Inthe dates encompass protein coding exons of Histone deace- pig retina, comparison of specificity by RNA-sequencing, tyase 9 (HDAC9). Using zebrafish and mouse enhancer showed that ZF6-R and ZF6-DB perturbed 220 and 19 assays, we showed that 8 candidates have limb/fin and differentially expressed genes (DEGs), respectively. Sur- branchial arch enhancer activity that recapitulate Twist1 prisingly, the endogenous ectopic expression of the TF expression. Each enhancer showed discrete activity pattern KLF15,showedsimilarhighselectivitywith156DEGsand that together compile a spatiotemporal transcriptional reg- therefore a safe profile. Efficacy assessed by retinal func- ulation of Twist1 in the developing limb/fin and branchial tional analysis in the adRP mouse model, show remarkable arches. Using 4C-seq, we showed that Twist1 promoter prevention of retinal degeneration. Collectively, these data interactswithHdac9exonsthatfunctionasenhancersinthe support transcriptional modulation as a novel paradigm to limbbudandbranchialarchofmouseembryosatday11.5. generatetranscriptional-basedtherapeuticsforthetreatment Alteration of these enhancers lead to Twist1 haploinsuffi- of human inherited disorders by gene therapy supporting ciency and polydactyly in mouse models. Furthermore, their use in translational medicine. TWIST1 enhancers are regulated by limb-expressed tran- S. Botta: None. E. Marrocco: None. E.M. scription factors, including LMX1B and TFAP2 that bind Surace: None. and regulate their activity. Deletion of the LMX1B and TFAP2 binding sites altered TWIST1 enhancer activity. Thus,ourstudyelucidatedessentialcomponentsofTWIST1 C05 Neurological and Neuromuscular Disorders transcriptional machinery, suggesting that alteration of coding exons of HDAC9 could lead to TWIST1 hap- C05.1 loinsufficiency and a similar phenotypic outcome as SMPD4 loss-of-function mutations cause cerebral TWIST1 coding mutations. malformations and arthrogryposis through endoplasmic N. Hirsch: None. F. shemuluvich: None. T. Kaplan: reticulum stress and autophagy induced by dysregulation None. D.G. Lupiáñez: None. R.Y.B. Birnbaum: None. of sphingolipid metabolism792 J.delPicchia P. Magini1,L. Vandervore2,R. Schot2,M.Columbaro3,M. van Results: In all patients, we identified biallelic loss-of- der Ent4,L. Iommarini5,M.Lequin6,A. M.Porcelli5, function mutations in SMPD4, encoding a putative neutral P. Govaert7,F. Palombo8,M.Dremmen9, M.C. deWit10, sphingomyelinase without a clearly defined role, localized M.Severino11,M.Hoogeveen-Westerveld2,M. T.Divizia12, in the endoplasmic reticulum. Analyses on patients’ P.vandenBerg13,F.Verheijen2,P.vanderSpek14,A.Jansen15, fibroblasts revealed a drastic reduction of normal SMPD4 G.Mirzaa16, W.B.Dobyns17, M.Seri1, T.Pippucci1, transcript levels, a dilated rough ER with aggregates of M.Fornerod4,G.M.S.Mancini2 misfolded proteins and excess of lysosomes and late autophagic vacuoles. In addition, cell division alterations 1Medical Genetics Unit, S.Orsola-Malpighi University were observed. Connectivity mapping of SMPD4 deficient Hospital, Bologna, Italy, 2Department of Clinical Genetics, gene expression signatures revealed highest similarity to Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, SPHK2 knock down. SPHK2 is one of the enzymes 3Laboratory of musculoskeletal cell biology, Istituto controlling the balance between ceramide and sphingo- Ortopedico Rizzoli, Bologna, Italy, 4Department of Cell sine-1-phosphate, which is important for regulation of cell Biology, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, stress response and cell growth. SMPD4 mutant patient 5Department of Pharmacy and Biotechnology-FABIT, fibroblasts were more sensitive to the SPHK2 inhibitor University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, 6Department of ABC294640 compared to control cells. Radiology, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Conclusions: Our data provide a mechanistic link Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 7Department between defects in sphingolipid homeostasis and a of Rehabilitation Sciences and Physiotherapy, Ghent congenitalmicrocephalythroughdysregulationofERstress University,Ghent,Belgium,8UnitofNeurology,Department and autophagy. of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences (DIBINEM), Funding: Stichting PPQA to GMM, ZonMW-TOP UniversityofBologna,Bologna,Italy,9DivisionofPediatric #91217045 to MF&GMM). Radiology, Department of Radiology, Erasmus MC - P. Magini: None. L. Vandervore: None. R. Schot: University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, None. M. Columbaro: None. M. van der Ent: None. 10Department of Paediatric Neurology, Erasmus Medical L. Iommarini: None. M. Lequin: None. A.M. Porcelli: Centre-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, Netherlands, None. P. Govaert: None. F. Palombo: None. M. Drem- 11Neuroradiology Unit, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genova, men: None. M.C. de Wit: None. M. Severino: None. Italy, 12UOC Genetica Medica, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, M. Hoogeveen-Westerveld: None. M.T. Divizia: None. Genova,Italy,13DepartmentofObstetricsandGynaecology, P. van den Berg: None. F. Verheijen: None. P. van der University of Groningen, University Medical Center Spek: None. A. Jansen: None. G. Mirzaa: None. Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 14Department of W.B. Dobyns: None. M. Seri: None. T. Pippucci: None. Bioinformatics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, M. Fornerod: None. G.M.S. Mancini: None. Netherlands, 15Department of Pediatrics, Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussel, Brussel, Belgium, 16Division of Genetic C05.2 Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Resolving the diagnostic odyssey for young patients with Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 17Division of rare genetic muscle disease through the application of Genetic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of extended exome sequencing technologies Washington, Seattle, WA, United States K. Johnson1,A. Töpf1,M.Bertoli1,L. Phillips1,A. Blain1, Introduction: Deregulation of sphingolipid homeostasis is M.Ensini1,M. Lek2,L.Xu2,D.G.MacArthur2,V. Straub1 an important mechanism in the pathogenesis of several metabolic, neuronal and proliferative diseases. 1NewcastleUniversity,NewcastleuponTyne,UnitedKingdom, Materials and Methods: Through whole exome and 2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, Massachusetts RNA sequencing, we studied three unrelated families, General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States presenting at birth with congenital arthrogryposis, micro- cephaly with consistent simplified gyral pattern and mild Introduction: Muscular dystrophies are rare genetic dis- cerebellar hypoplasia. The only child who survived up to orders characterised by progressive skeletal muscle weak- six years developed also anemia and diabetes. We used ness and atrophy. The diseases can be exceptionally electronic microscopy (EM) and flow citometry to evaluate debilitatingandcandirectlyprecipitateprematuremortality. ultrastructural and cell cycle anomalies in patients’ Many patients remain undiagnosed even after several years fibroblast cultures. In addition, we searched for similar of state-of-the-art clinical work-ups. With a view to resol- cellular alterations within the Connectivity library Map vingthisdiagnosticodyssey,theMYO-SEQprojectapplied from Broad Institute. targeted whole exome sequencing (WES) to over 1,000Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 793 European patients with suspected genetic muscle disease. patients with unusually large 4A alleles of 21-70 D4Z4 Here,wedetailtheresultsforthosepatientswithareported units. Recently, in cis D4Z4 repeat duplications were age at disease onset of ≤15 years (n = 470). described in ~2% of FSHD cases irrespective of SMCHD1 Materials and methods: WES was performed using mutation status, which prompted us to investigate FSHD2 Illumina exome capture (38 Mb target) and a Picard-based patients with unusually long D4Z4 repeats for this pipeline. The variant call set was uploaded onto seqr and duplication. 429 neuromuscular disease genes examined for point Materials and Methods: Genetic analysis of D4Z4 by mutations, small indels and copy number variations Southernblottingandmolecularcombingof251non-FSHD (CNVs). families, 351 FSHD1 families, 62 FSHD2 and 52 FSHD- Results:Pathogenicvariantswereidentifiedin59%(n= like families. 278) of patients across 70 genes. The average age at the Results: In 6/10 FSHD2 families with a 4A allele of 21- time of WES diagnosis was 29 years (median 26 years, 70 D4Z4 units, we identified a small D4Z4 repeat range 4-77 years). LGMD2A (CAPN3) and sarcoglycano- duplicationassociated withDUX4expression. Theduplica- pathies (SGCA, SGCB SGCD and SGCG) were the most tionallelefrequencywassignificantlyhigherthanintypical commonly diagnosed diseases, together accounting for a FSHD2 families (2.0%), FSHD1 (2,3%) or non-FSHD third of the solved cohort. Through an extended and families (2.6%). Interestingly, we identified duplication modifiedanalysisoftheWESdata, CNVs weredetectedin alleles in 7/52 (13.5%) FSHD-like families. 8%ofthesolvedpatientsandrangedinsizefrom0.11kbto Conclusions: Cis duplications explain DUX4 expression 1,047 kb. and disease presentation in FSHD2 families with unusual Conclusions: We have advanced the utility of whole long D4Z4 repeats on 4A chromosomes. Funded by exome sequencing technologies to pioneer an accessible NationalInstitutesofHealthandPrinsesBeatrixSpierfonds. pathwaythatefficaciouslyaddressesthediagnosticodyssey R.J.L.F. Lemmers: None. P.J. van der Vliet: None. J. faced by rare disease patients. P.Vreijling:None.J.Balog:None.D.Henderson:None. K. Johnson: None. A. Töpf: None. M. Bertoli: None. B. van Engelen: None. F. Baas: None. S. Sacconi: None. L. Phillips: None. A. Blain: None. M. Ensini: None. R. Tawil: None. S.M. van der Maarel: None. M. Lek: None. L. Xu: None. D.G. MacArthur: None. V. Straub: None. C05.4 Novel biallelic mutations in VPS13D cause spastic ataxia C05.3 and lead to mitochondrial dysfunction Cis D4Z4 repeat duplications associated with facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy type 2 M.Dulovic,J.Trinh,A.Münchau,C.Klein,N.Brüggemann,K. Lohmann R. J.L. F.Lemmers1,P. J. vander Vliet1,J. P.Vreijling1, J.Balog1,D.Henderson2, B.vanEngelen3,F. Baas1, Institute of Neurogenetics, Luebeck, Germany S. Sacconi4,R. Tawil2,S.M. vander Maarel1 Introduction: Spastic ataxia is a clinically and genetically 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, highlyheterogeneousneurologicaldisease.Despiteawealth 2University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, of known genes causing this syndrome, many cases remain UnitedStates,3RadboudUniversityNijmegenMedicalCentre, etiologically unexplained, suggesting that further genetic Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Nice University Hospital, Nice, heterogeneity remains to be discovered. France Results:ExomesequencinginaGermanfamilywithtwo affected sisters with spastic ataxia with onset in the third Introduction: Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, decade of life revealed compound-heterozygous variants in known in genetic forms FSHD1 and FSHD2, is associated VPS13D [c.5409C>A [Tyr1803Ter] and c.12629C>T with D4Z4 repeat chromatin relaxation and somatic dere- [Ala4210Val]) in both patients and heterozygous variants pression of DUX4 located in D4Z4. A complete copy of in their unaffected parents. Sanger sequencing of cDNA DUX4ispresenton4Achromosomes,butnotontheD4Z4- revealed lower expression of the nonsense mutated allele likerepeatsofchromosomes4Bor10.Normally,theD4Z4 compared to the missense mutated allele, resulting in a repeat varies between 8-100 units, while in FSHD1 it is ~50% reduction in thetotal mRNA level of VPS13D inthe only 1-10 units. In the rare FSHD2, a combination of a 4A patients compared to non-mutation carriers. This reduction allele with a D4Z4 repeat size of 8-20 units and hetero- was caused by nonsense-mediated mRNA decay as zygousvariantsinthechromatinmodifierSMCHD1causes demonstrated by cycloheximide treatment in cultured cells. DUX4 derepression and disease. We identified FSHD2 VPS13D encodes a large protein, paralogs of which cause794 J.delPicchia other neurological disorders including choreo- We observed a 14 days old newborn with primary acanthocytosis (VPS13A), Cohen syndrome (VPS13B), microcephaly and diffuse polymicrogyria at MRI, and and Parkinsons’s disease (VPS13C).Since VPS13D disrup- confirmed at autopsy, who died of untreatable epilepsy. tioninDrosophilaleadstomitochondrialabnormalities,we WES data revealed biallelic compound heterozygous investigated mitochondrial morphology and function in mutations in TMX2. Six similarly affected individuals from patient-derived fibroblasts. While the typical mitochondrial four additional unrelated families were found to have networkofelongatedorganellesandbrancheswasobserved biallelic TMX2 mutations. Thioredoxin(TRX)-Related in two controls, patients’ fibroblasts showed rounded Transmembrane protein 2 (TMX2) is a putative oxidor- mitochondriaanddisruptedmitochondrialinterconnectivity, eductaseenrichedatthemitochondria-associatedmembrane which was confirmed by decreased mitochondrial GRP-75 of the ER and known to protect against ER stress and to proteinlevels.Thesestructuralmitochondrialchanges were regulate neuronal apoptosis. accompanied by a reduced ATP production rate. UnderERstressconditions,exchangeofcalciumbetween Conclusions: Our study demonstrated that biallelic ERandmitochondriaisimpaired,whichleadstomitochon- mutations in VPS13D cause a movement disorder along drialaccumulation ofcalciumandsecondarymitochondrial the ataxia-spasticity spectrum. Analyses of patient-derived OXPHOS failure. Mitochondrial energy metabolism in fibroblasts suggest that mutations in this new ataxia/ fibroblasts from two unrelated patients showed deficient spasticity gene impact on mitochondrial structure and OXOPHOS reserve capacity (which measures mitochon- function. drial tolerance to stress) and an increase of glycolytic M.Dulovic:None.J.Trinh:None.A.Münchau:None. activity in basal conditions, suggesting a mechanism to C. Klein: None. N. Brüggemann: None. K. compensate bioenergetics defect. We hypothesize that Lohmann: None. mutations in TMX2 cause defects in bioenergetics metabo- lism and ER stress-induced apoptosis, leading to primary C05.5 microcephaly, polymicrogyria and severe neurodegenera- Mutations in the thioredoxin related gene TMX2 cause tion. While mutations of mitochondrial thioredoxin 2 primary microcephaly, polymicrogyria and severe (TXN2, TRX2, OMIM #616811) and of cytosolic thior- neurodegeneration with impaired mitochondrial energy edoxin reductase 1 (TXNRD1, OMIM #60112) have been metabolism relatedtoearlyonsetneurodegenerationandepilepsy,thisis to our knowledge the first observation linking one of the R. Schot1,C. Milanese2,L. Vandervore1,A. Fry3,N.Bahi- ER-TMX family members to abnormal neurodevelopment Buisson4,B. Keren5, C.Nava5, A.Afenjar6, F.Renaldo6, and secondary OXPHOS deficiency. S. Coury7,W.Tan7, M.Fornerod8,P. Mastroberardino2, R. Schot: None. C. Milanese: None. L. Vandervore: G.M.S. Mancini1 None. A. Fry: None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None. B. Keren: None. C. Nava: None. A. Afenjar: None. F. Renaldo: 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, None. S. Coury: None. W. Tan: None. M. Fornerod: Netherlands, 2Dept of Molecular Genetics, ErasmusMC, None.P.Mastroberardino:None.G.M.S.Mancini:None. Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park, Cardiff, United C05.6 Kingdom, 4Dept of Pediatric Neurology, Necker Hospital, Genome wide detection of somatic mutations in human Paris, France, 5Département de Génétique (Pr Leguern) muscle stem cells Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 6GRC ConCer-LD, Sorbonne Universités, Département de génétique et I.Franco1, A.Johansson2,K. Olsson3,P. Vrtačnik1,P. embryologie médicale, CRMR des déficits intellectuels de Lundin1,4,H.T. Helgadottir1,M.Larsson5,G.Revêchon1, C. causes rares, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, France, 7Division of Bosia6,7,A.Pagnani6,7,P. Provero8,9,T. Gustafsson3, H. Genetics, Boston Children’s hospital, Boston, MA, United Fischer3,M. Eriksson1 States, 8Dept of Cell Biology, ErasmusMC, Rotterdam, Netherlands 1Dept of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden,2Sciencefor LifeLaboratory,DeptofCell Theendoplasmicreticulum(ER)playsacrucialroleinredox andMolecularBiology,UppsalaUniversity,Uppsala,Sweden, and apoptosis regulation, through the ER stress response. 3Div of Clinical Physiology, Dept of Laboratory Medicine, Mutations in genes regulating ER-stress can cause micro- Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden, 4Science for Life cephaly and abnormal cortical development, e.g. EIF2AK3 Laboratory, Dept of Biochemistry and Biophysics (DBB), (OMIM#226980), and IER3IP1 (OMIM#614231) Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden, 5Science for Life mutations. Laboratory, Department of Physics, Chemistry and Biology,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 795 LinköpingUniversity,Linköping,Sweden,6ItalianInstitutefor J.Rivière2,B. Roquelaure8,J.Sarles11,S. Sigaudy8,E. Genomic Medicine (IIGM), Turin, Italy, 7Department of Savajols20,X.Stephenne21,C.Thauvin-Robinet2,3,J.Thevenon2, AppliedScienceandTechnology,PolitecnicodiTorino,Turin, N.Levy4,8,C. Badens4,8, J.Hugot9, N.Katsanis5,6,A. Fabre4,8 Italy, 8Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, Molecular Biotechnology Center, Turin, Italy, 1Departement de Genetique, Dijon, France, 2GAD Unit, 9Center for Translational Genomics and Bioinformatics, San UMR1231 Inserm, University of Burgundy-Franche Comté, Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy Dijon, France, 3Centre of Reference for Rare Diseases: DevelopmentdisordersandmalformationsyndromesandFHU Somatic mutations are beginning to be explored as a TRANSLAD, Dijon University Hospital, Dijon, France, pathological cause of a number of conditions, including 4GMGF, Aix Marseille Univ, Marseille, France, 5Center for aging.Hereweinvestigatedthewholegenomesequenceof Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, NC, single muscle stem cells from healthy individuals (21-79 United States, 6Department of Cell Biology, Duke University years of age) to identify age-associated mutation processes Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States, 7Service de andtheirfunctionalconsequences.Stemcellwholegenome Pédiatrie, Children’s Hospital, Dijon University Hospital, sequences were obtained from cultured single cell clones Dijon, France, 8AP-HM, La Timone Children’s Hospital, (n=29), circumventing disadvantages associated with sin- Marseille, France, 9Service des maladies digestives et gle cell sequencing. This strategy, together with functional respiratoiresdel’enfant,HôpitalRobertDebré,APHP,Paris, experimentsonculturedclones,allowedustodiscoverage- France, 10Univ Lyon, Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1, specific differences and to highlight their functional rele- CNRS, Laboratoire de Biométrie et Biologie Évolutive (UMR vance in driving age-related muscle decline. We show that CNRS / Lyon 1 5558), F-69622, Villeurbanne, France, aging affects the number of mutations and their genome 11Servicedepédiatriemultidisciplinaire,HôpitaldelaTimone distribution.Inparticular,whiletranscribedgenesofyoung Enfants, APHM,, Marseille, France, 12Service des maladies cells were protected from mutations, old cells had lost this digestives et respiratoires de l’enfant, Hôpital Robert Debré, protection, possibly as a result of impaired transcription- APHP, paris, France, 13Department of Pediatric coupled repair. In addition, old stem cells also showed an Gastroenterology,HepatologyandNutrition,Referencecenter increased non-synonymous/synonymous mutation ratio forRareDigestiveDiseases;HôpitalNecker;UniversityParis- compared to young cells, supporting impaired negative Cité-SorbonneParis-DescartesMedicalSchool,Paris,France, selection against cells with mutations in functional regions 14Pediatrichepatologyandpediatriclivertransplantationunit at older ages. Using ddPCR, to detect low frequency and National Reference Centre for rare pediatric liver mutations in tissue, we validated somatic mutations in the diseases, Hepatinov, Bicêtre Universitary Hospital, University musclebulktissue.Insummary,ourresultssupportsomatic of Paris-Sud, APHP, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, 15Inserm, mutagenesisinmusclestemcellsasacontributortotheage- UMR-S1174, Hepatinov, University of Paris-Sud 11, Orsay, related decline of muscle function. France, 16Pathology Unit, Bicêtre Universitary Hospital, I.Franco:None.A.Johansson:None.K.Olsson:None. University of Paris-Sud, APHP, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France, P. Vrtačnik: None. P. Lundin: None. H.T. Helgadottir: 17Anatomopathology Department, Cliniques Universitaires None. M. Larsson: None. G. Revêchon: None. C. Bosia: Saint-Luc,Brussels,Belgium,18Internalmedicineandclinical, None. A. Pagnani: None. P. Provero: None. T. Gustafs- Hôpital Conception, APHM, Marseille, France, 19Service de son: None. H. Fischer: None. M. Eriksson: None. Pédiatrie-Néonatologie, Centre Hospitalier Intercommunal Aix-Pertuis, Aix en Provence, France, 20Service de Pédiatrie, Children’s Hospital, Dijon University Hospital, Marseille, C06 Internal Organs France, 21Université catholique de Louvain, Cliniques universitaires St Luc, Département de pédiatrie, Service de C06.1 gastroentérologie et hépatologie pédiatrique, Brussels, Description Osteo-Oto-Hepato-Enteric (O2HE) syndrome, Belgium a new recessive autosomal syndrome secondary to loss of function mutations in the UNC45A gene Introduction: Combination of congenital diarrhea and hereditary cholestasis is rare in children, and molecular L. Faivre1,2,3,C.Esteve4, L. Francescatto5,P.L.Tan5,6,A. bases of numerous patients remains unknown. Recently, Bourchany2,7,C.Delafoulhouze8,E.Marinier9,P.Bourgeois4,8, certain genes that were identified in hereditary cholestasis C.Brochier-Armanet10,A.Bruel2,A.Delarue11,Y. Duffourd2,3, were found in families with congenital diarrhea, and vice E. Ecochard-Dugelay12,O.Goulet13, P.Gauchez11,E. versa (MYO5B, explained the role of this gene in the Gonzales14,15,C. Guettier-Bouttier16, F.Huet7,M.Komutora17, polarization of hepatocytes and enterocytes, ABCB11, G.Hery8,C.Lacoste8,R.Maudinas7,K.Mazodier18,Y.Rimet19, TTC37 and SKIV2L).796 J.delPicchia Materials and Methods: We used exome sequencing to University, Alexandria, Egypt, 3PCD Diagnostic Team and studyfourgirlsfrom3separatefamilies,aged4to23years, Department of Paediatric Respiratory Medicine, Royal presenting phenotypic constellation including cholestasis, BromptonandHarefieldNHSTrust,London,UnitedKingdom, congenital diarrhea, deafness, brittle bones and learning 4School of Medicine, University of Dundee, Dundee, United delays, who didn't correspond to an existing diagnostic Kingdom, 5Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC) framework. CEA,CNRS,Univ.ParisSud,UniversitéParis-Saclay,GifSur Results: None of the four patients presented identical Yvette, France, 6Department of Paediatrics, Makassed clinical signs, and mode of entry was severe congenital Hospital, East Jerusalem, Palestinian Territory, 7Department diarrhea with microvilli resulting in the need for long-term of Paediatrics, Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, exclusive parenteral nutrition for two patients, and choles- 8Department of Paediatrics, Hospital de Santa Maria, Centro tasis for the two others. Compound heterozygote or Hospitalar Lisboa Norte, Lisbon, Portugal, 9Universidade homozygote variants - truncation or missense - of the Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal Unc-45 Myosin Chaperone A (UNC45A) gene were identified in three families, which allowed researchers to Introduction: Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD, MIM: groupthefamiliesanddescribethedifferentexpressionofa 244400) is a rare motile ciliopathy with high genetic and newly discovered syndrome. UNC45A hadn't been pre- phenotypic heterogeneity. Symptoms include recurrent viouslyassociatedwithaconditioninhumans.Researchon respiratory tract infections, laterality defects and adult the C. elegans UNC-45 ortholog has shown the role of this subfertility. Disease-causingmutations havebeenidentified gene in motility disorders. In vitro and in vivo functional in37genesthatstillonlyaccountforaround70%ofcases, studies on a zebrafish model confirmed the involvement of with additional genes still to be identified. UNC45A. Subjects and Methods: 175 unrelated families from Conclusions: These results show the importance of next various ethnicities were recruited. We screened patients for generation sequencing for identification of new genes mutationsusingamulti-genepanelincludingalltheknown responsible for heterogeneous clinical presentation, and PCD genes and other potential candidates. All prioritized highlight value of data-sharing in research. variants were confirmed in the affected individuals and L. Faivre: None. C. Esteve: None. L. Francescatto: segregated in available family members using Sanger None. P.L. Tan: None. A. Bourchany: None. C. sequencing. To functional characterize novel candidate Delafoulhouze: None. E. Marinier: None. P. Bourgeois: genes, we analysed mutated cilia structure and the None. C. Brochier-Armanet: None. A. Bruel: None. A. consequences of gene silencing in the unicellular aquatic Delarue: None. Y. Duffourd: None. E. Ecochard- ciliate, Paramecium. Dugelay: None. O. Goulet: None. P. Gauchez: None. E. Results: We identified 167 disease-causing variants in Gonzales: None. C. Guettier-Bouttier: None. F. Huet: knownPCDgenesin128families(79%),revealingstriking None. M. Komutora: None. G. Hery: None. C. Lacoste: population stratification and high impact recurrent alleles. None. R. Maudinas: None. K. Mazodier: None. Y. 50%ofmutationswerenotpreviouslyreported.Variantsin Rimet: None. J. Rivière: None. B. Roquelaure: None. candidate genes not previously linked to PCD were J. Sarles: None.S. Sigaudy: None. E. Savajols:None.X. identified in 14 families. Mutational modelling in Para- Stephenne: None. C. Thauvin-Robinet: None. J. Theve- mecium and other functional characterization of the novel non: None. N. Levy: None. C. Badens: None. J. Hugot: C11orf70andDNAH9genesconfirmedtheirroleindynein- None. N. Katsanis: None. A. Fabre: None. related cilia motility, showing that loss-of-function muta- tions lead to ultrastructural ciliary defects and consequent C06.2 motile cilia dysfunction. Targeted NGS in primary ciliary dyskinesia: expanding Conclusions:TargetedNGSyieldsahighsuccessratefor mutationspectrumandnoveldynein-relatedgenediscovery PCD diagnosis, overcoming pitfalls of other diagnostic measures. It reveals clinically importantmutation stratifica- M.R. Fassad1,2,A. Shoemark3,4,J.Hayward1,M. Patel1, P.le tion and valuable potential for novel gene discovery. Gene Borgne5, F.Koll5,N.Rumman6,H.Morsy2,W.I.Shoman7,N. silencing in Paramecium is effective for modelling the Fasseeh7, L.Pereira8, C.Constant8,A. Pinto8,S. Lopes9,NE involvement of novel candidate genes in PCD. ThamesRegionalGeneticsService,M.Lemullois5,A.Aubusson- M.R.Fassad: None. A.Shoemark:None.J. Hayward: Fleury5,A.Tassin5,UKNationalPCDService,H.M.Mitchison1 None.M.Patel:None.P.leBorgne:None.F.Koll:None. N. Rumman: None. H. Morsy: None. W.I. Shoman: 1GeneticsandGenomicMedicine,UCLGOSInstituteofChild None. N. Fasseeh: None. L. Pereira: None. C. Constant: Health, London, United Kingdom, 2Human Genetics None. A. Pinto: None. S. Lopes: None. M. Lemullois: Department, Medical Research Institute, AlexandriaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 797 None.A.Aubusson-Fleury:None.A.Tassin:None.H.M. C06.4 Mitchison: None. Single cell RNA sequencing of T cells in Crohn’s disease identifies tissue specific drug targets C06.3 Targeted exon skipping of a CEP290 mutation is able to M.D.Voskuil, W.T. C.Uniken Venema,A.Vich Vila,R. K. rescue cellular and ciliary phenotypes in vitro and in vivo Weersma,E. A. M.Festen E. Molinari1,S. A.Ramsbottom1,S.Srivastava2,1,C. G.Miles1, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, J.A. Sayer1,2 Netherlands 1Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Introduction: Crohn’s disease (CD) is a chronic intestinal Kingdom, 2Renal Services, The Newcastle Hospitals NHS inflammatory disorder, for which 200 genetic risk loci are Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom known. CD risk loci are enriched for genes involved in T- cell signaling. Introduction: Mutations in CEP290 cause ciliopathy syn- Characterization of mucosal T-cells in a disease- and dromes including the cerebello-retinal-renal syndrome tissue-specificcontextatasinglecellresolutioniscrucialto known as Joubert syndrome. get insight in the underlying pathomechanisms of CD. We Materials and Methods: We established a secondary usedsingle-cell-RNA-sequencing(scRNA-seq)ofT-cellsto culture of human urine-derived renal epithelial cells increase insight in CD pathomechanisms and to identify (hURECs) from a boy aged 14 years with a Joubert potential novel drug targets. syndrome phenotype caused by a homozygous nonsense Methods: We performed scRNA-seq of 5,292 CD3+ T- mutation in exon 41 of CEP290. These cells were treated cells from peripheral blood (PBL) and from ileal mucosal with a morpholino antisense oligonucleotide designed to biopsiesofCDpatients.BiopsiesweredissociatedintoT-cells induce targeted in-frame skipping of CEP290 exon 41 from the epithelium (IEL) and the lamina propria (LPL). (ex41-CEP290 MO). A Cep290LacZ/LacZ gene trap mouse scRNA-seq was performed with an adapted SmartSeq2 that displays a mild cystic kidney phenotype was used to protocol, using 3’-end library generation and unique study in vivo delivery following tail vein injection of an molecularidentifiers,sequencedontheIlluminaNextSeq500. octaguanidinedendrimer-modifiedmorpholinooligonucleo- Results: Cytotoxic T-cells (CTL) dominated the IEL, tide designed to splice out the LacZ gene trap (vivo-LacZ while Th17 cells were the largest population in the LPL. MO). PBLs were mainly composed of quiescent T-cells. Th17 Results:Whencomparedtohealthycontrol,primarycilia cellsandCTLsshowthehighestproportionofdifferentially of patient’s hURECs appeared tortuous and abnormally expressed known CD risk genes. The biological Etrolizu- extended in length. A similar ciliary phenotype was mab, but not Vedolizumab, specifically appears to target observed in cystic epithelia of Cep290LacZ/LacZ mouse. mucosalCTLs.Twopotentialdrugrepositioningtargetsfor Treatmentofpatient’shURECswithex41-CEP290MOled mucosal Th17 cells, are MSX-122, an anti-tumor CXCR4- to a rescue of ciliary phenotype. In vivo delivery of vivo- antagonist,andRivenprost,whichtargetsPTGER4,andhas LacZ MO to Cep290LacZ/LacZ mice resulted in wild type been tested in UC patients. mRNAtranscriptsandrescueofCep290proteinexpression Conclusion: We have conducted the first detailed inrenaltissue.Consistentwiththiswastheobservedrescue transcriptomic characterization of disease- and tissue- of both the ciliary length and the cystic kidney disease specific effector cells in Crohn’s disease. We show that phenotype in vivo. CD risk genes are significantly overexpressed in ileal Conclusions: These data support the feasibility of mucosal Th17 and CTLs and provide promising targets for personalised approaches of induced exon skipping to future cell-specific therapies in CD patients. treating cystic kidney disease secondary to CEP290 M.D. Voskuil: None. W.T.C. Uniken Venema: None. mutations and show that intravenous delivery of morpho- A. Vich Vila: None. R.K. Weersma: None. E.A.M. lino oligonucleotide to murine renal tissue is efficacious. Festen: None. This research was supported by a MRC grant (MR/ M012212/1) to J.A.S. and C.G.M. C06.5 E. Molinari: None. S.A. Ramsbottom: None. S. Mutations in BNC2 Lead to Autosomal-Dominant Lower Srivastava: None. C.G. Miles: None. J.A. Sayer: None. Urinary Tract Obstruction (LUTO)798 J.delPicchia C.M.Kolvenbach1,2,S.Frese1,3,G.C.Dworschak3,1,2,A.Japp4, (c.2663A>G, p.H888R) in BNC2 could be identified. J.M. Schmidt2,1,M. Zaniew5, W.Newman6,G.Beaman6,H. Functional characterization of BNC2 using ISH showed Stuart6,A.Woolf6,R. Cervellione6,W.Rösch7,S.Weber8,W. expression at E13.5 in developing mouse urethra. KD of Merz9, F.Hildebrandt10,M.Feldkötter11, B.Hoppe11,H. bnc2byinjectionMOinzflcausedcloacalobstructionwith Thiele12,J.Altmüller12,13,C.Berg9,M.Ludwig14,P.Grote15,H. formationofavesicleatthedistalendofpronephricductin Reutter16,3,B. Odermatt2,A. C.Hilger3,1 10% of zfl and zystic dilated deformed glomeruli and dilated pronephric ducts in 50%. Co-injection of human 1Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, BNC2 mRNA with Bnc2-MO in zfl showed rescue of the Germany, 2Institute of Anatomy, University of Bonn, Bonn, phenotype confirming the specificity of the Bnc2-MO. Germany, 3Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Conclusions:Humangeneticanddevelopmentalbiology Bonn, Germany, 4Institute of Neuropathology, University of models suggest BNC2 as the first monogenic cause of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany, 5Children's Hospital, LUTO. Funding: BONFOR Poznań, Poland, 6Institute of Human Development, Faculty of C.M. Kolvenbach: None. S. Frese: None. G.C. Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Dworschak: None. A. Japp: None. J.M. Schmidt: None. Manchester Academic Health Science Centre and the Royal M. Zaniew: None. W. Newman: None. G. Beaman: Manchester Children's and St Mary's Hospitals, Manchester, None. H. Stuart: None. A. Woolf: None. R. Cervellione: United Kingdom, 7Pediatric Urology, University Medical None.W.Rösch:None.S.Weber:None.W.Merz:None. Center Regensburg, Regensburg, Germany, 8Department of F. Hildebrandt: None. M. Feldkötter: None. B. Hoppe: Pediatrics, University Hospital Marburg, Marburg, Germany, None. H. Thiele: None. J. Altmüller: None. C. Berg: 9Department of Obstetrics and Prenatal Medicine, University None. M. Ludwig: None. P. Grote: None. H. Reutter: of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 10Division of Nephrology, None. B. Odermatt: None. A.C. Hilger: None. DepartmentofMedicine,BostonChildren'sHospital,Harvard Medical School,, Boston, MA, United States, 11Department of C06.6 Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University Large-scale trans-ethnic genome-wide association study Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany, 12Cologne Center for reveals novel loci, causal molecular mechanisms and Genomics,UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany,13Center effector genes for kidney function for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany, 14Department of Clinical Chemistry and A.P.Morris1,A.Akbarov2,M.Tomaszewski2,N.Franceschini3, Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany, COGENT-Kidney Consortium 15Institute of Cardiovascular Regeneration, Center for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, 1University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom, Germany, 16Department of Neonatology and Pediatric 2University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, IntensiveCare,Children'sHospital,UniversityofBonn,Bonn, 3University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, Germany United States Introduction: Congenital “lower urinary tract obstruction” Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a major public health (LUTO)isdefinedbyadecreaseinthefreepassageofurine burdenandaffectsnearly10%oftheglobalpopulation.We through the urethra. About three out of 10,000 pregnancies assembledpublishedanddenovogenome-wideassociation are affected, the etiology is so far unknown. studies of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR), a Materials and Methods: Whole exome sequencing measure of kidney function used to define CKD, in up to (WES) in a family with 4 affected from 3 generations was 192,346 individuals of diverse ancestry. We identified 56 performed. 258 LUTO patients were screened for further loci attaining genome-wide significant evidence of asso- variantsintheidentifiedcandidategeneBNC2usingSanger ciation with eGFR (p<5x10-8), including 10 mapping sequencing.Functional studiescomprisedinsituhybridiza- outside those previously reported for kidney function. tion (ISH) studies in mouse embryos, translational knock- Across loci, we identified 78 distinct association signals at down (KD) in developing zebrafish larvae (zfl) using locus-wide significance (p<10-5), including four in the Morpholino oligonucleotides (MO) and ‘rescue‘ experi- region mapping to SLC22A2. Allelic effects on eGFR of ments by co-injection of human BNC2 mRNA with the index variants were consistent across populations, with no Bnc2-MO in zfl. evidence of heterogeneity due to ancestry (p <6.4x10-4, HET Results: Filtering of WES Data revealed a nonsense Bonferronicorrection).Integrationwithgenomicannotation mutation(c.2554C>T;p.Arg852*)inBNC2(basonuclin2). revealed that eGFR association signals were jointly enri- Out of 258 LUTO patients one additional family (affected ched in coding sequence, and binding sites for ATF3 and father and son) carrying a novel missense mutation HDAC8. ATF3 expression has been shown to be elevatedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 799 in animal models of proteinuria and diabetic nephropathy, mosaicism, repeat expansions, intermediate sized structural whilst class I histone deacetylases (including HDAC8) are variants, and translocations, which explain disease in 19 requiredforembryonickidneygeneexpression,growthand (6.5%)ofpatients.Basedonenhancedtertiaryanalysesand differentiation. Annotation-informed fine-mapping revealed in depth review we identified 38 candidate variants in 12 variants accounting for >80% of the probability of GUSs;thesearereported totheclinicalsitesandfunctional driving eGFR association signals, including coding alleles cores for follow up. We have made 5 definitive new diag- GCKR p.Leu446Pro (rs1260326), CPS1 p.Thr1406Asn noses.Intotal,throughapplicationofnovelmethodsandin (rs1047891), CACNA1S p.Arg1539Cys (rs3850625), and depthreview,wehaveprovidedfindingsofnotefor~14.4% non-coding expression quantitative trait loci in kidney for of our participants and families. Continued efforts on this RGS14 (rs35716097), and UMOD and GP2 (rs77924615). front will contribute to the advancement of knowledge of These results define novel causal molecular mechanisms rare diseases. underlying kidney function association signals, and high- E.A.worthey:None.D.Brown:None.C.Birch:None. light genes through which their effects are mediated, M. Gajapathy: None. L. Handley: None. M. Holt:None. offering a potential route to clinical translation and CKD N. Sosonkina: None. B. Wilk: None. M. Wilk: None. treatment development. J. Lazar: None. M. Schroeder: None. D. Bick: None. A.P. Morris: None. A. Akbarov: None. M. Tomas- H. Jacob: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; zewski: None. N. Franceschini: None. AbbVie. M. Members of the Undiagnosed Disease Network: None. C07 NGS diagnostics C07.2 Finding missing diagnoses in exome sequence data C07.1 Reanalysis of unsolved WGS clinical cases from the NIHs C.F.Wright1,J.McRae2,G.Gallone2,S.Aitken3,E.Prigmore2, undiagnosed diseases network (UDN) D.Rajan2,M.Hurles2,D.FitzPatrick3,H.Firth4,DDDStudy E. A.worthey1,D.Brown1,C. Birch1,M.Gajapathy1,L. 1Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Exeter, United Handley1,M.Holt1,N.Sosonkina1,B.Wilk1, M.Wilk1,J. Kingdom, 2Wellcome Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Lazar1,M.Schroeder1,D.Bick1,H.Jacob2,M.Membersofthe Kingdom, 3MRC IGMM to MRC Institute of Genetics and UndiagnosedDisease Network1 Molecular Medicine, Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 4Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, United 1HudsonAlphainstitute,huntsville,AL,UnitedStates,2AbbVie, Kingdom Chicago, IL, United States Systematic re-analysis of existing genomic data in light of The UDN works to provide patients with previously new knowledge and analytical techniques is expected to undiagnosed disease access to a cross-disciplinary network increase the diagnostic yield. Using the UK-wide Decipher- of investigators determined to explore their disease pathol- ing Developmental Disorders (DDD) Study, we tested this ogy, physiology, and genetics. Patients accepted undergo hypothesis by re-analysing exome sequence data from the comprehensive clinical evaluation and phenotyping. Qua- first 1133 parent-offspring trios three years’ after our initial lifying patients receive either whole exome sequencing at analysis. Through a combination of detecting new variant Baylor or whole genome sequencing at HudsonAlpha. Of classes and analysing disease-associated genes that were 300WGScasesanalyzed,88.9%hadreceivedpriorgenetic discovered since our initial analysis, we have been able to testing (WES=78.1%, other=10.8%). Primary Findings increaseourdiagnosticyieldfrom27%to40%.Around70% werefor51%oftheanalyzedgenomesandfor49%ofcases of our new diagnoses were in genes not known to be asso- with an existing WES. Secondary findings were reported, ciatedwithdevelopmentaldisordersatthetimeofourinitial for adults only, in 28% of cases. A wealth of new infor- analysis, highlighting the importance of regularly revisiting mation (gene discovery, disease-phenotypeexpansion,etc.) variant filtering and interpretation protocols. Nearly 5% of has become available since 2015. At the end of 2017 we our new diagnoses were mosaic variants inherited from an thereforebeganreanalysisofallunsolvedcasesmakinguse unaffected parent, of which half were previously wrongly of newly published diseases and phenotypes and novel classed as constitutively inherited and therefore excluded tools. This review also seeks to identify variants not meet- from our variant filtering pipeline, and half were previously ingclinicalreportingcriteriaincludingdamagingvariantsin wrongly classed as de novo and would have resulted in Genes of Uncertain Significance. Through novel secondary inaccurate counselling of parents about recurrence risk. We analysis we identified chromosomal abnormalities, were unable to detect any significant phenotypic differences800 J.delPicchia between probands with and without a diagnosis, suggesting L.C. Francioli: None. M.H. Guo: None. K.J. Karc- thatthediagnosticyieldshouldcontinuetoincreaseinfuture zewski: None. B.B. Cummings: None. M. Lek: None. V. as a result of similar repeated reanalyses. Thaker: None. M.J. Daly: None. J.J. Hirschhorn: None. C.F. Wright: None. J. McRae: None. G. Gallone: D.G. MacArthur: None. None. S. Aitken: None. E. Prigmore: None. D. Rajan: None. M. Hurles: Other; Modest; Congenica. D. FitzPa- C07.4 trick: None. H. Firth: None. Next Generation Children Project: Whole genome sequencing for rapid diagnosis of severely ill children in C07.3 intensive care Inferring compound heterozygotes from large-scale exome sequencing data C. E.French1,A. Sanchis-Juan1,2,I.Delon3,H.Dolling1,2,E. Dewhurst1,2,S.Agrawal3,T.Austin3,R.Armstrong3,G.Belteki3, L. C.Francioli1,2,M. H.Guo3,2,K. J.Karczewski1,2, B.B. M.Bohatschek3,S. Bowdin3,R. G.Branco3,S. Broster3, A. Cummings1,2,M.Lek1,2, V.Thaker4,3,M.J.Daly1,2, J.J. D'Amore3, R.Chaudhary3,C. Costa3,H.Firth3,J.Hague3,J. Hirschhorn4,3,2,D.G.MacArthur1,2 Harley3, R.Kayani3, W.Kelsall3, S.Mehta3,R. O'Donnell3,A. Ogilvy-Stuart3,S.Park3,M.Prapa3,A.Sammut3,K.Schon3,K. 1Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Spike3,A. TaylorTavares3,D.Wari-Pepple3, C.G.Woods1,3, 2Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, United States, 3Harvard NIHR BioResource - RareDiseases2,S. Abbs3,D.Rowitch1,3, MedicalSchool,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,4BostonChildren's F. L.Raymond1,2,3 Hospital, Boston, MA, United States 1University of Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Short-read sequencing technologies have enabled sequen- 2NIHR BioResource - Rare Diseases, Cambridge, United cing of the exomes and genomes of hundreds of thousands Kingdom, 3Cambridge University Hospitals, Cambridge, ofpeople.However,moststandardsequencingtechnologies United Kingdom do not readily provide phase, that is, assigning variants to individual haplotypes. The absence of phase information Children in neonatal or paediatric intensive care units particularly complicates the identification of compound (ICU) are at risk of having an underlying genetic condi- heterozygous variants in the diagnosis of recessive dis- tion. Achieving a rapid diagnosis augments clinical orders, where mutations of both copies of a given gene are decision-making, suggests more appropriate treatments, necessary to develop disease. While the phase of common and may reduce length of inpatient care. The objective of variants can be accurately inferred using imputation, phas- the Next Generation Children Project (NGC) is to rapidly ing rare variants is challenging, especially from exome identifyclinicallyrelevantraregeneticvariantsintheICU sequencing due to the sparse coverage of each haplotype. within the UK National Health Service (NHS). Proband/ Here, we leverage large-scale whole-exome sequencing parent trios were recruited for whole genome sequencing data from the genome aggregation database (gnomAD) (WGS). To date, 112 probands (neonate - 15 years) have which contains 123,136 individuals, to infer haplotype been sequenced and analysed, 85% with both parents frequencies between pairs of rare variants (allele frequency (319 samples at ~38 X coverage). Sequencing has been <1%)locatedinthesame gene.Wedemonstratethatthese reduced to ~10 days on average, bioinformatics and var- frequencies can be used to infer compound heterozygote iant interpretation takes ~3 days and clinical confirmation statusforvariantswithinagenewithhighaccuracy(92.3%) and NHS reporting takes <7 days. A likely diagnosis was from whole-exome sequencing data using 1,494 trios for reported in 15% of cases, including encephalopathies, which true phase can be determined by allele transmission. myopathies, skeletal dysplasias and rare syndromes. Notablyourapproachperformsverywellevenwithasingle Despiteextensivephenotyping(~17HPOterms/proband), observation of each allele in gnomAD (allele frequency a third of reported cases showed 2 or fewer terms over- ~10-5). lapping known gene terms. Preliminary findings of the Applying our approach to the 123,136 individuals in NGC Project show feasibility of implementing rapid- gnomAD, we compare the burden of rare protein-altering turnaroundWGSwithinanNHSclinicalpracticecontext. compound heterozygous variants and homozygous variants They highlight i) the utility of WGS that does not rely on in each gene. We show the clinical utility of our method gene panels; ii) the ability to diagnose diseases earlier when applied to several rare disease cases where we could increases the phenotypic spectrum and iii) fewer features either exclude or prioritize putative causative compound may present early for some conditions. The reduced cor- heterozygous variants (validated by sequencing the pro- relationbetweengenotypeandphenotypeinintensivelyill band’s parents). children suggests the importance of further research toAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 801 improve utility of rapid-turnaround WGS assessment in Conclusion: Consistent with other studies, rWGS has a the ICU setting. high diagnostic yield and reduces time to diagnosis. This This project is supported by the Rosetrees Trust and study demonstrates that early diagnosis changes acute NIHR BioResource. management. rWGS improves clinical care, preventing C.E. French: None. A. Sanchis-Juan: None. I. Delon: disability and unnecessary procedures, while simulta- None.H.Dolling:None.E.Dewhurst:None.S.Agrawal: neously reducing acute care costs among a broad cohort None. T. Austin: None. R. Armstrong: None. G. Belteki: of quaternary childrens hospital inpatient infants. None. M. Bohatschek: None. S. Bowdin: None. R.G. S. Nahas: None. S. Chowdhury: None. D. Dimmock: Branco: None. S. Broster: None. A. D'Amore: None. R. None. S. Kingsmore: None. Chaudhary: None. C. Costa: None. H. Firth: None. J. Hague: None. J. Harley: None. R. Kayani: None. W. C07.6 Kelsall: None. S. Mehta: None. R. O'Donnell: None. A. ExperiencesoftheDutchdiagnosticdatashareconsortium; Ogilvy-Stuart:None.S.Park:None.M.Prapa:None.A. limits of the current 5-tier classification system Sammut: None. K. Schon: None. K. Spike: None. A. Taylor Tavares: None. D. Wari-Pepple: None. C.G. M.E.vanGijn1,J.Laros2,M.A.Swertz3,4,VKGLdatasharing Woods:None.NIHRBioResource-RareDiseases:None. consortium S. Abbs:None. D.Rowitch: None.F.L. Raymond: None. 1Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, C07.5 Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Department of Human- and Clinical RapidWholeGenomeSequencingImprovesClinicalUtility Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, and Cost Effectiveness of Acutely Ill Children admitted to Netherlands, 3Department of Genetics, University Medical Neonatal Intensive Care Units Center Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 4Genomics Coordination Center, University Medical Center Groningen, S. Nahas,S.Chowdhury, D.Dimmock, S. Kingsmore Groningen, Netherlands Rady Children's Institute for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, The use of genomic information in both research and clinic CA, United States has expanded enormously the last decade. Yet, the inter- pretation of the obtained NGS data remains a huge chal- Introduction:Studieshaveshownthatrapidwholegenome lenge. Since sharing of data improves patient care and sequencing (rWGS) in neonatal intensive care units has facilitates harmonizing patient reports, the Dutch genome resulted in reduced time to diagnosis and improved diag- diagnostic laboratories created a national database with nostic rates compared to the current standard of care. connections to each of the labs for automated bi-directional Childrenwithillness,oftenduetogeneticdisease,represent sharing.Dataarestoredseparatelyforvariantclassifications 70%ofhealthcarecosts.Thus,thistestingholdspotentialto andvariantfrequencies,usingtheOpenSourceMOLGENIS impact healthcare economics worldwide. We sought to andVARDAsystems.Thesharedvariantclassificationdata investigatetheclinicalutilityofrWGSininfantinpatientsat isusedindailypracticeineachlabs’NGSanalysissoftware Rady Children’s Hospital. to improve the variant interpretation. Currently the classifi- Methods: After parental consent, blood samples were cation database contains >70,000 DNA variants in 4,500 collected from patients and parents when available. DNA genesofwhich66%havebeenclassifiedas(likely)benign, was isolated, PCR-free Illumina genomic library prepara- 18%asVUS,14%as(likely)pathogenicand2%unsolved. tion was performed, and Illumina WGS was undertaken to We developed a classification comparison tool and proce- ~45X coverage. Phenotypic features of the proband were dure for the variants classified by multiple labs (n>10,000). translated into Human Phenotype Ontology (HPO) terms. There was consensus for 8828 classifications. These valu- Results: After 12 months of testing, 94% of families ablecuratedconsensusdataalreadyhasbeensharedbeyond approachedenrolled.rWGSwasinterpretedin340families, diagnostic laboratories with the HVP share database yieldingdiagnosticinformationin115families(~34%).On (LOVD3)andtheirsubmissiontoClinVarisunderway.The average, diagnosis occurred within 96 hours (fastest 1248 variants without classification consensus are currently 37 hours). Changes in management as a result of diagnosis underdiscussion.Intryingtoresolvethesediscrepancies,we wereidentifiedin77families(~67%ofdiagnosedpatients). encountered the limits of the 5-tier classification system, The changes in management ranged from specific, changes which is currently a mix of functional and clinical classifi- insurgicalinterventions,topalliativecareguidance.Among cations. In 30 cases a variant had clear functional con- the first 42 infants, rWGS provided over $1.3M in net cost sequencesbutan associationwith a low-risk disease,which savings over projected standard care. resulted in opposite classifications. This could potentially802 J.delPicchia lead to misdiagnosis. An international discussion is pro- downoftheRBSG4genewasnotpossible,asthisgeneis posed to harmonize the classifications of these variants. not conserved in fly. M.E. van Gijn: None. J. Laros: None. M.A. Conclusions: Our results demonstrate, for the first time, Swertz: None. aneffectofgeneticvariantstotheefficacyofweightlossin obese subjects and identify a role for ANK1 in weight control. C08 Population Genetics A. Valsesia: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- nificant; Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA. Q. Wang: C08.1 None. N. Gheldof: A. Employment (full or part-time); Genome-wide gene-based analyses identifies ANK1 as a Significant; Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA. J. modulator of weight loss in obese patients Carayol: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA. V. Shenton: None. A. Valsesia1,Q.Wang2,N.Gheldof1,J.Carayol1,V. Shenton2, G. Lefebvre: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- G.Lefebvre1,S.Metairon1,C. Chabert1,O.Walter1,P. cant; Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA. S. Metairon: Mironova1,P.Lau3,N.Viguerie4,D.Langin4,5,P.Descombes1, A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Nestlé M.Harper6,G.Neely2,A.Astrup7,W.Saris8,R.Dent3,J.Hager1 Institute of Health Sciences SA. C. Chabert: A. Employ- ment (full or part-time); Significant; Nestlé Institute of 1NestléInstituteofHealthSciencesSA,Lausanne,Switzerland, Health Sciences SA. O. Walter: A. Employment (full or 2Charles Perkins Centre, Sydney, Australia, 3The Ottawa part-time); Significant; Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences Hospital, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 4INSERM, Toulouse, France, SA. P. Mironova: A. Employment (full or part-time); 5ToulouseUniversityHospitals,Toulouse,France,6University Significant;NestléInstituteofHealthSciencesSA.P.Lau: of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 7University of Copenhagen, None. N. Viguerie: None. D. Langin: None. P. Des- Copenhagen, Denmark, 8Maastricht University Medical combes: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA. M. Harper: None. G. Neely: None. A. Astrup: None. W. Saris: None. R. Introduction: Hundreds of genetic variants have been Dent: None. J. Hager: A. Employment (full or part-time); associated to obesity through genome-wide association Significant; Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences SA. studies (GWAS) using observational cohorts.However,the genetic contribution to efficient weight loss in response to C08.2 dietary intervention remains unknown. Insightsfromthelargestgeneticstudyofsexualorientation Materials and Methods: We performed a GWA in two large low-caloric diet intervention cohorts of obese A. Ganna1, G.Beecham2,F. Day3,E. Martin2,R. Meier1,B. participants: the Canadian Optifast900® meal replacement Neale1,M. Nivard4,J.Perry3, A.Sanders5, K.Verweij6, R. program (n=1166 obese subjects from Ottawa, LCD with Wedow7,B. Zietsch8 Optifast 900kcal/d); and the DiOGenes clinical study (n= 789 overweight/obese subjects from eight European 1Broadinstitute,Cambrdige,MA,UnitedStates,2Universityof countries, LCD with Modifast 800kcal/d). Miami, Miami, FL, United States, 3Cambridge University, Results: To improve statistical power, we performed Cambrdige, United Kingdom, 4Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, multi-marker (gene-based) analyses and took advantages Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5North Shore university, Chicago, of recent development in Bayesian linear mixed effect IL, United States, 6University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, models. Two loci close to the ANK1 and RBSG4 genes Netherlands, 7University of Colorado Boulder, Boulder, CO, respectively were identified in the Canadian discovery United States, 8University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia cohort (genome-wide FDR < 5%) and replicated in the DiOGenes sample (replication FDR < 5%). Joint- Solid evidence about the genetic determinants of sexual modelling of the association signal together with large- orientation is lacking. Moreover, the reduced number of scale epigenome datasets (450 annotations) restricted offspring in individuals engaging in non-heterosexual further the signals to two individal SNPs : rs6981587 behavior (NHB) presents a Darwinian paradox: why are for the ANK1 locus and rs873822 for the RBSG4 locus. variants that predispose to NHB are maintained in the Full body-knockdown in Drosophila melanogaster of the population despite apparent selection against them? We ANK1 ortholog (Ank) yielded a non-lethal strain with reporttheresultsfromthelargeststudyofsexualorientation 75% mRNA reduction, and these animals exhibited by focusing on two main phenotypes: NHB, defined as significantly increased body mass (+20%) and decreased havinghadatleastonesame-sexpartner(N=28,486cases triglyceride levels (-23%) compared to controls. Knock- and 469,427 controls) and number of partners inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 803 heterosexual individuals (NSP;N=362,993 individuals) in prioritized 538 protein-coding genes (247 novel) strongly a meta-analysis of UK Biobank and 23andMe. We identi- enriched for bone cell expression and known osteoporosis fied 4 and 41 loci significantly (P<5x10-8) associated with drugtargetandbonedisordergenes.Weidentifiedplausibly NHBandNSP,respectively.12lociweresex-differentiated causal DAAM2 coding SNPs and therefore generated and the genetic correlation between males and females was homozygous (Daam2-/-) and heterozygous knockout mice significantly < 1 (rg=0.67,P=4x10-14 for NHB). By for skeletal phenotyping with X-ray microradiography, studying the association between significant loci and microtomography, and biomechanical testing. Daam2-/- 2,500+ GWAS results we highlighted pleiotropic effects mice had non-significant reductions in femur length, and with smoking behavior and hormone-related phenotypes reduced femur and vertebral bone mineral content. Struc- (e.g. balding). Genetic correlations indicated a shared tural trabecular and cortical bone parameters did not differ genetic component between NHB and risk-taking (P= between wild-type and Daam2-/- mice. Strikingly, despite 5.1x10-9), substance use (e.g. cannabis use,P=3.6x10-6) normal parameters, maximum load was greatly reduced in and several psychiatric traits (e.g. schizophrenia,P= Daam2-/- femurs and vertebrae (2.14 standard deviations 1.1x10-4). A significant heritability enrichment in brain- below predicted strength), suggesting Daam2-deficiency expressed genes was observed for NSP, but not for NHB. impaired bone quality. Here, we increased the number of The strong genetic correlation between NHB and NSP associated loci 2.5-fold, the variance explained to 20%, (rg=0.47,P=9.5x10-25), which replicated in an external provided an efficient strategy to prioritize genes, and iden- study of adolescents (P=0.007), is consistent with antag- tified a novel determinant of bone quality, DAAM2. These onistic pleiotropy, suggesting that variants predisposing to results provide further insight into novel, potentially drug- NHB increase mating success (as measured by NSP) in gable, genes contributing to osteoporosis. heterosexuals. Overall, our results depict NHB as a com- J.A. Morris: None. plex, heritable behavioral phenotype, partially sharing a genetic component with risk-taking/substance use, partially C08.4 with hormonal-related phenotypes. Low pass genomes of 141,431 Chinese reveal patterns of A.Ganna:None.G.Beecham:None.F.Day:None.E. viral infection, novel phenotypic associations, and the Martin: None. R. Meier: None. B. Neale: None. M. genetic history of China Nivard: None. J. Perry: None. A. Sanders: None. K. Verweij: None. R. Wedow: None. B. Zietsch: None. S. Liu*1,2,S.Huang*1, F.Chen*1,L. Zhao*1,Y. Yuan1,S.S. Francis3,4,L.Fang1,Z.Li1,5,L.Lin1,R.Liu1,Y.Zhang1,H.Xu1, C08.3 S. Li1,Y. Zhou1,5,Q.Liu1,R. G.Walters6,K. Lin6, J.Ju1,T. Genome-wideassociationofbonemineraldensityintheUK Korneliussen7,M.A. Yang8,Q.Fu8,J. Wang1, L.Zhou1,A. Biobankfullreleaseidentifies301novellociandimplicates Krogh9,H.Zhang1,W. Wang1,Z. Chen6,Y. Yin1,H.Yang1,10, DAAM2 in osteoporosis M.Mao1,J.Shendure11,12,J.Wang1,10,A. Albrechtsen9, X. Jin1,13,14,R. Nielsen15,16,17,X.Xu1,*contributedequally J.A. Morris, GEFOS Consortium 1BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China, 2Bioinformatics Centre, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,Denmark,3Divisionof Epidemiology,University Bonemineraldensity(BMD)isthemostclinically-relevant of Nevada, Reno, NV, United States, 4Department of predictor of fracture and osteoporosis, a common, aging- Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California, San related disease. Previously, an estimated heel BMD Francisco, CA, United States, 5BGI Education Center, (eBMD) genome-wide association study (GWAS) in University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen, China, 142,487 individuals identified 203 loci, explained 12% of 6ClinicalTrialServiceUnitandEpidemiologicalStudiesUnit, the trait variance and identified novel determinants of Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of osteoporosis. Here, we performed an eBMD GWAS in Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 7Centre for GeoGenetics, 426,824 White-British UK-Biobank participants (55% Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of female). Using statistical fine-mapping and functional Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark, 8Key Laboratory of genomics, we prioritized genes for whole-animal model VertebrateEvolutionandHumanOriginsofChineseAcademy experiments and focused on dishevelled-associated acti- of Sciences, Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and vatorofmorphogenesis-2(DAAM2),anovelgeneinvolved Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, in Wnt-signalling. We identified 1,106 conditionally- China, 9Bioinformatics Centre, Department of Biology, independent signals (P<6.6x10-9) mapping to 518 loci University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, China, 10James D. (301 novel) and explained 20% of the trait variance. We Watson Institute of Genome Sciences, Hangzhou, China,804 J.delPicchia 11Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, J.Pickrell1,T. Berisa1,K. Wasik1,D.Fraser2,C. Cox3 Seattle, WA, United States, 12Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 13School of Medicine, 1Gencove, Inc., New York, NY, United States, 2PAREXEL South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, Genomic Medicine, Durham, NC, United States, 14School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, South China 3GlaxoSmithKline, Stevenege, United Kingdom University of Technology, Guangzhou, China, 15Centre for GeoGenetics,NaturalHistoryMuseumofDenmark,University The identification of genetic variants that influence multi- of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, China, 16Department of factorial traits in humans requires both large sample sizes Integrative Biology, University of California, Berkeley, CA, and comprehensive variant discovery. Historically, this has United States, 17Department of Statistics, University of posed a challenge-- the only cost-effective technology for California, Berkeley, CA, United States profiling large numbers of individuals has been genotyping arrays,which measurea small fractionofgeneticvariation; We analyze whole-genome sequencing data from 141,431 sequencing-based technologies, which enable more com- pregnant Chinese women generated for non-invasive prehensive profiling of genetic variation, remain too pregnancy testing (NIPT), and identify 9 million genetic expensive for routine usage. To bridge this gap, we devel- variants with a 0.2% false positive rate and a high impu- oped a low-pass sequencing assay (in which less than 1x tation accuracy at 2.1 million variable sites. We char- coverage of a target genome is sequenced) along with acterize the population genetic structure in China and software for genotyping imputation and de novo variant discover that the present day distribution of alleles is a discovery. To evaluate the performance of this assay, we functionofbothancientprocessesofmigration,suchasthe sequenced 83 individuals to 1x genome coverage and Silk Road trade, and very recent, large-scale, population genotyped the same samples on the Affymetrix Axiom movements within the last 70 years. We identify novel Precision Medicine Research Array. We then down- phenotype-genotype associations, including several repli- sampledthe sequencing data to 0.8, 0.6, 0.4, and 0.2x cov- cated associations with height and BMI, an association erage. At common single nucleotide polymorphisms between maternal age and a variant near HCN1 and EMB, (SNPs),themeanimputationaccuracyfromthegenotyping andbetweenmultiplefetuses(e.g.twins)andNRG1,agene array was 90%, which was comparable to the imputation modulating thyroid function. Finally, we characterize the accuracy from 0.4x (88%) to 0.6x (91%) sequencing. We distribution of circulating viral DNA at the individual and then performed de novo discovery of SNPs from the population level, and identify a unique pattern of high sequencing data, to test the possibility to discover pre- prevalence of hepatitis B and other clinically relevant viously unseen genetic variation. With 1x coverage maternalinfections.AGWASforviralinfectionsidentifies sequencing we identify over 95% of genetic variants in the an exceptionally strong association between high abun- samplesthatarepresentinatleast10copies,andwith0.6x dance integrated herpesvirus 6A/6B and two genes, one of coverage we identify over 95% of the genetic variants that which, MOV10L1, affects piRNA processing and PIWI are present in at least 20 copies. The method presented proteinfunction.OurresultsdemonstratetheNIPTdatacan allow for a path to association studies that are truly “gen- be effectively repurposed for large-scale virological and ome-wide”. population genomic studies. J. Pickrell: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- S. Liu*: None. S. Huang*: None. F. Chen*: None. L. cant;Gencove,Inc.T.Berisa:A.Employment(fullorpart- Zhao*: None. Y. Yuan: None. S.S. Francis: None. L. time); Significant; Gencove, Inc. K. Wasik: A. Employ- Fang:None.Z.Li:None.L.Lin:None.R.Liu:None.Y. ment (full or part-time); Significant; Gencove, Inc. D. Zhang:None.H.Xu:None.S.Li:None.Y.Zhou:None. Fraser: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Q. Liu: None. R.G. Walters: None. K. Lin: None. J. Ju: PAREXEL Genomic Medicine. C. Cox: A. Employment None. T. Korneliussen: None. M.A. Yang: None. Q. Fu: (full or part-time); Significant; GlaxoSmithKline. None. J. Wang: None. L. Zhou: None. A. Krogh: None. H. Zhang: None. W. Wang: None. Z. Chen: None. Y. C08.6 Yin:None.H.Yang:None.M.Mao:None.J.Shendure: Prioritisinggenesofinterestfromwholegenomesequences None. J. Wang: None. A. Albrechtsen: None. X. Jin: tomaximise diagnosticyield;theexperienceofthe100,000 None. R. Nielsen: None. X. Xu: None. genomes project C08.5 H.K. Brittain, E. R.A. Thomas,A. Tucci,E. Baple,E. M. Imputation and de novo variant discovery from low-pass McDonagh, A. Rueda-Martin, L. Daugherty,R. Foulger, S. whole genome sequencing data for cost-effective and Leigh,O.Niblock, E. Williams, A. Rendon,M. J.Caulfield,R. scalable trait mapping H.Scott, D.SmedleyAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 805 Genomics England, London, United Kingdom Hoganson13, M.Plona13,M. T.Cho14,Deciphering DevelopmentalDisordersStudy,C.T.Thiel1,H.Lüdecke15,4,T. Prioritisingvariantsforinterpretationisparamountinwhole M.Strom16,E.Calpena17,A.O.M.Wilkie17,D.Wieczorek15,4,F. genome sequencing. Patients and clinical teams benefit B. Engel2,A. Reis1 from efficient prioritisation of relevant genes, considering the original clinical question. The rare disease arm of the 1InstituteofHumanGenetics,Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 100,000 genomes project will sequence ~60,000 indivi- Erlangen-Nürnberg,Erlangen,Germany,2ExperimentalRenal duals, analysing each genome against a set of curated gene and Cardiovascular Research, Institute of Pathology, panels; enhancing diagnostic yield from the current Department of Nephropathology, Friedrich-Alexander- knowledgebase. Tooptimiseefficiency andreproducibility Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany, an automated, yet individualised, approach has been 3Génétique Clinique, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de designed. Genomics England PanelApp (https://panelapp. Caen, Caen, France, 4Institut für Humangenetik, genomicsengland.co.uk) is an international gene curation Universitätsklinikum Essen, Universität Duisburg-Essen, resource, which captures collective expertise; documenting Essen, Germany, 5Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, gene:phenotype relationships. 170 curated gene panels are Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation available for use, covering a wide range of clinical pheno- Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, types. A computer algorithm (PanelAssigner), supervised Manchester, United Kingdom, 6West Midlands Regional by clinicians experienced in rare disease diagnosis, prior- Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Partners, itises genes tailored to the clinical phenotype through: (i) Birmingham Women’s Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, identifying similarities between the participant’s phenotype Birmingham, United Kingdom, 7Clinical Genetics Service, and HPO data models defining a disease pre-assigned to a UniversityHospitalsofBristolNHSFoundationTrust,Bristol, specific gene panel (ii) identifying panels similar to a United Kingdom, 8Merseyside and Cheshire Clinical Genetics dynamically generated gene panel using participant’s HPO Service, Liverpool Women's NHS Foundation Hospital Trust, terms (iii) applying clinician-developed rules dependent on Liverpool, United Kingdom, 9Genetikum Neu-Ulm, Neu-Ulm, recruited disease category, HPO terms and age of onset. In Germany, 10Cologne Center for Genomics (CCG), University excess of 8,000 families, representing around 18,000 par- ofCologne,Cologne,Germany,11InstituteofHumanGenetics, ticipants, have undergone panel assignment using the University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, PanelAssignerledstrategy.24%oftheconfirmeddiagnoses 12IInstitute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center todateresultedfromadditionalpanelallocation,beyondthe Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, 13Pediatric Genetics; corepanelassociatedwiththerecruiteddisorder.Following University of Illinois Hospital, Chicago, IL, United States, clinical scientist review of the data, all positive diagnoses 14GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 15Institut für areusedtoinformiterationofthePanelAssigneralgorithm. Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Düsseldorf, Heinrich- Pre-population of panel assignment streamlines clinical Heine-Universität, Düsseldorf, Germany, 16Institute of Human input and opens systems to those less aware of the breadth Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, of panels available. Germany, 17Clinical Genetics Group, MRC Weatherall H.K. Brittain: None. E.R.A. Thomas: None. A. Tucci: Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John None. E. Baple: None. E.M. McDonagh: None. A. Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom Rueda-Martin: None. L. Daugherty: None. R. Foulger: None. S. Leigh: None. O. Niblock: None. E. Williams: Variants affecting the function of different subunits of the None. A. Rendon: None. M.J. Caulfield: None. R.H. BAF chromatin-remodelling complex lead to various neu- Scott: None. D. Smedley: None. rodevelopmental syndromes, including Coffin-Siris syn- drome. Furthermore, variants in proteins containing PHD fingers, motifs recognizing specific histone tail modifica- C09 Mendelian chromatin disorders tions, have been associated with several neurological and developmental-delay disorders. Here, we report eight het- C09.1 erozygousdenovovariants(oneframeshift,twosplicesite, Mutations in the BAF-complex subunit DPF2 are and five missense) in the gene encoding the BAF complex associated with Coffin-Siris syndrome subunit double plant homeodomain finger 2 (DPF2). Affected individuals share common clinical features G.Vasileiou1,S.Vergarajauregui2,S. Endele1,B. Popp1,C. described in individuals with Coffin-Siris syndrome, Büttner1,A. B. Ekici1,M. Gerard3,N.C. Bramswig4,B. including coarse facial features, global developmental Albrecht4,J.Clayton-Smith5,J.Morton6,S.Tomkins7,K.Low7, delay, intellectual disability, speech impairment, and A. Weber8, M.Wenzel9,J.Altmüller10,Y.Li11,B. Wollnik12,G. hypoplasia of fingernails and toenails. All variants occur806 J.delPicchia within the highly conserved PHD1 and PHD2 motifs. NuRD complex, hasrecentlybeen shownto be specifically Moreover, missense variants are situated close to zinc involved in late neural radial migration and layer specifi- binding sites and are predicted to disrupt these sites. Pull- cation in the developing cortex. Unlike other members of down assays of recombinant proteins and histone peptides the CHD subfamily, pathogenic alterations in the CHD3 revealed that a subset of the identified missense variants gene have not yet been implicated in a human neurodeve- abolishorimpairDPF2bindingtounmodifiedandmodified lopmentalphenotype.Uponwholegenomesequencingofa H3 histone tails. These results suggest an impairment of cohortofchildrenwithrarespeechdisorders,wediscovered PHDfingerstructuralintegrityandcohesionandmostlikely an individual with a de novo missense variant in CHD3. an aberrant recognition of histone modifications. Further- Through a genotype-driven approach to identify more var- more, the overexpression of these variants in HEK293 and iants disrupting the gene, we collected 35 individuals with COS7 cell lines was associated with the formation of de novo CHD3 mutations. The vast majority of individuals nuclear aggregates and the recruitment of both wild-type had missense mutations. These mutations showed a sig- DPF2 and BRG1 to these aggregates. Expression analysis nificantclusteringwithinthecharacteristicATPase/helicase of truncating variants found in the affected individuals domain of the encoded protein, in and around conserved indicated that the aberrant transcripts escape nonsense- SNF2-motifs.Weusedfunctionalassaystodemonstratethe mediated decay. Altogether, we provide compelling evi- effectofthemissensemutationsontheATPaseactivityand dence that de novo variants in DPF2 cause Coffin-Siris remodeling activity of the CHD3 protein. We implicate de syndrome and propose a dominant-negative mechanism of novo mutations of CHD3 in a new syndrome that is char- pathogenicity. acterized by intellectual disability, macrocephaly, impaired G. Vasileiou: None. S. Vergarajauregui: None. S. speech and language and a characteristic facial phenotype. Endele: None. B. Popp: None. C. Büttner: None. A.B. L. Snijders Blok: None. J. Rousseau: None. J. Twist: Ekici:None.M.Gerard:None.N.C.Bramswig:None.B. None. S. Ehresmann: None. H. Venselaar: None. M. Albrecht: None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. J. Morton: Takaku: None. J.D. Roberts: None. R.M. Petrovich: None. S. Tomkins: None. K. Low: None. A. Weber: None.R.Pfundt:None.P.Deriziotis:None.T.Kleefstra: None.M.Wenzel:None.J.Altmüller:None.Y.Li:None. None. H.G. Brunner: None. P.A. Wade: None. S.E. B. Wollnik: None. G. Hoganson: None. M. Plona: None. Fisher: None. P.M. Campeau: None. M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Gene Dx. C.T. Thiel: None. H. Lüdecke: None. T.M. C09.3 Strom: None. E. Calpena: None. A.O.M. Wilkie: None. Germline mutations on the histone H4 core cause a D. Wieczorek: None. F.B. Engel: None. A. Reis: None. developmental syndrome by affecting DNA damage response and cell cycle control C09.2 Novel neurodevelopmental syndrome due to de novo F.Tessadori1,2,J.Giltay1,J.Hurst3,M.Massink1,K.Duran1,H. mutations in chromatin remodeler CHD3 in 35 patients R. Vos1, R.M. vanEs1, theDDDstudy, R. Scott3,K. van Gassen1, J.Bakkers2,1,G.vanHaaften1 L.SnijdersBlok1,2,3,J.Rousseau4,J.Twist5,S.Ehresmann4,H. Venselaar1,M. Takaku5,J. D.Roberts5, R.M.Petrovich5,R. 1UMC Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Hubrecht Institute, Pfundt1, P.Deriziotis2,T. Kleefstra1,3, H.G.Brunner1,3,6,P.A. Utrecht, Netherlands, 3North East Thames Regional Genetics Wade5,S.E. Fisher2,3,P. M.Campeau4,7 Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London, United Kingdom 1Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Covalent modifications of histones have an established role Netherlands, 3Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and as chromatin effectors, as they control processes such as Behaviour, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4CHU Sainte-Justine DNA replication, transcription and repair or regulate ResearchCenter,Montreal,QC,Canada,5NationalInstituteof nucleosomal structure. Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC, Here we report monoallelic missense mutations affecting United States, 6Maastricht University Medical Center, Lysine 91 in the histone H4 core (H4K91) in three Maastricht, Netherlands, 7Sainte-Justine Hospital, University individualswithasyndromeofgrowthdelay,microcephaly of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada and intellectual disability. ThehumangenomecontainsfifteenhistoneH4genes,all Chromatin remodeling is of crucial importance during differing at the nucleotide level but encoding an invariant neurodevelopment. CHD3, a member of the CHD sub- H4 protein. RNA sequencing analysis of patient cells familyofchromatinremodelingATPasesandsubunitofthe showed that ±8% of H4 cDNA molecules carried theAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 807 mutatedallele.Analysisofthechromatinfractionofpatient 7Institute of Medical Genetics, University Hospital of Wales, fibroblasts by mass spectrometry revealed that 1-2% of Heath Park, Cardiff, United Kingdom, 8Division of Pediatric histone H4 molecules contained the mutated residue. Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of British Expression of the H4 mutants in zebrafish embryos Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 9Department of Medical recapitulate the developmental anomalies seen in the Genetics, Children’s and Women’s Health Centre of British patients. We show that the H4 mutations cause genomic Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 10Wessex Clinical instability, resulting in increased apoptosis and cell cycle Genetics Service and Division of Human Genetics, Princess progression anomalies during early development. Mechan- Anne Hospital, Southampton, United Kingdom, 11Northern istically, our findings indicate an important role for the Ireland Regional Genetics Service, Belfast City Hospital, ubiquitination of H4K91 in genomic stability during Belfast HSC Trust, Belfast, United Kingdom, 12West Midlands embryonic development. Regional Clinical Genetics Service and Birmingham Health Our results highlight the functional importance of the Partners,BirminghamWomen’sandChildren’sHospitalNHS histone core and establish H4K91 and its modifications in Foundation Trust, Birmingham, United Kingdom, 13Sheffield therealmofhumangeneticdisorders.LossofLysine91on Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children’s Hospital NHS histone H4 acts in a genetically dominant manner. On a Foundation Trust, Western Bank, Sheffield, United Kingdom, biological level, our data presented here point at a 14Peninsula Clinical Genetics Service, Exeter, United mechanism involving inherent DNA damage accumulation Kingdom,15NorthofScotlandRegionalGeneticsService,NHS and early perturbed cell cycle through which missense Grampian, Department of Medical Genetics Medical School, mutations affecting K91 are causative for an identifiable Foresterhill, Aberdeen, United Kingdom syndromeconsistingofdysmorphicfeaturesandintellectual disability. Introduction: Histone lysine methylation underpins gene F. Tessadori: None. J. Giltay: None. J. Hurst: None. regulation. Mutations in 11 out of 51 histone lysine M.Massink:None.K.Duran:None.H.R.Vos:None.R. methylases (KMT) and demethylases (KDM) encoding M. van Es: None. R. Scott: None. K. van Gassen: None. genes are known to cause autosomal dominant or X-linked J. Bakkers: None. G. van Haaften: None. human developmental disorders (DDs). We hypothesised that mutations in additional KMT/KDMs may cause C09.4 novel DDs. Examination of the landscape of histone lysine methylases Methods: Using gene attributes and variant frequencies and demethylasesin humandevelopmental disordersleads in general populations, we prioritised KMT/KDMs as to identification of novel syndromes candidate genes for dominant or recessive DDs. We then systematically interrogated databases of exome and array- V.Faundes1,2,W.G.Newman1,3,L.Bernardini4,N.Canham5,J. CGH of individuals with DDs. Clayton-Smith1,3,B.Dallapiccola6,S.J.Davies7,M.K.Demos8, Results: We identified 22 KMT/KDMs as additional A.Goldman3,H.Gill9,R.Horton10,B.Kerr3,D.Kumar7,A. candidates for dominant DDs. We detected significant Lehman9,S.McKee11,J.Morton12,M.J.Parker13,J.Rankin14, enrichment of de novo (DN) heterozygous or bi-allelic L.Robertson15,I.K.Temple10,ClinicalAssessmentoftheUtility protein truncating variants (PTVs) for specific genes in ofSequencingandEvaluationasaService(CAUSES)Study,The individuals with DDs against controls. Detailed phenotyp- DecipheringDevelopmentalDisorders(DDD)Study,S.Banka1,3 ing of affected individuals uncovered several novel disorders. These included a range of neurodevelopmental 1Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, Division of phenotypes caused by KMT2C or ASH1L haploinsuffi- Evolution&GenomicSciences,SchoolofBiologicalSciences, ciency and a dysmorphic overgrowth DD caused by Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of heterozygousKMT5BPTVs.Wealsoidentifiedarecogniz- Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, 2Laboratorio de able dysmorphic DD caused by bi-allelic KDM5B muta- GenéticayEnfermedadesMetabólicas,InstitutodeNutricióny tions, first autosomal recessive syndrome in this pathway. Tecnología de los Alimentos, Universidad de Chile, Santiago, We also expanded the phenotype spectrum of KMT2B DN Chile, 3Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Mary’s PTVs. Overall, we found that pathogenic KMT/KDM Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, mutations underlie the diagnoses in >1.5% individuals Health Innovation Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, with DDs. 4Cytogenetics Unit, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, Conclusions: Collectively, these results emphasize the Roma, Italy, 5North West Thames Regional Genetics Service, significance of histone lysine methylation in normal and London North West Healthcare NHS Trust, Northwick Park abnormalhumandevelopment.Ourresultsdemonstratethat Hospital, Harrow, United Kingdom, 6Scientific Directorate, systematic clinically oriented pathway-based analysis of Bambino Gesù Children’s Hospital, IRCCS, Roma, Italy, genomic data can accelerate the discovery of rare genetic808 J.delPicchia disorders. This work enables phenotype and molecular division. Patient fibroblast lines showed increased pro- aetiology-basedsub-classificationofthisimportantgroupof liferative capacity, which may contribute to the phenotype. chromatin disorders. E.J. Bhoj: None. Grants: CONICYT(72160007) V. Faundes: None. W.G. Newman: None. L. Bernar- C09.6 dini: None. N. Canham: None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. De novo mutations in the SET nuclear proto-oncogene B. Dallapiccola: None. S.J. Davies: None. M.K. Demos: (SET), encoding a component of the inhibitor of histone None. A. Goldman: None. H. Gill: None. R. Horton: acetyltransferases (INHAT) complex in patients with non- None. B. Kerr: None. D. Kumar: None. A. Lehman: syndromic intellectual disability (ID) None. S. McKee: None. J. Morton: None. M.J. Parker: None. J. Rankin: None. L. Robertson: None. I.K. S.J.C.Stevens1,V.vanderSchoot1,M.S.Leduc2,T.Rinne3,S.R. Temple: None. S. Banka: None. Lalani2,M.M.Weiss4,J.M.vanHagen4,A.A.M.Lachmeijer5,S. G.Stockler-Ipsiroglu6,A.Lehman7,H.G.Brunner3 C09.5 DenovogermlinevariantsinHistone3Family3A(H3F3A) 1Department of Clinical Genetics, Maastricht University andHistone3Family3B(H3F3B)associatedwithasevere Medical Centre, Maastricht, Netherlands, 2Department of neurodegenerative disorder with unique functional effect Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, different from somatic mutations Houston, TX, United States, 3Department of Genetics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, E. J.Bhoj 4Dept of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Dept of Genetics, Utrecht Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United UniversityMedicalCentre,Utrecht,Netherlands,6Department States of Pediatrics, British Columbia Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada, 7Department of Genetics, British Histones are nuclear proteins that associate with DNA Columbia Children’s Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada packageditintocondensedchromatin.Theyaredynamically decorated with post-translational modifications (PTMs), Introduction:Theroleofdisturbedchromatinremodellingin which regulate processeslike DNArepair,geneexpression, thepathogenesisofIDiswellestablishedandisillustratedby and mitosis/meiosis. The specific Histone 3 Family 3 his- de novo mutations found in aplethora ofgenesencodingfor tones (H3.3), encoded by H3F3A and H3F3B, mark active proteins of the epigenetic regulatory machinery in this dis- genes, maintain epigenetic memory, and maintain hetero- order.HerewedescribemutationsintheSETgene,encoding chromatin and telomeric integrity. Specific somatic muta- a component ofthe “inhibitor ofacetyltransferases” complex tions in H3F3A/B have been associated with pediatric involved in transcriptional silencing, as novel cause for ID. tumors, but no germline mutations have been described. MaterialsandMethods:Wholeexomesequencing(WES) Herewereport24patients,ages4monthsto32years,with was used to detect mutations in the SET gene in four ID de novo missense germline mutations in H3F3A or H3F3B patientsandinanaffectedmotherandson.Literaturerevealed who share a core phenotype of progressive neurologic dys- four additional patients with de novo SET mutations. functionandcongenitalanomalies,butnomalignanciesyet. Results: WES identified three de novo loss-of-function Allpatientshavemildtoprofounddevelopmentaldelay,and (LoF) mutations and two de novo missense mutations. some also have seizures, developmental regression, con- BesidesIDthemajorityofpatientshadseverespeechdelay, genital heart disease, and craniosynostosis. These 16 muta- but other clinical features were inconsistent. The mutations tions in 24 patients, are all de novo and not found in large affected all four known alternative transcripts of the SET population datasets. We analyzed histones from several gene. In contrast, LoF mutations in SET are exceedingly patients by mass spectroscopy (MS) and demonstrated that rareinthenormalpopulationandifpresenttheyaffectonly the mutant histone proteins are present at a level similar to one of the four SET transcripts. that of wild-type H3.3. We quantified PTMs on mutant Conclusions: Our study identifies SET as a new histones and demonstrated strikingly aberrant patterns of componentoftheepigeneticregulatorymodulesunderlying local, but not global, dysregulation of histone PTM. This human cognitive disorders and establishes de novo muta- suggests the pathogenic mechanism of germline histone tionsinthisgeneasnovelcausefornon-syndromicID.The mutationsisdistinctfromthatoftheglobaldysregulationof pivotal role of SET in neurogenesis is evident from cancer-associated somatic histone mutations. RNA-Seq on numerous previous in vitro and animal studies. The SET patient lymphoblast and fibroblasts showed a statistically protein interacts with several proteins encoded by known significant upregulation of genes related to mitosis and cell autosomal dominant ID genes, i.e. EP300, CREBBP,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 809 SETBP1, KMT2A, RAC1 and CTCF, most of which are 2F1000Res. 5:2124, 2017; 3bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10. involved in histone modification. 1101/231712. Funding:NSERCDiscovery RGPIN-2015- S.J.C. Stevens: None. V. van der Schoot: None. M.S. 06290. Leduc: None. T. Rinne: None. S.R. Lalani: None. M.M. P.K. Rogan: Other; Significant; CytogGnomix. E.J. Weiss: None. J.M. van Hagen: None. A.A.M. Lachmei- Mucaki: None. J.Z.L. Zhao: None. J.H.M. Knoll: Other; jer: None. S.G. Stockler-Ipsiroglu: None. A. Lehman: Significant; CytoGnomix. None. H.G. Brunner: None. P15.27C Establishmentoftumor-derivedorganoids:anapproachto C10 Best Poster Session 1 personalized medicine P15.05A M.Ovejero-Sánchez1,2,3,J.Fernández-Mateos1,2,P. Vázquez- Comprehensive prediction of responses to chemotherapies Cárdenas1,3,R. González-Sarmiento1,2,3 by biochemically-inspired machine learning 1MolecularMedicineUnit.DepartmentofMedicine.University P. K.Rogan, E.J. Mucaki,J. Z.L. Zhao,J. H.M.Knoll of Salamanca., Salamanca, Spain, 2Institute of Biomedical Research of Salamanca (IBSAL), Salamanca, Spain, 3Institute University of Western Ontario, London, ON, Canada of Molecular and Cellular Biology of Cancer (IBMCC). University of Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca, Spain Chemotherapyresponsevariessignificantlyamongcancer patients, and drug resistance is responsible for significant Introduction: Organoids are three-dimensional in vitro amount of this mortality. The patterns of gene expression grown structures derived from induced pluripotent stem and copy number changes in the tumour can predict cells,adultstemcellsorembryonicstemcellscapableof treatment outcomes after chemotherapy by supervised self-renewal and self-organization, that exhibit the same machine learning (ML)1-3. Computational models based organ functionality as the original tissue. They present on transcriptome gene signatures of tumor cell lines were organ-specific differential cells types and tissue com- usedpredictchemosensitivityandresistancefor25cancer partmentalization. Additionally, they can be used to drugs. This learned set of genes was used to predict detect genetic alterations in patients. In this work we clinical outcomes from tumor transcriptomes. Gene sig- studied the potential of this type of culture for modeling natures have been derived for 5-fluorouracil, bortezomib, cancer. carboplatin, cisplatin, docetaxel, doxorubicin, erlotinib, Materials and Methods: Organoids from fresh tumor epirubicin, etoposide, gefitinib, gemcitabine, hydro- tissues of 40 patients with several types of cancer (colon xycyclophosphamide, imatinib, irinotecan, Ixabepilone, (CRC), endometrial, ovary, kidney, lung, head and neck methotrexate, oxaliplatin, paclitaxel, pemetrexed, rapa- squamous cell carcinoma) were established. Tumor tissues mycin, sorafenib, tamoxifen, topotecan, vinblastine, and were dissociated into functional units, seeded in Matrigel vinorelbine.Thesearecomprisedof3-17biochemically- and cultured with the appropriate medium. relevant genes, and have misclassification rates from 0% Results: We established organoids from six types of to 26.1%. Validation is performed in patients with breast, cancer and determined their culture conditions. The bladder, ovarian, and colon cancers. Signatures derived cytokines needed for each cell type were different but all from tumour cell lines predicted complete remission from of them include EGF, Noggin, Y-27632 and Wnt-3A. For paclitaxeltreatmentin84%ofbreastcancerpatients(10% organoids derived from CRC, R-spondin, FGF10, FGF2, more accurate than differential expression analysis). prostaglandin E2, nicotinamide, A83-01 and gastrin are Expression of MAPT correlated with survival in needed. Organoids derived from kidney cancer, also need paclitaxel-treated breast cancer patients. Cisplatin and VEGF. Those derived from lung cancer require VEGF and hydroxycyclophosphamide-resistance were respectively progesterone and β-estradiol are necessary for organoids predicted with 71% and 66% accuracy in bladder and derived from gynecological cancers. breast cancer patients. Analysis of a comprehensive set Conclusions: Organoids can be obtained from different ML-basedgene signaturesfor apanelofdrugsin primary cancer tissues. For their development, it is essential to tumours would be feasible to carry out prior to treatment, choose the right cytokines to grow them in. These cultures and could influence selection of therapy. If current treat- have shown to mimic three-dimensional structure of the ment plans are not adequate, ML-based genomic origin tissue and could be a perfect source to determine profiling may also offer alternative tailored strategies for genetic alterations in these patients. adjuvant chemotherapies. 1Mol.Oncol. 10:85-100, 2016; This project was funded by PI16/01920810 J.delPicchia M. Ovejero-Sánchez: None. J. Fernández-Mateos: B.Bardoni1,V.Trezza2,S.Martin1,P.Vincent3,L.Ciranna4,M. None. P. Vázquez-Cárdenas: None. R. González- Jarjat1,S. Delhaye1,S.Castagnola1,F. Melancia2,T. Maurin1 Sarmiento: None. 1Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, P15.03C Valbonne, France, 2University Roma 3, Roma, Italy, 3Institut Correction of splice mutation in COL6A1 gene with novel deBiologieParisSeine,Paris,France,4UniversitàdiCatania, antisense oligonucleotides as prototype for other orphan Catania, Italy geneticdiseases Fragile X syndrome (FXS), the most common form of D.Yagel1,Y. Anikster1,2,A. Veber1,M.Shohat3 inherited intellectual disability and a leading cause of aut- ism spectrum disorder (ASD). It is due to the functional 1Metabolic Disease Unit, Edmond and Lily Safra Children's deficiency of the Fragile X Mental Retardation Protein Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, (FMRP), an RNA-binding protein involved in translational Israel, 2The Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Sheba regulation of many proteins having key roles in synaptic Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel, 3Sheba morphology and plasticity. No specific and effective treat- Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center,Tel- ment for FXS is available. We searched for FMRP targets Hashomer, Ramat Gan, Israel byHITS-CLIPduringearlydevelopmentofmultiplemouse brain regions (hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum) at a Premessenger RNA splicing is a necessary step in the time when FMRP is most highly expressed and synapto- production of a functional protein product. Many genetic genesis peaks. Our data point out one specific phospho- variants lead to aberrant splicing and cause genetic dis- diesterase mRNA as a prominent target of FMRP which eases. One prominent technique for correcting splicing- negatively modulates its translation and intracellular trans- related mutations is through the use of splice-switching port. Since the abundance of this protein and activity are antisense oligonucleotides (AONs). The antisense drug increased in Fmr1-KO cortex and hippocampus impacting Nusinersen for SMA, recently approved by the FDA, is the homeostasis of cAMP/cGMP, we propose here a new one notable example. Cummings et al. recently identified therapeutic approach for FXS, based on the specific phar- a highly recurrent pathogenic splice variant (c.904 macological inhibition of this protein. We will present data +189C>T)inCOL6A1asageneticcauseofCollagenVI- showing pharmacological inhibition ofthis enzymerescues related dystrophies (COL6-RD). The variant, located in some behavioral deficits in newborn and adolescent Fmr1- intron 11, leads to the insertion of a dominantly-acting nullmicesuchassocialcommunication,discriminationand pseudoexon that disrupts the gene’s critical motif. They interaction. Importantly, chronic blockade in newborn estimate that ~25% of all cases with COL6-RD, but Fmr1-KO mice, followed by a wash-out interval, results in negative by exon sequencing are due to this mutation. therescueofthealteredsocialbehaviorinadolescentmice, This variant was found in a de novo pattern in over 30 showingthatthebeneficialeffectsofearlypharmacological patients,andwerecentlyidentifieditinourlabina4year blockade of our target are long-lasting. old girl with COL6-RD. As part of in silico machine B. Bardoni: None. V. Trezza: None. S. Martin: None. learning tools we are developing in our lab, we designed P.Vincent:None.L.Ciranna:None.M.Jarjat:None.S. 16 AONs with 2’-OMe modifications and a phosphor- Delhaye:None.S.Castagnola:None.F.Melancia:None. othioate backbone to correct the c.904+189C>T variant. T. Maurin: None. The most effective AONs were able to reduce the mutant allele by 95% in a dose dependent manner. The AONs P15.41A designed in this work, as well as those designed in the 800 exomes for rare disease research: outcomes of the independent work by Bolduc et al., may offer a treatment transnationalBBMRI-LPCWEScallincollaborationwith for children suffering from the collagen VI-like dystro- EuroBioBank and RD-Connect phy.Weexpecttheknowledgegainedinthisprojecttobe applicable to a wide range of splice mutations. Grant S. Laurie1,S.Beltran1, M.Bayes1,B. Fuste1,M.Gut1, L. support: Thrasher Research Fund. Matalonga1,D.Piscia1, J.Dawson2,R. Thompson2,E. López- D. Yagel: None. Y. Anikster: None. A. Veber: None. Martín3,M.Posada3,L.Monaco4,C.Wang4,G.B.vanOmmen5, M. Shohat: None. S. Sims6,E. Zeggini6,H.Löchmuller2, I.Gut1,BBMRI-LPC consortium P15.11C Modulation of cGMP and cAMP as a new therapeutic 1CentroNacionaldeAnálisisGenómico(CNAG-CRG),Center target for Fragile X Syndrome for Genomic Regulation; Barcelona Institute of Science andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 811 Technology (BIST); Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), improves the behavioral phenotype of a mouse model of Barcelona,Spain,2InstituteofGeneticMedicine,MRCCentre Birk-Barel syndrome for Neuromuscular Diseases, Newcastle, United Kingdom, 3Institute of Rare Diseases Research, IIER-ISCIII; Centre for A.Cooper1,S.Jagannath2,T.Butto1,M.Linke1,F.Lesage3,K. Biomedical Network Research on Rare Diseases, CIBERER, Radyushkin4,J.Roeper2, S.Schweiger1,U.Zechner1 Madrid, Spain, 4Fondazione Telethon, Milano, Italy, 5Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical 1Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center, Center,Leiden,Netherlands,6WellcomeTrustSangerInstitute, JohannesGutenbergUniversity,Mainz,Germany,2Instituteof Hinxton, United Kingdom Neurophysiology, Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany, 32LabEx ICST, Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et The2016BBMRI-LPCWESCallofferedauniquefree-of- Cellulaire, CNRS and Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, charge opportunity to genetically diagnose rare disease Valbonne, France, 4Focus Program Translational patients with biological samples deposited within the Neuroscience, University Medical Center of the Johannes EuroBioBank network. 800 whole exomes were sequenced Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany from 17 distinct projects, each having 2-3 principal inves- tigators from different countries. The projects spanned a Kcnk9/KCNK9 is a maternally expressed imprinted gene, wide range of rare disease phenotypes, including neuro- whose mutations are causative for the maternally inherited muscular disorders, inborn errors of metabolism, albinism, Birk-Barel mental retardation syndrome. It encodes a K2P- and sudden cardiac depth, amongst others, and informed channel that controls resting membrane potential and consent had to permit data sharing for research purposes excitability of neurons. through controlled access repositories such as the EGA ByanalyzingWT,Kcnk9KOmatandKcnk9KOhommicein (https://ega.crg.eu/)andRD-Connect(http://rd-connect.eu/). a behavioral test battery during the light phase, our data Clinical and phenotypic information for every case was showsthattheabsenceofKcnk9leadstoimpairedworking collected in RD-Connect’s customised PhenoTips instance, memory, reduced acoustic startle response and abnormal using standards such as the Human Phenotype Ontology sensorimotor gating. Investigations of circadian rhythms (HPO), OMIM and Orpha codes, and sequencing under- revealedselectivelyincreasedlocomotoractivityduringthe taken at the CNAG in Spain, and the WTSI in the UK. dark phase in Kcnk9KOhom and, to a significantly smaller Sequencing data was processed using the RD-Connect extent, in Kcnk9KOmat mice compared to controls. Using standard analysis pipeline and results made available Quantification of Allele-Specific Expression by Pyrose- through the RD-Connect Genome-Phenome Analysis Plat- quencing (QUASEP) and Allele-Specific RT-qPCR in form (https://platform.rd-connect.eu/) once all call require- wildtype (C57BL/6xCast/Ei)F1 hybrid mice, biallelic ments had been met. The Platform allows researchers to Kcnk9 expression from the repressed paternal allele (1- analyse and interpret their genotype:phenotype data pri- 17% of transcripts) was observed in all analyzed brain vately for up to 6 months before it is shared with other regions and was particularly strong in the locus coeruleus authorised users. It also facilitates anonymised data sharing (LC). Slice patch-clamp recordings revealed wildtype-like through APIs from initiatives such as the GA4GH/IRDiRC pacemaker activity during the dark phase in LC neurons MatchMaker Exchange (http://www.matchmakerexchange. from Kcnk9KOmat but not from Kcnk9KOhom mice, which org/) and Beacon Network (https://beacon-network.org). dischargedatsignificantlyhigherfrequencies.Theneuronal We report on the challenges and lessons learned from data are in line with the locomotor phenotype and conducting such a complex transnational collaborative demonstrate the functional relevance of paternal Kcnk9 initiative and present an up-to-date diagnostic yield of the expression. project as a whole, with some illustrative success stories. Through epigenetic manipulation with CI994, a specific S.Laurie:None.S.Beltran:None.M.Bayes:None.B. histone deacetylase inhibitor, we could induce a significant Fuste: None. M. Gut: None. L. Matalonga: None. D. up-regulation of the paternal Kcnk9 allele in several Piscia: None. J. Dawson: None. R. Thompson: None. E. analyzedbrainregionsafterinjectionsinKcnk9KOmatmice. López-Martín: None. M. Posada: None. L. Monaco: Together with this we observed a significant behavioral None.C.Wang:None.G.B.vanOmmen:None.S.Sims: improvement of Kcnk9KOmat mice after CI994 treatment. None. E. Zeggini: None. H. Löchmuller: None. I. This novel approach shall open new avenues for treatment Gut: None. ofcognitivedysfunctionsinBirk-Barelsyndromeandother imprinting disorders. P17.06B A.Cooper:None.S.Jagannath:None.T.Butto:None. Inhibition of histone deacetylation up-regulates the M.Linke:None.F.Lesage:None.K.Radyushkin:None. repressed paternal allele of the imprinted Kcnk9 gene and J.Roeper:None.S.Schweiger:None.U.Zechner:None.812 J.delPicchia P11.017A P17.58B Efficient CrispR/Cas9-based nucleotide editing to model A CTCF- dependent chromatin interaction ensures robust cardiovascular anomalies of Cantú syndrome in zebrafish enhancer - promoter communication at the Shh locus H.I.Roessler1,F.Tessadori2,S.M.Savelberg1,J.Bakkers2,M. C. Paliou1,P. Guckelberger1, I.Jerković2,V. Heinrich1, S. M.van Haelst3,G.vanHaaften1 Haas1, S.Mundlos1,3,4,G.Andrey1 1Department of Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, 1Max Planck for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 2Institute of Human Genetics, Montpellier, France, 3Institute 2Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Centre forMedicalandHumanGenetics,CharitéUniversitätsmedizin, Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, 3Department of Clinical Berlin, Germany, 4Berlin-Brandenburg Center for Genetics, Amsterdam Medical Center and Free University Regenerative Therapies (BCRT), Charité Universitätsmedizin, Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands Berlin, Germany Cantú Syndrome (CS) is a rare genetic disorder caused by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the distal-posterior gain-of-function (GOF) mutations in genes encoding the part of developing limb buds and controls digit growth, pore-forming (Kir6.1, KCNJ8) and regulatory (SUR2, number and identity. The ZRS enhancer, which regulates ABCC9) subunits of an ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) Shh transcription in developing limbs, is located in the channel. CS is characterized by facial anomalies, hyper- intron 5 of the constitutively transcribed gene Lmbr1 and trichosis, extensive cardiac abnormalities and dilated cere- has been involved in numerous patient cases with limb bral blood vessels. CS is debilitating with no specific malformations. Shh and the ZRS communicate through a therapy available. Hence, we applied a novel CrispR/Cas9- 1Mb-large stable chromatin interaction. However the based genome editing approach to create CS zebrafish mechanismfacilitatingthislong-rangecontactisnotknown models for therapeutic drug screening. yet. Using a series of CRISPR/Cas9 engineered alleles and We efficiently introduced three CS-specific point muta- 4C-seqexperimentsinmouseembryos,weaimtoelucidate tions in abbc9 and kcnj8 of zebrafish by combining the the role of the Lmbr1 constitutive transcription as well as CrispR/Cas9 system with a short template oligonucleotide CTCF in the establishment of the Shh-ZRS chromatin harboring the site of mutation. To demonstrate functional interaction. Deletion of the Lmbr1 promoter abolishes the validity, we performed live high-speed video-imaging of transcriptionovertheZRS,yet4C-seqexperimentsshowed zebrafish heart and cardinal vein to assess cardiovascular that the contact frequency between Shh and its enhancer function at 5 days post fertilization. Additionally, cerebral remains unchanged in these embryos allowing for normal blood vessels were examined for dilations in live kcnj8 Shh expression. In contrast, the removal of CTCF binding mutants in a Tg(kdrl:GFP) transgenic background. sitesaroundandwithintheZRSresultsintheemergenceof Analogous to CS patients, knock-in fish reveal signifi- compensatory CTCF binding sites as well as in altered 3D cantly enlarged ventricles with enhanced cardiac output, chromatin architecture, diminished Shh transcription and contractility and development of pericardial edema. A skeletal abnormalities. Our results suggest that CTCF acts significantly reduced vein blood flow velocity can be to support a robust and permissive enhancer-promoter associated with diminished vascular tone reported in interactionthatensuresnormalShhexpression.ThisCTCF- patients. Additionally, kcnj8 mutant fish display distinct dependent regulatory mechanism provides a framework to cerebral vasodilation in a structure resembling the human understand the pathomechanism of unsolved structural circle of Willis. variants described at the Shh locus in patients with skeletal We developed a novel technique to establish CS-specific abnormalities. zebrafish that closely model cardiovascular features and C. Paliou: None. P. Guckelberger: None. I. Jerković: therefore open the possibility of phenotyping-based drug None. V. Heinrich: None. S. Haas: None. S. Mundlos: screening potentially repurposing sulfonylureas already None. G. Andrey: None. clinically applied to inhibit GOF KATP channels involved in neonatal diabetes. Consequently, future studies in our P17.22B model will improve understanding and clinical chromatinlandscapeofD4Z4repeatinteractomeunveilsa management of CS. muscle atrophy signature in facioscapulohumeral E-Rare grant I-2101-B26 dystrophy H.I. Roessler: None. F. Tessadori: None. S.M. Savel- berg: None. J. Bakkers: None. M.M. van Haelst: None. A.Cortesi1,M.Pesant1,S.Sinha1,F.Gregoretti2,L.Antonelli2, G. van Haaften: None. G.Oliva2,G.Soldà3,4, B.Bodega1Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 813 1IstitutoNazionalediGeneticaMolecolare,Milan,Italy,2CNR cause mortality. In the absence of therapies for CKD pre- Institute for High Performance Computing and Networking, vention, understanding the biological regulators of glo- Naples,Italy,3DepartmentofBiomedicalSciences,Humanitas merular filtration rate (GFR), the key element that defines University, Milan, Italy, 4Humanitas Clinical and Research CKD, is of the highest relevance. Center, Milan, Italy Materials and methods. Within the CKDGen Consor- tium,121studiesappliedstandardizedprotocolsandscripts Despite increasing insights in genome structure organiza- torungenome-wideassociationscans(GWAS)ofestimated tion, the role of DNA repetitive elements, accounting for GFR (eGFR) on ~9 million high-quality SNPs, imputed on more than two thirds of the human genome, remains elu- the 1000 Genomes ph3v5 or Haplotype Reference Con- sive.Facioscapulohumeral Dystrophy (FSHD) is associated sortium datasets. We performed fixed-effect meta-analysis with deletion of D4Z4 repeat array below 11 units at ofGWASdataon>750,000participantsofEuropean,East- 4q35.2. It is known that the deletion alters chromatin Asian, South-Asian, Hispanic, and African ancestries. structureincis,leadingtogeneupregulation.Hereweshow Effect heterogeneitydue to ancestry was investigated using a genome-wide role of 4q-D4Z4 array in modulating gene trans-ethnic genome-wide meta-regression as implemented expression via 3D nuclear contacts. We have developed an in MR-MEGA. integrated strategy of 4q-D4Z4 specific 4C-seq and chro- Results. Genomic inflation was negligible: lambda = matin segmentation analysis, showing that D4Z4 3D inter- 1.05 and LD score regression intercept = 1.04. Across actome and chromatin states of interacting genes are ethnicities, we identified 3081-Mb segments containing ≥1 impaired in FSHD; in particular, genes which have lost the SNP associated with eGFR (pvalue ≤ 5E-08): 228 ofthese D4Z4interactionandwithamoreactivechromatinstateare loci were novel and 80 validated previously identified enriched for muscle atrophy signature. Among these, we signals. Trans-ethnic meta-regression revealed limited further characterized the muscle atrophy marker Atrogin 1 heterogeneity correlated with ancestry for most genomic (8q24), showing by 4C-seq and 3C strengthened enhancer- regions.ApproximateconditionalanalysisoftheEuropean- promoter chromatin loops at the locus and transcriptional ancestry dataset identified 269 independent variants, which upregulation during FSHD myogenic differentiation. togetherdoubledtheeGFRvarianceexplainedcomparedto Expression level of these genes is restored by an ectopic previous estimates. wildtype4q-D4Z4array,suggestingthattherepeatdirectly Conclusions. This study represents the largest screen of modulates the transcription of contacted targets. kidney function genetic loci to date. The large number of Our study provides insight into the epigenetic role of identified loci will contribute to increase our understanding DNA repeats in fine-tuning gene transcription by orches- of kidney function’s biology. trating the crosstalk between chromatin folding and C. Pattaro: None. structure, which deregulation maybe central in human genetic diseases pathophysiology. P18.12D This work has been supported by the following grants Multi-phenotype genome-wide meta-analysis of lipid levels toB.B.:EPIGENItalianflagshipprogram,ItalianMinistryof and BMI in 64,736 Europeans suggests shared genetic Health,AssociationFrançaisecontrelesMyopathies(AFM). architecture A.Cortesi: None. M. Pesant: None. S. Sinha: None. F. Gregoretti:None.L.Antonelli:None.G.Oliva:None.G. M.Kaakinen1,R. Mägi2,V. Lagou3,4,A. Claringbould5,K. Soldà: None. B. Bodega: None. Gaulton6, BIOS consortium,K. Fischer2,A. P. Morris7,I. Prokopenko1 P18.34B Geneticlandscapeofkidneyfunction:resultsfromatrans- 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, ethnic genome-wide association meta-analysis of >750,000 2University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3VIB Center for Brain & individuals Disease Research, Leuven, Belgium, 4KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 5University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, C. Pattaro,CKDGen Consortium Netherlands, 6Stanford University, Stanford, CA, United States, 7University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom Eurac Research, Institute for Biomedicine, Bolzano, Italy Serumlipidlevelsandobesitysharebiochemicalpathways, Introduction. Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is a public suggesting overlapping causal genetic factors. Genome- health threat, which affects >10% adult population in wide association studies (GWAS) of correlated phenotypes Western countries and is associated with increased risk of havebeendevelopedtoidentifysuchsharedgeneticeffects end-stage renal disease, cardiovascular disease, and all- with increased power.814 J.delPicchia We performed a multi-phenotype GWAS (MP-GWAS) We thus planned to build the largest publically available on three blood lipids (high-/low-density lipoprotein choles- catalog of eQTLs, coupled with a browser, to optimize and terol and triglycerides, HDL-C/LDL-C/TG) and body-mass simplify their interrogation. index (BMI) in 22 European-ancestry studies (N=64,736) We collected and manually curated 51 eQTL public imputed to the 1000 Genomes reference panel (Phase 1). studies ranging from 2007 to date, corresponding to more Wefitteda“reverseregression”modelbetweeneachsingle- than 100 sample types and 25 human populations for a nucleotide variant (SNV) and the linear combination of total of 259176 cis-eQTLs and 32929 genes with at least HDL-C/LDL-C/TG/BMI using the SCOPA software, i.e. one cis-eQTL (cis-eGenes). Most of the eQTLs studies for the ith variant SNV =β ×HDL-C+β ×LDL-C+ wereconductedinbloodsamplesfromhealthyindividuals i 1i 2i β ×TG+β ×BMI+ε,whereε~N(0,ơ2).Study-specific ofEuropeanancestry.Wefoundthatfor93%oftheknown 3i 4i i i effect sizes and variance-covariance matrices for each protein-coding genes were eGenes, 20% of them inter- variant were combined in a meta-analysis using the secting (r2≥0.8) with the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog and META-SCOPA software. 26% of whom considered as druggable. Furthermore, for We identified 14 novel and 41/9 established lipid/BMI thoseGWAS variants forwhich an eGene wasknown, we loci,respectively,atgenome-widesignificance(P<5x10-8). found that the NHGRI-EBI GWAS Catalog proposed the Nine novel (SDC1, SLC8A1, EPHA6, SPATA4, MAGI2, same gene as candidate target only for the 60% of CTSB,BC014119,SMCO4andCNTN5)and32established the times. loci showed effects on both BMI and lipids in the joint OureQTL-Catalogcanbeusedasareferencetomeasure model, suggesting shared genetic architecture. This obser- the degree of novelty for future eQTLs studies; it is vation was supported through hierarchical cluster analysis, provided within a platform with a web interface (LinDA) whichresultedinsixcladesrepresentingamixtureoflipid- that we plan to implement with other types of quantitative andBMI-associatedvariants.WedetectedsignificanteQTL traits (i.e. epigenetic, proteomic, metabolomics and micro- effects in whole blood, subcutaneous/visceral fat and liver biota)tobetterdissectthepleiotropyoftheGWASvariants. at 16 of the identified loci, and enrichment of association S. Onano: None. F. Cucca: None. M. Pala: None. signalsatHDAC6bindingsites,indicatingacriticalroleof associated loci in various cellular events. P18.48D The MP-GWAS is a powerful approach to detect shared Predicting rare allele carriers from genotyping-array data genetic effects on correlated phenotypes, as demonstrated using whole genome sequencing data in the Estonian by our analysis of lipids and BMI. population Funding: EU-FP7-MARVEL (PIEF-GA-2013-626461), WT205915. T. Sikka1, M.Palover1,T. Nikopensius2, M.Alver1,2,M.Nelis2, M. Kaakinen: None. R. Mägi: None. V. Lagou: None. A. Metspalu1,2,N.Tõnisson2,T. Esko1,2 A. Claringbould: None. K. Gaulton: None. K. Fischer: None. A.P. Morris: None. I. Prokopenko: None. 1University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 2Estonian Genome Center, Tartu, Estonia P18.25A The eQTLs Catalog and LinDA browser: a platform for Introduction:Geneticimputationworkswellwithfrequent prioritising target genes of GWAS variants alleles(minorallelefrequency>1%),however,itspredictive accuracydropsforraregeneticvariantswhichcanalsoplay S. Onano1,2,F. Cucca1,2, M.Pala2 a role for eventual development of diseases. Exceptions to such limitations are endogamous populations like Estonia. 1Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche - Università degli Studi Currently, 50,000 participants of Estonian biobank have di Sassari, Sassari, Italy, 2Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e been genotyped, with additional 100,000 being collected Biomedica - Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cagliari, withinnext year, and theirgeneticprofiles will beaddedto Italy electronic health records. We performed a study to predict and verify rare mutation carriers for severe disease predis- TheexpressionQuantitativeTraitsLoci(eQTLs)aregenetic positions such as familial breast cancer (in genes BRCA1 polymorphisms associated with changes ingeneexpression and BRCA2) and familial hypercholesterolemia (APOB) levels. They have been successfully used to prioritize the usinglongrangehaplotyping(LRH)and“surrogateparent” target genes of the variants associated with complex traits theory. and diseases (GWAS variants). Up to date a few eQTLs Materials and Methods: We used whole genome databases exist and they collect only a small portion of the sequence data of 2,244 and genotyped data of 15,416 available datasets. participants of the Estonian biobank. Whole genomeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 815 sequencing (WGS) with 30x coverage was carried out at tagging lead breast cancer and T2D/lupus erythematosus Broad Institute using Illumina HiSeq xTen platform. SNPs at CHST9 and JAZF1 loci among others. Novel Results: WGS identified 14, 4 and 6 mutations carriers CNVs covered drug-target genes, such as HTR3D/C/E, for BRCA1, BRCA2 and APOB, respectively. We identified PLEKHA1, and MGST1 and tagged SNPs associated with 16 mutations carriers for BRCA1 and 3 for BRCA2, and 5 major depressive disorder, age related macular degenera- carriers for APOB using LRH among genotyped samples. tion, and visceral fat, respectively. Wefailedtofindcarriersforadditional6outof9mutations, Conclusion:ThisisthemostdetailedCNV-taggingSNPs highlighting these as recent mutations and only present in catalog to date, which will help in dissecting the functional limited historical lineages. impact of SNP-trait associations and could drive the Conclusions:LRHisacost-effectiveapproachtopredict development of new drugs. additional rare mutation carriers for different disease Funding: WT205915 predispositions from genotyped data in endogamous E.Loizidou:None.E.Bellos:None.L.Coin:None.M. populations and will be important in the process of Johnson: None. I. Prokopenko: None. reporting clinically relevant mutations to Estonian biobank participants. Grants: PUT1660 & IUT20-60 (Estonian Research C11 Metabolic and Mitochondrial Disorder Council) T. Sikka: None. M. Palover: None. T. Nikopensius: C11.1 None. M. Alver: None. M. Nelis: None. A. Metspalu: De novo mutations in SLC25A24 cause a disorder None. N. Tõnisson: None. T. Esko: None. characterizedbyearlyaging,bonedysplasia,characteristic face, and early demise (Fontaine syndrome) P18.77A Deletions at 63 GWAS catalog loci based on genome-wide K. Writzl1, A.Maver1,L. Kovačič2,P. Martinez-Valero3,4,5,L. 1000 Genomes project CNV-tagging SNPs Contreras3,4,5,J.Satrustegui3,4,5,M. Castori6,L. Faivre7,8,P. Lapunzina9,A. B.P. vanKuilenburg10,S. Radović11,C. E.Loizidou1,E.Bellos1,L.Coin2,M.Johnson1,I.Prokopenko1 Thauvin7,8,B. Peterlin1,A.del Arco4,5,12, R.C. Hennekam13 1Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom, 1Clinical Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical 2University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia Centre, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 2Novartis Ireland Ltd, Dublin, Ireland, 3Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Background: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa UAM-CSIC, Universidad successfully exploit the variability of most abundant DNA Autónoma de Madrid-Consejo Superior de Investigaciones variants, namely single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), Científicas, Madrid, Spain, 4Instituto de Investigación but frequently fail to provide information about causal Sanitaria Fundación Jiménez Diaz (IISFJD), Madrid, Spain, mutations. Copy number variation (CNV) impacts pheno- 5Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades type variability and disease susceptibility and is one of the Raras(CIBERER),ISCIII,Madrid,Spain,6DivisionofMedical sources for the so-called “missing heritability”. Despite Genetics,IRCCS-CasaSollievodellaSofferenza,SanGiovanni notable genomic effects of both CNVs and SNPs, the cor- Rotondo, Italy, 7Centre de Référence Maladies Rares « relation between them is understudied, and the role of Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs», CNVs in SNP-based phenotypic effects is not established. Centre de Génétique, FHU TRANSLAD, Hôpital d'Enfants, Methods: We estimated linkage disequilibrium (LD) CHU Dijon Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 8UMR1231 GAD, betweenCNVsandSNPsinprotein-codinggenesusingthe Inserm - Université de Bourgogne Franche-Comté, Dijon, 1000Genomesprojectsequencingdata(1000G)fromphase France, 9Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular 3. We defined CNV-tagging SNPs for variants reported in (INGEMM)-IdiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, and theGWAScatalogfordisease/phenotypeassociations(July, CIBERER, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 2017) and for recently published DIAGRAM consortium Enfermedades Raras, Madrid, Spain, 10Laboratory Genetic type 2 diabetes (T2D) 1000G reference panel-imputed Metabolic Diseases, Academic Medical Center, University of meta-analysis in Europeans (PMID:28566273). Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 11IGA Technology Results: We replicated established CNV-tagging SNP ServicesSrl,Udine,Italy,12FacultaddeCienciasAmbientales effects at ten loci, including NEGR1, LCE3A/B, CFHR1-3 yBioquímica,CentroRegionaIdeInvestigacionesBiomédicas; for obesity, psoriasis and nephropathy, respectively. We Universidad de Castilla la Mancha, Toledo, Spain, revealed 31 novel CNVs (length 275bp to ~ 6kb), all but 13Department of Pediatrics, Academic Medical Center, one being deletions. Among novel CNVs fifteen are <1kb, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands816 J.delPicchia Mitochondria play a critical role in aging. Secondary 1TelethonInstituteofGeneticsandMedicine-TIGEM,Pozzuoli, mitochondrial dysfunction was reported in several proger- Italy, 2Universita degli Studi della Campania Luigi Vanvitelli, oid syndromes, caused by alterations in components of the Naples, Italy, 3Federico II University, Naples, Italy, 4Institute nuclear envelope (Hutchinson-Gilford progeria) or by of Genetics and Biophysics (IGB), CNR, Naples, Italy, 5Dept. impaired DNA repair (Cockayne syndrome). We present of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of evidencethataprogeroidFontainesyndromeiscausedbya Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6The Jackson primary mitochondrial dysfunction. Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, Farmington, CT, United Four unrelated cases are reported, sharing congenitally States, 7Dept. of Immunobiology, Yale University School of decreased subcutaneous fat tissue and sparse hair, bone Medicine, Yale, CT, United States dysplasiaoftheskullandfingers,adistinctiveface,growth retardation, and early demise. Exome sequencing showed Introduction: Mitochondrial dysfunction underlies the that all carried de novo missense variant c.649C>T (p. pathogenesis of a variety of human neurodegenerative dis- Arg217Cys) or c.650G>A (p.Arg217His) in SLC25A24, orders, either directly, e.g., in the case of mitochondrial coding for calcium-binding mitochondrial carrier protein diseases, or indirectly, e.g. in the case of Parkinson’s dis- (SCaMC-1, SLC25A24). SLC25A24 allows an electro- ease.Thecomplexityofthesedisordershassofarprevented neutral and reversible exchange of ATP-Mg and phosphate the development of effective therapeutic strategies. between thecytosolandmitochondria, required foroptimal Results: We demonstrate that the microRNAs miR-181a adenine nucleotide levels in the mitochondrial matrix. andmiR-181b(miR-181a/b)regulatekeygenesinvolvedin Molecular dynamic simulation studies predict that p. mitochondrial biogenesis and function. We also show that Arg217Cys and p.Arg217His narrow the substrate cavity these miRNAs are involved in the global regulation of oftheproteinanddisrupttransporterdynamics.SLC25A24- mitochondrial turnover in the central nervous system mutant fibroblasts and cells expressing p.Arg217Cys or p. through the simultaneous and fine tuning modulation of Arg217Hisvariantsshowedalteredmitochondrialmorphol- different gene pathways. We sought to verify whether the ogy, a decreased proliferation rate, increased mitochondrial modulation of these miRNAs could be therapeutically membrane potential, and decreased ATP-linked mitochon- exploited in neurodegenerative conditions associated to drial oxygen consumption. impaired mitochondrial activity. We show that miR-181a/b Our findings identify SLC25A24 mutations affecting downregulation strongly protects neurons from cell death codon 217 as the underlying genetic cause of human and significantly ameliorates the disease phenotype in progeroid Fontaine syndrome and suggest that the in vivo models of both primary and secondary SLC25A24 mutations lead to impaired mitochondrial ATP mitochondria-mediated neurodegeneration, such as Micro- synthesis and cause hyperpolarization and increased proton phthalmia with Linear Skin Lesions, Leber hereditary optic leak in association with an impaired energy metabolism. neuropathy and Parkinson’s disease. Fontaine syndrome creates a clinical spectrum with Gorlin- Conclusions: Altogether our results indicate that miR- Chaudhry-Moss syndrome, which is caused by the same 181a/b act as hubs in mitochondrial homeostasis in the mutations, shares several clinical features, but has apparent central nervous system and represent novel gene- normal lifespan. independent therapeutic targets for a wide-range of K. Writzl: None. A. Maver: None. L. Kovačič: None. neurodegenerative diseases caused by mitochondrial P. Martinez-Valero: None. L. Contreras: None. J. dysfunction. Satrustegui: None. M. Castori: None. L. Faivre: None. Supported by the Italian Fondazione Telethon P. Lapunzina: None. A.B.P. van Kuilenburg: None. S. (TGM16YGM02) and by a grant from Compagnia di San Radović:None. C. Thauvin: None. B. Peterlin: None. A. Paolo and University of Naples “Federico II” (Bando del Arco: None. R.C. Hennekam: None. STAR, 16-CSP-UNINA-048). S. Carrella: None. A. Indrieri: None. A. Romano: C11.2 None. F. Golia: None. M. Pizzo: None. R. Tammaro: miR-181a and miR-181b Downregulation Protects From None. E. Marroco: None. N. Giordano: None. A. Mitochondria-associated Neurodegeneration by enhancing Carboncino:None.A.Spaziano:None.L.Ciampi:None. mitochondrial biogenesis and mitophagy J. Henao-Mejia: None. A. Williams: None. R. Flavell: None. S. Banfi: None. B. Franco: None. S.Carrella1,2,A.Indrieri1,3,A.Romano1,F.Golia1,M.Pizzo1,R. Tammaro1,E. Marroco1,N.Giordano4,A. Carboncino4,A. C11.3 Spaziano1,L. Ciampi1, J.Henao-Mejia5,A. Williams6,R. The genetic landscape of mitochondrial disease: a study of Flavell7,S.Banfi1,2,B. Franco1,3 1116 exomesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 817 S. L.Stenton1,2, B.Alhaddad1,2, C.Chang1,2,T. Haack1,2,3,S. genes. 345 (31%) individuals harboured pathogenic variant Wortmann1,2,4,J.A.Mayr4,5,6,B.Büchner7,5,6,M.Hempel8,5,F. (s) within 122 mitochondrial disease-associated genes. Distelmaier9,5, P.Freisinger10,5,C.Makowski11,5, D.Rokicki12, DefectsinACAD9,ECHS1,FBXL4andMT-ATP6occurred R. Taylor13,K. Murayama14,D.Ghezzi15, C.Lamperti15,6,A. most frequently. Defects in 45 of the 122 genes occurred Rötig16,6,T. Strom1,2,T. Klopstock7,5,6,T. Meitinger1,5,6,H. only in single cases. 29 patients with molecularly-verified Prokisch1,5,6 mitochondrial disease didn’t demonstrate respiratory chain complexdefectsinmuscleand/orfibroblasts.56diagnosed- 1Institute of Human Genetics, Klinikum rechts der Isar, cases are amenable to treatment strategies, highlighting the Technische Universität München, München, Germany, importance of WES. Difficulty in mitochondrial disease 2Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, definitionwasreflectedby101patientsharbouringdisease- Neuherberg, München, Germany, 3Institute of Medical causing variant(s) in non-primarily mitochondrial disease- Genetics and Applied Genomics, University of Tübingen, associatedgenes(84genesincludingTANGO2,CAD,IARS, Tübingen, Germany, 4Department of Pediatrics, Salzburger SLC52A2) and 118 individuals with unsuspected but Landeskliniken (SALK), Paracelsus Medical University genetically-proven mitochondrial disease diagnosed in the (PMU), Salzburg, Austria, 5mitoNET German Network for same time-period. Mitochondrial Diseases, München, Germany, 6GENOMIT Conclusions: This study further elucidates the hetero- European Network for Mitochondrial Diseases, München, geneous genetic landscape of mitochondrial disease, Germany, 7Friedrich-Baur-Institut an der Neurologischen prompting careful consideration of diagnostic criteria by Klinik und Poliklinik, LMU München, München, Germany, highlighting discrepancies between clinical, biochemical 8Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Center and genetic means of diagnosis. Our data demonstrate the Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany, 9Department of need consider this entire body of evidence in aggregate for General Pediatrics, Neonatology and Pediatric Cardiology, the diagnosis of mitochondrial disease. University Children's Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University S.L. Stenton: None. B. Alhaddad: None. C. Chang: Düsseldorf,Düsseldorf,Germany,10DepartmentofPediatrics, None. T. Haack: None. S. Wortmann: None. J.A. Mayr: Klinikum Reutlingen, Reutlingen, Germany, 11Department of None. B. Büchner: None. M. Hempel: None. F. Pediatrics, Technische Universität München, München, Distelmaier: None. P. Freisinger: None. C. Makowski: Germany,12DepartmentofPediatrics,NutritionandMetabolic None. D. Rokicki: None. R. Taylor: None. K. Mur- Diseases, The Children's Memorial Health Institute, Warsaw, ayama: None. D. Ghezzi: None. C. Lamperti: None. A. Poland, 13Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Rötig: None. T. Strom: None. T. Klopstock: None. T. Institute of Neuroscience, The Medical School, Newcastle Meitinger: None. H. Prokisch: None. University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 14Department of Metabolism, Chiba Children's Hospital, C11.4 Chiba,Japan,15UnitofMolecularNeurogenetics,Foundation Novelgenesassociatedwithseveremitochondrialdisorders IRCCS (Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carettere Scientifico) Neurological Institute 'Carlo Besta', Milan, Italy, 16INSERM, P. Arumugam1,M.Angamuthu K.2,S. Gampa3,V. Challa1, T. Université Paris Descartes - Sorbonne Paris Cité, Institut Kumarasamy1 Imagine, Paris, France 1CCMB, Hyderabad, India, 2Nizam’s Institute of Medical Introduction: Mitochondrial diseases pose a diagnostic Sciences, Hyderabad, India, 3Bhimavaram Hospitals, challenge due to clinical and genetic heterogeneity. 306 Bhimavaram, India disease-associatedgenesimplicatedinmitochondrialenergy metabolism are currently recognised and this number con- Introduction: Mitochondrial disorders are genetically and tinuestogrow.Thishaspropelledwholeexomesequencing phenotypically heterogeneous caused by mutations in (WES) into the clinical setting, achieving high diagnostic mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) or nuclear genes. Their yields. diagnosis and treatment remains challenging. The pre- Methods: The WES data of 1116 paediatric and adult valenceofmitochondrialdisordersinIndiaismorethanthe individuals investigated under clinical and/or biochemical projected data available in the literature. In India, with a suspicion of mitochondrial disease and collected over a 5- huge number of endogamous ethnic groups, the transmis- year period, were systematically analysed. Each solved sion rate of mitochondrial disorder is more. exome was coupled to clinical (HPO), biochemical and Materials and Methods: We used targeted exome and experimental data. Sanger sequencing in 425 patients with mitochondrial Results: Genetic diagnosis was established in446 (40%) disorders to identify pathogenic mutations. individuals and included discovery of 40 novel disease818 J.delPicchia Results: We have identified mutations in mtDNA and München, German Research Center for Enviromental Health, commonnucleargenesin27%ofthecases.However,the Neuherberg, Germany, 7Research Unit Molecular Immune majority of cases (>70%) remain genetically undeter- Regulation, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research mined.Therefore,weperformedwholeexomesequencing Center for Enviromental Health, Neuherberg, Germany, to identify novel genes responsible for mitochondrial 8Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Justus-Liebig- disease. We sequenced whole exome of 30 patients with UniversityofGiessen,Giessen,Germany,9FacultyofMedicine mitochondrial disease and identified several novel, and Life Science, University of Tamper, Tampere, Finland, reported mutations and novel genes. Of the novel genes 10Functional Proteomics, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe identified, ALKBH1/ABH1 gene mutations cause severe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany, 11Institute of autosomal recessive mitochondrial disease in early adult- Human Genetis, Helmholtz Zentrum München, German hood; hence we have sequenced complete ALKBH1 in Research Center for Enviromental Health, Neuherberg, 275 patients with mitochondrial disease, found biallelic Germany ALKBH1 mutations in 6 patients from four different families.Allmutationsinacompound-heterozygousstate, Introduction: The ubiquinol:cytochrome c oxidoreductase disrupted the function of the gene. These mutations hinge protein (UQCRH) plays an important role in the showed complete co-segregation with the disease pheno- assembly of the complex III (CIII) of the oxidative phos- type and absent in 650 control chromosomes. Knock- phorylation (OXPHOS) system. A disease linked to down of ALKBH1 in zebrafish using morpholino UQCRH has not yet been described. oligonucleotides (MOs) showed severe developmental Methods: Whole exome sequencing and autozygosity abnormalities and multiple mitochondrial respiratory mapping were performed on two male first cousins from a chain complex defects. consanguineous family with recurrent episodes of severe Conclusion: Our study shows the usefulness of exome ketoacidosis, excess blood ammonia and hypoglycaemia sequencing for identification of novel genetic causes of and signs of encephalopathy. Brain MRI’s showed no inherited mitochondrial disease. abnormality and between episodes health was entirely P. Arumugam: None. M. Angamuthu K.: None. S. normal. OXPHOS protein levels and complex assembly Gampa:None.V.Challa:None.T.Kumarasamy:None. were analysed by western blot and blue native PAGE. A mousemodelwascreatedinC57BL/6Nmicebydeletionof C11.5 exons 2 and 3 of UQCRH. Standard full screening of the A homozygous two exon deletion in UQCRH: matching mouse phenotypes was performed. Moreover, enzymatic mouse and human phenotype activity and protein expression of OXPHOS complexes were investigated in mouse tissue. S. Vidali1,2,J.Urquhart3,J.Rozman4,K. Thompson5,C. Results:AhomozygousUQCRHdeletionofexons2and Sanders5,E. Jamson3,C. Breen3,B. Rathkolb4,P. daSilva- 3 was detected. Cultured patients’ primary fibroblasts Buttkus4,S.Marschall4,O.V.Amarie4,J.Aguilar-Pimentel4,J. showed incomplete assembly and decreased steady-state Calzada-Wack4,L.Becker4,Y.Cho4,L.Garrett4,S.M.Hölter4, proteinlevelsofCIIIsubunitsandlowCIIIenzymeactivity. T.Klein-Rodewald4,P.Mayer-Kuckuk4,I.Treise4,A.Zimprich4, The murine presentation was more severe with progressive K. Gampe4,S. Leuchtenberger4,K. Pfannes4,C. Stöger4,H. functionalimpairmentandprematuredeathattheageof6-8 Maier4, J.Graw6,W. Wurst6,K.Höfig7,R.G.Feichtinger2,U. weeks. Enzyme activity assays revealed a significant Gärtner8,M. Szibor9,I. Wittig10,J.A. Mayr2,W. Newman3, H. decrease in CIII activity in heart, brain and liver tissues. Fuchs4, R.W. Taylor5, V.Gailus-Durner4,H.Prokisch1,11, M. Conclusions: Here we describe the first patients with HrabědeAngelis4 biallelicmutationsinUQCRH.Notably,biallelicvariantsin UQCRC2 and UQCRB, two other subunits of complex III, 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität result in a similar episodic clinical presentation. München, Munich, Germany, 2Department of Pediatrics, Funding:BMBF(Infrafrontiergrant01KX1012),E-Rare University Hospital Salzburg, Paracelsus Medical University, project GENOMIT (01GM1207), Wellcome Centre for Salzburg,Austria,3ManchesterCentreforGenomicMedicine, Mitochondrial Research (203105/Z/16/Z). University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom, S.Vidali:None.J.Urquhart:None.J.Rozman:None. 4German Mouse Clinic, Institute of Experimental Genetis, K. Thompson: None. C. Sanders: None. E. Jamson: Helmholtz Zentrum München, German Research Center for None. C. Breen: None. B. Rathkolb: None. P. da Silva- EnviromentalHealth,Neuherberg,Germany,5WellcomeTrust Buttkus:None.S.Marschall:None.O.V.Amarie:None. Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Institute of Neuroscience, J. Aguilar-Pimentel: None. J. Calzada-Wack: None. L. The Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, Becker: None. Y. Cho: None. L. Garrett: None. S.M. 6Institute of Developmental Genetis, Helmholtz Zentrum Hölter: None. T. Klein-Rodewald: None. P. Mayer-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 819 Kuckuk: None. I. Treise: None. A. Zimprich: None. K. Results: WES identified rare biallelic variants in PPCS. Gampe: None. S. Leuchtenberger: None. K. Pfannes: The pathogenicity of identified variants was assessed by None. C. Stöger: None. H. Maier: None. J. Graw: None. functionalcomplementationofayeastmodelnullforPPCS W. Wurst: None. K. Höfig: None. R.G. Feichtinger: (yPPCS). Ablation of yPPCS islethal; yPPCS-null mutants None. U. Gärtner: None. M. Szibor: None. I. Wittig: transformed with the human wild-type PPCS were able to None. J.A. Mayr: None. W. Newman: None. H. Fuchs: grow, whereas mutants transformed with variant-carrying None. R.W. Taylor: None. V. Gailus-Durner: None. H. PPCS constructs had clear growth defects, confirming the Prokisch: None. M. Hrabě de Angelis: None. deleterious nature of the variants. Drosophila PPCS mutants showed a significant increase in heart rate, heart C11.6 wall shortening and arrhythmia index, and a decrease in Mutationsin phosphopantothenoylcysteine synthetase systolic length, indicating that homozygous variants in (PPCS) cause dilated cardiomyopathy PPCS are associated with cardiac dysfunction. Conclusions: Identification of biallelic variants in PPCS A. Iuso1,2,3,M. Wiersma4,H.J.Schüller5,B.Pode-Shakked6,7, inindividualswithcardiomyopathy,linkedforthefirsttime D.Marek-Yagel6,7,T. B. Haack1,2,8,T. Meitinger1,2,3,H. CoA synthesis with a cardiac phenotype. Since CoA Prokisch1,2,D.Haas9, O.C.M. Sibon10,Y. Anikster6,7,11 biosynthesis can occur with pantethine as a source independent from PPCS, pantethine can be envisaged as 1Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität therapeutic options for the patients still alive. München, Munich, Germany, 2Institute of Human Genetics, A. Iuso: None. M. Wiersma: None. H.J. Schüller: Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany, 3DZHK None. B. Pode-Shakked: None. D. Marek-Yagel: None. (German Centre for Cardiovascular Research), partner site T.B. Haack: None. T. Meitinger: None. H. Prokisch: Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany, 4Department of None. D. Haas: None. O.C.M. Sibon: None. Y. Physiology, Amsterdam Cardiovascular Sciences, VUmc, Anikster: None. Amsterdam, Netherlands, 5Institute für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt Universität, Greifswald, Germany, 6Metabolic Disease Unit, C12 Skin and Bones Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel, 7Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel- C12.1 Aviv, Israel, 8Institute of Medical Genetics and Applied Functional analysis of large numbers of non-coding Genomics, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany, variants from WGS studies by massively parallel cis- 9Division of Neuropediatrics and Metabolic Disease, regulatory assays University Children's Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany, 10Department of Cell Biology, University of Groningen, M.Spielmann1, M.Kircher2,B. Kragsteen3,M.Mensa4,R. University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, Flöttmann4,M.van deVorst5,L. Wiel5,J. Veltman6, S. Netherlands, 11The Wohl Institute for Translational Medicine, Mundlos3,C. Gilissen5, J.Shendure1 Sheba Medical Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 2BIH, Introduction: Coenzyme A (CoA) is an essential cofactor Berlin, Germany, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular which transfers acyl groups among molecules. Cells syn- Genetics, Berlin, Germany, 4Charite Berlin, Berlin, Germany, thesize CoA de novo from pantothenate through five con- 5Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, secutive enzymatic steps. Dysfunction of two enzymes, 6Institute of Genetic Medicine Newcastle, Newcastle, United PANK2 and COASY, leads to Neurodegeneration with Kingdom Brain Iron Accumulation. To our knowledge mutations in PPCS,anotherenzymeofthepathway,havesofarnotbeen NGS technologies enable the simultaneous investigation of associated with human diseases. the entire genome. However, 40% of patients remain Subjects and Methods: Five patients of two unrelated without molecular diagnosis despite that fact that on aver- families presented with dilated cardiomyopathy of varied age~80denovoSNVsperpatientsareidentified.Thesheer severity and no neurodegeneration. Identification of number of these variants, overhwhelmingly non-coding, variants was performed by WES; pathogenicity of make classical functional workup strategies impractical. identified mutations evaluated by functional complemen- Here we performed whole genome sequencing of 50 trios tation in yeast and modeling in Drosophila; biochemical affected with congenital limb malformations, and followed consequences of PPCS deficiency assessed in patients' this with functional characterization of all observed non- fibroblasts. codingdenovoSNVsviamassivelyparallelreporterassays820 J.delPicchia (MPRAs).AllpatientsincludedwerearrayCGHandexome not known, the tissue distribution of the clinical manifes- negative. In total we identified 3,396 de novo mutations in tations in GLA seems to follow a pattern of somatic the 50 patients. 5 de novo mutations were located in pre- mosaicism. dicted enhancer regions based on epigenetics marks. For Materials and Methods: We performed targeted high- two of these predicted enhancers we could show positive throughputsequencingonpairedblood/tissuesamplesfrom in vivo enhancer activity in transgenic mouse reporter 10 GLA patients. All variants detected were confirmed assays. Next we used microarray-based DNA synthesis to using at least one orthogonal method. We isolated LECs create230bpoligonucleotidescontainingall3,396denovo fromfreshtissuesamplesobtainedfromthreeGLApatients non-coding variants and the corresponding wild-type thatwerealsousedforhigh-throughputsequencing.Finally sequences and perform lentivirus-based MPRAs in human weusedaCre-loxPsysteminmiceLECs(Prox1-CreERT2; chondrocyte cells and primary mouse limb bud cells. We LSL-Pik3caH1047R)to characterize theeffect ofexcessive experimentallymeasuredthecis-regulatoryactivityof3,396 PI3Ksignallingonthestructureandfunctionoflymphatics. de novo non-coding mutations in a single, quantitative Results: We identified four different mosaic PIK3CA experiment. We identified 48 variants that showed sig- variantsinsixoftenpatients.Thevariantsweredetectedin nificant differential expression of the reporter gene. The LMs and in LECs isolated from affected tissues. These positive candidates showed up to 5-fold enrichment for same PIK3CA variants occur in patients with PIK3CA- ENCODE TF binding motifs indicating that the mutations related overgrowth spectrum and cause hyperactivation of are likely to change TF binding and thereby contribute to thePI3Ksignallingpathway.WeshowthatexcessivePI3K disease.Ourstudyprovidesaconceptualframeworkforthe signallinginLECscausesmicelymphatichyperplasia,non- experimental assessment of the large number of de novo functionalvessels, andinducestheformationoflymphatics non-coding mutations from WGS studies. in bone. M.Spielmann:None.M.Kircher:None.B.Kragsteen: Conclusions: We describe for the first time the presence None. M. Mensa: None. R. Flöttmann: None. M. van de of somatic activating PIK3CA mutations in patients with Vorst: None. L. Wiel: None. J. Veltman: None. S. GLA. This will help to better define the phenotypic Mundlos: None. C. Gilissen: None. J. Shendure: None. consequences of this pathology, and has consequences in the diagnosis, monitoring and treatment of patients. This C12.2 work was founded by The Lymphatic Malformation Identification of somatic activating PIK3CA mutations in Institute (LMI), USA. patients with generalized lymphatic anomaly L. Rodriguez Laguna: None. N. Agra: None. K. Ibañez: None. G. Oliva-Molina: None. G. Gordo: None. L. RodriguezLaguna1,N.Agra1,K. Ibañez1,G.Oliva-Molina1, N. Khurana: None. D. Hominick: None. G. Herranz: G.Gordo1,N.Khurana2,D.Hominick2,G.Herranz1,J.Torres None. J. Torres Canizalez: None. R. Rodriguez Pena: Canizalez3,R. RodriguezPena3,E. Vallespín1, R.Martín- None. E. Vallespín: None. R. Martín-Arenas: None. Á. Arenas1,Á.delPozo1,C.Villaverde4,A.Bustamante4,C.Ayuso4, del Pozo: None. C. Villaverde: None. A. Bustamante: P.Lapunzina1,J.Lopez-Gutierrez5,M.Dellinger2,6,V.Martinez- None. C. Ayuso: None. P. Lapunzina: None. J. Lopez- Glez1 Gutierrez: None. M. Dellinger: None. V. Martinez- Glez: None. 1INGEMM-CIBERER-idiPAZ, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain, 2Hamon Center for Therapeutic Oncology C12.3 Research,UTSouthwesternMedicalCente,Dallas,TX,United A mutant ATP6V1E1 zebrafish model recapitulates the States, 3Unit of Immunology, Hospital Universitario La Paz, human cutis laxa syndrome Madrid, Spain, 4Department of Genetics, IIS-Fundación Jiménez Díaz UAM, Madrid, Spain, 5Vascular Anomalies L. Pottie,P. Sips,P. Coucke, B.Callewaert Center, Plastic Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid,Spain,6DivisionofSurgicalOncology,Departmentof Center for Medical Genetics, Gent, Belgium Surgery,UTSouthwesternMedicalCenter,Dallas,TX,United States A mutant ATP6V1E1 zebrafish model recapitulates the human cutis laxa syndrome Introduction: Generalized lymphatic anomaly (GLA) is a Pottie L1, Sips P1, Coucke P1, and Callewaert B1 rarevasculardisordercharacterizedbydiffuseormultifocal 1CenterforMedicalGenetics,GhentUniversityHospital, lymphatic malformations (LMs), associated with osteolysis Ghent, Belgium and/or involvement of skin, soft tissues, and viscera. Here We recently described a novel autosomal recessive cutis we tested the hypothesis that, although the genetic cause is laxa (CL) syndrome, caused by missense mutations inAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 821 + subunit V1E1 of vacuolar H -ATPase (ATP6V1E1). The Bi-allelicmutationsinFLNBcauseSCTSinsomefamilies, conditionisclinicallycharacterizedbylooseredundantskin while monoallelic variants in the gene encoding embryonic folds, facial characteristics, lipodystrophy, hypotonia and heavy chain myosin 3, MYH3, have been implicated in cardiopulmonary involvement including pneumothorax, dominantly inherited forms. Here five FLNB mutation- hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and aortic root dilatation. negative cases from three families were hypothesised to Similarly, to ATP6V02-related cutis laxa, impaired retro- havearecessiveformofSCTSonaccountofsibrecurrence. grade Golgi transport, glycosylation abnormalities, and a WholeExomeSequencing(WES)showedthatallfivewere dysfunctional secretory pathway have been implicated in heterozygous for one of two splice-site variants in MYH3. the pathogenesis, but the pleiotropic manifestations remain Despite3ofthe5casessharingtwoallelichaplotypesover largely unexplained. We use a zebrafish model with a MYH3, no second variant could be identified by WES. proviral insertion in the 5’UTR of atp6v1e1. Homozygous Subsequent WGS demonstrated a variant altering a con- mutant embryos show decreased pigmentation. Decreased servedsplicedonorsiteinthe5’UTRofMYH3,aregionof and delayed spontaneous hatching of the homozygous the gene not captured by exome capture platforms. atp6v1e1b mutants suggests hypotonia, which could be Expanding the case cohort to 16 unsolved SCTS cases, 9 quantitatively assessed by a reduced touch-evoked escape had truncatingmutations transmitted byunaffected parents, response. All homozygous mutant fish die by 8 days post with 6 inheriting the same 5’UTR variant in trans, an fertilization (dpf) due to severe cardiovascular edema and observation at variance with the allele frequency for this insufficient cardiovascular circulation. Quantification of variant in population databases. This variant disrupts spli- cardiac function at 3 dpf indicates a significantly decreased cing of exons 1-3 in the 5’ UTR but is still permissive of cardiac output and stroke volume, but normal heart rate in MYH3 translational initiation, albeit with reduced effi- homozygous mutant embryos, and a similar, but not ciency. Although some MYH3 variants cause dominant significanttrendinheterozygousembryos.Moreover,blood SCTS, these data indicate that many truncating variants do flow is severely reduced in mutants compared to hetero- not lead to the disease except when in trans with a second zygous and wild-type fish. hypomorphic allele. These observations make genetic Conclusion, our zebrafish model recapitulates several diagnosis and counselling challenging in the context of important clinical features including hypotonia and cardi- simplexpresentationsofSCTSespeciallyusingagenotype- omyopathy. This model provides an important asset to first methodology. unravel the molecular mechanism causing ATP6V1E1- S.P. Robertson: None. S. Cameron-Christie: None. C. related cutis laxa and to evaluate potential therapeutic F.Wells:None.M.Simon:None.M.Wessels:None.C.Z. strategies. N.Tang:None.W.Wei:None.R.Takei:None.C.Aarts- L. Pottie: None. P. Sips: None. P. Coucke: None. B. Tesselaar: None. S. Sandaradura: None. D.O. Sillence: Callewaert: None. None. M. Cordier: None. H.E. Veenstra-Knol: None. E. Trevisson: None. D.M. Markie: None. Z.A. C12.4 Jenkins: None. Recessivespondylocarpotarsalsyndromeduetocompound heterozygosity for variants in MYH3 C12.5 Mutations in the Epithelial Cadherin p120 Catenin S. P.Robertson1, S.Cameron-Christie1,C. F.Wells1, M. ComplexCause Mendelian Non-Syndromic Cleft Lip and Simon2,3,M.Wessels3, C.Z. N.Tang1,W. Wei1,R. Takei1,C. Palate Aarts-Tesselaar4,S.Sandaradura5,D.O.Sillence5,M.Cordier6, H.E. Veenstra-Knol7,E.Trevisson8,D.M.Markie1, Z.A. T. Roscioli1,L.L.Cox2,T. C. Cox2, L.M. MorenoUribe3,Y. Jenkins1 Zhu4, C.T. Richter5,N.Nidey6, J.M.Standley6,M. Deng7,E. Blue8,J.X.Chong9,Y.Yang10,R.P.Carstens10,D.Anand11,S. 1Dunedin School of Medicine, Dunedin, New Zealand, A. Lachke11,J.D.Smith12,M.O.Dorschner13,E. Kirk4,A.V. 2University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, Hing14,H.Venselaar15,L. ConsueloValencia Ramirez16,M.J. 3Erasmus University, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 4Amphia Bamshad9,I.A. Glass9,J.A. Cooper17, E.Haan18,D.A. Hospital, Breda, Netherlands, 5Children's Hospital at Nickerson12,H.vanBokhoven19,H.Zhou19,K. Krahn20,M. F. Westmead, Sydney, Australia, 6Hôpitaux de Lyon, Lyon, Buckley4, J.C. Murray6, A.C. Lidral21 France, 7University of Groningen, Groningen, Netherlands, 8University of Padova, Padova, Italy 1University of New South Wales, Randwick, Australia, 2DivisionofCraniofacialMedicine,Seattle,WA,UnitedStates, Spondylocarpotarsal Syndrome (SCTS) is characterised by 3DepartmentofOrthodontics&theIowaInstituteforOraland vertebral fusions and fusion of the carpal and tarsal bones. Craniofacial Research, University of Iowa,, Iowa, IA, United822 J.delPicchia States, 4New South Wales Health Pathology, Prince of Wales addition to CDH1. The findings were validated in a second Hospital,Randwick,Australia,55.DepartmentofOrthodontics cohort of 497 NS-CL/P patients comprising small families & the Iowa Institute for Oral and Craniofacial Research, and singletons. Pathogenic variants in these genes were University of Iowa,, Iowa, IA, United States, 6Department of found in 14% of multi-affected families and 2% of the Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa, IA, United States, 7Birth replication cohort of smaller families. Enriched expression Defects Research Laboratory, University of Washington, of each new gene/protein in human and mouse embryonic Seattle, WA, United States, 8Division of Medical Genetics, oro-palatal epithelia, demonstration of functional impact of Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, CTNND1andESRP2variants,andrecapitulationoftheCL/ WA,UnitedStates,9DivisionofGeneticMedicine,Department P spectrum in Ctnnd1 knockout mice support a causative of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United role in CL/P pathogenesis. These data show that primary States, 10Department of Medicine, Perelman School of defectsinregulatorsofepithelialcelladhesionarethemost Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, significant contributors to NS-CL/P identified to date and UnitedStates,11DepartmentofBiologicalSciences,University that inherited and de novo single gene variants explain a of Delaware, Newark, DE, United States, 12Department of substantial proportion of NS-CL/P. <!--EndFragment--> Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, T.Roscioli:None.L.L.Cox:None.T.C.Cox:None.L. United States, 13Northwest Clinical Genomics Laboratory, M. Moreno Uribe: None. Y. Zhu: None. C.T. Richter: Center for Precision Diagnostics, University of Washington, None. N. Nidey: None. J.M. Standley: None. M. Deng: Seattle, WA, United States, 14Division of Craniofacial None.E.Blue: None.J.X.Chong: None.Y.Yang:None. Medicine,DepartmentofPediatrics,UniversityofWashington, R.P. Carstens: None. D. Anand: None. S.A. Lachke: Seattle, WA, United States, 15Centre for Molecular and None. J.D. Smith: None. M.O. Dorschner: None. E. Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud University Nijmegen Kirk: None. A.V. Hing: None. H. Venselaar: None. L. Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 16Fundación Clínica Consuelo Valencia Ramirez: None. M.J. Bamshad: Noel, Medellin, Colombia, 17Division of Basic Sciences, Fred None. I.A. Glass: None. J.A. Cooper: None. E. Haan: Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA, United None.D.A.Nickerson:None.H.vanBokhoven:None.H. States,18SouthAustralianClinicalGeneticsService,Adelaide, Zhou: None.K. Krahn: None.M.F.Buckley:None.J.C. Australia, 19Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Murray: None. A.C. Lidral: None. University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 20UVA Center for Advanced Medical Analytics, School of C12.6 Medicine, University of Virginia, Virginia, VA, United States, Somatic activating mutations in MAP2K1 cause 21Lidral Orthodontics, Rockford, MN, United States melorheostosis Normal 0 false false false EN-US JA X-NONE /* Style H.Kang1,S.Jha2,3,Z.Deng4,N.Fratzl-Zelman5,W.A.Cabral1, Definitions */ table.MsoNormalTable {mso-style-name:"- A. Ivovic6, F.Meylan7,E. P. Hanson8,E.Lange9,J.Katz9,P. Table Normal"; mso-tstyle-rowband-size:0; mso-tstyle-col- Roschger5, K.Klaushofer5,E. W.Cowen10,R. M.Siegel7,T. band-size:0; mso-style-noshow:yes; mso-style-priority:99; Bhattacharyya2,J.C. Marini1 mso-style-parent:""; mso-padding-alt:0cm 5.4pt 0cm 5.4pt; mso-para-margin:0cm; mso-para-margin-bottom:.0001pt; 1Section on Heritable Disorders of Bone and Extracellular mso-pagination:widow-orphan; font-size:12.0pt; font- Matrix, National Institute of Child Health and Human family:Cambria; mso-ascii-font-family:Cambria; mso-ascii- Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, theme-font:minor-latin; mso-hansi-font-family:Cambria; UnitedStates,2ClinicalandInvestigativeOrthopedicsSurgery mso-hansi-theme-font:minor-latin; mso-ansi-language:EN- Unit, National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and US;} Non-syndromic cleft lip/palate (NS-CL/P) is one of Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, the most common human birth defects and is generally United States, 3Program in Reproductive and Adult consideredacomplextrait.Despitenumerouslociidentified Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of by genome-wide association studies, the effect sizes of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of common variants are relatively small with much of the Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Biodata Mining and presumedgeneticcontributionremainingelusive.Wereport DiscoverySection,OfficeofScienceandTechnology,National exome sequencing results in 209 people from 72 multi- Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, affected families with pedigree structures consistent with National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, autosomal dominant inheritance and variable penetrance. 5Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Osteology at the Hanusch We describe four new NS-CL/P genes encoding compo- Hospital of WGKK, and AUVA Trauma Center Meidling, 1st nents of the p120-catenin complex (CTNND1, PLEKHA7, Medical Department Hanusch Hospital, Vienna, Austria, 67 PLEKHA5)andanepithelialsplicingregulator(ESRP2),in Immunoregulation Section, Autoimmunity Branch, NationalAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 823 Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, None.J.Katz:None.P.Roschger:None.K.Klaushofer: National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, None. E.W. Cowen: None. R.M. Siegel: None. T. 7Immunoregulation Section, Autoimmunity Branch, National Bhattacharyya: None. J.C. Marini: None. Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 8Immunodeficiency and Inflammation Unit, Autoimmunity C13 Prenatal and Reproductive Genetics Branch,NationalInstituteofArthritisandMusculoskeletaland Skin Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, C13.1 United States, 9Office of the Clinical Director, National Implementing NIPT as part of a national prenatal Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, screening program: The Dutch TRIDENT studies National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 10Dermatology Branch, National Institute of Arthritis and M.M.Weiss1,R.H.Galjaard2,E.A.Sistermans1,C.J.Bax3,M. Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, National Institutes of N.Bekker4,C. E. M.deDie-Smulders5,I. Feenstra6,M.J. V. Health, Bethesda, MD, United States Hoffer7,N.S.denHollander7,M.F.C.M.Knapen8,9,I.M.van Langen10,K. D.Lichtenbelt11, P.M. Lombardi12,M.C. van Melorheostosisisabenignboneovergrowthcondition,with Maarle12,K. R.M.van der Meij1,M.J. Pieters13,14,G.H. radiographicappearanceof“drippingcandlewax”.Because Schuring-Blom11,E. Sikkel15,S. J.Stevens5,R.F. melorheostosisoccurssporadically,somaticmutationswere Suijkerbuijk10,A. J.E. M.vander Ven16,D.VanOpstal2,L. hypothesized, but bone tissue was not previously investi- Henneman1, M.V. Macville5,Dutch NIPT Consortium gated. Paired biopsies of affected and contralateral unaf- fected bone of 15 melorheostosis patients were utilized for 1Dept of Clinical Genetics, VU University Medical Center, DNA extraction, osteoblast cultures and histology. Using Amsterdam,Netherlands,2DeptofClinicalGenetics,Erasmus WES and ddPCR, we identified somatic mutations in University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 3Dept of MAP2K1, encoding the kinase MEK1, in affected, but not Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Academic Medical Center, unaffected, bone of 8 melorheostosis patients. Mosaicism Amsterdam, Netherlands, 4Dept of Obstetrics and was supported by immunohistochemistry of ERK1/2 acti- Gynaecology, Utrecht University Medical Center, Utrecht, vation in bone tissue and two populations of cultured Netherlands,5DeptofClinicalGenetics,MaastrichtUniversity osteoblasts with distinct p-ERK1/2 levels on flow cyto- Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 6Dept of Clinical metry. These activating mutations (p.Q56P, p.K57E, p. Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, K57N) cluster in the MEK1 negative regulatory domain. Netherlands, 7Dept of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University OsteoblastsfromaffectedbonedisplayedincreasedMEK1- Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 8Dept of Obstetrics and ERK1/2 signaling, which enhanced osteoblast proliferation Gynaecology,ErasmusUniversityMedicalCenter,Rotterdam, and stimulated bone remodelling, while inhibiting osteo- Netherlands, 9Foundation Prenatal Screening Southwest blastdifferentiationandbonemineralization.Thiscoincided region of the Netherlands, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 10Dept of with the histology of melorheostosis, featuring exuberant Clinical Genetics, Groningen University Medical Center, deposition of parallel layers of lamellar bone, followed by Groningen, Netherlands, 11Dept of Medical Genetics, Utrecht intense bone remodelling with elevated cellularity. Melor- University Medical Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 12Dept of heostosisprovidesthefirstdemonstrationthattheMAP2K1 Clinical Genetics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, oncogene is important to human bone formation. Interest- Netherlands, 13Dept of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Grow, ingly, germline mutations in the catalytic core of MAP2K1 School for Oncology and Developmental Biology, Maastricht and the negative regulatory domain of MAP2K1 and University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, MAP2K2 were identified in Cardio-Facio-Cutaneous syn- 14Stichting Prenatale Screening Zuidoost Nederland, drome (CFC). CFC and other RASopathies are associated Maastricht, Netherlands, 15Dept of Obestrics and with variable cardiac, facial and neurodevelopmental Gynaecology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, defects, but not with bone overgrowth. Somatic MAP2K1 Netherlands, 16The Royal Dutch Organisation of Midwives mutations in melorheostotic osteoblasts and others recently (KNOV), Utrecht, Netherlands reported in extracranial arteriovenous malformations apparently have consequences distinct from germline In the Netherlands, Non-Invasive Prenatal Testing (NIPT) mutations. We conclude that outcomes of MAP2K1 muta- has been implemented as part of the TRIDENT studies. tions depend on mutation timing and location. TRIDENT-2 aims at offering NIPT to all pregnant women H. Kang: None. S. Jha: None. Z. Deng: None. N. (~174,000/year) within the national governmentally sup- Fratzl-Zelman: None. W.A. Cabral: None. A. Ivovic: ported prenatal fetal aneuploidy screening program. Since None. F. Meylan: None. E.P. Hanson: None. E. Lange: April 2017 women can choose NIPT as a contingent test824 J.delPicchia afterfirst-trimestercombinedscreening(FTS),butmayalso London, UK, London, United Kingdom, 6Genetics and choose NIPT as first-tier test. The TRIDENT-2 study Genomic Medicine, UCL Great Ormond Street Institute of evaluates implementation and women’s perspectives. Child Health, London, United Kingdom All women are offered screening and are counselled by certified counsellors, generally midwives. A first-tier NIPT Background: Prenatal genetic diagnosis provides infor- costs women € 175, comparable to FTS (~€ 168). NIPT is mation for pregnancy and perinatal decision-making and performed by three Dutch university clinical genetic management. Prenatal exome sequencing approaches have laboratories using an in-house validated test. Women can identified genetic diagnoses when conventional tests (kar- choose to have analysis of chromosomes 21, 18, and 13 yotype and microarray) were not diagnostic. However, withoutorwithareportofincidentalfindings(findingsother prenatal phenotyping limitations, counselling challenges than trisomy 21, 13, 18) on the remaining autosomes, regarding variants of uncertain significance, incidental and respectively using the ‘targeted’ or ‘whole genome’ WISE- secondary findings, and technical problems pose unique CONDOR pipeline. Sex chromosomes are not analyzed. challenges in the prenatal use of exome sequencing. Here After eight months of study, 48,234 tests have been weuseamultidisciplinaryapproachtoexploretheutilityof performed (first-tier NIPT uptake 40%) and 98.3% reports rapid targeted fetal exome sequencing for prenatal diag- were successfully issued. Mean turnaround time was 7 nosis, using skeletal dysplasias as an exemplar. working days. 80% of women chose to have all autosomes Methods: Pregnant women who had had, or who were analyzed. A total of 152 cases of T21 (0.3%), 32 cases of undergoing,aninvasiveproceduretoexcludechromosomal T18 (0.1%), 41 cases of T13 (0.1%) and 158 (0.3%) other abnormalities following ultrasound detection of fetal chromosomalaberrationswerefound.Firstyearresults(and abnormalities suggestive of a skeletal dysplasia in UK available follow-up) will be presented. Fetal Medicine units were identified prospectively. After This 3-year study aims to provide all necessary informa- multidisciplinaryreviewbylocalFetalMedicineteams and tionforasuccessfulintroductionofNIPTwithintheDutch Clinical Geneticists with expertise in fetal dysmorphology, National prenatal screening program. parentswereconsentedfortargetedexometrio-sequencing. Grant: ZonMw Netherlands Variant interpretation focused on a virtual panel of 240 M.M. Weiss: None. R.H. Galjaard: None. E.A. Sister- genes known to cause skeletal dysplasias. mans: None. C.J. Bax: None. M.N. Bekker: None. C.E. Results: Definitive molecular diagnosis was made in 15/ M. de Die-Smulders: None. I. Feenstra: None. M.J.V. 18 (83%) cases. In some cases fetal ultrasound findings Hoffer: None. N.S. den Hollander: None. M.F.C.M. alone were of sufficient severity for parents to opt for Knapen: None. I.M. van Langen: None. K.D. Lichten- termination. In others, molecular diagnosis informed belt: None. P.M. Lombardi: None. M.C. van Maarle: accuratepredictionofoutcome, improvedparentalcounsel- None. K.R.M. van der Meij: None. M.J. Pieters: None. ling and informed parental decisions and perinatal G.H. Schuring-Blom: None. E. Sikkel: None. S.J. management. Stevens: None. R.F. Suijkerbuijk: None. A.J.E.M. van Conclusions:Trio-sequencingwithexpertmultidisciplin- der Ven: None. D. Van Opstal: None. L. Henneman: ary review for case selection and data interpretation yields None. M.V. Macville: None. timely, high diagnostic rates in fetuses presenting with unexpected skeletal abnormalities. This can result in C13.2 improvedparentalcounsellingandpregnancymanagement. Rapid Prenatal Diagnosis through Targeted Exome F. Faravelli: None. N. Chandler: None. S. Best: None. Sequencing: A Cohort study J.Hayward:None.S.Mansour:None.E.Kivuva:None. D. Tapon: None. A. Male: None. C. DeVile: None. L. F.Faravelli1,N.Chandler1,S.Best1,J.Hayward1,S.Mansour2, Chitty: None. E. Kivuva3,D.Tapon4, A.Male1,C. DeVile5,L. Chitty6,1 C13.3 1NorthThamesNHSRegionalGeneticsService,GreatOrmond Temporal dynamics of placental gene expression Street NHS Foundation, London, United Kingdom, 2South West Thames Regional Genetics Department, University of M.Reiman, S. Sõber,M. Laan London & St George’s, London, United Kingdom, 3Peninsula Clinical Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Institute of Biomedicine and Translational Medicine, Tartu, Trust, Royal Devon, Exeter, United Kingdom, 4Queen Estonia Charlotte's & Chelsea Hospital, Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, Du Cane, London, United Kingdom, 5Great Introduction:Placentahasaprincipalroleinaffectingfetal Ormond Street NHS Foundation Trust, Great Ormond Street, and maternal physiology. Since pregnancy complicationsAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 825 coincide with changes in placental transcriptome, knowl- process, termed selfish spermatogonial selection, explains edge of normal placental gene expression dynamics across the high spontaneous birth rate and strong paternal age gestationiscrucialtounderstandalterationsintheplacental effect of disorders such as achondroplasia, Apert, Noonan transcriptome that may lead to pregnancy complications. and Costello syndromes, with direct evidence for this pro- The aim of the study is to describe a profile of placental cess occurring at specific positions in six genes (FGFR2, temporal gene expression dynamics over the course of FGFR3, RET, PTPN11, HRAS and KRAS). Here we per- human pregnancy. form a discovery screen to identify novel mutations and Materials and Methods: Analyzed placental samples genes under selection in the male germline by performing covered the entire human gestational period: 1st trimester massively-parallel simplex PCR targeting using RainDance (7-10 gestational weeks; n=8), 2nd trimester (17-21 g.w.; technology to interrogate mutational hotspots in 71 genes n=8)andterm(37-41g.w.;n=8).RNA-Seqprotocoland (66.5kbintotal)in276biopsiesoftestesfrom5men(mean basic bioinformatics have been reported by Reiman et al. age:73years).Ultra-deepsequencing(~22,000x),acustom (2017). The current study focused on grouping placental low-frequency variant prioritization pipeline and targeted genesbasedontheirhighlycorrelated expressiondynamics validationidentified59distinctvariantswithfrequenciesas across pregnancy trimesters. Enrichment analysis for low as0.06%, including53variantsnotpreviously directly functional pathways was conducted for each gene-group associated with selfish selection. The majority (80%) of using g:Profiler (https://biit.cs.ut.ee/gprofiler/). variants identified were previously implicated in either Results: Among 14,920 genes expressed in the placenta, developmental disorders and/or oncogenesis, including roughly a quarter exhibited a clear temporal expression mutations in six newly-associated (BRAF, CBL, MAP2K1, pattern over the course of pregnancy. Enrichment analysis MAP2K2, NF1 and RAF1) genes, all of which encode showed that genes overexpressed in the first trimester are componentsofRAS/MAPKsignalling.Ourfindingsextend involved in cell cycle and transcription regulation; whereas the link between mutations causing dysregulation of RAS/ mid-gestation specific genes are associated with fetal MAPK signalling and selfish selection and suggest that the development, cell communication and differentiation of ageing male germ line is a repository for such deleterious tissues. mutations. Supported by grants from the Wellcome Trust. Conclusions: We show that a large proportion of genes G.J. Maher: None. H.K. Ralph: None. Z. Ding: None. expressed in the human placenta follow a tightly correlated N. Koelling: None. H. Mlcochova: None. E. Giannoula- temporal expression profile. We hypothesize that distur- tou: None. P. Dhami: None. G. McVean: None. A.O.M. bances of this ‘gestational clock’may lead to placental and Wilkie: None. A. Goriely: None. fetal developmental abnormalities and pregnancy complications. C13.5 Reiman et al. FASEB J. (2017): 201601031RR X-chromosome exome sequencing in highly selected Grants: IUT34-12 (Estonian Research Agency), Happy idiopathicazoospermicpatients:identificationofnoveland Pregnancy (SA Archimedes). recurrent genetic factors for early spermatogenic failure M. Reiman: None. S. Sõber: None. M. Laan: None. A. Riera-Escamilla1, D.Moreno-Mendoza1,L. Nagirnaja2, J. C13.4 Rusch2, E.Ruiz-Castañé1,E. Ars1, D.F.Conrad2, C.Krausz3 Assessing the landscape of selfish de novo mutations in human testes 1Andrology Department, Fundació Puigvert, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, IIB-Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain, G.J.Maher1,H.K. Ralph1,Z. Ding1,N.Koelling1,H. 2Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Mlcochova1,E. Giannoulatou1,P. Dhami2,G.McVean1,A.O. Medicine, St. Louis, MO, United States, 3Department of M.Wilkie1, A.Goriely1 Experimental and Clinical Biomedical Sciences “Mario Serio”,CentreofExcellenceDeNothe,UniversityofFlorence, 1University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom, 2University Florence, Italy College London, London, United Kingdom Background:DespitethewellknownenrichmentoftheX Low level mosaicism, attributed to clonal expansion of chromosome in genes specifically expressed in the testis, spontaneous mutations, is prevalent in somatic tissues such so far only two X-linked genes are diagnostic targets in as skin and blood. We have previously shown that specific non obstructive azoospermia (NOA). The apparent pau- ‘selfish’ mutations spontaneously arising in male germline city of X-linked NOA is likely to be the consequence of stem cells (spermatogonia) lead to clonal expansion result- the lack of comprehensive, whole X chromosome target- ing in elevated mutation levels in sperm over time. This ing studies.826 J.delPicchia Material and Methods: X-chromosome exome sequen- modelling to identify a shared point mutation of the cing in 50 idiopathic NOA patients with known testis Semaphorin 3G (SEMA3G) gene in two brothers with HH, histology.Variantswerefilteredandprioritizedaccordingto bornfromconsanguineousparents.Further,wehaveshown theirminorallelefrequency(MAF≤0.01)andtheirpredicted that the mutation impairs GnRH neuron migration and Akt pathogenicity. RNA interference was used to determine the activation in vitro, and that mice lacking Sema3g show a roleofCaf1-55(thehumanRBBP7ortholog)inDrosophila reduced number of hypothalamic GnRH neurons and spermatogenesis. reduced fertility. Together, these results indicate that Results: We identified 77 rare and predicted as SEMA3GsignallingisrequiredforGnRHneuronmigration pathogenic variants in 42/50 NOA patients. 76 variants anditsinsufficiency contributes tothepathogenesisofHH. were private mutations whereas one was found in two Grants; telethon GP13142 for AC, unrelated patients. Nine genes (six of them with testis A.Cariboni:None.A.Lettieri:None.R.Oleari:None. specific expression or overexpression in the testis) were S. Tahir: None. K. Hussain: None. recurrently mutated in 16 different patients. Two patients affected by spermatogonial arrest presented pathogenic mutations in the RBBP7 gene. Conditional Caf1-55 KO C14 Cancer genetics showed that male mutants had tiny testis, no spermatozoa and were sterile. C14.1 Conclusions: This is the first X chromosome exome Tet1 and Tdg suppress intestinal tumorigenesis by analysisinhighlyselectedNOApatients.Ourapproachwas downregulatingtheinflammatoryandimmuneresponsesin relatively successful in identifying candidate genes for the the ApcMinmouse model NOA phenotype. Up to now, we performed functional analysis only for the RBBP7 gene demonstrating that the R. Tricarico1,J.Madzo2,G.Scher1,J.Jelinek2,J. Ingram3,I. protein is essential for Drosophila spermatogenesis hence Peshkova3,W.Chang4,E.Nicolas5,Y.Zhou6,K.Devarajan6,S. we propose it as a novel genetic factor for early Maegawa2,V. Doneddu7,L. Bagella7,H.Cooper8,S. spermatogenic failure. Balachandran3,M.Clapper4,S. Grivennikov4,E. Koltsova3, J. Funding: Instituto Carlos III (FIS/FEDER: PI14/01250) Issa2,A. Bellacosa1 and GEMINI Consortium A.Riera-Escamilla:None.D.Moreno-Mendoza:None. 1Cancer Epigenetics Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, L. Nagirnaja: None. J. Rusch: None. E. Ruiz-Castañé: Philadelphia, PA, United States, 2Fels Institute for Cancer None. E. Ars: None. D.F. Conrad: None. C. ResearchandMolecularBiology,TempleUniversitySchoolof Krausz: None. Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 3Immune Cell Development and Host Defense Program, Fox Chase Cancer C13.6 Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 4Cancer Risk and Dysfunctional SEMA3G signalling underlies familiar PreventionProgram,FoxChaseCancerCenter,Philadelphia, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism & defective GnRH PA, United States, 5Molecular Therapeutics Program, Fox neuron migration Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 6Department of Biostatistics, Fox Chase Cancer Center, A. Cariboni1, A.Lettieri1,R. Oleari1, S.Tahir2,K. Hussain3 Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7Department of Biomedical Sciences and Biochemistry, University of Sassari, Sassari, 1Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Sciences, Italy, 8Department of Pathology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Milan, Italy, 2University College of London, London, United Philadelphia, PA, United States Kingdom, 3Sidra Medicine, Doha, Qatar Introduction: Aberrant DNA methylation is frequently Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (HH) is a rare genetic observed in colorectal cancer (CRC), but the underlying disorder that impairs sexual reproduction. It can be caused mechanisms are poorly understood. Ten-Eleven Transloca- by a defective development or function of Gonadotropin- tion(TET)dioxygenasesandDNArepairenzymeThymine releasing hormone (GnRH)-neurons. Most HH cases isstill DNA Glycosylase (TDG) are involved in active DNA idiopathic, despite recent advances in sequencing technol- demethylation by generating and removing, respectively, ogies. Here we have combined in silico with in vitro and novel oxidized cytosine species. Mutations of TET1 and in vivo mouse models to identify and functionally char- TDG, and alterations of the levels of oxidized cytosine acterise the role of a novel gene in the etiopathogenesis of species have been identified in human CRC cases, but the HH. Specifically, we have applied homozygosity mapping biologicalsignificanceoftheTET-TDGdemethylationaxis together with exome sequencing and computational in intestinal tumorigenesis is unclear.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 827 MaterialsandMethods:WegeneratedApcMinmicewith France, 6Nancy University Hospital, Department of Genetics, additional inactivation of Tet1 and/or Tdg, and character- Vandœuvre-lès-Nancy, France, 7Gustave Roussy Institute, ized the methylome and transcriptome of intestinal DepartmentofBiologyandPathology,Villejuif,France,8Lille adenomas by DREAM and RNA sequencing, respectively. University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Lille, France, Results: Tet1- and/or Tdg-deficient ApcMin mice show 9Claudius Regaud Institute, IUCT-Oncopôle, Department of enhanced intestinal tumorigenesis in comparison to wild Oncogenetics, Toulouse, France, 10Amiens University type Tet1 and Tdg ApcMin mice. Specifically, Tet1 and/or Hospital, Department of Genetics, Amiens, France, 11Rouen Tdg-deficientApcMinadenomasmanifestedincreasedsizeor University Hospital, Department of Genetics, Normandy features of erosion and stroma activation. Methylome Centre for Genomic and Personalized Medicine, Rouen, analysis revealed progressive loss of global DNA hypo- France,12NancyUniversityHospital,DepartmentofGenetics, methylation in colonic adenomas from Tet1- and Tdg- and Inserm U954, University of Lorraine, Vandœuvre-lès- deficientApcMinmice,andhypermethylationofCpGislands Nancy, France, 13Georges Pompidou European Hospital, inTet1-deficientApcMinmice.Inaddition,RNAsequencing Department of Biology, Paris, France showedupregulationofgenesininflammatoryandimmune response pathways in Tet1- and Tdg-mutant colonic Introduction:Constitutionalepimutationsareanalternative adenomas compared to control ApcMin adenomas. to genetic mutations in the etiology of genetic diseases. Conclusions: Taken together, these findings demonstrate These epimutations can be primary, defined as purely epi- the important role of active DNA demethylation mediated genetic events labile in the germline. They can also be by TET-TDG in reducing intestinal tumor formation, by secondary,causedbyacis-actinggeneticdefecttransmitted modulating the epigenome and inflammatory/immune following a Mendelian inheritance pattern, with re- responses. This study highlights a novel mechanism of establishment of the epigenetic change in the offspring. In epigeneticderegulationduringintestinaltumorigenesiswith Lynch syndrome, a few families with a heritable MLH1 diagnostic, therapeutic and prognostic implications. epimutationhavebeenreportedsofar,withvariousgenetic R. Tricarico: None. J. Madzo: None. G. Scher: None. bases including single nucleotide variations and copy J. Jelinek: None. J. Ingram: None. I. Peshkova: None. number variations. W. Chang: None. E. Nicolas: None. Y. Zhou: None. K. MaterialsandMethods:Wedesignedalong-rangePCR Devarajan: None. S. Maegawa: None. V. Doneddu: next-generation sequencing strategy to screen MLH1 entire None. L. Bagella: None. H. Cooper: None. S. Balachan- gene and applied it to 4 French families with heritable dran:None.M.Clapper:None.S.Grivennikov:None.E. epimutations and 10 additional patients with no proven Koltsova: None. J. Issa: None. A. Bellacosa: None. transmission of their epimutations. Results: This strategy successfully detected the insertion C14.2 ofanAluelementinMLH1codingsequenceinonefamily. Lynch syndrome families with heritable constitutional Two previously unreported MLH1 variants were identified epimutationrevealthediversityofgeneticeventsassociated in other epimutation carriers: a nucleotide substitution with methylation of MLH1 promoter within intron 1 and a single-nucleotide deletion in the 5’- UTR. A partial duplication of MLH1 gene was detected in J.Leclerc1,C. Flament2, T.Lovecchio2,L. Delattre2,E. Ait another family. We demonstrated the segregation of these Yahya3, S.Baert-Desurmont4,N.Burnichon5,M. Bronner6,O. variants with MLH1 methylation and studied the functional Cabaret7,S.Lejeune8,R.Guimbaud9,G.Morin10,J.Mauillon11, consequences of these defects on transcription. P.Jonveaux12,P.Laurent-Puig13,T.Frébourg4,N.Porchet1,M. Conclusions: This study represents the largest cohort of Buisine1 patientswithMLH1secondaryepimutationsassociatedwitha broad spectrum of genetic defects. It provides further insight 1Inserm UMR-S 1172, JPA Research Center, Lille University, into the complexity of molecular mechanisms leading to andLilleUniversityHospital,DepartmentofBiochemistryand heritable epimutations. This work was supported by Lille Molecular Biology, Lille, France, 2Lille University Hospital, UniversityHospital(Fondshospitalierd'aideàl'émergenceet Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Lille, la structuration des activités et équipes de recherche). France, 3Lille University Hospital, Bioinformatics Unit, J. Leclerc: None. C. Flament: None. T. Lovecchio: Molecular Biology Facility, Lille, France, 4Rouen University None. L. Delattre: None. E. Ait Yahya: None. S. Baert- Hospital, Department of Genetics, and Normandie Univ, Desurmont: None. N. Burnichon: None. M. Bronner: UNIROUEN, Inserm U1245, Normandy Centre for Genomic None. O. Cabaret: None. S. Lejeune: None. R. Guim- andPersonalizedMedicine,Rouen,France,5InsermUMR970, baud: None. G. Morin: None. J. Mauillon: None. P. Paris-Cardiovascular Research Center, and Georges Jonveaux: None. P. Laurent-Puig: None. T. Frébourg: PompidouEuropeanHospital,DepartmentofGenetics,Paris, None. N. Porchet: None. M. Buisine: None.828 J.delPicchia C14.3 C14.4 Oxidative modification of cell-free DNA fragments Accurate functional classification of thousands of BRCA1 promotes their penetration into stem and cancer cells and variants with saturation genome editing activates adaptive response G.M.Findlay1,R. Daza1,B. K. Martin1,M.D.Zhang1,A.P. V. Sergeeva1,E. Malinovskaya1,V. Veiko2,E.Ershova1,L. Leith1,M.Gasperini1,J.D.Janizek1,L. M.Starita1,2,J. Kameneva1,M.Konkova1,N.Veiko1, A.Kalyanov1,M. Shendure1,2,3 Abramova1,3,E. Savinova1,3,S. Kostyuk1 1University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 1FSBI “Research Centre For Medical Genetics”, Moscow, 2Brotman Baty Institute for Precision Medicine, Seattle, WA, Russian Federation, 2Bach Institute of Biochemistry and UnitedStates,3HowardHughesMedicalInstitute,Seattle,WA, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow, Russian Federation, United States 3N. I. PirogovRussian NationalResearchMedical University, Moscow, Russian Federation Introduction: Variants of uncertain significance (VUS) limit the utility of genetic information. The challenge of Introduction: In pathologies such as cancer and under VUS is epitomized by BRCA1, a tumor suppressor gene damaging conditions (e.x. radiation) fraction of cells integral to DNA repair and genomic stability. Germline undergoescelldeathandreleasesDNAthatbecomespartof BRCA1 loss-of-function variants predispose women to thecirculatingcell-freeDNA(cfDNA)pool.CfDNAcanbe early-onset breast and ovarian cancers. Although BRCA1 oxidizedunderoxidativestress.Wehaveshownthatincase has been sequenced in millions of people, the risk asso- of cancer the level of oxidation in cfDNA increases. ciated with most newly observed variants cannot be defi- MaterialsandMethods:Modelgeneticconstructionwas nitively assigned. To date, functional studies of BRCA1 obtainedbyinsertionofpoly-GDNAfragmentsinavector VUS have been limited in scope and performed outside of withGFPgeneandsubsequentoxidationwithUV-radiation the gene's endogenous context. or H O . Penetration was confirmed with fluorescent Methods:Weemploysaturationgenomeeditingtoassay 2 2 microscopy (comparison with penetration using TurboFect 96.5% of all possible single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in (Thermo, Germany)). mRNA was isolated from MSCs and 13 exons that encode critical domains of BRCA1. Our MCF-7 using RNeasy Mini kit (Qiagen, Germany). Gene multiplex, CRISPR/Cas9-based assay leverages targeted expression level was assessed using RT-PCR (TBP as deep sequencing to measure variants' effects on cellular internal standard). Protein levels were measured with fitness and mRNA expression in human cells dependent on fluorescent antibodies using flow cytometry. Statistics was BRCA1 function. performed using Statgraphics software. Results: We obtain function scores for 3,893 SNVs. Results: Oxidation of cfDNA transforms cfDNA frag- Scores are bimodally distributed and nearly perfectly ments into biologically active molecules that regulate level concordant with established assessments of pathogenicity of expression of number of genes. This was shown on a (sensitivity = 97%; specificity = 98%). Of 256 VUS, modelgeneticconstructioncontainingpoly-Ginsertionthat 25.0%scoreasnon-functional,asdo15.9%of3,140SNVs is prone to oxidation. Plasmids with oxidized poly-G currentlyunobservedclinically.RNAmeasurementsdeline- insertions penetrate MCF-7 and MSCs and cause rapidly- ate mechanisms by which SNVs result in loss of BRCA1 repaired DNA breaks. In concentration 10 - 200 ng/ml function. Hundreds of missense SNVs detrimental to oxidized plasmids activate DNA reparation processes and protein function are identified, as well as dozens of exonic induce antioxidant signaling pathways regulated by NRF2, and intronic SNVs that compromise BRCA1 function by thus,inhibitingapoptosisandcausingadaptiveresponse.In disrupting splicing. concentrations >350 ng/ml oxidized plasmids cause Conclusions: We predict this data will be directly useful apoptosis. fortheclinicalinterpretationofcancerriskbasedonBRCA1 Conclusions: Oxidation of cfDNA plays an important sequencing. Furthermore, we propose that this paradigm role in its penetration into cancer and stem cells and in can be extended to many additional clinically- adaptive response development. The study was supported actionable genes. by RFBR grants № 16-04-01099А, № 16-04-00576А. G.M. Findlay: None. R. Daza: None. B.K. Martin: V. Sergeeva: None. E. Malinovskaya: None. V. Veiko: None. M.D. Zhang: None. A.P. Leith: None. M. None. E. Ershova: None. L. Kameneva: None. M. Gasperini: None. J.D. Janizek: None. L.M. Starita: Konkova: None. N. Veiko: None. A. Kalyanov: None. None. J. Shendure: None. M. Abramova: None. E. Savinova: None. S. Kostyuk: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 829 C14.5 M.A.M.Reijns18,M.Preller2,B.Wiese19,C.Hartmann3,R.G. A whole-exome case-control study of soft-tissue sarcoma Weber1 F. Hu1,Y.Yu2, J.Chen2, P.Scheet2,C.D.Huff2 1Hannover Medical School, Department of Human Genetics, Hannover, Germany, 2Hannover Medical School, Institute for 1Public Health College, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Biophysical Chemistry, Hannover, Germany, 3Hannover China,2TheUniversityofTexasMDAndersonCancerCenter, Medical School, Division of Neuropathology, Hannover, Houston, TX, United States Germany, 4University of Leipzig, Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and Epidemiology, Leipzig, Germany, To evaluate the contribution of rare genetic variation to the 5University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Department developmentofsoft-tissuesarcoma,weconductedawhole- of Neurosurgery, Hamburg, Germany, 6Technical University exomecase-controlstudyin219casesand3,507controlsof Dresden, Department of Neurosurgery, Dresden, Germany, European ancestry. We controlled for technological strati- 7University of Bonn Medical School, Department of fication biases using XPAT and conducted gene-based Neuropathology, Bonn, Germany, 8Hannover Medical School, association tests using VAAST 2.1. Our cases consisted of Department of Neurosurgery, Hannover, Germany, samples from TCGA with one of six soft-tissue sarcoma 9International Neuroscience Institute, Department of subtypes: leiomyosarcoma (LMS), dedifferentiated lipo- Neurosurgery, Hannover, Germany, 10Hannover Medical sarcoma (DLPS), myxofibrosarcoma (MFS), undiffer- School, Department of Neuroradiologie, Hannover, Germany, entiated pleiomorphic sarcoma(UPS),malignant peripheral 11Hannover Medical School, Department of Pediatric Kidney, nerve sheathtumors (MPNST),and synovial sarcoma(SS). Liver and Metabolic Diseases, Hannover, Germany, We observed nominally significant association signals for 12NordstadtHospital,DepartmentofNeurosurgery,Hannover, three well-established sarcoma susceptibility genes, NF1 Germany, 13University of Rostock, Department of Urology, (p=1 x 10-5), TP53 (p=0.0025), and RB1 (p=0.028). Rostock, Germany, 14University of Rostock, Department of MSH2, an HNPCC gene, was also nominally significant Pathology, Rostock, Germany, 15Hannover Medical School, (p=0.0085);previousstudieshavesuggestedthatsarcomas Department of Pathology, Hannover, Germany, 16Heinrich- may be within the spectrum of HNPCC tumors. In general, Heine-University, Department of Neuropathology, Düsseldorf, the effect size estimates for variants in these genes were Germany, 17University Hospital and University of Zürich, large relative to other cancer types. For likely-gene dis- DepartmentofNeurology,Zürich,Switzerland,18Universityof rupting variants, the ORs were 39.4 (95% CI: 7.1 – 219.3) Edinburgh, Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, and 33.0 (95% CI: 2.4 – 462.5) for NF1 and MSH2, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, respectively.Forpredicteddamagingmissensevariants,the Edinburgh, United Kingdom, 19Henriettenstift, Diakovere ORs were 12.0 (95% CI: 2.4 – 59.1)and ∞ (95% CI:6.7 – Hospital, Department of Neurology, Hannover, Germany ∞) for RB1 and TP53, respectively. In subtype-specific analyses, all four genes were significantly associated with Insearchofnovelgermlinealterationspredisposingtotumors, LMS,thesubtypewiththelargestsamplesize.Threeofthe inparticulartogliomas,westudiedafamilywithtwobrothers four genes were significantly associated with at least one affected by anaplastic gliomas, and their father and paternal additional subtype. Our results indicate that rare coding great-unclediagnosedwithprostatecarcinoma.Inthisfamily, variantscanconfersubstantialincreasesinriskformultiple whole-exome sequencing yielded rare, simultaneously het- soft-tissue sarcoma subtypes. erozygousvariantsin the Aicardi-Goutièressyndrome (AGS) F. Hu: None. Y. Yu: None. J. Chen: None. P. Scheet: genes ADAR and RNASEH2B co-segregating with the tumor None. C.D. Huff: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; phenotype. AGS is a genetically induced inflammatory dis- Living DNA. ease particularly of the brain, which has not been associated with a consistently increased cancer risk to date. By targeted C14.6 sequencing, we identified novel ADAR and RNASEH2B var- Rare variants in the Aicardi-Goutières syndrome genes iants, and a 3- to 17-fold frequency increase of the AGS ADARandRNASEH2BandatypeIinterferonsignaturein mutations ADAR,c.577C>G;p.(P193A) and RNASEH2B, glioma and prostate carcinoma risk and tumorigenesis c.529G>A;p.(A177T) in the germline of familial glioma patients as well as in test and validation cohorts of glio- F.Brand1,U.Beyer1,H.Martens1,J.Weder2,A.Christians3,N. blastomas and prostate carcinomas versus ethnicity-matched Elyan1,B.Hentschel4,M.Westphal5,G.Schackert6,T.Pietsch7, controls,wherebyrareRNASEH2Bvariantsweresignificantly B. Hong8, J.K.Krauss8, A.Samii9, P.Raab10,A. Das11,C.A. morefrequentinfamilialgliomapatients.TumorswithADAR Dumitru12, I.E.Sandalcioglu12,O.W.Hakenberg13,A. orRNASEH2BvariantsrecapitulatedfeaturesofAGS,suchas Erbersdobler14,U.Lehmann15,G.Reifenberger16,M.Weller17, calcification and increased type I interferon expression.830 J.delPicchia Patients carrying ADAR or RNASEH2B variants showed submitted. All patients had truncating mutations which upregulationofinterferon-stimulatedgene(ISG)transcriptsin were distributed throughout the gene. Remarkably, no peripheralbloodasseeninAGS.AnincreasedISGexpression pathogenic mutations were identified in the small in-frame wasalsoinducedbyADARandRNASEH2Bvariantsintumor exon3andthefirst850basesofexon1.Allbutonepatient cells and was blocked by the JAK inhibitor Ruxolitinib. Our were reportedto have intellectual disability (ID). ARID1B- data implicate rare variants in the AGS genes ADAR and CSS patients displayed more CSS-associated dysmorphic RNASEH2B and a type I interferon signature in glioma and features(p<0.001)thanARID1B-IDpatients.ARID1B-ID prostate carcinoma risk and tumorigenesis, consistent with a patients were more inclined to have myopia (39.5% vs genetic basis underlying inflammation-driven malignant 18.3%, p=0.024) and cryptorchidism (67.6% vs 41.4%, transformationingliomaandprostatecarcinomadevelopment. p=0.005). Prevalences of motor (100%) and speech F.Brand:None.U.Beyer:None.H.Martens:None.J. (93.8%) delay, feeding difficulties (69.2%), seizures Weder: None. A. Christians: None. N. Elyan: None. B. (29.7%) and agenesis of corpus callosum (41.2%) were Hentschel: None. M. Westphal: None. G. Schackert: comparable in both groups. None. T. Pietsch: None. B. Hong: None. J.K. Krauss: D. Basedonourdataof144patientsweconcludethatexcept Speakers Bureau/Honoraria (speakers bureau, symposia, for dysmorphic features there do not seem to be major and expert witness); Modest; St. Jude Medical/AbbVie. F. differences between ARID1B-ID and ARID1B-CSS Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Medtronic, Boston patients. There therefore appears to be an ARID1B- Scientific.A.Samii:None.P.Raab:None.A.Das:None. spectrum, and patients should be managed similarly C.A. Dumitru: None. I.E. Sandalcioglu: None. O.W. regardless of clinical diagnosis. Hakenberg:None.A.Erbersdobler:None.U.Lehmann: E.P.J. van der Sluijs: None. J. Clayton-Smith: None. None. G. Reifenberger: B. Research Grant (principal G.W.E. Santen: None. investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already received); Modest; Roche, Merck C15.2 (EMD,Darmstadt).F.Consultant/AdvisoryBoard;Modest; Novel gene and pathomechanism in Cornelia de Lange Amgen, Celldex, Medac. M. Weller: None. M.A.M. syndrome Reijns: None. M. Preller: None. B. Wiese: None. C. Hartmann: None. R.G. Weber: None. I.Parenti1,S.RuizGil1,J.Pié2,3,T.M.Strom4,5,R.Brouwer6,F. Diab7,V.Dupé7,G.Gillessen-Kaesbach8,E.Mulugeta6,W.van IJcken6,F. Ramos2,9,E.Watrin7,K. S.Wendt6,F. J.Kaiser1 C15 Syndrome updates 2 1Section for Functional Genetics at the Institute of Human C15.1 Genetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany, 2Unit of The ARID1B spectrum: From non-syndromic intellectual Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of disability to Coffin-Siris syndrome Pharmacology-Physiology, School of Medicine, University of Zaragoza, CIBERER-GCV and ISS-Aragon, Zaragoza, Spain, E. P.J. vander Sluijs1,J. Clayton-Smith2,G.W.E. Santen1 3Unit of Clinical Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of Paediatrics, School of Medicine, University of 1Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, Zaragoza, CIBERER-GCV and ISS-Aragon, Zaragoza, Spain, 2Manchester Centre For Genomic Medicine, Manchester, 4Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität United Kingdom München, München, Germany, 5Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, München, Germany, ARID1BmutationsareoneofthemostfrequentcausesofID 6Department of Cell Biology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, as determined by large-scale whole exome sequencing stu- Netherlands, 7Faculté de Médecine, Institut de Génétique et dies. Most published clinical data however is obtained from Développement de Rennes, Rennes, France, 8Institut für clinicallydiagnosedCoffin-Sirispatients(ARID1B-CSS)and Humangenetik Lübeck, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, it is unclear whether this data is representative for patients Germany, 9Clinical Genetics Unit, Service of Paediatrics, identifiedthroughunbiasedsequencingtechniques(ARID1B- Hospital “Lozano Blesa” Medical School, University of ID). Therefore we sought to determine genotypic and phe- Zaragoza, CIBERER-GCV and IIS-Aragon, Zaragoza, Spain notypicdifferences between ARID1B-ID and ARID1B-CSS. Weaskedclinicianstoaddtheirpatient’sinformationtoa Cornelia de Lange syndrome (CdLS) is a rare multisystem web-based survey based on previously reported ARID1B developmental disorder caused by mutations in different features (www.arid1bgene.com). In total, 144 patients (80 subunits (SMC1A, SMC3, RAD21) or regulators (NIPBL, ARID1B-CSS and 64 ARID1B-ID patients) were HDAC8)ofthecohesincomplex.NIPBLvariantsaccountforAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 831 >70% of patients and result in NIPBL haploinsufficiency. December2017comprises4,364genes,whichadds~1,000 NIPBLinteracts via its N-terminus withMAU2,formingthe genes to those previously published, and identifies new kollerin complex, responsible for cohesin’s loading onto models for human diseases. chromatin. By CRISPR/Cas9, we generated cell lines Methods: Relevant disease models were identified by expressing an N-terminal truncated form of NIPBL deficient computingthesimilaritybetweenthephenotypesinthemice for complex formation with MAU2. Molecular characteriza- and the human phenotypes associated to their orthologous tion revealed reduced NIPBL protein levels and loss of loci in Mendelian disease. We also compared the ability of MAU2. However, ChIP-sequencing analyses show similar homozygous and heterozygous knockouts to phenocopy chromatin-boundcohesinandNIPBLinwildtypeandmutant human disease, stratifying by mode of inheritance. cells indicating unaffected cohesin loading mechanisms. Results: 281 new knockouts in rare disease genes have Interestingly, by genome sequencing of CdLS patients, we been analysed since August 2016. Approximately 40% of identified the first de novo variant in MAU2. This mutation these partially mimic the clinical phenotypes. Homozygous causesanin-framedeletionofsevenaminoacidsaffectingan mutants showed higher similarity scores. However, when α-helix important for wrapping the N-terminus of NIPBL divided according to mode of inheritance, these differences within MAU2. Accordingly, in vitro analyses revealed a only remained significant for autosomal recessive genes, dramaticreductionofMAU2heterodimerizationwithNIPBL. which also had better concordance with mouse zygosity. Notably, MAU2 is required for the correct folding of the N- Diseases with no previous mouse models described in the terminus of NIPBL, which becomes unstable in the absence literature by the Mouse Genome Informatics (MGI) group ofMAU2.Therefore,itmightbepossiblethattheinabilityof (~10% of new strains) include Spermatogenic Failure-6, an MAU2 to interact with NIPBL results in decreased NIPBL infertility condition caused by mutations in SPATA16, now protein levels, confirming NIPBL haploinsufficiency as the observed in homozygous mice, and Dilated Cardiomyo- major pathogenic mechanism of CdLS. In summary, we pathy-1BB, associated with DSG2 and mice displaying described the first MAU2 mutation in a patient with char- increasedheartweight,leftventriculardilation,andreduced acteristic CdLS phenotype. Our functional investigations cardiac contractility. reveal a new pathogenic mechanism relevant for CdLS Conclusions: Novel mouse models covering diverse resultingindecreasedNIPBLlevelsuponfunctionalalteration biologicalsystemscontinuetobeincorporatedtotheIMPC of its binding partner MAU2. catalogue. Analysis of their phenotypes is enhancing the I.Parenti:None.S.RuizGil:None.J.Pié:None.T.M. range of available models that are relevant for human Strom: None. R. Brouwer: None. F. Diab: None. V. diseases. Dupé:None.G.Gillessen-Kaesbach:None.E.Mulugeta: P. Cacheiro: None. T. Konopka: None. D. Smedley: None.W.vanIJcken:None.F.Ramos:None.E.Watrin: None. A. Mallon: None. T. Meehan: None. H. None. K.S. Wendt: None. F.J. Kaiser: None. Parkinson: None. C15.3 C15.4 New models for human diseases from the International Thrombocytopenia Microcephaly Syndrome - a novel Mouse Phenotyping Consortium phenotype associated with ACTB mutations P. Cacheiro1,T. Konopka1, D.Smedley1, A.Mallon2,T. S.L.Latham1,N.Ehmke2,P.Y.A.Reinke1,M.H.Taft1,M.J. Meehan3, H.Parkinson3 Lyons3,M.J.Friez3,J.A.Lee3,R.Hecker4,M.C.Frühwald5,K. Becker6, T.M. Neuhann6,E. Schrock7,K. Sarnow7, K. 1WilliamHarveyResearchInstitute,QueenMaryUniversityof Grützmann8,L.Gawehn7,B.Klink7,A.Rump7,C.Chaponnier9, London,London,UnitedKingdom,2MedicalResearchCouncil R. Knöfler10, D.Manstein1, N.Di Donato7 Harwell, Mammalian Genetics Unit and Mary Lyon Centre, Harwell, United Kingdom, 3European Molecular Biology 1Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Hannover Medical Laboratory, European Bioinformatics Institute, Hinxton, School,Hannover,Germany,2InstituteofMedicalandHuman United Kingdom Genetics, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany, 3Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, SC, Introduction: The International Mouse Phenotyping Con- UnitedStates,4InstituteforClinicalChemistryandLaboratory sortium (IMPC) is conducting genome and phenome-wide Medicine, TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany, 5Swabian phenotyping on knockout-mouse strains. Following a via- Children's Cancer Center, Children's Hospital Augsburg, bility screen, homozygous-viable mice enter the adult Augsburg, Germany, 6Medical Genetics Center, Munich, pipeline, whereas for homozygous-lethal strains, hetero- Germany, 7Institute for Clinical Genetics, TU Dresden, zygous animals are phenotyped. The latest data release in Dresden, Germany, 8Core Unit for Molecular Tumor832 J.delPicchia Diagnostics, National Center for Tumor Diseases Dresden, AnalliancebetweenSAPathologyandtheUniversityofSouth Dresden, Germany, 9Department of Pathology-Immunology, Australia, Adelaide, Australia, 4Center for Mendelian Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Genomics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Switzerland, 10Department of Paediatric Haemostaseology, MA, United States, 5School of Pharmacy and Medical Medical Faculty of TU Dresden, Dresden, Germany Sciences, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia, 6ACRFCancerGenomicsFacility,CentreforCancerBiology, Until recently missense germ-line mutations in ACTB, AnalliancebetweenSAPathologyandtheUniversityofSouth encoding the ubiquitously expressed β-cytoplasmic actin Australia, Adelaide, Australia, 73ACRF Cancer Genomics (CYA), were exclusively associated with Baraitser-Winter Facility, Centre for Cancer Biology, An alliance between SA Cerebrofrontofacial syndrome (BWCFF), a complex Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide, developmental disorder. Here, we report six patients with Australia, 8School of Biological Sciences, University of previously undescribed heterozygous variants clustered in Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 94Department of Genetics and the 3’-coding region of ACTB. These patients present with Molecular Pathology, SA Pathology, North Adelaide, clinical features different from BWCFF, including throm- Australia,10DepartmentofGeneticsandMolecularPathology, bocytopenia, microcephaly, and mild developmental dis- SA Pathology,, North Adelaide, Australia, 11Department of ability. Patient derived cells are morphologically and Anatomical Pathology, SA Pathology at Women's and functionally distinct from controls. Assessment of cytos- Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia, 12Kinghorn keletal constituents identifiedadiscretefilament population Centre for Clinical Genomics, Garvan Institute of Medical alteredinthesecells,whichcomprisesforcegeneratingand Research, Sydney, Australia, 13Genetics and Molecular transmitting actin binding proteins (ABP) known to be Pathology Research Laboratory, Centre for Cancer Biology, associated with thrombocytopenia. In silico modelling and AnalliancebetweenSAPathologyandtheUniversityofSouth molecular dynamics (MD)-simulations support altered Australia, North Adelaide, Australia, 14Australian Genomic interactions between these ABP and mutant β-CYA. Our Health Alliance, Melbourne, Australia, 15School of Medicine, results describe a new clinical syndrome associated with University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 16ACRF Cancer ACTB mutations with a distinct genotype-phenotype cor- Genomics Facility, Centre for Cancer Biology, An alliance relation, identify a cytoskeletal protein interaction network between SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, crucial for thrombopoiesis, and provide support for the Adealaide,Australia,17DepartmentofGeneticsandMolecular hypomorphic nature of these actinopathy mutations. Pathology, SA Pathology,, Adelaide, Australia S.L. Latham: None. N. Ehmke: None. P.Y.A. Reinke: None. M.H. Taft: None. M.J. Lyons: None. M.J. Friez: Background: The cause of pregnancy loss and perinatal None.J.A.Lee:None.R.Hecker:None.M.C.Frühwald: deathremainsunexplainedin~25%ofcases,despiteahigh None. K. Becker: None. T.M. Neuhann: None. E. perinatalautopsyrateinAustralia.Themostcommonfactor Schrock:None.K.Sarnow:None.K.Grützmann:None. contributing to perinatal death is congenital abnormalities. L. Gawehn: None. B. Klink: None. A. Rump: None. C. Aim: To use WES and WGS to identify genetic causes of Chaponnier: None. R. Knöfler: None. D. Manstein: fetal/newborn abnormalities that result in termination of None. N. Di Donato: None. pregnancy,deathinuteroorinthenewbornperiod,inview to providing families with answers regarding cause and C15.5 likelihood of recurrence. TheGenomicAutopsyStudy:usinggenomicsasanadjunct Methods: WES and/or WGS is being performed using to standard autopsy to unlock the cause of complex fetal Illumina sequencing systems, if microarray has not and neonatal presentations identified a cause. Prospective cases are families referred to the Genetics unit (parent-fetus trios) and retrospective C. P.Barnett1,2,A. B. Byrne3,4,5,P. Arts3,5, J.Feng6,5,P.S. cases are from stored autopsy samples (singletons). High Wang7,A. Schrieber6,5,8,P. Brautigan3,M.Babic3,W.Waters9, priority cases are consanguineous families, fetuses with L. Pais4, S.Yu10,J.Lipsett11,L. Moore11,N.Manton11,Y. multiple malformations, and unexplained fetal/newborn Khong11,E. Luddington1, E.Thompson1,J.Liebelt1,L. death.Statistical,bioinformaticandexperimentallaboratory McGregor1,M.Dinger12,D.G.MacArthur4,S.King-Smith13,14, techniques are used to confirm causality of variants. C. Hahn13,15,5,K. Kassahn3,8,H. Scott3,16,17,15 Results: 43 prospective trios and 60 retrospective singletons have been recruited and sequenced. Of the 1Paediatric and Reproductive Genetics Unit, Women's and prospective cohort, 23% of cases have been solved and an Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, Australia, 2University of additional 26% have a single promising candidate being Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia, 3Genetics and Molecular investigated.Intheretrospectivecohort,18%ofcaseshave Pathology Research Laboratory, Centre for Cancer Biology, strong candidates identified. Solved cases include newAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 833 disease gene discoveries, new syndrome identification and Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, novel severe fetal presentations of existing rare pediatric 23University Hospital Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany disease. The study has contributed directly to the birth of 3 healthy newborns. Exomesequencinghasmarkedlyenhancedthediscoveryof Discussion: Our results provide insights into molecular genes implicated in Mendelian disorders, particularly for mechanismsofearlydevelopmentandindicatethatagenomic individuals in whom a known clinical entity could not be autopsy using WES/WGS should be a routine component of assigned. This has led to the recognition that phenotypic the investigation of pregnancy loss and perinatal death. heterogeneity resulting from allelic mutations occurs more C.P. Barnett: None. A.B. Byrne: None. P. Arts: None. commonlythanpreviouslyappreciated.Here,wereportthat J.Feng:None.P.S. Wang:None.A.Schrieber: None. P. missense variants in CDC42, a gene encoding a small Brautigan: None. M. Babic: None. W. Waters: None. L. GTPase functioning as an intracellular signaling node, Pais: None. S. Yu: None. J. Lipsett: None. L. Moore: underlie a clinically heterogeneous group of phenotypes None. N. Manton: None. Y. Khong: None. E. Ludding- characterized by variable growth dysregulation, facial dys- ton: None. E. Thompson: None. J. Liebelt: None. L. morphism, and neurodevelopmental, immunological, and McGregor: None. M. Dinger: None. D.G. MacArthur: hematologicalanomalies,includingaphenotyperesembling None.S.King-Smith:None.C.Hahn:None.K.Kassahn: Noonan syndrome, a developmental disorder caused by None. H. Scott: None. dysregulated RAS signaling. In silico, in vitro, and in vivo analyses demonstrate that mutations variably perturb C15.6 CDC42 function by altering the switch between the active Functional Dysregulation of CDC42 Causes Diverse and inactive states of the GTPase and/or affecting CDC42 Developmental Phenotypes interaction with effectors, and differentially disturb cellular and developmental processes. These findings reveal the S. Martinelli1, O.Krumbach2,F. Pantaleoni3,S. Coppola1,E. remarkably variable impact that dominantly acting CDC42 Amin2,L. Pannone3,K. Nouri2,L. Farina1,R. Dvorsky2,F. mutations have on cell function and development, creating Lepri3,M.Buchholzer2,R. Konopatzki2,L. Walsh4, K.Payne4, challenges in syndrome definition, and exemplify the M.E. Pierpont5,S. Vergano6,K. Langley7, D.Larsen8,K. importanceoffunctionalprofilingforsyndromerecognition Farwell9,S.Tang9,C.Mroske9,I.Gallotta10,E.DiSchiavi10,M. and delineation. E-Rare (NSEuroNet), National Institute of dellaMonica11,L.Lugli12,C.Rossi13,M.Seri14,G.Cocchi14,L. Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) Henderson7,B.Baskin7,M.Alders15,R.Mendoza-Londono16,L. S. Martinelli: None. O. Krumbach: None. F. Panta- Dupuis16,D.Nickerson17,J.Chong18,N.Meeks19,K. Brown19, leoni: None. S. Coppola: None. E. Amin: None. L. T. Causey20, M.Cho7,S. Demuth21,M.Digilio3, B.Gelb22,M. Pannone: None. K. Nouri: None. L. Farina: None. R. Bamshad18, M.Zenker23,M.Ahmadian2, R.Hennekam15,M. Dvorsky: None. F. Lepri: None. M. Buchholzer: None. Tartaglia3,G.Mirzaa18 R. Konopatzki: None. L. Walsh: None. K. Payne: None. M.E. Pierpont: None. S. Vergano: None. K. Langley: 1Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Roma, Italy, 2Medical Faculty of None. D. Larsen: None. K. Farwell: None. S. Tang: theHeinrich-HeineUniversity,Dusseldorf,Germany,3Ospedale None.C.Mroske:None.I.Gallotta:None.E.DiSchiavi: Pediatricobambino Gesù, Roma, Italy, 4Riley Hospital for None. M. della Monica: None. L. Lugli: None. C. Rossi: Children,Indianapolis, IN, United States,5University of None. M. Seri: None. G. Cocchi: None. L. Henderson: Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, United States, 6Children’s None. B. Baskin: None. M. Alders: None. R. Mendoza- Hospitalof TheKing’s Daughters, Norfolk, VA,United States, Londono:None.L.Dupuis:None.D.Nickerson:None.J. 7GeneDX,Gaithersburg, MD,United States, 8Washington Chong: None. N. Meeks: None. K. Brown: None. T. University,St.Louis,MO,UnitedStates,9AmbryGenetics,Aliso Causey: None. M. Cho: None. S. Demuth: None. M. Viejo, CA, United States, 10National Research Council, Napoli, Digilio: None. B. Gelb: None. M. Bamshad: None. M. Italy,11AziendaOspedalieraUniversitariaMeyer,Firenze,Italy, Zenker: None. M. Ahmadian: None. R. Hennekam: 12Policlinico di Modena, Modena, Italy, 13Policlinico S.Orsola- None. M. Tartaglia: None. G. Mirzaa: None. Malpighi, Bologna, Italy, 14University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy,15UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,Netherlands,16The Hospitalfor Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 17University C16 Multi-omics 2 ofWashington, Seattle, WA,United States, 18University of Washington, Seattle, WA,United States, 19Children’s Hospital C16.1 Colorado,Aurora,CO,UnitedStates,20VirginiaCommonwealth High throughput characterization of genetic effects on University, Richmond, VA, United States, 21Praxis fu¨r DNA:protein binding and gene transcription Humangenetik Erfurt, Erfurt, Germany, 22Icahn School of834 J.delPicchia C.Kalita1,C.Brown2,A.Freiman1,X.Wen3,R.Pique-Regi1,F. mobile element retrotransposition has been inferred only Luca1 indirectly from phylogenetic comparisons. We report the first direct estimate of the retrotransposition rate in a large 1Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, United States, series of 3-generation human pedigrees. 2University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, Materials and Methods: We performed whole genome 3University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, United States sequencingat30xaveragecoverageonblood-derivedDNA from 603 CEPH individuals, comprising 34 multi- The majority of the human genome is composed of non- generation pedigrees. The families were joint-called using coding regions containing regulatory elements, which con- Mobile Element Locator Tool (MELT) and RUFUS to trol gene expression. Many variants associated with com- identify de novo Alu, LINE1, and SVA elements. All plex traits are in these regions, and contribute to an candidate de novo mobile element insertions (MEI) were individual's phenotype by disrupting gene regulatory validated using PCR and Sanger sequencing, and flanking sequences.Consequently,itisimportanttonotonlyidentify SNPs were typed to determine parent of origin. functional regulatory elements, but also to test if a variant Results: The false-negative and false-positive rates of withinabindingsiteaffectsgeneregulation.Wedeveloped MEI detection were 5% and 15%, respectively. The a new streamlined protocol for high-throughput reporter retrotransposition rate estimates for Alu elements, one in assay, BiT-STARR-seq (Biallelic targeted STARR-seq), to 50, is roughly half the rate estimated using phylogenetic identify allele-specific expression (ASE) while directly analyses, a difference similar to that observed for single accounting for PCR duplicates through unique molecular nucleotidevariants.TheSVAandLINE1retrotransposition identifiers incorporation. We tested 75,501 oligos (43,500 ratesarebothapproximatelyonein100-150births,whichis SNPs) and identified 2,720 SNPs with significant ASE higher than phylogenetic estimates. De novo MEIs were (FDR10%).Tovalidatedisruptionofbindingasoneofthe transmitted at a 3-fold higher rate among fathers than mechanisms underlying ASE, we performed high through- mothers, with no apparent age bias. put EMSA (BUNDLE-seq) for NFKB-p50. We tested the Conclusions: The directly estimated Alu retrotransposi- same oligo library used in BiT-STARR-seq and identified tion rate is roughly half of previous phylogenetically based 2,951 SNPs with significant allele-specific binding (ASB) estimates, whereas LINE1 and SVA rates are higher than (FDR 10%). Of the SNPs with ASB, 173 also had ASE previously estimated. Future studies will investigate (OR=1.97, p-value=0.0006). When we focused on var- whether a paternal bias is a consistent hallmark of de novo iants associated with complex traits, we identified 1,531 retrotransposition. SNPs with ASE in the BiT-STARR-seq and 1,662 SNPs Support: NIH GM-59290 withASBintheBUNDLE-seqassay.Wecharacterizedthe J.E. Feusier: None. W. Watkins: None. J. Thomas: mechanism whereby the alternate allele for variant None. L. Baird: None. M. Leppert: None. L.B. rs3810936 increases risk for Crohn’s disease through Jorde: None. increased NFKB binding and consequent altered gene expression. In conclusion, combining ASB and ASE in C16.3 high-throughput assays is a new powerful approach to Multivariate analysis of immune phenotypes reveals novel validate the molecular mechanism for regulatory variants genetic and context specific genetic factors for cytokine associated with disease traits. production capacity C. Kalita: None. C. Brown: None. A. Freiman: None. X. Wen: None. R. Pique-Regi: None. F. Luca: None. R. A.Aguirre-Gamboa1,O.Bakker1, T.Spenkelink1,U.Võsa1, M.Jaeger2,M. Oosting2, S.Smeekens2,R. Netea-Maier3,R. C16.2 Xavier4,5,I.Jonkers1,L.Franke1,L.A.B.Joosten2,S.Sanna1, A pedigree-based estimate of the human germline V. Kumar1,C.Wijmenga1,6,M.Netea2,7, Y.Li1 retrotransposition rate 1University of Groningen, University Medical Center J.E.Feusier, W.Watkins,J.Thomas,L.Baird,M.Leppert, L. Groningen, Department of Genetics, Groningen, Groningen, B. Jorde Netherlands, 2Department of Internal Medicine and Radboud Center for Infectious Diseases, Radboud University Medical University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, United States Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 3Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Radboud University Introduction:Mobileelementscomposeatleasthalfofthe Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Broad Institute of human genome, and some mobile element families are still MIT and Harvard University, Boston, MA, United States, actively inserting in the genome. However, the rate of 5Center for Computational and Integrative Biology andAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 835 Gastrointestinal Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, During the last years, we have witnessed a conspicuous Harvard School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States, upraise in the sequencing of ancient DNA data, with the 6Department of Immunology, University of Oslo, Oslo proliferation of studies attempting to shed light on human University Hospital, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway, origins and migration routes. Dating the ancient DNA is, 7Department for Genomics & Immunoregulation, Life and therefore, of key importance. However, although radio- MedicalSciencesInstitute(LIMES),UniversityofBonn,Bonn, carbondatingisawell-establishedpractice,itsoutcomecan Germany bealteredbynumerousfactors,leadingtoinaccuracieswith carbon dates older than 25,000 BP considered highly Immuneresponsesinhealthyindividualsshowaremarkable unreliable. Here, we introduce a DNA admixture-based inter-individual variation. Previous studies have identified dating method, which utilizes allele frequencies that vary thatgeneticandnon-genetichostfactorsplayanimportant over time to create dating components. We developed role in this variation of the immune response. However, a syntheticDNAtypicaltospecifictimeperiods(e.g.,10,500- large portion of the variation remains unexplained due to 9,000 BP) and then calculated for each ancient genome the limited power of these studies and to the fact that interac- time profile, which consisted of the frequencies of those tionsbetweengeneticsandenvironmentarelargelyignored. DNAmolecules.Usingadatasetof~300ancientEurasians We aim to identify both the genetic and the environment- with reliable radiocarbon date ranging from 15,000 BP to dependent genetic effects that are shared by multiple 1,500 BP, we demonstrated that our predicted dates are immune functions in a large population cohort. perfectly correlated with radiocarbon dates (r2=0.9). The After the measurement of cytokines (protein level) in average difference between ourpredictions andtheaverage responsetopathogenstimulationsin500healthyindividuals, radiocarbon dates was 800 years. Our results confirm the wefirstlygroupedcytokinesbasedonbiologicalrelevancein usefulness of using time-dependent allelic frequency for monocytes (IL-β, IL-6 and TNF-α) or T cells (IFN-γ, IL17 biodating and contribute to the understanding of the com- andIL22)andthepathogenusedinstimulation,respectively. plexity of migration and admixture events. Grant Info: GH Subsequently, we applied a multi-trait modeling strategy, was partially supported by the UK EPSRC Doctoral where the biological relevant groups were evaluated at Training Partnership Grant EP/N509735/1 as a Vacation genome-wide level. A total of 12 genome-wide significant Bursary Training Project. loci were detected, of which 6 replicate the previous single- U. Esposito: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, trait mapping and 6 are novel. The 12 loci are enriched for collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as genes implicated in immune response pathways and are co- grants already received); Significant; DNA Diagnostic localized with genetic risk factors associated to immune- Centre. G. Holland: None. E. Elhaik: B. Research Grant mediated diseases like inflammatory bowel disease and (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, several loci were identified pending grants as well as grants already received); toregulatecytokineproductiondifferentiallybetweengender Significant; DNA Diagnostic Centre. and smoking status. Our results show that integration of multiple immune C16.5 phenotypes can reveal novel genomic associations and Ahomozygousloss-of-functionmutationinC17orf62causes context-specific cytokine QTLs, highlighting the shared chronic granulomatous disease genetic basis of cytokine production upon stimulation that contributetointer-individualdiversityoftheimmunefunction. G.A. Arnadottir1,G.L. Norddahl1, S.Gudmundsdottir1, A.B. R.A. Aguirre-Gamboa: None. O. Bakker: None. T. Agustsdottir1, S.Sigurdsson1,B. O.Jensson1,K. Bjarnadottir1, Spenkelink: None. U. Võsa: None. M. Jaeger: None. M. F.Theodors1,S.Benonisdottir1,E.V.Ivarsdottir1,2,A.Oddsson1, Oosting: None. S. Smeekens: None. R. Netea-Maier: R. P.Kristjansson1,G.Sulem1,G.Masson1,K. B.Orvar3,4, H. None. R. Xavier: None. I. Jonkers: None. L. Franke: Holm1,S. Bjornsson3,4,R. Arngrimsson5,6,D.F. None.L.A.B.Joosten:None.S.Sanna:None.V.Kumar: Gudbjartsson1,2,U.Thorsteinsdottir1,6,I.Jonsdottir1,6,A. None.C.Wijmenga:None.M.Netea:None.Y.Li:None. Haraldsson6,7, P.Sulem1,K. Stefansson1,6 C16.4 1deCODE genetics / Amgen, Reykjavik, Iceland, 2School of Time informative markers to date ancient Skeletons Engineering and Natural Sciences, University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 3Department of Internal Medicine, U.Esposito,G.Holland,E. Elhaik Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 4The MedicalCenter,Glaesibae,Reykjavik,Iceland,5Departmentof Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Landspitali University Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland, 6Faculty of Medicine, University836 J.delPicchia of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland, 7Children's Hospital Iceland, genetics / Amgen. R.P. Kristjansson: A. Employment (full Landspitali University Hospital, Reykjavik, Iceland or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics / Amgen. G. Sulem: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Introduction: Chronic granulomatous disease (CGD) is a deCODE genetics / Amgen. G. Masson: A. Employment rare primary immunodeficiency that results from defects in (fullorpart-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen.K. the phagocytic NADPH (the reduced nicotinamide adenine B. Orvar: None. H. Holm: A. Employment (full or part- dinucleotide phosphate) oxidase complex. time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen.S.Bjornsson: Materials and Methods: We have whole-genome None. R. Arngrimsson: None. D.F. Gudbjartsson: A. sequenced 37K Icelanders and genotyped 155K, a large Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics fraction of the Icelandic population (11% and 46% of /Amgen.U. Thorsteinsdottir:A. Employment(fullor part- 338K, respectively). As part of this effort, we are time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen.I.Jonsdottir: performing genetic analysis of rare diseases in the clinical A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE setting. We sequenced the genomes of two Icelandic genetics / Amgen. A. Haraldsson: None. P. Sulem: A. brothers diagnosed with CGD in an attempt at finding the Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics causal mutation. / Amgen. K. Stefansson:A. Employment(full or part-time); Results: We identified a homozygous loss-of-function Significant; deCODE genetics / Amgen. mutation, p.Tyr2Ter, in C17orf62 in both brothers, and found six additional homozygous individuals through C16.6 imputation of the mutation into 155K chip-genotyped The neurodevelopmental 16p11.2 CNVs have, as yet Icelanders. Genotype-based recall, and review of hospital- overlooked,mirroreffectonsexualdevelopmentinhumans basedinformation,revealedthatalleighthomozygoteshave and animal models signs of CGD, manifesting as colitis, severe and recurrent infections, or an impaired neutrophil oxidative burst. Mice K. Mannik1,2, M.Lepamets2,3,A. Mikhaleva1,K.Lepik4,5,6, Z. deficientinthehomologofC17orf62arehighlysusceptible Kupchinsky7,H.Ademi8,T. Arbogast7,A. Messina9,S. to infections. Homozygosity for p.Tyr2Ter associates with Rotman10,E.Dubruc10,J.Chrast1,S.Martin-Brevet11,T.Laisk- inflammatoryboweldisease(P=8.3×10−8;OR(95%CI) Podar12, The16p11.2 EuropeanConsortium, TheSimons VIP =67.6(14.5,315.5)),andgrowthretardation(P=3.3×10 Consortium, The eQTLGenConsortium, Y. Herault13, C.M. −4; Effect (95% CI) = -1.24 SD (-1.92, -0.56) / -8.5 cm). Lindgren14,15,16, Z.Kutalik5,6,J.C. Stehle17, N.Katsanis7,S. Weshowthathomozygosityforp.Tyr2Tercausescomplete Nef8,B. Draganski11,E.E. Davis7,R. Magi2,A. Reymond1 loss of the C17orf62 protein and a drastic reduction in one of NADPH‘s subunits, indicating a chaperone role for 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, C17orf62. Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Conclusions: By leveraging a large population-specific Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of dataset we have elucidated the role of a previously Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, uncharacterized gene in humans, C17orf62, and identified Estonia, 4Institute of Computer Science, University of Tartu, a novel cause of CGD. Tartu, Estonia, 5Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, G.A. Arnadottir: A. Employment (full or part-time); Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 6Swiss Significant; deCODE genetics/Amgen Inc. G.L. Norddahl: InstituteofBioinformatics,Lausanne,Switzerland,7Centerfor A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE Human Disease Modeling, Duke University, Durham, NC, genetics/Amgen.S.Gudmundsdottir:A.Employment(full United States, 8Department of Genetic Medicine and or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics / Amgen. A.B. Development, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, Agustsdottir:A.Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant; 9Endocrinology, Diabetes & Metabolism Service, Lausanne deCODE genetics / Amgen. S. Sigurdsson: A. Employment University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, 10Service of (fullorpart-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen.B. Clinical Pathology, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, O. Jensson: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Switzerland, 11LREN, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, deCODE genetics / Amgen. K. Bjarnadottir: A. Employ- Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, Switzerland, ment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE genetics / 12Women’sClinic,InstituteofClinicalMedicine,Universityof Amgen. F. Theodors: A. Employment (full or part-time); Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 13Institute of Genetics and Molecular Significant;deCODEgenetics/Amgen.S.Benonisdottir:A. and Cellular Biology, Illkirch, France, 14Program in Medical Employment(fullorpart-time);Significant;deCODEgenetics and Population Genetics, Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, / Amgen. E.V. Ivarsdottir: A. Employment (full or part- United States, 15Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, time); Significant; deCODE genetics / Amgen. A. Oddsson: Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; deCODE Oxford,UnitedKingdom,16TheBigDataInstitute,LiKaShingAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 837 Centre for Health Information and Discovery, University of S.Küry1,2,G.M.vanWoerden3,4,T. Besnard1,2,X.Latypova1,2, Oxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,17MousePathologyFacility, M.T. Cho5,S. Sanders6,H.A. F. Stessman7, E.A. Sellars8, J. University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Berg9,J.L. Waugh10,L. A.Robak11, J.A. Bernstein12,M. Deardorff13,G.E.Hoganson14,D.S.Johnson15,T. Dabir16,A. We uncovered that the16p11.2 BP4-BP5 dosage, one ofthe Sarkar17,G.Lesca18,19,P. A. Terhal20,T. E. Prescott21,D.K. most frequent genetic causes of mental disorders, was asso- Grange22,A. vanHaeringen23, C.Lam24, G.Mirzaa24,25,K.L. ciated with age at menarche (AAM) in 60,498 UKBB Helbig26,A.Afenjar27,C.Nava28,A.Vitobello29,L.Faivre29,B. females. Compared to controls AAM was decreased in dele- Cogné1,2, J.A.Rosenfeld11,P. B. Agrawal10,CAMK2A/B tion (Δ=-1.5 years, p=0.01) and increased in duplication Consortium, S.Odent30,S. Bézieau1,2,Y. Elgersma3,4, S. carriers (Δ=+1.5; p=7.8x10-5; corrected for BMI and Mercier1,2 birthyear).Wereplicatedtheseassociationsin129,991UKBB women, 22,212 EGCUT females and 67 16p11.2 clinical 1CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, 2l'institut du thorax, patients. A directionally consistent trend was observed in INSERM, CNRS, UNIV Nantes, Nantes, France, 3Erasmus 16p11.2 UKBB and patient males. These features were University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, accompanied by reproductive tract/fertility disorders, e.g. 4ENCORE Expertise Center for Neurodevelopmental miscarriages(OR=2.65;p=0.019),oligo-/amenorrhea(OR Disorders, Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5GeneDx, Gaithersburg, =10.2;p=0.01),cryptorchidism/hypospadias.Wevalidated MD, United States, 6UCSF Weill Institute for Neurosciences, theseresultsin16p11.2micemodelsbydetectingsignificant University of California, San Francisco, CA, United States, changes in timing of first ovulation (p<0.01), estrous cycli- 7Creighton University Medical School, Omaha, NE, United city (p=0.03) and uterine size (p=8.1x10-3). Corrobora- States,8ArkansasChildren’sHospital,LittleRock,AR,United tively, genes differentially-expressed in 16p11.2 patients and States, 9University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom, models were enriched for urogenital disease genes. 10Boston Children's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, We found a significant link between the human 16p11.2 Boston, MA, United States, 11Baylor College of Medicine, dosage, AAM and volume of hypothalamus (p <0.05), a Houston, TX, United States, 12Stanford University School of FWE structure associated with sexual development, suggesting that Medicine,Stanford,CA,UnitedStates,13Children'sHospitalof perturbation of the GnRH axis could be responsible for Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 14University of theobservedphenotypes.UsingMendelianRandomizationwe Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, United States, 15Sheffield prioritized three potential causal genes for AAM. We Children's Hospital, Sheffield, United Kingdom, 16Belfast City challenged them by modulating dosage of all 16p11.2 genes Hospital, Belfast, United Kingdom, 17Nottingham University ingnrh3:egfptransgeniczebrafishlarvaeandquantifiedGnRH Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham, United Kingdom, neuronal patterning. We confirmed a putative causal effect of 18Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 19INSERM, CNRS, INO80E and GDPD3 in the 16p11.2 reproductive axis. CentredeRechercheenNeurosciencesdeLyon,Lyon,France, These findings highlight that identification of traits 20University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, Netherlands, associated with neurodevelopmental CNVs in the general 21Telemark Hospital, Skien, Norway, 22Washington University population provides valuable and unbiased insight into School of Medicine, Saint-Louis, MO, United States, 23Leiden disease etiologies in terms of affected genes and pathways, University Medical Center, Leiden, Netherlands, 24University pleiotropy and comorbidities. of Washington School of Medicine and Seattle Children's K.Mannik:None.M.Lepamets:None.A.Mikhaleva: Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States, 25Seattle Children’s None.K.Lepik:None.Z.Kupchinsky:None.H.Ademi: Research Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 26Children’s None.T.Arbogast:None.A.Messina:None.S.Rotman: Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, None. E. Dubruc: None. J. Chrast: None. S. Martin- 27GRCConCer-LD,SorbonneUniversités,HôpitalTrousseau, Brevet: None. T. Laisk-Podar: None. Y. Herault: None. Paris, France, 28Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et C.M. Lindgren: None. Z. Kutalik: None. J.C. Stehle: Marie Curie, INSERM, CNRS, Paris, France, 29Université de None. N. Katsanis: None. S. Nef: None. B. Draganski: BourgogneFranche-Comté,Dijon,France,30CHUdeRennes, None. E.E. Davis: None. R. Magi: None. A. Rennes, France Reymond: None. The alpha- and beta-isoforms of calcium/calmodulin- dependentserine/threonineproteinkinaseII(CAMK2)play C17 Intellectual disability 1 a pivotal role in neuronal function. Although CAMK2 was one of the first proteins shown to be essential for normal C17.1 learning and synaptic plasticity in mice, its requirement for De novo mutations in protein kinase genes CAMK2A and human brain development has not yet been established. CAMK2B cause intellectual disability Through a multi-center collaborative study based on a838 J.delPicchia whole-exome sequencing approach, we identified 20 Institute, Seattle, WA, United States, 7Imagine Institute, exceedinglyraredenovoCAMK2AorCAMK2Bvariantsin INSERMUMR-1163,LaboratoryGeneticsandEmbryologyof 27 unrelated individuals with neurodevelopmental impair- Congenital Malformations, Paris Descartes University, Paris, ment.Theindividualsallpresentwithintellectualdisability, France, 8Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Pediatrics, language and speech delay, and virtually all of them show UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium behavioral anomalies. The variants are either in the kinase domain or in the autoregulatory domain, suggesting they Centrosomes are conserved microtubule-based organelles may change the kinetic function of the enzyme. Variants involved in eukaryotic cell division and ciliogenesis. Mul- were assessed for their effect on CAMK2 function on tiple malformations of cortical development are associated neuronal migration in the developing nervous of mouse with abnormal centrosomal protein function. Rotatin embryos transfected with cDNA constructs by in utero (RTTN), localized at centrosome and basal body, is a pro- electroporation. For both CAMK2A and CAMK2B, we tein previously linked to a wide variety of brain mal- identified pathogenic variants that decreased or increased formations, affecting neuronal proliferation, migration and CAMK2 auto-phosphorylation at Thr286/Thr287. We fur- organization.Themoleculardiseasemechanism(s)havenot ther found that all variants affecting auto-phosphorylation yetbeenelucidated.Wehavegatheredpatientmaterialfrom also affected neuronal migration, highlighting the impor- a cohort of 8 patients with homozygous or compound het- tance of tightly regulated CAMK2 auto-phosphorylation in erozygousRTTNmutations.QuantificationofRTTNmRNA neuronal function and neurodevelopment. Our data estab- shows residual transcript in all patients, supporting the lish the importance of CAMK2A and CAMK2B and their hypothesis that complete lack of RTTN is embryonically auto-phosphorylation in human brain function, and expand lethal in human, as seen in RTTN-/- knockout mice. thephenotypicspectrumofthedisorderscausedbyvariants Immunocytochemistry of RTTN in control fibroblasts and in key players of the glutamatergic signaling pathway. derived neurons shows localization at the centrosome. S.Küry:None.G.M.vanWoerden:None.T.Besnard: Furthermore, in the cohort of RTTN patients and siRTTN None. X. Latypova: None. M.T. Cho: A. Employment fibroblasts, we show that RTTN deficiency leads to abnor- (full orpart-time); Significant;GeneDx.S. Sanders: None. mal centrosome amplification during cell division, leading H.A.F. Stessman: None. E.A. Sellars: None. J. Berg: to multipolar mitotic spindles and mitotic failure. This None. J.L. Waugh: None. L.A. Robak: None. J.A. cellular phenotype has also been reported in Drosophila Bernstein: None. M. Deardorff: None. G.E. Hoganson: melanogaster homologue Ana3 knockout neuroblasts. None. D.S. Johnson: None. T. Dabir: None. A. Sarkar: FACS cell cycle analysis showed a highly significant None.G.Lesca:None.P.A.Terhal:None.T.E.Prescott: increaseofG1phasecellsanddecreaseinG2/M-phasecells None. D.K. Grange: None. A. van Haeringen: None. C. in RTTN deficient fibroblasts. Proteomics analysis shows Lam: None. G. Mirzaa: None. K.L. Helbig: None. A. that RTTN interacts with the non-muscle cellular myosin Afenjar: None. C. Nava: None. A. Vitobello: None. L. complex (MYH9-MYH10-MYH14). This complex has Faivre: None. B. Cogné: None. J.A. Rosenfeld: None. P. already shown to play a role in centrosome amplification, B.Agrawal:None.S.Odent:None.S.Bézieau:None.Y. ciliogenesis and nucleokinesis during neuronal migration. Elgersma: None. S. Mercier: None. MutationalimpairmentoftheRTTN-Myosinbindingcould explainthecellularphenotypeandcorticalmalformationsin C17.2 our patients. LV was supported by Steunfonds Marguerite- Rotatinmutationsimpairbipolarmitoticspindleformation MarieDelacroix,ResearchFoundationFlanders(FWO)and leading to a wide spectrum of brain malformations COST Action CA16118. L.V.Vandervore:None.R.Schot:None.E.Kasteleijn: L. V.Vandervore1,2,3,R. Schot2,E. Kasteleijn2, R.Oegema2,F. None. R. Oegema: None. F. Verheijen: None. A. Verheijen2, A.Gheldof1,3,K. Stouffs1,3, R.Poot4,W. B. Gheldof: None. K. Stouffs: None. R. Poot: None. W.B. Dobyns5,6, N.Bahi-Buisson7, A.C. Jansen1,8,G.Mancini2 Dobyns: None. N. Bahi-Buisson: None. A.C. Jansen: None. G. Mancini: None. 1Neurogenetics Research Group, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,Belgium,2DepartmentofClinicalGenetics,Erasmus C17.3 UniversityMedicalCenter,Rotterdam,Netherlands,3Centerof DualmoleculareffectsofdominantRORAmutationscause MedicalGenetics,UZBrussel,Brussels,Belgium,4Department twovariantsofsyndromicintellectualdisabilitywitheither of Cell Biology, Erasmus University Medical Center, autistic features or cerebellar ataxia Rotterdam, Netherlands, 5Departments of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 6Center X. Latypova1,2,3,C. Guissart4,T. N.Khan2,P. Rollier5,H. for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children’s Research Stamberger6,7,8,K. McWalter9,M.T. Cho9,S. Kjaergaard10,S.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 839 Weckhuysen6,7,8,G.Lesca11,12,T. Besnard1,3,K. Õunap13,L. City, MO, United States, 23University of Missouri Kansas Schema14,A.G.Chiocchetti15,M.McDonald16,J. de City,SchoolofMedicine, KansasCity,MO,United States, Bellescize17,M. Vincent1,3,H.Van Esch18,S. Sattler19, I. 24DivisionofClinicalGenetics,Children’sMercyHospital, Forghani20,I.Thiffault21,22,23,C. M.Freitag15,D.Barbouth20, Kansas City, MO, United States, 25Department of Pedia- M.Cadieux-Dion21,N.P. Saffina23,24,25,L. Grote23,24,25, W. trics, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, MO, United Carré26,C.Saunders21,22,23,S.Pajusalu13,A.Boland27,D.Hays States, 26Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire & Géno- Karlowicz16, J.Deleuze27,M.H.Wojcik28,R. Pressman20,B. mique,CHUdeRennes, Rennes, France, 27CentreNational Isidor1,3,A. Vogels18,W.Van Paesschen29,F. Rivier30,N. de Recherche en Génomique Humaine (CNRGH), Institut Leboucq31,B. Cogné1,3,S. Sasorith4, D.Sanlaville11,12,K. de Biologie François Jacob, DRF, CEA, Evry, France, Retterer9,S.Odent5,32,N.Katsanis2,S.Bézieau1,3,M.Koenig4,L. 28TheBroadInstituteofMITandHarvard,Cambridge,MA, Pasquier33, E.E. Davis2,S. Küry1,3; United States, 29Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium, 30Department of 1Service de Génétique Médicale, CHU Nantes, Nantes, Neuropédiatrie and CR Maladies Neuromusculaires, CHU France, 2Center for Human Disease Modeling, Durham, de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 31Neuroradiologie, NC, United States, 3l'institut du thorax, INSERM, CNRS, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier, France, 32CNRS UMR UNIV Nantes, Nantes, France, 4EA7402 Institut Uni- 6290, Université de Rennes, Rennes, France, 33Service de versitaire de Recherche Clinique, and Laboratoire de Génétique Clinique, Centre Référence Déficiences Intel- Génétique Moléculaire, CHU and Université de Mon- lectuelles de causes rares (CRDI), Centre de référence tpellier, Montpellier, France, 5Service de Génétique Clin- anomalies du développement CLAD-Ouest, Rennes, ique, Centre Référence “Déficiences Intellectuelles de France. causes rares” (CRDI), Centre de référence anomalies du Introduction: Through a multi-center international col- développement CLAD-Ouest, CHU Rennes, Rennes, laboration, we identified 16 individuals with de novo or France, 6Division of Neurology, University Hospital dominant variants in RORA, encoding the retinoic acid Antwerp,Antwerp,Belgium,7NeurogeneticsGroup,Center receptor (RAR)-related orphan nuclear receptor alpha, by for Molecular Neurology, VIB, Antwerp, Belgium, whole exome sequencing or chromosomal microarray. The 8Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, Uni- mutational spectrum included four copy number variations versityofAntwerp,Antwerp,Belgium,9GeneDx,207Perry (two de novo deletions, one dominant deletion and one de Parkway, Gaithersburg, MD, UnitedStates, 10Chromosome novo duplication) and nine de novo single nucleotide var- Laboratory, Department of Clinical Genetics, Copenhagen iants.Intellectualdisability(ID)wasthepredominantclinical UniversityHospital,Rigshospitalet,Copenhagen,Denmark, feature (15/16), accompanied by seizures (11/16), autistic 11Service de génétique, Groupement Hospitalier Est, Hos- features (5/16) and cerebellar hypoplasia or atrophy (3/16). pices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France, 12INSERM U1028, Materialsandmethods:Toinvestigatetherelevanceof CNRS UMR5292, Centre de Recherche en Neurosciences RORA disruption to neurodevelopmental phenotypes in deLyon,UniversitéClaudeBernardLyon1,Lyon,France, humans,weabrogatedtheD.rerioortholog,roraa,through 13Department of Clinical Genetics, United Laboratories, either transient suppression or CRISPR/Cas9 genome Tartu University Hospital and Institute of Clinical Medi- editing. cine, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 14University of Results: Disruption of roraa causes a significant Minnesota -Fairview Minneapolis, Minneapolis, MN, Uni- reductionofcerebellarsizeindevelopinglarvae.Moreover, ted States, 15Department of Child and Adolescent Psy- wild-type human RORA mRNA could rescue cerebellar chiatry, Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, JW Goethe defects caused by roraa morpholino knockdown. Through University Frankfurt, Deutschordenstraße 50, Frankfurt, invivocomplementationandtitrationofvariantmRNA,we Germany, 16Division of Medical Genetics, Department of observedthatmissensevariantshadtwodistinctpathogenic Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, NC, United States, mechanisms of either haploinsufficiency or dominant toxic 17Epilepsy, Sleep and Pediatric Neurophysiology Depart- effects, according to their localization in the ligand- or ment, Hospices Civils, Lyon, Bron, France, 18Center for DNA-binding domains. Notably, ID and autism were hall- Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, mark features in individuals with loss of function variants, Belgium, 19Carle Physician Group, Urbana, IL, United whereas ID and cerebellar features were the main pheno- States,20Dr.JohnT.MacdonaldFoundationDepartmentof types in individuals with variants harboring a dominant Human Genetics, University of Miami, Miller School of toxic effect. Medicine, Miami, FL, United States, 21Center for Pediatric Conclusions: Our combined genetic and functional data Genomic Medicine, Children’s Mercy Hospital, Kansas point to dual mutational effects that likely determine phe- City, MO, United States, 22Department of Pathology and notypic outcome. In sum, our results show that RORA Laboratory Medicine, Children's Mercy Hospitals, Kansas variants lead to a neurodevelopmental disorder840 J.delPicchia characterized by intellectual disability, seizures, autistic United States, 13University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, United features and cerebellar defects. States X. Latypova: None. C. Guissart: None. T.N. Khan: None. P. Rollier: None. H. Stamberger: None. K. Monogenic forms of intellectual disability (ID) are char- McWalter: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; acterized by an extreme heterogeneity, with more than 700 Gene Dx. M.T. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); genes now implicated. The most frequent cause of mono- Significant; Gene Dx. S. Kjaergaard: None. S. Wec- genic ID -thefragile X-syndrome- isduetotheabsence of khuysen: None. G. Lesca: None. T. Besnard: None. K. the RNA-binding protein (RBP) FMRP. Many other ID Õunap:None.L.Schema:None.A.G.Chiocchetti:None. genes involved in RNA metabolism have been recently M.McDonald:None.J.deBellescize:None.M.Vincent: identified. About 5% (40/721) of the ID-associated genes None.H.VanEsch: None.S.Sattler: None.I.Forghani: play a role in the post-transcriptional regulation of gene None. I. Thiffault: None. C.M. Freitag: None. D. Bar- expression by regulating mRNA splicing, nuclear export, bouth: None. M. Cadieux-Dion: None. N.P. Saffina: degradation or translation into proteins. We describe here None. L. Grote: None. W. Carré: None. C. Saunders: two novel ID genes involved in RNA metabolism. None. S. Pajusalu: None. A. Boland: None. D. Hays We identified 4 de novo frameshift variants in NOVA2 in Karlowicz:None.J.Deleuze:None.M.H.Wojcik:None. patients with Angelman-like ID. This gene encodes a RBP R. Pressman: None. B. Isidor: None. A. Vogels: None. implicated in alternative splicing of axon-guidance genes. W. Van Paesschen: None. F. Rivier: None. N. Leboucq: The 4 mutations cluster in a small interval suggesting a None. B. Cogné: None. S. Sasorith: None. D. Sanlaville: dominant negative mechanism. This GC and repeat-rich None. K. Retterer: A. Employment (full or part-time); interval is poorly covered in most exomes, and the gene Significant; Gene Dx. S. Odent: None. N. Katsanis: E. may have thus been missed in large scale projects, such as Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other DDD. We show that the mutations lead to dysfunctional intellectual property); Significant; Rescindo Therapeutics, truncated proteins not able to regulate specific splicing Inc. F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; Rescindo events like the NOVA2 wild-type. The inactivation of Therapeutics,Inc.S.Bézieau:None.M.Koenig:None.L. NOVA2 by siRNA in differentiated N2A cells causes an Pasquier: None. E.E. Davis: None. S. Küry: None. increase of neurons with multiple neurites. We identified 4 de novo missense variants in DDX6, C17.4 encoding a protein implicated in mRNA degradation and Descriptionofnovelintellectualdisabilitygenesinvolvedin regulation of translation initiation. These variants alter the RNA metabolism interaction between DDX6 and its known partners and its ability to form P-bodies. F.Mattioli1,B.Isidor2,C.Balak3,M.Benard4,E.Schaefer5,M. These two novel ID genes highlight the important role of Hinckelmann-Rivas1,V. Geoffroy6,J. Muller6,A. Lebechec7,J. RNAmetabolism alterations inneurodevelopmentaldisorders. Deleuze8,A.Boland8, H.Dollfus9,J.Chelly1, K.Ramsey3,F. F.Mattioli:None.B.Isidor:None.C.Balak:None.M. Tran-Mau-Them10,S. Nambot10,N.Jean10,A. Telegraphi11,A. Benard: None. E. Schaefer: None. M. Hinckelmann- Boughton12,C.Gamble12,M.Cho11,Z.Shad13,E.Kaplan13,R. Rivas: None. V. Geoffroy: None. J. Muller: None. A. Dineen13,M. Huentelman3,V.Narayanan3, D.Weil4,J. Lebechec: None. J. Deleuze: None. A. Boland: None. H. Mandel1,A. Piton1 Dollfus: None. J. Chelly: None. K. Ramsey: None. F. Tran-Mau-Them: None. S. Nambot: None. N. Jean: 1IGBMC, Illkirch, France, 2CHU de Nantes, Nantes, France, None. A. Telegraphi: A. Employment (full or part-time); 3TGen's Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Phoenix, AZ, Modest; GeneDx. A. Boughton: None. C. Gamble: None. United States, 4UPMC, Paris, France, 5Service de Service de M. Cho: A. Employment (full or part-time); Modest; Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de GeneDx. Z. Shad: None. E. Kaplan: None. R. Dineen: StrasbourgGénétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de None. M. Huentelman: None. V. Narayanan: None. D. Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 6INSERM U1112, Weil: None. J. Mandel: None. A. Piton: None. Strasbourg, France, 7Centre National de Recherche en Génomique Humaine, Institut de Biologie François Jacob, C17.5 Evry, France, 8Laboratory of Genetic Diagnostic, Hôpitaux OTUD7A regulates neurodevelopmental phenotypes in the Universitaires de Strasbourg,Strasbourg, France, 9Service de 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome Génétique Médicale, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Institut de Génétique Médicale d'Alsace, Strasbourg, France, U.Mohammed1,B.K.Unda2,V.Kwan2,N.T.Holzapfel2,S.H. 10CHUdeDijon,Dijon,France,11GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD, White2, L.Chalil2,M.Woodbury-Smith3,K.H.Ho4,E. United States, 12Cook Children's Genetics, Fort Worth, TX, Harward4,N.Murtaza2,B.Dave2,G.Pellecchia5,L.D'Abate5,T.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 841 Nalpathamkalam5,S. Lamoureux5, J.Wei5,M. Speevak5,J. Pellecchia: None. L. D'Abate: None. T. Nalpathamka- Stavropoulos5,K. J.Hope2,B. W.Doble2,J.Nielsen6,R. lam: None. S. Lamoureux: None. J. Wei: None. M. Wassman4,S.W. Scherer5,K. K.Singh2 Speevak:None.J.Stavropoulos:None.K.J.Hope:None. B.W.Doble:None.J.Nielsen:None.R.Wassman:None. 1Mohammed Bin Rashid University of Medicine and Health S.W. Scherer: None. K.K. Singh: None. Sciences,Dubai,UnitedArabEmirates,2McMasterUniversity, Hamilton, ON, Canada, 3Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle C17.6 University,NewcastleuponTyne,Newcastle,UnitedKingdom, AbnormalSocialandCognitiveBehaviorisassociatedwith 4Lineagen Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, United States, 5The Inherited Noncoding Mutations in Human Accelerated Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON, Canada, 6Synaptic Regions (HARs) Transmission, In Vitro, Neuroscience Research, Lundbeck, Denmark R. N.Doan1,T. Shin1,B. Bae2,B. Cubelos3,C. Chang1,A.A. Hossain1, S.Al-Saad4,N.M. Mukaddes5,O.Oner6,M. Al- Introduction: Copy number variations (CNVs) are strong Saffar1,S. Balkhy7,G.G.Gascon8,M. Nieto9,C.A. Walsh1 risk factors for neurodevelopmental and psychiatric dis- orders. The 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome region con- 1BostonChildren'sHospital,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,2Yale tains up to 10 genes and is associated with numerous University,NewHaven,CT,UnitedStates,3CentrodeBiología conditions, including autism spectrum disorder (ASD), Molecular‘SeveroOchoa’,Madrid,Spain,4KuwaitCenterfor epilepsy,schizophreniaandintellectualdisability;however, Autism, Kuwait City, Kuwait, 5Istanbul Institute of Child and the mechanisms underlying their pathogenesis remain Adolescent Psychiatry, Istanbul, Turkey, 6Bahcesehir unknown. 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome region impacts University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey, 7King Faisal tengenesanditisverycomplextounravelthecriticalgene Specialist Hospital and Research Center, Jeddah, Saudi or genes that regulates the phenotype. Arabia,8MassachusettsGeneralHospital,Boston,MA,United Materials and Methods: We combined whole genome States, 9Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, Madrid, Spain sequencing, human brain gene expression (proteome and transcriptome), and a mouse model with a syntenic Comparative analyses have identified genomic regions heterozygousdeletion(Df(h15q13)/+mice)anddetermined potentiallyinvolvedinhumanevolution,butdonotdirectly that the microdeletion results in abnormal development of assess function. Human accelerated regions (HARs) repre- corticaldendriticspinesanddendriteoutgrowth.Largescale sent conserved genomic loci with elevated divergence in geneticdatawasintegratedtofindoutthemostcriticalgene humanscomparedtootherprimateandnon-primatespecies. (s) within the 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome region. In At least some HARs are thought to contribute to neurode- addition, we have applied functional analysis in vivo and velopmental functions underlying the unique social and in vitro to identify phenotypes in mouse and human cell behavioraltraitsofhumans.IfsomeHARsregulatehuman- lines. specific social and behavioral traits, then mutations would Results: Analysis of large scale genomic, transcriptomic likely impact cognitive and social disorders.Recent studies andproteomicdataidentifiedOTUD7Aasacriticalgenefor support the role of HARs in complex neurodevelopmental brain function. OTUD7A expression was found to localize functions and associated disorders including Autism Spec- todendriticandspinecompartmentsincorticalneurons,and trum Disorder (ASD) and Schizophrenia. Strikingly, its reduced expression in Df(h15q13)/+ cortical neurons through large-scale whole-genome and targeted HAR-ome contributed to the dendritic spine and dendrite outgrowth sequencing we find, for the first time, that rare noncoding deficits. mutations in neurally active HARs contribute to simplex, Conclusions: Our results reveal OTUD7A as a major multiplex,andconsanguineousASDcases.Thesemutations regulatory gene for 15q13.3 microdeletion syndrome highlight more than 20 HARs with putative essential roles phenotypes that contribute to the disease mechanism in neural development. Functional validation of candidate through abnormal cortical neuron morphological HARs and underlying mutations using chromatin interac- development. tion sequencing, high-throughput reporter assays, and U. Mohammed: B. Research Grant (principal investiga- transgenic mice allowed for further functional character- tor,collaboratororconsultantandpendinggrantsaswellas ization of inherited HAR mutations in active regulatory grants already received); Modest; Al Jalila FOundation, elementsforRBFOX1,CUX1,PTBP2,GPC4,CDKL5,and Lineagen, NeuroGen. B.K. Unda: None. V. Kwan: None. other genes implicated in neural function, autism spectrum N.T. Holzapfel: None. S.H. White: None. L. Chalil: disorder, or both. Our data expand the previous association None. M. Woodbury-Smith: None. K.H. Ho: None. E. of HARs in consanguineous families with ASD to include Harward: None. N. Murtaza: None. B. Dave: None. G. both simplex and multiplex families, providing strong842 J.delPicchia geneticevidencethatspecificHARsareessentialfornormal hQ mice, desmosome density and length were significantly development, consistent with suggestions that their evolu- decreased and Wnt/β-catenin signalling suppressed. RNA- tionary changes may have altered social and/or cognitive Seq performed in Tg-hQ hearts and non-transgenic hearts behavior. revealed 24 miRNAs deregulated in transgenic animals. R.N. Doan: None. T. Shin: None. B. Bae: None. B. Further bioinformatic analyses for selected miRNAs Cubelos:None.C.Chang: None.A.A.Hossain:None.S. suggested that miR-217-5p, miR-499-5p, and miR-708-5p Al-Saad: None. N.M. Mukaddes: None. O. Oner: None. might be involved in AC pathogenesis. M. Al-Saffar: None. S. Balkhy: None. G.G. Gascon: Conclusions: Downregulation of the Wnt/β-catenin None. M. Nieto: None. C.A. Walsh: None. signaling might be considered a common key event in AC pathogenesis. We identified the miRNA signature in AC hearts, with miR-708-5p and miR-217-5p being the most C18 Cardiovascular disorders upregulated and miR-499-5p the most downregulated miRNAs. All of them were predicted to be involved in C18.1 the regulation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway and might Anovelmurinemodelforarrhythmogeniccardiomyopathy reveal the potential pathophysiology of AC, as well as be points to a pathogenic role of Wnt/b-catenin signaling and useful as therapeutic targets for the disease. miRNA dysregulation Grants: H2020-MSCA-IF-2014; TRANSAC, University of Padua Strategic Grant CPDA133979/13; Veneto Region M.Calore1,2,A. Lorenzon2,L. Vitiello2,G.Poloni2,G. Target Research. Beffagna2,E.Dazzo2,R.Polishchuk3,P.Sabatelli4,R.Doliana5, M. Calore: None. A. Lorenzon: None. L. Vitiello: D.Carnevale6, G.Lembo7,P. Bonaldo8,L. J.deWindt1,P. None. G. Poloni: None. G. Beffagna: None. E. Dazzo: Braghetta8,A. Rampazzo2 None. R. Polishchuk: None. P. Sabatelli: None. R. Doliana: None. D. Carnevale: None. G. Lembo: None. 1Department of Cardiology, Faculty of Health, Medicine and P. Bonaldo: None. L.J. de Windt: None. P. Braghetta: LifeSciences, MaastrichtUniversity, Maastricht,Netherlands, None. A. Rampazzo: None. 2Biology Department, Padova University, Padova, Italy, 3TelethonInstituteofGeneticsandMedicine(TIGEM),Naples, C18.2 Italy, 4National Research Council of Italy, Institute of Large-scale meta-analysis of GWAS in over one million Molecular Genetics, Bologna, Italy, 5Department of individuals identifies more than 1,000 novel independent Translational Research, CRO-IRCCS National Cancer variants associated with blood pressure Institute,Aviano,Italy,67DepartmentofAngiocardioneurology and Translational Medicine, IRCCS Neuromed, Pozzilli, Italy, E.Evangelou1,2,H.Warren3,4,D.Mosen-Ansorena2,B.Mifsud3, 7Department of Molecular Medicine, "Sapienza" University of R.Pazoki2,H.Gao2,G.Ntritsos1,N.Dimou1,J.N.Hellwege5,A. Rome, Rome, Italy, 8Department of Molecular Medicine, Giri6,T.Esko7,A.Metspalu7,A.M.Hung8,C.J.O’Donnell9,T. Padova University, Padova, Italy L. Edwards5,I.Tzoulaki1,2, M.Barnes3,4,L. V. Wain10, P. Elliott2,M.Caulfield3,4 Aims: Among the most common inherited cardiomyo- pathies, arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (AC) is char- 1Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, University of acterizedbyprogressivemyocardialfibro-fattyreplacement. Ioannina Medical School, Ioannina, Greece, 2Department of Clinically, AC manifests with ventricular arrhythmias, Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Imperial College London, syncope, and sudden death. Among the known causative London,UnitedKingdom,3WilliamHarveyResearchInstitute, genes, those encoding for the desmosomal proteins Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, plakophilin-2(PKP2),desmoplakin(DSP),anddesmoglein- Queen Mary University of London, London, United Kingdom, 2 (DSG2) are most commonly mutated. Little is known 4NIHR Cardiovascular Biomedical Research Centre, William about the molecular mechanism(s) behind AC wide phe- HarveyResearchInstitute,QueenMaryUniversityofLondon, notypic variability, although it seems that the causative London, United Kingdom, 5Division of Epidemiology, mutationsleadtobothstructuralandepigeneticalterations. Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt Genetics Institute, We aimed at studying the pathogenic effects of a nonsense Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, United mutation in desmoglein-2, both at the structural and States, 6Departmentof Obstetrics andGynecology, Vanderbilt epigenetic level. Genetics Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Methods and Results: We generated transgenic mice Nashville, TN, United States, 7Estonian Genome Center, with cardiac-specific overexpression of the FLAG-tagged Institute of Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, humandesmoglein-2harboringtheQ558*mutation.InTg- 8Nashville VA Medical Center & Vanderbilt University,Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 843 Nashville, TN, United States, 9VA Boston Healthcare, Section Colley7,S. Rajagopalan7,Y. Berman8,A. Ronan9,10, D. of Cardiology and Department of Medicine, Brigham and Fatkin5,11,12, C.Semsarian1,2,3 Women’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States, 10Department of Health Sciences, University of 1Centenary Institute, Sydney, Australia, 2Sydney Medical Leicester, Leicester, United Kingdom School, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia, 3Department of Cardiology, Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, Introduction: Elevated blood pressure (BP) is the leading Australia, 4Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, causeofcardiovasculardeathworldwide.Wereportgenetic Australia, 5St Vincent's Hospital Clinical School, Sydney, association analysis of three BP traitsin >1 million people. Australia,6TheSydneyChildren'sHospital,Sydney,Australia, Methods: We undertook a combination of a one- and 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Liverpool, Australia, two-stagegenome-wideassociationstudy(GWAS)analysis 8Clinical Genetic Department, Royal North Shore Hospital, to test ~7M single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with Sydney, Australia, 9Hunter Genetics Unit, Newcastle, minor allele frequency ≥1% for systolic and diastolic BP Australia, 10University of Newcastle, Newcastle, Australia, and pulse pressure. We combined the UK Biobank (UKB) 11Victor Chang Cardiac ResearchInstitute, Sydney, Australia, cohort(N=458,577)withtheInternationalConsortiumfor 12Cardiology Department, St. Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, Blood Pressure GWAS (N=299,024), totalling 757,601 Australia individualsofEuropeandescentinthediscovery.Datafrom the Millions Veterans Program and the Estonian Biobank Background:Wholegenomesequencing(WGS)candetect was used in the two-stage design as replication samples most types of genetic variants. We assessed WGS for (N=249,262). hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in which prior cardi- Results: We identified 535 novel loci. We also omyopathy gene-panel sequencing, or exome sequencing, confirmed all 274 published loci and a further 92 loci did not establish a molecular diagnosis, i.e. gene-elusive that had been previously reported but not replicated. HCM, and as a first-line genetic test. Conditional analysis revealed 163 additional independent Methods:WGSwasperformedon46gene-elusiveHCM secondary variants, hence totalling over 1,000 indepen- probands, 16familymembers, and 12 HCM probands with dent signals at 901 loci. There is substantial gain in the no prior genetic testing. We searched for coding-region percentageofBPvarianceexplainedbymorethan2-fold. variants and genomic rearrangements in 184 cardiac We also observed ~10mmHg higher systolic BP in UKB hypertrophy genes, deep intronic variants that alter RNA for the comparison between the upper and lower quintiles splicing, and mitochondrial genome variants. All splice- of the genetic risk score distribution. Bioinformatics altering variants were validated using RNA extracted from analyses identified new potential therapeutic targets for fresh venous blood, or cardiomyocytes derived from hypertension. induced pluripotent stem cells, of the patients. Conclusions:Thisisthelargest ever BPGWAS thathas Results: We found a pathogenic or likely pathogenic tripled the number of BP loci to a total of 901, explaining variant in 10 out of 46 (22%) gene-elusive HCM families. 27% of the estimated heritability of BP. This study reveals Four families had deep intronic variants in MYBPC3 that many new insights into BP regulation and drug targeting activate splicing of pseudo-exons; one family had a illustrating the potential for improved cardiovascular synonymous MYBPC3 variant shown to disrupt splicing; disease prevention in the future. one family had mitochondrial genome variant; one family E. Evangelou: None. H. Warren: None. D. Mosen- had a nonsynonymous MYH7 variant that was not Ansorena: None. B. Mifsud: None. R. Pazoki: None. H. genotyped during exome sequencing; and three families Gao: None. G. Ntritsos: None. N. Dimou: None. J.N. had variants in genes not included in prior cardiomyopathy Hellwege: None. A. Giri: None. T. Esko: None. A. gene-panel testing. As a first-line genetic test, WGS Metspalu: None. A.M. Hung: None. C.J. O’Donnell: identifiedapathogenicvariantin5outof12(42%)families None. T.L. Edwards: None. I. Tzoulaki: None. M. with no prior genetic testing. Barnes: None. L.V. Wain: None. P. Elliott: None. M. Conclusions:WGSidentifiedadditionalgeneticcausesof Caulfield: None. HCM over targeted gene sequencing approaches. Genetic screening of deep intronic regions identified pathogenic C18.3 variants in 9% of gene-elusive HCM. These findings Whole genome sequencing improves genetic testing translate to more accurate diagnosis and management in outcomes in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy HCM families. R.D. Bagnall: None. J. Ingles: None. M.E. Dinger: R. D.Bagnall1,2,J. Ingles1,2,3,M. E.Dinger4,5, M.J.Cowley4,5, None. M.J. Cowley: None. S. Barratt-Ross: None. A.E. S. Barratt-Ross1,2, A.E. Minoche4,S. Lal2,3, C.Turner6,A. Minoche: None. S. Lal: None. C. Turner: None. A.844 J.delPicchia Colley: None. S. Rajagopalan: None. Y. Berman: None. UniversityHospital,Caen,France,21DepartmentofMolecular A. Ronan: None. D. Fatkin: None. C. Semsarian: None. Medicine and Surgery, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 22Department of C18.4 Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Stanford University Germline loss-of-function mutations in EPHB4 cause a School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States, 23Hopital second form of capillary malformation-arteriovenous PellegrinEnfants,Bordeaux,France,24HôpitalSainte-Justine, malformation (CM-AVM2) deregulating RAS-MAPK Montreal, QC, Canada, 25Department of Dermatology, Texas signaling Children's Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 26Département de pédiatrie et génétique médicale, CHRU N.Revencu1,M.Amyere2, R.Helaers2,E. Pairet3, E.Baselga4, HôpitalMorvan,Brest,France,27DepartmentofDermatology, M.Cordisco5,W.Chung6,J.Dubois7,J.Lacour8,L.Martorell9, Paul Sabatier University, Toulouse, France, 28Service de J.Mazereeuw-Hautier10,R.Pyeritz11,D.Amor12,A.Bisdorff6,F. Génétique Clinique, Hôpital Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, Blei13,H.Bombei14,A.Dompmartin15,D.Brooks16,J.Dupont17, Lille,France,29PediatricDermatologyUnit,ClaudeBernard- M.González-Enseñat18,I.Frieden19,M.Gerard20,M. Lyon,UniversityandHospicesCivilsdeLyon,HôpitalFemme- Kvarnung21,A.KwanHanson-Kahn22,L.Hudgins22,C.Léauté- Mère-Enfant, Lyon, France, 30Centre Hospitalier Labrèze23,C.McCuaig24,D.Metry25,P. Parent26,C. Paul27, F. Universitaire, Montpellier, Montpellier, France, Petit28,A. Phan29, I.Quere30,A. Salhi31,A.Turner32,P. 31Dermatolgie, Faculté de Médecine d’Alger, Alger, Algeria, Vabres33,A.Vicente18,O.Wargon34,S.Watanabe35,L.Weibel36, 32DepartmentofMedicalGenetics,SydneyChildren'sHospital, A.Wilson37,M.Willing38,J.Mulliken39,L.Boon40,M.Vikkula2 Randwick, New South Wales, Australia, 33Service de Dermatologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire Dijon- 1Center for Human Genetics, Cliniques universitaires St-Luc Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 34Department of Paediatric (CUSL), Université catholique de Louvain (UCL), Brussels, Dermatology, Sydney Children’s Hospital, Sidney, Australia, Belgium, 2Human Molecular Genetics, de Duve Institute, 35Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, 36Department of Pediatric 3Université catholique de Louvain (UCL), Brussels, Belgium, Dermatology, University Children's Hospital Zurich, Zürich, 4DepartmentofDermatology,HospitaldelaSantaCreuISant Switzerland, 37Children’s Hospital of New York, New York, Pau, Barcelona, Spain, 5Strong Hospital, University of NY,UnitedStates,38UniversityofIowaHospitalsandClinics, Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY, Iowa City, Iowa, IA, United States, 39Vascular Anomalies United States, 6Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, Center, Boston Children’s Hospital and Harvard Medical Columbia University, New York, NY, United States, School, Boston, MA, United States, 40Center for Vascular 7DepartmentofMedicalImaging,Sainte-JustineMother-Child Anomalies, Division of Plastic Surgery, Cliniques University Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada, 8Service de universitairesSaint-LucandUniversitécatholiquedeLouvain, Dermatologie, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire de Nice, Nice, Brussels, Belgium France, 9Genética Molecular, Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Barcelona, Spain, 10Service de Dermatologie, Centre de Purpose:MostAVMsarelocalizedandoccursporadically; Référence des Maladies rares de la peau, Hôpital Larrey, howevertheyalsocanbemultifocalinautosomaldominant Toulouse, France, 11Departments of Medicine and Genetics, disorders, such as Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia Perelman School of Medicine at the University of (HHT) and Capillary Malformation-Arteriovenous Mal- Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 12Victorian formation (CM-AVM). Previously, we identified RASA1 Clinical Genetics Services, Murdoch Childrens Research mutations in 50% of patients with CM-AVM. Herein we Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Victoria, Australia, studied non-RASA1 patients to further elucidate the 13Vascular Anomalies Program, Lenox Hill Hospital, New pathogenicity of CMs and AVMs. York, NY, United States, 14Department of Pediatrics- Medical Methods : We conducted a genome-wide linkage study GeneticsUniversityofIowaCarverCollegeofMedicine,Iowa, on a CM-AVM family. Whole exome sequencing was also IA,UnitedStates,15DepartmentofDermatology,Universitéde performedon9unrelatedCM-AVMfamilies.Weidentified Caen Basse Normandie, CHU Caen, Caen, France, acandidate-geneandscreeneditinalargeseriesofpatients. 16Department of Urology, Wake Forest School of Medicine, The influence of several missense variants on protein Winston Salem, NC, United States, 17Genetics Service, function was also studied in vitro. Paediatric Department, University Hospital Santa Maria, Results : We found evidence for linkage in two loci. Lisbon,Portugal,18DepartmentofDermatology,HospitalSant Whole-exome sequencing data unraveled four distinct Joan de Deu, Barcelona, Spain, 19Departement of damaging variants in EPHB4 in five families that co- Dermatology, School of Medicine, University of California, segregated with CM-AVM. Overall, screening of EPHB4 San Francisco, CA, United States, 20Department of Genetics, detected 47 distinct mutations in 54 index patients: 27 leadAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 845 to a premature stop codon or splice-site alteration, 11Universite Paris Diderot, Paris, France, 12INSERM U1078, suggesting loss of function. The other 20 are non- CHRU Brest, Université de Bretagne Occidentale, Brest, synonymousvariantsthatresultinamino-acidsubstitutions. France In vitro expression of several mutations confirmed loss of function of EPHB4. The clinical features included multi- p { margin-bottom: 0.25cm; line-height: 120%; }a:link { focal CMs, telangiectasias, and AVMs. color: rgb(0, 0, 255); } Marfan syndrome (MFS) is a rare Conclusions : We found EPHB4 mutations in patients autosomal dominant connective tissue disorder related to with multifocal CMs associated with AVMs. The pheno- mutations in the FBN1 gene. Prognosis is related to aortic type, CM-AVM2, mimics RASA1-related CM-AVM1 and riskofdissection.MFSclinicalvariabilityisnotable,forage also HHT. RASA1 encoded p120RASGAP is a direct of onset as well as severity and number of clinical mani- effector of EPHB4. Our data highlights the pathogenetic festations. To identify genetic modifiers, we combined importance of this interaction and indicts EPHB4-RAS- genome-wide approaches in 1070 clinically well- ERKsignalingpathwayasamajorcauseforarterio-venous characterized FBN1 disease-causing variant carriers: 1) an malformations. FBN1eQTLanalysisin80fibroblasts ofFBN1stopvariant N. Revencu: None. M. Amyere: None. R. Helaers: carriers, 2) a linkage analysis and 3) a kinship matrix asso- None. E. Pairet: None. E. Baselga: None. M. Cordisco: ciation study in 14 clinically concordantand discordant sib- None. W. Chung: None. J. Dubois: None. J. Lacour: pairs, 4) a genome-wide association study and 5) a whole None.L.Martorell:None.J.Mazereeuw-Hautier:None. exome sequencing in 98 extreme phenotype samples. Three R. Pyeritz: None. D. Amor: None. A. Bisdorff: None. F. genetic mechanisms of variability were found. A new gen- Blei:None.H.Bombei:None.A.Dompmartin:None.D. otype/phenotype correlation with an excess of loss-of- Brooks: None. J. Dupont: None. M. González-Enseñat: cysteine variants (p=0.004) in severely affected subjects. None.I.Frieden:None.M.Gerard:None.M.Kvarnung: A second pathogenic event in another thoracic aortic None.A.KwanHanson-Kahn:None.L.Hudgins:None. aneurysm gene or the COL4A1 gene (involved in cerebral C.Léauté-Labrèze:None.C.McCuaig:None.D.Metry: aneurysm) was found in 9 individuals. A polygenic model None.P.Parent:None.C.Paul:None.F.Petit:None.A. involving at least 9 modifier loci (named gMod-M1-9) was Phan: None. I. Quere: None. A.Salhi: None. A.Turner: observed through cross-mapping of results. Notably, gMod- None. P. Vabres: None. A. Vicente: None. O. Wargon: M2 which co-localizes with PRKG1, in which activating None. S. Watanabe: None. L. Weibel: None. A. Wilson: variants have already been described in thoracic aortic None. M. Willing: None. J. Mulliken: None. L. Boon: aneurysm, and gMod-M3 which co-localized with a metal- None. M. Vikkula: None. loprotease (proteins of extra-cellular matrix regulation) cluster. Our results represent a major advance in under- C18.5 standing the complex genetic architecture of MFS and pro- Association of modifiers and other genetic factors explain vide the first steps toward prediction of clinical evolution. Marfan syndrome clinical variability M. Aubart: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- nificant; AP-HP, INSERM. B. Research Grant (principal M.AUBART1,2,S.GAZAL3,P.ARNAUD1,4,L.BENARROCH1, investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants M.GROSS1,J.BURATTI5,A. BOLAND6,V. MEYER6,N. aswellasgrantsalreadyreceived);Significant;DHUFIRE. HANNA4, O.MILLERON7,C. STHENEUR7, H.ZOUALI6,T. S. Gazal: None. P. Arnaud: None. L. Benarroch: None. BOURGERON8,I. DESGUERRE2,9,M. JACOB1,L. M. Gross: None. J. Buratti: None. A. Boland: None. V. GOUYA7,10,11,E. GENIN12, J.DELEUZE6,G.JONDEAU1,7,11, Meyer: None. N. Hanna: None. O. Milleron: None. C. C. BOILEAU1 Stheneur: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as 1LVTSINSERMU1148,Paris,France,2Servicedeneurologie grants already received); Significant; Programme Hospita- pediatrique, Hopital Necker-Enfants malades, AP-HP, Paris, lier de Recherche Clinique CRC07032 and P071009. H. France, 3INSERM, IAME, UMR 1137, Paris, France, Zouali: None. T. Bourgeron: None. I. Desguerre: None. 4Departement de Genetique, hôpital Bichat, AP-HP, Paris, M. Jacob: None. L. Gouya: None. E. Genin: None. J. France, 5Institut Pasteur, Human Genetics and Cognitive Deleuze: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Functions Unit,, Paris, France, 6Centre National de Centre National de Genotypage. G. Jondeau: B. Research Génotypage,InstitutdeGénomique,Paris,France,7Centrede Grant (principal investigator,collaboratororconsultantand Reference Syndrome de Marfan, Paris, France, 8CNRS UMR pending grants as well as grants already received); 3571:Genes,SynapsesandCognition,InstitutPasteur,Paris, Significant; Agence Nationale de la Recherche France,9UniversiteParisDescartes,Paris,France,10INSERM (NONAGES, ANR-14-CE15-0012-01, Fédération de Car- U1149, Faculté de Médecine site Bichat,, Paris, France, diologie, Société Française de Cardiologie. C. Boileau: B.846 J.delPicchia Research Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or heterozygous lacked intact sarcomeres. These analyses consultant and pending grants as well as grants already addanewdimensiontotheunderstandingofthemolecular received); Significant; Programme hospitalier de recherche predisposition for AF. clinique AOM10108 and CRC15014. G. Ahlberg: None. L. Refsgaard: None. P.R. Lunde- gaard:None.L.S.Andreasen:None.M.F.Ranthe:None. C18.6 N.S. Linscheid: None. J.S. Nielsen: None. M.S. Melbye: Nationwide study associates atrial fibrillation with titin- None. S. Haunsø: None. A. Sajadieh: None. S. Olesen: truncating variants None. S. Rasmussen: None. A. Lundby: None. P.T. Ellinor: None. A.G. Holst: None. J.H. Svendsen: None. G.Ahlberg1,L. Refsgaard1,P. R. Lundegaard1,L.S. M.S. Olesen: None. Andreasen1,M.F.Ranthe2,N.S.Linscheid3,J.S.Nielsen1,M. S.Melbye1,S.Haunsø1,A.Sajadieh4,S.Olesen1,S.Rasmussen5, A.Lundby1,P.T.Ellinor6,7,A.G.Holst1,J.H.Svendsen1,M.S. C19 Advanced sequencing technologies Olesen1 C19.1 1Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2Statens Serum Clinical experience with shallowwhole genome sequencing Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark, 3University of Copenhagen, as a detection method for Copy Number Variations Copenhagen, Denmark, 4Copenhagen University Hospital Bispebjerg, Copenhagen, Denmark, 5Technical University of B. Menten, M.DeSmet, L. Raman,T.Sante, N.Van Roy, A. Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark, 6Massachusetts General Dheedene Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 7Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium, Ghent, Belgium Introduction: Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common cardiac arrhythmia with more than 30 million people Genomic Copy Number Variations (CNVs) are an affected. AF is a major risk factor for stroke, heart failure important cause of several human genetic disorders. and premature death. Genomic microarrays are currently widely implemented Materials and Methods: We performed whole exome as the first tier test for CNV detection. Although it has sequencing on 24 families with at least three family been proven that microarrays perform well for detecting members diagnosed with AF. To investigate the effect of submicroscopic CNVs, throughput is still rather limited, genetic variants we investigated CRISPR/Cas9 modified consumablecostishigh,andresolutionisfixeddepending zebrafish carrying truncating variant of titin (ttn.2). on the probe density on the microarray. We replaced Results: Four titin-truncating variants (TTNtv) were microarrays by shallow whole genome sequencing identified.Thesevariantsco-segregatedperfectlywithdisease (sWGS) for the detection of submicroscopic CNVs in a and were significantly enriched in patients with familial AF diagnostic setting. Library preparation is largely auto- (P=1.76x10-6),ascomparedtothecontrolgroup(n=663). mated on a liquid handling robot and afterwards samples This association was replicated in an independent cohort of are sequenced on a HiSeq3000 instrument by means of early-onsetloneAFpatients(n=399;OddRatio=36.8;P= 50bpsingle-endsequencing.Dependingontheindication, 4.13x10-6). We studied CRISPR/Cas9 modified zebrafish resolution can be adjusted by altering the number of carryingatitintruncatingvariant.Usingconfocalmicroscopi samples per lane and hence the amount of sequence reads we observed compromised assembly of the sarcomere in the persample.Moresequencereadsenableasmallerwindow atriaattheearlylarvalstageinhomozygousfishsuggestinga size and hence a higher resolution. Since July 2017 more predisposition for disease of the atria already in the early than 1000 clinical samples were processed including development of the heart. We investigated the adult postnatalbloodspecimen,leukemicsamples(ALL,CLL), heterozygous mutant hearts using Transmission electron tumors, products of conception (POCs) and prenatal microscopy. The heterozygous mutant hearts lacked structu- samples. The plummeting costs of sequencing and the rallyintactsarcomeres.Thez-discsappearedfuzzyandpoorly ability to automation results in a more cost-effective organised, and the M-line was missing from all the workflow and a higher throughput. CNVseq shows a sarcomeres in both atria and ventricle. Mutant had signifi- higher flexibility towards resolution and species under cantly shorter sarcomere in atria (p<0.001). investigation. Moreover, we show that both duplications Conclusions: These results indicate that TTNtv are and deletions are more clearly defined, enabling a better important risk factors for AF that predispose for disease identificationof(low-grade)mosaicism.Inconclusion,we ([OR]=36.8). CRISPR/Cas9 modified zebrafish show that shallow whole genome sequencing is anAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 847 appropriate alternative for genomic microarrays for the is available to members of the ESHG community and is detection of clinically relevant copy number aberrations. being expanded. B.Menten:None.M.DeSmet:None.L.Raman:None. S. Lincoln: A. Employment (full or part-time); Sig- T. Sante: None. N. Van Roy: None. A. Dheedene: None. nificant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Modest; C19.2 Illumina,ThermoFisher.E.OwnershipInterest(stock,stock An international interlaboratory study of complex variant options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; detection by clinical genetic tests Invitae. A. Fellowes: None. S. Mahamdallie: None. S. Chowdhury:None.E. Klee: E.OwnershipInterest(stock, S. Lincoln1,A. Fellowes2,S. Mahamdallie3,S. Chowdhury4,E. stockoptions,patentorotherintellectualproperty);Modest; Klee5,J.Zook6,R.Truty1,R.Garlick7,S.Aradhya1,M.Salit8,N. Soft Genetics. J. Zook: None. R. Truty: A. Employment Rahman3,S.Kingsmore4,R.Nussbaum1,M.Ferber5,B.Shirts9 (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual 1Invitae,SanFrancisco,CA,UnitedStates,2PeterMacCallum property);Significant;Invitae.R.Garlick:A.Employment Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Australia, 3Institute of Cancer (full or part-time); Significant; Seracare. E. Ownership Research,London,UnitedKingdom,4RadyChildren'sInstitute Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual for Genomic Medicine, San Diego, CA, United States, 5Mayo property); Significant; Seracare. S. Aradhya: A. Employ- Clinic, Rochester, MN, United States, 6National Institute of ment (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. E. Ownership Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual 7Seracare, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8Stanford property); Significant; Invitae. M. Salit: None. N. Rah- University, Palo Alto, CA, United States, 9University of man: F. Consultant/Advisory Board; Significant; AstraZe- Washington, Seattle, WA, United States neca.S.Kingsmore:None.R.Nussbaum:A.Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Invitae. E. Ownership Background: NGS is a capable technique for detecting Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual SNVs and small indels in tractable parts of a patient's property); Significant; Invitae. M. Ferber: E. Ownership genome. NGS, however, has limitations. In a study pre- Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual sentedatthe2017ESHGmeeting,wefoundthatvariantsof property); Modest; Soft Genetics. F. Consultant/Advisory other,technicallychallengingtypescomprisebetween9and Board; Modest; Oneome. B. Shirts: None. 19% of the pathogenic variants harbored by patients, depending on clinical indication. These variants include C19.3 large indels, single-exon CNVs, variants in repetitive A pipeline to detect repeat expansions from whole genome regions,etc. Thisstudyhassincebeenexpanded toinclude sequencing in the 100,000 Genomes Project over180,000patientswithdiverseindications,andleadsto similar conclusions. K.Ibanez1,E.Dolzhenko2,K.RSmith1,R.HScott1,E.Thomas1, Methods:Wedevelopedasyntheticspecimencontaining E. Baple1,H.Brittain1,D.Bourn3,P. Brennan3, J.Polke4,H. 22 challenging pathogenic variants of diverse types in 7 Houlden4,A.Rendon1,M.JCaulfield1,M.AEberle2,A.Tucci1 commonly tested genes. This specimen was sequenced using10differentNGSworkflowsbyaninternationalgroup 1Genomics England,London,UnitedKingdom,2Illumina, San ofcollaboratinglaboratories.Thesetestsemployeddifferent Diego, CA, United States, 3Northern Genetics Service, sequencing platforms, library methods, and bioinformatics Newcastle Upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, pipelines. Newcastle, United Kingdom, 4Neurogenetics Unit UCL Results: With one exception, all of the relatively "easy" Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom SNVs and indels were uniformly detected. However, only 10ofthe22challengingvariantsweredetectedbyalltests, Introduction:The100,000GenomesProjectisbuildingthe and just 3 tests detected all 22. Many, but not all of these infrastructure to deliver short read whole genome sequen- limitations were bioinformatic in nature. cing (WGS) as part of a new genomic medicine service for Discussion: Evaluating the sensitivity of tests for theNHSinEngland.OneadvantageofWGSisitsabilityto complex variants can be difficult. Recent guidelines [Roy test for a variety of variant types simultaneously. Germline etal.2017]recommendthatatleast59variantsofeachtype repeatexpansionscauseover20neurological disordersthat be used in validation, a number that is difficult to achieve can be hard to differentiate clinically from each other and forcomplexvariantsgiventhescarcityofpositivecontrols. from disorders caused by other variant types. We present Methods such as ours may help, and this specific specimen data on the use of pipeline to identify repeat expansions848 J.delPicchia from WGS that uses the ExpansionHunter bioinformatics many genetic disorders have extreme GC content and/or tool. repetitive sequences that tend to be recalcitrant to faithful Materials and Methods: A pilot dataset comprising amplification. 4,833 genomes from rare disease patients was used to We have developed a novel, amplification-free enrich- genotype repeats in 20 loci. Within this cohort, 414 ment technique that employs the CRISPR/Cas9 system to experimental validation results (normal alleles) across 13 target individual genes. This method, in conjunction with loci were available to assess the STR size estimates. An the long reads, high consensus accuracy, and uniform additional cohort of 5,529 patient genomes was then coverageofSMRTSequencing,allowsaccuratesequence analysed to identify pathogenic expansions. analysis of complex genomic regions that cannot be Results:ExpansionHuntercomputedpreciseandaccurate investigated with other technologies. Using this estimates of 99.8% normal alleles tested across all the loci strategy, we have successfully targeted a number of analysed. Further, we identified 10 pathogenic expansions repeat expansion disorder loci (HTT, FMR1, ATXN10, including FXS, ALS, HTT, SCA6 and SCA12 that were C9orf72). consistent with the patient phenotype. Of these, 6 were With this data, we demonstrate the ability to isolate externally validated and the remaining are awaiting thousands of individual on-target molecules and, using the validation results. Sequel System, accurately sequence through long repeats Conclusions: We describe an accurate pipeline to detect regardless of the extreme GC-content. The method is repeat expansions from WGS which is suitable for use in compatible with multiplexing of multiple target loci and thefutureNHSgenomicmedicineservice.Additionallywe multiplesamplesinasingle reaction.Furthermore, because will assess the performance ExpansionHunter at a range of there is no amplification step, this technique also preserves expanded allele sizes though the analysis of 180 positive native DNA molecules for sequencing, allowing for the controls. direct detection and characterization of epigenetic signa- K. Ibanez: None. E. Dolzhenko: None. K. R Smith: tures.Tothisend,wedemonstratethedetectionof5-mCin None. R. H Scott: None. E. Thomas: None. E. Baple: the CGG repeat of the FMR1 gene that is responsible for None. H. Brittain: None. D. Bourn: None. P. Brennan: Fragile X syndrome. None. J. Polke: None. H. Houlden: None. A. Rendon: J. Ekholm: A. Employment (full or part-time); None. M. J Caulfield: None. M. A Eberle: None. A. Significant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Tucci: None. options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; PacBio. Y. Tsai: A. Employment (full or part-time); C19.4 Significant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock Amplification-free,CRISPR-Cas9targetedenrichmentand options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; SMRT Sequencing of repeat-expansion disease causative PacBio. T. Hon: A. Employment (full or part-time); genomic regions Significant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; J.Ekholm1,Y. Tsai1,T. Hon1, B.Bowman1,J.Ziegle1,B. PacBio. B. Bowman: A. Employment (full or part-time); Schule2,T.Ashizawa3,K.McFarland4,T.Clark1,R.Vogelsang1 Significant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; 1Pacific Biosciences, Menlo Park, CA, United States, PacBio. J. Ziegle: A. Employment (full or part-time); 2Parkinson’s Institute andClinical Center, Sunnyvale, CA, Significant; PacBio. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock UnitedStates,3HoustonMethodistResearchInstitute,Houston, options, patent or other intellectual property); Significant; TX, United States, 4Center for Translational Research in PacBio. B. Schule: B. Research Grant (principal inves- Neurodegenerative Disease andThe McKnight Brain Institute, tigator, collaborator or consultant and pending grants as University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, United States well as grants already received); Modest; PacBio. T. Ashizawa: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, Targeted sequencing has proven to be economical for collaborator or consultant and pending grants as well as obtaining sequence information for defined regions of the grants already received); Modest; PacBio. K. McFar- genome. However, most target enrichment methods are land: B. Research Grant (principal investigator, colla- reliant upon some form of amplification which can nega- borator orconsultantand pending grants aswellasgrants tively impact downstream analysis. For example, amplifi- alreadyreceived);Modest;PacBio.T.Clark:A.Employ- cation removes epigenetic marks present in native DNA, ment (full or part-time); Significant; PacBio. E. Owner- including nucleotide methylation, which are hypothesized ship Interest (stock, stock options, patent or other to contribute to disease mechanisms in some disorders. In intellectual property); Significant; PacBio. R. addition, some genomic regions known to be causative of Vogelsang: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 849 C19.5 M. Nelen: None. K. Neveling: None. P. Baybayan: A. Long-read sequencing - for detecting clinically relevant Employment (full or part-time); Significant; A.M.W., P.B., structural variation L.H.,J.K.,K.C.andJ.K.areemployeesandshareholdersof Pacific Biosciences, a company commercializing DNA A.Hoischen1,2,A.M.Wenger3,M.vanderVorst1,M.Kwint1,M. sequencing technologies. The other authors declare no Nelen1,K. Neveling1,P.Baybayan3,L.Hickey3,J.Kuijpers3,J. conflictofinterest.L.Hickey:A.Employment(fullorpart- Korlach3,K.Corcoran3,H.G.Brunner1,4,L.E.L.M.Vissers1, time); Significant; A.M.W., P.B., L.H., J.K., K.C. and J.K. C. Gilissen1 are employees and shareholders of Pacific Biosciences, a company commercializing DNA sequencing technologies. 1Department of Human Genetics, Radbouduniversity medical The other authors declare no conflict of interest. J. center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 2Department of Internal Kuijpers: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; Medicine and RadboudCenterforInfectious Diseases (RCI), A.M.W.,P.B.,L.H.,J.K.,K.C.andJ.K.areemployeesand Radboudumc, Nijmegen, Netherlands,3Pacific Biosciences, shareholders of Pacific Biosciences, a company commer- MenloPark,CA,UnitedStates,4DepartmentofClinicalGenetics cializing DNA sequencing technologies. The other authors andSchool forOncology &Developmental Biology (GROW), declare no conflict of interest. J. Korlach: A. Employment Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Netherlands (fullorpart-time);Significant;A.M.W.,P.B.,L.H.,J.K.,K. C. and J.K. are employees and shareholders of Pacific Current genome sequencing approaches are extremely suc- Biosciences, a company commercializing DNA sequencing cessful in identifying disease causing mutations. None- technologies. The other authors declare no conflict of theless,thesemethodsyielddatathatisincomplete,andfall interest. K. Corcoran: A. Employment (full or part-time); short of detecting all clinically relevant genetic variants Significant; A.M.W., P.B., L.H., J.K., K.C. and J.K. are presentinindividualgenomes.Weanticipatethatlong-read employees and shareholders of Pacific Biosciences, a sequencingtechniquesmayaugmentgeneticdiagnosisfora company commercializing DNA sequencing technologies. clinically well-characterized patient population with intel- The other authors declare no conflict of interest. H.G. lectual disability that we have studied over the years. Pre- Brunner: None. L.E.L.M. Vissers: None. C. viously analyses with CNV-microarrays, WES (de Ligt, Gilissen: None. NEJM 2012) and by short-read WGS (Gilissen, Nature 2014) all failed to detect a causal variant. We performed C19.6 long-read SMRT-sequencing in five such patient-parent A novel approach using long‐read sequencing and ddPCR trios with coverages between 15-45-fold. to investigate gonadal mosaicism and estimate recurrence Perindividualgenomeweidentify>22,000SVsbetween risk in two families with developmental disorders 50bp-50kb in size. More than 65% of SVs are novel compared to high-depth short-read sequencing (Illumina M.Wilbe1, S.Gudmundsson1, J.Johansson1,A. Ameur1,E. NovaSeq). Using the trio approach we are able to filter the Stattin1, G.Annerén1, H.Malmgren2,C. Frykholm1,M. 500-1,000 rare SVs per patient to ~40 SVs that have no Bondeson1 parentalreadsupport;validationsofthebest5candidatede novoSVspercaseareongoing.Thehighcoveragegenomes 1Immunology, Genetics, Pathology, Uppsala University, even allow detection of SVs/indels in the 20-50bp range; Uppsala, Sweden, 2Department of Molecular Medicine and per genome >25,000 of those are called per genome. Surgery, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden Next to identifying novel SVs our data also confirm that long-read sequencing data provide coverage in >20Mb Introduction:Denovomutationscontributesignificantlyto previously uncovered genome regions. Additionally long- severeearly‐onsetgeneticdisorders.Evenifthemutationis read sequencing data facilitate phasing of de novo SNVs apparentlydenovo,thereisarecurrenceriskduetoparental and compound heterozygous variants. germ line mosaicism, depending on in which gonadal In summary, long-read sequencingidentifiesa significant generation the mutation occurred. number of previously hidden SVs. The de novo mutation Materials and Methods: We demonstrate the power of rates as well as the clinical relevance of these previously using SMRT sequencing and ddPCR to determine parental hidden genetic variants can now be further explored. origin and allele frequencies of de novo mutations in germ A.Hoischen:None.A.M.Wenger:A.Employment(full cells in two families whom had undergone assisted or part-time); Significant; A.M.W., P.B., L.H., J.K., K.C. reproduction. and J.K. are employees and shareholders of Pacific Results: In the first family, a TCOF1 variant c.3156C>T Biosciences, a company commercializing DNA sequencing was identified in the proband with Treacher Collins technologies. M. van der Vorst: None. M. Kwint: None. syndrome. The variant affects splicing and was determined850 J.delPicchia to be of paternal origin. It was present in <1% of the Genomic Diagnostics, The Children’s Hospital of paternal germ cells, suggesting a very low recurrence risk. Philadelphia,Philadelphia,PA,UnitedStates,10Departmentof In the second family, the couple had undergone several Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of unsuccessful pregnancies where a de novo mutation Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, PTPN11 c.923A>C causing Noonan syndrome was identi- United States, 11Duke University Medical Center, Division of fied. The variant was present in 40% of the paternal germ Pediatric Neurology, Durham, NC, United States, cells suggesting a high recurrence risk. 12Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical Conclusions:Ourfindingshighlightasuccessfulstrategy Center, Maastricht, Netherlands, 13Epilepsy Genetics to identify the parental origin of mutations and to Program, Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s investigate the recurrence risk in couples that have under- Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 14Department of gone assisted reproduction with an unknown donor or in Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United couples with gonadal mosaicism that will undergo pre- States, 15Pereleman School of Medicine, University of implantation genetic diagnosis. Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 16Ambry Grant references: Marcus Borgströms Foundation, Genetics, Aliso Viejo, CA, United States, 17Department of Magnus Bergvalls Foundation, The Lars Hierta Memorial Clinical Genetics and School for Oncology & Developmental Foundation,TheRoyalPhysiographicSocietyinLund,The Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, Swedish Society of Medicine and Uppsala University Netherlands, 18Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Hospital. MW was supported by Swedish Society for TrustGenomeCampus,Hinxton,Cambridge,UnitedKingdom, Medical Research and SG by the Sävstaholm Foundation. 19Institute of Biochemistry, Emil-Fischer Center, FAU M. Wilbe: None. S. Gudmundsson: None. J. Johans- Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany son: None. A. Ameur: None. E. Stattin: None. G. Annerén: None. H. Malmgren: None. C. Frykholm: WhiletheroleoftypicalRhoGTPasesandotherRho-linked None. M. Bondeson: None. proteins in synaptic plasticity and cognitive function is widely acknowledged, the role of atypical RhoGTPases such as RHOBTB2 in neurodevelopment has barely been C20 Intellectual Disability 2 characterized.Wenowidentifieddenovomissensevariants clustering in the BTB-domain encoding region of C20.1 RHOBTB2 in ten individuals with a developmental and De novo missense variants in RHOBTB2 cause a epileptic encephalopathy, characterized by early onset epi- developmental and epileptic encephalopathy in humans, lepsy,severe intellectualdisability, postnatal microcephaly, and altered levels cause neurological defects in Drosophila movement disorders and in several individuals by (post- ictal) hemiparesis and secondary MRI anomalies. J.Straub1,E. D.H.Konrad1,J. Grüner1, A.Toutain2, L.A. RHOBTB2 interacts with a cullin-dependent ubiquitin Bok3,M.T.Cho4,H.P.Crawford5,H.Dubbs6,G.Douglas4,R. ligase complex and thus regulates auto-ubiquitination and Jobling7,D.Johnson8,B.Krock9,10,M.A.Mikati11,A.Nesbitt9, recruits other substrates to the complex. Though direct J.Nicolai12,M.Phillips5,A.Poduri13,14,X.R.Ortiz-Gonzales6,15, interactionofmutantRHOBTB2withCUL3didnotappear Z. Powis16,A. Santani9,10, L.Smith13,A. P. A.Stegmann17,C. to be impaired by co-immunoprecipitation, we observed Stumpel17,M.Vreeburg17,D.D.D.Study18, A.Fliedner1,A. increased levels of mutant RHOBTB2 compared to wild- Gregor1,H. Sticht19, C.Zweier1 type 24 hours after transfection of HEK293 cells. Abol- ishingthiseffectbyaddingaproteasomeinhibitorindicates 1Institute of Human Genetics, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg, decreased degradation of mutant RHOBTB2 in the protea- Erlangen, Germany, 2Service de Génétique, CHU de Tours, some, probably due to impaired ubiquitination. Similarly, Tours, France, 3Department of Pediatrics, Máxima Medical elevatedlevelsoftheDrosophilaorthologRhoBTBinvivo Center,Veldhoven,Netherlands,4GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD, were associated with seizure susceptibility and severe United States, 5Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Cook locomotor defects, while knockdown of RhoBTB resulted Children’s Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX, United States, in no or only very mild phenotypes. Knockdown of 6Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, RhoBTB in the Drosophila dendritic arborization neurons, Philadelphia, PA, United States, 7Division of Clinical and however, resulted in a significantly decreased number of Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital dendrites, thus suggesting a role of RhoBTB in dendritic for Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, development. We establish missense variants in the BTB Canada, 8Division of Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, domain encoding region of RHOBTB2 as causative for a Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, developmental and epileptic encephalopathy and elucidate UniversityofToronto,Sheffield,UnitedKingdom,9Divisionof the role of atypical RhoGTPase RhoBTB in DrosophilaAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 851 neurological function and possibly for dendrite master regulator of defense against stress. Somatic muta- development. tions of NFE2L2 leading to NRF2 accumulation promote J. Straub: None. E.D.H. Konrad: None. J. Grüner: drug resistance in cancer cells. None. A. Toutain: None. L.A. Bok: None. M.T. Cho: Materials and Methods: We investigated a 9-year old None. H.P. Crawford: None. H. Dubbs: None. G. boy with developmental delay, failure to thrive, immuno- Douglas: None. R. Jobling: None. D. Johnson: None. B. deficiency and leukoencephalopathy. We applied Mende- Krock: None. M.A. Mikati: None. A. Nesbitt: None. J. liome patient-parent sequencing on the Illumina Miseq Nicolai: None. M. Phillips: None. A. Poduri: None. X.R. platform and filtered for pathogenic variants. GeneMatcher Ortiz-Gonzales: None. Z. Powis: A. Employment (full or was used to find further patients. NFE2L2 variant was part-time);Significant;AmbryGenetics.A.Santani:None. characterized using cell biology and biochemical L. Smith: None. A.P.A. Stegmann: None. C. Stumpel: approaches. As a therapy approach the flavone luteolin None. M. Vreeburg: None. D.D.D. Study: None. A. was tested. Fliedner: None. A. Gregor: None. H. Sticht: None. C. Results: We identified de novo mutations in NFE2L2 in Zweier: None. four children and showed that cancer related mutations as inborn de novo mutations cause an early onset multisystem C20.2 disorder with failure to thrive, immunodeficiency and Inborndenovomutations inNFE2L2 cause amultisystem neurological symptoms. NRF2 accumulation leads to disorder in children and adolescents: From gene widespread misregulation of gene expression and an identification to therapy development imbalance incytosolic redox balance.Patients’blood show increased activity of the NRF2 regulated enzymes G-6-P- S. Diegmann1,J. Church2, R.Schnur3,M.Krusen4,S. Dreha- dehydrogenase and glutathione reductase as well as Kulaczewski1, W.Kühn-Velten5, A.Wolf1, B.Huppke1,F. decreased homocysteine level. Treatment with luteolin Millan6,A.Begtrup6,F.Almusafri7,H.Thiele8,J.Altmüller8,9,10, leads to a reduction of the NRF2 level and decreased P. Nürnberg8,10,11,M.Müller12,13, J.Gärtner1,P. Huppke1,12 expression of NRF2 targets in fibroblasts and an improve- ment of the course of disease in one patient. 1Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Conclusions: The unique combination of white matter University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany, lesions, hypohomocysteinaemia and increased G-6-P- 2Divison of Clinical Immunology and Allergy, Childrens dehydrogenase activity will facilitate early diagnosis and Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, United States, therapeutic intervention of this novel disorder. 3Division of Genetics, Cooper University Health Care, Grant: DFG:Ga354/14-1 Camden, NJ, United States, 4Lebenszentrum Königsborn S. Diegmann: None. J. Church: None. R. Schnur: Fachklinik für Kinderneurologie und Sozialpädiatrie mit None. M. Krusen: None. S. Dreha-Kulaczewski: None. Sozialpädiatrischem Zentrum, Unna, Germany, 5Medical W. Kühn-Velten: None. A. Wolf: None. B. Huppke: Laboratory Bremen, Bremen, Germany, 6GeneDx, None. F. Millan: None. A. Begtrup: None. F. Almusafri: Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 7Department of Pediatrics, None.H.Thiele:None.J.Altmüller:None.P.Nürnberg: Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Doha, Qatar, 8Cologne None. M. Müller: None. J. Gärtner: None. P. Center for Genomics (CCG), University of Cologne, Cologne, Huppke: None. Germany, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Universitätsklinik Köln, Cologne, Germany, 10Center for Molecular Medicine C20.3 Cologne(CMMC),UniversityofCologne,Cologne,Germany, De novo mutations affecting PPP2CA, encoding the 11Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in catalyticCαsubunitofPP2A,causePP2Adysfunctionand Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, a neurodevelopmental disorder Cologne, Germany, 12Center for Nanoscale Microscopy and Molecular Physiology of the Brain (CNMPB), Göttingen, S. Reynhout1, S.Jansen2, D.Haesen1, S.Van Belle1, S.de Germany, 13Zentrum Physiologie und Pathophysiologie, Munnik2,E. Bongers3,J. Schieving4,C. Marcelis2, J.Amiel5,6, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen, Universitätsmedizin, M.Rio6,H.McLaughlin7,R. Ladda8,S. Sell8,M. Kriek9, C. Göttingen, Germany Peeters-Scholte10,P.Terhal11,K.vanGassen11,N.Verbeek11,S. Henry12,J. Scott Schwoerer12,S.Malik13,N.Revencu14,C. Introduction: In more than half of the children with leu- Ferreira15,E. Macnamara15,16, B.deVries2,C. Gordon5,6,V. koencephalopathy conventional methods are insufficient to Janssens1,L. Vissers2 identify the cause of disease. Using NGS we were able to describe a new paediatric neurological disease caused by 1Laboratory of Protein Phosphorylation & Proteomics, Dept. variants in NFE2L2. NRF2, encoded by NFE2L2, is the of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of Leuven (KU852 J.delPicchia Leuven), Leuven, Belgium, 2Department of Human Genetics, decreased binding to the A subunit and/or specific B-type Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, subunits,aswellasmildlytoseverelyimpairedphosphatase Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, activity. Several mutants showed increased binding to the 3DepartmentofHumanGenetics,RadboudUniversityMedical B”’/STRN subunits, an observation previously also made Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 4Department of Neurology, for ID-associated Aα mutants. Thus, in the latter eight Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, cases, a dominant mechanism could not be excluded. We 5Laboratory of Embryology and Genetics of Human conclude that PP2A biogenesis and activity are severely Malformations, Paris Descartes-Sorbonne Paris Cité compromised in individuals with ID/DD carrying de novo University & Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche PPP2CAmutations, furtherunderscoring theimportanceof Médicale (INSERM) U1163, Institut Imagine, Paris, France, PP2A dysfunction in genetic brain disorders. 6Service de Génétique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, S.Reynhout:None.S.Jansen:None.D.Haesen:None. Assistance Publique - Hôpitaux de Paris (APHP), Paris, S. Van Belle: None. S. de Munnik: None. E. Bongers: France, 7GeneDx, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, 8Penn None. J. Schieving: None. C. Marcelis: None. J. Amiel: StateHersheyChildren'sHospital,Hershey,PA,UnitedStates, None. M. Rio: None. H. McLaughlin: None. R. Ladda: 9Department of Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, None.S.Sell:None.M.Kriek:None.C.Peeters-Scholte: Leiden, Netherlands, 10Department of Neurology, Leiden None. P. Terhal: None. K. van Gassen: None. N. UniversityMedicalCenter,Leiden,Netherlands,11Department Verbeek: None. S. Henry: None. J. Scott Schwoerer: of Genetics, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, None. S. Malik: None. N. Revencu: None. C. Ferreira: Netherlands,12UniversityofWisconsin,Wisconsin,WI,United None. E. Macnamara: None. B. de Vries: None. C. States, 13Comprehensive Epilepsy Program, Jane and John Gordon: None. V. Janssens: None. L. Vissers: None. Justin Neuroscience Center, Cook Children's Medical Center, Fort Worth, TX, United States, 14Centre de Génétique C20.4 Humaine, Cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, Université Breaking TADs: an emerging pathogenic mechanism catholique de Louvain, Leuven, Belgium, 15Office of the exemplified by Autosomal Dominant demyelinating ClinicalDirector,NationalHumanGenomeResearchInstitute, LeukoDystrophy (ADLD) National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States, 16NIH Undiagnosed Diseases Program, Common Fund, E. Giorgio1, M.Spielmann2,3,B. C.Nmezi4,G.Vaula5, A. National Human Genome Research Institute, National Lehman6,A.Brussino1, S.Cavalieri7,M.Ferrero1, E.Di Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States Gregorio7,C.Mancini1,E.Pozzi1,E.Riberi8,Q.S.Padiath4,A. Brusco1 Reversible protein phosphorylation plays an essential reg- ulatory role in neuronal signaling. Type 2A Protein Phos- 1University of Torino-Dep Medical Sciences, Torino, Italy, phatases(PP2A)arehighlyexpressedinbrain,andcatalyze 2Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics- Dep. Medical dephosphorylation of phospho-Ser/Thr residues in diverse Sciences,Berlin,Germany,3UniversityofWashington-Dep.of substrates. Structurally, PP2A holoenzymes comprise a Genome Sciences, Seattle, WA, United States, 4University of catalytic C, a scaffolding A, and a regulatory B-type sub- Pittsburgh, Dept. of Human Genetics, Pittsburgh, PA, United unit, which determines substrate specificity and physiolo- States,5CittàdellaSaluteedellaScienzaUniversityHospital- gical function. Recently, de novo mutations in genes Dep. of Neurology,, Torino, Italy, 6University of British encoding subunits Aα and B56δ,and less frequently,B56β Columbia- Dep. Medical Genetics, Vancouver, BC, Canada, and B56γ, have been implicated in intellectual disability/ 7Città della Salute e della Scienza University Hospital- developmental delay (ID/DD). Now, we describe 12 indi- Medical Genetics Unit, Torino, Italy, 8University of Torino- viduals with a de novo mutation in PPP2CA, encoding the Dep. Public Health and Pediatrics, Torino, Italy catalytic Cα subunit, phenotypically characterized by mild to severe ID/DD, behavioral problems, variable types of Genomic rearrangements and CNVs are structural aberra- epilepsy, hypotonia and brain abnormalities. PPP2CA tions of the human genome which contribute to human mutations consist of a partial deletion, a frame shift, three disease. It is well established that structural abnormalities nonsense (Gln125*, Arg214*, Arg295*), one single amino spanning coding genes can have pathogenic consequences acid duplication, four non-recurrent and one recurrent due to gene dosage effect (coding CNVs). However, the missensemutation(His191Arg).Functionalstudiesshowed increasing knowledge about regulatory elements, spatial complete null alleles in the former four cases, hinting folding of DNA, and the discovery of Topologically towards a haploinsufficiency mechanism. In the eight other Associated Domains (TADs) allowed the identification of cases, functional characterization of the mutants showed rearrangements that modify the regulatory context of dis- mutation-specific biochemical distortions, including ease genes, without affecting their coding region (non-Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 853 codingCNVs).Here,wedescribeaninstructiveandunique that AAV9 serotype is an efficient vector to preferentially exampleofa neurodegenerative disorder associated toboth target neuronal cells in-vivo by intravenous injection. We coding and noncoding CNVs at the LMNB1 locus. Auto- have recently generated iPSC-derived neurons from somal Dominant adult-onset demyelinating LeukoDystro- FOXG1-mutated patients, paving the way to testing perso- phy (ADLD) is a fatal disorder affecting myelin in the nalizedtherapeuticapproachesindisease-relevantcells.We central nervous system. ADLD is due to LMNB1 gene have engineered a two-plasmid system to correct specific duplication, causing its overexpression at mRNA and pro- FOXG1 mutations, namely c.460dupG - p.Glu154Gly teinlevels.Wehavecollectedfourpatientswithclinicaland fs*300 and c.688C>T - p.Arg230Cys. The first construct MRI findings suggestive of ADLD, without LMNB1 brings mutation-specific sgRNA and donor DNA and an duplication. Using array-CGH, we have identified four mCherry/GFP reporter system. The second construct har- different overlapping deletions located upstream LMNB1. bours a self-cleaving spCas9 able to inactivate itself after The minimal deleted region was 167 kb and span the cleavage, avoiding off-target cuts. The two plasmids have physiological enhancer of the LMNB1 gene already char- been encapsidated into AAV9. The efficiency of the AAV acterized by our group. Furthermore, it eliminates a TAD system has been tested in multiple cell types in-vitro, boundary, allowing foreign interactions between the indicating that AAV9 has indeed the highest infection LMNB1 promoter and four brain-specific enhancers. We efficiency in neurons and fibroblasts while for iPSCs and demonstrated LMNB1 overexpressionin fibroblasts, andin neuronal precursor cells AAV2 is more efficient. The effi- apostmortembrainsample.Inconclusion,ADLDiscaused cacy of sequence correction has been tested by Next Gen- by LMNB1 overexpression due to the duplication of the eration Sequencing (NGS) analysis. Our proposed AAV9- gene or to the alteration of the LMNB1 regulatory land- CRISPR/Cas9strategycanprovidetheproof-of-principleof scape. This latter represents an emerging pathogenic the feasibility of a gene therapy strategy, opening up the mechanism that should be taken into account in clinical possibility of in-vivo clinical trials for patients affected by practice. the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. E. Giorgio: None. M. Spielmann: None. B.C. Nmezi: S. Croci: None. S. Daga: None. F.C. Lorenzetti: None. None. G. Vaula: None. A. Lehman: None. A. Brussino: F.T.Papa:None.F.Donati:None.C.LoRizzo:None.D. None. S. Cavalieri: None. M. Ferrero: None. E. Di Lopergolo:None.L.Pancrazi:None.M.Doria:None.A. Gregorio: None. C. Mancini: None. E. Pozzi: None. E. Auricchio: None. M. Costa: None. S. Conticello: None. Riberi: None. Q.S. Padiath: None. A. Brusco: None. A. Renieri: None. I. Meloni: None. C20.5 C20.6 AAV9- CRiSPR/Cas9 preclinical trial on patient-derived ArecurrentdenovoPACS2heterozygousmissensevariant FOXG1 mutated cells causes neonatal-onset developmental epileptic encephalopathy, facial dysmorphism and cerebellar S.Croci1,S.Daga1,F.C.Lorenzetti1,F.T.Papa1,F.Donati2,C. dysgenesis LoRizzo1,3,D.Lopergolo1,3,L. Pancrazi4,M. Doria5, A. Auricchio5, M.Costa4, S.Conticello2,A. Renieri1,3,I.Meloni1 N.Jean-Marçais1,H.E.Olson2,E.Yang3,D.Heron4,K.Tatton- Brown5,P.A.vanderZwaag6,E.K.Bijlsma7,B.L.Krock8,E. 1Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy, Backer9,E.Kamsteeg10,M.Sinnema11,M.R.F.Reijnders10,D. 2Molecular Mechanisms of Oncogenesis, ITT Core Research Bearden12,R. J.Lunsing13,L. Burglen14, G.Lesca15,L.A. Laboratory (CRL), Firenze, Italy, 3Genetica Medica, Azienda Smith2,B.Sheidley2,P.L.Pearl2,C.MoufawadElAchkar2,A. Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy, 4Institute of Poduri2,C. M.Skraban16,A.I. Nesbitt8,D.E. Fransen vande Neuroscience, Laboratory of Neurophysiology, Italian Putte7,C. A. L.Ruivenkamp7,P. Rump6,I.Sabatier17,D.A. National Research Council (CNR), Pisa, Italy, 5TIGEM Sweetser18,J.L. Waxler18,J.Tarpinian16,K. J.Wierenga19,J. (Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine), Pozzuoli, Italy Donadieu20,V. Narayanan21,K. M.Ramsey21,C.Nava22,S.H. Lelieveld10, J.Schuurs-Hoeijmakers10,H.G.Brunner10,B. A curative therapy for the congenital variant of Rett syn- Keren4,F.TranMau-Them1,23,J.Thevenon1,23,L.Faivre1,23,G. drome due to FOXG1 mutations is lacking. Regenerative Thomas24, C.Thauvin-Robinet1,23 gene-based medicines aim to cure disease at the molecular level using innovative gene editing technologies, such as 1Centre de Génétique, FHU TRANSLAD, CHU de Dijon, CRiSPR/Cas9 technology. Recent studies have shown the Dijon, France, 2Department of Neurology, Boston Children’s efficacy of adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors which Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, 3Department of transport guide RNAs (sgRNA) and Cas9 in restoring the Radiology, Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston, MA, United expression of altered proteins. Recent works have shown States, 4Département de Génétique, Hôpital la Pitié-854 J.delPicchia Salpêtrière, Paris, France, 5St George’s university, NHS the PACS2 recurrent variant reduces the ability of the Foundation Trust, London, United Kingdom, 6Department of predicted autoregulatory domain to modulate the interac- Genetics,UniversityMedicalCenter,Groningen,Netherlands, tion between the PACS2 FBR and client proteins, which 7Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical may disturb cellular function. These findings support the Center, Utrecht, Netherlands, 8Department of Pathology, The causality of this recurrent de novo PACS2 heterozygous Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United missense in DEEs with facial dysmorphim and cerebellar States, 9Genomic Diagnostics Laboratory, NHS Foundation dysgenesis. Trust, Manchester, United Kingdom, 10Department of Human N. Jean-Marçais: None. H.E. Olson: None. E. Yang: Genetics, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 11Department of Clinical None.D.Heron:None.K.Tatton-Brown:None.P.A.van Genetics, Maastricht, Netherlands, 12Division of Neurology, der Zwaag: None. E.K. Bijlsma: None. B.L. Krock: The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, None. E. Backer: None. E. Kamsteeg: None. M. United States, 13Department of Child Neurology, Groningen, Sinnema: None. M.R.F. Reijnders: None. D. Bearden: Netherlands, 14Service de neuropédiatrie, Hôpital Trousseau, None. R.J. Lunsing: None. L. Burglen: None. G. Lesca: Paris, France, 15Department of Medical Genetics, Lyon None. L.A. Smith: None. B. Sheidley: None. P. L. Pearl: University Hospital, Lyon, France, 16Division of Genetics, None. C. Moufawad El Achkar: None. A. Poduri: None. Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United C.M. Skraban: None. A.I. Nesbitt: None. D.E. Fransen States, 17Department of Pediatric Neurology, Lyon, France, van de Putte: None. C.A.L. Ruivenkamp: None. P. 18Division of Medical Genetics, MassGeneral Hospital for Rump:None. I.Sabatier:None. D.A.Sweetser: None. J. Children, Boston, MA, United States, 19Department of L. Waxler: None. J. Tarpinian: None. K.J. Wierenga: Pediatrics, Oklahoma City, OK, United States, 20Service None. J. Donadieu: None. V. Narayanan: None. K.M. d’hémato-oncologie pédiatrique, Hôpital Trousseau, Paris, Ramsey: None. C. Nava: None. S.H. Lelieveld: None. J. France, 21Center for Rare Childhood Disorders, Phoenix, AZ, Schuurs-Hoeijmakers: None. H.G. Brunner: None. B. United States, 22Hôpital la Pitié-Salpêtrière, Département de Keren: None. F. Tran Mau-Them: None. J. Thevenon: Génétique, Paris, France, 23Inserm UMR1231 GAD, None. L. Faivre: None. G. Thomas: None. C. Thauvin- Université de Bourgogne, Dijon, France, 24Department of Robinet: None. Molecular Genetics, Pittsburgh, PA, United States The developmental and epileptic encephalopathies (DEEs) C21 Statistical Genetics are a group of severe infantile and childhood onset. The identification of pathogenic genetic variants in DEEs C21.1 remainscrucialfordecipheringthiscomplexgroupandfor Detection of widespread horizontal pleiotropy in causal accurately caring affected patients. Using trio whole relationships inferred from Mendelian randomization exome sequencing, we first identified a heterozygous between complex traits and diseases missense variant in PACS2 in two unrelated patients with DEE and facial dysmorphism. National and international M.Verbanck1,C. Chen2,B. Neale2,D.Ron1 data sharing allowed us to identify a recurrent de novo PACS2 heterozygous missense variant (p.Glu209Lys) in 1The Charles Bronfman Institute for Personalized Medicine, 12otherunrelatedpatients.Allpatients,aged16monthsto Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, 16 years, presented infantile epilepsy starting on the first United States, 2Analytic and Translational Genetics Unit, days or weeks of life and an overall developmental delay Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States or ID with or without behavioral disorders, common cer- ebellar dysgenesis and facial dysmorphism. PACS2 Introduction: Mendelian randomization (MR) is an encodes a multifunctional sorting protein involved in approachtoinfercausalityofanexposurewithanoutcome. nuclear gene expression and pathway traffic regulation. An assumption in MR is that the variant used as the PACS2 depletion alters gene expression and causes mito- instrumental variable acts on the outcome exclusively chondriafragmentation,mitochondriauncouplingfromthe through the exposure. Horizontal pleiotropy occurs when endoplasmic reticulum and disturbs cell metabolism and the variant has an effect on the outcome outside of the blocksapoptoticprograms.PACS2isanimportantparalog pathway of the exposure. Horizontal pleiotropy can cause of PACS1 that has been previously reported in patients bias in the causal estimate in MR. Studies have shown that with intellectual disability, facial morphological features variants identified from genome-wide association studies and/or epilepsy. Both proteins harbor cargo(furin)-binding are associated with multiple traits and that pleiotropy may regions (FBRs) that bind cargo proteins, sorting adaptors be common. However, the extent to which horizontal and cellular kinase. Functional studies demonstrated that pleiotropy affects MR is unknown.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 855 Materials and Methods: We have evaluated the role of When applied to 43 human phenotypes it uncovered 3,233 horizontal pleiotropy in MR. Specifically, we developed a putative genes causally associated with at least one phe- method to detect and correct for horizontal pleiotropic notype resulting in 8,388 gene-trait associations; of note outliers, called the Mendelian Randomization Pleiotropy 5,982 of these loci were missed by GWAS. For example, RESidual Sum and Outlier (MR-PRESSO) test. expression of CRIPT, previously associated with a Men- Results: After applying MR-PRESSO to pairwise delian syndrome with short stature (OMIM:615789), is comparisonsof82complextraitsanddiseases,weobserved causally associated with height in the general population. significanthorizontalpleiotropyin922(22%)of4,250MR Similarly, expression of the RIDDLE syndrome-associated tests in total. Amongst causal relationships, we observed RNF168 (OMIM:611943) correlates with educational thatsignificantpleiotropicoutliersdistortedcausalestimates attainment. Ouranalysisfound 58%(1,866/3,233)ofgenes in MR between 168% and 189% on average. Finally, we having pleiotropic causal effect, impacting up to 20 traits. observed that horizontal pleiotropy in MR can be corrected Notably, ANKRD55 showed directionally consistent causal in some but not in all instances. effect on rheumatoid arthritis, Crohn’s disease and inflam- Conclusions: These findings suggest that horizontal matory bowel disease. Using eQTLs from multiple tissues pleiotropy is pervasive and should be carefully considered (GTEx) revealed numerous tissue-specific causal effects, in order to maintain the validity of MR. often driven by differences ingene-expression.In line with Grants: RD is supported by R35GM124836 and previous findings, LDL level is driven specifically by R01HL139865 from the NIH, and 15CVGPSD27130014 SORT1 liver expression.Our method identifies loci missed from the AHA. B.N. is supported by R01MH094469 and by conventional GWAS and pinpoints likely functionally R01MH107649-01 from the NIH. relevant disease genes in known regions. Our findings M. Verbanck: None. C. Chen: None. B. Neale: F. unravel tissue-specific, causal gene-expression networks Consultant/Advisory Board; Modest; Deep Genomics, shared among a range of phenotypes. They shed light onto Avanir, Trigeminal solutions. Other; Modest; Illumina. D. key biological mechanisms underlying complex clinically Ron:B.ResearchGrant(principalinvestigator,collaborator important traits. or consultant and pending grants as well as grants already E. Porcu: None. S. Rueger: None. F.A. Santoni: None. received); Significant; AstraZeneca, Goldfinch Bio. A. Reymond: None. Z. Kutalik: None. C21.2 C21.3 Mendelian randomization combining GWAS and eQTL Equivalence of LD-score regression and individual-level- data reveals new loci, extensive pleiotropy and genetic data methods determinants of complex and clinical traits R.deVlaming1,M.Johannesson2,P.K.E.Magnusson3,M.A. E.Porcu1,2,S.Rueger3,2,eQTLGenConsortium,F.A.Santoni4, Ikram4,P. M.Visscher5 A. Reymond1,Z. Kutalik3,2 1Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, 2Stockholm School of Economics, Stockholm, Sweden, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, 3Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, 4Erasmus Lausanne, Switzerland, 3Institute of Social and Preventive University Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands, Medicine, CHUV and University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 5University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia Switzerland, 4Endocrine, Diabetes, and Metabolism Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, LD-score (LDSC) regression disentangles the contribution Switzerland ofpolygenicsignal,intermsofSNP-basedheritability,and populationstratification,intermsofaso-calledintercept,to Interpretation of GWAS results is challenging, as most of GWAS test statistics. Whereas LDSC regression uses the associated variants fall into regulatory regions and summary statistics, methods like Haseman-Elston (HE) overlap with expression-QTLs (eQTLs), indicating their regression and genomic-relatedness-matrix (GRM) restric- potential involvement in gene expression regulation. To ted maximum likelihood infer parameters such as SNP- address this challenge, we propose a summary statistics- based heritability from individual-level data directly. based Mendelian Randomization (MR) approach that uses Therefore, these two types of methods are typically con- multiple SNPs jointly as instruments and multiple gene sidered to be profoundly different. Nevertheless, recent expression traits as simultaneous exposures. Such an workhasrevealedthatLDSCandHEregressionyieldnear- approach should be more robust to violations of MR identical SNP-based heritability estimates when confound- assumptions than state-of-the-art tools (GSMR, TWAS). ingstratificationisabsent.Wenowextendtheequivalence;856 J.delPicchia under the stratification assumed by LDSC regression, we to the phenotypic variation that existing GWAS methods show that the intercept can be estimated from individual- failtocapture.Weimplementedthisapproachonsimulated leveldatabytransformingthecoefficientsofaregressionof data and explored it in some detail, with results from the thephenotypeontheleadingprincipalcomponentsfromthe simulation study supporting our hypothesis. We further GRM. Using simulations, considering various degrees and demonstrate that there are real benefits to be gained from forms of population stratification, we find that intercept this approach by applying it to real data from circa 20,000 estimates obtained from individual-level data are nearly individuals from the Generation Scotland: Scottish Family equivalent to estimates from LDSC regression (R2 > 99%). Health Study. We analysed height and major depressive An empirical application corroborates these findings. disorder (MDD). We identified four novel regions (p-value Hence, LDSC regression is not profoundly different from between3.75E-05and3.605E-06)and32novelregions(p- methods using individual-level data; parameters that are value between 4.92E-05 and 7.5E-07) harbouring a total of identified by LDSC regression are also identified by meth- 64 and 1156 SNPs for height and MDD respectively. This ods using individual-level data. In addition, our results approach, therefore, offers an opportunity to capture novel indicate that, under strong stratification, there is mis- genetic variants in complex traits. attributionofstratificationtotheslopeofLDSCregression, R.F. Oppong: None. P. Navarro: None. C.S. Haley: inflating estimates of SNP-based heritability from LDSC None. S. Knott: None. regression ceteris paribus. Hence, the intercept is not a panacea for population stratification. Consequently, LDSC- C21.5 regression estimates should be interpreted with caution, Associations of polygenic scores with lipid biomarkers in especially when the intercept estimate is significantly diverse populations greater than one. R. de Vlaming: None. M. Johannesson: None. P.K.E. K. Kuchenbaecker1, T.Reiker2,A. Gilly3,D.Gurdasani3, B. Magnusson: None. M.A. Ikram: None. P.M. Prins3,D.Suveges3, L.Southam3, G.Asiki4,J. Seeley4,A. Visscher: None. Kamali4, K.Hatzikotoulas3, A.Farmaki5,G.Melloni3,G. Ritchie3,J.Schwartzentruber3, P.Danecek3, B.Kilian3,M. C21.4 Pollard3,E. Tsafantakis6,M.Karaleftheri7,G.Dedoussis5, M. Regional heritability analysis of complex traits using Sandhu3,E. Zeggini3 haplotype blocks defined by natural recombination boundaries 1University CollegeLondon,London,UnitedKingdom,2Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland, R. F.Oppong1,P. Navarro2,C. S.Haley2,3,S. Knott1 3Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Cambridge, United Kingdom,4MedicalResearchCouncil/UgandaVirusResearch 1IEB, SBS, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Institute (MRC/UVRI), Entebbe, Uganda, 5Harokopio Kingdom, 2MRC IGMM, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UniversityofAthens,Athens,Greece,6AnogiaMedicalCentre, UnitedKingdom,3TheRoslinInstituteandRoyal(Dick)School Anogia, Greece, 7Echinos Medical Centre, Echinos, Greece of Veterinary Studies, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom Lipidbiomarkersareriskfactorsforcardiovasculardisease. The majority of findings to-date stem from genome-wide Wedescribe agenome-wide analytical approach that draws association studies conducted in cosmopolitan European itstheoreticalbasisfromavariantoftheGREMLapproach populations. It is not clear whether the genetic architecture that uses both local and genome-wide relationship matrices of lipids differs across populations. to provide regional estimates of the heritability across We used imputed genotypes from genome-wide arrays locally defined regions in the genome. The novelty in this and measures of high (HDL), low density lipoprotein- approachisthatitutilisesarelationshipmatrixthatisbased cholesterol (LDL) and triglycerides from UKHLS (N= on local haplotype blocks defined by recombination 9,961), two isolated Greek populations from the HELIC boundariesinthegenome.ComparedwithsingleSNPs,use study (N=1,641 and N=1,945), Ugandan samples from of haplotypes provides a better strategy for capturing the the APCDR study (N=4,778). We tested associations of true genomic relationship amongst individuals in the pre- established lipid-associated SNPs identified through Eur- sence of rare variants and thus provides real benefit over opean samples and of polygenic scores based on these single SNPs in recovering much of the hidden heritability variants using linear mixed models. and identifying novel gene variants. We hypothesize that Few of the 140 loci displayed nominally significant this approach will complement existing GWAS analytical associations with their target biomarker in the Greek and approachesbycapturingregionsinthegenomecontributing Ugandan samples. The polygenic scores were associatedAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 857 with highly consistent effects across the European popula- approaches using our annotation of 33,000 heterozygous tions (p<3x10-4 in each case). For the Ugandan cohort, deletions in a cohort of 350,000 unrelated genetically there were significant associations of the HDL (beta= British individuals from the UK Biobank. 0.153perSD,95%confidenceinterval[CI]:0.125-0.182,p First, we analyzed all pairwise combinations of deletions =4x10-26) and LDL scores (beta=0.133, 95%CI:0.105- andobservedthatsomedeletion-pairswereidentifiedinthe 0.161, p=4x10-20) with slightly attenuated effect sizes same genome significantly less than expected by chance. compared to the UK samples (beta=0.216, 95%CI:0.197- We observed that deletions that often co-occur are 0.235,p=2x10-102andbeta=0.177,95%CI:0.157-0.196, significantly shorter than those who co-occur rarely. Our p=5x10-69, respectively). There was no evidence of results suggest antagonistic epistasis between long dele- association for the triglyceride score in the Ugandan tions, with each additional variant decreasing fitness more samples (beta=-0.022, 95%CI:-0.050-0.007, p=0.14). drastically than the previous one. Triglyceride levels were predicted inversely by the HDL Second, assuming that decreased expression of a gene is score in the UK (beta=-0.032, 95%CI:-0.052--0.012, p= an important consequence of a deletion, we expect to see 1x10-3)andtheUgandansamples(beta=-0.062, 95%CI:- more Gain of Expression (GOE) single-nucleotide regula- 0.090−0.033, p=5x10-4). tory alleles in hemizygous deletion carriers, with potential Our findings question the assumption that genetic factors compensatoryeffecttopartiallyrecoverthegeneexpression are generally the same across populations for any complex level.Indeed,weobserveasignificantincreaseinfrequency trait. This cautions against generalising findings from of GOE alleles (defined as cis-eQTLs in GTEx) in deletion studies in samples with European ancestry to non- carriers versus euploid controls, supporting our hypothesis European populations. that cases with non-compensated deleterious variants have K. Kuchenbaecker: None. T. Reiker: None. A. Gilly: increased probability to be selected out . None. D. Gurdasani: None. B. Prins: None. D. Suveges: Altogether our results revealed abundant epistatic inter- None. L. Southam: None. G. Asiki: None. J. Seeley: actions both between different deletions and between None. A. Kamali: None. K. Hatzikotoulas: None. A. deletions and single-nucleotide regulatory variants, the Farmaki: None. G. Melloni: None. G. Ritchie: None. J. determination of which will be important to reliably assess Schwartzentruber: None. P. Danecek: None. B. Kilian: the human mutation load in the personalized health era. None. M. Pollard: None. E. Tsafantakis: None. M. K. Popadin: None. E. Porcu: None. M. Lepamets: Karaleftheri: None. G. Dedoussis: None. M. Sandhu: None. K. Mannik: None. M. Garieri: None. R. Magi: None. E. Zeggini: None. None. Z. Kutalik: None. A. Reymond: None. C21.6 Twoevidenceofongoingepistaticselectionagainstgenomic C22 Best Poster Session 2 deletions in the human population P02.48C K. Popadin1,E. Porcu1,M. Lepamets2,3, K.Mannik1,4,M. Mutation in the intracellular chloride channel CLCC1 Garieri5,R. Magi2,Z. Kutalik6,A.Reymond1 associated with autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa 1Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, I.D'Atri1,L.Li2,X. Jiao2,F. Ono3,R. Nelson4,C. Chan5, N. Lausanne, Switzerland, 2Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Nakaya6, Z.Ma2,Y.Ma2,X. Cai7,L. Zhang7,S. Lin1,A. Genomics, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, 3Institute of Hameed8,B.A. Chioza1,H.Hardy1,G.Arno9,S. Hull9,M. Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Tartu, Khan10,J.Fasham1,G.V. Harlalka1,M. Michaelides9,A.T. Estonia, 4Estonian Genome Center, Institute of Genomics, Moore9,Z. Akdemir11,S.Jhangiani12,J.R. Lupski11,F.P.M. University of Tartu, Estonia., Tartu, Estonia, 5Department of Cremers12,R.Qamar10,A.Salman13,J.K.Chilton1,J.Self13,F. Medical Genetics and Development, University of Geneva, Kabir14,M.Naeem14,M.Ali14,J. Akram15,P. A.Sieving16,S. Geneva, Switzerland, 6Institute of Social and Preventive Riazuddin14,S.Riazuddin14,J.Hejtmancik2,E.L.Baple1,A.H. Medicine, Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Crosby1 Every human genome harbors several rare potentially 1RILDWellcomeWolfsonCentre,RoyalDevon&ExeterNHS deleterious deletions. Previous work has evaluated their Foundation Trust, University of Exeter, Exeter, United impact (in terms of their total length, number of affected Kingdom, 2Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, genes) on human health. This however fails to account for National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, potential interactions between deleterious variants. To 3SectiononModelSynapticSystems,LaboratoryofMolecular estimate possible epistatic mechanisms we followed two Physiology, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and858 J.delPicchia Alcoholism, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States, 4Unit on None. Z. Ma: None. Y. Ma: None. X. Cai: None. L. Neural Circuits, National Institute of Neurological Disorders Zhang: None. S. Lin: None. A. Hameed: None. B.A. andStroke,NIH,Rockville,MD,UnitedStates,5Laboratoryof Chioza:None.H. Hardy: None.G. Arno: None. S. Hull: Immunology, National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, None.M.Khan:None.J.Fasham:None.G.V.Harlalka: United States, 6Section of Molecular Mechanisms of None. M. Michaelides: None. A.T. Moore: None. Z. Glaucoma, Laboratory of Molecular and Developmental Akdemir: None. S. Jhangiani: None. J.R. Lupski: None. Biology National Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United F.P.M. Cremers: None. R. Qamar: None. A. Salman: States, 7School of Life Sciences, University of Science and None.J.K.Chilton:None.J.Self:None.F.Kabir:None. Technology of China, Hafei, China, 8Institute of Biomedical M. Naeem: None. M. Ali: None. J. Akram: None. P.A. and Genetic Engineering (IBGE), Islamabad, Pakistan, Sieving: None. S. Riazuddin: None. S. Riazuddin: None. 9University College London, Institute of Ophthalmology, J. Hejtmancik: None. E.L. Baple: None. A.H. London, United Kingdom, 10Faculty of Science, COMSATS Crosby: None. Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan, 11Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor P04.05A CollegeofMedicine,Huston,TX,UnitedStates,12Department Loss of GPNMB causes autosomal recessive amyloidosis ofHumanGenetics,DondersInstituteforBrain,Cognitionand cutis dyschromica in humans Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, Netherlands, 13Faculty of Medicine, University of C.Yang1,S.Lin2,3,C.Chiang4,5,Y.Wu2,3,W.H'ng1,C.Chang1, Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom, 14National Y. Chen1, J.Wu1 Centre of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan, 15Allama Iqbal Medical College, 1Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, 2Mackay Medical College, University of Health Sciences, Lahore, Pakistan, 16National NewTaipeiCity,Taiwan,3MackayMemorialHospital,Taipei, Eye Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD, United States Taiwan, 4Tri-Service General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, 5National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan Retinitis pigmentosa (RP) is an inherited eye disease char- acterised by photoreceptor death and retinal degeneration, Amyloidosis cutisdyschromica (ACD) is a distinct form of resulting in vision loss. This condition affects ~1:4000 primarycutaneousamyloidosischaracterizedbygeneralized individuals worldwide and is highly clinically and geneti- hyperpigmentation mottled with small hypopigmented cally heterogeneous, presenting with variable symptoms macules on the trunks and limbs. Families and sporadic and inheritance patterns. We identified a homozygous cases have been reported predominantly in East and missensealteration(c.75C>A,p.D25E)intheCLCC1gene, Southeast Asian ethnicities; however, the genetic cause has which encodes a presumptive intracellular chloride channel not been elucidated. Homozygous premature nonsense highly expressed in the retina, associated with autosomal mutationsleadingtolossoffunctionofGPNMBcontribute recessive RP in eight consanguineous families from Pakis- to the iris pigment dispersion phenotype in mouse pig- tani and the UK. The p.D25E alteration decreased CLCC1 mentaryglaucoma.However,nomutationsinGPNMBhave channel function accompanied by accumulation of mutant beenidentifiedinhumanpigmentaryglaucomaandpigment protein in granules within the ER lumen. In keeping with dispersion syndrome. We establish that the compound het- these findings, Clcc1+/- KO mice displayed depressed erozygosity or homozygosity of GPNMB truncating alleles electroretinogram and photoreceptor number. Together is the cause of autosomal recessive ACD. Six nonsense or these findings define a single founder gene mutation as a frameshift mutations were identified in nine individuals cause of RP in families of Pakistani descent, and strongly diagnosedwithACD.Immunofluorescenceanalysisofskin suggest that CLCC1 function is crucial for maintaining biopsiesshowedthatGPNMBisexpressedinallepidermal retinal integrity and function. This work was supported by cells, with the highest staining observed in melanocytes. National Eye Institute Grant R01EY021237-01 (SAR), GPNMB staining is significantly reduced in the lesional National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI)/ skin of affected individuals. Hyperpigmented lesions National Heart Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) to the exhibited significantly increased amounts of DNA/keratin- Baylor Hopkins Center for Mendelian Genomics (UM1 positive amyloid deposits in the papillary dermis and infil- HG006542, JRL), Medical Research Council UK trating macrophages compared with hypo-/depigemented (G1002279),theNewlifeFoundationforDisabledChildren macules. Depigmentation of the lesions was attributable to (SG/15-16/12),FightForSight(Ref2027),WellcomeTrust loss of melanocytes. Intracytoplamic fibrillary aggregates 209083/Z/17/Z. were observed in keratinocytes scattered in the lesional I. D'Atri: None. L. Li: None. X. Jiao: None. F. Ono: epidermis. Thus, our analysis indicates that loss of None. R. Nelson: None. C. Chan: None. N. Nakaya: GPNMB, which has been implicated in melanosomeAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 859 formation, autophagy, phagocytosis, tissue repair, and N. Benetó: None. E. Creus-Bachiller: None. M. negative regulation of inflammation, underlies autosomal García-Morant: None. D. Grinberg: None. L. Vilageliu: recessive ACD, and provides insights into the etiology of None. I. Canals: None. amyloidosis and pigment dyschromia. C.Yang:None.S.Lin:None.C.Chiang:None.Y.Wu: P06.72D None. W. H'ng: None. C. Chang: None. Y. Chen: None. Methylmalonic Aciduria cblB type cellular model: J. Wu: None. HepatocytedifferentiationfromiPSCandpharmacological chaperones evaluation P06.64D Substrate reduction therapy approach for Sanfilippo C E. Richard, Á.Briso-Montiano, S. Brasil,L. R. Desviat,M. syndrome: use of iPSC and iPSC-derived neurons from Ugarte, B. Pérez patients as cellular models CentrodeBiologíaMolecular(CBM)"SeveroOchoa",Centro N.Benetó1,E. Creus-Bachiller1,M.García-Morant1,D. de Diagnóstico de Enfermedades Moleculares, Universidad Grinberg1, L.Vilageliu1,I.Canals2,1 Autónoma de Madrid, Ciberer, Madrid, Spain 1DepartmentofGenetics,MicrobiologyandStatistics,Faculty The understanding of the cellular and molecular mechan- ofBiology,University ofBarcelona,CIBERER, IBUB,IRSJD, isms underlying inherited metabolic disorders (IMDs) is Barcelona, Spain, 2Stem Cells, Aging and Neurodegeneration essential for developing new strategies for their prevention Group, Lund Stem Cell Center, University Hospital, Lund, andtreatment.DuetothegenotypevariabilityofIMDsand Sweden the upcoming of personalized medicine has prompted the emergenceofdevelopingnewmodels.Theaimofthiswork Sanfilippo C syndrome is a rare lysosomal storage disorder was the generation of a hepatic model of methylmalonic caused by mutations in the HGSNAT gene, which encodes aciduria cblB type by hepatocyte differentiation of induced an enzyme involved in heparan sulphate (HS) degradation. pluripotentstemcells(IPSCs)generatedbyreprogramming It is characterized by a severe and progressive neurode- of patient-derived fibroblasts. This organic aciduria is generation for which no effective treatment exists. caused by the deficiency of ATP: cob(I)alamin adenosyl- Previously, we demonstrated the usefulness of siRNAs transferase(ATR) encoded bytheMMABgene.Fibroblasts targeting EXTL2 genes (involved in HS synthesis) as an from a patient bearing a hypomorphic destabilizing muta- effective short-term substrate reduction therapy (SRT), on tion in this gene (p.Ile96Thr) were reprogrammed using a Sanfilippo C patients’ fibroblasts. Now, we use different commercial kit based on Sendai virus vectors. After the lentiviral vectors encoding shRNAs targeting EXTL2 to molecular and functional characterization of the iPSC line, analysetheirlong-termeffect.Weobserveaclearreduction these cells were differentiated in vitro into definitive inEXTL2mRNAlevelssixtydaysaftertransductionandan endodermandthenincubatedwithspecificfactors,aimedat evident decrease of the HS amounts. hepatocyte differentiation. IPSC-derived hepatocytes Due to the good results obtained, now we are using expressed relevant hepatic markers analyzed by immuno- neurons derived from patients’ induced pluripotent stem fluorescence. Finally, the hepatocytes generated were used cells(iPSC)asacellularmodel.Weareusinganestablished for evaluation of potential pharmacological chaperones protocol to differentiate those iPSC into neurons within a previously described (N-{[(4-chlorophenyl)carbamothioyl] week. Neurons show mature signatures and functional amino]-2-phenylacetamide and 4-(4-(4-fluorophenyl)-5- propertiesafteronemonth.Thistechniquewillprovidenew methyl-1H-pyrazol-3-yl)benzene-1,3-diol)) in combination insights in the usefulness of this treatment in the main withhydroxocobalamin,providingevidencesofitspositive affected cell type. To evaluate this therapeutic option, we effect on the activity of the mutant ATR hepatocytes. are analysing the neurons, focusing on aspects such as the Hence,ourfindingsprovideanexperimentalsuitablemodel inhibition of the EXTL2 gene at the mRNA level or the fortheinvestigationofthehepatotoxicityofnewdrugsand accumulation of HS over time by immunocytochemistry. the pathogenesis of this severe disease serving also as Our preliminary results in patients’ fibroblasts indicate ex vivo platform for organoids generation and therapeutic thatshRNAscouldbealong-termSRTandopenadoorfor applications. the development of a promising therapeutic approach for PI13/01239 ISCIII; Fundación Isabel Gemio; LCF/PR/ Sanfilippo C syndrome. PR16/11110018 Fundación la Caixa Fundings: Catalan Government (2014SGR 932), Spanish E.Richard:None.Á.Briso-Montiano:None.S.Brasil: Government (SAF201456562R), Asoc. Stop Sanfilippo None. L. R. Desviat: None. M. Ugarte: None. B. (Spain), MPS España. Pérez: None.860 J.delPicchia P06.35C 23Division of Genetics, Arnold Palmer Hospital for Children, Biallelic mutations in MRPS34 lead to instability of the Orlando, FL, United States, 24University of Pennsylvania small mitoribosomal subunit and Leigh syndrome PerelmanSchoolofMedicine,Philadelphia,PA,UnitedStates, 25INSERM U1163, Paris Descartes University - Sorbonne N.J.Lake1,2, B.D.Webb3,4,D.A.Stroud5,T. R. Richman6,B. Paris Cite, Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 26Victorian Ruzzenente7,A.G.Compton8,2,H.S.Mountford1,2,9,J.Pulman7, Clinical Genetic Services, Royal Children’s Hospital, C. Zangarelli7,M.Rio10,N.Bodaert11,Z. Assouline10,M.D. Melbourne, Australia Sherpa3,12,E.E.Schadt3,12,S.M.Houten3,12,J.Byrnes13,E.M. McCormick13,Z. Zolkipli-Cunningham13,14,K. Haude15,Z. The synthesis of all 13 mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)- Zhang15,K. Retterer15,R. Bai15,S.E. Calvo16,17,18,V.K. encoded protein subunits of the human oxidative phos- Mootha19,17,18, J.Christodoulou1,2,A. Rotig20,A. Filipovska6,21, phorylation (OXPHOS) system is carried out by mito- I.Cristian22,23,M. J.Falk13,24,M. D.Metodiev25, D. R. chondrial ribosomes (mitoribosomes). Defects in the Thorburn1,2,26 stability of mitoribosomal proteins or mitoribosome assembly impair mitochondrial protein translation, causing 1Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s combined OXPHOS enzyme deficiency and clinical dis- Hospital, Melbourne, Australia, 2Department of Paediatrics, ease. Here we report four autosomal-recessive pathogenic University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia, 3Department mutations in the gene encoding the small mitoribosomal of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine subunit protein, MRPS34, in six subjects from four unre- at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, 4Department of lated families with Leigh syndrome and combined Pediatrics, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New OXPHOS defects. Whole-exome sequencing was used to York, NY, United States, 5Department of Biochemistry and independently identify all variants. Two splice-site muta- Molecular Biology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, tions were identified, including homozygous c.321+1G>T Monash University, Clayton Campus, Melbourne, Australia, in a subject of Italian ancestry and homozygous c.322- 6Harry Perkins Institute of Medical Research and Centre for 10G>Ainaffectedsiblingpairsfromtwounrelatedfamilies Medical Research, University of Western Australia, Perth, of Puerto Rican descent. In addition, compound hetero- Australia, 7Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 8Murdoch zygous MRPS34 mutations were identified in a proband of Children’s Research Institute, Royal Children’s Hospital, Frenchancestry;amissense(c.37G>A[p.Glu13Lys])anda Melbourne, Austria, 9Department of Biological and Medical nonsense (c.94C>T [p.Gln32*]) variant. We demonstrated Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, Oxford Brookes that these mutations reduce MRPS34proteinlevelsandthe University,Oxford,Oxford,UnitedKingdom,10Departmentsof synthesis of OXPHOS subunits encoded by mtDNA. Pediatric, Neurology and Genetics, Hospital Necker-Enfants- Examination of the mitoribosome profile and quantitative Malades, Paris, France, 11Pediatric Radiology Department, proteomicsshowedthatthemitochondrialtranslationdefect Hospital Necker Enfants Malades, AP-HP, University Rene was caused by destabilization of the small mitoribosomal Descartes, PRES Sorbonne Paris Cite, INSERM U1000 and subunit and impaired monosome assembly. Lentiviral- UMR1163,InstituteImagine,,Paris,France,12IcahnInstitute mediated expression of wild-type MRPS34 rescued the for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Icahn School of defect in mitochondrial translation observed in skin fibro- Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, United States, blasts from affected subjects, confirming the pathogenicity 13Division of Human Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, The of MRPS34 mutations. Our data establish that MRPS34 is Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United requiredfornormalfunctionofthemitoribosomeinhumans States,14DivisionofNeurology,DepartmentofPediatrics,The and furthermore demonstrate the power of quantitative Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia,Philadelphia,PA,United proteomic analysis to identify signatures of defects in spe- States,15GeneDx,Gaithersburg,MD,UnitedStates,16Howard cific cellular pathways in fibroblasts from subjects with Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, inherited disease. Massachusetts General Hospital,, Boston, MA, United States, N.J. Lake: None. B.D. Webb: None. D.A. Stroud: 17Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, None.T.R.Richman:None.B.Ruzzenente:None.A.G. Boston, MA, United States, 18Broad Institute of MIT and Compton: None. H.S. Mountford: None. J. Pulman: Harvard, Cambridge, MA, United States, 19Howard Hughes None. C. Zangarelli: None. M. Rio: None. N. Bodaert: Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, None. Z. Assouline: None. M.D. Sherpa: None. E.E. Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, United States, Schadt: None. S.M. Houten: None. J. Byrnes: None. E. 20NSERMU1163,ParisDescartesUniversity-SorbonneParis M.McCormick:None.Z.Zolkipli-Cunningham:None. Cite, Institute Imagine, Paris, France, 21School of Molecular K. Haude: A. Employment (full or part-time); Signifi- Sciences,UniversityofWesternAustralia,,Crawley,Australia, cant; GeneDx. Z. Zhang: A. Employment (full or part- 22Nemours Children’s Hospital,, Orlando, FL, United States, time); Significant;GeneDx.K. Retterer: A. EmploymentAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 861 (full or part-time); Significant; GeneDx. R. Bai: A. MaterialsandMethodsWholeexomeandtargetednext- Employment (full or part-time); Significant; GeneDx. S. generation sequencing was performed for three subjects E.Calvo:None.V.K.Mootha:None.J.Christodoulou: withsuspectedmitochondrialdisease.Functionalevaluation None.A.Rotig:None.A.Filipovska:None.I.Cristian: of identified variants was undertaken using subject None. M.J. Falk: None. M.D. Metodiev: None. D.R. fibroblasts and/or muscle biopsy, including cDNA studies, Thorburn: None. complexomeprofiling,complementationstudiesandassess- ment of steady-state levels. P06.36D Results We describe three unrelated individuals who Mutations in NDUFAF8 cause Leigh syndrome with an harbourbiallelicvariantsinNDUFAF8,arecentlyidentified isolated complex I deficiency ancillary factor required for assembly of the complex I holoenzyme.Weprovidefunctionalevidencetosupportthe C. L.Alston1,2,M. T.Veling3,4,J. Heidler5,L. S.Taylor6, L. pathogenicity of these NDUFAF8 variants and unequivo- He6,2, A.Broomfield7,J. Pavaine8,H. Prokisch9,10,S. cally establish this gene as a cause of complex I deficiency Wortmann9,10,11,P. E. Bonnen12,R. McFarland1,2,I. in association with an exclusively Leigh-like clinical Wittig5,13,14,D.J. Pagliarini3,4,R. W.Taylor1,2 presentation. Conclusions Functional experimentation including com- 1Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle plementation studies and complexome profiling of subject University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 2NHS cell lines establishes NDUFAF8 as the twelfth complex I Highly Specialised Service for Rare Mitochondrial Disorders, assembly factor associated with human disease and Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 3Morgridge Institute validates the importance of orphan gene characterisation. for Research, Madison, WI, United States, 4Department of Acknowledgements NIHR doctoral fellowship (NIHR- Biochemistry,UniversityofWisconsin–Madison,Madison,WI, HCS-D12-03-04); Wellcome Centre for Mitochondrial United States, 5Functional Proteomics, Goethe-Universität, Research(203105/Z/16/Z);MRCCentreforNeuromuscular Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 6Wellcome Centre for Diseases (G0601943); NHS Highly Specialised Service for Mitochondrial Research, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Rare Mitochondrial Disorders; The Lily Foundation; Kingdom, 7Manchester Centre for Genomic Medicine, St Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft: SFB 815/Z1; BMBF Mary'sHospital,ManchesterAcademicHealthScienceCentre mitoNET: 01GM1113B. The views expressed are those of (MAHSC), Manchester, United Kingdom, 8Department of the author(s) and not necessarily the NHS, NIHR or DoH. Paediatric Neuroradiology, Royal Manchester Children's C.L. Alston: None. M.T. Veling: None. J. Heidler: Hospital, Central Manchester Foundation Trust, Manchester, None. L.S. Taylor: None. L. He: None. A. Broomfield: United Kingdom, 9Institute of Human Genetics, Technische None. J. Pavaine: None. H. Prokisch: None. S. Wort- Universität München, München, Germany, 10Institute of mann: None. P.E. Bonnen: None. R. McFarland: None. Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, I. Wittig: None. D.J. Pagliarini: None. R.W. Germany, 11Department of Pediatrics, Salzburger Taylor: None. Landeskliniken (SALK), Paracelsus Medical University (PMU), Salzburg, Austria, 12Department of Molecular and P09.001A Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, Dissecting tissue-specific functional networks associated United States, 13Cluster of Excellence “Macromolecular with 16p11.2 reciprocal genomic disorder using CRISPR Complexes”, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, engineered human iPS and mouse models Germany, 14German Center for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner site RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany P. Razaz1,2,3, D.J.Tai1,2,3, S.Erdin1,2,3,T. Aneichyk1,2,3,T. Arbogast4,A.Ragavendran1,A.Stortchevoi1,2,B.B.Currall1,2,3, Introduction Mitochondrial diseases are clinically and C. E.F. Esch1,2,3,E. Morini1,2,W. Ma1,2,R. J.Kelleher1,2,C. genetically heterogeneous metabolic conditions. Complex I Golzio4,5,N.Katsanis4, J.F. Gusella1,2,3,6,M.Talkowski1,2,3,6 deficiency is the most common biochemical diagnosis, particularly prevalent in paediatric patients. Mitochondrial 1Center for Genomic Medicine and Department of Neurology, disease is caused by mutations affecting the mitochon- MassachusettsGeneralHospital,BOSTON,MA,UnitedStates, drion’sowngenome(mtDNA)oroneofthe~1150nuclear- 2Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, encoded mitoproteome components. The limited genotype: MA, United States, 3Program in Medical and Population phenotypecorrelationinmitochondrialdiseasemeansnext- Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, generation sequencing methodologies are critical for the MA, United States, 4Center for Human Disease Modeling, rapid genetic diagnosis of patients. Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, United States,862 J.delPicchia 5InstitutdeGénétiqueetdeBiologieMoléculaireetCellulaire, 1Bambino Gesu' Children's Hospital, Rome, Italy, 2Paris Illkirch, France, 6Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical Diderot University, Paris, France, 3The University of School, Boston, MA, United States Queensland, St Lucia, Australia, 4Robert Debré Hospital, Paris, France, 5Hôpital Armand-Trousseau,, Paris, France, Reciprocal genomic disorders (RGDs) represent a recurrent 6Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy, 7VU University class of copy number variants (CNVs) that collectively Medical Center,, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 8Children's comprise a major contributor to neurodevelopmental dis- Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, United States, orders (NDD) and altered anthropometric traits. Here, we 9Hôpital Armand-Trousseau, Paris, France systematically dissected the functional networks associated with16p11.2RGDfromtranscriptomeanalysesof70mice Introduction: Hypomyelinating leukodystrophies are with reciprocal CNV of the syntenic 7qF3 region across genetically heterogeneous disorders with overlapping cortex,striatum,andcerebellum,aswellasliver,whiteand clinical and neuroimaging features reflecting variable brown adipose tissues in a subset of 16 mice (n=250 abnormalities in myelin formation. The homeobox protein samples).Weintegratedthesedatawithbraintissuesfroma NKX6-2 is a transcription factor regulating multiple Kctd13 mouse model (a putative driver of 16p11.2 neu- developmental processes with a main role in oligoden- roanatomical phenotypes, n=50), and CRISPR-engi- drocyte differentiation and regulation of myelin-specific neered, isogenic 16p11.2 iPSC-derived NSCs (n=25) and gene expression. inducedneurons(n=27).Thestrongestmagnitudeofeffect Materials and Methods: Whole-exome sequencing sizes from 7qF3 were observed across brain regions by (WES) and homozygosity mapping of selected patients comparison to non-brain tissues (cortex 7qF3 region aver- from three unrelated families was undertaken. The variants age p-value=8.80E-35; non-brain p=0.0013), reflecting identified were validated by Sanger sequencing and the ~3x higher basal expression changes. Coexpression cosegregation analysis. network analyses isolated a consistent module of 16p11.2 Results: Five affected subjects (three unrelated families) genes, as well as a module that was highly enriched for were documented to share biallelic inactivating mutations constrained genes (ExAC pLI≥0.9), autism-associated affecting the NKX6-2 homeobox domain. A trio-based genes, early fetal development coexpression networks whole exome sequencing analysis in the first family derived from BrainSpan, and neurological phenotypes and detected a homozygous frameshift change [c.606delinsTA; processes. Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were p.(Lys202Asnfs*?)]. In the second family, homozygosity enriched in this ‘constrained’ module network; moreover, mapping coupled to whole exome sequencing identified a DEGs from the Kctd13 mouse coalesced into this same homozygous nucleotide substitution (c.565G>T) introdu- module (cortex enrichment p=7.82E-41), suggesting cing a premature stop codon (p.Glu189*). In the third overlap in altered transcriptional networks between full family, whole exome sequencing established compound lengthCNVanddeletionofKCTD13alone.Theseanalyses heterozygosity for a non-conservative missense change identify a tissue-specific impact of 16p11.2 RGD that affecting a key residue participating in DNA binding converges on a module of co-expressed genes that are (c.599G>A; p.Arg200Gln) and a nonsense substitution intoleranttogeneticperturbationandassociatedwithcritical (c.589C>T; p.Gln197*), in both affected siblings. The processes in human neurodevelopment. clinical presentation was homogeneous, with four subjects P. Razaz: None. D.J. Tai: None. S. Erdin: None. T. having severe motor delays, nystagmus and absent head Aneichyk: None. T. Arbogast: None. A. Ragavendran: control, and one individual showing gross motor delay at None. A. Stortchevoi: None. B.B. Currall: None. C.E.F. the age of 6 months. All exhibited neuroimaging that was Esch: None. E. Morini: None. W. Ma: None. R.J. consistent with hypomyelination. Kelleher: None. C. Golzio: None. N. Katsanis: None. J. Conclusions: The finding of individuals with a severe F. Gusella: None. M. Talkowski: None. neurodevelopemental phenotype with hypomyelination associated with biallelic mutations in NKX6-2 provides P09.098B direct evidence of the relevant role of NKX6-2 in CNS Biallelic mutations in the homeodomain of NKX6-2 development in humans. underlie a severe hypomyelinating leukodystrophy C.Aiello:None.I.Dorboz:None.C.Simons:None.R. Stone: None. M. Niceta: None. M. Elmaleh: None. M. C. Aiello1,I. Dorboz2,C.Simons3,R. Stone4,M.Niceta1, M. Abuawad: None. D. Doummar: None. A. Bruselles: Elmaleh4,M.Abuawad2,D.Doummar5,A.Bruselles6,N.Wolf7, None.N.Wolf:None.L.Travaglini:None.O.Boespflug- L. Travaglini1,O.Boespflug-Tanguy4,M.Tartaglia1,A. Tanguy:None.M.Tartaglia:None.A.Vanderver:None. Vanderver8,D.Rodriguez9,E. Bertini1 D. Rodriguez: None. E. Bertini: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 863 P09.139C F.Di Leva:None.M.Arnoldi: None.G.Alvari:None. SINEUP, a synthetic antisense non-coding RNA-based A. Messina: None. S. Casarosa: None. G.L. Carvill: technology, as possible new therapeutic tool for None. S. Zucchelli: None. S. Gustincich: None. M. haploinsufficiency: Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) and Biagioli: None. Epilepsy as Proof-of-Principle P12.214B F.DiLeva1,M.Arnoldi1,G.Alvari1,A.Messina2,S.Casarosa2,3, Modeling human hereditary cancer syndromes using G.L. Carvill4,S. Zucchelli5,6,S. Gustincich5,7,M.Biagioli1 CRISPR/Cas9 mediated genome editing in Xenopus tropicalis 1NeuroEpigeneticslaboratory,CentreforIntegrativeBiology, Trento, Italy, 2Laboratory of Neural Development and D.Dimitrakopoulou1,2,T. Naert1,2,D.Tulkens1,2, R. Regeneration, Centre for Integrative Biology, Trento, Italy, Noelanders1,T. VanNieuwenhuyse1,P. Van Vlierberghe2,3,K. 3CNRNeuroscienceInstitute,Pisa,Italy,4KenandRuthDavee Vleminckx1,2,3 Department of Neurology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, United States, 5Area of 1Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent, Neuroscience, Scuola Internazionale Superiore di Studi Belgium, 2Cancer Research Institute Ghent, Ghent, Belgium, Avanzati (SISSA), Trieste, Italy, 6Department of Health 3Center for Medical Genetics Ghent, Ghent, Belgium Sciences, Università del Piemonte Orientale, Novara, Italy, 7DepartmentofNeuroscienceandBrainTechnologies,Istituto CRISPR/Cas9 and TALEN mediated genome editing cre- Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT), Genova, Italy ates unique and unmatched opportunities for modeling human disease in non-mammalian model organisms. The Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and epilepsies are het- amphibian Xenopus tropicalis is extremely well positioned erogeneous conditions that frequently coexist with other forthisapproach.Itshareswithzebrafishtheaquatichabitat developmentaldisabilities.Geneticbasesareprominentrisk and easy manipulations associated with its external devel- factors for both disorders. Among others, loss of function opment. However, it manifests unique features making it a mutations in CHD8 gene represents a recurrent risk factor powerfulorganismformodelinghumangeneticdisease.(1) for ASD, while CHD2 is more frequently mutated in epi- unlike zebrafish, Xenopus tropicalis has a true diploid lepsy. Thus, the sole reduction in CHD8 or CHD2 expres- genome,precludingredundancy.(2)Itsgenomeshowshigh sionisabletocausecellularandmolecularphenotypesthat synteny with humans, greatly facilitating identification of are key hallmarks to follow and rescue in assessing new disease orthologs. (3) Gene manipulations can be restricted therapeutic approaches. to specific tissues and organs via targeted blastomere Particularly, we aim to test SINEUPs, a novel class of injection. We have recently generated the first genetic syntheticantisenselongnon-codingRNAs-abletoincrease cancer models in Xenopus tropicalis. Via mosaic targeting the translation of target proteins to physiological level ofthetumorsuppressorgeneapcwegeneratedtadpolesthat without affecting transcription - to rescue the phenotypes rapidly (< 1.5 months) and efficiently (>90%) developed a caused by CHD8 or CHD2 haploinsufficiency. range of neoplasia characteristic for Familial Adenomatous Since the activity of SINEUP depends on two domains, Polyposis (Van Nieuwenhuysen et al., Oncoscience 2015). an effector domain required for translation enhancement Similarly, we found that rb1/rbl1 double mosaic mutant and a binding domain conferring target specificity, we tadpoles rapidly develop retinoblastoma (Naert et al. Sci. designed SINEUP molecules able to recognize the initial Rep. 2016). More recent work also indicates the possibility andinternalmethioninesofCHD8andCHD2proteins.We of modeling Li-Fraumeni, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leu- thenproceededtotesttheefficacyofdifferentSINEUPson kemia and pancreatic neuroendocrine cancer. The rapid neural progenitors. From our preliminary observations, kineticsoftumordevelopmentinXenopuspavethewayfor SINEUPs targeting internal methionines are more efficient their use as pre-clinical model, providing unique possibi- in stimulating CHD8 and CHD2 protein production, thus litiesforfastidentificationofmodifiergenesandnoveldrug representing a valid target to be further tested in patients’ targets. We present our first promising results with multi- derived cell lines and in zebrafish, an in vivo model of the plexed gene targeting in desmoid tumors. We believe that disorders. these models offer a unique experimental platform to con- Inconclusion,ourstudiesrepresentsthefirststeptowards tribute to the field of human cancer and medical genetics. the development of new types of RNA-based therapy, with D.Dimitrakopoulou:None.T.Naert:None.D.Tulkens: implications for a large repertory of presently incurable None.R.Noelanders:None.T.VanNieuwenhuyse:None. genetic diseases. P. Van Vlierberghe: None. K. Vleminckx: None.864 J.delPicchia P19.24D Conclusion:Structured healthcare in HDGC economic- Genetic counselling in hereditary diffuse gastric cancer: allybenefitsNHS,islife-savingforcarriers,reassuringnon- economical and psycho-social impact carriers. L. Garrido: None. T. Nércio: None. R. Leal: None. R. L. Garrido1,T. Nércio1,R. Leal2,R.Guimarães1,L. Ferro1, L. Guimarães:None.L.Ferro:None.L.Vilarinho:None.S. Vilarinho1,S. Costa1,A. Magalhães1,A. S.Mesquita1,A.F. Costa:None.A.Magalhães:None.A.S.Mesquita:None. Pereira1,I.Gullo1,3,2,H.Pinheiro2,S.Sousa2,B.Carvalho3,2,A. A.F.Pereira:None.I.Gullo:None.H.Pinheiro:None.S. P.Neto3,2,L.Capela3,2,C.Teixeira1,A.Fareleira1,V.Devezas1, Sousa: None. B. Carvalho: None. A.P. Neto: None. L. G.Macedo1,3,J.Preto1,3,J.Barbosa1,3,M.Baptista1,3,G.Pinto1, Capela:None.C.Teixeira:None.A.Fareleira:None.V. M.Damasceno1,J.L.Fougo1,3,J.Costa-Maia1,S.Fernandes3,2, Devezas: None. G. Macedo: None. J. Preto: None. J. F. Carneiro1,3,2,S.Castedo1,3,2,C. Oliveira2,3 Barbosa: None. M. Baptista: None. G. Pinto: None. M. Damasceno: None. J.L. Fougo: None. J. Costa-Maia: 1Centro Hospitalar São João, Porto, Portugal, 2Ipatimup/i3S, None. S. Fernandes: None. F. Carneiro: None. S. Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology at the Castedo: None. C. Oliveira: None. University ofPorto(Ipatimup), Porto,Portugal&Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S), University of Porto, P20.05A Porto,Portugal,Porto,Portugal,3FMUP,FacultyofMedicine Raw Genomic Data: Storage, Access and Sharing of the University of Porto, Porto, Portugal, Porto, Portugal M.Shabani,D.Vears, P. Borry Introduction: Hereditary Diffuse Gastric Cancer (HDGC) syndrome is caused by CDH1-germline mutations and KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium carriershavehigh-risktodevelopearly-onsetdiffusegastric cancer (DGC) in both genders and lobular breast cancer Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) and Whole Exome (LBC) in females. HDGC is deadly for those expressing sequencing (WES) for diagnostic and research purposes clinical phenotype, but presymptomatic testing allows dis- generatealargevolumeofrawdata.Previousethicaland ease prevention or early-diagnosis in mutation-carriers legal discussions concerning genomic data management through risk-reduction gastrectomy and yearly breast MRI, have mainly focused on concerns related to interpreta- discharging~50%ofnon-carriers.AsHealth-Care-Provider tion of the results and the return of both primary and of ERN-GENTURIS, we aim to evaluate the economic secondary findings from these tests. Yet to date, issues impact of genetic counselling, presymptomatic diagnosis related to the storage and return of primary sequencing and multidisciplinary care for the National Health Service data (such as bam (Binary Alignment) or fastq files (NHS), and the clinical and psycho-social implications for (unaligned reads)) that allow both the regeneration of HDGC families. primary results and the reanalysis of data have received Material and Methods:We evaluated outputs of struc- farlessattention,particularlyintheclinicalsetting.This tured oncogenetics and high-risk consultations in 111 isdespitethehugepotentialforlong-termdatastorageto individuals from 7 HDGC families by consulting clinical/ lead to future data re-analysis and reinterpretation in financial records, and assessed its psycho-social impact by light of new evidence. In this paper, we critically applying an emotional-distress-scale (HADS) to 70/111 appraise three main issues, namely, data storage policies individuals. and practices of clinical laboratories, patients’ access to Results:From 2011-2016, we screened 111 individuals, raw data, and sharing of raw data by individuals. We from which 53% tested negative (n=58;30M:28F) and argue that there is a need for well-established and were discharged from follow-up each costing 200€ to the transparent raw genomic data retention and returning Hospital. 47% (n=53;26M:27F) tested positive. From 7 policiesinordertoenablepatientstopracticetheirrights probands, 2 were diagnosed with LBC and remain alive to access raw genomic data. In addition, professional after curative surgery, while 5 diagnosed with DGC are communities could guide laboratories in adopting deceased. The hospital expenses with probands range from best practices for the storage and return of raw data, and 30-50K€ independently of cancer type. Costs with carriers introduce uniformity to these practices. As WES and opting for prophylactic approaches range from 4-8K€ WGS become more embedded in diagnostics, it is (higher cost/females), except if disease is identified after timelytoconsiderhowcurrentdatastoragepoliciesalign the first high-risk consultation,raisingthe cost to 27K€ but with patients’ rights and interests to access raw data, life-saving. Those opting for surveillance, cost ~1K and how these rights can be managed in the clinical €/patient. Concerning psychologic impact, carriers demon- setting. strate higher levels of distress than non-carriers. M. Shabani: None. D. Vears: None. P. Borry: None.Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 865 P16.40D Employment (full or part-time); Significant; FDNA. N. Exploring molecular interactions by clustering analysis of Fleischer: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; similarity scores from next-generation phenotyping FDNA. H. David-Eden: A. Employment (full or part- approaches time); Significant; FDNA. Y. Hanani: A. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; FDNA. T. Kamphans: T. Hsieh1,N.Hajjir2,J. T.Pantel2, M.Mensah2,M.Zhao2,J. None. D. Horn: None. S. Mundlos: None. P. Hertzberg2, M.Schubach3,S. Köhler2,Y. Gurovich4, N. Krawitz: None. Fleischer5,H.David-Eden4,Y. Hanani4, T.Kamphans6,D. Horn2, S.Mundlos2,P. Krawitz1 C23 Sensory disorders 1Institute for Genomic Statistics and Bioinformatics, Bonn, Germany, 2Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, C23.1 Germany, 3Berlin Institute of Health, Berlin, Germany, Antisense therapy for a common corneal dystrophy 4FDNA,Boston,MA,UnitedStates,5FDNA,Bonn,MA,United ameliorates TCF4repeat expansion-mediated toxicity States, 6GeneTalk, Bonn, Germany C. Zarouchlioti1,B. Sanchez-Pintado1,N.J.Hafford Tear1,P. Introduction: Recent advances in computer vision and Klein2,P. Liskova3,K. Dulla2,M.Semo1,A. A.Vugler1, K. machine learning resulted in the next-generation pheno- Muthusamy4,L.Dudakova3,H.J.Levis5,P.Skalicka6,P.Hysi7, typing (NGP) tools for syndromology. Deep convolutional M.E.Cheetham1,S.J.Tuft4,P.Adamson2,A.J.Hardcastle1,A. neural networks such as DeepGestalt in Face2Gene have E. Davidson1 beentrainedonthousandsofpatientphotoswithconfirmed molecular diagnoses and learned phenotype representations 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, ofmultipledisorders.Thesesystemsofartificialintelligence 2ProQR therapeutics, Leiden, Netherlands, 3Institute of support clinicians in the diagnostic workup of patients and InheritedMetabolicDisordersCharlesUniversityandGeneral evenexcelhumanexpertsincertainclassificationtasks.We University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, therefore wondered whether this unprecedented sensitivity 4Moorfields EyeHospital,London,UnitedKingdom, 5Institute to detect mutation-specific patterns in the facial gestalt of Aging and Chronic Disease, University of Liverpool, could also be used to reveal information about gene Liverpool, United Kingdom, 6Department of Ophthalmology function. CharlesUniversityandGeneralUniversityHospitalinPrague, Materials and Methods: We designed the knowledge Prague, Czech Republic, 7Department of Ophthalmology and base Deep Phenotyping for Deep Learning (DPDL) as a Twin Research, King's College London, London, United publicresourcetocompilesimilarityscoresfromNGPtools Kingdom and performed a cluster analysis on currently 1216 cases with monogenic disorders. Introduction:Fuchsendothelialcornealdystrophy(FECD) Results: A prominent cluster was formed by BRAF, is a common triplet repeat-mediated disease. Corneal PTPN11, NRAS and other genes of the MAPKinase transplantation is the only treatment option available to pathway that result in phenotypes such as Noonan, patients with advanced disease; alternative therapeutic LEOPARD or cardiofaciocutaneous syndrome and which strategies are urgently required. are considered similar. Likewise, many genes linked to Methods:Atotalof450FECDpatientswererecruitedto inborn errors of metabolism also clustered, mirroring a the study; either with clinical signs of FECD or prior higher-level feature that is referred to by clinicians as corneal transplantation surgery for FECD. The triplet ‘coarse facies’. Furthermore, we also found genes involved repeat, termed CTG18.1, situated within an intronic region in chromatin remodeling to be near neighbors, even if no ofTCF4,wasgenotypedusingashorttandemrepeatassay. superordinate joint feature exists in medical terminology to A corneal endothelial cell (CEC) model was developed to describe the associated diseases. probe disease mechanism and investigate therapeutic Conclusions: We were able to reproduce molecular approaches. RNA foci were visualised by fluorescence interactionsbyinformationencodedinthefacialgestaltby in situ hybridisation. Immunocytochemistry was performed usingNGP tools. Thus, the phenotype spaceexploration is to determined MBNL1 and MBNL2 cellular localisation. a promising subject in the characterization of gene Differential splicing events were analysed by reverse function. transcription (RT)-PCR and antisense oligonucleotides T.Hsieh:None.N.Hajjir:None.J.T.Pantel:None.M. (ASOs) were transfected using standard methodologies. Mensah: None. M. Zhao: None. J. Hertzberg: None. M. Results: We determine that a non-coding trinucleotide Schubach: None. S. Köhler: None. Y. Gurovich: A. repeatexpansioninTCF4conferssignificantriskforFECD866 J.delPicchia in our large patient cohort (OR=76.47; 95% CI: 47.45- Results We identified SLC9A3R1 as a new ARHL gene. 123.2; p=5.69x10-71). CTG18.1 expansions are asso- An ultra-rare (MAF: 7,70E-05) missense variant was ciated with nuclear RNA foci, sequestration of splicing detected in 2 unrelated male patients showing severe to factor proteins (MBNL1 and MBNL2) to the foci and profound high-frequency hearing loss. The variant, pre- altered mRNA processing in the patient-derived CEC dicted as damaging, was not present in 1071 matched model. Antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) treatment led to controls and protein modelling confirmed its pathogenic a significant reduction in the incidence of nuclear foci, effect on protein’s structure. In situ hybridization showed MBNL1 recruitment and downstream aberrant splicing Slc9a3r1 expression in zebrafish inner ear. A zebrafish KI events, suggesting functional rescue. model, using CRISPR-Cas9 technology, was generated, Conclusions: This proof-of-concept study highlights the revealing a reduced auditory response at all frequencies in potential of a targeted ASO therapy to treat the accessible Slc9a3r1-/- compared to Slc9a3r1+/+ and Slc9a3r1+/-. and tractable corneal tissue affected by this repeat Additional phenotypic analyses demonstrated no abnorm- expansion-mediated disease. alities in the anatomy or number of hair cells or in the C.Zarouchlioti:None.B.Sanchez-Pintado:None.N. volume of the stato-acoustic ganglion, however, a sig- J.HaffordTear:None.P.Klein:A.Employment(fullor nificant variation in the total volume of the saccular otolith part-time); Significant; ProQR therapeutics. P. Liskova: which is responsible for sound detection, was observed in None. K. Dulla: A. Employment (full or part-time); Slc9a3r1-/- compared to Slc9a3r1+/+ (while the utricular Significant; ProQR therapeutics. M. Semo: None. A.A. otolith, necessary for balance, was not affected, in Vugler: None. K. Muthusamy: None. L. Dudakova: agreement with the human phenotype). None. H.J. Levis: None. P. Skalicka: None. P. Hysi: ConclusionsOurdatastronglysupportSLC9A3R1rolein None. M.E. Cheetham: None. S.J. Tuft: B. Research the pathogenesis of ARHL in both human and zebrafish. Grant (principal investigator, collaborator or consultant Larger cohorts of patients should be further analyzed to and pending grants as well as grants already received); understandtheoverallcontributionofSLC9A3R1toARHL. Significant; ProQR therapeutics. P. Adamson: A. A.Morgan:None.M.Brumat:None.M.Cocca:None. Employment (full or part-time); Significant; ProQR M. Di Stazio: None. S. Bassani: None. M. La Bianca: therapeutics. E. Ownership Interest (stock, stock options, None. P. Gasparini: None. G. Girotto: None. patent or other intellectual property); Significant; ProQR therapeutics.A.J.Hardcastle:C.OtherResearchSupport C23.3 (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind Congenital Macular Dystrophy is caused by non-coding support); Significant; ProQR therapeutics. A.E. David- duplications downstream of the IRXA cluster son: C. Other Research Support (supplies, equipment, receipt of drugs or other in-kind support); Significant; R.S.Silva1,2,K.Kraft3,4,G.Arno1,2,V.Cipriani1,V.Heinrich3,4, ProQR Therapeutics. N.Pontikos1,B. Puech5, A.Moore6,V. vanHeyningen1,S. Mundlos3,4,A. R.Webster1,2 C23.2 NGS and animal model reveal SLC9A3R1 as a new gene 1UCL Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, involved in human age-related hearing loss (ARHL) 2Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, United Kingdom, 3Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany, A.Morgan1,M.Brumat1,M.Cocca2,M.DiStazio1,S.Bassani1, 4Institute for Medical and Human Genetics, Charité M.La Bianca2,P. Gasparini1,2,G.Girotto1,2 Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany, 5Exploration de la Vision et Neuro-Ophtalmologie, Centre Hospitalier 1University of Trieste, Trieste, Italy, 2IRCCS Burlo Garofolo, Universitaire, Lille, France, 6Ophthalmology Department, Trieste, Italy UCSF School of Medicine, San Francisco, CA, United States Introduction To shed light on the genetics of ARHL (the Introduction: Autosomal dominant North Carolina Macu- most common sensory disorder in the elderly) we analysed lar Dystrophy (NCMD) is believed to represent a failure of a large cohort of patients and developed a series of animal macular development, impairing central vision. Prior models. geneticlinkagepinpointedthediseaselocustochromosome Methods 46 genes, selected on the basis of GWAS, 6q16 and 5p15. The aim was to identify causative variants animalmodels andliteratureupdates,wereanalysed in464 and further the understanding of the disease mechanism. ARHL patients. After data filtering, the most promising Materials & Methods: CRISPR technology was used to results were validated by either “in vitro” or “in vivo” reproduce a non-coding duplication between IRX1 and studies. ADAMTS16(chr5)recurrentlyidentifiedinNCMDfamiliesAbstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 867 by whole genome sequencing. Gene expression analysis sequencing identified the same variant in three additional was verifiedon thedeveloping eye and limb-bud.Chromo- unsolved PPCD families, including a de novo occurrence some conformation capture (c-HI-C) and chromatin immu- that suggests this is a recurrent mutation. Two further noprecipitation performed on the same tissues, mapped uniquevariantswereidentifiedinintron1ofGRHL2(c.20 chromatin architectural folding and defined regulatory +257delT and c.20+133delA) in unrelated PPCD famil- elements. ies. GRHL2 is a transcription factor that suppresses Results: A non-coding duplication (chr5) was identified epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and is a as an ancestral allele in 12 NCMD families. Expression of direct transcriptional repressor of ZEB1. ZEB1 mutations PRDM13 (chr6) was substantially elevated in eye but not leading to haploinsufficiency cause PPCD3. We pre- limb-bud tissue in the mouse model versus control. c-Hi-C viously identified promoter mutations in OVOL2, a gene at the 5p locus showed unique chromatin interactions in notnormallyexpressed inthe cornealendothelium,asthe developing wild-type eye versus limb-bud, suggesting cause of PPCD1. OVOL2 drives mesenchymal-to- distinct tissue-specific regulation. epithelial transition (MET) by directly inhibiting EMT- Conclusions: The eye-specific over-expression of inducing transcription factors, such as ZEB1. Here, we PRDM13, a previously suggested candidate, provides the demonstratethattheGRHL2regulatoryvariantsidentified first molecular evidence that elevated PRDM13 expression in PPCD4 individuals induce increased transcriptional may be the origin of the phenotype. It also represents the activity in vitro. Furthermore, although GRHL2 is not first molecular evidence to link the two loci biologically. expressedincornealendothelialcellsincontroltissue,we The possible interaction between the putative element and detected aberrant ectopic expression of GRHL2 in the subsequent PRDM13 expression control remains unknown. corneal ‘endothelium’ in PPCD4 patient tissue. GRHL2 Chromatin organization findings highlight the relevance of patient corneal ‘endothelial’ cells also ectopically express tissue specific DNA contacts in development and disease. the epithelial markers E-Cadherin and Cytokeratin 7 Furthercharacterizationofmousemodelandexplorationof indicating they have transitioned to an epithelial-like cell the nine unsolved cases may uncover additional molecular type.WesuggestthatmutationsinducingMETwithinthe targets for NCMD. Funding: FightForSight; Erasmus; corneal endothelium are a convergent pathogenic MaxPlanckFoundation. mechanismleadingtofailureoftheendothelialbarrierand R.S. Silva: None. K. Kraft: None. G. Arno: None. V. disease. Cipriani: None. V. Heinrich: None. N. Pontikos: None. P.Liskova:None.L.Dudakova:None.C.J.Evans:None. B. Puech: None. A. Moore: None. V. van Heyningen: K.E. Rojas López: None. N. Pontikos: None. D. Athana- None. S. Mundlos: None. A.R. Webster: None. siou: None. H. Jama: None. J. Sach: None. P. Skalicka: None. V. Stranecky: None. S. Kmoch: None. C. Thaung: C23.4 None. M. Filipec: None. M.E. Cheetham: None. A.E. EctopicexpressionofGRHL2duetonon-codingmutations Davidson: None. S.J. Tuft: None. A.J. Hardcastle: None. promotes cell state transition and causes Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy 4 C23.5 Whole genome sequencing in patients with ciliopathies P.Liskova1,2,L.Dudakova1,C.J.Evans2,K.E.RojasLópez2,N. uncovers a novel recurrent tandem duplication in IFT140 Pontikos2,D.Athanasiou2,H.Jama2,J.Sach3,P.Skalicka1,V. Stranecky1, S.Kmoch1, C.Thaung2,M. Filipec1,M. E. V. Geoffroy1,C. Stoetzel1, S.Scheidecker1,E. Schaefer1, I. Cheetham2, A.E. Davidson2, S.J.Tuft4, A.J. Hardcastle2,4 Perrault2,S. Bär3, A.Kröll1,M.Delbarre4, M.Antin4,A. Leuvrey4,C. Henry5, H.Blanché6, E.Decker7,K. Kloth8, G. 1Charles University and General University Hospital in Klaus9,C. Mache10,D.Martin-Coignard11,S.McGinn12,A. Prague, Prague, Czech Republic, 2UCL Institute of Boland13, J.Deleuze13,S. Friant1,S. Saunier5,J. Rozet2, C. Ophthalmology, London, United Kingdom, 3Charles Bergmann14,H.Dollfus1,J. Muller1 University,Prague,CzechRepublic,4MoorfieldsEyeHospital, London, United Kingdom 1U1112, Strasbourg, France, 2Laboratory of Genetics in Ophthalmology (LGO), INSERM UMR1163, Institute of InalargefamilyofCzechorigin,wemappedanewlocus Genetic Diseases, Imagine, Paris, France, 3Department of foranautosomaldominantcornealendothelialdystrophy, Molecular and Cellular Genetics, UMR7156, Strasbourg, Posterior Polymorphous Corneal Dystrophy 4 (PPCD4), France, 4Laboratoire de Diagnostic Génétique, Hôpitaux to 8q22.3-q24.12. Whole genome sequencing identified a Universitaires Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France, 5INSERM, unique variant (c.20+544G>T) in this locus, within a U983, Paris Descartes University, Paris, France, 6Centre regulatory region in intron 1 of GRHL2. Targeted d’études du polymorphisme humain-Fondation Jean Dausset,868 J.delPicchia Paris, France, 7Center for Human Genetics, Bioscientia, C23.6 Ingelheim, Germany, 8Institut für Humangenetik, Biallelic loss-of-function variants in DNMBP cause Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, congenital cataract and visual impairment Germany, 9University Marburg, KfH-Nierenzentrum für KinderundJugendliche,Marburg,Germany,10Departmentof M.Ansar1,A.Nazir2,H.Chung3,4,S.Imtiaz5,M.T.Sarwar1,2,P. Pediatrics, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria, Makrythanasis1,6,E.Falconnet1,M.Guipponi7,C.Borel1,C.J. 11ServicedeGénétique,CentreHospitalier,CCLAD,LeMans, Pournaras8, M.A. Ansari5, E.Ranza7, F.A. Santoni1,9,J. France, 12CNRGH, Institut de Biologie François Jacob, DRF, Ahmed2,I. Shah2,K. Gul10,H.Bellen3,4,11,S.E. Antonarakis1 CEA, Paris, France, 13CNRGH, Institut de Biologie François Jacob, DRF, CEA, Evry, France, 14Center for Human 1DepartmentofGeneticMedicineandDevelopment,University Genetics, Bioscientia, Ingelheim, France of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 2Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Khyber Medical University, Peshawar, Pakistan, Introduction: Ciliopathies represent a wide spectrum of 3Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor rare diseases with overlapping phenotypes and a high College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States, 4Jan and genetic heterogeneity. Among those, IFT140 is implicated DanDuncanNeurologicalResearchInstitute,TexasChildren's in a variety of phenotypes ranging from isolated retinis Hospital, Houston, TX, United States, 5Department of pigmentosa to more syndromic cases such as the Bardet- Genetics, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan, Biedl syndrome. 6Biomedical Research Foundation of the Academy of Athens, Materials and Methods: Clinicalcharacterizations,whole Athens, Greece, 7Service of Genetic Medicine, University genome(4individuals)andtargetedexomesequencing(~350 Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 8Hirslanden patients) and bioinformatics analysis were performed on Clinique La Colline, Geneva, Switzerland, 9Department of ciliopathyfamilies.Patients’skinfibroblastswereanalyzedto Endocrinology Diabetes and Metabolism, University Hospital assess the pathogenicity of the causative mutations. of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 10Department of Bio Results: Using whole genome sequencing in patients Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, Muhammad Ali Jinnah with uncharacterized ciliopathies, we identified a University, Karachi, Pakistan, 11Howard Hughes Medical novel recurrent tandem duplication of exon 27 to 30 Institute, Houston, TX, United States (6.7 kb) in IFT140, c.3454-488_4182+2588dup p. (Tyr1152_Thr1394dup), missed by whole exome sequen- Visual impairment is a heterogeneous group of disorders cing. Pathogenicity of the mutation was assessed on the both in etiology and clinical presentation. Autosomal patients’ skin fibroblasts. Several hundreds of patients recessive disorders have a high prevalence in con- with a ciliopathy phenotype were screened and biallelic sanguineous populations, due to the extensive genomic mutations were identified in 11 families representing 12 regions of homozygosity that include alleles identical by pathogenic variants of which 7 are novel. Among those descent. Hence, consanguineous families are the best unrelated families especially with a Mainzer-Saldino source to identify novel causative autosomal recessive syndrome, 8 carried the same tandem duplication (2 at genes. We have analyzed more than 150 consanguineous the homozygous state and 6 at the heterozygous state). families with diverse phenotypes related to visual Conclusions: We demonstrated the implication of impairment. We used a strategy that combines exome structural variations in IFT140 related diseases expanding sequencing of a proband and genotyping of the entire its mutation spectrum. We also provide evidences for a family. In two different families, we found two different unique genomic event mediated by an Alu-Alu recombina- homozygous loss-of-function (LoF) variants in the tion occurring on a shared haplotype. We confirm that DNMBPgene(OMIM#611282);astopgain(NM_015221: wholegenomesequencingcanbeinstrumentalintheability c.811C>T:p.Arg271Ter) in family F385 (nine-affected to detect structural variants for genomic disorders. individuals, LOD score: 5.18 at θ=0), and a frameshift V. Geoffroy: None. C. Stoetzel: None. S. Schei- deletion (NM_015221:c.2947_2948delGA) in family decker:None.E.Schaefer:None.I.Perrault:None.S. F372 (two-affected individuals; LOD score: 0.85). The Bär: None. A. Kröll: None. M. Delbarre: None. M. phenotypes in both families correspond to a congenital Antin: None. A. Leuvrey: None. C. Henry: None. H. cataract and retinopathy. The expression of the DNMBP Blanché: None. E. Decker: None. K. Kloth: None. G. gene is enriched during eye development in mice, zebra- Klaus: None. C. Mache: None. D. Martin-Coignard: fish and flies. Preliminary analysis using RNAi mediated None. S. McGinn: None. A. Boland: None. J. Deleuze: knockdown of the sif gene in Drosophila (the DNMBP None. S. Friant: None. S. Saunier: None. J. Rozet: orthologue)affectstheamplitudesoftheERGin3dayold None. C. Bergmann: None. H. Dollfus: None. J. flies using different drivers. DNMBP regulates the shap- Muller: None. ingofcelljunctionsthroughthelocalactivationofCdc42Abstractsfromthe51stEuropeanSocietyofHumanGeneticsConference:Oral... 869 and its effectors in human. RNAi-mediated depletion of M. Ansar: None. A. Nazir: None. H. Chung: None. S. DNMBP resulted in modified assembly pattern of junc- Imtiaz: None. M.T. Sarwar: None. P. Makrythanasis: tional F-actin and E-cadherin. Notably, E-cadherin has an None.E.Falconnet:None.M.Guipponi:None.C.Borel: important role in lens vesicle separation and lens epithe- None. C.J. Pournaras: None. M.A. Ansari: None. E. lial cell survival. These results establish that DNMBP is a Ranza: None. F.A. Santoni: None. J. Ahmed: None. I. candidate for early onset of severe cataract and visual Shah: None. K. Gul: None. H. Bellen: None. S.E. impairment. Antonarakis: None.